THE SECOND AND LAST part of Reasons for Refusal of Subscription to the Book
of Common prayer, under the hands of certain Ministers of Deuon. and Cornwall,
as they were exhibited by them to the right Reverend Father in God WILLIAM
COTTON Doctor of Divinity, and Lord Bishop of Exceter.

As also an APPENDIX, or Compendious Brief of all other Exceptions taken by
others against the Books of Communion, Homilies, and Ordination, word for
word, as it came to the hands of an Honorable Personage.

With an ANSWER to both at several times returned them in public
conference, and in diverse Sermons upon occasion preached in the Cathedral
Church of Exceter by Thomas Hutton Bachiler of Divinity, and Fellow of S.
John's College in Oxon.

Fuerant hortamenta, vt Deus, and Christus eius a populo in vnum conueniente
pariter rogaretur: Nullus erat primitus terror, Nemo viderat virgam, nemo
custodiam: Sola vt diximus fuerant hortamenta Optatus Lib. Tertio. LONDON.
Printed by John Windet for the Company of Stationers. 1606.

To the most Reverend father in God my very good Lord, the Lord Arch bishop his
Grace, Primate, and Metropolitan of all England.
MOst Reverend in Christ my late trauiles in laboring other of my fellow
brethren their godly, peaceable, quiet contentment in such doubts as their
busy learning, and too much pains has unnecessarily occasioned, I began, and
withal at once thought to have finished, but since finding I have but begun
(for somewhat remained, and that somewhat much in their opinion, whose opinions
go for articles of faith) much or little, such as it is, I present unto your
Graces favor: May it stand with your good pleasure to take knowledge of my
best affections, how deeply indebted to God his Church, the Kings most
excellent Majesty, and your Honorable self for your special favors done me
in the prime of my studies after some few years spent in the University of
Oxford, I shall take it for no small comfort, specially as the times now are,
wherein like the days of Moses that blessed peace maker, Act. 7.27.
I am sure to receive no small portion of grief from them, whose understanding
I labor to reconcile unto our form of public prayers. And were not that
duetifull remembrance I have of your ancient favor, sufficient cause as I
must and do profess, it is far more, then any service of mine can
thoroughly recompense, yet your continual, long, grave experience in this
argument, your Reverend, learned, great pains heretofore in the days of our
Renowned late Queen both by preaching and writing, as also in that late
conference (where our now dread sovereign Lord King James royally to the
admiration of all there present moderated the controversies then proposed) are
effectual motives to imbolden me in the humble offer, which I make of this
present treatise: Nor are all these the only persuasiue, though every of them
forcible enough, but the eminency of your place, and highest prelacie,
whereunto you are now called, farther exacteth of me submission of my writings,
because your greatest authority next after the Kings highness may in these
Ecclesiastical causes give me best approbation. Wherefore be entreated to
vouchsafe your gracious acceptance of a few lines, and whatsoever may be
thought defective, I heartily crave it may no way impeach that fuller defense,
with which our Church can make supply, to whose most sacred judgment I wholly
commend my self. Now that God of power, who has so mercifully appointed the
times and seasons, in advancing the throne of King James above the throne of
Queen Elizabeth, be blessed and praised of us all this day and for ever. So
are mine and every true hearted subject his unfeigned thanks to Godward for root
and branch, for our King, Queen, their royal progeny, with the high Court of
Parliament, grave Senators, Reverend Bishops, Honorable Judges, our Worshipful
knights, and choicest Burgesses so lately, so mightily, so miraculously
preserved to the everlasting shame of all mischievous traitors, Nouemb. 5.1605.
and to the incredible joy of all them that truly fear God and the King. More
it is my thoughts conceive in this point: But remembering, as I pray to God in
heaven, so I write to men on earth, I stay my self for this time. Humbly
beseeching your Grace to pardon this my attempt, and to interpret it (as I
unfeignedly intend it) the earnest of greater, in deed (as the truth is) of all
possible thankfulnesses.

Your Graces in all duty. Thomas Hutton.

To my fellow brethren the ministers of (...) Cornwall, whose exceptions made
against subscription, follow farther to be examined.
ACcording to my promise, I proceed and send the rest of that answer, which
before was intended reuiew your grieua^ces with the several defense annexed. It
may be upon examination of what you reprove and we maintain, if you spare a
little time to keep repetitions with your selves, and read that over, which you
did dislike, you wilbee of another mind. Second thoghts are better then the
first. (...)
Consider what peril may come to the Church and to your selves, knowing that
many of your congregation did not so much admire your pains as they now
heartily lament to see the^ soil bestowed in uncharitably taxing, Inuidiam
facitis Macario qui sialiquid asper^fecit pro vnitate, leave viders poterit d^^
v^^ pro dissentione, etc. Optat. lib. 2.
what the wisdom, and zeal of our godly ancients have faithfully penned.
Draw not blessed Macarius into envy, who if he have done any thing sharply
for preservation of godly unity, Quiduis facer^debuisse poti^^q^^m ecclesiam
schismate sci^d^^e. Diony. Ale^ad N^^at apud Hieronan Cataelo.
it may seem light to the harm, which comes by needless opposition: Any
thing you should have done (as Dionysius Alexandrinus writes to Nouatian)
rather then cause a rent in the Church remembering, Manus dextra and prasbyter.
Origin homil. 7. in Iosu^.
though you be taken for right hand and be called Presbiters, and seem to
preach the word of God, yet if you do any thing against the discipline of the
Church, Si aliquid contra ^cclesiastscam discipl^nam ibid. In vno consens^
ecclesia e^^ cidat dexteram suam, etc.
or rule of the Gospel, the Church with one consent must cut you off being
their right hand and cast you from them. Which severe course some you know
that (favor the discipline you stand for) took (in places where it prevails)
against others that were contrary minded. Ducto Sutr. in the ^al^e sembla^r.
page 182.
For when one John Morellie disputed in a certain treatise that the words.
Tell the Church belonged not to the consistory, his book was burnt, and the
man excommunicate. Two ministers at Geneua were deposed, and banished for
speaking against usury allowed in that estate, and a third was glad to fly
for speaking against unleavened bread. But fearing the allegation of these
examples may distaste your liking of that, which I write, my conclusion shall be
to you with the words of Saint Paul to his scholar Timothy and in the same
manner I rpotest before the Lord that ye strive not about words, 2. Tim. 2.14.
which are good for nothing, but to pervert the hearers, he might (under
Apostolical correction be it spoken) have said which pervert the readers.
Wherefore entreating your care, and diligence to bethink your selves better,
then you have done, I commend you to God, and to the grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, whose holy spirit be with us all. Amen.

To the Christian Reader.
NOtwithstanding that my weekelie and daily urgent occasions scarcely aford
me any laisure to write much, specially in this kind, yet because of a former
promise made, as also somewhat (I confess) was left unanswered, I have renewed
these pains for thy sake (good Reader) whom I entreat, if thou be not
partial and unlearned, to become an indifferent judge of the answer once
heretofore and now again farther tendered. Would thou did know how painful,
and chargeable a work it has been unto me, surely then might I hope it will
prove thank worthy. Howsoever, thus far I presume of thy charitable
Christian affection, whereunto thou art daily called upon, by the operation of
Gods spirit in the ministry of his word, that I shall have thy prayers to him
for me. Other recompense I look not for, and less thy love cannot yield me.
Throughout the whole argument handled in this, and the former book, I have
dealt with men of some learning and gravity, to whom peradventure in many
respects thou may think me far inferior, and J think the same. But to the
glory of God be it spoken, and the truth of the cause I undertake, herein I
well know, I am nothing inferior. Yea did I spare my appeal to the truth, for
any thing I see, they are compassed with like infirmities, as my self and
others. So little cause have they or others for them, to boast of their
learning, zeal, integrity and painfulness, which is made their crest in the
worlds blason of their commendable well doing. Such popular applause I always
suspected holding S. Austin his choice best, if any must needs have such
applause, Toleramus illased tremimus inter ^l^a^. Aug. de verb, dom: s^rm. 5.
yet to fear and tremble, when they have it. A danger which were the less if
the unity of the Church and the saints were not iniuried thereby in prizing of
one to the disgrace of many others. But to leave this to the effects better or
worse, which may follow upon it, I am to remember thee of one thing had like to
have escaped my memory, and so peradventure thy knowledge: namely, whereas in
the former part of our answer. I set down the Reasons for refusal of
subscription al together, and afterward in the handling did refer thee with
this watchworde See their reasons etc. J have chosen (as I think) a better
course to set them, and their answer jointly together, that in seeing one thou
may see both, holding it less comber some to the Printer, and every way
more convenient for thy self. Some other things there are, which I would give
thee notice of, but considering thou have much to read, if thou read all (and I
pray that thou so do) it shall not be amiss to abridge this preface. And
therefore requesting thee to turn over a new leaf, see the chapters and their
contents in the Page following.

The Contents of the Chapters in this Book and in the APPENDIX, which APPENDIX
begins Page 156. and so forward continneth to the end of this Book.
OF Burial chap. 1. Page 1. 2. 3. and 167. Prayers dare not presume. chap. 2.
Page 20. 21. and 182. unworthiness in asking chap. 3. Page 37. ^. 183. Rubricks
how understood, chap. 4. Free from all Adversity chap. 5. The name PRIEST.
chap. 6. Christ this day to be borne. chap. 7 Fall into no sin. chap 8.
Kneeling at the Lords supper. chap. 9. Private Communion chap. 10. Page 65. 172.
Confirmation chap. 11. Page 79. Confession made by any^t the Communion chap. 12.
Page 97. 204. Every Parishioner to communicate and receive the sacraments chap.
13. Page 100. Faith and Repentance in persons to be baptized cap. 14. Page 104.
166 Two sacraments generally necessary. chap. 15. Page 107. 172. The body and
blood of Christ chap. 16. Page 110. Matrimony an excellent mystery. chap. 17.
Page 112. From fornication and all other deadly sin chap. 18. Page 114. From
sudden death chap. 19. Page 115. Often repetition Good Lord d^li^^r ^s. chap.
20. Page 119. Three orders of Ministers chap. 21. Page 126. 227. Receive the
holy Ghost chap. 22. Page 127. 235. 236. Matrimony how a sacrament chap. 23.
Page 146. Plurality of wives chap. 24. Page 149. 239.
The Printer to the friendly Reader.
Hereafter in this book Page 156. follows the APPENDIX or Compendious brief
which we call An Answer to the additionals. Wherefore we entreat thee good Reader
to take every Page after the 156. and so forward to be to that purpose; though
we have not set down that same title in these express terms, nor now cannot
well, the Book being as it was already finished before we did remember our
selves hereof.

The APPENDIX or Additionals begin at Page 156.
Ratio I. NO reasonable sense as in these following.
1 Ephesians. 5.13. what is manifest the same is light. Read for Epist. on the
third Sunday in Lent Page 157. 2 Collect for Trinity sunday. In the power of
the divine majesty to worship the unity. 158. 3 Every parishioner to
communicate and to receive the Sacraments Ibid and Page 100. 4 Ephesians 3.15.
God the father of all that is called in heaven Read for epist. on 17. sunday
after Trinity 159. 5 Luke 1.36. this is the sixth month, which was called
barr^^ read for epist on Annunciation to Mary Ibid. 6 Psalm 5 and 8. or ever
your pots be made hot 160. 7 Psalm 68.30. when the company of speare-men etc.
Ibid.
Ratio 2. Contradiction.
1 COnfirmation no visible sign, and yet a visible sign Page 79. 160. 161. 2
But two sacraments and yet Confirmation is made (...) 79.162.
Ratio 3. Untruth.
1 INnocents called Gods witnesses 162.163.226. 2 Faith and repentance in
infants how 104.165. 3 Children baptized have althings necessary to salvation
166. 4 Sure and certain hope of every one to be buried Page 1. and 167. 5
Nothing ordained to be read but the pure word of God 167. 6 Read without
breaking of one piece from another Ibid.
Ratio 4. Doubtful matters.
1 ARchangels and Michael for one 168.227. 2 Baptism merely prinate 172. 3
Conditional baptism Ibid. 4 2. sacraments only as necessary 107.172. 5
Prinate communion 65.173. 6 Ceremonies apt to edification 173.190.190. 7
Ministers Priests 173. and before chap. 6. 8 Prinate absolution 173.
Ratio 5. Scriptures disgraced 175.
1 APocrypha called scriptures Ibid. 176. 2 Read on a holyday rather then,
Canonical 177. 3 Canonical left unread 178. 4 Apocryphal read oftener Ibid. 5
Genealogy of Christ not read Ibid. 6 Untruths in Apocrypha Ibid.
Ratio 6. No dependence 179.
1 INnocents day the Collect Ibid. 2 3 Sunday after Easter the Collect Ibid. 3
Epiphany Ibid. 4 1 Sunday in Lent the Collect 181. 5 Collect on Trinity sunday
Ibid. 6 Collect on sunday before Easter 182. 7 Collect on 15. sunday after
Trinity Ibid. No presumption to ask any thing lawful Ibid. We say we dare
not presume 21.22.183. We pray and yet say we dare not pray Ibid. Ceremonies
unlawful 184. Human inventions Ibid. Without warrant of Gods word 189. Of
mystical signification 190. Defiled with superstition Ibid. 191. Scandalous
Ibid. No necessary use 192. Appropriated to Gods service Ibid. 193.194. We
subscribe to Homilies we cannot tell what. Page 199. Collects, Epistles,
Gospels savor of superstition 200.201. Of Lent and of fasting 202. Custom of
open penance 204. Confession of sin at communion by any page 97. 98. 204.
Corrupt translations. Leaning out 205.
1 Higgai^^ Sel^l^ Ibid 206. 2 Conclusion of the (...) Psalm. and praise the
Lord Ibid 3 Conclusion of the Lords prayer 206. 4 brought thee out of the house
of bondage 207. 5 Holy and beloved on the fist sunday after Epiph. Ibid
Putting 10.
Whole verses to the Psalm 14.208. A whole verse in Psalm 15.209. Psalm
24.6. Ibid. Matthew 10.25. page 210. Ierem. 23.5. Ibid. Luke. 19.42.211. Luke
24.36. Ibid. 2. Tim 4.5.212.
Perverting the meaning of the holy Ghost.
Psalm 17.4. page 212. 18. 26. page 213. 28. 28. page 241. 37.38. Ibid.
68.16.243.27. Ibd. 75.3.244. a. 76.5. Ibid. 93.1.244. b. 105.28.216.106.30.
Ibid. 107.40. Ibid. 217.119.21.244. b. 119.122. Ibid. 125.3.217.141.6. Ibid.
Isa 63.11.218. Matthew 27.9.219. Luke 1.28.220.48.221. 1. Cor. 9.27.222. Gal.
4.^5.223. Phil. 2.7. Ibid. Heb. 9.25.224. 1. Pet. 3.20.225.
Misapplication. 225.
Reuelat. 14.1. Ibid. 1. Pet. 3.17.227. Reuelat. 12.7.
Book of Ordination
Whither Stephen a Deacon as ^^r (...). Whither Stephen did preach 229: Whither
Philippe did preach 230: Whither they did it by ordinary office 231: Whither
Lords supper greater then baptism 234: Whither it profer private prayer before
public 235: The Bishope his ordaining Priests and Deacons Ibid. Receive the
holy Ghost. 127.235: 236:
Homilies.
Apocrypha called scriptures 236. World not destroyed for (...) slaughter Ibid.
237. After Ahabs example to turn to God Ibid. Ambrose commended for
excommunicating he Emperor Ibid. Indith a despensation to we are vain
apparel 238. P^ura^itse of wives 149. 239. 240: Concubin a lawful wife how.
240. Concubin an honest name Ibid. Sanctify the flood, Jordan 245. August 26.
story of Bell and Dragon 246: November 7 wisdom created 247. November 18.
Ecclesiasticus chapter 48. of Elias Ibid. second sunday after Epiphanie Romans
12.11.248. Collect on S. Thomas day 249. Conversion of Paul Taught all the world
250. Bartholomew day Collect men and weomen preachers 252. 19. sunday after
Trinity past repentance Ephesians. 4.19. Page 254. 25. sunday after Trinity
Collect good works may be ^^warded 255.
Advantages taken by way of retortion against the communion Book which was
exhibited to the Parliament and would be obtruded by some upon our Church.
1 Doubtful page 256. 257. 2 Disgraceful Ibid. 3 Untruths Ibid. 4 Misapplying
scriptures 258. 5 Misinterpreting Ibid. 6 Contradiction Ibid. 7 Leaving out
Ibid. 8 Putting in.
The Conclusion of all.

Faults escaped.
Entreat for enter ^8. crauers for caruers 35. any for and 39. ^. ^^7. we may
for which may 44. a. humanity for summarily 54. a. pa^^ly for pertly ^^. b.
eyes which for with 51. b. up with for which 120. prove ceremony for prove
their ceremony 58. full godliness for al^ godliness ^9. know (...) for know
not Ibid. But for but 70. be for by 8^. 86. 97. 18^. ^91 now th^se for now are
these 80. or impious for are 87. where for were 9^. pre^ti^^^er for parishioner
100. Not for Note 101. he for we 120. de^^ding for deriding 137. before so. for
before. So 143. springs (...) taken for springs and is taken 146. treat for
mete 154. in Calvin for C. cum. m. 156. now for ^aw 160. answer before part for
answer part. 172. 216. 236. do so more for do so no more 176. uses of for
uses of it 177. diversity for adversity 181. or for our 184. not for. Not
187. being for brings 188. if for If 189. of necessary for of no necessary use
191. fantastically for fantasticals 192. says the ministry for says in the
ministry 193. before this time in these hundred for Before this time in those
hundred 194. arguments for garments 198. pur^e for p^^ zel Ibid godile for
godly 204. Doctor Eureux for D'eureux ^07. Doctor Ambrose for Diuus Ambrose
252. wear for we are 223. pen, to some for pen to some, 250. world. Farther.
for world farther proves 252.

Cyphars misplaced.

37. to 56. are twice numbered, so is 144. so is 177. for 185. which so far as
occasion in this table is offered, we distinguish by a and b. 2^ 37. a and 37.
b. etc. Likewise chap. 14. put for cap. 15. page 172. Other faults in printing
we pray thee pardon us. Fare well.

The second and last part of the answer to the Reasons for refusal of
Subscription.
Chap. 1. Of Burial. We may not Subscribe, because we see not, how it may
agree with the Scripture to commit the body of a notorious wicked man, dying
without tokens of repentance to the earth, in sure and certain hope of
resurrection to eternal life.
BEcause we see not, how exact and strict some are in their verdict, they pass
against what they imagine, not what they can prove blame-worthie: we entreat
them in the fear of the Lord, as they shall answer in that great day of
accounts for false witnes-bearing, that they show us in what line, leaf, Page
of the Communion Book, there is so much as one syllable of a wicked man, of a
notorious wicked man, or impenitent person dying without tokens of Repentance.
For the persons, of whom the Communion Book speaks are living, or dead:
Living they are prayed for, the dead, God is praised for: Living put in mind of
Jesus Christ, and of themselves. Of Jesus Christ who is the resurrection and
the life, etc. Of themselves, their original, continuance, fall, and
recovery, Original from a vessel of much weakness, and therefore
themselves not much better (Man that is borne of a woman) Continuance short,
and sharp: Short a sembriefe of days, for he has but a short time to live,
Sharp stored with pains and troubles: for it (is full of miseries) The fall
like a flower (soon cut down) The recovery in Christ in whom they shall be
made alive.

For with their own eyes they shall see their Redeemer. Wherefore the
suruiuers at the grave in view of their own estate, by a present spectacle of
mortality presented to their eye, make their confession with a prayer, and
then after follows a thanksgiving. The confession with a Prayer. In the
midst of life we be in death, of whom may we seek for succor but of thee O
Lord, which for our sins art justly displeased? Yet O Lord God most holy, O
Lord most mighty, O holy and most merciful Savior deliver us not into the
bitter pains of eternal death. Then follows a thanksgiving for the dead,
who depart in the Lord, and in whom the souls of them that be elect, after
they be delivered from the burden of their flesh, be in joy and felicity.
Thus it is for the dead, but commonly such as depart in the true faith of
Christ, that they may have their perfect consummation both in body and soul in
eternal and everlasting glory: For the dead, but those which rest in Christ,
that at the general resurrection in the last day they may be found acceptable
in his sight, and receive the blessing, etc. In all which limitations, no word
of a notorious wicked person dying without tokens of Repentance. But suppose
that the Book did require that the body of such a person should be interred,
and committed to the earth, how appears it contrary unto Scripture? Does
Scripture any where forbid to commit the carcass of a wicked man that is dead
to the ground? 2 King, 9, 34
Rather as was said of Iezabel Bury her, she was a Kings daughter, so may it
well be said Bury him, or her, be they like Iezabel for wickedness, yet bury
them: for time was, their Christian profession made us account them sanctified
by the blood of the Testament.

But it says, In sure and certain hope of the resurrection.
Quando nos pra dicamus. etc: Nobis liquere ^on potest, qui ad veri^tatis
agnitionem sin^ peruenturi, qui non, vndesentire nos decet sal^ tem
vniuersorum, qui audient. Proponimus en^^ omnibus in me^ dium sicutietia^ nobis
praec^ptu^ est, ne cui prae^ iudicemusin malum praesertim. Marlo: in 1, Ioh. 4,
14,
When we preach the Gospel (says Marlorat) it cannot be manifest to us, who
will reach through to the acknowledging of the truth, and who will not,
whereupon it becomes us to think the Salvation of all, vho do hear the
word of God. For we propose it indifferently to all, as we are also commanded,
that we prejudice none, specially in the worse part. For it is better and a
more safe course to think well of bad persons, then of the good to judge ill,
unless we fully see they are obstinate, stubbourne, and contumelious. And yet
in such, or toward such we may not give too hasty a sentence. Now as the
Church of God in preaching the Gospel delivers it pell mell in the hearing
of elect and reprobate, which directly pertains to the faithful that love
and fear the Lord, so in giving thanks to God for this, or that brother the
Church intends her direction in general for burial of the dead, which in
special belongs to them, that die in the Lord, At whose sickness the
Minister was either present, or not present: If present, by exhortation,
conference, prayer, Nam tutius est de malis been sentire quam de bonis etc.
Ibidem. quanquam (...) in his quidem pracipitari d^^ bet sententia. Ibidem.
and all such good means he did labor the sick man's amendment, and therefore
may well give a comfortable testimony in the audience of his people: If absent
and could not come, he is to bethink himself, how far forth the sick
party had profited in knowledge, and what hope he gave thereof in health,
sickness, or both: If some one he were that gave no testimony at all, but
lived a wretched life, and made a wretched end, as it may fall out sometimes,
then must the Minister know the censures of the Church were exercised upon him,
or not: If not upon him, he may be held a member of Christ his visible Church,
till he be cut off, because all things must be done in order, and in their due
place, neither till then need the Minister take knowledge to the contrary.
Semel bonus, semper bonus, do necprobetur esse malus.
For as once an honest man is ever presumed to be an honest man, till evidence
come in against him, so once a member of Christ to be thought ever after, till
sentence be pronounced by those to whom Authority is committed. And if
sentence be pronounced, but not reuersed, or otherwise a man be taken in some
notorious sin of Treason, wilfully murdering, strangling, browning himself,
or the like, and good proof made thereof, at such times this order for burial
of such a notorious, wicked person is not prescribed to any Minister, nor
required of him.

The Minister must peremtorilie affirm, that God has taken the Soul.
And if the Minister do, it is no other necessity, nor peremptory
affirmation, then is agreeable to Gods word. For be he a wicked, or a godly man
that teath seazeth upon, indifferent it is in the form of the prayer Book,
and no untruth either way, because God has taken him of his great mercy,
though not toward the reprobate, yet of his great mercy toward his Church, in
disburdening the world of him. Some have thought, and more then thought it, for
they have disputed the contrary.

The soul of a wicked man God cannot be said to take unto him. For Luke 12.20.
This night shall they fetch away thy Soul (that is) the Devil, and his Angels
shall.
The place misconstrued breeds a wrong conclusion. For first they shall take
etc. is a speech usual in the language of Hebrew, Greek, Ferunt, aiunt,
pradicant, clamitant, (...) 1 Cor. 6. (...) Luc: 12.48. (...) Ibid:
Latin, and English: They say, they report, they give out, etc. When our
meaning is no other, but in the destrate indefinitly to be understood, not
determining, who says, or who reports, for that we cannot distinctly tell,
only a general report: it is like that of Paul It is generally said, that
there is fornication, etc. So Luke 12. to whom much is given, of him they
require much (that is) as the same Evangelist there in the same verse renders,
it shall be required: Secondly to say (that by those words objected) the devil
and his Angels are meant is to restrain it, and ouerstreighten the liberty of
the observation. Whereas these words They shall fetch may well note any,
whether men, Angels, devils, or other creatures of what kind soever: And all
to teach us, that all are to be feared, and are as well known to the Lord, as
we are to one another, where being demanded Who it is that calls, Ioh. 18.8
we answer It is I, and who it is that fetches his soul, It is they. They it
is: not one only executioner of the Lord his wrath, but many. Sisera a nail
in his temples: Iud: 4.21 2. King. 19, 37.
Sennacherib his own bowels Adramelech and Sharezar: Herod his worms:
Egyptians frogs, li^e, etc. A Fi^e in the uttermost parts of the floods, Act,
12, 13. Exodus, 8, 4, 17. Isay, 5, 27.
a Be in the land of Ashur. And what ministers of indignation can be want
for any exploite by death, that has a mighty and strong host like a tempest
of hail and a whirlewinde? Luc. 28, 2.
that causes the blood fall on the head of Ioab and all his Fathers house,
that the house of Ioab was never without some, ^ Sam. 3.29.
that had running issues, or a Lepar, or that leans on a staff, or that does
fall on the sword, or that lacks bread. So as what Rabsake said for his
Master is true of the Almighty How can thou despise any Captame of the least
of my Masters servants? 2 King. 18.24.
The least of them (contemptible though they seem) are able to take our life,
and soul from us, and yet at such times they come not without the Lord; yea
what ever deadly arrest is made upon any man, it is a Capias from the Lord. Be
it devil, or any imp of the devil, few or many they fetch away a wretched
soul, yet God it is, who (greater then the Prince of this world) so
commands and appoints, and therefore to be held his action, and work. As
Psalm. 78.49. Psalm, 78, 49.
He did cast upon them the fierceness of his anger, and ^^dignation, and
wrath, and vengeance by sending out of evil Angels. So that did we know (which
we do not) that such a day, such an hour, such a man a reprobate is to be
buried, yet the words of Scripture allow us to say, The Lord has taken the
soul of such a one. For the body is committed to the grave, and his Soul to
God that gave it. Eccles, 12.7. Job, 27, 8.
Job makes it plain Chap. 27. in his demand what hope has an hypocrite when
he has heaped up riches, if God take away his Soul? Heb. 10, 31.
In judgment it is (we confess) because a fearful thing to fall into the
hands of the living God.

He must affirm him to be a dear brother.
And reason. For we are somewhat beholding to the received style of our
country, somewhat to humanity, (...) Act. 27.27.
somewhat to our opinion and the outward appearance of a thing. In Paul his
voyage the Mariners thought that some country did approach unto them: That was
their opinion, such was the appearance, for in failing the eye so informs.
Humanity sometimes so tempereth a man's speech, as were it precisely censured,
might peradventure be suspected for an untruth. Saint Austin writing to
Macedonius gives him in his letter the name of a good man, Ego quidem intuens
mores tuas appellaus te virum bonu^s, sed to intuens verba Christi die
tibi-ipsi etc. August: Maced epist: 54. Quod cu^ veru^ sit hoc eni veritas
dixit etc. Fallacia ssentatione dixisse, and dominicis verbis quasi contrarius
extitisse Ibid. No^ enim et ipse do^inus co^trar^a sibi loquutus est etc: Nee
^egitur conuersus fuisse ad fidem et paenitent^am. Auctor compilation.
Chron^log. Temput est beat a memoria Liberii pracepta reuoluere Ambros^a a
vurgim: Lib. 3. Ad Liberium Beatum Roma episcopum vna and Epiphan. hares. 75. A
beatisims Liberis etc. Basil, epist 74. ad episcop: occidentales.
hereat Macedonius pausing, because there is none good but God, the answer is
returned him by Saint Austin. In deed (quoth he) looking upon thy manners I
called the a good man, but you looking upon the words of Christ say to your
self their is none good but God: Which being a truth, (for the truth has
spoken it) yet would I not be thought to have spoken in a dissembling sort,
and to contrary (as it were) the Lord his own words nor did the Lord
himself contrary his own saing Luke. 6. A good manous of the good treasure
of the heart brings forth good things: Afterward resolving the doubt he
shows that God of himself is singularly good by himself, and
vnchangeablie, but man is not so, and yet be there proves withal, how man may
be called good. So as every scripture enforced to lend the coppie of a
countenance for some notable objection must not detain us from using kind
terms of one another, or to one another, though happslie at the first catch, a
dest wi^te may be thought to have said somewhat. Liberius Bishop of Rome in
the days of Constantius the Emperor became an Arrian, and an some histories
write was not thought to have revoked his heresy and repented. Yet Saint
Ambrose speaking of him names him not, but with great reverence, Time is
(says he) O holy sister to reuolue, and con over the precepts of Liberius of
blessed memory etc. In the Grecke church the ancient fathers Epiphanius, and
Basil do the like: Epiphanius in this wise, Eustachius (says he) together
with a many Bishops went in embassic to blessed Liberius Bishop of Rome.
Saint Basil has these words Certain things were proposed him by most
blessed Liberius All these good men in their gracious hope call Liberius more
then a dear brother though sometime living, and (as histories do record) dying
a professed Arrian, and in sure and certain hope of resurrection to eternal
life call him blessed of the Lord, the memory of his name blessed, yea himself
a most blessed man: Upon occasion or which words Master Iunius observes in
the monuments of antiquity that it is a very usual thing to call the dead
whether men or weomen by the name of blessed, (...). Beatos app ellari
defunctos etc. qui etsi culpate vixerunt tame^ in gratians and gloriama deo
recepti prasismun tur charitatis ethumani tat is officio, Iun. con. Bellar.
controuers. 3. Lib 4. c 9. Math. 21 1^ (...). Luc. 16.25 (...).
who though they lived blame-worthie yet by the duty of charity and
humanity are presumed by us to be received into grace and glory. If the
duty of charity, and humanity bind us so to speak, our church must be
reverenced for taking this order for the dead, and others better advise, who
not knowing to the contrary the last estate of some particular persons, yet
thwartinglie in opposition will needs hold the contraries, But beside this
received practice, (if sarder proof need) add this hereunto: our blessed
savior calls him, that had not on a wedding garment fellow, and Abraham
names the glutton in hell Son: He was not his son, nor the other
hailefellow. Noe such fault therefore (as somethinke) to call a man Brother,
dear brother. The phrase of our country, the guise of eiuill conversation,
the outward appearance, the rule of charity all justify this appellation,
though a sharpe-sighted eye see it not, and a sharpedged dislike approve it
not. Yet a brother 1. because of the same nation and people if a brother Deuteronomy.
15.12
2. because of the same kindred, brethren because of consanguinitie, Ioh. 7.3.
though they did not believe in him: He disclaimeth not the bond of nature
though they knit not with him in the 1 Kings. 20.33.
3. a brother sometimes because of the same office Ahab and Benhadad call one
the other so, because they were both Kings, 4. a brother because somewhat 1
Cor. 6.6.
5. a brother because of the same profession a brother goes to law with a
brother. Malus propter sacramenta communia frater esset Aug breuicicollat. 3.
c. 3.
A wicked man is a brother says Saint Austin even for this, because of his
outward profession, and fellowshippe in the Sacrements. So many of these ways
one that dies may be a brother, a dear brother, how much rather may we use
the name, not knoweing his final and last end, as we do not.


How can we say, In sure and certains hope of resurrection to eternal life.
Such a sure and certain hope it is, as in such a case needs to rely upon
things apprehended in part, for so does hope, receiving her direction from the
rules of Christian charity, which otherwhiles kindly qualifieth, what
knowledge would over severely censure. A sure and certain hope of resurrection
to eternal life in so many as do believe, which whither this or that
particular person now to be interred, as we know not, so of our knowledge we
speak not, but hoping in the rules of our Christian love we make a favorable
construction such as (we nothing doubt) is most acceptable to God and men.
Potest fieri, vt ribi asiud videatur quam veritas habet, dum tamen abt te non
aliud fiat, quam charitas habet opist 15: Hieron.
One (says Saint Austin) may think otherwise then truth has, so he speak
not otherwise then charity has.

This is besides his knowledge.
Does any one know to the contrary, and can so well skill of all the infallible
tokens of an impenitent heart, which is no ordinary knowledge, the Book no
more inforceth him to use every word in that precise manner there set down,
then to say a dear brother when it is a sister? And with as much reason men
may urge this cavil, as thus impertinently pretend that the Book inioyneth us
to account a reprobate for an elect child of God. But at any time will a
Minister bary from the standing rule, and order prescribed, let him consult
episcopal authority to whom direction at such times belongs, and from
thence reciue warrant for his proceedings? And withal let him be of sure
ground, that he speak according to knowledge, which bold ignorance cannot, yea
let him see in his several course that he give not offense to others, and draw
upon himself a needelesse hatred, De nullo quam nis pessimo in hac vita
desperandum est. Aug. Retract. lib. 1. c, 19.
as no other likelihood but he shall, unless at such times for that particular
he be lawfully authorized, remembering what Saint Austin aduertiseth, Not to
despair of any, be he never so bad, while his Soul is within him. And in his
last gasp, who art thou that iudgest of his estate to be dammed? Perkin. how
far a Reprobate may go. Page 12. B.
Notes (says Master Perkins) that this often betalleth reprobates to be
effeemed christians and they are often like them, that none but Christ can
discern sheep from goats true christians from apperant. Wherefore it is to
be thought far more besides a man his knowledge to deny, rather then it is to
hope.

And it is against Gods word.
Whatsoever disagreeth with Gods word deferueth to be condemned, Sed quia
hicsape hallucinars conting it pracedat modesta and placida inquisitie, vt
sanum sit, ac sobrium iudicium Call. in Job. 5. v. 10. Curiose inquirere no^ vt
emendes etc. ld. in Math. 7. Sed notes, tibique vel probitatis opinionem sicu^
aliis co^fera ris, vel praus a nimi oblectatinem concilies. Ibid. Superciliose
de re qualibet sint strum feramus indicium, etiam si in bonam pat tem accipi
poterat. Ibid. Hoe vitio laberant partim inuidi: partim hypocrita: partim
amantes sui. Ibid. Vi morosi sumus and maligui magis pendemus in s^^ifram
parsem Id. Act. 10. 1 f. Qui Iudidicat ex verbo des, Legem domini and Iudicium
suum^ ad charitatis regulam exigit, semper a soip so mititum faciens, etc.
Ibid. Math. 7.1.
but because in the misapplying it often falls out we may be deceived, let a
modest and temperat inquisition go before that the judgment given may prove
sober, discrete, and sound, otherwise it is no better then curiously inquiring
into other folks their words and deeds not to amend, or commend them, but to
note and tax, and all this to please our corrupt minds, and to get an opinion
of much holiness in comparison of others. This disease breaks forth into a
perverse holdnesse with a supercilious high look pasting a finister judgment
of that, which might better be interpreted. A vice some men labor of, that are
enulous, some that are hypocrites, and some that are lovers of themselves, and
not they only, but the better sort of men to, as Peter the Apostle in eating
food offered him of the Lord, whereupon it is noted That as we are testie, and
ill minded, we more and more incline to the worser part. Against which a
present help to settle and stay our judgments, and to keep a right measure,
and order is, by judging out of the word of God, bringing that judgment (we
thence make) to the rule of charity, always beginning at a man's own self.
Which it seems some men do not, whose foongs are so flippant, what others
know, and know not. For if they began with themselves, they would learn to
esteem of others better then themselves: In Gods graces that little, which is
in others (though but little) they would price, and make more of, the^ of their
own, contrary wise in sin and infirmities, that much which is in others, (
much as it is) they would think nothing in comparison of their own. 2. Tim.
1.15.
In evil, iudgeing worst of our selves, like Paul, when he reckons himself
chief of all sinners: In good, holding it little to that, which others have,
and do good with, more then we, making this full account: Ours is a more
greenous sin, and what we want in measure or weight, we match at times for
number. And so much is it the more heinous, as we know more against our
selves, then against another, and so much the more odious in the sight of God
as I, or thou have been taught more, Spiritualiae pec cata sunt maioris
culpae, carnalia maioris pana.
and condemned it more then others. Spiritual sins (says one) are of
greater fault, carnal of greater punishnment. Such odds their is twixt person
and person, though one of less blemish in the eye of the world, then some
other is. A man that takes his beginning at himself can have small time to let
his thoughts range abroad, as if he were all eye to look forth, and noe
heart to consider, what measure he meateth, shall be measured back upon him.
Thus a censurer rightly fitted in iudgeing others, must see into Gods word,
and beholding the truth in general, fear, least he be over hasty, and too
quick in making a particular apply of final condemnation. Licebit interdu^
statuere sitne de ploratus qui cecidit etc. sed quia rarissime hoc accidit. etc
Call. in 1. Ioh. 5.16: Immensas gratia sua diustias commend ins, nos suo exemplo
ass iubet. Luc. (...) non temere in quenquam seren dum est mortis aterna
iudicisi, potius noscharitas ad been sperandum flectat Ibid:
Otherwhiles in deed we may determine whether a man be to be doubted of,
that is fallen, or whether any place be for remedy: But because this happens
very seldom, and God commending the infinite riches of his grace commands
us to be merciful Luke 6.36. judgment of eternal death is not rashly to
be past upon any: Rather let charity bind us to hope well. It is but
sometimes, and seldom, and very seldom: and sometimes or very seldom,
overthrows not a general order of prayer, which for the most part holds,
as the communion book expresses. Beside God commends the infinite riches of
his grace, not his grace only, but the riches thereof, nor the riches but the
infinite riches of his grace in commanding us to be merciful, as if either
grace were wanting, or if present, it were in poverty, and that poverty
infinite) to be straight laced toward our brethren that depart hence. Again
judgment is a matter of judgment and therefore not rashly to be pronounced,
how much less judgment of eternal death: not upon any, in that be says
any, be tendereth every particular. Lastly in steed of deeming the worst,
Master Calvin his counsel is, that love should fake place to hope well, as if
this did well become us. And therefore in the large view a man takes of others,
he must borrowe help from rules of charity believing all things, Quod ait
Apost. Heb 6, and 10 de his qui malitia sanguinem Christi pedibus proterunt
illos sanguino faederis suisse sanctificatos referendum est ad iudicium
charitatis, qua om^nia crede^s proximi fidem ex professione estimat, sed
interin^ non rar^ falls tur. Piscat. co^t. And. Schaaf. These 68 and 70 2. Pet.
2.1. Heb: 10, and v. 6. Non est in oca cultadei tudici^ nobis inquiren; dum,
sed probabiliter omnes ex professis Christianisinal natos ad vitam aternam
electos merito praesupponimus Q. 9.19: Respom Iaco: Bethake These. 5.
Ecclesiast. 9.2.
and hopeing well of his neighbors estate to Godwarde by the profession the
party makes, speaking of him as of one whom the Lord has bought with a price
(for so Saint Peter does in his 2. epistle: 2. Chapter and 1. verse) sanctified
with the blood of the covenant, for so does the Apostle. Heb. 6. and 10.
Chapters, yet, notwithstanding such a one (thus charitablie thought of) may in
the end receive his portion with the devil and his Angels.

Gods word Deuteronomy 29.29. Secret things belong to the Lord our God, but the
things reave aled unto us, and our children for ever, that we may do all the
words of this law.
Namely secret things, which are not at all, nor in part revealed: True it
is that a reprobate, and an elect child of God may be found a like in yt
manner of their last end: We can go noe farther then the outward appearance.
We are not to pry into the secret judgments of the Lord, but that
probably all borne of such as profess the Christian faith, we do upon good
cause presuppose, are elected to eternal life. Not to be inquired into, of
us, but probably, and upon good ground we do presuppose it etc. Does our
church with us any more? Is it not to be confessed with tears, some die
rauing, blaspheeming etc. Alack at such times what should we think, but as
we are taught in the preacher. All things fall out alike to him that fears
an oath, and to him that fears it not. As for those extremities mentioned,
they arise many times from occasion of some hidden melancholies, and frenzies,
which often fall out in the paroximse and burnig fit, at what time the choler
shoot up into the brain and so disturbing the spirits with their mobilitie
make the head light, and giddie. Some are blacks as a chimnie stock, yet noe
argument of the wrath of God upon the person so disfigured. A reasonable
cause may be given for it, as proceeding from some bruze, or putrefaction of
the liver, or some impostume. All these and a thousand more deprive a man of
health, of use of his limes, of sense, memory, understanding, faith,
consolation, yea life, and all, yet noe warrant for us to hold such a man or
woman damned. Rather keep we to our compass of hope yea a sure and certain
hope, Facile est atque procliue malos odisse, quia mali sunt, rarum autem et
pium eosdem ipsos diligere quia homines sunt vt simul culpam im probes and
naturam approbes. August: epist. 54. Si desperata quorundam ma litia and
impietas nonsecus nobis apparet, acsi dominus came digito monstraret non est
quodcer temus. etc: Call in Ioh 15, 16 apud Marlor. Sunt tales diui no iudicio
relin quendi. Ibid.
for hope makes not ashamed. To hate an evil man because evil is noe hard
matter (says Saint Austin) but a rare thing, and virtuous to love the same
rarties, because they are men, that so it may appear we do both at once
reprove their fault, and approve their nature. But if the desperate malice,
and impieties of any be so evident, as if God did point with his finger to it,
then is it not for us to wrestle with his just judgment, as desireing to be
thought more merciful then he. And what of such? They are to be left to the
judgment of God. Wherein we may not (if we would leave ye form prescribed
in the communion book,) many a prouiso must be thought upon: 1. It must be
wickedness 2. not any wickedness at all adventures but malice (that is) a
malignant cankred mind of set purpose against that, which is good, for so is
malice: 3. it must be desperate past all hope; as who should say there is noe
more time remaining. All little enough to make experience (if at any time) so
indefinite the time is and uncertain, whither God will call to repentance, in
the turning of a hand, in a trice,, in the twinckleing of an eye twixt the
bridge and the water, the cup and the lip. Therefore it becomes us to be
wise that we give not over our hope, as long as any hope may posiblie be
conceived: 4. This wickedness, malice, desperate wickedness must be evident,
not surmised only but apparent, certainly apparent, not by guesses but upon
sufficient warrant, for so it is, when God in his word gives express
direction: Al which if the minister make conscience are so dangerous points,
and so nicelie set, as he will not easily be wrought from a public course
established. Si deus iniq^^^^ and scelestis parcendo ^isque vitam largiendo.
etc. August. epist. 54 Vtru^ faciant quod promittu^t incerti sumus, etc. Ibid.
Fratres nostri sunt permoti profunditate quastionis, sed regi debuerunt
gubernaculo authoritatis. August de verb. Apost. sermon. 14.

For if God in sparing wicked and vile persons give them life, yea many of
them, whom he well knows will never repent, how much more should we he
merciful toward them, that (peradventure) promise amendment, and whether
they make good their word or not, we cannot tell. In points of greater
difficulty (then any we now handle) Saint Austin aduertiseth those of his
time: Our brethren (says he) are very much mooned with profoundnes of
questions in this kind, who should, if they did regard their duty be
governed by them, that sit at the stern of authorytie. But we may se to what
pass men are now come, our ^ritickes and graund censurers meddle with noe
small things, but the very heigh of all, as children their estate at their
entrance to the grave buried by baptism, and elders at their going into the
grave to be laid up in the earth: one coming into the world, the other
going out, asoording neither one nor other a good word, noe not so much as the
^^ne of brethren dear brethren. A mariull it is that Deuteronomy. 29.29. Deuteronomy. 29, 29
Forbids us to hope well, because election is the Lords secret, as if it did
not condenme us as well for suspecting the worst. All the good comes by such
barbarous, rude, sanadge opinions, i^, it spreads strange discipline ^^wens
outward behavior, that, as if they had forgotten all humanity, scarce yield
now adays a kind salutation of God speed, or God deen. Turks and infidels
do not thus, whose manner, (as our merchants know) is, Alech salem, Illiric.
clauis Scrip. verb. Pax.
whereunto the murswere is valich sas lem To the peace and to the peale. The
reason of this by course (among some with us) arises from hence. For what
know they, whither he be a brother or sister, what know they where about
he goes, and whither he will? For ought they can tell he may go kill,
steal, break upon some house. So that by this blind reason it may seem
should any of this refined straternitie suffer in bonds, (...). 1. Pet. 4, 15.
and be cast into prison as an evil doer, or a busy body, an other honest
well meaning man heareing of it would in the bowels of his christian: tender
affection pity him much after this fashion. Sure lie such a one in prison, I
hold him a very godly man and one I dare say will change his opinion. And let
others upon what ground (I know not) be offended with him, I hold him the dear
child of God, a brother in Christ, a dear brother, and in sure and certain
hope of his coming forth, dare pawn all I am worth, and do engage my self
with all thankfulness for enlarging his liberty. All this said. One should
presently cast him this their position in Divinity for a chokepeare. It is
more then you know, And speak no more then you know. A good Christian must
prove his sayings and doings out of Gods word, you cannot justify this your
hope in Scripture, it speaks to the contrary: Secret things belong unto the
Lord. This is not revealed, For it is a contingent. It may be so, and it may
not be so, De contingenti. bus nemo nisi Deuteronomy.
In a point so doubtful as another man's arbitrarie will, dare you tell us of
asure and certain hope you have concerning him? You are far wide, and your
judgment is too peremptory. A strange reproof a man may say this is, and yet
as strange as it is, the premises are theirs, that object against the
Communion Book: we put but minors to them, and in the applycation make the
absurdity of their doctrine more manifestly appear. Thus much by the way. In
a word for a man's last end, he stands and falls to the Lord. As for us (at his
burial) we come forth as his brethren, not as his judges, Remember we what S.
Austin has, Erogatorem me posuit deus non exactorem, ser. 164.
The Lord appoints me to lay out not to call in. And therefore our care must
be to do that, wherefore we come, namely in a decent manner to bury the dead,
and to judge charitablie as in the Book is ordained, rather then peremptorily
to cross it, as some would. Keep we to our direction unless we know the
contrary, and be we of a sure ground, that we know the contrary.

It nourishes Origens error, that says All shall be saved.
It does in deed as much, Psalm: 77.9.
as Psalm. 77. where the Prophet demands. Has God forgot to be merciful?
Has he shut up his tender mercies in displeasure? Romans 11.32.
or that Romans 11. He has shut up all in unbelief that he might have mercy on
all: or that, 1. Cor. 4. Judge nothing before the time, 1, Cor, 4.5.
etc. and then shall every man have praise of God. All which places, as they
are not to be spunged out of Canonical scripture, because Origin derived his
error thence, neither is their cause for this, though it so seem in their
corrupt understanding, whose fault it is, wresting it, as the unlearned, and
unstable abused diverse sentences in the writings of Saint Paul. 2, Pet, 3, 16,


This is, as it is in Esaias, 5. to call good evil, and evil good.
Are all subject to the woe there denounced by the Prophet, Vsis hoe venit
omnibus co^mis ^niter. Muscul. in Isay. c, 5, 20,
that of ignorance and infirmity speak what they think, though by
mispersuasion seduced? Are all under a curse, that sometimes raise up their
voice like a trumpet bidding battle to sin, and yet anon after sound a
retreit, and call for a parlie, having chid, and chid roundly, change their
note, and wrap up their dose in a sugarsweete with some sentence as this? But
we are persuaded better things of you, and such as accompany salvation, though
we thus speak. Spoke he of a reproof, a curse, and burning, and yet makes up
his period with, But we are persuaded? Heb. 6.9.
etc. When many times (God he knows) the teachers persuasion had need be
strong, for in experience else, they will soon find the contrary. And shall
any one twit them with this of the Prophet Isay, that they call good evil,
etc. Because other whiles their persuasion is greater then their proof? God
forbid, Was it the Prophet his meaning, or is it theirs, that thus dispute to
bold plea against God? whom it pleases of his unspeakable goodness, though
we be evil, to call himself our heavenly Father, and they whose Father he is,
are his children, and his children are those some which he names saying, A
good man out of the treasure of his heart, etc. Luc. 6, 45,
Well done good and faithful servant enter into thy master his joy. Are all
under a curse, that talking of a stubborue people, stifnecked, Mat: 25, 21,
Act, 7, 2.
and of uncircumcised hearts and ears, whose Fathers resisted the holy Ghost,
and their children heirs of the same wickedness, a generation of murderers,
persecutors, traitors to God and Christ? Yet for all this evil known upon
them, and by them, calls them notwithstanding brethren and Fathers in the one
name afording reverence, in the other love, in both (because of both) prays
for them, yea for all their cross, obstinate courses in his presence that
their hearts burst for anger, gnash their teeth, fret, grin, shout, all to pault
him with stones, when he in the greatness of hope against hope prays for
them. Lord lay not this sin to their charge. What can be said more against
the form of thanksgiving enjoined in the book, then may be (but fondly
objected) against Saint Stephen his practice? They resisted the holy Ghost, yet
that hindered not his prayer: Murderers and Traitors he calls in civility and
good manners Fathers and Brethren They were enemies to God and him, yet that
diminishes not his love: He set Christ before him for an example, Peccarunt ad
mortem and in peccato suo mor tui sunt. etc. Mar. in 1. Ioh. 5, 16. Orationes
non debito ordine factae, ad nullis nobis imputantur peccatum propter
chavitatem qua oramus Ibid. Quinil potest sperare desperet nihil.
who on the Cross prayed for his enemies, though the Father forgave not all of
them: for some died, and perished in their sins, and are under condemnation.
And as prayers at such times for men (peradventure) out of order are not
imputed for sin, because they are made in love and charity, so when a man
gives thanks to God for one, he takes his dear brother, it is not charged
upon him for sin, because of his love and charitable hope. And little is his
love and less his hope, that will needs despair as denying him for a brother.
All a man loses is: He was deceived in giving thanks for one, with whom it
sped not so well, and yet that it did not, he cannot absolutely say, nor
positiuely determine which kind of error bears no action amongst men, but
rather is a motive to draw somewhat from men, who have not been so kind (as
we well hoped) how much more may it, and shall it from God, all in good time.
For not mere natural policy, but a fruit of the spirit it is, Satius est
reum absoluere, quam condemnare innoceniem.
of the two rather to save a man that destructh to die, then to condemn an
innocent: and a more gracious work to call one brother tormented in hell (for
so did Abraham) then set a negative in place of it, which must so be, if the
contrary prevail. And though it be said that a man given to lodge strangers
may intertaine he knows not whom, yet that Apostolical adulse shall stand,
as a principle of Christian hospitality. Be not forgetful to lodge Strangers
for thereby some at unawares have received Angels into their house: So in like
manner though it be said, that a Minister accustomed to bury the dead, in
burial giving thanks to God, may give thanks he knows not for whom, yet
that Ecclesiastical direction may stand for a principle not disproued* Be not
forgetful: nay know it your duty in th^se and these words. In sure and
certain hope etc. For thereby at unawares, yea purposely, thanks giving shall be
made for many, that are heirs of the promise, and who is not so in
particular, neither they, nor any else can or dare holdely demonstrate. For
such a one was in his life reputed a member of Gods church partaker of the
holy word, and sacraments. And therefore this practice of ours is most
consonant to christian religion specially setng the ground of this hope is in
that form of burial plainly expressed videlicet. Thorough our Lord Jesus
Christ. Here now it were time to conclude this point but that we must let thee
to understand (good reader) that these exceptions (we take) are not made so
much against the words delivered at the grave over the dead, as against this
that we use any words at al. Their communion book exhibited to ye parliament
forbids any farther duty to be used, but only the neighbors following
the corpse to the grave, (...).
and there with a dumb show turning it to the earth so leave it without any
admonition and consolation to the living, or comfortable remembrance of ye
dead. And this (forsooth) is done under a color of remoouing superstition, so
calling that holy custom which our church uses in her manifestation of ye
christian hope which she has and then publishes concerning the glorious
resurrection of our bodies at the last day. But (God be thanked) our practice
is most commendable, employing the time of burial in godly prayers, wholesome
instructions necessary consolation, and special meditations of our mortality
with effectual motives leading unto mortification: Others that would vary from
this order have only these pretenses for their best reasons. 1. The example of
Geneua to warrantize them herein, whose slender performance of this solenme
duty is noe sufficient rule to direct v^: 2. because their purpose is to
wind the minister out from attendance upon this office, and they can noe
better way (it seems) redeem his liberty, but by utterly disclaiming any
such duty as then to be performed, whereas we would understand, why the
minister may not as well bury, as join in marriage, unless this may go for a
reason? The minister of Geneua does the one and not the other: He marries,
but butteth not. Well: Retain we our irreproueable discipline in this kind,
had we noe church to join hands of fellowshippe with us herein, (...). Greg.
Nazian. orat. in laudem Basil. page 516. Grae. 64.98. (...). Id. orat. 2, in
Iul. page 304. (...). Page 305. (...) Chris. homil. 4, ad Heb. p. 124.
Tertullia lib. de anima mortuos etiam oratione a proesbyteri, co^ poni
consueuisse Centur. 3. c. 6. page 138. Orig. in 3. lib. Job Ibid Tota ad funus
eius Palastimarum vrbju^ turba conuenit: hebra^, graco, latmo sermon psalmi in
ordine personabant. Hieron, in epist ad E^stoch. Paucanos dice re temporiscogit
angustia, quod nouit and charitas vestra aebere nos exequits fidelis corporis
solemn objequium. August. con. 2, in Psalm. 103. sub mitio.
as yet we know we have examples both of elder and present churches: Greg.
Nazian. writing of ye holy man Basil witnesses, how lamentation for him were
so great as the Psalms then sung were quire borne down with mourning and
heaviness. Again in another place comparing the government of Constantine with
the tyranny of Iulia^ the Apostate and of their death: He, (that is)
Constantine was brought with solemn public praises, and orations to the
grave, and withal such complements, as we christians think to honor a
Godly translation, or death of godly men. Anon after he calls the duties
then performed. A funeral recompense of Psalms singing etc. S. Chrisostom of
his time what are himnes (says he)? Do we not with them glorify and thank
God, that at the last he has crowned (our friend) gone hence now he is eased of
his sore labors? Again anon after. Consider what thou singest at such a time:
Return O my soul into thy rest, or that Psalm I will not fear what man does
unto me. For these were the Psalms of David it seems they sung in those
days. As thus in the greek church, so in the west churches the like manner
was: for Tertullian shows that the dead were wont to be buried by the
presbiters or ministers with prayer: Origin upon Job, witnesses that there was
thanksgiving to God for the dead that they dyed in the faith and every one
wished the like for himself that he might make the like godly and peaceable
end. Saint Ierom notes the like of the life and death of Paula, y^ whole
companies of ye citys of Palestin came forth to her funeral, and there were
sung in course Psalms in Heb, greek Latin, and Syriack, and in other places of
his works he alleges as much of others. And Saint Austin also implies, that
his second sermon upon the 103. Psalm was at some funeral, wherefore he was
driven to abridge his speech. The shortness of the time forces me to be
brief and the reason your love knows, Qui divine ^ocatione ab hac vita
recodunt cum Psalmis tantu^modo and Psallentium vo cibus debent ad sepulchru^
deferri. council. Tol. 3, can. 21. In sepulturis and exequiis morta lit atis
admonitio diligens fiat and exeit ands in ter alia prasentes, vt recogite^t sib
teodem modo hinc excedendi^s esse. council. Col. part. 7. c. 52. Antequam cor
pustradatur se pultura quaeda^ recitantur a maioribus eori^a ad hoc conscrip
ta, quibus diutna iustitia commendatur and hominum peccata exaggerantur. etc.
Maimoni. tractat de luctu c, 4, apud Tre^. in mare. 4 8. Improbamus maxim Cyni
coscorpora mor tuorum negligentes, aut qua^ negligentissime contemptissime que
in terram abiscientes nun quam vel verbu^ bonum de defunctis facientes Helnet
conf. posler. c. 26 Sect. 16. Iudicamus vtile esse vt in funeribus ca e sacris
literis recitentur and explicentur, qua ad corroborandam fidem in horrore
mortis and ad co^firmandam spem resurrectionis conducunt. Witteberg, confess.
cap. 24. Ibid an har.
because we are to perform a solemn duty to the funerals of a faithful
body. In the council. 3. Of Toledo. can. 21. They who by God are called out
of this life must be brought to the grave with Psalms only, and the voice of
singers. As for a funeral song which was commonly sung for, or to the dead,
we utterly forbid. In the council of Colon. Par. 7. c. 52. In burials and
funerals the people must carefully, be admonished of mortality, and they which
are present must be rouzed up to recount with themselves, that they must depart
hence after the same manner. Among the Jew, as ^their own Rabbis witness
the fashion at burial, has been and is this: Before the corpse be ^eliuered
to the grave, certain points are recited by their anncesters written to this
purpose wherein the divine justice is commended, and men's shines exaggerated,
whereby they deserved death, and God is entreated so to exercise his justice,
that withal he forget not to be merciful. But these examples are
(peradventure) out of date, and some later practice nearer home in our reformed
churches will better content some. These therefore be the confessions of other
churches at this day. We utterly disallow al Cinicks, who neglecting the bodies
of the dead, or else tumbling them into the earth in a most negligent and
contemptuous sort never once mention a good word of their dead. Heluet.
confess. Again the church of Wittenberg. c. 24. Love and charity exacteth at
our hands to wish the dead al tranquillity and happiness in Christ: Besides
that we must commend our dead to honest burial so near as we can in regard
of the time, and of men's places and all to witness the hope of the
resurrection. Therefore judge we it expedient that in funerals those things
be recited out of holy scripture and then published, as do make for
strengthening of faith against the terrors of death, and to confirm our hope
of the resurrection. But leaving this argument sufficiently handled so far
forth as it concerns other men's contradictions or our just defense, we
proceed to the chap: following.


Chap. 2. We cannot Subscribe, Because we know not how it agrees with Gods
word to desire him to grant any thing, which our prayers dare not presume to
ask.
WOrds ministering this doubt, are taken out of the Collect on the 1.2. Sunday
after Trinity. Almighty and everlasting God, which art always more ready to
hear then we to pray, and art wont to give more then we desire or deserve,
power down upon us the abundance of thy mercy, forgiving us those things,
whereof our conscience is afraid, and giving unto us that, which our prayers
dare not presume to ask, etc. Herein our find-faults, and their abettors make
plain what they mislike, but what cause they have so to do they mention not.
It ^alleth out very often that the mind of him who prays is otherwhiles much
straightened, as thinking it does not pray, when it does, and forgetting how it
dares while it complains that it dares not.

These words are contrary to another Collect read on the 23. Sunday after
Trinity. God our refuge and strength, which art the Author of all godliness,
be ready to hear the deuou^ prayers of the Church, and grant that those
things, which we ask faithfully, we may obtain effectually. To ask
faithfully, and to ask doubtfully, are contrary one to the other.
These two are no such extremities but for a time one in^ureth the other, as
heat and cold, when either of them is indifferently found in the same person,
but with this difference that they are imputed to a several beginning, the one
of nature the other of grace, the one of flesh the other of the spirit. The
flesh begets wavering, doubting, perplexed thoughts, and all from a law in
the members rebelling against the law of the mind, where the ^^^fe is like the
^ight twixt the house of Saul and the house of David, no day no hour but
giving or taking a soil. His expectation goes away in a dream, Quamuis vide
autur hac du^ pugnare nemb tamen est qui non idem in se experiatur. Marso in
Marc, 9, 24. Quum ^^squo^ extet fides perfect a sequitur ex part nos esse
incredulos. Ibid. Etiamsi in n^bis aliquam diffidentia (peciom sentiamus non
tame^ propt^ rea daspo^dend^^^ esse animum quasi nullae fiduci^^ donat^ sumus a
domino. Zanch. de relig. lib. 1, de diffiden. Orationes breauissimas and rap
tim quoda^modo ci^culatas. Au, gust. ad Proba^ epist. 121. Act. 20, 10. Isay.
6, 13. (...). 2 Cor 4.8. Pro charitate Christi nolis habere Christi^s Hieron.
ad Algas. 9.9.
and perishes like an abortiue that thinks he can have abundance of the one,
and no touch of the other. For our Faith being imperfect as it is, the very best
bele^u^ not so fully as they ought: But though we feel some spice of distrust
in our selves, yet must we not be quite out of heart, as if we had no confidence
at all. To begin this point somewhat higher and speak more thoroughly to it,
and of it. First, they that contrary our Communion Book must know, that the
Collects are certain dartings and quick elaculations, such as the earnestest
devotion is well acquainted with, fittest to express the speedy thoughts of
our Soul, when she is winged as a Dove in her flight toward heaven. The
motions are diversely raised and they diversely fall, sometimes as in a full sea
our thoughts bear aloft, sometimes they are at a low ebb, all a-mort, dead
and alive in the twinkling of an eye: sometimes as the Crow out of the Arc
houering twixt heaven and earth, and as in a sickness a good day and a bad day
interchangeably have their intercourse, ever and anon so these have some
swawin or other. Such are the spiritual apoplexies and traunces, whereinto the
faithful are cast, and yet like Eutychus they draw life though inwardly, for a
holy substance is in them, as in an Elm or an Oak, when they have shed their
leaves and (unlikely clusters as they seem) Wine is found in them Destroy them
not for their is a blessing. Subject they may be, and are unto doubtings,
mammerings, and the like, but overcome they are not. They stagger but stick
not. They may be, and are humbled in the sight of their own sin, but not
destitute of all confidence in Gods mercies. Wherefore the current of their
prayer in such a perpiexed style speaks better things, then it pleases some
to think. And as Ierom of Moses for love unto Christ would not have Christ, so
our Church in a childlike boldness, while it presumes not to ask, makes
bold to ask. Secondly, they that knit these knots, and cast a mist before the
Sun, should consider what is the course of these s^uerall Collects, how
(commonly) they are a summary abridgement of some special matter handled in
Epistle, or Gospel, or both, as they know that busy themselves in a diligent
observation of the particular contents in the Epistle appointed to be read
that day: Saint Paul speaking of their dignity that labor in the word shows
the insufficiency of man, yea of the chiefest even the Apostles, that they,
though they have trust to godward through Christ, and so both themselves and
their prayers dare much, yet are not sufficient of themselves to pray, because
no prayer is without employment of our thoughts wherein such weakness they
acknowledge, that whereas a man would take it for the easiest matter of a
thousand to lend a spare thought upon occasion, they renounce all possibility:
How then should their prayer dare presume to ask? For if they be able to any
thing the same comes of God: all this the Epistle compriseth: no sufficiency
how then may they dare? not daring how can they presume? neither daring, nor
presuming a truth it is their prayers dare not presume. In the Gospel read the
same day, the like may be marked out unto us. For the history taken out of the
Evangelist, shows, how cercame of Decapolis brought unto Christ a man that
was deaf and stammered in his speech, and they all prayed our Savior, that he
would lay his hands on him, not mentioning, what they would have cured, nor
how, nor in what manner: As for the party himself he was so far from
speaking (for the string of his tongue was not untied) and so far from
hearing for he was deaf, that if Christ had not been more ready to hear,
then he to speak, and to grant more, then his or their prayers did presume to
ask, he might have lived and died in his infirmity. Whereupon our Church
gathering brief notes out of the Gospel (and the collection is warranted by
the text) observes of Gods part it is meet to acknowledge, he is more ready
to hear, then we to pray, and is wont to give more then either we desire or
deserve, yea so gracious our God is, that he forgiueth us, what our consciences
may well be afraid of, namely sin, and gives us, what our prayers dare not
to presume to ask (namely in temporal blessings) such, and such, in this or
that manner, at this, or that time, which our prayers dare not presume to ask
in such special sort: 3. they should it own self must show it self, el^^ we
see it not: so a spirit, and that a holy one, and that in like measure may best
give judgment of prayers thus in^ited Wherefore this considered; we return
them what our Savior said of his Disciples, Luke 9.15.
They know not of what spirit they are. Had they such bruised, humblest, wounded
consciences, as that servant of God (whosoever in his meditation penned these
Collects) they would soon skill, how the pulse of such a prayer beats and
keeps tune very pleasingly in the ears of the Lord. For as a discord in
Music gives a grace, and commendation to the song, so these discords and
iars in our petitions desirous to pray, and yet not daring to pray, coming,
returning, and making a broken note, much pleases our Father, which is in
heaven, though they seem to displease us: Palm 42 5.
Why art thou cast down O my Soul, why art thou disquieted within me, Hope in
the Lord, for I will yet give him thanks for the help of his presence.
^gredere anima mea quid times, egredere quid trepidas, 70. prope annis
serui^sts Christ^ and mortem times? Hieron. d^ Hilari. Act. 27.41.
The like dispute of and on Saint Ierom writes Hilarion had. Go forth my
Soul what fear thou? go forth why tremblest thou? Almost 70. years have
thou served Christ, and do thou fear death (...) Such wavering affections
like Paul's ship caught between two seas, when the forepart stuck, and the
hinder part was broken, and yet the Pa^^ingers ^afe. These streights they fall
into, that fall to prayer, and (what Saint Paul said of life and death) they
are difficulties the faithful are straightened with. The presence of his
Majesty to whom they pray, (...) Philip. 1.23.
the guiltienesse of their sin, the rigor of the law, the multitude of their
wants, some bid the^ pray for mercy, abundance of mercy, as if a little would
not serve but abundance must be powered down, some again (to their thinking)
forbid them to pray, and demand how they dare presume, and so both ways their
speech sauoureth of confidence, and infirmity. Such mixture is always in our
petitions, because such mixture is in our selves, flesh and not all spirit,
some distrust, and not all fulness of faith, sometime a feeling that we believe,
sometime complaineing that we do not believe the tongue of our balance
bearing so doubtful, doubtful it is, which scale will prevail, and yet the
better in the end prevails. For thorough stitch it goes, comes,
ouercometh, and ouercomeing triumphs, triumphing concluddeth and the
conclusion is through our Lord Jesus Christ, so as in the same sentence the
fall of the leaf, and a spring again, fire in the ashes and stirred up
again: A little faith appears not with the soonest, but like scuit in the
bud, whence his nature and substance is, so coucheth, and so is preserved. Thus
it flu^t^reth twirt daring and not daring praying and not praying because it
would have abundance of mercy, and yet finds wants in the petition. This
striving in the womb of the same collect argues the life of faith rather
quickened then dying, springing then falling, so faultlesse it is, if all be
well considered. For as Rebecca when she felt the twins in her womb (though it
pained bit yet) thereby knew, she had conceived, and that the children were
alive, so they who are brought upon their knees, finding the majesty of God
infinite, his justice strict, his knoweledge searching the reins, his
holiness such, as Angels are not pure in his sight, and what themselves are on
the other side, their baseness odious, their ignorance blockish, their sins
abominable, their wants lamentable, (at what time notwithstanding they
conceive comfort, for else could they not pray) are foully abasht and ^eicted, as
professing they dare not ask somethinges at the hand of the almighty. Which
to like effect we find: as if an honest good heart laying open his estate in
more words would be thus understood. Whereas our prayers, by which we crave
that thou power down the abundance of thy mercies are thorough the want of a
most holy faith ouerlaide with unspeakable imperfections, such as tire them
out in the way to heaven, therefore we pray thee O Lord with all other
transgressions forgive us even our prayers, whereof our conscience guilty as
it is (yt they are so stained as they are) presumes not nor dares presum: to
ask, what otherwise it would, and at other times does, when more comforted
then now it is, thou well know O almighty God the petitions of them that
ask in thy sons name, Collet. 23 sun. after Trinity and after the Communion
at dismissing of the Congregation.
we beseech the mercifully to incline thine ears to us, that have made now our
prayers and supplications unto thee, and grant that these things which we have
faithfully asked according to thy will, may effectually be obtained to the
relief of our necessity and to the setting forth of thy glory etc. Thus a
faithfule soul in prayer so^time raised and anon dejected wrestling with God as
did Jacob in his conflict with y^ Angel, diversely tuneth the phrase of his
troubled spirit and notwithstanding a supposed discord keeps measure and
concord with faith and with the holy scripture. Genes. 32.24.
But when men set their wits upon the tenter to reach out their objections, and
to deal as if they had to deal with Beuis of Southhampton, thinking noe more
reverently of the humble, duetifull, bashful, modest, Job. 1.1. c 9.15
Altercando, disceptando, gloriando, nihilcora^ de^ obti^e ^imu^ La^ater. Ibid.
Deo indicante* nemo i^sons est ipse melius qua^ nos ipsinoust quales simus,
(...) vsde^ pectatum vbi nos nullu^ animaduertimus. Ibid. 20. No^ ex toto eredo
me, velipsi co^ scienti^ mea, quippe cum (...) ipsa quidem queat me
comprehendere tot^^ neque iudicare potest de toto, qui totum non audit.
Bernard. epist. 42. Audit deus in cord cog^tantis quod non audit velipse, qui
cogitat. Ibid. Licet integerrimus essem tama^ adeo sulgoro maiestatis eius
consternarer, vt de me-ipso ni hi^ scirem. Lauater an Job. 9.21.
low and lowly speethes proceeding from a broken heart, thence it is, they make
a doubt where no doubting is if the same mind were in them, as becomes
censurers of the prayers of the church, those irreprouable collects would have
greater commendation, then be thought a stumbling block of offense, as they
are. Take we example from Job, Abraham, and Solomon. Holy Job, of whom
scripture gives testimony, that he was an upright just man, one that feared
God, and eschewed evil confesses of himself though he were just he could not
answer, but would make supplicatio^s to his judge, holding it more fit to leave
wrangling, disputing, boasting, for these will obtain naught, but praying
zealously, behauing himself submisly he may find favor at ye Lords hand, yea
were he just, his own mouth would condemn him, were he perfect the Lord could
judge him wicked, because none is innocent, when God judges, and he it is,
that knows us better the^ we our selves, and sees such sins, as we never
think for. Accordingly whereunto S. Bernard speaks I do not wholly believe my
self, nor my own conscience, for it cannot comprehend me all, neither can he
judge of the whole that hears not the whole. Anon after, God hears in the
heart of him, that he thinks, which a man's own self hears not. yea were Job
righteous, yet should he be ashamed with ye brightness of God his majesty, that
he should not know himself. We see how the look of a Prince dasheth his
subject out of countenance and therefore much rather may the presence of ye Lord
(who is a dreadful God clothed with unspeakable majesty, as with a garment,
whose glory surpasses ye brightness of all the lights in heaven) astonish y^
bruised conscience of Job who knew, if he should wash himself with snow water
and purge his hands most clean, yet should God dip him in ye pit, and his own
cloths would make him unclean. For God is not a man, yt he should answer him,
if they should strine in judgment. Job. 9.30.31.
All which sentences debasing him discover the true estate of an humble soul,
who upon due examination made, says in effect as a troubled conscience in
this collect, that dares not presume to ask, and yet would gladly have what
it stands in need of. The like may be observed in Abraham the father of all
the faithful, who in his communication with God and prayer to him for Sodom,
ministers to our edification these excellent notes. First he confesses he was
dust and ashes, not forgetting he had a living soul, Now oblituse^as Abraham
se se anima imortali praditum esse sedquod maxim conte^p tibile est eligit qui
scomni dig^itate exina^iat. Luth. in G^nes. 18.27. Quo propius ad deum accessit
co melins sen tit, quam mise ^^s^t and abiect^ hominum conditio. Solus est ^nim
deisulgor qui homines stulta and ebria sui fiducia exutos pudore confundit, and
peni tus humiliat. Ibs Non debemus ^^pudentes esse ad petendum quidlibet sed
pudore^ soruare ac vere cundiam. Muse. Ibid. Pro. 28.14. c. 14.16.
but choosing the most conte^ptible things, and emptying himself of al other
things whence he might Glory: so yt faithful saying in their prayers they dare
not presume, proves not they want al confidence in God his fatherly love, but
choose rather to lay open their abject and distressed condition. Secondly it is
to be observed in Abraham The nearer a man draws unto God, the more feeling
he has how miserable and wretched man's estate is. For the only brightness of
the Lord his glory it is, that puts to shame and truly hu^bleth men, so as
they are stripped of al foolish confidence in themselves, wherewith commonly they
are besotted and stark dru^k. Thirdly in these words: let not my Lord be angry
yt I speak etc. And 32. Let not my Lord now be angry, and I will speak but this
once: He prays to turn away ye Lord his wrath, and so makes his pelitio^
acceptable by his humble suit, teaching us withal, how we must not be saucy nor
impudent to ask any thing at al adue^turs, but to preserve shamefastnes and
bashful modesty when we pray to God. And what else does y^ collect in these
words forgiving us those things whereof our conscience is afraid, and giving
unto us, yt which our prayers dare not presume to ask, which form of prayer is
very agreeable to yt place. Pro. 28. Blessed is ye man yt fears always, meaning
is wary, and of a tender conscience loath to do or say, yea even in prayer ye
least thing that may offend God, as ye other branch of ye verse, and the 16. of
the 14. Chap. sufficiently proves. This is certain he yt never doubted of his
salvation after he was called to y^ knowledge of God in christ, yt man never
rightly believed, for he which believes in yt truth (of a truth) feels many
wants and doubts like a sound man after a recovery from an ague feels many
grudgings of that disease, which if he had no health, nor life he could not
feel at al. Let men please them selves, y^ are disposed to thwart this truth,
Affermant tibi, non sibi Cicer^. de d^inations
what Tully spoke of Metrodorus fitteth the^ well. They say so to others, but
not to themselves. Fourthly we are to mark in whose name these prayers are
offered not for the minister himself only, or some few, yt have profited in
the ways of godliness, and may be thought to have a greater measure of grace,
but for the most, who commonly are the weakest, and but lately yeand in y^
sold of christ, tender lambs they must needs tremble hearing, as they do the
Lions, such as Abraham, and Job behauing the^seluss in fearful and bashful
manner. Only he that knows not what belongs thereto, will think all this a
great deal more the^ needs. Pancissimos esse qui excellenti fide polleant, pa^
cisesse mediocr^^ plurimos auiem mensura exigu^ esse praditos. Marc. 9.24.
But if we will observe what is given every one, it will easily appear the
fewest have an excellent faith a very few an indifferent faith, and the most
are they, that have the least measure of faith. Should a nurse be lisping to
the babe on her knee, another that stands by knows not the reason. It is
sufficient that she does. Our brethren think we do in repeating this strain
what beseems us not, we answer. Let alone now. For it well beseems us to
fulfill al humility, and if any be vile in his own eyes upon true repentance for
sin, Tristitia and pudor sunt coniuncta semper, vbi est vera pe^cati agnitie.
Quod sicognoscere velumus a^ in penitenti^ profecerimus, videamus an praoculis
istos duos affectus habeamu; C^ls Luc. 18 13.
he will think of himself more vildely the^ all this comes to, resolving
the more a man is ashamed of himself, and heartily sorrowful, ye more he
profits in ye course of repentance. Did we not know more sin of presumtion
the^ are guilty of faultles humility, and come to the Lord like hail fellow well
met, rather the^ smitten with a holy fear, such clauses as these might
otherwhiles be spared. But most of us in our hearts know the contrary. And
were we (as some think) they may be bold and confident, it is for us to have a
lively touch for sin. No man but the less he prizeth himself in his own eyes,
the more he pleases the Lord, who gives grace to the lowly. And though it may
seem the speech of a dastardly conscience, yet unto who^ will the Lord look,
but unto him that is poor and of a contrite spirit, and trimbleth at his
words? Say a son may be bold, and we will not say otherwise, yet a father
likes his son never a whit the worse, if he make not always so bold as the
father would have him. Isay. 66.1.
That made Saint Paul use this course. Sanctified he was from his mothers
womb, yet he held himself chief of all sinners, Galat. 1. 15.
in regard what he once was, though it were forgiven him. 1. Tim. 1.15.
And he that prayed for Corinth, Ephesus, and the like, beggeth praters at
their hands like Lazarus, Ephesians. 6, 18.19.
y^ begged crumbs at y^ rich man's table. Pray for all saints and for me, As if
he were no saint, or as if y^ still ran in his mind, how he had been a perse
quutor of ye chruch of God. Which kind of thoughts having their course, and
recourse in prayer are a damp, and if not (as they cannot quite) put out the
light of our hope, yet they dim, and calm the heat of our confidence, that it
be not more hardy then is expedient.

Forgiving us those things, whereof our conscience is afraid.
This clause may stand uncontrolled. For is not forgiveness the remission of sin,
and has not our conscience good cause to be afraid of sin, doing that which
God severely forbids, omitting that with he strictly commands, negligently
performing ye best duties, we should intend? Can it be other, but that our
conscience may well fear, til it be released, when it calls to mindether
wherein, or against who^ the offense is committed? Wherein, namely in prayer
for so it is many times, Copiosa vanitatis cateruas August confess. lib. 10. c.
35. Irruentibus nugatoriis cogitationibus etc. Ibid. Abductus turpi cogitatione
etia^ qua dictu erubescenda sunt gero. Heiron. dial. aduers. Luciseria. Quanta
cu^ reu^rentia, qua^to timore quanta illuc humilitate accedere debet a palude
sua procedens repe^s ranuncula vilis, quam tremeb undus, supplex and solicitus
Bern. de 4 modes ^rands.
as diverse of ye ancients witness. S. Austin with grief confesses seeing our
heart (says he) is a little hold, or seat or conceit of such things (he spoke
of toying thoughts a little before) and carries after it whole troops of
plenteous vanity, hence is it that our prayers are often interrupted, and
troubled and that in thy presence O Lord, while with ye voice of our heart we
apply our selves to thy ear, I know not how so great a service is cut off in
yt very entrance by trifling thoughts rushing in upon us. S. Ierom witnesses
ye like, when I am at my prayers (I should thus and thus lament my sins and
entreat my savior) very often one while I am either walking in our gallerys or
casting up my accounts, or carried away with filthy thoghts or doing those
things, whic a man should blush to name. All with strike the conscience with
fear and shame, so do they ye more, when we consider before who^, and unto
whom it is, our supplicatio^s are directed. In time of prayer we must entreat,
says Barnard the court of heaven, even that very court wherein the king of
heaven sits on his thron, attended upon with an unspeakable army of blessed
spirits, and therefore with great reverence, with great fear with great
humility should a vile cotemptible little frog, crawling out of a marsh come
before him, how fearful how suppliant how humble, and careful, wholly,
heartily thoroughly intentive on the majesty of his glory in the presence of
his Angels, Assistere poterit homuncio Ibid.
in the counsel of the just can such a habberdehoy dare to stand or show his
face.

Giving us those things which our prayers dare not presume to ask.
Neither dare they presume to ask. For why should they? and yet God gives us,
what we need, Sed and vitam aeterna^ fortassis aliqui non in humilitate
quarunt, sed tantum in fiduciae meritorum Idem. Serms. 5. de Quadrag. Prasume
non de operatione aut oratione tuae, sed de gras tia Christ's. Aug. sermon. 28. de
veth dom. Constaeutinu^ imperatorem tantis terrenis impleuit ^^^ribus, quantae
optare nullus auderet. August. de Cinis. des. lib 5. c. 25. Quandoquide^ vix
petere debe mus. etc. Iosia^ Simler, in obitum. P. Martyris.
else we might perish both here, and hereafter. There are (says Bernard) that
think because they pray, that God is indebted to them. Peradventure also
eternal life some seek for not in humility, but in special trust, they have
of their own merits. Upon like occasion it seems Saint Austin gives like
counsel: Presume not of thy own work or prayer, but of the favor of Christ.
Accordingly our Church speaks here, and in the Collect after the offertorie,
where it says, for our unworthiness we dare not, etc. A phrase we dare
adventure used by ancient and sat writers. One of each for example. S. Austin
of old and Josias Simler of late time. Saint Austin writes that God furnished
Constantine the Emperor after his conversion with so great earthly blessings,
as no man else may dare to wish the like. A wish every man knows is fat less
then a prayer. If sometimes God bestow somethings, as no man dare to wish for
the like, what reason is there, but we may arknowledge, God gives somewhat
which our prayers dare not presume to ask? Josias Simler in his Oration upon
Peter Martyr his death toward his conclusion makes this prayer. Grant unto us
O most gracious good Father, if not another Martyr and such a one we ought
hardly so much, as to pray for, yet at the least, etc. Where it appears how
the excellency of God his gifts so rauisheth the mind of an humble suitor,
that in the fullness of admiration astonished with the Lord his singular
mercy, and on the other side with his own loathsome vslemsse, he plainly
confesses his prayer dares not ask what the Almighty notwithstanding gives
for his Son Christ. In which sense any equal Reader shall do well to think
our Book uses it, if he do well bethink him, how he must not speak against
the light of his own heart.

These are directly against the word and true faith, Heb. 10.19. By the blood
of Jesus we may be bold to enter into the holy place. And verse 22. Let us draw
near with a true heart in assurance of faith, etc. And Heb 4.16. Let us go
boldly to the throne of the grace. These places are directly against doubting,
and slavish fear: Ergo^ not to be Subscribed unto.
Be they, and ever may they he places directly against doubting, and slavish
fear. Such doubting as is a slavish fear we admit not, because the assurance
of our faith does not: yet our knowledge in Scripture teaches thus much, that
Faith is beholding unto fear, both in her entrance, and afterward in the
growth. In the entrance, when she takes possession of our hearts. For the
judgments of God and the terrors of the law in humbling us, are a School
master unto Christ, and after too, when we many times are likely to play the
wantons, and think our estate like mount Sion that cannot be moved, so as what
is said of Faith and Charity is a true saying of assurance and fear. Fides
and charitasbene distinguntor in libris sed male in moribus.
They are better distinguished in our Books, then in our persons. Much there
is in us of the flesh, that is unregenerate, though like a beggar still mending
his cloak, we make up the breaches by daily repentance. At the entrance how it
works may appear by a similitude taken from a Sempsters work, Act 9.38.
who whither Dorcas, or some other drawing her needle in and out brings the
silk after. The needle comes and goes, the silk stays and makes a
garment of needle-worke, yea if makes a samplar for many years, though the
needle break, or be lost, or the party dead: So is it in fear. The work
begun, the point makes an entrance, after which the mercies of God as soft as
silk follow, and stay to make up a garment to put on, where no needle is now,
but once was, so no show of fear to fore, but the effect of it may be seen in
the evil not of punishment, but of sin, Osculatur mise ricordi^ pedem vt
pedem indicis non attendat Ber^serm de S. Maria.
which as certainly draws on punishment, as Ahaz dial in a Sunshine day
casts his shadow. Far wide he is (says Bernard) that does so kiss the
foot of Gods mercy that he does not heed the foot of his justice, as if he
were a father and not a Lord. If a Father where is his love, if a Lord, where
is his fear? Malach. 1.6.

By the blood of Iej^^ we may be bold to enter into the holy place.
Heb. 10.19. The Author shows all ceremonies have an en^e in Christ, Popule
aditus in visibile factarium prohib^batur. Marlor. Ibid. Non symbolice tantum,
sed reipsa ingressus in caelum. Ibid.
and where in time of the law people might not enter into the Sanctuary, but
must, and did stand without: now we may enter into heaven it self whereof the
Sanctuary was a tipe. Such boldness we have to Godward thorough Christ his
blood.

Let us go boldly to the throne, etc. Heb. 4.16.
That is, Let us not stick, and be doubtful in seeking after other mediators,
as if he alone were not sufficient. Christi sacerdotio adim^ virt^ tem quamdi^
hasitamus. Mar ^o. Heb. 4.
Such wavering, and uncertainty propending to invocation of Angels, or Saints
(as if there were not a God in Israel) our Church is no less vehement in
prosecuting for erroneous doctrine, then any other Church pray^ed be God. Nisi
quitrepid^ ad solam cius misericordiam confugiunt. Call. in Luc. 18.13:
Dubitatio Infi^ delitans Admirationis. Vox aptissim^ paenitentis v^^^^ que
c^^tine^^ sensum peccats. Mercer. in Iocl. 2.14. Ambig^^m ponitur, vt dum
dub^^ant homi^^^ fortius aga^t paenitentiam. Hiero^. Ibid. A^opiae (...).
What do these places Heb. 10. and the fourth Chapter more discredit the use
of this strain (whereof our consciences are afraid) then Master Calvin, who
speeking of the Publican his unfeigned him liation writes, that God will not be
entreated of any, but those who in a trembling manner, fly to his mercy?
Where this fourth to the Hebrews has, Let us go boldly, this author writes
tremblingly, yet will not we fondly injury him so much, as these do wrong our
Church with taunis, and reproaches saying, It is against the word, This against
true faith, etc. A doubting which proceeds of infidelity may be thought so,
but not that doubting, which arises from admiration, like that in Joel 2. who
knows whether God will turn and leave a blessing? Which words carry a doubt
in sound, but in effect imply a sound affirmation, and are most apt for
repentance to speak with, because they include a sense of sum, and yet
withal some hope to speed. Not amiss observed by S. Jerome men's doubting
other whiles makes the^ more earnestly penitent. And it may well so be. For if
doubting be the mother of inquiry (as they say it is) because he that doubts
not seeks not, then also is fearfulness the mother, or milch-nurse of a
kindly repentance. Potuerunt peruenire, nisi putarent se perueniss. Seneca.
Illud ingenioru^ pracox genus no^ temere vnqua^ peruenit ad fru gem Quintil.
Institut. lib. 1. c. 3.
Well had it been with some long ere now, if they would have skilled of this
point, that as in learning some held themselves for great Scholars, who fail
of it, because they thought, they had obtained, what they have not: so in
duties to godward some want true confidence, because they are not rightly
confident making ouerbold, where it is more wisdom to use modesty; more
courage to seele their own famines, more audacitie to acknowledge their own
fear, fearing as they ought to be afraid. Mark the tree whose branches are
seen. A grain (for thence sometimes is the beginning) lies in the earth,
Arbor em at tendite, Petit imaprius vt sur sum excrescat, Figit radicem in
humili, vt verticem tedas in caelum. Aug. de verbo dom. in Ioh sermon. 38. Multos
impedit a firmit ate presumptio firmitatis. Id.
sinks low, but the branches shoot forth that birds may nestle in them. It
first takes downward, then seen above, at the first low, afterward aloft.
Many are hindered (says Austin) of their strength, while they presume on their
strength. Men that find such contrariety twixt Heb. 4. and this Collect our
consciences are afraid, may by their wrangling principles cavil with ease at a
thousand places else, yea, and set Scripture against it self. As where the
Publican is said to stand a far off, loath to come to the Altar, not daring to
lift up his eyes, that the Lord might lift up the light of his countenance upon
him, etc. May not a fair glass be set upon it that he did amiss. For say
they, where he stood a far off he should have gone near. And was not Peter
well chidden in saying, Luc. 5.8.
Go away from me a sinner? As if the neater the better, the worse the farther
off. Again, in that he would not lift up his eyes to heaven, he was much to
blame. Genesis 4.6.
Such a look Caut had, for is it not said He cast down his countenance. Much
of this making skill they, whose delight is to weaue, though it be but a
spiders web, and men of their metal are like enough to charge Mary Magdalen
for a micher well she escapes, if not reproved for want of faith, Let us go
(say they) Why then stood she the still? Boldly. Why did she trouble her self
with Christ his feet, Luc. 7.3^.
when she was to to go to the throne of grace? And what was he at whose feet
she stood, but the author of grace? (weeping) a womanish condition: more
courage would have done well, and she began to wash, as not daring to go on.
The basest in man (his feet) why not his head? Too too much str^ngen^s. (With
her tears) why? Water of the next brook might have served. The more blame she
that would not make bolder. Was her eyes d^m, that she could not see eye-water
was more precious, then to trickle at ones feet? (She did wipe them) Happily
with a towell, No such matter. The tresses of her hair she wiped them with. A
great deal more then needed (as they think that dispute thus) twixt friends
and kinffolkes (...) the spirit. He no doubt our eldest brother would have
accepted of far less, then all she did, for is he not our brother and more,
if more need, to all that do believe? Another it was came behind him. Both
of them contrary to this exhortation. Go with holdnesse she said. Math.
9.20.21.
But who heard it? For she durst not ask it with her lips (she said within her
self, If I may) What Ifs and Ands be these, Why did she not go boldly?
(Touch) why did she not embrace? (But touch) was not be reproved that smote but
three times, 2. King. 13.18.
when he might have smote a many more? (His garment) why not his person? Belike
a little would serve the turn. Overmuch squeamishness spoyleth all. Boldly
she should have gone, and pressed forward and thrungd before him, not near him,
or to him, much less behind him. A sign of a servile and crauenlike sear.
All this yet their argument makes good that oppose. Heb. 4. to discountenance
this truth (our consciences are afraid) Faith we acknowledge and reverence in
her certainty, and full assurance. She may, and is, and must be in the
faithful, Luct a fidei. Vrs sin. Catech. Quemlibet timorem non esse fidet
contrarin^ inde patet, quod si nihil metusmus, obrepit supina carnis secu
ritas. It a la^^ guescitfides. Math. 8.26. Stupids magis sunt quam constantes.
Ita timor fidem sollicitat ibid.
yet that no ground of dislike to our selves, or cause at all, why we should
not in a godly jealousy suspect our own ways. Nay by wrestling, and combats
in this kind we learn what vigor, and life is in our faith. The Collect
speaks neither of slavish nor servile fear, neither of the spirit of
bondage, only this is all ( whereof our consciences are afraid.) Now all fear
is not contrary to faith. Por if we fear not, a careless security of flesh
creeps upon us, so faith languisheth, the affection to prayer becomes dull,
and in the end a due remembrance of God and his mercy is extinguished. Over
and beside, they which are not touched with a sense of evils to be afraid of
them, are rather dullards, then constant. Thus fear stirs up and quickneth
faith. Little to the commendation of the Disciples, that our Savior said, Why
are ye afraid, O ye of ^^^le faith? A small faith, but faith notwithstanding.
And a small faith in God his children is no small portion, which when it is the
least though ourneast with terthre of (...), con^^^^^th hope, even in her
read and deadliest time, knowing the spirit of adoption keeps fire in the
heart, and that in most apparent weakness her power in Christ is perfected,
gaining by her loss, raised by her fall, and after the combat finished,
returns home a conqueror. In which opposition of faith and fear, that which
feeds one, nourishes the other. the mercies of God are the support of our
faith, so are they the root of our fear, and forgiveness of sin, a just
occasion ministering sufficient matter for true humiliation (forgiving us those
things, whereof our consciences are afraid) like those couples in the Lords
prayer Forgive us our sins and presently in the next petition Lead us not
into tentation: The one immediately following the other, as if we said more then
every one is aware of in saying (forgiving us those things) etc. either
because of sin (the remembrance whereof is grievous, Ama dei homit atem, tima
seueritatem, vtrumque te superbum esse won sinit: Amado enim times ne amatum
and amaurem perodas. August. de sanct. virg. c. 37. Si non amastime ue perdas,
si amas time no displiceas. Ibid. Romans 8.1. Cor. 2. Philip. 2.12. Non te a
praefidents elatione reuerberat, va mundo a scandalis: Non contremiscis? etc.
Ibid.
the burden intolerable) or else because of forgiveness it self, as it when
they are forgiven, even then in that very instant we are afraid. For that when
we have most security, we have most cause to fear, as if the sentence of S.
Paul went for a watch-wood. Be not high-minded but fear, or that of our
Savior, Thou art made whole, sin no more lest a worse thing happen unto
thee, as it will soon do, where security breeds pride: S. Austin
entreating how fear is in use with Gods servants, and how far forth out of
use, advises in these words, Be not high-minded but fear. Love the goodness
of God, fear his severity. Both these will keep thee from being proud, For
in loving thou do fear, least thou grievously offend thy loving and beloved:
It thou love not, fear least thou perish, if thou love, fear least thou
displease. He that said you have not received the spirit of hondage to fear
any more, said that himself was among the Corinthians with fear and
trembling: He that said be not high minded but fear gave a general
advertisement to all the members of Christ, work out your salvation with fear
and trembling. Anon after that blessed father adds. Does not that sentence
beat thee of from presumptuous pride, woe unto the world because of offenses?
Do thou not stand in a we? lest thou be reckoned among those many, whose love
should ware cold and iniquity abound? do thou ^h^ strike thy blessed when thou
hear this sentence. Let him that stands take heed lest be fall? As for the
other clause (Giving us those things, which our prayers dare not presume to
ask) is and may be referd to spiritual and temporal blessings, which in the
general we may assure our selves shall be granted, and we must dare to ask,
but in particular as in this, or that very manner, at this, or that very time,
by such and such means, we have no warrant to limit the holy one of Israel,
nor commandment to crave or promise our selue. Paul prayed that Satan might be
removed, and be prayed often, and earnestly, yet was he not then removed. 2.
Cor. 12.6.
Some things we may pray for absolutely, and affirmatively, as that the
kingdom of God do come, his will he done, the forgiveness of sin, and our
own salvation, but the means sometimes we may fail in, while this may or
that way, after this fashion, or that fashion, we pray they may come to pass.
S. Paul could not be ignorant of so easy a point, and therefore it was not the
form he stood upon, as the end he proposed. The very like is to be thought in
temporal blessings: David prayed to God for his child, which he had by
Bothsabe, thoroughly and fully persuaded of Gods mercies toward him, though
touching the babe, 2. Sam. 12, 121
his thoughts and speech were not so resolute, but arguing rather his
expectation, then assurance. For this be said, Who can tell whether God will
have mercy on me that the child may live? Thus it appears that every
particular neither may we, nor dare we presume to determine. Leave we that to
the wisdom, and gracious good pleasure of the Lord. Beggars must not be
choosers, nor caruers, their own caruers. Thus they will have it, and thus; or
else it fitteth not him, that comes in prayer unto God. He may assure
himself in general, but in every particular he may not, he need not, he must
not. It may be victory; it may be an overthrow, it may be peace, it may be
persecution: He may have a child, he may go childlesse. He may pray now, but
the issue of his prayer is like Abraham a great way of. Such is the course of
the faithful. They apprehend Christ Jesus in whom all the promises are yea,
and Amen. Sure of this once. That if they have what they dare not indent for at
Gods hand, they will be thankful, and if they have it not, they will possess
their souls in patience, only because, they will not be thought wiser then
the Lord, they commend all to his blessed disposition. When Zaedok carried the
Arc into the Tittle these words David vttred. ^. Sam, 15.25:
If I shall s^^de favor in the eyes of the Lord, be will bring me again, and
show me both it and the Tabernacle thereof. But if he thus say, I have no
delight in thee, Behold here I am, let him do to me, as seems good in his
eyes. Here is a doubtful, and perplexed speech, yet not destitute of
assurance, which a holy faith ministers. For he was certain of his salvation;
Quoad aterna^ salutem certus erat, sed hic de rectitutio^e in regnum agitur At
deus ei regnum, etc. P. martyr. Ibid. 2. Sam. 16.22
yea and certain of the temporal kingdom which God had promised him: But
here was all the doubt: He knew not, whether the promise was absolute, or upon
condition. The like follows in the next Chapter, where the same Prophet
makes this use of Shimes his railing and reuiling. It may be, that the Lord
will look upon my affliction, and do me good for his cursing this day. In
that he says (Peradventure, or it may be) not doubting of his salvation, but
of being restored to his former estate, Cur dicit forte? Non quod de aterna
salute dubitaret, sed de restitutione. Id. in 2. Sa. 16.
or else thinking of the heinousness of sin before committed, doubts
whether his afflictions should be assuaged so speedily. As who would say,
Peremptorily I affirm it not: my sins have deserved more then all this
counneth to. This I take as a gentle remembrance to put me in mind of my
duty, It may be: If not: I know what to trust to: I Will not attempt to teach the
Lord: I neither do nor dare presume to ask, that it may be thus, and no
otherwise. The Prophet Amos has the like It may be, Amos. 5.15.
the Lord God of Israel will be merciful to the remnant of Joseph. He means
in preventing their captivity: But whether deliverance, or no, the reckoning
is made, they forgot not all comfort, well persuading themselves, that if the
mercy of God fail them one way, some other way it shall meet with them, and
they with it, knowing of a truth that God is good unto Israel in not giving us
many times what we would, Bonus dominus, qui non tribuit saepe, quod volumus,
vt quod malimus attribuat, August. Paul^epist. 34.
that he may give over, and above, that which we should rather. So as to wind
up all on a small bottom, and comprehend much in few words (our prayers dare
not presume to ask) many things, which God gives, because they dare not set
the Lord a time, nor bind him to such, and such means, but resolving of the
general, and making faith of our duty therein, refer our selves wholly to the
Lord, for all such changeable circumstances, knowing that fall they out so, or
not so, or contrariwise, Romans 8.^8.
they fall out for the best to them that fear the Lord

Cap. 3 Almighty God those things, which for our unworthiness we dare not, and
for our blindness we cannot ask, vouchsafe to give us etc. These words directly
fight against gods word and true faith Iam. 1.5.6.7. If any lack let him ask
in faith and waver not etc. For such receive not. And Romans 14.25. Whatsoever is
not of faith is sin.
THese words are in the collect after the offertory Almighty God the fountain
of all wisdom which know our necessities before we ask, and our ignorance
in asking, we beseech the to have compassion upon our infirmities, and those
things, which for our unworthiness we dare not, and for our blindness we
cannot ask, vouchsafe to give us for the worthiness of thy son. etc. This,
and the last chap. for their neighborhood may communicate each unto other
mutual help. Much has been said already, whereon we might be content to stay
our selves without farther proceeding, but ye we are drawn on to a larger
discourse, by reason of their so great importunity, that hold these words
matter of fresh complaint: There is no doubting, nor Stammering, nor
uncertainty in saying these words (for our unworthiness we dare not, nor for
our blindness we cannot ask) They are the words of sobriety and humility, not
of fear nor despair. Non desperatio^^ dictum est sed sobria and pia
humilitate, August. de verb dom. sermon. 23. Iam 1.5. 6. Romans 14. 23.
For we are certainly persuaded as of an article of our faith, that we are
both unworthy, and blind. Yet some urge scripture to the contrary. S. James,
say they, bids us ask in faith without wavering. Whereunto we answer. So does
a penitent person ask that is fully assured he has naught to commend him
before the Lord. Again they urge Romans 14. whatsoever is not of faith is sin)
So think we the man sins that continues doubting of Gods mercy when he
comes to God in prayer. A conscience not resolved in such a point of doctrine
shameth the work in hand, be it never so specious. Happily these men (whose
objection this is) think that the faithful, Quando nihil prorsus sumus, et
minus quam nihil, visentiamus nostram (...) and abiecta o^ni fiducia tam nostri
quam totius mundi. Calvin. in Iere. 17. To tobsequiis defaenerati, quot defungs
non possumus, etiamsi omnes nostra cogitationes, omniaque membra in legit
officia verterentur. Marlo in Luc. 17.10. Mat. 9.20. Luc. 15.21. Ad filis
affectu^, qui omnia quae patris sunt sua esse no^ ambigit aspirare nequa quam
praesumit, sed mercenaris statumiam proseruitatis, mercede desiderat, Bid.
lib. 4. super Luc* m. c. 63. Non proponitur vt admiremur tantum sed etia^ vt
imitemur. Marlo in Mat. ^.
because of the full assurance of Gods mercies, therefore may not be cast down
in sight of their sin. As if ye voice of a man vilifying himself before the
Lord, were not the voice of a man that builds upon ye Lord his comfortable
promise. Then surely M. Calvin mistook what he prayed for, when upon occasion
of the words in the Prophet Jeremy 17. (The heart of man is deceitful, and
wicked above all things, who can know it) makes this prayer. Grant almighty
God since we are plain nothing, yea less then nothing, that feeling this
naughtworth estate, and casting aside all confidence both of our selves, and of
the whole world we may learn to fly in all humility unto thee etc. But M.
Calvin mistook no more, then they that of our savior learned to hold
themselves un profitable servants, not, ye they had done just nothing, but when
they had done all, and all (if possible) that was commanded. For we are
servants in so many offices indebted, as we cannot come out, though all our
thoughts and all our parts, or members were turned into the duties of the law.
Wherefore if we hold our selves unworthy, and such, as for our unworthiness dare
not ask, what are we any whit the worse more-then the woman with the bloody
issue, who was sufficiently persuaded of Christ's power, but having her faith
mixed with fear durst not crave with her lips, what her body stood in need
of. And the prodigal child was thoroughly grounded, and established in his
fathers kindly love, yet because of his lewd pranks, so far debased himself yt
he durst not ask the room of a son, but thought it well, if he might be
reckoned among his fathers hired servants: concerning whom venerable Bede
speaks thus. To a sons affection, that reckons all his own, which his
father has, this unthrift does noe way presume to aspire, but desires only
the state of a servant etc. Some such unworthiness was that of ye Centurio^
who had done much good to Christ, his countrime^, built the^ a sinagog etc. yet
professes he was altogether unworthy yt our savior should come under his
roof, or vouchsafe him so much as talking with. Whose modest conceit of
himself is not for us to admire, but to follow, which we then do, if we
truly acknowledge, what we are of our own nature in the sight of God; and if
any be vile to think we are more vile then the basest: Abiectissi ^ is
hominibus in feriores. Ibid:
Nor is this humbling our selves, not dareing to present our persons in the
Lords sight an argument, we want faith, more then this behavior of the
Centurion so highly commended for his faith both speedy, and well settled, upon
very small beginnings. In the confession, which Daniel makes for Israel, and
in that prayer while Israel thinks and speaks of their own unworthiness,
Dan. 9.4.5.
that unto the^ belongs confusion of faces, that they have sinned, and
committed iniquity and done wickedly, yea rebelled and departed from Gods
precepts and judgments, largely amplyfying the indictment against their own
souls, they take hold of the mercies of God, Luke 15.19.2^ Caeucamus de nobis
dicere gloriosa, minimum de se sentire tam magnum quid^^ est, quaem maximas res
feciss^. Chrisost. homili 38 ad pop. Antiocheum. Super Iudaeos factus est
admirationis Ibid. Maenum, quam calceamento dixit esse indignam, hanc super
caput Christus attraxit. Ibid. Absit vt iusti vt tam aternam expectent, sicut
pauper elemosya^ Tapper in explicat. artio. Iouan. tom. 2. artic. 9;
and have comfort in this that compassion and forgiveness of sin is the
Lords. In the tipe of the lost child spoken of before, reclaimed to God the
point is much labored. I am not worthy to be called thy son etc, Yet, he
that said so, and said but a truth, was not ere the more withhelde from
coming to his father. Let us beware (says Chrysostom) how we speak
glorious things of ourselves. It is noe mean point to think meanly of our
selves, noe small grace to disgrace our selves in the presence of the Lord. The
words of the Centurion (says he) were, I am not worthy and he was in more
admiration, then all the Jews beside: So spoke the Apostle I am not worthy,
and he was the chief: The like did John, I am not worthy, and he was a friend
to the spouse, yea that hand, which he thought too base to touch the shoolachet
of Christ did cover his head with baptism. All these debasing themselves were
advanced. And if because our faith excludes carnal doubting any final
distrust of Gods saving health, it must also spare confession of our
unworthiness, then (belike) we shall do well to give way to those supposed
arguments, that upon like mispriso^ conclude possibility of merit, and
impossibility of error. For if no such unworthiness, why may we not merit? and
if noe such blindness what fear is there of running into error. For ye first
say we as ye deuines of Louain God fordid the just should wait for life
everlasting, as a poor man does for an alms. It is far more glorious, that
they as co^querours and triu^phers possess it as a reward due to their sweat.
and travel. For the second say we as they likewise do, because the faithful
are led by the spirit into all truth, Diseamut de nostra owinino industria,
magis autem de wostris diffidere meritis. Bern. in fest. Paul. sermon 2.
Obtusisumus, and indulgenter nimium sentimus de nobis. Marl^. in 1. Cor. 4.4.
1. Cor. 8.2? Psalm. 19.12. Deus solus nouit quod nescire potest etiam ipse qui
fecit. Ambros. in Psalm. 118. Plerunque inter vitia, virtu. tesque caliga mus.
Greg. mor. lib. 9. c. 17. and 19. Genes. 18. 15* 1. Ioh. 3. 20. Job. 37 19.
Rerum inagna egnor antia, qua mentes nostra loborant etc. Mercer. Ibid. Caci
sumus in regando deo etc. Marlo in Romans 8.26. quam vt recte eligant, quid
conueniat, vel expediat etc. Ibid.
that they are therefore exempt from all blin denes to be seduced. But if we so
say, we deceive our selves, and noe marvel then, if easily seduced. In
remedy whereof let us learn to distrust our own selves, and altogether our
own industry but most of all our own worth and worthiness, as Bernard
speaks. The collect yielding as much, to what end serves some men's reproof?
Is it to make us think better of our selves, then there is cause, who can
nether do nor think ought as of our selves who are dull and over partial
toward our selves, who if we know any thing know not as we ought to know,
whither of our sin, or wants, or conscience, or what God has done for our
souls? Of our sin, how manifold and grievous for number and weight, insomuch
as David prayed Lord cleanse me from my secret sins: Secret yet known to God,
when the party that commits them knew not, so much. For how often have our eyes
twinckled and we taken vice for virtue, as Jacob took Lea, for Rabel? How often
have we hoodwincht our consciences that entreat us like the Angel, when he
told Sara she laughed, though she made show to the contrary? How often, when
our conscience cleared us to our thinking, God (that is greater then our
conscience) has, or might have condemned us? How often have we not prated, and
should; and in praying have been to seek what to pray for, as Elihu well
confessed, for we cannot (says he) dispose our matter because of darkness,
and that great ignorance wherein we are? The regard of which truth led S. Paul
to say as much, where he writes we know not to pray as we ought. For blind we
are in calling upon God, and though we feel our wants, or evils, yet our
minds are more entangled, and coufounded, then that readily they can well
choose what is good and convenient? How often have we called for a stone, when
we thought we did call for bread? How often have we prayed amiss, either in
respect of our selves bleaklie, coldlie, perfunctorily, as if a north wind
blew out of our mouths; or in respect of the end, to abuse Gods gifts in
pride, lust and sensuality, turning the graces of God into wantonness like
the serpents receipt, that changes all into poison. Lastly how often has our
ignorance been more, then all this? And for all this shame we not with the
Jews to make a doubt, Are we also blind? that speaking unto God in prater
take it offen^^ue to confess our unworthiness and our blindness? Among many
things we beg of God, Inter alia, qua petimus cum be ne petimus, illud etiam
esse debet vt petamus nobit non dari* quod ignorante^ non been petimus. August.
tract* 73 in I^a han.
when we ask well, this must be a clause necessarily remembered to ask, that
those things may not be given, which we in our ignorance did not well to pray
for. Now the conclusion answereable to the collect, shall be that of the Apostle,
where setting forth the infinite power, and mercies of God, he emptieth
himsel^e of words and so much the rather to disable man, with whom he enters
comparison: unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that
we ask, or think according to the power that works in us, be praise in the
church through all generations, for ever Amen. Ephesians. 3.20.21.
Thus far be the exceptions under one man's hand exhibited in one schedule or
scroule, yea and all to in a second, which were intended with their ^nswer in
the first part, but that we were disappointed by the Printer.

Yea but in the second schedule were there no other?
We answer as he does in ye Poet, Qui demum (...) lif? solus Sauni^ soruat
dome.
when Thraso mustred his for ces, what other do you mean? Only a scof, or
gird is remaining ye last and least worth. Bare repeating whereof is answer
sufficient.

Chap. 4 Last of all, we desire to be resolved, whither all the Rubricks are
not so to be understood, and expounded as they may agree, and not be contrary
to the word of God and of religion established by the law, and the analogy of
faith now professed in the Realm.
THe answer is short and easy: It was never the mind of any our famous
princes either past, Osten^^^^ ^^^ris hunc ta^^u^ fata, necvltra esse sinunt.
Aeneid, lib 6.
or present to ensnare the consciences of their trusty and well beloved
subjects. That religious Prince Edward who in ye blooming or his age was
translated into heaven, for in the prime of the Gospel restored he did show,
and but show himself, establishing the book of common prayer, gave way to noe
such surmise of error, and false doctrine, as in this our unthankful
generation is finistrely conceived. Nor did that gracious Lady ourlate good
Queen Elizabeth. Far was it from her innocent virtuous soul or any manner of
authority designed by her sacred appointment, to admit any the least syllable
of doctrine contrary to Gods word, and true religion. The like (as we must
acknowledge to the glory of God) does manifest it seize in that royal care of
our dread sovereign, wherein we may safely repose our selves knowing for our
part, his majesty, as he holds himself obliged both in conscience and
wisdom, Proclamation at Westminster the 22. Fe. 1603.
so has, and will use all good means to keep his subjects from being
infected with superstitious opinions in master of religion, This special divine
care, his learned, orations, general proclamations, final determination at
the last conference have all solemnly witnessed to the world, in redeeming the
state of our church from all such scandals, as were injuriously brought upon
her, and upon that truth, which we do^ maintain: Etsi non aliqua nocuisses,
mortuus esses. Virg. Eclog.
So as it, is but a waspish doubt even of purpose set in the last place, to
leave a sling behind in steed of a farewell. Not but that a third, and fourth
paper object more, as follows to be considered.

Chap 5. Lord we beseech thee keep thy church, that it may be free from al
aduersitys: This is against the manifest word, and decre of God, and true faith
Act 14*22. we must through many afflictions enter into the kingdom of God. And
2. Timoth 3.12. all that will live godly in christ Jesus shall suffer
persecutions. And Ioh 16.33. In the world ye shall have tribulation. God has
promised we shall not be swallowed up with adversity: but noe promise that we
shall be free from al. Ergo to pray for that whereof we have no promise, is
against faith, and so sin Ergo not to be subscribed unto.
THis collect we find the church uses on the 22. sunday after Trini. Lord we
beseech thee keep thy household the church in continual godliness, that
through thy protection it may be free from all adversities, and devoutly given
to serve thee in good works to the glory of thy name, etc. In which prayer the
church supposes not all immunity and freedom, that noe adversity shall come
near her. Pro. 11.8. (...) c. 12.13.
but knowing that it will, she beggeth of God to be delivered from it. The
righteous (says Solomon) is delivered out of trouble, but so, that he may go
free. For otherwise the church cannot be ignorant, nor is, that afflictions
wait upon her, and compass her on every side. Who knows not, that in our
Letanie such a particular suit is remembered unto God that in all time of our
tribulation he will deliver us, that in all our troubles, and adversities
whenever they oppress us, 15. Sund. after Trinit. 16. Sund. after Trinit. 3.
Sund. after Epiph. Septuages and the second sun-in Lent. 8. and 15 after Tipit.
those evils which the craft and subtlety of the diuil, or man works against
us be brought to naught etc. She confesses her frailty, ye with out the Lord
she cannot but fall that she cannot continue without his suero^^, and therefore
calls upon God, that he will mercifully look, upon her infirmittes, and in
all dangers, and necessities stretch forth his right hand to help, and defend,
putting away all hurtful things, and giving things profitable to her
salvation, that so being governed and preserved evermore both in body and soul
by the stedfastnes, of faith, she may be defended from all adversities. In all
which places ye honest godly virtuous meaning of our church well appears
praying to be free from all adversities, not but that she must feel the^, but
that she may not fall by the^, not, but that like surges they may come over
her, but in assurance of her God, she may overcome them, Therefore is it she
beseeches God, the course of this world may be so peaceably ordered by his
governance that she may joyfully serve him in all godly quietness, craving by
this free dome such readiness both in body, and soul, as a free heart that
would accomplish those things, which the Lord would have done All which
petitions concurring in this clause minister diverse good notes. First, ye
weight of grief, ye in anguish of soul casts a cloud twixtioy and our
understanding, 2. King. 4.27.
at which time it may be said as Elisha of ye Iuo^no^. Lethir alone, her spirit
is vexed within her. Atro bled prayer ou^^ easily be pard^ed, if not so
advisedly other whiles indicted, as others peradventure may think, that are not
fli like distress. In tribulations bus, qua possunt and prodesse and nocere.
etc: August: epist: 121 ad Probam vid. c. 14. Vninersals volu^ tate vt nobis
bac auferantur oramus. etc. Ibid. Pia patientia malorum bona speremus ample ora
etc. Ibid
Secondly, it would be thought upon what naturally our desire. presses after,
not what should be, but what it would have. In tribulations we may both hurt
and profit, we know not what to pray, as we ought, and yet because things are
tough, and hard, because they are troublesome. because they are against the
sense of our infirmity, by a general, or vnsuersal will we pray that these
things may be taken from us. But this point of devotion we are indebted to god
for, that if he take not such things away from us, we should not therefore
think we are neglected, but rather by our godly enduring these evils hope for
larger good things. For so virtue is perfited in infirmity. Thirdly Gods decree
may cross yt effect, but it is not against the natural affection, nay the Lord
would be offended, if that affection were not: make it a childs case, whose
kind father is sore sick even to yt death, and his life draws to the grave.
The Lord purposes by this visitation to call him hence, therefore it is that
his child mourns. Here have yourthe will of the child one way (he would
have his father live) and the will of God another way inte^deth death. Is the
child faulty herein, or rather is he not faul tie, if all childlike affection
die with his fathers death? Does he not offend, if nature and duty utterly
forgotten he should wish otherwise? So that the matter of our obedience is not
seen always in our willing, what God decrees, or not willing, what be
forbids, but sometimes in delivering contrary to that, which thee Lord
purposes shall come to pass. S. Paul the Apostle well knew yt sickness comes
of the Lord, and that whe^^ Epaphroditus fell sick it was ye Lord his doing;
Philip, 2, 25,
Yet that was no reason, but Paul both might, and cid sorrow for him. Fourthly,
we are commanded to ask what we stand in need of, and we need deliverance
from all adversities. Propria infirmi tatis nobis con scit dei prasidso defendi
nos cup^ mus, vt inexpug Dabiles stemus ad^ersus quaeslibet Satana machinas.
Call in Math, 6.13.
Fifthly, such prayers are testimonies of our professed weakness, proving unto
our selves and others, what conceit we have of yt Dangers of this life. Not the
least aduersit, but we have cause to stand in fear of, and therefore pray we;
that were may stand in expugnable against all the Engines of Satan. Sixtlie at
these times that we entreat God in this manner, there is a lively evidence
of our faith in his power and of a full resolution in making our refuge to him,
as constantly be^eueing he can, and will help us, else would we not seek
thus unto him, as then we do. Seventhly, it may be conceived, that the extent
of our petition is bound with a necessary supposall of the Lords will, though
not always so expresty mentioned. Quod necessario intelligitur non deest. Act.
18.21.1. Cor. 4.10.
For that which is necessarily understood is never thought wanting. Act. 18. I
will return again unto you, and 1. Corinthians. 4. I will come unto you if God
will. In the one place implied, in the other expressed. So here to be
interpreted, A freedom from all adversities but no farther, nor otherwise then
as the Lord will, though this clause be not word for word set down in the
Collect. Lastly, the eye of our thought looks two ways, one to Gods
providence, the other to our selves, and our extremity either present, or
possible. An example hereof our Savior gave us, Huiusmodi exe^plum prabuit no
^^sille mediator qui cum dixisset Paeter si fires po test transeat a me calix,
huma nam in se volu^a tatem ex hominis sosceptione transformans continuo subita
cit. August. ad Probam. episte 121. cap. 14.
when he had said these words, Father if it be possible let this Cup pass
from me, transforming the will of man upon himself by taking our nature he
presently adds this withal, Yet not as I will but as thou will O Father. So
the Prophets weep for Jerusalem to think, how she should lie in the dust, yet
again to Godward as they raise up their eye, they stand contented. Injury
therefore is it to the Saints in that whereof they have our Savior Christ for
an example; injury to those affections, which God bath fashioned in us for his
service; injury to all the reasons before alleged if prayer (to be free from
all adversities) must be arraigned as a slaunderer of the truth of God: yet so
it pleases some to give forth.

This is against the manifest word and decree of God. Act. 14.22.
A man may will a diverse thing from that, which God wills, and yet without
sin. Act. 16 7.
Paul desired to preach the word in Asia, and Bethinia but he was hindered by
the spirit, yet no contrariety twixt Paul and the spirit of God, but (for all
that show of discord) great consent. For that which Paul wills well, the
spirit of God wills not, but yet by a better will, though the reason hereof
be secret; Gloria celesti superindui absque mortis interuentu. Pis^. in 2. Cor.
5.
and the reason of Paul's will be manifest. The same Apostle desires for
himself, and other the Saints that they might be clothed upon with heavenly
glory without death coming between. For we (says he) that are in this
tabernacle figh and are burdened because we would not be unclothed but clothed
upon, 2. Cor. 5.4.
that mortality might be swallowed of life, which yet we know God had
otherwise determined. And Saint Peter was told aforehand that be must die some
violent death, for so our Savior prophesied, yet that Apostle in some sort did
will otherwise then God his manifest will was. Ioh. 21.18. (...) Psalm. 55.6.
For John 21.18. another shall gird thee and lead thee whither thou would
not. The Prophet David in Psalm 55. wishes that he had the wings of a Dove,
then would be file, etc. No manifest word or decrec of God known to avouch
this wish and earnest prayer. Electio tantum fertur in possibalia, voluntas
interdum proponit ea qua no^ possunt fieri: Arist. Eth. lib. 3
But the note which the Philosopher in his wisdom of gentile learning gives
is not amiss; Election is carried only unto things possible, but the will
sometimes proposes those things which cannot be, and yet no fault at all in so
doing. As for example, the Minister in charity reputing the whole congregation
to be Elect in an holy manner. seeks and wills the salvation of every one
which nevertheless the Lord in his eternal counsel wills not, twixt which
two wills, a difference without contrariety. For one good thing as it is good
may differ from another, but cannot be contrary unto it. We are not always to
will (says Saint Austin) that done which God will have done, or has decreed
in the will of his secret pleasure. For God may wish one thing, Et tamen donae
volu^tati dei pietas illius potius consonat, quam huius idem vodentis impitas
(...) August, enchir. ad Lauren. cap. 101.
and man another, and sometimes it falls out that he wishes better, though
cross to Gods Decres then he that wishes happily what God intends. The
wicked Jews would have Christ put to death, Joseph of Arimathea would not
consent to his death. Luke 23. which God had decreed, yet he did well, they did
ill: That we must through many afflictions enter into the kingdom of heaven,
that all who will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer tribulation, that in
the world we shall have it, as they are the manifest words of God, so is it
manifest they are much wronged in being urged against this clause (freedom
from all adversity.) Math. 26.25. 1. Cor. 11.19. Math. 18 7.
For as it was true that the treason of Judas must be, so is it true that
heresies and offenses must be. As much necessity of one as of the other, and
the same words are delivered of them all. They must be, shall be, must needs
be, etc. Now, though offenses must be, wherein the decree of God appears, yet
who is he that with the Apostle prays not for himself, and for others, that
they neither give, nor take offense but that in their course of a Christian
life, 1. Cor. 8.13. 1. Cor. 10.32. Philip. 1.10.
they may carry themselves with an even foot in all things possibly indenouring
to please all men, and yet such a necessity of offenses our Savior mentions
as that it cannot be otherwise, Luc. 17.1. (...).
nor can they be avoided. Judas must betray his Master, and that his Lord and
Master well knew, yet no prejudice to the prayet made that the Cup might pass
which our Savior would never have so done if he might not have so prayed:
(Heresies must be) that no hinderance wherefore we should not teach, instruct,
pray, and use all good means to root them up. For as a Gardener well knows
that weeds will grow, and the husbandman finds that the envious man sows
tares, and therefore so much the more imployeth himself painfully, in all
which he offends not, but well pleases the Lord, so beseems it the mother
with her children to pray, exhort, inform, and do all diligence for
succouring her self and hers in the times of all adversity, and to strive
with God in all humbleness, and true repentance, that they may be prevented
(if the Lord will,) or lessened, or withal patience meekely endured. Saint
Austin says well, What is he that can find in his heart to suffer troubles and
difficulties? Quis velit mo^ lestias and difficultates pati? Tolerare iubet
illas, no^ amare. Nemo quod tolerat amat. Quamuis enim gaudeat tolerare ma^ult
tamen non esse quod toleret. August. lib. 10. confes^e 28.
God commands us to tolerate them not to love them. No man loves, that
which he must tolerate: For although he rejoice to tolerate them, yet had he
rather there were none for him to tolerate.

For the Church to be free from all adversity is against the manifest word of
God.
It is not against the manifest word of God that the Church sometimes have rest
and breathing after a sore travel: many examples thereof are, before, and
since yt days of Solamon, Josias, In whose reign Israel had great peace, and
plenty, and such prosperity the Lord promised by the mouth of his Prophet, as
old men and old women should dwell in yt streets of Jerusalem, Zachar. 8.4.
and every man with his staff in his hand for very age, and the streets of ye
city shall be full of boys and girls, Qui victurisu^t secure, and sine aliqua
molestia (externa dico) Na^ scimus hoc non posse accide re, vt multi senes
aliquo in loco cernantur quasi fere exanimes atar ita vt baculo se se
sustineant, nisi vndique pax, et quies sit ab bostibus. Call. Ibid. Vniuersum
Ro^. orbem tenuit in gerendis bellis victoriosissimus per omnia prospe^atus
est. filios ^^per^tes reliqu^^. Aug. de Ciuit, dei lib. 5. c. 25. Proclamation
for Authorizing an uniformity of the book of Common prayer. Given at
Westminster the 5. of March. 1. an. Reg. Iacobi Psalm, 1.3. Genes. 39.2. 2.
Chro. 32.30 2. Chro. 20.20. Nunquam been esse hominibus, nisiquatenus benignum
se dominus illi^exhibet Calvin. in Genes. 39.2.
who shall live securely and without trouble at all (I mean outward) For we
know, it cannot come to pass that many old men be seen in any place spent
for very age: that they must be feign to bear themselves up with a staff,
unless there be peace and rest on all sides from the enemy. Which gracious
favor has stretched out to the days of the Gospel both in the reign of
Constantine, Theodosius, Honorius, and other good Emperors. Of Constantine,
whose government was so happy that be b^d the whole Roman world in subjection
under him, most victorious in his wars, every where throughout prosperous in
subduing of tyrants, of a very great age ere he died, and blessed with sons,
whom he left Emperors after him. But what speak we of times past. Have we not
examples in our own age? The kingdom wherein we live under that form of
Religion, which by law was established in the days of our late Queen of famous
memory, blessed with a peace and prosperity both extraordinary, and of many
years continuance (a strong evidence that God was therewith well pleased.)
Which mercy in this kind long may we pray for, and he grant to the joy of our
King, Queen, and their royal progeny, and the comfort of us all his loyal
Subjects. They who with it not (as holding it unlawful) show themselves
unthankful to God, unnatural to their Country, yea and contrary to the
manifest Scripture: which promises what ever a righteous man takes in hand
shall prosper: verified in Joseph, who was a man that prospered; in Ezechia
that prospered in all his works, and in the resolution that Ichosuphat made the
people, believe the Prophets and ye shall prosper. If any reply these three
sentences last quoted mean by prosperity, the favor and mercies of God, as
that then only it is well with a man, when God shows himself gracious. We
confess their exposition is a truth, and our Church in her prayer desires so
to be understood. For that which the wicked name adversity she calls not so,
nor what they hold for prosperity does she always account so, having well
learned by comparing the Scriptures that there is no prosperity to the mercies
of God, and when that wants, the mercies of God are wanting. He that hides
his sins shall not prosper, but he that confesses and forsakes them,
Prot^^^ 131
shall have mercy, (...) repentance had a reward, and that reward were
prosperity, and the mercies of God were that prosperity: yet so far forth as
the righteous and profane necessarily communicate in the meaning of the same
language, freedom from infirmity, sickness, persecution, troubles, bondage,
ex^e, deration, and a thousand the like is to be desired in our prayers, or
else it would go ill with us, that any adversity should befall us, and we not
have recourse unto prayer against it.

It is contrary to Gods decres.
It is not contrary to Gods Decree, that some particular Church at some one
time, or other for some space may be free from all adversity, in comparison of
that which it self either has felt, or may feel, or in respect of what some
other Churches do endure. And in as much, as there is reason to pray for
freedom against one affliction, as another, and so in effect by consequent
against all (for a ship may sink by a leake, as by a wrack) not lying in our
power to distinguish, which we can be safe in, and in which we cannot, our
Church wisely provides by prayer, universally against all adversities, not
binding the Lord ere the more, then stands with the good pleasure of his
blessed will, but making known what our duty is to do, and what our
necessity inforceth us to do. For as God has decreed to chastise his people,
and his people must as well look for it, so has he decreed, that even
therefore they should call upon him, and prepare to meet him in the
humbleness of their soul. That God, which purposed to send a famine in
Chanaan, put into the heart of Joseph wisely to provide for a dear year, and
made Jacob to send down into Egypt for corn. 1. Sam. 23.12.13.
The same God that raised the men of Keilah against David, directed the
thoughts of the Prophet unto prayer, and made him resolute to fly from Keilah.
It was of the Lord in judgment, that Saul cast his iauelin at David, where he
was, but in mercy the Lord so disposed it, that David should, and did escape
it. And it because the Lord has decreed his Church shall have adversity,
therefore it may not use prayer against it, neither then may we pray that all
men be saved, Nescie^tes, quis pertineat ad pradestinatorum numerum, quis non
pertineat, sic affici debemus charitatis affectu, vt omnes velimus saluos
fieri. August. de Correp. and gra. cap. 15. 1. Tim. 2.2. Psalm. 119 39.
because God has decreed otherwise. But a better Divine resolves us better:
Not knowing says Austin, who belong, and who do not belong to the number of
the predestinate, it is our duty to be so affected toward all with a
charitable affection, that we should wish all might be saved. And if because
the Lord has decreed his Church shall have adversity, therefore it may not
use prayer against it, neither then may we pray to lead a godly and peaceable
life, which yet the Apostle does, neither may we frame our prayers against
reproach and shame, which yet the Prophet does, Lord (says he) turn from me
shame and contempt. For who knows not that in Scripture persecution, reproach,
etc. are the ordinary portion commonly allotted those, that profess the
Gospel in truth and sincerity? And if because the Lord has decreed his
Church shall have adversity, therefore it may not use prayer against it, then
may it not use any means at all by way of prevention. Which error spposed for
a truth opens a wide gappe for presumption, despair, and all neglect of all
godly means: Orig lib. 2. contra Celsum.
What reason had the Sophister in Origin to dissuade a sick person from
sending for a Physician but this: If God have decreed thy health it shall be
whether thou use the Physician, or use him not; And if God have decreed thy
death, thou may spend thy money, he loose his pains, and thou never a whit
the better. And as good never a whit as never the better. The Sophister being
to marry, was confuted by an argument of the like making, and this he had
returned upon him. To what end is it thou take a wife, if God have purposed
you children you must needs have them, and if he have purposed you none, do
all you can, you shall have none. One pin driven out with another, both of them
a sufficient proof that our actions and counsels must not depend upon
uncertainties this way or that way, but by a stayed sure line are to be ruled
and ordered. And though it be one way true a man sometimes marries and has no
children, yet on the otherside being utterly impossible in the course of nature
for a man to have children without company of some woman, we are to do in
this case, what godly reason counsels, not what the Sophister concluded. So
likewise what ever adversity the Church fears, and God has decreed to
exercise her patience withal, she must bind the sacrifice of her prayers with
cords to the horns of the Altar; and in forecast of all imminent dangers call
upon God that mercy may step in twixt her transgression, and his judgment.

Impossible it is to be free from all adversities, and therefore it is not a
petition, but a vain babbling.
What is simply absolutely and fully impossible, which we know shall never be
granted at all to one or other in any measure, that we are not to crave. But
freedom from all adversity in some measure for some particular Church is
possible, Math. 26.39 Non obstat, quod re^ impossibilem sibi concedi poscit,
quia non semper fidelium preces continue tenore ad finem vsque flu^^^, non
semper ^quabile temperame^tum servant, non semper distinctoordine su^t
composita, quin potius implicita and perplexa vel confligunt secum, vel in
mediocursu sub sistunt. Call. apud marlor in Math. 26. v. 39. Siomisso diui^^
consilis intuit^^ desyderium su^^ quo astuabat inpatris smum depos^^rit. Ibid
begun here, and hereafter more fully granted, so that our prayers may well
entreat for it. And as eternal life we crave here, yea and in some small
measure do enjoy even now, while flesh is upon us, so freedom from all
adversities we shall have in the life to come but the beginnings thereof, and a
certain sweet taste we have now and pray we may have more and more abundant,
the consummation whereof also we desire now, though presently now we obtain it
not. Easy it is to know the difference of these several petitions. To obtain
a thing, and to desire a thing. We ask not the consummation here, but here we
ask the consummation. The beginning, middle, and increase we may hope for,
pray for, and here obtain, but fully after this life an end of all
adversity. Upon those words of our Savior his prayer. Father if it be
possible let this Cup pass from me, etc. Matthew. 26. Our learned godly
writers note thus. No hinderance it is, that our Savior craves an impossible
thing to be granted. For the prayers of the faithful do not always flow one
with a continual tenor to the end, they do not always keep an even temper,
they are not always composed in a distinct order, but rather implicat and
perplexed either at variance with themselves, or stop in the midst of the way,
etc. And anon after follows this observation. It is no absurdity if Christ
by a common received manner among the faithful (the view in of Gods counsel
being omitted) laid down in his Fathers besome that desire of his, In
funde^dis pre cibus non se^per ad speculanda ce^scendunt etc. vel tanquam in
otio expendunt quid factu sit possibile. etc. Ibid. Sed votorum fernore
interdu^ celeres feru^tur Ibid.
wherewith he did boil. For the faith^ull in pouring forth their prayers, do
not always clamber up to pry into Gods secrets, nor are always at lessure to
weigh what is possible, but are sometimes speedily carried with the feruencie
of their prayers to the thing which they beg.

No promise that we shall be free from all: Ergo to pray for that, whereof we
have no promise is against faith, and so not to be Subscribed unto.
Both these propositions must be warily understood. For if their meaning be,
that we are not to pray for any thing, but what is expressly promised in Gods
word, as concerning every particular that we stand in need of, we shall deny
our selves in many things the comfortable use of prayer. Whereas it may fall
out that the Lord is so far Trom promising, as he utterly denies us what we
ask, yea* he makes known unto us by his some he will not grant our
petition, but puts it of and by name puts us of. Math. 15.22.24.^5.
Thus it pleased our Savior to entreat the Woman of Chanaan, whose daughter
was miserably vexed with a Devil. He answered bix not a word, and after much
add, when he spoke, he spoke nothing to her comfort, for he said. He was not
sent, but to the lost sheep of the bouse of Israel. And then afterward
notwithstanding her importunity, he told her it was not for a dog to have
the childrens bread. In all which answers, as that also of the Disciples
motion to have her thrust away, because she cried after them no express
promise did the Lord make unto her for that which she craved at his hands: No
doubt inwardly the spirit of God wrought in her heart: and the more she endured
an open repulse the more she was extraordinarily encouraged to wait in
expectation and give attendance upon the Lord for what she craved. Besides do
we instance in that example of our Savior before alleged. What express
promise had Christ to be delivered from the Cup, who well knew that therefore
be came into the world, Quamuis sit vera rectitude for mare n^str^s ^mmes
affectus ad des arbitriu^, esse tamen qua^ dam obliqua dissensio^is specum qua
culpa caret, and in p^^catum non imputatur Cala^ud Marls. in Math. 26.39. Si
quis tra^quil lum and florent^^ ecclesia statum expetat etc. Ibid. Si cupiat
arum ^is liber atosessa dei filios, sublatat e medio omnes superstisiones,
repressam. etc. Ibid. H^^ quam perse recta sint rita possunt a fidelsbus expeti
etc. Ibid. Proprium est fidelis ^^^is nolla pati aliquid doloris. Orig homil.
35. in Math.
and that the prophe^^es, ^acritices, tipes, and sacrausents of the law did
foretell what death he should die. From both which particular allegations we
gather this comfortable instruction. Although it be a true rightnesse, or
rectitude to frame all our affections to the will of God, yet there is a
certain show of a slope or obliq^^ diff^ntion and disagrament, which is
without blame and is not imputed unto sin: as for example, if a man wish for
a quiet and flourishing estate of the church, if he desire the sons of God be
freed from sorrows, and that all superstitions be utterly taken away and that
the lustful licentiousnes of the wicked be repressed, least it do hurt. These
things for as much as they are right in themselves they may rightly be prayed
for by the faithful, although it please God otherwise to have his some reign
among his enemies, his children exercised under the cross etc. For as Origin
has upon like occasion. It is the property of every faithful man not to be
willing to suffer any grief etc. Wherefore be it, there is noe express
promise, nay were we the persons, whom God by name had dented. Yet so long as
we crave in assurance of grace (with the church of God, well perfwaded she is
in favor,) so long as all we beg is with reference to his blessed will, and in
faith that he hears, certainly believing in generali he will give, though
not this nor that for quality or quotient, yet so much as is expedient that we
may the better go for ward in the duties of our calling: there is noe
likelihood to the contrary but we may pray and praying shall effectually
obtain to the relief of our necessity and the setting forth of his glory.
But scripture is full of promises made to the faithful for freedom from all
adversities except we think they were only current with the Jews and noe way
concern the Israel of God. Exodus 23. Ye shall serve the Lord your God, He
shall bless thy bread, and thy water, and will take all sickness away from
thee. And Deuteronomy. 7. The Lord will take away all infirmities, Exodus 23.25. Deuteronomy.
7.15. c. 28.2.3.4.5.6. etc.
and will put none of the evil diseases etc. Cap 28. The Lord is rich in
mercy and vouchsafes large promises of all manner of blessings to his people
that barken to the law and obey the same, whither at home, or abroad in the
field, in the house in his children, cattle going forth, conuning home etc.
As may be scene by the specialties there expressed crossing the particular
crosses and ^^ses threa^^ed to be cast upon the shineched and disobedient. In
nous Testamento prater ^^er^^nd possessio^^^, qua promittitur sanctis ^uins
possesionis qua transitura est, multiplicatio non substrabitur, and tante fit
vberior quan to contemptius pos^idetur, Aug. contra Adima. c. 1^. Psalm. 91.20.
Abomni pericu le quod tibi creabitur. Iunins. Ibid. defendet te ab emniperi
culo. Ibid. Post aliquod malorum specificationem sum matim and in ^enere dicit,
Non occurret tibi malu^ di cti one mali omni^ generis afflictones miserias and
arumnas complectens. Marlo. Ibid. ^aollerus totide^ p^ne verbis. Psalm. 122.6.
Pacis nomen g^ neraliter pro la to and felsci sta t^ posuit Marlo in Psalm.
121.2 ^riuatam, publicam, intus and foris, Iunius. Ibid. Psalm. 128.5.
Again cap, 30. The Lord thy God will make thee plenteous in every work of thy
hand, in yt fruit of thy body, of thy cattle, and of thy land for thy wealth.
Upon which words in that 28. chap, the former of these two quotations Saint
Austin writes in this fort. In the new testament beside the eternal
possession, which is promised to the Saints the multiplication of a transitory
possession is not subtracted, but so much the more plentiful it becomes, as
the more contemptedly it is possessed. But to proceed in other scriptures.
What is it else but a grations promise to be defended from al adversities, where
in the first Psalm it is avouched in general terms. Whatsouer thou take in
hand, shall prosper. The like is Psalm. 91. there shall no evil come unto thee v.
10, and a little before v. 3 The Lord will deliver thee from the snare etc that
is says M. Iunius the Lord will deliner thee from all danger, and v. 4. Where
the prophet says, he will cover thee vnter his wings etc. that is he will
defend thee from all evil. All danger and aleuil is no more then answereable
unto this collect All adversities. Of which indgement is Marlorat and Mollerus.
After a specialty of some evils he says humanity and in general. Noe evil
shall come unto yt under the word (evil) comprehending afflictions, miseries,
and sorrows of all forts. Beside these authorities and commentaries Psalm.
121. Witnesses as much. The Lord out of Sion shall preserve thee from all
evil, and he shall preferue thy going out and thy coming in, that is all the
actions and occasions of our life, for so going out and coming in is taken 1.
Reg. 37. Number. 27.17. As Master Iunius proves in that place. Far der Psalm.
122.6. the prophet shows it is the duty of the faithful to pray for the
peace of Jeruslem, that peace may be within her wales and prosperity within
her palaces. Which name of peace is put generally for the pleasant and happy
estate, and all things prosperous as Marlorat has, or as Master Iunius
divides it for all peace whither private or public, whither within or
without. Again Psalm. 128. The Lord out of slon shall bless ye and thou shall
see ye wealth and prospecous estate of Jerusalem all the days of thy life, to
like effect is yt promise by Esaias yt prophet when thou passest thorough the
waters I will be with the, and through the floods that they do not ever flow
thee, Isay. 43.^. Per ^gn^^^ and aquam intelligi^, omne genu^ miser^arum quibus
in hae vita ob^^xij s^^ mus. Calain. Ibid. Visi^^^in or as. domin Ioh. 16.23.
when thou walk thorough the very fire thou shall not be burnt, neither
shall the flame kindle upon thee etc. Where Master Calain teaches that the
Lord by fire and water does understand all kind of meseries: If al these
quotations suffice not, the words of our savior note as much in the prayer
deliver us from cuil that is (faieth Vrsinus whom we have quoted else where) all
euels both of sin and punishment whither present or to come. Nor does this
clause only warrantize thus much but also those words Ioh. 16. whatsoever ye
ask the father in my name he shall give it you: If whatsoever a man can ask,
he shall have, what cause is there that ye church praying for freedom from all
adversities, any son or daughter of hirs should doubt that the Lord will grant
it, or rather deny yt the Lord will grant it, being amply confirmed by many
scripturs in the old and new testament. In a word to put an end (if not to al
adversities till our lives end, yet) is our adversaries and the trouble which
this objection has occasioned, cuery word here arrested puts in bail for more
security. The church may be free by ye protection of ye Almighty from al
adversity. Romans 6.201 (...). 22. (...).
First ye church particular not universal: secondly may be argues it is not.
3. free but freed as ye Apostle speaks of our estate in christ freed from sin
because borne naturally the vassals of sin, and our freedom not natural but
purchased, not active but passive. 4. (From) not utterly without all, but in
adversity, and then afterward freed, For though this word from in most
languages be sometimes taken exclusive for without in what manner young
scholars prove their argument by a proposstion drawn from Aristotle where it
never was, meaning it is not in Aristotle at all, Ex Aristotele.
and so is out but quite out, yet no such error is here bred in these words
(may be free from) because (free from) in Scripture signifies to have been
first in it: 1. Cor. 1.10. Ibid. c. 10.13.
and the^ afterward delivered: So Paul receiving ye sentence of death was
delivered from it but he was first subject unto it: Math. 17.43.
So God delivers from evil but a man is first in the tentation and then the
Lord makes way out So. Mat 27. of Christ scoffingly they spoke, he trusted in
God let him deliver him, if he will have him. So Luke 1.74 delivered from ye
hands of our enemies may serve him without fear al ye days of our life. And
that before in the Psalm. 121. The Lord shall preserve she from evil, Romans
7.24.1^.31. 2. These. 3.2. 2. Tim. 3.11. Deuteronomy. 29.20. Non possunt quidem omnia
maledicta e^enire vni homini: Non e^im toties more potest quot genera mortis
hic dicta sunt, sed omnia dixit pro quibuslibet. August super Deuteronomy lib. 5. c.
49. Romans 1.8. Inomnibus eccles^is totius mundi Synechdo che est generis
hyperbolica, na^ intelligit ecclesias plurinias. Piscat. Romans 1 8. Optime
compre henduntur o^nia mala culpa and p^na etc. Vrsin. in orat. dominic. In dei
custodia^ ac fidem suscepti ac protectione ^ius s^curi supra peccatu^, mortem,
inferorum portas and totum Diabols regnum inuicts duremus. Call. in Math. 6.13.
he shall preserve thy going out and thy coming in from this time forth. And
many the like In all which places danger is still presupposed imminent and
possible. Fifthlie (All) that is all manner not every particular but in
general, or rather indefinite terms, because all at once do not usually
fall upon the church in one only age. But as S. Austin well notes upon Deuteronomy,
29.20, 27. The Lord his Jealousy shall smoke against that man and every curse
that is written in this book shall light upon him. All (says that good
father,) cannot come to one man for he cannot die so often, so many several
kinds of death, as are set down in that book But (all) he said for any. Or
else this word (all) may be taken for most as Rom 1. Because your faith is
published throughout the whole world (that is) in all churches of the whole
world. An hyperbolical, or excessive speech. For the Apostle thereby means
most churches, or very many churches. So in this petition here all adversities
that is most adversities. Sixthly (Adversity) may be taken here for what ever
is adverse and contrary to souls health whither sin, or the punishment for
sin: Suitable whereunto is that petition, which our savior taught his
disciples Deliver us from evil, which Vrsinus interprets in these words
under the name of evil some understand the diuill, some understand sin,
others understand death: But under this name are comprehended all evils of
sin and punishment whither they be present or to come: So as in asking that
God deliver us from evils we crave that he do send us no evil but deliver us
from all evils present, and to come both of sin and punishment etc. Read the
place in Vrsinus his Carechisme. Seventhly (through thy protection) may be free
from al adversities (that is) being taken into the trust and custody of God,
and by his protection secure over sin, death, the gates of hell, and the
whole kingdom of Satan we may continue unconquered. Implying All it is free
from, is by his protection, as he that is said to teach All the scholars in a
town, not that (All) in the town are taught, but that (all) which are taught
are of his teaching: so not that the church is free from all, but that all she
may be free from, may be by his protection as S. Austin interpreth that in 2.
Tim 2.4. (All men are saved,) not that all are saved, but that all which are
saved, are saved by him. Non quod nullus sit hominu^ quem saluu^ fires velit,
sed quod nullus fiat, nisi quem velit. Aug. ad Lauren c. 103.
Lastly in the communion book which themselves perued and offered to the
parliament in a prayer that follows after their prayer for the whole church,
are the like words. Assuage and stay thy corrections, and so at length by
delivering them from all their troubles. We in our leiturgie say All
adversities which they call corrections and all troubles. Grant it good in
theirs after their meaning, then cannot it be misconstrued in ours being to
the same sense, and purpose. Now when so evident a truth in the manifold
explanation shows it self, they who have had a hand in wounding the credit
of our church about this prayer, will in the end receive condign reproach, and
well worthy are they for their fond defamations raised against that, which so
many ways clears it self in the upright judgment of the Godly well
advised

Cap. 6. Of the name Priest. The word Priest is often given to the minister of
the word and sacraments as the name of his office, which is never found in the
new testament given to any minister, but to Christ.
And good reason it (...) given the minister of the word, as the name of his
office in such sense as our church intends. For so is it generally found in
the new testament.

In the whole bible there is mentioned only 2. sorts of Priests the one of
Aron, the other after Melchisedecke.
TWo sorts of Priests offering to God some visible, external present, as
sacrificeing unto him, we read in the bible. But if our word (Priest) being
lished for that in the original hebrew we must know there are more the^
only two sorts of Priests. For the original word in in Hebrew signifies a
principal honorable officer of chief no^^ whither in ecclesiastical or
eiuill occasions. Cohen
In which sense P^^^phar. because of his enmient place about Pharao has the
name, Genes. 41.45.
whose daughter Joseph married. So the sons of David, who might not burn
incense are called 2. Sam. 8. So Iarah a chief prince about David 2. Sam
20.26. (...). 1. Ch^o. 18.17 2. Sam. 8. 2. Sam. 20.26.
And because Aaron and his sons were to be of greater account then the Lenite,
this name of pre-eminence they distinctlie had from the rest. In the Greek of
the new testament there are two words both translated by this same word Priest,
signifying a sacerdotall office in sacrificing, or else taken for an ancient
and elder, in which sense commonly it is the name of a minister of the gospel,
and so the word from Presbyteros and presbyter contracted and made short
Priest. (...). Presbyter. Priest.
The occasion intended may charge our language with penury and want of words,
in that she is enforced to make one english word interpreter to them al, and
did we speak latin, the plea we put in would be of more force, but in our
mother tongue, which we use, it is not against us, nor our letturgie.

Aarons priesthood with the name, together with all therest of the Ceremomes
had their end by Christ, which to renew were to deni^ Christ.
Yet they so have not their end by Christ, but the ministers of the gospel
succeed Aaron in teaching, and praying for the people, which duties belonged
to Aaron, and die not with him. The priest his lips should preserve knoweledge,
Malac. 2.7:
and of him should the people ask counsel, which very course continues in
the ministers of the word and sacraments.

So if ministers must be Priests by their office, it must needs be of the
Popish sacrificing order, which I hope, none dare affirm.
So must ministers of the word be Priests by their office, and yet no need they
be of the Popish sacrificing order. For they are Priests, as the word is given
them in the new testament that is ancients, and elders; And reason it is, they
should be so thought, because of yt original, whence our english word is
derived. For it is not home borne but a stranger, first a greek; then latin,
and now english. And yt very word, which the holy ghost calls us by in yt new
testament, is the grand-sire to this name priest: Wherein our language (if any
complain of her poverty that she is not copious as yt griek is) yet may
rejoice in this her dexterity, that she gives the name in yt very same
characts the other does.

To affirm a Priest and Priesthood does derogate from Christ Jesus who has
put an end to Priest, and Priesthood.
True it does; to mean a sacrificer of a carnal, real, external,
propitiatory sacrifice of the very body, and blood of Christ under the forms
of bread, and wine upon a material altar for the quick and dead: Isay. 61.6.
1. Pet 2.5. Apoc. 5.10.
Else in a borrowed speech by way of allusion to the legal rites, it does no
way derogate. For the holy ghost witnesses accordingly, as was prophesied by
Esaias, we are a roial priesthood unto God to offer up spiritual sacrifices.

So is every godly man and woman a Priest, but this is nothing to the
minister.
True also it is, Every godly man and woman is a Priest in the common
received sense as the prophet speaks Isay 61. ye shall be named the Priests of
the Lord yet from among them he will take out some more specially to be
Priests and Levites, Isay. 61.6.66.21.
that is such, as in the ministry of the Gospel should be distinguished both
from the people, and from themselves, as were the Priest and Luites. For though
the people offer up the calves of their lips, and their bodies a living,
reasonable sacrifice, yet in two respects else for distinction sake the minister
may have that name, rather then the people. First because, they offer up for
themselves distinctly a part, but he in public by virtue of his office both
for himself, and for them in the name of the congregation, standing up before
the Lord, and offering their prayers in that only atonement, Christ Jesus,
they in the mean while accompanying him with sighs and groans, sealing up
every petition with a still, silent, but effectual Amen: Secondly he
ministers in holy things the word and sacraments, which ministration Saint
Paul calls by the name of one employed in a sacred business, (...). Romans
15.16. Pastores quo sensu sacerdotes dicantur Feguernek. Crisost. (...).
Episcopi and prasbyters proprie appella^tur sacerdotes Aug de ciuit dei lib. 20
cap 10 vetustissima co^ suetudo fuit in ecclesia christiana, vt ministr^
vocare^sur sacerdotes Neque egomultum moror nomina modo de rebus conueniat
Zanch. derede^p. lib. 1 c. 19. (...) Kirck Church.
for the word is a sacrificing knife in the hand of his minister, by which our
flesh is killed, and offered up a ^^ring sacrifice unto God: Where Peguer
nekinus in his promtuarie upon Marlorat, says in the title of the pastor. (In
which sense Pastors are called sacrificers, or ministering in holy things) And
it may be thought S. Chrisost. so meant intituling six books by yt name
(Hierosune) and S. Austin writing that Bishops and Priests are now properly
called sacerdotall Priests. Zanchius says in the 4. commandment: It was a
most ancient custom in the church of christ, that the ministers of the word
and sacraments should be called sacerdotall Priests, because ministers of
sacred things Nor do I much contend about names, so we did agrece in the
things themselves.

To give this new name to the ministers of the Gospel is to cross, and reject
the wisdom of God who has given so many fit names to his in his word.
It is no new name but the old, and the very same which the word of God
gives them: For it is Priest, whose name is presbuteros, and so translated
into our tongue, as other words Bible, Euangilest, Baptism, Church, and the
like, which retain the foot-print of their original. And could we redeem
the wrong it has received, in being put to interpret the office of a popish
sacrificer, our labor should be employed herein, but we are not to command
words. As for other natural english Elder, ancient sen^or, whereof some are
no more english the^ this, the reason, why we use them not, is because they are
made triuial and common in other trifling pelting, and profane occasions: So
as what in regard thereof, as also for (...) riuation whence this word is
taken, and the allusion it has by way of similitude to them in the law (as we
generally among us receive it in our church, not to be misliked, nor so
contentiously to be imrupned, more then yt word (Sunday) among the beathe^,
which name we retain, understanding not yt Sun in the firmament (though Pagans
do) but our Lord the sun of righteousness to whose honor we observe it.
Lingua^ teneat mentem corrigat August.
And therefore as S. Austin in another case about the word (free will) Let him
retainethe word, and correct his mind. If any be popishlie affected it is not
the word, but their judgment that needs reformation.

Chap. 7. Almighty God which have given us thine only begotten Son and this
day to be borne of a pure Virgin: And by a rubricke, The Minister must. ^e
these words seven days following, affirming that in every of these seven days
Christ was borne. This is against the plain manifest truth of the Scripture.
For Christ had his natural birth in one only day.
THis Collect read^^^. Christn^^^ day is here only named, but through the
^^des thereof, another in the time of the Commu^^ion appointed for the same
purpose, a third for Innocents say, a faineth for Whitsunday, all wounded
at^^^^^ ^ith the flourish of a pen, so as how ever ^^arily some make show to
mislike but this one, they do what lies in them condemn the use of the rest.
For they all aim a^ one mark: on Christmas day, and the Sunday sorts wing
there are two Collects ^^ther of them so one purpose. Among the Epistles and
Gospels this. Almighty God which have given us thy only begotten Son to take
our nature upon him, and this day to be borne of a pure Virgin, grant that we
being regenerabe and made thy Children by adoption may daily be ^^^ued by thy
holy spirit, etc. Again, at the Communion, proper prefaces upon Christmas day,
and scuen days after. Because thou did give Jesus Christ thy only Son to be
born as this day for us, who by the operation of the holy Ghost was made very
man of the substance of the Virgin, etc. On Innocents day thus. Almighty God
whose praise this day the young Innocents thy witnesses, etc, On the
Purification of the Virgin. Almighty, etc. As thy only begotten Son was
this day presented in the Temple in the substance of our flesh: On Whitsunday
and seven days after the Collects are two: One thus. God (which as upon this
day) bast taught the hearts of thy faithful, etc. Again, in the preface
through Jesus Christ our Lord according to whose most true promise the holy
Ghost came down this day from headen with a sudden great sound, etc. Where
that on Whitsunday interprets what is meant, not precisely determining the
very day whereon Christ was borne, solemnized by the Innocents, presented in
the Temple sent forth his holy spirits for that neither the Church proposes,
nor if she did, can she so well determine, but about some such time of the
year, and therefore in one of the Prefaces it is, God which (as upon this day)
And that in common English is much about that time: Now that a thing done one
day, many ^ayes and ^^ea^^^, after^ may bear some special note of choice
remembrance, and that for many days together, as if but now done, is a matter
not unknown to Scripture, Fathers, and the language of other countries.
Scripture as in the old and now Testament. Genes. 40.20.
The old Genesis 40. And so the third day (...) was Phara^ his birth day, etc. At
which time Phara^ was in years, and Joseph in trust under him. yet then so
fane of, and after (as it was) Pharaohs birth day, was the name. Exodus 12. when
four himbred and thirty years were erpired oven the self same day departed
all the ^^^tes of the Lord, Exodus 12.41 51 (...) Psalm. 118.24 Non loquitur de
die allo praeci se, sed de caus^ propter quam diesesse Panegy ricus merebatur.
Muscul. Ibid. (...). Math. 13.1. (...). Marc. 4.1. (...) Luc. 8.1.
etc. And ^^^s^^. ^1. the self sallie day, etc. Did the Lord bring the
children of Israel, etc. Where in the Original the words are. In the very
nicke or joint of that very self same day, which in so many hundred ye^eres
could not be, but by revolution only, as it was a day re^ued. Bsal. ^18. This
is the day which the Lord has made, speaking of the happy day wherein David
was by Samuel appointed under king, yet not precisely of that very day but of
the cause and occasion, wherefore it might well be thought to be panegyricall,
and triumphant-like. In the new Testament. S. Math. cap. 13. has the same day
went Jesus out of the house, which same day Saint Mark calls again cap. 4.
and he began again to teach, but Saint Luke renders it afterward. Both these
S. Math. interprets the same day whereupon some of the learned note. It is
not necessary to be taken for the same day, since it may be taken after the
manner of the Scripture for time a^ large. In all which pla^es euiden^ly
appears a thing done (...) day, many dai^^, and years (...) (as if but the
first day) so (...). So Christ his birth) 1600. years ago yet now this day to
be made famous arguing the memory thereof should be as fresh as the day that
breaks, and as the words sound in the Collect (to be borne this day) Come w^
to the Fathers, and (...) how this speech may plead prescription: So Cypri^^,
or one of that time speaking of Christ his birth day 200. years after Christ,
accounts him as then newly to be borne. A^e^t christi multum deside r^itu,
and expectat^ na^^iu^t as, adesi sole^nit as inclyta etc. Ciprian de nati^.
dom. Nunquia^ 2. pascha factur^ su^^^? non sod lysum ^^^iplic^ter: s^entenim
semper solex^ritur etc Christ. hon^^t to regres. S. Joan de Asi^. Paseba
propinquaente dicim^^^-crastioam vel perendinam esse domini passionem, cum ille
tam multos annot passus sit nec omnino nisi semelilla passi^ facta sit Aug.
epist. 23. ips^ die domini co dicimus body dominus resurrexit, cu^ ex qu^
resurrexeri^ for ^^^ui tra^ssierunt. Cur nemoram ^^egius est, vt no^^s a
loque^tes arg^at esse mentitus, nisiqu^d^ (...) dids secundum u^^erum, q^^i^us
hac g^^^a (...) dime^^ nu^cup^mus, us dicatur dies (...) qu^ ^onest t^se,
sedr^^o^t (...) should (...) Ibid.
The birth of Christ is come so long desired and much looked for that famous
solemnity is very now, and in the presence of the Savior the holy Church
^^^dreth thanks, and praises throughout the whole world into God that has
visited on high: Saint Chrysostom^, and Saint Austin some 200. years after
this, one of them writes of a solemn feast by way of an Interrogatiue. What
do we make two Easte^^s, No, but one, and the some in a manifold manner. For
(...) the Sun arises always, and we do not (...) many Suns, but one Sun
daily arises, so the Pasch o^ Easter is always consummated, and seeing it is
always celebrated it is one for the matter of our solemnity. Saint Austin upon
another occasi^^ exemplyfieth his answer^ by the speech here questioned, and
then in use. When Easter is at hand we say to morrow or the next day after to
be the Passion of the Lord, where it is a many years ago since, that he,
suffered, neither could that Passion of his be more then once. Again, on the
Lord day we say this day the Lord rose again, whereas many years are gone and
past since he rose. Why is none so foolish (says this grave Father) to tell us
in speaking so we lie, but that we call those days after this fashion, for the
like is now done that was done heretofore. So then it is called this very day
and that very day, not that it is the very self same day, but in revolution of
time like unto it. Where that Reue^nd Father says None were so foolish, men
of this generation are become so wise, that the veriest punie of our rath-ripe
age can partly controull him for this man^er of speech, which he used not once,
but often as those Sermons under his name. De tempote (...) confir^^. Istum
celebra* mus diem, quo nasci est dignatus ex virgin. August* de temp ser. 25.
ser. 21. Iste quo humana carni copula tut tanquam sponsus processit de thalamo
suo, nunc hod^ernus, cras fit hesternus verunt am^ hodiernus natu^ ex virgin
commendat aternu^ quia aternus natui ex virgin consecrauit ^^diernum. Ibid.
Hodie nasc^dig (...) est etc. sermon. 22. Celebremus cu^ gaudio diem quo peperit
Maria Christum Ibid,
We celebrate this day, wherein Christ vouchsafed to be borne of a Virgin.
Again, This day (wherein Christ coupled to man's flesh came forth as a
Bridegroom out of his bedchamber) is now called this day, to morrow it is
made yesterday, yet notwithstanding this day commends him borne of a Virgin
eternal, because eternal borne of a Virgin has consecrated this day. Again,
in another Sermon following Christ vouchsafed to be borne this day by whom all
things were made. Anon after are these words as an exposition of the former.
Let us celebrat with joy the day, wherein Maria brought forth Christ: In which
last word^ expressly it is said. The day wherein Mary brought forth, showing
that the day is past, as it is in deed, yet in other places before delivered
in terms, as if it were just now to be done, and that Christ on this very day
were to be borne. Which speeches compared toge^h^^ (...) each ^^^ers
^^^erpreter, one alluding to the word^ of the Prophet Esaias, and the Angel Thou
shall conceive, and bring forth a Son, the other not strictly using the same
words, but in steed of that which they foretold Christ to be borne this
mentions in the time past namely that he is borne. A practice of the ancient
which our Church (it se^^es) follows. For that which is in one Collect (this
day to be borne) another renders (as this day) by the operation of the holy.
Ghost was made very Man of the substance of the Virgin which plainly
distinguishes the (...), and unless a man will be too abs^^d judging against
all equity, y^^ (...) his own understanding, it entreats from the Reader a
warrantable construction. But suppose a man could not satisfy his own heart
for reconciling thus, which he imagines such an intolerable s^^uple, then
might he with but danger oue^hip the word, a^way provided, that he be a man of
approved behavior, not given to contention about words, nor in other matters
opposite to public order. For except we will shamefully wrong the Saints in
heaven, we cannot think that those holy men (whose labors were used in
penning our Communion Book) did propose unto us matters of absurdity for a
form of publi^e prayer. But restless and unquiet disputants will not give it
over so. Thus they object.

To say that on Christmas day and the Sabbath following Christ to be borne
this day is against the plain manifest truth of Scripture. For Christ had his
natural birth in one only day.
Christ had his natural birth in one only day, ^ut not his solemnized birth
in one only day, which is the meaning of the words in the Collect. And if that
which has been already spoken suffice not, this we add for a more plenary and
full answer. As a day in computation varieth, natural, artificial,
supernatural. Natural comprising day and night; artificial, as that which
our Savior mentions of 12. hours, are there not 12. hours in the day:
supernatural as that in Joshua his time, and in the reign of King Ezechias, so
is there a day Political, and Ecclesiastical; Political as that of our
Kings, who are crowned one day, yet their tilts, iusts, and triumphs last
three, seven, or 13. days after. Ecclesiastical and that is threefold
Historical, Evangelical, Festival* Historical the time of our Saviors
being here in the world: Evangelical the day of mercy, and forberance. O if
thou had known in this thy day. Festival a time of solemnity, which
differs more, or less. Less as the strict account of 12. hours from
morning to evening, which commonly is the limited observation of every Saints
day. More, as that of Christ his Nativity, Passover, and the coming of the
holy Ghost, at which times the Church ordains not only for the
anniuersaries, when it comes, but also a diurnall for some days more, or
less continued, as the example of the Jews in their Passover, Exodus 12.15.
Ioh. 18.39. Luc. 23.17.
whereof the first, and the seventh was a calling forth of the people to serve
God, yea, six days before it was called by the name of a Passover, as
appears in the history of Barrabas. So the first and the seventh, yea
sometimes sooner, whereon Christ was borne; arose: as this day, the holy Ghost
came down: notwithstanding it was but once done, yet twice, or more in that
seven night more solemnly* and publicly the memorial is preserved. For as a
day in the nature of the first relation strictly signifies the day wherein
Christ was borne, and that could be but once, so in the nature of a history, ye
reports a report or festiual, that sosemnizeth, it signifies the days
after, yea, even so many as the memory of that special action
representatiuely by public prayer, Memoria^ Pascha and Pentecostes veteres
Ecclesiastici scriptores voca^t Pascha et Pentecosten Confess: Wittenberg de
sacra Cana sect. 14. page 147.
and thanksgiving is duly sanctified. So the ancient (says the confession of
Wittenberg) call the memorial of Easter, and Whitsuntide by the name of Easter
and Whitsuntide it self. Which in effect is like this received manner of our
Church. We call the momoriall of Christ his birth day, by the name of ye very
natural day, wherein he was once to be borne. In a word little he observes in
Scripture, Philosophy or other learning, who observes not, that these words
Now, this day, yesterday, etc. signify more then a bare stint either of
moment, 12. hours, Math. 24 (...) pro (...). Pascat: Heb. 2.16: 24, (...).
etc. For they reach sometimes to 3. 4. 6. days yea a great while after upon
occasion. Lastly, considering Aduent sunday before presenting Christ to come,
though come before, as also the phrase, Herod asked, where Christ should be
borne, who was borne already, and that Heb. 2. He takes not Angels but the
seed of Abraham, as if this day to be done which was so long ago, and could
be but once: yet a truth by a grace of speech putting that in the present or
future tence, which should be in the preterperfect tence, all prove that this
clause in the Collect thus carped at, is sufficiently defended.

Chap. 8. That this day we fall into no sin: There is no warrant in God his
word to pray so. Therefore we may not subscribe unto it.
THese words are set down in the third Collect for morning prayer, thus O
Lord, etc. which have safely brought us to the beginning of this day, defend us
in the same by thy mighty power, and grant that this day, we fall into no
sin, nor run into any kind of danger, but that all our doings may be
ordered by thy governance to do always, that is righteous in thy sight, etc.
Where the meaning of these words (that we fall into no sin) is expounded by
the clause following, namely that all our doings may be ordered by thy
governance, etc. A course very familiar to them, that are acquainted with their
own prayers, and the prayers of other of Gods children, and is found in the
style of our Saviors prayer, which he taught his Disciples, (Lead us not into
tentation, but deliver us from evil) where the aduersatiue parcel (but)
coupleth both members together, as M. Calvin after S. Austin wisely observed,
so as it may be thus resolved, Least we be led into tentation, deliver us from
evil. Aduersatiu^ particula quae media ponitur 2. me^bra inter se simul
colliga^ quod etiam pr^^ denter expe^dis Augustinus. Sic ^gitur resolui debet
^ratione in tentationem feramu^, not a malo redi me Call. in Math 6.13.
So least we fall into any sin, we pray that all our doings may be ordered by
thy governance. But were not this exception raised naturally from the place it
self, seeing in the holy Scriptures (which are of all sufficiency, and worth)
we make recourse in a doubt from one Text to another, and salve the wound that
schism, or heresy gives: much faulty they are, that will not do the like in
scanning those sentences, which are framed by ye Church of God. Now in the
third Collect after Easter it is, Almighty God, etc Grant unto all them, that
be admitted into the fellowship of Christ's Religion, that they may eschew all
those things that be contrary to their profession and follow all such things as
are agreeable to the same. Which words interpret what the other prayer
mentions (To fall into no sin.) 3. Because our eye much respects the
writings of strangers more, then of our own countrymen. Take a view of the
morning prayers published by M. Calvin where it is thus, Grant O Lord, I may
spend this whole day in the service and worship of thy holy power. Fac. vt
diem hunc totum in sanctissimi numinis tu^ cult^^ and veneration^ consumam.
Nihilomnino, aut cogitem au^ d^cam, aut facia^ quod conon ten dat. Call prece^
matut: inter opuscula.
And that nothing in the world I may think, say, or do, that may not tend to
this purpose to obey thee. Which aims to the same scope which this does here
(that we fall into no sin) forasmuch as all sin is either in thought, word, or
deed. 4. Every word here mentioned in this Collect speaks the language of
Scripture, Fall into no sin. Fall he says not slip, trip, or stumble. But
fall; nor simply fall but with addition fall into, That we fall the Book
acknowledges, as appears in the Letanie wherein the prayer of the
congregation is to strengthen the^ that stand and to raise up the^ that fall
which is the condition of a righteous man seven times a day (a certain number
put for an uncertain) that is many times, Pro: 24.6. Corruit in peccatum
impius.
but the wicked run, or rush into sin: so as this prayer fall into implies
our godly desire that we cast not our selves headlong: the compound aggravating
the single, naked, bare signification of the simple word supposing not a
freedom from falling, but from falling into, which is a sore bruze or
downfall: (...)
5. This word (No) may be thought comparatively spoken as in Ioh. 9.3. neither
has this man sinned, nor his parents, and v. 41. If ye were blind, ye should
have no sin: not absolutely denying all sin, but implying no sin so
grievous, as now. So fall into no sin not so grievous, and heinous, as
otherwise, but for our prayers (apprehending the sweet mercies of God) we
might readily fall into. 1. Ioh. 3.6.
6. Sin bears a construction as, whosoever abides in him sins not,
whosoever sins has not known him, and verse. 8, he that commits sin is
of the devil, and verse. 9. whosoever is borne of God sins not, neither can
he, because he is borne of God. Where sin is taken, Hoc istud est no^
peccare, quum labuntur fideles infirmitate carnis sed sub onere peccati ge munt
sibi displi cent, deum time re non de sinunt. Call. in. 1. Ioh. 3,
not for every the least breach of Gods commandment, for he that takes it in
that sense deceives himself, as the Apostle shows. It we say we have no
sin, we deceive our selves, etc. But not to sin is in this place, when the
faithful slip through infirmities of the flesh, but yet under the burden of
sin they groan, they displease themselves, they cease not to fear God. The
prayer of the Church therefore is not to fall into sin, that is, as the holy
Ghost means in other places, that she neither sin, nor may sin. Besides, we
would ask this question? What sin it is we need not pray against, Quotidie
e^eha ristia co^munione^ percipere nec laudo, nec repre hendo, omnibus ramen
domini cis diebus communicandum suadeo, and horror, sitamen men's sine affectu
peccands. Aug. de eccles. dog. cap. 53.
or what reason have we to be at peace with any? In as much as we are to fear
one, and another, and every one, the conclusion is summarilie none can be
excepted from, within the compass of our holy deprecation. 7. What S. Austin,
or one among his works writes in another case fitteth well here. I neither
praise, nor dispraise (says he) daily communicating at the Lords table, yet
every Lords day I advise, and exhort that men would communicate; Provided always
that their mind be without any liking to sin. A dislike to sin, we must always
have, and in praying we fall into no sin, we evidently protest a fear we have
to sin, and our dislike to all, because our hearts desire to godward is to fall
into no sin. 8. wherein is this prayer more offensive, then that of our
savior or of S. Paul, or of S. Jude? Duobus modit etc. Aug. de not. et great.
67, caueamus dice^do, ne nos inferas etc. vt quicquid humana fragilitas vitare
non praeualet, hoc ille propitius nobis confer dignetur sermon. 135. de temp.
Eum a^ omni scelere puru^ and imu une^ seruabit. Call. 2. Tim. 4 18. Eripiet me
ab omnid^ licto Theophi lact. Ibid. (...), 2. Corin. 13.7. Ne deum offendatis
vel vt nihil vnquam delinquatis Theop^ilact Ibid. Oramus dominum ne quid
faciatis mali vnde satis apparet quod ad non pecca^dum etc. Aug. epist. 95.
Esse sine offe^sa est in culpatu^ esse, tam in doctrina qua^ moribus sarcer. in
Philip 1.10.
Our savior taught his disciples to pray lead us not into tentation etc. not
praying that sin might be forgiven, for that was mentioned before, but that
it might be prevented. Two ways (says Saint Austin) the evil of a disease
is shunned in the body, either that it happen not at all, or happening be
quickly healed. That it happen not at al, let us take heed, by saying lead us
not into tentation etc. that it quickly be healed, by praying forgive us our
trespasses. And as the author in his Sermons has. Pray we that whatsoever man's
frailty prevails not to shun, and avoid, the Lord of his great mercy
vouchsafe to bestow. Thus much we may hope for in this prayer (that we fall
into no sin) namely preventing that, which otherwise we shall gladly fall
into. Saint Paul has some such petition for himself, for the Corinthians,
Philippians, and Thessalonians. For himself. The Lord will deliver me from
every evil work, not only in others to do me wrong, but in my self to
offer wrong, or to do any evil thing. For so the fence best fitteth in
Master Caluins judgment. There is the like for the Corinthians, where the
Apostle delivers his mind in these vehement earnest terms. I pray God that
ye do no evil at all: Which some interpret, that ye do in no case offend
the Lord. For two negatiues in the original are very forceable to express a
denial: We pray (says S. Austin) the Lord, that ye do no evil at all.
Whence it sufficiently appears that the prayer is that they do not sin Now
then to fall into no s^n and to do no evil at all be arms of onebody, and
extend themselves to one signification, so as if prayer against one be
prejudicial to truth, so is the other, and if Saint Paul, as he does by his
example justify the one, then gives he approbation to the other. Which
zealous affection he bears the Philippians, when he prays God, that they
may be found pure, and without offense until the day of Christ. To be without
offense, is to be blameless both in doctrine, and manners. The integrity of
both which, answers in effect to ye petition of our church. That we fall into
no sin. So the Apostle beggeth for the Thessalonians that the very God of
peace sanctify them throughout, Tune purus est, and integer homo, sin^hil men
te cogitat, nihil cord appetit, nihil de corpore exequitur nisi quod probatur
deo. Call. 1, These. 5.23. (...). Iud, 24,
and that their whole spirit, and soul, and body may be kept blameless. Then
is one a pure and entire man, if he think nothing in his mind; desire nothing
in his heart, execute nothing in the body, but what is allowed of God. All
this Saint Paul prays for which is as much, as if he had prayed they might
fall into no sin. Finally Saint Jude in his epistle commends the Saints
unto God, who is able to keep them from falling whereof to little purpose he
should put them in mind, but that therein he comprehends the Lord his loving
savor that as he is able, so he does it also. A truth verified both in head,
and members. For he has given his Angels charge to carry them in their hands,
that they dash not their foot against a stone. Where fore gathering al these
scattered branches to their root, Deus nonuult nobis in hac vita praestare
liberationem a peccatis perfectam and tamen vult nos came optare nosque singulis
momentis petere vt omnino a peccatis libere utur. Vrsin. Catec, part, 3, page,
864.
warrant in scripture we find sufficient for renewing the use of this prayer.
That we fall into no sin whither we look to the place, whence it is taken; or
to other collects in the book, that expound the meaning; or to the godly
practice of learned men in other countries; or to the grace of speech it self;
or to our saviors example or to apostolical presidents, as before at large
has been showed. The conclusion therefore we make in the very words which
Vrsinus uses God will not in this life give us perfect deliverance from al
sins, yet will he have us to pray for it, and beg of God every moment to be
thoroughly, and fully delivered from all sins.

Chap 9. Of kneeling at the Sacrament of the Lords supper. The people are
commanded to receive the sacrament kneeling, and the minister so to minister
it unto them, yet is himself commanded to stand. This is dangerous,
THe words in the rubricke are these. Then shall the minister receive the
communion in both kinds, himself, and next deliver it to other ministers (if
any be there present) that they may help the chief minister, and after to
the people in their hands, kneeling. And when he delivers the bread he shall
say etc. Whereupon note^, that minister, and people both in their place, and
order are to receive the sacrament open their knees, or kneeling, so is the
minister to receive it himself, and the people at his hands. As for the
objection.

Himself is commanded to s^and.
How can any man think the minister should deliver it otherwise, being as he
is to pass from one to another?

To receive the sacrament kneeling is dangerous for minister, and people, in
respect of law, in respect of God, religion, and conscience. Of law for the
minister is charged by a statute Elizab. 13. to subscribe to the articles of
religion etc. upon pain of depriuatio^. But the 28. article commaundes that
the sacrament must not be worship. Ergo to minister to the people kneeling is
to be in danger of the law.
Law is pretended, but disobedience intended. Rather then self-will can brook
a controull, church, and common wealth shall be made enemies each to other, as
if the same persons, that have authority in both did command things
contrary, and were not well advised, what they do exact. But a truth it is,
men are not advised nor care they, against what it is that they do except. The
28. article speaks not by way of command, but only in these words, The
sacrament of the Lords supper was not by Christ's ordinance reserved, carried
about, lifted up, or worshipped whereunto as an article of truth the statute
Elizabeth 13. requires our subscription, and if any shall teach otherwise, it
passes upon him sentence of deprivation. Prove they that any among us does
reserve, carry about, lift up or worship the sacrament of the Lords supper,
and good leave have they to sue all extremities. A devise only found out to
gull a simple honest well affected mind. For let men talk of law, as much as
they list and bleare men's eyes, which they dare not do thus, nor thus, and al
for fear of law, truth will detect a bad mind, and easily prove, that they
respect not law nor lawful proceedings more, then fits their own humor: 1.
Elizabeth a law it is, if any persons, any manner of way shall deprave the
book of common prayer, so, and so his punishment is set down, and the
penalty quick for every such trespass, yet how manifest, and daily breaches
are made, such writings, and preaching in this kind do publish to the world.
And therefore what tell they us of law that are themselves lawless, and
careless? But did they well smart for this breach of good order, offenses
would be fewer, and obedience more usual.

kneeling is worshipping For Mark 5.22. and Luk 8.41. Iairus is said to fall,
or kneel down at Christ's feet. And Math 9.18. relating the same story
says, that He did worship.
Kneeling is not in that place put for divine worshipping. Christ^ diuinu^
bonorem non exhibuit Iairus, sed coluit vt dei prophetam. Genuaute^ flexio quam
vulgaris fuerit apud or^ entales satit notum. Marlor in Mare. Gen 33.3.23.7.
Iairus gave not Christ any divine honor, but reverenced him as a prophet of
God. For bending the knee, how common it was among the eastern men is well
known, and the manner of the country in the debtor to his creditor Matthew 18.
and in Jacob his obe^sance to Esau in Abraham, before the people of H^th, Gen,
23.7. So that mere kneeling that is, bowing of the knee, is not worshipping in a
divine manner. Children do it to their parents, subjects to their king, and no
hard point is it to be persuaded, that some, who object thus, have as much done
them by the fruit of their loins when their children ask blessing, or else
both children, and parents fault is the greater.

This kneeling to the sacrament was brought into the sacrament by Antichrist,
the man of sin, Pope Honorius the third an. 1220. teaching the people thereby
to worship the bread, and all to be-god it.
The question is not of kneeling to the sacrament, Totius terrae prostrationem,
terrae deosculais one^, alta suspiri^, pectoris percus^iones Ber. d^^^n dom.
aduers lodoc. Har. montensis dogmata page 144.
but kneeling at the sacrament. The one we allow, the other we mislike, and
condemn. Receiving on our knees is not forbid, but ducking, prostrating
falling on all four, kissing the earth, bouncing the breast, and popish
crouching, al to begodding the sacrament, this we like not of, nor does the
book, whence the objection would enforce an argument. The name of the book is
a treatise of custom, and truth inserted in the book of Martyrs in King Edward
the 6. his days, where it speaks of the practice of the primitive church.
When the sacrament was dealt, none of them all crouched down and took it for
his God, forgetting him, that sat there present before their eyes, page 1264.
Apostols non l^guntur prostrati in terra^ adorasse sacramentum. Call. Instit.
4.17. and 35.36.
but took, and eat it, knowing it was a sacrament, and a remembrance of Christ
his body. Now all to be-goding it. Honorius appointed and thus the question is
handled by Master Calvin. The Apostles are not read prostrated or laid along
on the earth to have worshipped the sacrament. Again speaking of Rome at this
day and the practice of her followers They prostrate themselves before the
bread to adore it. Of our writers, the author of the view of popery sets it
down thus. Coram pane s^se homines prosternunt vt panem adorent. Ibid.
Honorius the third did first command the people at eleuatro^ time to incline
and bow themselves, and when the host was carried about in procession. This
superstitious abuse, neither the 28. article, nor we justify, only what is
decent we labor to restore. For we know these mystical signs must be
reverently handled which the east, (...)
and western churches did express with humbling, and bowing of their body,
to show that they presented themselves with bashfulnes and a reverent fear.

The papist^ would not kneel, if there Idols were not there, no more would men
kneel, if the bread, and sacraments were not there.
If the bread, and sacraments were not there: What these words may imply we
conjecture, but as here they are set down we cannot, following their example,
but needs must dislike. Some error sure it is; for they afterward (as it
appears) challendge our book of common prayer, wherein the title of the
communion the Eucharist has the name of Sacraments. But we will take their
meaning. (No more would men kneel if the sacrament were not there) which is a
false proposition. For we kneel always in prayer, as well, when that blessed
sacrament is not, as when it is administered. Secondly if we may not kneel for
fear of superstition, neither may we be uncovered and bare head: The papist
adoreth it calls upon it, confesses unto it etc. all which be the parts of
adoration. We then call not upon it, nor confess unto it but because at time
of divine prayer, receiving it we use such submisse religious gestures, as well
beseem that singular work. Cum sa^cti serio ^rant solent flectere genua.
Oleuian. in Ephesians. 3 14.
For when the saints pray earnestly (says Oleuian) they use to kneel, under
which very name Saint Paul, comprehends prayer, when he says Ephesians 3.
For this cause I bow my knees etc. that is I pray. Which bahauiour springing
from an honest, and unfeigned heart cannot but be, (as it is) acceptable unto
God, otherwise in deeds, Math. 27.29.
if the heart go not withal, of as much acceptance with the Lord, as that
kneeling of the Jews, when they platted a crown of thorns on the head of
our savior.

This kneeling crosses the practice of our savior, when evening was come he
sat down with the twelve.
As if the argument were in method and order concluded thus. Whatsoever
crosses the practice of our savior must not be allowed of. But kneeling
crosses the practice of our savior. For he kneeled not but sat. Whereunto
our answer is. We deny both the mayor and the minor: The mayor For if
whatsoever crosses the practice of our savior must not be allowed of, then
the church order of Geneua (where the ministers of the word distribute unto
the people the bread, and the elders (their governors for discipline) reach
the cup) may not be approved. For one part of the sacrament is no way inferior
to the other, our savior brake the bread, and then took the cup, and gave it
to his disciples. The same hand that did one, did both. Again for the mayor,
if that be true, Christi actio nostra imitatio
then the meaning is. Christ his action must be our imitation, as if he did
it, we must do it to; Which principle is the foundation, that bears the
weight, and peize of all this argument, and is in great request with the
Anabaptists. Christ was baptized at 30. years, and we trow (say they) he
knew well the right use of the sacrament, therefore neither must we be
baptized sooner. Which proposition if it go uncontrolled, then must we be
first circumcised, and afterward baptized, then must baptism be administered
in Jordan or some such running water. As for the other sacrament of the Lords
supper, we must then receive it, not in the church, but in an upper chamber,
not in the morning, but at evening, not before dinner, but after supper, nor
after his resurrection, but before he suffered, which is in effect not at all.
For we cannot so receive it. And by that reason call us to wash one another
feet for so he did Where the reason is added we should do so to. Ioh. 13.34.
You must also wash one another feet. Here is our saviors practice, what he
did, and his express commandment, Ablutio pedum ad essentiam sacraments
coenae non pertinet Zanch. de cult^ dei exter. lib. 1. argument. 1. page 450.
Horat. 1. carm: ode. 27. and lib. 2. ode. 3. Plutar Plato. (...). Lucian. Amos.
2 8. Ester. 7.8, Pet. Ciaccon. de triclinio. (...). Ioh. 13.23. Hoe refertur ad
antiquorum discubitum, in quo fiebat pluri bus discumbena tibus, vt proximus
quasitu priores recumbe res pedibus exterius repositis. Bez. Ibid. Posset hodie
id vtdert parum decorum, sed ta liserat tum discumbendi ratio
what he did inioine. Yet this we do not. For satisfying of which doubt, least
any man be offended at the omitting hereof, the answer which Master Zanchius
gives, is the answer generally, which the rest of our divines return: washing
of the feet pertains not to the essence of the sacrament, as for that his
commandment it is not properly, and strictly so to be understood as if one
should wash another feeet, but only a lesson of humility, that every one so
carry himself, upon occasion, as charity requires to serve his brother.
etc. arguing hereby, that we are necessarily to learn the general
instruction of humility, and not precisely to imitate that particular fact of
our saviors. But proceed we on: Is it true? must our conformity be in
sitting after the example of our savior? then we ask, whither our shoes
must of, and we lie a long, the second leaning in the bosom of his fellows,
his feet drawn out upon a bed, with a pillow under his arms. For this was the
ancient manner of the East, and west countries, Romans, Grecians, and the
Jews both in the time of the law, and in the days of our savior. For the
Romans and Grecians we refer our selves to Horace, Plutarch, Plato, and
Lucian: For the Jews in the time of the law to Amos 2.8. and Ester 7.8. and in
the days of our savior because that more nearely concerns this argument, we
commend the reader to Petrus Ciaccon de triclinio. but more specially to M.
Beza, and M. Calvin. M. Beza upon this verse there was one of his disciples,
which leaned on Jesus bosom This is to be referd (says he) to the sitting
down of the ancient, that many being sat, the last did (as it were) lean
back upon the former, his feet laid out from him. M. Calvin delivers his
mind in these words: It might seem at this day little seemly, but such
was their manner of sitting then; for they did not sit, as we do now at
thee table, but their shoes of, Neque enim se debant, vt nos ad mensam sed
calcess exuto and puluinis innixi in lectulis semisupini iacebant Call. lid.
leaning on cushions, laid all along upon little beds with their bodies half
way boult upright. Now being so, it were good that men resolved upon this
point, how they would have us sit, before we change the received custom of a
most humble, and reverent gesture, which our church uses.

This kneeling crosses the practice of our savior etc.
When we said before this argument was in great request with the Anabaptist, we
might also have added, that it is so with the papist. Neque enim dubitars
potest quin illud sit melius, and faciendum quod Christus secit. Bell. de
Euchar. lib. 4. c. 7. Dico nauu^ esse duplicem in us ecclesiss quaeazy ^o
potius qua^ fermentato pane vtuntur. Hoc enim and Iudaismum sapit, and minus
est quotidiani c^^s analogiae accommodatum. Beza. Qq. and Respon. page 139.
Nempe qu^nia^ eo tempore caenam hanc. etc Ibid. Si Christus ad coenam hanc eo
qus tum vsitatuserat pane vsus est etc. Ibid. Kneeling crosses not Christ his
practice.
For in the question whither leauened or unleavened bread is to be used in the
sacrament, Bellarmin reasons thus. Christ at his last supper used vnleauend
bread, therefore we must also. For it cannot be doubted but that is far
better and rather to be done which Christ himself did. Whereunto Master Beza
answering (not Bellarmin, for he writ long before Bellarmin his works came
forth but to this argument) makes this reply. Although I will not greatly
contend, yet to tell you my mind freely, I say there is a double fault or
blemish in those churches, which use rather unleavened, then leauened bread.
First because it sauoureth of Iudaisme, 2. because it is less fitted to the
analogy and proportion of our ordinary bread. True it is Christ blessed
unleavened bread, because at that time he ordained his supper, when in deed
the Jews might use no other. So as we may retort ye argument: If Christ in
this supper used such bread, as they then used, we must do so to; But he used
common ordinary bread the^, and therefore we must use ordinary bread. Now our
ordinary and usual bread is leauened therefore also is it that we use such. As
if he implied thus much. Be it Christ's action is our imitation; We deny not,
but even in our bread we imitate Christ, not in that very particular, because
ours is leauened, but in the general because ours is such, as is ordinary, for
so was christ's. The sum, and substance of with answer may justify our denial of
ye minor which is here urged, namely ye our kneeling crosses the practice of
our savior. For christ's actio^ and gesture is followed, if in the general
drift we do, as he did, though not in that special strict manner as he did.
Which interpretation rightly conceived pleads our case thus far. Christ and
his A postls did that, which the custom both of those times and of their
country made usual, we do now that, which the custom of our church of a long
time has made usual. It was their wonted guise to sit at meat so, and so as
before, it is our ordinary fashion to kneel in prayer, because though a ba^quet
we assemble at, yet heavenly, divine, spiritual it is, not a mere corporal
banquet, as if eating were all we came for, but strengthening of our faith,
sealing up in our hearts forgiveness of sins, and the like spiritual graces we
come for at that time, and therefore we pray, kneel, confess our sumes, and
sing Psalms, and all little enough, no way crossing the practice of our
Savior more in this, then in the use of leauened bread in time of the
Sacrament, but here in following our Savior, because he did what the use of
his times and Country made fit, and decent, we what decency, and custom of
our times, and Country has now made usual, and convenient.

This is a shameless, and impudent reproching of Christ and his Apostles, that
used not this gesture. As if Christ, or they wanted humility, and reverence.
How chollericke these disputants are, and in their pelting chafe all to
berattle us for our Church custom, and usual practice. But though they revile
us, we will not revile again. For what were that else, but to prove us both
slaunderers? Quid aliud quam duo maledici essemus? August. cont. liter.
Petilian. lib. 3. c. 1.
as S. Austin well notes in his answer to Petilian. This shall be only our
defense at this present. It is neither shameless, nor impudent reproching of
Christ, and his Apostles. For no commendable gesture suitable to the several
times can be thought contrary, one to the other. When our Savior instituted
this Sacrament, he was not yet rose from Supper, where he sat with his
Disciples. The place, the time, the person all plead that his action was
lawful, and good, neither does any man say contrary hereunto: So far of are
we from reproouing what he did. For it was in a Chamber, and after they had
supped, being not then risen from the board, and our Savior himself was
greater then any constitution of our Church since. At which time no doubt
himself, and his presence might dispense with the Apostles for their gesture
of sitting: which being but a circumstance might be afterward, as well altered,
as other circumstances of time, and place, and number of persons, or the like.
For not long after, these were all altered, as we see them at this day. Our
Savior might do that well, which we cannot so well. Any indifferent gesture
might beseem his person, because without sin, yet chose he to frame himself
to the rites of his country for that action at that time. He commended his
demeanor, and not his demeanor commended him. With us it is far otherwise.
We are sinners, we come to confess our sins, and to crave pardon for the
same, in token whereof is our humiliation, by kneeling, etc. None of all which
needed Christ to do. Such ods there is in regard of our selves, who are not,
as Christ was to give, but to receive, and do differ as much as the Master,
and the Disciple, a merciful Savior, and a polluted sinner, a Law giver as
then he was, and a Law receiver, for so we are. Were a Scripture as ready at
their hands for to prove ceremony of sitting, which some urge, as there is in
time of fasting to anoint our head, and wash our face, Math. 6.17. Praecipit
vngi non vt hoc omnino facianius sed vt semper omns cum diligentia bonum hunc
thesauru^ studeamut occultare. Chrisost. super Mat. homil. 21. Hubenda est in
istis componen dis ratio tempo rum, quibus Christus est loquutus, and
spectandus est loque^ it is scopus Bez. in Math. Vnguentorum vsu nunc vix
quisquam sinc luxus suspicione iusta vtatur. Ibid.
what bitter words would they spare to lode us withal, who upon so small
occasion here given, charge us for shameless, and impudent reproching of
Christ and his Apostles? Our Savior commands saying, When thou fastest,
anoint thy head, and wash thy face. A Commandment is more then a practice,
for the true sense of which place the interpretation both of ancient and late
Divines well agrees, and among them by name Saint Chrisostom, and M. Beza.
Chrisostom thus: The Lord commanded us to be anointed, not that we should
absolutely do it, but that always withal diligence we should study to hide
this good treasure of fasting in private. Master Beza his observation is, that
the manner of anointing was the fashion of those times, and the drift of the
speaker we are to regard more, then the practice enjoined. For now if a man
should use that ceremony of anointing his head, etc. He can hardly use it
without just suspicion of wast, and rioting. Whence we may observe, if
notwithstanding Christ his own practice, yea his express commandment, the
Church uses her liberty in refusal of this custom, then much rather may she
in that ceremony of sitting, where only is Christ his example, but no
commanundement at all, specially when we retain the scope, and drift of
reverence, and humility as we do. For in such cases, we are not so much to
respect, what was done, as what Christ intended we should learn to be done.
For many things he did, which we neither may, nor need, nor can do, Actiones
Christi miraculosae, piaculares, morales, Heming. dominic. Quad. Sieadem tent^
mus prapostera erit a^nulatio. Call. 1. Pct. 2.21. Romans 4.25. Math. 11.29.
Colos. 3.13. Ephesians. 5.2.
and therefore it is fit to distinguish Christ his actions, and know how far
forth they require our imitation. Some were miraculous as his walking upon the
water, Math. 14. Clensing the Lepars, restoring sight to the blind, fasting
forty days and forty nights, if we assay to do the like, our emulation is
preposterous, some were expiatorie by way of atonement, as when delivered to
death for our sins he rose again for our instification; some were arbitrary,
as washing the Disciples feet, sitting at the Table, anointing his head, some
moral for our imitation as his humility, for he is meek, his kindness in
our forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, even as Christ forgave
us, walking in love, even as Christ has loved us, meaning for quality not
equality; for comparison, not proportion; not in the same degree and
perfection, but for the truth, and sincerity. Lastly, in a word his
constancy, who suffered for us leaving an example, Luc. 9.23. Christi pana
(...). Afflictiones no strain (...). Non dicit iciunium suum esse imitandu^
etc. Chrisost. in. Math. homil. 47 Non dicit disci te a m^ mundu^ fabricare aus
morious suscita re August. de 5. virginita. c. 35
that we should follow his steps in denying our selves, and taking up his
Cross, not that we can satisfy for others as he did for us, but in trial of
our faith, and in witness of the truth, as also in justifying God, when he
checketh man for sin. These many ways above mentioned are Christ his actions
sorted, and every one is a lesson for our instruction but not a sampler for
imitation. Christ faith not his fast is to be imitated, nor learn of me to
make the world, or raise the dead, but learn of me for I am humble, and meek
of heart. Such difference there is of those things which Christ did and
suffered: And in the things which he did, because that concerns the point, let
us distinguish what is the argument of our obedience, and make him our
president, but otherwise we may not. Which distinction easily succoureth that
doubt, of Christ what he did, and of us what we must follow. His sitting
therefore being arbitrarie, and none of those moral actions, which necessarily
require our obedience, we are in this to rely on the judgment of our Church,
in whose power it is to supply it with some other decent and reverent
behavior. I deny not (says Bishop Jewel) certain circumstances, as fasting,
sitting, Iuel. cont. Harding artic. 1. sect. 8.
standing, kneeling, and other like ceremonies observed in celebrating the holy
mysteries are to be moderated and appointed at the judgment of the Church,
which resolution though to be acknowledged as a truth, for a truth it is, yet
because some will not be idle, but incumber themselves and others with vain
iangling to the contrary, read we, M. Calvin touching this action, who in his
institutions moving the question whither (kneeling) at time of solemn prayer
be a human tradition, Dico sic esse bu manam, vt simul sit diuina: Dei est
quatenuspars est decoris illiu^, cuius cura and obseruatio per Apostolum commen
d^tur, hominu^ autem quatenus specialiter designat, quod in genere suerat
indicatum Call. Instit. lib. 4. c. 10. et. 30 Quoad genus di vina quoad speciem
humana. Ibic. (...). Justin. martyr. apol 2. ad Auto nium imperato rem. Aliud
stans als udsedens.
that one may refuse, or neglect, answers thus. I say it is so a human
tradition that withal it is divine: Gods it is so far forth as it is a part
of that beauty, whose care and observation is commended us by the Apostle: it
is man's, or of men, so far forth, as it specially designeth what was showed
in the general. The brief of all which answer is, that in the general it is
divine, in the special it is human. Being therefore at the solemn time of
prayer, for the Minister prays over the Communicant. The body of our Lord
Jesus Christ that was given for thy body preserve it to eternal life, etc. And
of thanksgiving for therefore it is called the Eucharist, we must take this
action as a divine ordinance, though appointed by men, and from men, yet not
barely men as opposite unto God, but such as are sanctified, and guided by the
spirit of the Lord, for so may we assure our selves, and it is our rejoicing,
that our Church is so to be accounted at this present.

This kneeling was never used in any other Sacrament of the old, or new
Testament, Circumcision, Passover, or Baptism.
Where they urge in Circumcision it was not so, nor in Baptism, how do they
proone it? A Catholic affirmative has either need be, or give a Catholic
proof. Because the Paschall Lamb was eat standing, mean they this must be so
to, and if standing how then kneeling. To be of one mind standing, of another
mind sitting argues inconstancy. By that reason of theirs, the conclusion
may enforce staves in our hands, for so the Hebrews eat the Passover. Such
post have men make to be delivered of an untimely argument. But they, whose it
is, reply in our defense that we, who kneel before the Sacrament detest
Idolatry: Which speech of theirs we doubt not, but is vttred upon their
knowledge. For in another place before alleged they tell us, Part. 1 page 18
30.
that the Minister must not affirm more then he knows. Since therefore they
know so much we have done, yet they that so speak, prosecute it thus far
against us.

It is granted: They that kneel before the Sacrament detest Idolatry: yet
their outward bowing to, or before a creature in the matter of Gods worship, is
a breach of the second Commandment. Thou shall not how down, nor worship.
A strange definition of Idolatry. For then by that reckoning if a man kneel,
his Bible lying before him, he is an Idolater, then Peter at the raising up of
Tabitha must be so charged, for he kneeled on his knees and turning himself to
the dead budy said Tabitha arise: yea then may we not kneel at any time. For
how can we kneel but it is before some creature in heaven, or in earth, either
Angles themselves, or our breethren, and sisters where we are and live, or the
roof, and walls, and whole edifice where we pray, valesse peradventure these
are not to be thought creatures, but must be styled by some other name. Again,
where it is objected that bowing before a creature in the matter of Gods
worship is a breach of the second Commandment, it is very material to know,
what they mean by these words (in a matter of Gods worship.) If they mean the
time, or place of divine service, sure we are, that kneeling is expedient to
profess our humility in the hour of solemn prayer, which then is performed
by the Communicants. If they mean bowing to, or before a creature it self in
a matter of Gods worship (that is) exhibiting divine worship unto the creature,
which is due unto God, they knowing that we detest Idolatry, know also that we
detest that doctrine. But if in the time of the words of holy institution then
pronounced, they call the Elements of Bread and Wine Popish Images. or Idols,
and esteem our howing to be no other, but Idolatrous at such time, as that
blessed Sacrament is administered: of the two we had rather be held (though
falsely) superstitious, then (truly) profane for so speaking, and yet to the
glory of God we may, and do proclaim our utter detestation of all
superstition, and profaneness. As for the meaning of the second
Commandment, hitherto always we understood this clause (Thou shall not bow
down to them nor worship them,) to forbid us worshipping or bowing down is
them, which God there mentions, such as we make unto our selves either
graven, or the likeness of some such in heaven or in earth Now we demand
whither those sacred Elements are of our making, or do we make them to our
selves, or be they graven, or do we bow down to them? If so: hold us
Idolaters, and partake not with bs in that sin. But being not so, esteem of
us as the Ministers of Christ, and faithful disposers of those holy mysteries.
The sum of all is, Our bowing at that time is an outward reuerenec (we
think) meet should be performed, because of that holy action, which is then
in hand, namely a religious communicating of that blessed Sacrament of the very
body and blood of our Lord Jesus, partly to stir up in others a more
religious estimation of those divine seals; Seiungimus nos ab Epicureis co^
temptoribus ^ysteriorum, excitamus alios adveram reuerentiam ne occasio detur
simplisioribus etc.
partly to remove all profane thoughts of Epicures and like contemners;
partly to put a difference hereby even externally from other Bread, Vulgares
concoe ^ationes.
and Wine, which at home, or in our Gossiping and public feasts we receive, as
the good creatures of God with thanks giving, but standing, or sitting, never
kneeling as we use to do in receiving this Sacrament, and therefore we give it
the more reverence because it is more, then ordinary Bread, and Wine. And if
for fear of Idolatry it be dangerous to kneel, so is it to stand: for a man
may commit Idolatry standing. 2. If for fear of Idolatry it be dangerous to
kneel, so is it to uncover our heads, for this ceremony also we use in the
matter of Gods worship: Now how seemly that is let the indifferentest give
judgment? 3. If so necessary to kneel because our Savior did it at other
times, then are we not alone to be reproved, but other Churches also that
receive it standing, walking, etc. A ceremony wherein we judge not them,
neither should they, or any else condemn us. But to be reproched for well
doing we account our Cross, and we will bear it.

For this same reason the Popish Wafer-cake was removed, as in the Rubricke of
the Book of Common prayer.
For fear of Idolatry was the Wafer cake removed, yet not kneeling forbid,
because the reason is not alike. For the Wafer cake did many ways offend. 1.
For the substance, because it was not usual, as that which our Savior had. 2.
In the qualitte, for the thinness did not so fully represent the form of
ordinary Bread. 3. The fashion was round. 4. The stamp upon it was, we think,
the Image of Christ crucified. 5. The gross opinion then had of it, as that it
was really, corporally, and carnally transubstantiated Christ himself, and
only in outward show a Wafer cake.
All which opinions being now confuted, and we by the preaching of the Gospel
better instructed, the commendable practice of kneeling may be retained safely,
where before it could not well be, at what time men held transubstantiation for
a doctrine of faith; Neither is it a good argument, when we dispute of the
action, to argue of the Element, as if because a Wafer cake is to be mist^ked,
therefore kneeling also must endure a check. But we will produce a few
witnesses for proof of this point, and so conclude. True it is, that where
Master Beza lives, the Communicants receive standing, but that no more
impeacheth our kneeling, then that of theirs who receive in Wafer cakes, and we
in ordinary Bread: Now as our Countriementie not themselves to the one, for
the form of Element, no more need they bind themselves to the other, for the
manner of the action. Si qui infirmitate suorum ceactivel alias ob causas
aliquid aliud ex vetustis ritibus sib^ retinendum pu tarit, sua cut. que maneat
lia bertas. Beza. 0664 0 de can. do^^. adners. lar. li. page 146.
For Geneua is no more a Lawgiuer unto us, the^ we are to it. This folly
advanced Rome to that height of pride, whereunto she aspired, enforcing all
other Churches to her rites, and ceremouies. In regard whereof it may be that
M. Beza speaking of this gesture, uses these words. If any (says he)
compelled by the infirmity of their own brethren or for some other causes
shall think good to retain any of the ancient rites let every one have their
accustomed liberty herein Peter Martyr thus determines this question for us,
and others. I advise in adoring when, we receive the Eucharist, that we stay
not in the elements, but worship in spirit, Quoadisti doce rentur P. martyr
Com. Loc. clas. 4. c. 10. and 50. Adoratio interna potest absque periculo ex
biberi, neque externa sua na tura esset mala Multi eni^ pie genu fle^tu^t etc
Nisi requen^ esset de his rebus in conci^ns bus nic^tio. Ibid
and truth, Christ sitting in the heavens. Which thing because the simpler sort
understand not, we think, not amiss, if we restrain them from outward
adoration, namely prostrating, and kneeling till such times, as they have been
taught. Inward adoration may be given, without any danger, and the outward of
it own nature cannot be evil. For many do in a godly manner bend the knee, and
adore at the hearing of those words of the Gospel (and the word was made
flesh) yet those words are not to be said to be adored, but the things
themselves signified thereby. And what should hinder the very same thing to be
done here, so that the Elements themselves be not worshipped, but that which is
signified by them? Yet at this time for the cause before mentioned (pera
duenture) outward adoration is not so fit and convenient, unless often mention
were made of those ^^ings in Sermons. In which large discourse these notes may
be gathered. 1. The outward worship of it own nature is not evil. 2. If the
words of the Gospel may be outwardly reverenced in a godly manner, at what
time they are read, then may these Elements have the like. 3. Yet not they, but
Christ signified by them: 4. He would have external reverence by kneeling
spared only for a time: 5. But inward adoration always exhibited, because
without danger: Now inward worship is more then outward, for this is but a
sign of the other, and if no danger in the inward, much less in the outward.
6. He delivers his judgment in very easy terms, as peradventure it may be
a while forborne: Like a indicious wise man that speaks under correction of
better advertisement, H^c sacramentum sine adoratione, sincque illo (vni deo
debit^) ^^ltis, cu^ debita tame^ religione and reuerentia percipi ad^^^nis
trariq^e debet, atque ca inpri ^is, quae o^nium est maxim fide scilicet, and
sui ips^^s explorati ^ne Sect. 14. page 120.
not peremptorily as some among us that are every way inferior to him both for
modesty and learning.
Lastly, he takes this kneeling or prostrating not to be so fit, unless often
preaching be joined by way of instruction. So as if the people be taught, then
no such fear, but it may still be used: which is our very case at this day.
Beside the judgment of this great divine, we have the consent of the Churches
of Bohemia, who far from superstitious adoring the Elements, how their knees at
receiving of the Sacrament, as appears in the harmony of the Confess. This
Sacrament without adoration, and that worship which is due to God only, yet
with due religion, and reverence must be received, and administered, and that
specially, which is the greatest of all, namely faith, and examining every ones
own self. Sacramentum religiose cum ^ nipietate distri bustur. Populus autem
fide^ium vsitatissime in genua procum bens hoc accipit cum gratiaru^ action.
etc.
Anon after it is added This sacrament is religiously distributed withfull
godliness, and devotion: The congregation of the faith all most usually kneeling
on their knees receive it with thanks giving, ioyfulnesse, singing of himnes
and holy Psalms etc. The spirit of God directing them, and our churches in
the unity of one external holy behavior doing the like, may be a motive to
persuade others contrarily minded, to think that the Lord has not left us
destitute of that small portion of knoweledge, which may determine a
circumstance of this nature, and so we entreat them to resolve.

Cap. 10. Private communion. The book gives allowance to minister to one
alone, clean contrary to the word of God, and Christ his institution.
Whatsoever will not stand with the word of institution (Eat ye) that is
forbidden without exception: But to minister the sacrament to one alone will
not stand with (Eat ye): Therefore to minister to one alone is without
exception forbidden.
THis chapter is here as it seems entitled. A private communion. Upon what
ground we know it, but with what a sinister mind, and to how wrong a
conclusion any one may conjecture, and mame do fear. If they take our
communion for the mass then have they reason for the name. Bishop Jewel
proving that a private mass, for 600. years after Christ was never heard of,
calls that a private mass, where the mass priest alone did eat, and drink
although in public, and that happily 2. or 3. or more such as himself all
apart were mumbling, one in this corner, another in that end, a third in a
third place, and all by themselves at the same time in several places of the
church, where the people present did neither eat, nor drink, but only every
mass priest himself by himself. Can these men (who like the name of
communion we give to the sacrament) prove in this sense we maintain a private
Communion. These terms were never known to fit our church doctrine, till
those first moniters and the heirs of their scruples had the use of the
feruler more fit themseles to be under a ferular. The gentle admonition that
was the first bate for this idle debate, then rawely entered, since over hotly
followed (but vainelie, and vnfruitfullie God he knows, and we deplore)
makes this an occasion of their lamentable separation. Ye should first prove
(say they) that the private communion is agreeable to the word of God. And is
it not reason they should first prove that we inioyne a private communion,
before they inioyne us to prove what they now reprove? Look over the book of
common prayer from the first word to the last lease, it were an adventure
warrantable (should the maine cause lie on it) to justify all by this one, and
not to spare a solemn protestation that we will loose the whole cause if they
can make good but this one single, singular accusation, and take them at their
bare word private communion. Show they, or any for them, where we use these
terms. Name the leaf, page, sentence, line, any syllable that bears to any
such purpose. Mean they it in these words of the Rubricke. There shall be no
celebration of the Lords supper, except there be a good number to communicate
etc. or in these following. If there be not above 20. persons in the parish of
discretion to receive the communion, yet shall there be no communion except 4.
or 3. at the least communicate. Where a good number is to communicate, where at
least, ^. or 3. are to communicate no just suspicion of ministering to one
alone. Peradventure ye words they mislike, are not in the style and title of ye
communion but in some other place. What the^. Turn we to ye communion of ye
u^cke, where the Rubricke is thus. For as much as al mortal men be subject to
many sudden perils, diseases, and sickenesses, and ever uncertain at what
time they shall depart out of this life, therefore to the intent they may be
always in a readiness to die, whenever it shall please almigty God to call
the^, the curats shall diligently from time to time, but specially in the plague
time exhort their parishioners to the often receiving in the church of the holy
communion of the body, and blood of our savior, which if they do, they shall
have no cause in their sudden visitation to be unquiet for lack of the same.
But if the sick person be not able to come to the church and yet is desirous
to receive the communion in his house, then he must give knowledge over night,
or else early in the morning to the curate, signifying also how many be
appointed with him, and having a convenient place in the sick man's house,
where the curate may reverently minister, and a good number to receive the
communion with the sick person etc. A quick eye may soon ouerhip these words
(in the church) which considered satisfy to the full, and show it must be in
public. Other words there are in an other place following, at the time of the
distribution of the holy sacrament, the priest shall first receive the
communion himself, and after minister unto the^, that be appointed to
communicate with the sick. Here still in these places are more then one to
join with the minister, and therefore is not the communion ministered to one
alone. Where then is it they have so much as the least them for pretense of
dislike. It may be these words ensuing. But if a man either by reason of
extremity of sickness, or for want of warning in due time to the curate or
for lack of company to receive with hm, or by any other just impediment do not
receive the sacrament of Christ his body, and blood, then the curate shall
instruct him, that if he do truly repent him of his sins, and steadfastly
believe that Jesus Christ has suffered death upon the cross for him, and shed
his blood for his redemption, earnestly remembering the ben^fits he has
thereby, and giving him hearty thanks before he does eat. and drink the body
and blood of our savior profitablely to his souls health, although he do not
receive the sacrament with his mouth. In which brief, many causes are alleged
for not ministering ye communion 1. extremity of sickness. 2. want of due
warning 3. lack of company 4. some other just impediment.
In supply whereof, least ye sick party may find him self a grieved he is to
learn^; if he have learned, he is to remember that earnest, and true repentance
of sins, and a steadfast faith in the merits of Christ his death with a but
meditation of all the benefits, that come thereby, and hearty thanksgiving to
God for the same, are an effectual powerful, true communicating to his souls
health, though the visible elements be not for that time received. Nitherto
then so much inquiry (as as has beens made) yields no sufficient proose for
their querelous allegation: Some other place belike there is, or else they are
ill bested, that without all show in the world make show of complaint. Were it
not for one only sentence violently wrested, they had no color at all. The
words are upon a closing point of direction for the communion of the sick. In
the time of the plague, sweat, are such other like contagious times of
sicknesses, or diseases, when none of the parish, or nei^hbours can be got ten
to commnnicate with the sick in their houses for fear of the infection. Upon
especial request of the diseased, the minister may: lonely communicate with
him. Where the caucat greatly sets forth the wisdom of God in raising up the
thoughts of his church, by kindly prouideing for occurrences, whither of
health, sickness or any contagious disease. Sufficient affliction we may
think it, when the Lord humbles a man upon his bed debarreth him access unto
the public congregation. For no doubt in the stirring of the seas one wave
ouertaketh not another more busily then surges of grief accompany one another
in a man's deep meditation, to think with himself, what he is deprived of.
And the more delight and comfort any one has took in the seal of his
assureance, the more his soul longs after it, and all little enough he
thinks (and herein not decetued) to strengthen his faith, to enlarge his hope,
and give him thorough contentment for his present estate. Then comes to his
mind, what a glad man sometimes the Lord made him, when he went with other
leading, or following them into the house of God, and there accompanying them
with the voice of singing, and praising, as does a multitude that keeps a
feast. (O Lord of hosts how amiable are thy owellings) when he sends long
wishes after the courts of his God: The flight of a sparrow, yt sluttering of a
swallow occasion multiplied thoughts The little ones scarce peeping forth of
their shell, more happy then he. For they can (...), and (...) the alters of
the Lord of ^offs. A steaking sigh often falls from him, and that sigh not
speechless. O that he had the wings of a dove the^ would his souls find
comfort in the tabernades of the most high, and because he cannot come abroad,
might he receive ^^is letter missiue to him, whither by hand, or month of the
minister (so we understand the word of God, and the holy sacrament kissing
each other, and coupling themselves ^^th in one a^^all to cheer him, pooze
prisoner as he is) no question then would they be as seasonablie welcome, as
the rain upon the me w^^^ grass, and the shewers, that water the earth. It
has (...) the case of many God his children. Hiperius and others ^^^ge^ously
fallen ^^ke upon some heave, In vita Hipea rit.
and ^^^^uous brunt they endured by tentations outward, ins^^^^^ or both, to
desire comfort upon comfort, and all little enough, as they thought, and
knowing what great things are spoken of the sacrament, and how it has
ministered much joy unto them heretofore, with earnest destres they have crau^^d
the like helps for their langaishing conscient^ before they give their last
(...) will is a decayed nature: We that are at health, (...) brought to the
dozes of death may think it more then absolutely n^^deth, and (happily) so it
is, because though a man he dep^^^ed of the sacrament, yet he is not dep^ and
of eternal (...). But many in their distress thus pers waded, yet (...) the
(...) thereof, (...) they reckon, (and they reckon not a miss) that th^^^ last
and may thereby be made unto them the more comfortable. Wherefore as Elisha
said to Ge^^^zie of the woman that did (...) (as he thought) then needed. Let
her (...), for her (...) is vexed with in her, and the Lord has (...) it
(...). Let them alone good souled: their sp^^ite in that ^^guish is much
troubled, and panting like the heart, that brayeth for the water brooks will
not take comfort to arile purpose, till it be had into the wine celler, and
dr^nks his fill, at the well spring of that spiritual consolation, which is
committed unto the church, Viaticum illis qui de hoc saculo recedunt. Canon.
Arausican.
and is the souls hea^^nlis viand, while she is yet a solo inner upon the
earth. It is a doctrine of our church anouched in the Rubrici^e cited before,
that in case the minister can persuade, he do his hest in de^ou^. But say he
neither does, (...) can, and the ^^^ke body well assured of the truth of our
doctrine, yet for all this coueteth to have the ^^gnes visi^^^ aforded him for
better imprinting in his memory the death, and passion of his, and our (...)
it (for unquestion but somewhat they add, and that somewhat is much comfort
when they may be had) what can our church doc less, but so far yecide to the
earnest, and in deebe possibly his last request then made upon special, Nemo
illud vel quarit vel accipit quodiam habet, ergo in vsu ^ucharistia, nec
quaritur nec ac cipitur remissio peccatorum. Andrad con Chemnit and passim
Anabap Illum pater proponit fide appre hendendum, and accipiendum ad
remiss^^nem peccatorum, and in verbo and in sacramontis. Chemnit. de in stitut.
sacram. cana page 77. B In hac carnis noctra depranatione inter tam varias
Diaboli insidias etc. Ibid. Cum promiss^e loquatur in genere, an etiam ego qui
credo, habeam remiss, onem peccatoru^ an vere, and cer to and firmiter came
^abeam. Ibid.
and weighty occasions. No than but instructed in the words acknowledges that
he, which repents and believes the Gospel receives forgi^enesse of soute*
which as it is a true foundation, so an ill frame is raised upon it, that
therefore there is no need of the sacrament. For to what end seek we
remission of sins when we have obtained it already? But such conclusions are
in force with those, who look upon the truth with popish spa^tacles, or
Anabaptises -- eyes: Their wrong imagination springes from ignorance of the
doctrine, and saving use of this sacrament. For Christ the mediator with his
obedience, and merits is the only foundation of reconciliation with God, and
remission of our (...). But God the father proposes him to be apprehended by
faith, and to be received for forgiveness of sin both in the word, and
sacraments: Now they are much deceived that think our reconciliation with God,
and forgiveness of sin are like colors laid in ayle away alike fresh, the
beauty never fading, so as one had, we have no ^e^de to think (...) more of
it. But the perpetuallaction of says, and day^^e exercise in this life is to
apprehend Christ more, and more firmly, to abide, and persener in him, not that
he can be utterly, and quite lost, but because else the live ^e feeling, and
present comforts there by had may weaken and fa^^^. Nay there is not any
moment of time in this corrupt estate of ours, what with the devils snares, the
worlds suggestions, and our own deceuable hearts. But the more we examine our
selves, the more we confess this for a truth, that we are to seek, embrace,
and apprehend the favor of God, a forgiveness of sin. Beside that in
tentations the mind is chiefly grieved in such a question as this. VVheras the
promise speaks in general terms, how may it appear to me who do believe
whither I have remission of sin, or how may I assure my self certainly hereof?
To this end therefore God, who is rich in mercy which he has powered out in
ab^^^^dance upon the^, that ^o bele^^^e, beside the word, Frater verbum*
instituit etians vsum sacram^^ tertum. Ibid. Justin martyr, apol. 2. versus sid
ne Dionysi. Alex and Pabia. in epist.
has ordained the use of the fro^^meded* Shall we looks to the times ancient,
or present, the equity of this truth (...) soo^^ show it self? The ancient
christians reckoning the communion performed in public to be their act, that
were absent, as theirs, who were present, did communicate ^rist unto the absent
in token of their lone, (...) mutual ^^^ship. Such absent, as were either
necessarilith n^red* (...) inevitable occasions, or else were sore sick drawing
to their long home, or otherwise standing excommunicate, desired to make their
peace with God* and his church, and so (in token of bear^^^ re^^^^^ation on all
sides) were made pertakers of the holi^^misteries, Supa^^^^^ recaps poster v^
rum nems alls attender at. E^ (eb. lib. etc. 44. Mo^^^^^ as ^^^^tan^ v^. mages
mest etian awls teasuppli^^^^ petier^^e an^^ mitridebare, ve spe bo^^^^^ (...)
Ibid. (...) dunt ex^^^por^ (...) gi^^^ g^^la (...) tu^ v^ fifo^^^ (...) rio
vita. (...) ^o^ defraudetur v^ atico. Council. Nicen. can. 12. grac. 13. Quoties
aliqua infirmitas superuenerit, cor pus and sanguis nem ille qui agrotat
accipiat August. sirm. detempore.
though at home an their deathbed This witnesses Justin Martyr, who was in the
first age after the Apostles: And in the second age a^ample may be taken from
Dionys. of Alexandria in his Epistle unto Fabius as it is quotet by Eus^b.
writing the bistorie of Serapion, how falling through pe^se^ uutio^, offerin^
to I^ols he was out off from the church, to the terror and affrighting of
others: Good old man he often desired to be received in to the bosom of the
church: It would not he. No may a ^^^eded the request. His ^cknesse out en^^^^
belay (...) blasse f^^ th^^^ whole days deprived of the use of ^^^^nces the
(...) to himself again, at what time, seeing how it was with him, he grew more
instant, then ever before to receive the sacrant out, the pledge of his peace
made with God and the church which no sooner obtained but withal most com
ortably be finished his life (...) thing usual in those times for such ^^lay a
dying, if they made request special earnest suppliant, humble request, they
were allowed yt favor of the co^mnuion, that supported with a good hope they
might depart hence in peace. In the next one the same course was held by the
counsel of Nice where the fathers and gan^^in charge according to the ancient
rule, that the holy* co^mnuion should be denied none toward the time of their
death. This counsel so ancient as it was nigh 1300 years ago, even the^
cousessed that this order (the church took (...) retain was before those
times much auncioniar* Sa^i^ (...) long after, as we may observe in those
sermones of time, that go under Saint Austin his name. As often as any
sickness, or infirmity shall happen, let him that it sick ^^^^i^e the body
and blood of the Lord. Quoties aliqua infirmit^s superuenerit, corpus and
sangusnem ille qui agrotat accipiat, August. ser. de tempore. Aegrotis dare
oportet fateor sed etiam cora^ agroti^ p^ssent perage mysteria, I^ martyr.
Aegrotis quipe tebant cunam dominicam non negabat^^u Suta Oecolom-Bue^r censis.
Call. epist. Museut. it is. de can. dom. Sine superstitia ou^, and effendicule and
ut a fla^ gitat agrotor^^ infirmitas n^limus sane ob^qusam ecclesia^ s^ind^re,
Beca.
In these latter times Peeter Marty^ answering this objection that the
^derament must be ministered to the sick. It must I confess (says he) be
ministered to the sick. But then mighty be in the presence of the sick. In
the life of Oe^^compadius it is written of him. The sick that desire the Lords
supper he denied it not them. Bucor in his censure allo^eth etc. to does M.
Calvin in his epistles, if the sick folks desire it. The like does Muscului
and Hiperius. If this we speak of (faith M. Beza) may be done without
superstition, and offense, and that the weakness of the sick party do
require it, we would not truly that any one for such a cause should rent the
church by schism; and contention. And certainly it seems the general
opinion has been from time to time, that if men in their health need this
sacrament, much more when they are weakened and spent with sickness. For it
fitteth best, when we are most humble, and penitent, which commonise in the
elect of God is by degrees more, or less, but in a heavy visitation many times
our humiliation is wrought most effectually, when the conscience almost squeze^
with a serious consociation offi^a^^, the body, and soul are humbled under the
mighty hand of God. Which may be the case of many in these times, whither
excommunicate, or suspended from the Lords table, or having wasted themselves
in lawless states, or conceiving amuse of our sacraments ministry, doctrine
etc. afterwar^es touches in heart seeing the grossones of their error us recover
themselves, the Lord mightning their eyes, that they beg with great earnestnes
to have a part in that sacrament visibly, whose fellowship poor seduced souls
they did either detest, or neglect, or except against before. What joys the
Lord ministr^th his children at such times, as in faith, and true repentance
they receive these infallible tokens of his gracious love, they only know
whom the Lord has prepared for that heavenly banquet, and what can they tell
(good hearts) yet once again ere they give up the ghost, how the Lord may
yield them like comfortes, and that with more cheerfulness then hitherto he
has done? And may it not be hoped that a faithful Communicant in the very
instant twixt life and death, sees in this loue-token the very joys of heaven
presented unto him, as an effectual motive to hasten him hence, and to
strengthen him in his journey to his long home?

The Communion Book gives allowance to the Minister, to minister to one alone.
Nothing contrary to Gods word, and Christ his institution to minister to one
alone at a time, for how can it be otherwise. But if they mean one alone, and
alonely, as if none else did communicate, but the sick party bedridden, they
speak an untruth. For more are required at the Minister his discretion. And a
very poor body, he or she is, like a Sparrow on the house top, that has
neither wife, nor servant, nor friend, nor chairewoman, nor keeper to tend, and
tender him in his sickness, yea even in the Plague-time God disfurnisheth not
a man of all company, but one, or other good neighbor he has (beside the
Minister) whom (unless the congregation be provided of another sufficiently
able, that may supply his absence) the laws of our. Church, and his own
conscience spare from communicating when the infection is: And great reason,
because if a particular grieved, be to be caredfor, so are many much rather
both of his family and of the whole parrish, least through his vndauisednesse
he draw them into the like contagion. Zanch. in Philip. 2.27.30.
Master Zanchius shows this at large speaking of Epaphroditus and his earnest
care for the Saints at Philippi, so do other writers, whose names we spare in
this argument, yea so does the Rubricke in the Book of common prayer, Can.
Eccles. 67.
and the Canons Ecclesiastical in case the disease be known or probably
suspected to be infectious. But admitting there were not another to communicate
with the sick person, is the Minister no body, does not be, Etiamsi minimo
numero. B^cer. in Math. 18.19.
and that sick party make a number, though the least of all numbers? If but
two, or three agree upon earth says our Savior, etc.

To minister the Sacrament to one alone does not stand with eat ye.
To minister the sacrament to one alone at a time stands with the words of
Christ his institution, because Tertullian his rule is true: Subiectum est
generali speciacle, in ipso significatur quia in ipso continetur. Tertul. de
vela^. virg. cap. 5.
Particularities are signified under that which is general. And therefore in
saying (eat ye) necessarily is implied eat thou, unless we shall think
that when our Savior said Baptize ye, therefore one alone may not Baptize, or
praying (Pray ye thus) therefore one may not pray alone.

It is faulty that we do not use in a generality, once for all to say to the
Communicants. Take ye, eat ye, drink ye. But unto every particular person,
Eat thou, Drink thou, which is according to the Popish manner, and not
answerable to the form, that our Savior did use.
One false principle breeds many errors. Arist, Physic. lib. 1. c. 2.
For see their argument how it is concluded. That which will not stand with the
words of institution (eat ye) that is forbidden: But to say take thou, eat
thou, drink thou, stands not with the words of institution, eat ye, drink
ye, etc. Therefore to minister it in such words, is without exception
forbidden. But a weak eye may see the weakness of this reason. Must we tie
our selves unto every syllable. And if Christ speak in the plural number of
more may not we speak in the singular number of one, and one apart by
themselves, which howsoever singled, are more then one being reckoned together?
For so is this Eat thou, Drink thou, Being but of two, how much rather. Which
in effect is, as Christ commanded, Eat ye, Drink ye, etc. So do they: But
say: must we needs tie our selves to yt very syllables, which Christ spoke, and
in that express form which he used, then leave we our natural language, and
speak we Siriack or some such like, because he so delivered the words of
institution? And must we use these words (Eat ye) once for all and no other?
Why then is not a complaint taken up against other Churches beyond the Seas,
where one Minister comes, and says upon delivery of one part of the
Sacrament. Minister ecclesia vnicuique ad canam accedenti partem de pane domini
defractam porrigent dicate, panis quem frangimus etc. mi. Formula ad nist.
Catech. page 296.
The Bread which we break is the Communion of the body of Christ. Then another
Minister of the Church reaching the Cup says: The Cup of blessing which
we bless is the Communion of the blood of Christ.

In Sermons we do not distinctly speak to one man apart from another,
therefore neither is it convenient to speak these words, Eat thou, drink
thou, severally to man after man.
This is no reason at all. For first we know how in Sermons many (whose massy
boldness ouerballanceth godly wisdom,) furiously convent the consciences of
men. Not amiss to speak to men's hearts out of Gods word plainly, and truly;
but splenetickly to gall men's persons as if men would call them distinctly by
their proper names, growing into particulars by a finger-pointing description,
culling a man out thus? Thus attired, thus sitting, in such a pew, etc. We
hold not fit. The fault is not better known, then they are, that make the
fault. Scio me offens^ rum esse quam plurimos qui generalem d^ viti is
disputatione^ in suam ref^ru^t co^tumelians, and dum mihi irascuntur suam
indicant conscientiam multo peins de se quam de me iudicant. Ego enim nen inem
nominabo, nec veteris com^dia licentia certas personas eligam atque
perstringam. Hieron ad R^st epist de viuinds forma.
A general discourse will reach home. I know (says Saint Ierom) that I shall
offend very many, who refer a general disputation concerning vice to their
own shame, and while they are angry with me, they show their own conscience,
and do judge far worse of themselves then of me. For I will name no man, nor
after the licentious manner of the old comedy, will I choose out certain
persons to perstringe them. Here we learn, how it is not safe to speak unto
men personally in our Sermons, and that they, who do so, are rather
satyricall, then other. But come we to the second branch of their comparison,
which is rather a disparison, if it be rightly called. For the Sacrament is not
so to be ministered, as Sermons, which are published in general terms, but
more particularly, and by personal application. Because, first though Christ
said, Eat ye, Drink ye, collectiuely all at once, yet that distributiuely
he did not, they must prove before we reuerse that form we have received. 2.
In ministering co^forts we may distinctly speak to every one in his own person,
because it is a part of the glad tidings of the Gospel, but in denouncing of
Gods judgments so warrantably we cannot do. 3. Our voice comineth unto all at
once, but distributing the Sacrament is to man after man. 4. These petty
controuerst Divines, that are so hard to please, allow in Baptism, that the
Minister say, I Baptize, though our Savior spoke in the plural go ye, and
Baptize: And if in one Sacrament the application must be made, why not in
another? seeing that Sacraments are applicatorie seals of yt righteousness of
faith.
To justify their opposition they might allege against us the manner of the
Greek Church which says not as we do I Baptize thee, Baptizetur N. seruus
Christi in nomine etc.
but let, N. the servant of Christ be Baptized in the name, etc. But will we
know, why this is not misliked, and in the Sacrament of the Eucharist the other
is, our Antagonists want neither stomach, nor will, but the only reason why
they do not, is, some foreign Church beyond the Sea retains the form,
which we do use. In brief to fit both their scruples, whether Eat ye, or in
particular, Eat thou, the answer, Non praescripsit suis ministris Christus
quibut, vel quot vo cibus essent vsu ri etc. sed actu^ ipsum definist. Bez. Qq.
and Respon. page 85. Formula in latinis ecclesiis ob seruata mihs videtur
adma^datum domins propius accedere, and confirma^ dae baptizandi fidei
acco^mada tior. Ibid.
which Master Beza makes in the words of Baptism may sutably be used in the
words of the Eucharist: Christ has not enjoined his Ministers what, and how
many syllables they must use in the function of their calling, but he has
limited the Act, when he commands them to Baptize. And whether they say (I
Baptize thee) or let this servant of Christ be baptized, the matter is not
great, so the form of the very Act be observed. And (yet says he) to speak
as it is the form in the Lattin Churches (me thinks) comes nearer to the
commandment of the Lord, and is far more fit to confirm the faith of the
party baptized. Because the Minister speaking of himself in the first person
I baptize, and putting to the pronoune (thee) makes the mind of the party
baptized, both to observe the action more diligently, as if God himself were
then present, doing by himself, what the Minister by word of mouth testifies,
as also to apply the promise to himself properly and peculiarly. No hard
matter to fit this to the present occasion, why in the Euchatist we use these
words Eat thou. Tum ad promisstonem proprio, ac peculia riter sibi applicandam
Ibid.
First, because often repeated better remembered, 2. Because of the special
denomination, and applycation then made: As for the other point, our Church is
not alone in ministering to the sick, for beside those testimonies before
produced we may understand. That to the right and due action of the Eucharist
are required two at the least, namely the Minister blessing the Eucharist, and
he to whom the Sacrament of the Eucharist is dispensed, Hac est pia vuctio qua
spiri tus sanctus efficax. Ibid. sect. 15. page 197. Private a and extrema agro^
tantium comunio etc. Musc. tit. de coena d^ mini.
so speaks the Church of Wittenberg, naming it that godly ointment (in S. John
his Epistle) whereby the holy Ghost is effectual in those that do believe. In
diverse other Churches this manner of ministering the Communion in a private
manner is to be retained as Musculus witnesses for this end, that the party
thereby may be strengthened in faith, ma^de stronger against tentations of
Satan, and better armed to bear the pains of death. As for the place (though
private because some chamber, or the like) yet we must not think it
frustrateth the power of the sacrament and the virtue of the administration.
For that is one, and the same in it own nature, how ever circumstances of time,
and place do alter extraordinarily. What else was the room but an upper
chamber, where our savior kept his supper with his disciples? Where was it but
at home the paschall lamb was eaten? and where for many years after Christ
the whole service and sacraments celebrated, but in hidden places, private and
secret, (...)
at what time persequtio^, and sickness were in force? yt former of which two
cease, namely persequution; for God has raised up one, whose just title
Defe^der of the true ancient faith strengthen and eue^ long may it our good
hope of the peace of the Gospel but impotencie thorough sickness to come
abroad, as also the weak conscience needing special choice comforts are even
now very urgent occasions to have the communion sometimes somewhat private, not
any way herein contrary to our savior christ his institution. But for ought
we can see complain we may of want hereof, not using it at all, rather then
of the abuse in using it ill. For what with the venom of some doctrine, as that
sacraments need not, what with the prophainnesse of men, that they care not,
what with the slacknesse of some minister, what with forgetfulness in the
sick, what with frivolous obiectiones in misliking it, what with yt danger of
contagion by some diseases, a very ancient praiseworthie commendatione is
discontinued. Satan much aduantaged and the sick soul, that needs the spirit
of corroboration against the terrors of death and hartned in a joyful
expectation of deliverance in good time, is then left destitute, when is most
use of all such possible helps. What think we of this? Shall Scribes and
Pharisees use falsely supposed remedies, for so they do, and we neglect true,
seasonable, convenient succor? as if the readiest way to reach home were best
to shoot short, and enough were held done to prove a good Christian (always
provided) we do not so much as Papists. Because they pray, fast, give alms,
etc. We shall do well to do none of all, Seven. Sulpit, epist. histor. eccles.
these like one Ithacius, who so far detested Priscillians doctrine of
abstinence, and every spare diet was suspected of that heresy, and with him
the loosest demeanor made the sincerest profession. But in utter lothing of
all such gross folly this we may learn as a sufficient resolution. What if
the shield of Popery bear not out Paper shot, and their private Masses stand
the sick in no fleed? yet know we so many, as fix not the grace of the Lord on
the outward Element, but bring their thoughts in obedience to his
commandment, distressed souls craving comfort at home, when they cannot come
abroad shall (no doubt) find the Lord to seal up in their consciences by the
ministry of the word and Sacrament, as effectually in that hour of their
necessity, as in times of greater assemblies and more public meetings? Always
remembered that some neighbors join in fellowship for that holy business,
they prepared aforehand, as it becomes, and the sickness b^ (though
desperate yet) not infectious, or if none can be got (and that were very
strange) yet because others default may not abringe a sick man's comfort,
resolve that the Minister communicating, the sick party cannot be thought to
receive alone, as some are disposed to argue.

Chap. 11. Of Confirmation. These words are in the Rubric before the
Catechism: Confirmation is ministered to them, that be baptized, that by
imposition of hands, and prayer they may receive strength, and defense against
all tentations to sin and assaults of the world, and the devil, etc. These
words we cannot Subscribe unto.
IMposition of hands joined with holy prayer is a grave ancient custom, whose
original we read of in Scripture, as of Isaac blessing his Son Jacob,
Genes. 27.24.
when he would offer, Exemplum habemus in Isaac qui manus etc Calu. apud Marlo.
in Math 19.13.
and consecrate him unto God, that he might be the promised heir. Jacob
likewise blessing Ephraim and Manasses Joseph his Sons imposed his hands on
them, and prayed. Which self same ceremony was used in sacrifices: for Aaron,
and his Sons laid their hands on them. And in ordination, Genes. 48.14.
as when Joshua was chosen. Number. 27. Exodus 29 10.
In bodily cures I thought (says Naaman) the man will, Leuit. 1.4.
etc. Call upon the name of the Lord, and put his hand on the place to the end
he may heal the leprousie: Numb. 27.18.
And Christ our Savior used it, 2. King. 5.11.
when he entreated to lay his hand upon his daughter, Math. 9.18.
as also in curing a blind man: Marc. 8.22.
as also in admitting little infants to bless them, he put his hands upon
the^, and prayed. After whose departure to the Father, Math. 19.13.
the believers for a time used it in common. Marc. 16.17
For so our Savior promised They shall lay their hands on the sick, etc. But
then (and always after) the Apostles, and after the Apostles in succeeding ages,
( Bishops in regard of their prelacie (as S. Ierom witnesses) did accustom
themselves to this ceremony, and withal God did vouchsafe miraculous gifts,
which have their Sun setting, and know their going down, yet other graces of
corroboration, and perseverance are of continuance hold on still, and stand in
supply. A time there is that Barzillai may go to the brook, and can go no
farther, but David, and the spirit of David has farther to go. The date is at
an end for those extraordinary gifts, which came by necessity of those
times, and made entrance for the Gospel, now these of strength, knowledge,
comfort, and daily increase in them, for which the Bishop prays over the
child with imposition of hands are for longer time, namely to the worlds
end. As for this speech where the words in the Rubricke by imposition of
hands and prayer the baptized receive strength. etc. as (if like the children
of the prophets crying Death in the pot, when somewhat was shred in, scarcely
pleasing their taste), so these mean, there is death in this sentence, not
fitting their knoweledge, that have tasted of the heavenly grace revealed in
the word; we answer this phraise by imposition of hands etc. is agreeable
to scripture, Act 8.18. (...). 2. Tim. 1.6.
and the ancient truth recorded since that time in the monuments, and
writings of the fathers. To scripture, where this express form is mentioned
when Simon Magus, saw that by laying on of hands the holy spirit was given
etc. So to stir up the gist of God, which is in thee by the putting on of
my hands, which latter place though it speak of this ceremony in ordination
yet the former of these quotations entreats of confirmation after baptism as
does also Asts 19.6. But (whither first, or last of those scriptures cited in
the margent) the grace of speech is the same namely by imposition of hands
etc. The like we find in the writings of the fathers. Tertul^ian thus, the
flesh is shadowed with imposition of hands, that the soul may be illightned
by the spirit. Again in another place. After baptism administered then hands
are laid on by benediction, and blessing, Caro manus impositione adumbratur,
vt anima spiritu illuminetur. Tertull. de " imponitur per benedictionem
aduocans and inuitaus spiriturn sanctum, Id de baptis.
aduocating and inuiting the holy Ghost. This ancient manner Saint Ciprian
justifying out of Asts 8. by the example of John, and Peter, makes this
observation. The faithful in Samaria (says he) had already obtained
baptism, only that which was wanting Peter, and John, Nunquid quoque apud nos
ge ritur, vt qui in ecclesia baptizantur per pra latos ecclesia offerantur, and
per nostram orationem and manus impositi onem spiritum sanctum consequantur.
Cyp. epist. 73. ad Iubatan Post fontem sequitur, vt perfectio fiat, quan do ad
inuocationem sacerdotis spiritus sanctus infunditur. Ambros. lib 3. de
sacrament. c. 2. Exigis vbiscrip tum sit? In acti bus Apost. sed etiamsi scrip
turae authoritas non subesset totius orbis in hanc partem co^sensus instar
praecepts obtineret. Hieron. aduer. Luciseri. Si superuenerit ad episcopum
cumperducat vt per manus impositionem perfics possit. Council. Eliber can. 38.
Eos episcopus per benedictionem perficere debebit. can. 77. thid. Manus ab
episcopo imponi vt accipiant spiritum sanctum. Arelat. can. 17. Vt mundi, donu^
sp^^tus sanctvaleant accipire. Aurelian. Deus largitur gratiam per impositionem
manuum. Chemuit de sacra meant ordints. page 245. Donum comfirmatum in eo fuit
and auctum per impositionem manuum Zanch pracep. in c. 4.19. page 715.
supplied by prayer and imposition of hands to the end the holy ghost might be
powered upon them, which also is now done among our selves, that they which are
baptized in the church, are offered up to God by the prelates of the church,
and by our prayers, and imposition of hands obtain the holy ghost. This
phraise continued to the days of Saint Ambrose who speaking of confirmation
writes. After the fountain, it follows that more be done (or word for
words) that there be perfection, when at the prayer of the priest the holy
Ghost is infused, and powered down. Saint Ierom against the Luciferians writing
that the Bishop did give the holy Ghost unto the baptized by imposition of hands
adds you are earnest to know where it is written: I answer (says he) in
the Acts of the Apostles. But although there were no authority of scripture,
the consent of the whole world in this behalf should be as a commandment.
Out of diverse ancient councels, of Eliberis, Arls, Orleance ye like may be
proved. Eliberis: If the baptized shall happen to live, bring him to the
Eishoppe that by imposition of hands he may be perfited, and after ward can.
77. Those which the Deacon has baptized, the bishop must perfect by prayer or
benediction. The council of Arls. hands are laid on by the bishop, that
they may receive the holy Ghost. That of Orleance. After coming to
confirmation they be warned to make their confession that being cleansed they
may receive the holy Ghost. But contenting our selves with these testimonys of
antiquity, among our late writers not to name many: Chemnitius and Zanchius
witness yt use of this phrase: Chemnit: God gives grace by impositio^ of
hands. And Zanch. the gist was confirmed and augmented in him by imposition of
hands. True it is that our writers speak of the cerimonie used in ordination,
but yet of the ceremony it is, that they so write, which argues the phrase
not only tolerable but lawful. How much rather are we to judge thus, both
scripture and antiquity auouching as much. And therefore what reason have we
for some few unadvised men's pleasure to renounce a truth so thoroughly
approved, namely that by impositio^ of hands and prayer children may receive
strength and defense.

Confirmation has that ascribed unto it, which is proper to the sacraments, in
these words; That by imposition of hands, and prayer they may receive
strength, and defense against all temptations to sin, and the assaults of the
world, and the devil.
Proof for some men's just dislike in this, hence appears, because it is
proper to the sacraments, as if thus in form of argument it were concluded
what is proper to the sacraments must not be attributed to any thing else: to
give strength, and defense against all tentations of sin is proper to the
sacraments, therefore not to be attributed to any thing else: and if not to any
thing else, then not to imposition of hands, and prayer. In making answer
whereunto, we must know, that it is not proper to the sacraments to give
strength and defense, against all tentations. For proper that is called which
is only, always, and unto all proper. But to give strength against all
temptations is not proper to the sacraments: It is a thing common to other, as
to the sacraments, but not proper only unto them. For the spirit properly is
the spirit of strength, and corroboration and none else. As means indeed, or
helps so the sacraments are, but so are they not alone. For the word of
grace is able to build farther, and exhortations, and faith, and prayer, and
daily experience of Gods mercies heretofore, and conference with learned men,
and diverse other good blessings from Goddoe strengthen a man against all
tentations etc. Wherefore in a word we return them for answer, it is
manifestly untrue, that confirmation has that ascribed unto it, which is
proper to the sacraments.

Confirmation has that ascribed unto it, which is proper to the sacraments in
these words: we pray thee to certify them, on whom we have laid our hands
by this sign of thy favor, and gracious goodness toward them.
No good argument to conclude from a sign to a sacrament; as if because we
hold imposition of hands a significant action therefore we ascribe that unto
it, which is proper to the sacraments. All churches, that take this ceremony
to use, understand that it is a sign of commending to God that same party, on
whom hands are laid and if so, what difference is herein, from that practice,
which our church retains. May it be a sign of commending unto God without
derogation to the sacraments, and shall it not be as lawful to certify of
Gods favor? Hitherto we have always thought, that they who are commended unto
God by prayer (as at this time they are) have a sure evidence, that they are
the Lords. The very order of the words whence it pleases some to take this
their exception does sufficiently clear both, what our church coth, and what
her purpose is herein. It is not the bare imposition of hands, as if yt had
power of it self to give such a certificate. Solemn prayers are made be the
Bishop over the child, yea prayers are doubled, trebled, then this ceremony
annexed withal for a visible sign and not a sacramental sign, which
consists of some outward earthly element as bread, and wine etc. but sign
in this prayer is sign of what the Bishop does and the party baptized
understands is done, which is to such a one a plain certificate, that he
has had Gods singular favor revealed unto him, in that of an infant of a day
old, he is brought to some competent measure of knowledge of God his grace,
and will, as also in that he is upon examination confirmed, and certified by his
reverent father in God, who is able to judge, and accordingly so does, how,
and how far forth he is grounded in the necessary elements of true religion.

Imposition of hands and prayer are both lincked together with a conjunction
copulative (And) implying that they both jointly concur to obtain this
strength, and neither of them sever allie.
If this copulative (And) were in the same kind of cause, as it is couched in
the course of the same sentence, Reason were to judge equally of them both,
But in as much, as the one is externallie to us, the other internallie
internallie to God, both effectually, but in a diverse manner the practice of
such disputants may be more justly suspected, then their argument need greatly
be feared. This word (and) here, is a copulative in use but a disjunctive in
power: the weakest being put first in the rank, but with respect to him that
follows. Imposition of hands were of little worth, but for prayer. The method
and ordring of which words is like that Math 17. By fasting and prayer diuils
are cast out: Math. 17.21.
None but knows fasting is no part of the spiritual service, and worship of
God, nor any cause of it self able to dispossess a diuill, yet joined with
earnest and hearty yrayer unto God, we read what is spoken thereof.

If it be prayer alone, that obtains strength, why is imposition of hands
used?
Prayer alone may obtain strength, but not altogether in this action because
though a weaker coupled with it, Doctor Fulk: Act. 8.17.6.7. Cum tincti esse^t
homines in infantia nec fidei professionem ediderunt, dea cretum est, vt cum
venirent ad maturiorem aetatem, vocaren tur ad ep^scopum, vt public fidem sua^
proficerentnr Tune episcopus manus imponebat its, hoc est orabat pro iis, vt in
ve rafide persisterent. P. Martyr. Com. loc. clas. 3. c 8.14. Inutilis est
confirmatio, nisi primo modo ser uetur. Ibid.
as a candle that is tinned in the sun, yet somewhat it is, though how much
or how little, we cannot discern. But that prayer it is, which strikes the
stroke we are led to think with ancient and late writers. Ancient as Saint
Austin and after him Doctor Fulk, and Peter Martyr. Imposition of hands by
Doctor Fulke after Saint Austin, is prayer over a man. Master Peter Martyr in
his common places, When infants were baptized not able to give an account of
their faith, it was decreed that when they came to riper years, they should be
called to the Bishop to make public profession of their faith. Then the
Bishop did lay his hands upon them, that is he prayed for them, that they
might continue in that true faith, which they publickelie professed. And
afterward touching the gross abuse thereof he adds these words.
Confirmation is unprofitable, unless it be kept after the first manner. That
manner he means which before is here mentioned. Now then albeit prayer be
the very principal, yet that external ceremony namely imposition of hands
was also used for diverse reasons; partly in regard of the baptized, partly
of the ceremony it self. Of the baptized, because by this means such an one
knowing he should be examined, did look the better to the learning of those
principles, which were required and after the episcopal benediction was much
comforted and strengthened as his own comfortable experience herein could best
witness. 2. in respect of the ceremony it self used gravely and solemnly by
the Bishop after and with prayer, which if altogether needelesse, and of no
use, Peter and John needed not to have took such pains as to come from
Jerusalem to Samaria to have laid hands upon them, whom Philip the Deacon did
baptize. For they might have prayed in Jerusalem for them, but to show that the
other ceremonial action might have due place, therefore is it, they did both
accordingly ever since the church of God has used both prayer and imposition
of hands for distinction sake to distinguish the baptized after examination
from others that are prayed for, Because though prayers be made for others, and
so the comparison is alike, yet are they not with imposition of hands after
catechizing a young graft, as then the manner is.

If the signs that Christ has instituted in the Gospel be sufficient to
represent, and seal up unto us Gods favor, as in Baptism the washing of
water, in the Lord his supper the representations which the bread and wine do
offer to our minds, then to bring in, or to approve by subscription the
bringing in of other signs at the administration of these sacraments, to
represent, or seal up unto us Gods favor as special graces, which the said
sacraments were instituted to represent, is to detract from the sufficiency
of Christ his institution, and is an impious addition. The like may be said of
the signs of imposition of hands in confirmation, and in other like things
not commended unto us by Christ's institution.
So far forth as this objection concerns the sign of the cross in baptism,
because we would not trouble our selves, Part. 1. c. 26. page 139. 140. etc.
or the reader again, we entreat him to look our first part cap. 26. As for
that where it is added. The like may be said of imposition of hands in
confirmation, we inuert their words. The like may not be said. For impositio^
of hands is not a sign brought in at ye administration of ye sacrament either
baptism, or ye Eucharist but long after baptism and sometime before ye
Euchrist: therefore (supposing it were true that is fasly surmised) the like may
not be said of imposition of hantes in comfirmation. For the argument it self
here used (to ripe up the very bowels thereof) is very weak and ruinous.
The sequel of the Mayor proposition we utterly dente (that is) It does not
follow that we detract from the sufficiency of Christ his institution, if we
approve of the bringing in this ceremony of imposition of hands. For might
this be a matter of consequence it would enforce by way of reasoning to the
like purpose in the days of the law. If the signs that God has ordained in
the law were sufficient to represe^t and seal up unto the Jews God his
favor as in circumcision the cutting of the flesh, in the passover the
representatio^s, which the Paschall Lamb did offer to their minds, the^ to
bring in other signs as imposition of hands etc. is to detract from the
sufficiency of Gods ordinance and is an impious addition. All which draught
fails in the handling, because that notwithstanding the sufficiency of both
sacraments in time of the law, yet this ceremony of impositio^ of hands and
prayer for confirming and strengthening was the^ used. Where hence follows. If
so that imposition of hands did not impeach those sacraments at that time no
more may it be thought to hinder the sufficie^cy of these, and if then no cause
but it might be used though those sacraments were ordained, much less now is
there cause, for the reason is all alike both in the sacraments of the law and
of the Gospel. This might suffice to show the inconsequence of this reason.
But we will examine the words yet more thoroughly.

If the signs that Christ has instituted be sufficient etc (See before)
The sufficiency of a thing, whither sacrament, sign, yea of ye word it self
is not impeached be addition of that which is explicatorie and of good use.
Sufficient is the holy scripture it self, neither may a man add, or detract
from it, a curse there is upon those that so do, yet none of all their persons
are in danger thereof, whose reverend, ancient, painful godly labors have been
employed in commentaries, expositions, sermons, catechism, paraphrase, or the
like, nor do their commendable trauils detract from the sufficiency of the
scripture. Sufficient is a word of truth delivered by one honest man to
another, yet an oath sometimes is annexed, and never thought derogatorie to the
truth being so tendered, as it should be. Sufficient is an oath to bind a man,
Simin^r ^ai^^ re^ discerit.
yet more inviolable, and barder upon any plea to be recalled, when a
corporal ceremony of lifting up the hand, or laying it on ye holy gospelis
joined thereunto. Sufficient is a vow made in baptism. For therein we promise
unto God all things that are for his glory, our neighbors benefit, and our
own duty, yet if a man do promise any thing afresh, bending himself to, or
from this or that, being the furderance of the glory of God, and his own good,
it is no way derogatorie from the former which he made, and therefore these
terms of (impious addition) might have well been spared.

The like may be said of other like things, not commended unto us by Christ's
institution.
As if other things added to, or after the sacraments, not commended unto us
by Christ were impious additions for this coherence we note in the words by
their necessary dependence from the former. But we have cleared imposition of
hands which was not by Christ his institution in ye sense as this objection
intends, yet was always practiced by Christ and his Apostles and afterward by
apostolical men. And that other things, which our church approves, Audiuiiam
ex te confessionem sides tuae quodcredas in deum patrem, silium, et spiritum
sanctums in hanc igitur confessionem in tingo te in aquam, vi hoc signaculo
certus sisle esse insertum Christo. vade in pace Brentius in catechis. de bapt.
Sponsores Tert. debaptismo.
not mentioned by institution or impious addition, we hold a speech that
proceeds from more spleen then truth. The manner of saying I baptize, is no
form of words, which our savior instituted, yet no impious addition to the
sacrament, That it is not the express form, which we can exactly enforce upon
Christ's institution may appear before, as also by M. Brentius, who in his
catechism approves of the minister that shall say thus to a new convert
coming to baptism. I have now heard of thee a confession of thy faith that
thou beleeuest in God the father, God the son, God the holy Ghost, and therefore
into this confession I baptize thee into the water that by this seal thou
may be sure that thou art grafted into Christ. Go in peace. The having of
Godfathers and Godmothers in baptism is a thing not commended unto us by
Christ's institution, yet no impious addition: The ceremony of dipping once or
forice in baptism is that, Tertull. de coro milit. and aduers Praream.
Chrisost. homil. 24. in loba.
which the church has used diversely sometimes one way sometimes another:
thrice at a time in, and before the days of Tertullian, and Chrysostom,
sometimes once, as now, because of the Arians and other heretics, which did
abuse that triple actio^ to signify three natures of the 3. persons, where
before it was intended by the church to signify 3. persons in the Trinity,
Greg. lib 1 epist 41. ad ^eand. council. Toleta. 4. c. 5. Eusebius. Lister. ^c
cles. lib 7 cap. 20.
and Christ his 3. days abode in the grave. The giving of a name (as we
term it a christian name) to the child in baptism is not commended unto us
by Christ his institution yet we hold it (as our church uses herein) no
impious addition. The ceremonies of diuing the whole body into the water,
pausing vnter the water and rising up again from thence seems to be an
ancient rite, P^scator. Romans 6.3. Beza. Ibid.
whereunto the Apostle Romans 6. is thought to allude in the death of the old
man, his burial, and resurrection to newness of life. A sign added unto
baptism (notwithstanding baptism it self does signify so much) and never
then called an impious addition, nor detracting from the sufficiency of that
holy sacrament, which hereby appears not essential, but changeable, because
not in use no we with us in our church by reason of the coldness of the
country, as also the tenderness of our infants, with whom charity and
necessity do both well to dispense. Perk. armil. aurea. c. 3^.
These signs, actions, additions all significant used in the administration of
baptism, yet never to this hour (except we only this objection) ministered
just cause of dislike, as being thought impious, or derogatorie from baptism
and the sufficiency thereof. The like we are to exemplify in the sacrament
of the Lord his supper, which is (that we may return men their own english)
a sign, that Christ instituted in the Gospel to represent, and seal up
unto men Gods favor, as also the friend ship and love. which should be
amongst us, whereof it is a symbol and pledge. For 1. Cor. 10. we that are many
are one bread and one body because we are al persakers of one bread, yet ye,
which this sign instituted by christ does represent and scale unto us, 1. Cor.
10.17. Justin. martyr. apolog. 2.
the very same representation was offered to the minds of the faithful by a
kiss when they saluted one another at the same time. For it was a symbol and
significant sign of linking their affections and giving like honor one to
another, Non solum ami citiae sed (...). Bez. 1. Cor. 16 20. and 2. Cor. 13.
and so by consequent a note of Gods love unto them. Not of Christ's
institution, yet not therefore detracting from the sufficiency of the
Sacrament, nor an impious addition. Many other instances we might add, but
this shall serve only for this time. Mutual consent twixt couples makes
marriage, specially solemnized in public and witnessed by the congregation,
and sanctified by the Minister his holy benediction, yet the ceremony of the
Ring is added hereunto by the Church, which is so far from being impious as
that Master Bucer, and Master Viret (a man ignorant of our controversies now on
foot) does allow the use thereof.

This ceremony is added but not in the administration of Baptism, or the
Lords Supper, which are the Sacraments we speak of.
So likewise imposition of hands is not in the administration of either
Sacrament, and therefore the instance, which we bring is pertinent enough to
the purpose wherefore alleged, and suitable to the objection before urged,
where these words are. The like may be said (namely that they are impious
additions, what are not commended by Christ his institution. But to conclude
our answer to this strain, and to return a necessary observation upon this
point. The terms in the former objection pretending to open the nature of both
Sacraments in full sufficiency, are themselves insufficient and defective. For
to call the Elements (instituted by Christ) of water in Baptism, and of bread
and wine in the Eucharist representations, which offer to our minds, etc. Or
such as represent special graces, as if their seal were to represent, and
make some fair show, we hold no definition, nor sound explanation of a
Sacrament. For seeing they do exhibit and offer grace, seeing they are very
true substances, not qualities, and therefore not representations, seeing they
are effectual instruments of saving grace unto Gods children, yea more then
all this, surely more would have been added, and not thus rawly ralling them
representations, and doubling that one word, as if therein lay the strength,
dignity, and excellency of a Sacrament. Again, this clause is doubtful
where it is said (to bring in, or to approve by subscription the bringing in of
other signs, etc.) (other signs) if they mean, such as thrust forth those,
which Christ has instituted, and will needs supply their place, or (other
signs) if they mean of like necessity use or validity, equaling them to the
Sacraments which Christ has instituted, we confess to bring in such signs
were to detract from Christ his institution, but otherwise as tokens from man
to man, yea some of them through prayer in the spirit as certificates of Gods
grace and favor, we how no way derogatorie at, or after administration of the
Sacraments.

In the prayer the Bishop says After the example of the Apostles we have laid
on our hands. This is no true imitation.
It is, and therefore a true speech, For they and the apostolical Churches did
it, always joining prayer with it. A ceremony it was used after Baptism upon
diverse considerations, but always for sarder strengthening the party, whether
Baptized, or to be ordained. And if comparisons were needful. There is reason
to judge of the two, young children (anon after they have been entered in the
principles of our holy faith) have more need of this after-helpe to put them
in mind of the power of Baptism, and to work a remembrance thereof more
effectual in their hearts and memories.

They had warrant, the Bishops have none.
In this point, Apostolical practice is Episcopal warrant. What express word
in Scripture for all Churches both Primitive and since, the same is for our
Churches (at this day) with whom the ceremony is used, then to translate it
from the sacrifices of the Law now to derive it over from those times to us.
This fashion of imposition of hands the Church (says Austin speaking of the
custom continued unto his days) retains in her Prelates. Hunc morem
impositionis manu um in suis praepositi^ e^iam nunc seruat. August.
And the reason is manyfold, why they rather, then other Ministers that
Baptized the children. 1. Because Philip that baptized did not impose hands but
John and Peter did. 2. Because all ages since Christ held a Bishop superior to
an ordinary Minister in his Diocese, Heb. 7.7.
for without all contradiction the less is blessed of the greater. 3. They
rather then others in honor to their prelacie and place as Ierom witnesses.
4. Because the parochial Minister should not be thought a partial Minister
over those whom he baptized. 5. For greater grace, and reverence to the
proceedings countenanced by one whose gravity, years, and authority much
preua^leth in such occasions. 6. For anoyding of heresy, schism, and the like.
Lastly, for that the Bishop might be an arbiter twixt the Parishioners and
their Minister in praising, or dispraising, accordingly as upon examination he
found the youth and their friends had taken care for watring those buds with
vertuons education, and nurtured them up in the knowledge of the articles of
faith, and all such necessary points as well beseem a good Christian to his
souls health. These and the like in histories seem to be the cause why
Bishops laid on their hands, and prayed over children baptized, that could give
account of the hope that was in them. A point duly to be remembered, because
some take exception against the Papist herein, yet against our Church justly
they cannot. For we prefer it not before Baptism, but Baptism before it: We
make not alike necessity of the one as of the other. For that may be deferd
without any detriment to the child, till he come to more years, Baptism we
hold not arbitrarie, nor (having convenient means and time) do we think
meet it should be long deferd. Every lawful Minister fitteth for Baptism,
but not every one so fit for imposition of hands: that a holy Sacrament of
Christ his own institution, and by him commanded: this a reverent ceremony,
and sign only, though not expressly commanded in Gods word, yet laudably
practiced by Christ, by his Apostles, and apostolical men which we do even
for this cause embrace, as commendable and expedient, always professing the
necessity, dignity, and excellency of Baptism above it, because every
approoned Minister is used in that, and not in this, which argues the
worthiness of the Sacrament, be the Minister of superior or inferior note.
Whereas in this other ceremony it is not so. For though Philip did Baptize,
yet John and Peter did lay on hands, Ipsique adhibita impositione manuum in
ella sis n^ confirman di quanquam ipsam manuu^ impositionem putamus liberae
obseruationis esse, vt cutus exemplum quidem Apostolicu^ extet, non aute^
preceptum Christ's Riscat. in Heb. 6.2. Ad precatione^ pro illespueris sine
superstitione adhihers posset impositio manu um. Nec inanis esset ea precatio.
Nititur enim promissionibus de dono perseuerantiae and gratia confirmationit.
Chemnit. de con firm. p. 69. De exhortatione etiam ad per seuerantiam and de
confirmatione per verbu^ in semel suscepta doctrina and fide extant Apostolicae
eccle sia exempla. Act. 14.15. and 18. Ibid.
not derogating from what Philip did, nor extolling their confirmation above
his Baptism, notwithstanding that they were superior to him in place and
pre-eminence. Can our Church then be thought to do without warrant, when it
does but as it has the first and following Churches for an example? So
Piscator observes, that when children have been taught the doctrine of
repentance and faith, they are to make profession thereof, and then to be
confirmed by imposition of hands. Although we think the very laying on of
hands, to be a point of free observation, as having the Apostles example for a
president, though not any express commandment from Christ. Then the Apostles
fact being an example. and this done after it, no such untruth is maintained as
some think in saying. After the example of the Apostles we have laid on our
hands, etc. Chemnitius writes thus unto prayer over the child to be confirmed,
imposition of hands may be used without superstition. And that prayer cannot be
in vain. For it relieth on promises, concerning the gift of perseverance, and
the grace of confirmation. This rite (says he) would bring much profit to the
edefying of youth, and of the whole Church, and were also agreeing to Scripture
and purer antiquity. For in the Apostolical laying on of hands was a trial
of doctrine and profession of faith. Act. 19. and of exhortation to
perseverance, and of confirmation by the word in the doctrine and faith.
Examples of the Apostolical Church are extant, Act. 14.15. and 18. Which being
so, witnesses in their judgment whom we cannot think partial in this
behalf, that the phrase, which our Book uses (after the example of the
Apostles, etc.) is a phrase irreprouable.

The Apostles laid on hands and gave gifts.
Saint Austin writing of Simon Magus seeing the holy Ghost was given by laying
on of hands, notes, that the Apostles did not themselves give it, but it was
given, they praying and calling upon God. For they did pray that it might come
upon them, on whom they laid hands, but themselves did not give it. Non quia
ipsi dabant, sed quia ipsis orantibus datusest. August. in Ioh. euangitract. 6.
Orabant, quippe vt veniret in eos, etc. Idem de Trinitate, lib. 15. cap. 26.


The Bishop lays on hands, but gives no gifts.
Signa crant te^pori opportuna, oportebat enim ita significari Ibid.
Significatum est and transut numquid mode quibus imponitur mannus vt accipiant
spiritum sanctum hoc expectatur vt linguis loquantur? Ibid. Ita perverse cor de
aliquis vestrum fuit vt diceret, non acceperunt? etc. Interroget cor suum etc.
0752 0 Id. tract. 6. in epist Johan. Sed inuisibiliter and latentur
intelligitur per vinculum pacis eorum cordibus diuina charitas inspirari. Id.
lib 3. de bapt. c. 16.
Those gifts were signs fitting the time. For so must signification be given
by the holy Ghost in all languages, because the Gospel of God was to run
through the whole world in all languages, so much was signified, but is past and
gone. Is it now expected that so many speak with toongs, as have hands laid on
them to receive the holy Ghost? or when we have laid hands on children, does
every one attend, whether they speak with toonges, and when he has seen they
speak not with toonges, has any of you been so frowardly bent to say, they
received not the holy Ghost? etc. Since therefore by such kind of miracles
there is not now that witness of the presence of the holy Ghost, whence it is,
and how a man may know whether he love his brother, Let him see and try
himself in the sight of God, let him see, if there be in him the love of peace
and unities, the love of the Church, etc. Which whole discourse verbatim, word
for word rendered by that Father is more plainly to like purpose laid open, else
where writing of Baptism against the Donatist. The holy Ghost is not now given
in temporal, and sensible miracles by laying on of hands as heretofore, etc.
But inuisibly and secretly, love is known to be inspired in their hearts
through the bond of peace. The substance of which answer so often handled by
that Father implies Imposition of hands with prayer, was used not only for
miraculous gifts, but also for confirmation and strengthening of their faith,
which very same mark our Church aims at in those, on whom hands are laid,
though former extraordinary graces long since discontinued. So in effect
answers Doctor Fulke in his defense of our translation against the Rhemists,
namely, Doct. Fulk. Act. 8.17.6.7.
that how ever imposition of hands, by which Simon Magus saw the holy Ghost was
given, endured no longer, then the miraculous gifts, as unction with oil named
by Saint James: yet another kind of imposition of hands, mentioned Heb. 6. is,
and may be in perpetual use, etc. And where the Rhemists charge us to make no
more of it, or the Apostles fact, but as of a doctrine, institution, or
exhortation to continue in the faith received. Doctor Fulke answers it is
false. For we acknowledge (says he) Imposition of hands with prayer, that
they which were so taught, instructed, and exhorted might receive strength of
Gods spirit so to continue. And where those accusers lay to our charge that
there are among us, which put the baptized coming to years of discretion to
their own choice, whether they will continue Christians or no, he utterly
denies that imputation, adding hereunto in our Churches name, that they are
required to make confession from their own mouth of the same articles, In
primitiua ecclesia, qui ex paganismo in Christianismu^ etc Innocent. Gentilit.
in exa^ council. Trid. lib. 2. sess. 7.6.4. page 83. Illis manus imponebantur ab
episcopo deum orante, etc. Ibid. Hoc denique sed serius sacrame^ tum appellatu^
est, sed a primitiua ecclesia co^firmatio simpliciter dicebatur. Ibid.
and perform by themselves, what others promised for them. Then afterward
with these words he shuts up his sentence: finally that which the Scripture
tells us of prayers, imposition of hands, of the holy Ghost, of grace, and
virtue from above we acknowledge, as well as instruction. Gentiletus in his
examination of the council of Trent handles the argument thus. In Baptism
this ceremonte was retained in admitting two sorts of persons, one borne of
unbelieving, the other of believing parents. Those of unbelieving first
Catechized in the word, conuerts from Paganism, able to yield good reason for
maintenance of the true Faith, were by Baptism admitted into the fellowship of
Christ his visible Church, the other borne of believing parents (and so in the
covenant) were first baptized, and then after growing up to years of
maturitie, were confirmed by the Bishop with prayer, etc. In the end this was
called a Sacrament, but by the Primitive Church plainly and simply Confirmation.

There is no commandment in Gods word for this imposition of hands.
Sci^ quidem no^ extare praceptu^ hac de re, Inierim exempla Apostolorum and
veteris eccle sia vellem pluris astimari, imo deberent nobis esse instar diuina
legis. Zanch. in 4. pracep. c. 19 page 716. Sciamus enim huius carimonia
originem fluxisse ab Apostolis and ab illis authoribus institutam suisse vt
esset solennis precands ritus, etc. Marlorat. in Heb. 6.3.
We answer hereunto as Master Zanchius does of this ceremony in ordination. I
know it well (says he) yet in the mean 0752 0 while I could wish the examples
of the Apostles, and the ancient Church to be of more account and indeed they
should be a divine rule unto us. Would they so were as he well aduertiseth they
should be. For we may, or must know that the original of this ceremony came
from the Apostles and was ordained by them the Authors, to be a solemn rite of
prayer. Quorsum enim cadem doctrina etc nisiquia infantes, etc. Vt non aliud
restaret quam illis manum imponere, etc.
For to what end should the same doctrine be called in some the doctrine of
Baptism, in other some a doctrine of imposition of hands, but because infants
having received baptism were instructed in the faith, so as nothing remained
but to lay hands upon them? This instruction in the faith was point after point
a grave declaration how, why, into what, the little one was baptized, what ye
blessed Trinity gave and sealed up, how a covenant of grace was made, and a
renouncing of Satan with promise of obedience. 2. Secundum fora mulam Cated
chismi quam tune habebant cortam and co^munem. Call institut. 4. c. 19.4
Magistri Canteches.
The child being presented by the parents or friends did openly make
confession of his faith according to a set Catechism in those times. For there
were Masters, as Chemnitius observes, whose part it was, to see, that infants
were taught, as soon as they became capable of godly information. 3. If in any
thing any one of them doubted, or had been corruptly taught (for there were
heretics sometimes Nouatians and Arrians, etc. that did seduce) he was better
informed, and there publicly did disclaim all such false doctrines and
heresies. 4. If he did answer right, then followed an open protestation
solemnly undertaken to persevere, and maintain that doctrine which he
protest. 5. This promise and vow being made the Bishop offered up prayers to
God in his behalf, that he might continue in that faith, and increase in all
other graces of God his spirit. Consecrare de^ and illius gratia Zanch. in 4.
pra cep. c. 19. Tradere illis ius vt inter reliquos recipere^^ tur Ibid. Bonum
auctu^ and confirmate^ per impositionu^ manuum Ibid. Quo (episcopalis) actio,
qua alioqui grauis sanctaque merito esse debebat, plus reuerentia baberet ac
dignitatis carimonia adhibebatur manuum impositionis. Call. instir. lib. 4. c.
19.4.
Unto which prayer then made, imposition of hands was joined, whose use was
partly to consecrate to God and to his grace, so did the Hebrews their beasts
in the law when they laid hands upon their sacrifice, 2. To give the^ right to
be received among yt rest of the children; so Jacob laid his hands on Ephraim
and Manasses. 3. For confirming the graces of Gods spirit in the^, namely that
the good etc. might be augmented and confirmed by imposition of hands. 4.
Tonote that the Lord took the^ into his protection, to win reverence (as M.
Calvin notes) to that grave holy actio^ of the Bishops, imposition of hands
was used, that it might have the more reverence and dignity.

For more testimonies we might heap up, of Hessusius, Melanction, Herbrand,
Bucer, Calvin, etc. But we will content our selves with the two last. Master
Bucer, upon the 4. to the Ephesians. The sign of imposition of hands Bishops
only did give, and that not without reason. For whether the conenant of the
Lord is to be confirmed to those that are Baptized, or whether they are to be
reconciled, that have grievously offended, or whether the Ministers of the
Church are to be ordained, all these ministeries do best become those, to whom
the chief care is committed. Master Calvin in his institutions and other
treatises does greatly commend it, Talem laudo. Ibid. Eiusmodiritum vbique
institutum merito optaremus Id vera eccl. reform page 459. inter opus.
and wishes the restoring of the same. What impregnable necessities commanded
it forth of some Churches we know not, but the wisdom of our Church yet
retains it, and we may rather be condemned for neglect of it, then blamed for
the use.

All reformed Churches speak against confirmation.
Denied it is not, but every one of these whose names we have cited, speak
against confirmation, as does also the Church of Wittenberg calling it a vain,
Popish, superstitious ceremony, and well may they so do, nor let out Church
find any favor, do we maintain confirmation to be a Sacrament: 2. Or detract
we from Baptism to give unto it? 3. Or make we unction a part thereof? 4. Or
give we it prehemiuence above Baptism? Consigne te fig no crucis and cofirme
te chrysmate salutis etc.
5. Or make we the essential form to be the holy Chrisme, (as some call it)
of salvation? 6. Or teach we that it does confer grace? 7. Or do we use balm?
etc. 8. Or pussing over a cruze salute it with all hasle holy Chrisme? 9. Or
put we the child to kiss the Pax? 10. Or, in steed of laying on of hands give
it a pat with the thumb, and then a blow on the cheek? 11. Or tie a rag about
the forehead? 12. Or pretend to confirm it being a child but seven days old?
If these, or any of these, we be guilty of, we heartily give them thanks that
reprove But the world knows, so far as our name is heard of, even therefore
are we traduced by our open enemy abroad, because we omit all these things.
What then shall we forgo all patience? Our hope is, when our Countriemen know
the sincerity of our defense, and how far approved of by other Churches,
they will flake their itching heat against us in this argument.

Chap. 12. In the Rubricke of the Communion at the entrance of the people to
the Lords board, the title of the confession has this. Then shall this
general confession be made in the name of all those, that are minded to
receive the holy communion, either be one of them, or else by one of the
ministers, or by the priest himself, all kneeling humbly upon their knees.
These words were excepted against by word of mouth, and this reason given for
dislike. The word of God, allows not a woman or any other person beside the
minister to speak in the church 1. Cor. 14.34. This Rubricke admits any one
of the communicants to make the confession, therefore not to be allowed nor
subscribed unto.
REply by personal and real argument. Quoad homine^ and quoad re^.
personal for the day before, at what time this conference was had, a minister
being conuented did confess at the marriage of his daughter, he required her
to take the communion book, which she did accordingly and without any
spiritual guide to inform her (contrary to our church order set down)
holding the book in her hand, did publicly and audiblie read the words,
wherein her consent is required. Which novelty pleased the father so well, as
he would needs ask his parishioners, whither that were not far better, then
the other fashion of pronouncing them after the minister, he reading the
words, and directing the couples by them. So as if the objection here made
have strength, it mightily ouermatcheth this practice of some one, who has
fellowshippe in other points of opposition against our ecclesiastical canons
and order. The real answer to purpose was, and is thus. First none could give
instance that any other did it but the minister, the rest of the congregation
pronou^cing that general confession, word for word after him. But if so it
were (as the book to their understanding pretends a liberty, yet no offense
at all for any one of the congregation publickely to read an indictment drawn
against his own soul. For so that confession is, wherein the people are
deeply engaged. Where it handling the kay of opening the kingdom of God by
the ministry of his word, that the Rubricke should say This sentence of
absolution be pronounced by man or woman, or any one of the Communicants, then
were just cause to be taken against it. But the truth is, the book wisely
provides that the priest or Bishop being present shall upon confession first
made, turning himself to the people say etc. Well known it is that in the
universities, our colleges, and schools of learning appoint in time of divine
service, certain choristers or scholars to read chap. say prayers, sing the
letanie, and such like. All which so done by such, is performed all that while
by other then profess ministers, that have taken orders. As for the enforced
conclusion (That we permit weomen to speak openly) proves no such thing:
secondly did it; No such advantage. For weomen are to speak jointly with the
whole congregation whereof they are a part, or else how shall they sing Psalms,
and several alone by themselves, as occasion may be offered, whither at the
lauer of regeneration when they became sureties and Godmothers for little ones
then to be baptized, or to make answer at the solemnization of marriage, when as
their husbands for their part promise to take them to wives, and they again in
like words say as much on their own behalf audibly, and aloud, that the rest
of the congregation may witness the public vow each of them make to one
another. Wherefore it cannot be thought scandalous if need so require, that a
confession be made in the name of all those that receive the holy communion,
either by one of them (as this objection will needs have it thought) man or
woman, or else by any of the ministers. For as it appears in story the
manner was, that weomen having publickely offended, the church required public
proof of their vntained repentance, both by word and deed. This Irenaeus
witnesses Certain weomen seduced, Mulieres quaedam a Marco haeretico seducta
and corrupta cu^ conuartebantur in manifest of a ciebant (...) pla^gentes and
lamentantes corruptelam. Irena. lib. 1. c. 9 Chemnit. exam 2. part. titul. de
confess. Eusebius. lib. 6. c. 43 Nouel constitut 3. vt d^termenatus sit nume ^rus
Clericorum.
and corrupted by one Mark an heriticke, and afterward converted did
manifestly publish their confession weeping and bewailing their error, that
they were so abused. The like course was kept with diverse others who (not
withstanding private persons) made a public confession of their sins in their
own name and behalf. And whereas any one of the ministers is named (beside
the priest) we must know that many particular congregations had, as some
churches yet have in supply 2.3. yea more that did attend their public
function till such time as they were called forth to reside in some special
charge. Therefore person, vicar, curate, yea many more then al these in greater
churches Cathedral, and the like as in the city of Rome under one Bishop, 46.
presbiters, 7. deacons, beside many other inferior helpers for many several
duetys so at Constantinople 60. priests, 100. Deacons etc. to read, sing,
expound, and to make supply in the offices of prayer, confession, etc, which
is the very cause here challenged in this place: now in regard of these
occasions before specified, that men and weomen did, as also for that ample
supply was and is in some churches, the book offeceth it in these terms.
This general confession shall be made either by any one of them that
communicate, or by one of the ministers. 1. Cor. 14.34:
As for the scripture (that suffers not weomen to speak) must be thought not
to exlude them from all manner of speaking, namely singing of Psalms, praying
with the congregation, or publicly confessing their sins, but debarreth them
only the ecclesiastical function of preaching, which yet is not utterly
forbidden. Talis necessitas potest accidere quae mulieris vo cem requirat. Call.
Ibid.
For some such necessity may fall out (says Master Calvin) though not
ordinarily, which may require a woman's voice and utterance. And diverse
examples might be alleged for the equity of such their humble, penitent,
submssiue public, leuerall confessions. But we content our selves with this
for this time.

Chap. 13. In the last Rubricke of the communion. Note that every practitioner
shall communicate at the least 3. times in the year, of which easter to be
one, and shall also receive the sacraments and other rites according to the
order in this book appointed.
THat is, He shall communicate to and with the Saints (for communicating is
twofold in scripture) to them by way of relief, with them in prayer
thanksgiving and other bolie duties so often as occasion is ministered. And for
fear he will slip his neck out of this yoke, or may by some urgent occasions
be drawn away, he is to note that at the least 3. times in the year, of which
Easter to be one, when also he shall receive the sacraments and other rites,
The ministration of Baptis.
whither for himself or his little ones. For baptism was of old administered
at Easter and Whitsontide, as the book shows in another Rubricke in the page
following.

The Rubricke speaks in the plural number. Shall also receive the sacraments.
It does, but either it takes the word (sacraments) properly, or at large.
(...) Math. 12.1.
For so the word sacrament may be taken. Properly there are but two, and in
that construction it bears this sense. He shall also receive the sacraments
that is he shall also receive one of the sacraments. (...) Luc. 6.1.
Like unto that speech of the'uangelist Math. 12. Jesus went on the sabboths,
through the corn which S. Luke renders in the singular number on the sabbath
the second after the first, (...). Ioh 6.45.
so this, the sacraments, namely yt second after the first or like unto that
Ioh, 6.45. a sentence written in the prophets that is one of the prophets
namely Esaias. Synecdoche integri P. scator indofinite loqui solet vulgus. Beza.
For the vulgar people use thus to speak indefinitlie. After which manner
Master Zanchius writting of the Eucharist received by a man of understanding
able to distinguish twixt the sign and the thing signified, which cannot be
done by children. Sacraments (says he) are mysteries whereunto none are
admitted, Sacrame^ta sunt mysteria, ad qua non admittuntur, nisi qui fide
praediti relationes possint intelligere discernereque signum a resignata Zanch.
de cultu dei exter, page 3^9. colu^. 1.
but such as endued with faith can understand and discern the sign from the
thing signified. Where this word sacraments understood of the Lords supper, for
of that he entreats, must needs be taken for one of the sacraments.
Secondly this word sacraments is taken at large for rites, as the term
accompanying does well imply: He shall also receive the sacraments and rites,
as appears in another Rubricke, where it is said by the holy sacraments of
his body and blood, that is the consecrated bread and wine. As for the wrong
conclusion (which men do wrest upon those words) follows not at all, but
rather the contrary, as may appear by these two arguments. 1. The sacraments
and rites, which the Communion book appoints, and no other a parishioner is
to receive: But more then two sacraments the communion book appoints not,
and therefore a parishioner is not inioined to receive more. 2. the placing of
the words necessarily enforce as much. Not that every parishioner shall
communicate and also receive the sacraments and other rites.
For had the book meant other sacraments as of penance, confirmation etc. He
would have set them in this order. Not that every parishioner shall receive
the sacraments, and other rites, and shall also communicate. Because in a
popish sense, parishoners are first brought to eareshrift and then after
haueing done penance etc. They are suffered to communicate But the contrary
order is here set down, and therefore must needs, and does, entreat a
contrary interpretation.

In the second exhortation to the Communion which sometimes is to be said at
the discretion of the Curat there are these words. Our savior Christ not
only to dye for us, but also to be our spiritual food and sustenance as it
is declared unto us as well by Gods word, as by the holy sacraments of his
blessed body and blood. Here the book styles it by the name of sacraments,
where it should not so be, but rather by the holy sacrament of his body and
blood etc.
This objection may well serve for an argument, that the book means by the
word sacraments, Baptism itum tum intersorts quo Christus nos spiritu sa^cto
baptizat, and igne, tum exterioris, etc. lun. parallel lib. 3. c 6. in Heb.
Baptismos plurals numero no ininat solennes ritus and statos baptizandi dies.
Call. Heb. 6.2 Baptisma tum meminit plurali numero, non quod iteratus vnquam sed
sed quod plures Catechumini so lere^t ad baptis. conu^nire. Beza. Ibid. (...)
Vnanobis et illis fides, vnus Deus, idem Christus, eade^ spes, eadem lauacra
sacrame^ta. Tertull. de velan. virg. c. 2. Apostolica traditio est qua in toto
mundo praedicatur vt baptismi sacramenta. Hieron in 2. These. 2. Sensus est
Apostolicam traditionem nihil aliud esse, quam doctrinam Apostolorum toti
ecclesia traditam et sacras res ex ponentem quibus per baptismum initiati sunt.
Iunius contra Belarm. de To. Pontis. lib. 4. c. 4:
2. parts, which make but one yet are two parts, namely the body and blood
answereable to the outward elements, which are like 2. eyes though but one
sight. One sign alone is called a sacrament how much more being more may they
be called sacraments. If so: why not then the rather at what time the thing
signified is employed therein? being as the other was bread and wine, so this in
a sacramental relation the body and blood of our Lord Jesus. An argument to
prove so much may be this, by way of more then probable conseque^t. If the holy
Ghost speaking of baptism (which is but one) calls it baptismes as more,
either because outward and inward, so M. Iunius interprets it, that is the
element and the thing signified which numbered severally are two, or because of
the solemn set days ordained in the primitive church for baptism, as M.
Calvin renders it, or because many striplings nouices in the faith did meet
together at one time as M. Beza thinks, then may this also though but one yet
be multiplied for number in the same sense, because as then many were baptized
at one time, and therefore baptismes so one communicating many times it may be
called sacraments. A speech somewhat unusual, yet not untrue. Baptism is but
one says S. Paul, yet in the language of ancient fathers as Tertullian and
S. Ierom, and others it is not strange to say the sacraments of baptism.
Tertullian says, we and they have one faith, one God, ye same Christ, the
same hope, the same sacraments of the lauer of baptism. S. Ierom thus. An
Apostolical tradition it is, which is published in ye whole world, as ye
sacraments of baptism. The meaning of which word (says M. Iunius) is that an
Apostolical tradition is nothing else, but ye doctrine of the Apostles
delivered to the whole church, and expou^ding the holy things, whereby in
baptism we are entered into ye church. Which speech of Ieroms M. Iunius
condemns not, but niterpreteth The sacraments of baptism for holy things and
rites as our communion book there interprets it. Wherefore contracting these
before mentioned into one brief, as some do by way of question who demand
thus.

Whither according to the word of God a man having been once baptized and
communicating 3. times a year there be any other sacraments to be received?
We answer: 1. Cor. 15.5. Act. 1.26.
This question (as commonly all such interrogatiues) made thus cunningly, is
but a snare set to entangle a reply. For examples sake: We read in 1. Corinthians.
15. that Christ was seen of the 12. Where as in the first of the Acts there
were but eleven, for Judas had hung himself. Whereupon with a frame of words
after the form of the demand here prefixed, we may style our question thus.
Whither according to the word of God Judas having hung himself, and therefore
but 11. it may be said there were any other to be reckoned then at that time
for a 12. No difference at all in the scruple occasioned. For in what terms
that is proposed, so may we tender this, but not without danger and therefore
such questions must be cast in a new mould, and be made in some other form and
fashion then this is here. Else we shall not only endanger the book of common
prayer, but even by the like choplogick (at unawares peradventure) make work
for Atheists and their reprobate contradictions. Hoping therefore that men
desire to be satisfied, and not wrangling at any hand multiplied, our
conclusion is thus. We answer. A man having been once baptized and
communicating 3. times in a year, has no other sacraments to receive but the
Lord his supper, which is called sacraments because it is one of the
sacraments, as also because a man communicates often, as also because there
are many co^municants with receive with him, as also because of the several
elements bread and wine, as also because of the several parts signified by
them, as also the sacramental rites annexed to them. For all which respects
though but vnum totale, one entire thing, yet as has been said in the
language of 1400. years ago and now since in the communion book called
sacraments in these words: He shall also receive the sacraments, and other
rites. And again. The sacraments of the body, blood etc.

By other rites is thought to insinuate ashes, holy water, the kissing of the
pax, and such other like rites used in popery.
Not so, but other rites according to the order in the book prescribed, for so
the express words are of the Rubricke, and therefore seeing both by law and
practice the contrary is required, what reason have men to wrong out church
thus? (Other rites a man must receive according to the order in the book
prescribed) namely bread and not a water cake, leauened not unleavened, only
wine alone for the other element, and not wine mingled with water, in the
morning and not after supper, kneeling and so forth, for this order our church
follows. But thus much he spoken of both these Rubricks.

Chap 14. The Catechism of the book. What is required in persons to be
baptized? (Answer) Faith and repentance. These are the words of the
Catechism, as it is enlarged in the communion book since it has been
reuiewed. But this is more then God in his word requires. For children can
have no faith Romans 10. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by preaching.
IN deed: part. 1. c. 30. p. 173. Ipsa baptismi actio est sidei professio.
Aug. de precat. merit and remiss. cap. 27. Idem epist. 57. ad Dardanum. Nem^
mibi dicat, quod non habet fidem, cui matter impertis suam inuoluens ^llam
sacrame^to quousque ido^eus fia^ proprio asse^s^^ euoluta^ pura^que recipere.
Ber^a. ferm. 66. in Cantica.
if children can have no faith as the words in the objection plainly say, then
is it true that faith and repentance are not to be required. But wherefore have
they baptism if faith and repentance may not be said to be required. Is not
baptism the sacrament of faith and repentance? Children (as has been showed)
have no actual faith but yet (as S. Austin well says) the very action of
baptism is in some sort a profession of faith. Again in another place. God
dwelling in children though they know him not, when he dwells not in elder
folks, that know him. And S. Bernard stirred at such speches as now are on
foot. Let none tell me that a child has no faith, to whom the mother
imparteth her own, applying it and inrowling it in the sacrament, till such
time as by it own kind assent, it become fit to receive it open and plain. But
more of this in the words following.

Why are children baptized not being able to perform these that is, faith and
repentance (Answ.) In the Catechism. They do perform it by their Sureties.
This is most absurd, and against the word, that one man shall believe for
another, and one repent for another. The just shall live by his own faith, and
every sinner must repent for his own sin.
Neither absurd, nor against the word. But when proof wants, or draws low,
then let every arrow of the quiver fly: Absurd, most absurd, and can more be
added to aggrauate their accusation? These may be degrees of comparison in bad
English, but neither one, nor other of them that good degree, which Saint Paul's
Minister should get unto him. The places in Abacuk and Romans 1.17. speak of
actual faith, by which the just live, but not of that which the Catechism
intends, namely the spirit of faith, the Sacrament of faith, and that which
is in steed and supply of faith working by love: the latter quotation of
Scripture speaks of such as are come to years and can distinguish twixt the
right hand and the left, which children neither do nor through imperfection of
age can they. Let such Texts be urged against them whom it may concern,
against us it needs not. For as it is every ones own life a man lives, so we
confess it is every ones proper faith which iustifleth. But that is no
hinderance to a child, that lives by his mother while it is in the womb, nor
any let to a babe, with whom the Church trauaileth in birth. Heming postil. in
Math. 9. in Dommic. 19, post Trinitat. Act. 27.24
Another faith benefiteth even an Infidel and that very much, we say not
immediately to his justification, remission of sin, and salvation, but yet to
his preservation from danger, as it did those whom God gave Paul in his voyage.
Yea it helps much to obtain faith, that howsoever not now, yet hereafter the
party, we pray for, may believe. Which faith obtained at the humble request
which we make (like that of the Palsy man his friends) may so far justify,
Si S. Stephanu^ sic non or asset, ecclesia Paulu^^ non baberet. August. sermon.
de Stephan.
as remission of sins and eternal life will certainly follow. Thus Saint
Austin and other of the Fathers, take that Paul was converted at the prayer of
Stephen For if holy Stephen had not thus prayed, the Church should not have had
Paul a convert. And it is manifest (says that good Father) that God gives men
in their prayer things to be given as the beginnings and entrance of faith and
that he prepares for others (not unless they pray) perseverance and
constancy to the end. Co^st at deum dare alia da^da non or antibus sicut
mitium fidei, alsa non nisi or antibus praeparasse, sicut vsque in finem
perseuerantia^ Id de bono per seueran. lib. 2. c. 16.
Thus far Saint Austin. We all must and do confess no man is wise by
another man his wisdom, yet another man his wisdom helps to put one into the
way of knowledge and understanding. So think we of another man's faith whether
for children newly baptized, or old folks that are not converted, if so they
belong unto God. They whose leisure is more then the running band of a ready
writer permits, may have recourse in this wise to the ancient and late
Divines. Ambrose upon Saint Luke. If thou art somewhat doubtful of pardon, for
thine own sins, Sigrauium pec catorum diffidis veniam, adhibe precatore^,
adhibe ecclesia^ quapro te prece tur Ambros* lib 5. in Luc. c. 5. Intelligitur
simul referri and ad portantes et ad eu^ quiporta batur. Chrisost. vide quantum
vale at apud Deum fides propria, apud que^ sic valuit aliema vt intus and exera
curaret homi^e^^ Glos. ordin* Hoc vere dixerim interuenic ente pioru^ pare^ tum
fide fieri vt nati vel nascituri infa^tes sancti sint idest in f^dere
censcantur ac proinds serue^tur. Bez. Questionu^ and respons. part. 2. page 68.
Non negamus, quin baptismus fidem requirat sednon quali^ requiritur in c^na.
Fidesenim relationem semper ad dei promissionem habet. Ero. etc. Bez. refut.
errerum Micha, Seruet. page 829.
take others to beg for thee. Saint Chrysostom upon these words Christ seeing
their faith, Math. 9.2. refers it not only to those that bare the sick
man, bu^ unto him also that was borne. The ordinary gloss. See how much ones
own faith avails with God, that another so much prevails, that both
inwardly and outwardly a man is healed. Our late writers as Hemingius in the
place quoted before, and Calvin upon the ninth of Matthew give the like note.
This may I truly say (the words are Master Bezaes) The faith of the Godly
parents entering between, it comes to pass that infants borne or to be borne
are holy (that is) reckoned in the covenant and therefore saved. Which answer
of his upon some occasion of dispute twixt him, and one Michael Seruetus (who
was afterward burnt at Geneua) is more fully enlarged. We deny not (says he)
but baptism requires faith; but not such as is required in the Supper of the
Lord. For faith has always relation to the promise of God. I will be thy God
and the God of thy seed. The same Author answering this Anabaptist, that we
may see how one egg is like another, when Seruetus had said as much, as some
else, thus he replyeth If thy word (Seruetius) must be an oracle unto us, Si
v^xtua (Ser nete) pro ^rac^ l^ nobis ost, cre^ dimus figment^^ ess^ papistic^^,
quod in alterius fide alter baptizetur, sedqui^ prohibet des institutto, ^e
tibi credam secure contemu^, quod pronuntiat Ibid 834.
we must belleue it is a Popish device to say that one is Baptized into
another faith, but because Gods holy institution forbids me, I safely
contemn, what thou do boldly pronounce. So then if no Popish devise to say
that one may be baptized into another faith, understanding it as has been
shown, if their word be no oracle that say the contrary, if Gods institution
will have us so speak, if Baptism require faith, though not such as is in the
other Sacrament required of striplings and men of years, if no more be said by
our opponents. then was by Michael Seruetus, if sureties may promise, what
children (God inabling them) in time will themselves actually perform, we may
do well not to heed, what others have done ill unadvisedly to utter.

Chap. 15. There are two Sacraments as generally necessary to salvation. This
word general imports other and more Sacraments in particular implying the
Popish Sacraments and so clean contrary to the 15. article of Religion,
whereas it is said. There are two Sacraments only.
IN the addition to the Catechism these words raise up some men's quick
appetite; and a maruill it is that their queasie stomach all this while takes
not a surfeit with ouercloynig it self. But it seems they are sharp set, Ne
musea quidem.
and as if Domitians delight were much to their liking, a fly shall not escape
them. A mere cavil it is in falsely combining this word (general) unto
Sacraments, implying some else particular. Whereas it is to be understood
generally necessary to salvation, notes it to be every man's duty in
submitting unto them, because every one is either an infant or of more years.
And if both, both generally necessary to salvation for both. Beside one might
think the word (as) should tell them a partition wall is betwixt the
Sacraments and general, giving the^ a reason why two Sacraments received and
no more. For so this conjunction (as) signifies both in Scripture and in this
place. In Scripture these witnesses shall serve though more might be produced.
I beseech ye as strangers and pilgrims abstain from fleshly lusts, etc. Where
the Apostle drawing an argument from the thing whereof he entreats uses a
course dehortatorie and exhortatorie. Dehortatorie abstain from fleshly lusts,
exhortatorie and have your conversation, etc. From the person (As strangers and
pilgrims) that is, Math. 6.12. Luc. 11.4. Ve aliquid sit sacramentum ecclesia,
requiritur (vt sic loquar) vniuersa litas ma^dats and promissionis atuina
complecte^s o^nesministros and omnesfideles omnium temporum in noue testamento.
Chemnit. de co^firmat. p. 62. Cerimonias in ordinatione mi nistrorum eccle
siae, modo rite et cum edificatione obseruatas laudamus, vt quae vntuersale^
vsum non obtinent. Nec enim ownes, etc. Goulart. in epist. 63. ad Ca cilian.
because strangers and pilgrims. So Math. 6. Forgive us our trespasses as we
forgive which in Luke c. 11. is forgive, for we forgive, Little as we are
wretches as we are, we do forgive: be entreated therefore O Lord to forgive us.
For we (glory be to thy name) that we can so do, even we forgive, where (as)
signifies (because) one put for the other. Thus likewise, There are two
Sacraments because generally necessary to salvation: and if they were not so
generally they were not Sacraments. So that an argument might well be taken
hence for refusing the other, rather then inferring hereupon more then two.
Chemnitius his rule is this. To a Sacrament of the Church there is required
that I may so speak the generality of the commandment, and of the divine
promise comprising all Ministers, and all the faithful of all times in the
new Testament. An universality he says of the commandment for time and
persons, both Ministers by whom, and the faithful on whom it is conferred. One
Simon Goulartius, whom we have alleged in his notes upon Cyprian writes
thus. The ceremonies in ordaining of Ministers of the Church we commend so they
be rightly and with edification observed. But Sacraments we deny them to be as
which (that is) because they obtain not a universal use. For neither are all
to be ordained, but all are to be baptized and being baptized, when they are in
years they must come to the Table of the Lord. Do men approve this reason
given by others, and will they not take reason at our hands. What is this but
like wantons that will have no bread at any ones hand, but such a one, or such
a one they fancy; though it be delivered them as kindly, cut from the same
loaf that others give. But because children make orts, and are sick of the
wantons, they have a rod otherwhiles and the bread taken from the^ and all
little enough to bring down their stout stomach glad afterward to leap at a
crust and to prize husks and hogs wash as the unthrift did, when he was in a
strange country: We need not apply it, they are of understanding, whom we
make answer unto: God give them as inward and inlie a feeling of that we know
they well understand. This third interpretation we add from their mouth,
whose presence near his highness person may give assurance of a truth. The
word necessary has a twofold signification. One more large, the other more
strict. Large as that which is necessary upon supposition if it may well be,
strict without supposition as that if must needs be what ere come of it. The
first we call generally necessary, the second strictly, absolutely, simply
necessary. There are two sacraments as generally necessary in yt signification
taken at large meaning no more, because naming no more but two and thesetwo not
simply and absolutely necessary as if a christian were damned without them, but
as generally necessary, that is when they may be had according to Christ's holy
institution. The words as general, as general might be, and that of ourpose
to give full contentment, but the devil enuieth the peace of the church and
crosses otherwhiles our best thoughts and purposes, when we most intend them
for other men's satisfaction.

Chap. 16. The Catechism says That the body and blood of Christ are verily
and indeed taken and received of the faithful. Not plain of
transubstantiation, yet it favors too much. And the article of religion 28.
says: they are taken and eaten only after a heavenly and spiritual manner
by faith.
DId the Catechism deliver these words. The bread and wine are verily and
indeed the body and blood of the Lord, not only changed in their use and
quality, but in their natural substance, so as men's senses are deceived that
take the color, taste, and quantity of one, and other to be the color, taste
and quantity of those elements (For they are all vanished, and the very body
and blood is hid in the shapes, and shronded under those forms, and be the
party faithful or unfaithful, he eats that very natural body and blood
of Christ under, and in those shows enclosed) did the catechism say thus?
Surely then had it been transubstantiation and sauoured too much. But being
neither so, nor in part so, neither too much nor at all, our brethren have not
done the part of the ministers and servants of Jesus Christ to slander the
doctrine of our church, generally in all our books contrarily professed, and
in this place particularly expounded. For is not here in this sentence set
down a difference from Anabaptist and Papist. The Anabaptist making them bare
and naked signs: the papist teaching as before: briefly one clause
distinguishing both dangerous opinions (the body and blood of Christ verily
and indeed) So then not only bare and naked signs (are taken and received)
so then not (are only) as if there a stop and breath (but are taken and
received) to show they are not if out of use, and out of use if not taken and
received (Of the faithful) as if no faith then verily and indeed nobodie nor
blood of Christ: Of the faithful, to distinguish from that falsehood which
teaches the body and blood of Christ are verily and indeed (used or not
used, be the party faithful or not faithful) For all this that our book
speaks so expreslie, yet men that are disposed to be thwarting will slily
bear the simple in hand as if what became not Eleazar did beseem us to
dissemble, whereby many young persons, that take all upon credit, 2. Machab.
6.24.
might think that our church so long continuing the Gospel publikelie
professed, were now gone to another religion. But what should we look for, from
them, whose heart is not upright to the present truth. Verily and indeed the
words they stick at, favor as much of transubstantiation, as these words of M.
Calvin, where speaking of the elements in the Eucharist he says. They are not
bare signs, but joined to their truth and substance, Non sunt signa nuda, sed
veritati and substan tiae suae coniuncta nec sacramenta domini vllo mode a sub
stantis, et veritate suasep arari oportet Call institut. lib 4. c 17. and 15.
Libeter accipie, quicquid adexprimenda veram substantialemque corporit and
sanguinis domini communicationem Ibid. De modo siquis me interroget, fateri non
pude bit, sublimtus esse arcanum quam vt vel meoingenio comprehendi, vel
enarrari verbisqueat: atque vt apertius dicam: expertor magisquam intelligam.
32. Fios verecorpus and sanguinem domini percipere. P. martyr epest. D.
Bullingipag. 1139. and alibi. Non igitur tantum panis and vinum necta^tum
deitas chri sti etc. These. Aman. Pola. Basil. Ipsum corpuset ipse sanguis
Christi reuera adsu^t in sacra caena.
neither must the sacraments by any means be seprated from their truth, and
substance. Anon after is added by him. I willingly admit, whatsoever may make
for expressing the very substantial communicating of the body and blood of the
Lord. Again of the manner thus he writes. If any one ask me: I will not be
ashamed to confess, that it is a higher secret, then can be comprehended by my
wit, or declared in word, and to speak it more plainly I findit more in
experience, and in a comfortable feeling the^ I can well understand. M. Peter
Martyr in diverse epistles showing his judgment, confesses that the godly
communicating in the holy supper do verily receive the body and blood of the
Lord. In the disputation kept at Basil under Amandus Polanus Doctor of the
chair, one Johan: Hosma^ being responde^t, the body of Christ is absent from
us in place but most present with us by our union with him, through the holy
spirit dweling in him, and he in us. Therefore not only bread and wine, nor
only the Godhead of Christ, nor only the virtue and efficacy of Christ is
present in yt supper, but also ye very body and the very blood of Christ
arpresent indeed in the holy supper. Present they are not enclosed invisibly
in, with, or under the bread and wine, be in the first supper they were not
so: Adsunt non inclusa inuisib^liter in cum vel sub pane et vino quia in prima
coena non suerunt. Ibid. Ephesians, 3, 17, Non delapsa^o coelo in terrena elementa.
Act. 3.21. Eam prasentiam non efficit fides sed spiritus, Ibid.
but present they are offered and exhibited: Not the bread and wine (for the
promise is made to the beleuer not to the bread and wine) Present they are by
the holy Ghost and by faith. Present they are, not slipping out of heaven upon
the earthly elements, because the heavens must contain him till the restoring
of all things: Present with ye mind, carried up into heaven by the holy
Ghost. Now in these places before, where it is written that the very body and
blood of Christ are indeed received, and the very substantial communicating
of Christ his body and blood, one should have twitted these learned divines: O
this sauoureth too much of transubstantiation, and crosses the 28. article: As
if eaten only after a heavenly, and spiritual manner by faith, it were not
eaten verily and indeed. Verily and indeed such opponents show want of
love, and truth, and what marvel, if they ever learn, and never be learned?
Carnal men take nothing for verily and indeed, that is heavenly and
spiritual: For did they, then must they think this to be a truth, which more
then seems, that verily and indeed they do not.

Chap. 17. Of matrimony. O God which have consecrated the state of matrimony
to such an excellent mystery, that in it is signified and represented the
spiritual marriage and unity of Christ his church. This is directly
contrary to the word of God Ephesians. 5. which teaches the uniting of Christ to
the church, his love to it, and the churches obedience to him, teaching how the
man should love his wife, and the wife obey her husband and this is repeated 4.
times, and still the similitude drawn from Christ, and his church.
FIrst the place in ye Communion book quoteth not any text, either in the Ephe.
or else where: Secondly since truth in any kind is not directly contrary to
truth, neither can this be, nor is it to the word of God: And that it is not
appears here in, because as face answers face in a glass, so^^ofe
similitude ex^resseth ^^^ther, and therefore as it is true that: Christ's
marriage represents the marriage of man and wife, so the marriage of man and
wife does represent Christ's marriage. 3. Ephesians 5.23.31 ^8.
The place in the Ephesians speaks of Christ and his Church, so does it of
Adam and Eve verse. 31. so does it generally of all verse. 28. and therefore an
in^urie to streighthen it more then that quotation does. 4. No heresy is it,
nor any whit contrary to Gods word, to say, that in married couples is
represe^ted unto us che marriage of Christ to his spouse. For it is the
properly of things that are alike to set out one another. And if it be true,
that in the joining of Christ to his Church the unity of man and wife is
expressed, then also on the other side in the fellowship of wedlock twixt man
and wife, is the memory of Christ his love to his Church renewed. In this case,
for confirmation of that sentence, August de bono coniug. c. 18. and alibi
Annon audis Paulum dicentem, quod ^uptiae sunt sacrameta, and imago dilection^s
Christ's, quam erga ecclesiam declarauit Chri so. homil. 56. in Gene^. 29.
Matrimoniu^ est similitudo, quam Christ's atque ecclesiae coniunctio signi
ficat. Whit. con. Duraeum. de pa radox. p. 656. Matrimonium typus and imago
fuit vere diuini and spiritualss coniugii, quod futurum erat inter Christum and
ecclesiam Bucan. institut theol. loc 12 O Deus quiper hoc vinculum matrimonis
excellens et arcanum vinculum ^uae inessabilis et patern^a charitatis,
significare volussti, quando officio coniugals vouitate fide nostras animas
tibi vero sponso copulare placuit de ritibus et inflitutis Tigurme ecclesia.
Matrimdnium dulcissima est imago inter Christum et ecclesiam Lauat, narratio.
de Nabale.
ask the judgment of Divines elder and later not engaged in the question:
Elder Saint Austin and Saint Chrysostom. Austin in many places of his works,
Chrysostom more briefly: Hear thou not Paul saying, that marriage is a
mystery, and the image of the love of Christ, which he has declared to his
Church? Of our later writers Doctor Whitakers against Dur, Matrimony is a
similitude wherein is signified the ceniunction of Christ, and his Church,
Bucan in his institution. Marriage (says he) is a tipe and figure of the truly
divine and spiritual marriage, which was afterward to be betwixt Christ and his
Church: To this purpose the same writer quoteth Paul. Ephesians. 5.23. The Church
of Tigurin uses the like in the celebration of Matrimony as we do, where
these words are set down: O God, which by the bond of Matrimony an excellent
and secret bond of thy unspeakable and fatherly love would signify, when by
a marriage duty it pleased thee in truth, and faith to couple our souls unto
thee the true spouse. Lauater in his story of Nabals life and death says,
that Marriage is a mystery of the covenant twixt Christ and his Church.
Chen^nitius handling the title of Marriage speaks as our Communion Book dath.
Coniugium d^! cissima est imago Christi and ecclesia, sicut ex plicatimem il
lam tradit Pau lus ephesians. 5. Che^ nit in exam council. Triden.
Marriage (says he) is a most sweet image of Christ and the Church, as Paul
makes the exposition. For whereas Eve is framed of the side of Adam fallen a
sleep, that she is bone of his bones, this the ancient make a godly
interpretation of, that it did signify and foreshew how the Son of God
leaving his Father, etc. Again, A most sweet Image of man's redemption is
proposed in Wedlock, and what can any more lovely picture set out unto us,
Dulcis sima imago rede^ptionis ext in ipso coniugio proposita, and quasua ^icr
picturaetc. Ibid. Non dubium est ceniugrum inec clesia semper fuisse mysteriu^
conjunction is christi and eccle sie Ibid. page 256. calum. 2.
as when couples in Marriage kindly love one another. Anon after. Out of doubt
Marriage in the Church has always been the mystery of the conjunction of
Christ and his Church. Thus far Chemnitius, and others (...) agreeable to our
Communion Book, and our Communion Book to them, and they, and it conformable
to the truth. Wherefore we return these our opponents their own language. It
is neither contrary, nor directly contrary to the word of God, but agreeable,
yea very agreeable to Scripture, as the objection recites the words, namely,
that God has consecrated the state of Matrimony to an excellent mystery that
is he has applied Matrimony to represent, signify, and shadow out unto man
the mystical union twixt Christ and his Church. But thus much be spoken of
this exception.

Chap. 18. Of the Letanie. From fornication, and all other deadly sins. This
maintains that Popish distinction of deadly, and venial sins. Whereas all
sins are deadly.
SEe men afraid of their own shadow: What one syllable inforceth this
interpretation? Does it not rather implie fornication to ve a deadly sin
being included with the copulative, and the universal note of all. And all
other deadly sinner. Might such ^^ris spirits, as these have had a King at
Saint James, how would they have told him his own, for reckoning fornication
with things of indifferent nature, Acts. 15.20.
as blood strangled, and the like, that so busily except against this, being
as it is mentioned here amongst heinous and grievous sins. As for the word
mortal, and venial our prayers intertaine not the use of them, and if they
did, no Church misliketh them rightly understood, because all sins are
pardonable to the Elect, Consess. Bo^e^ et Saxon sect. 9
and to the reprobate no sin even the least but is damnable: Not but that al
in their own nature deserve death, which we affirm, and the Papist denies. So
as could we restore the word to it wonted and safe signification, it might be
used, as well as remissible and irremissible. For both tend to the same effect
in our Churches construction, and therefore this wrangling about words might
have been spared, but then could not such fond objections have been so freely
vented.

Chap. 19. Of sudden death. The Letanie teaches the people to pray against
sudden death. This clause would be reformed, for we are not to pray against
it.
IT is not justly offensive to pray against sudden death. The argument to
prove so much may be this, which follows. That which is simply evil in it
self, and respectively in regard of our selves and others may well be prayed
against. But so is sudden death, therefore sudden death may be prayed
against. The mayor is evidently true, and needs no proof. All the doubt is
in the minor, which was this: but sudden death is evil simply in it self,
and respectively inregard of our selves and others. The proof whereof is thus.
Evil in it self because an enemy to life, which man and beast fly from. All
(...) desire their being and God never created death. It came pa^^ly through
the (...) of the devil, who lied unto man, saying ye shall not die, partly
through the transgression of Adam, and partly through the wrath of God,
rendering it as a due recompense vp^n man's head for sin. This Saint Paul
names an enemy, (...). 1. Cor. 15.26. Galath 3.13.
1. Cor. 15. The last enemy that shall be subdued is death. Again, a second
proof may be thus. That which is ( Galath. 3.) of it self a part of the
curse, and malediction of the law, is evil simply in it self: But death is a
part of the curse, and malediction of the law: therefore death is of it self
simply evil. It must be notes for fear of mistaking: All this while we do
not question what death is by a^^ident in respect of Jesus Christ, Ex accidenti^
by whom it is a wicket, or entrance into glory, for that is no thank to
death: neither do we question, what it is in respect of Gods children who die.
Romans 8.28.
For to them all things fall out for the best. So persecution, famine, the
sword in Gods children are blessed, yet no man but prays against them,
because we take a view of them, and of death, as in it self it is presented.
Secondly, death is evil respectively in regard of our selves, and others first
of our selves that endure it, thus far it may be thought an evil, because
this good comes by a lay urable and treatable dissolution, our selves are
better able to set all things in order toward God and the world: toward God
there is time to bethink our selves in better earnest, then we did before of
his power, justice, mercy, etc. toward the world, finding the deceaueablenesse
thereof in all her flitting pleasures, which upon our experience we see then
come to an end. At that time others present that survive us are more touched,
and have a more tender feeling of things, then said or done, For the words of a
dying man are better fastened in the remembrance of them that stand by, when the
riches of Gods mercy are seen in a holy, mortified meditation, when appears,
how ready a man is to die, how willing, and with what patience fitted,
contentedly enduring the griefs of this mortal life, till his changing shall
come. All which observations beneficial to others (beside a many more) are
drowned and swallowed-vp in a man's sudden death. Moreover heathen men, and
such as have been given to a reprobate sense are content to be gone in all
have, not caring, so they be rid of a present pain^. This made tyrants
strangely expertenced in devising exquisite tormet^ to singer a man^ death, and
all to multiply his pains. Now therefore became it so naturasly answers our
own desire, we have the more cause to suspect it, and fear, running as it
does (...) the channel of our cortupt sense, and sensual^ affections. A farther
argument to prove what the Letanie uses in this point may be the general
opinion which men have of it? yea the best men are amassed, when it hapnesh to
any friend of theirs. And howsoever we must stand all content if it come, yet
no man but his hearts wish is, he might not fall under voubtfull construction,
which all are subject unto, that on a sudden are taken hence. In the Books of
Genesis we read, that when Jacob made an end of giving charge to his Suns,
he plucked up his seete into the bed, Genesis 49.33. Non est prater rationem, quod
is it a Moses tam diligenter velu ti ob oculos vise^da proponit Muscul. Ibid.
Fulcherrimu^ est et vehementer optandum hoc genus mortes etc. Sic ex hac vita
decedu^t, quibus a deo datur, vt quasimorte^ in suapotestate ha beant, vt eam
vbi voluerint, admittant Ibid (...) Job. 34.20.
and gave up the Ghost, and was gathered unto his Fathers: upon which words
Mufculus well notes, that it is not for naught Moses does a^ it were propose
those things before our eye, parcel after parcel. So easy, so quiet, so
comely, and honest kind of death is most beautiful and to be wished for, yea
earnestly to be wished for. It so as he well observes, then is that to be
wished for, yea and that earnessly, which is contrary to a sudden death. For
in the Patriarks kind of death; men (says he) to whom God grannieth so, to
depart dot of this life, have death as it were in their own powet to ad^^t it,
when they will, which course assuredly we must confess is not so in sudden
death. For Elihis speaking of the judgments that be fast the wicked, reckons
sudden death for one. They die suddenly as did Absolon, Cora, Dathan, and
Abiram, and the ^^^st horn^ of Egypt, and Ananias, and Saphira, with infinite
others.

Yet the Apostle says in the first of Corinth. 15.21. we shall not all sleep,
but we shall all be changed, in a moment, in the twickling of an eye, at the
last trump.
True in deed it is, that some shall be reserved till that time, and suddenly
changed, yet that no exception, because sudden death shall be to some persons,
yt therefore none shall pray against it. For it needs must be, that heresies
shall come, yet that no hinderance why we should not do all diligence by
prayer, study, reading the word of God, or any other good holy means to stop
them. And if the Lord shall dispase of any of us, (other wise, then in the
point we entreat of) calling us on the sudden, as he has done many good
men, yet to pray against it, is no disobeying the Lords will, which is his own
secret, and unknown to us. For if a man may wish contrary to that which he
knows will fall out, so man he be otherwhiles extraordinarily affected, and
yet in a holy manner, as did Saint Paul desiring himself to be cut off, Romans 9.
so his kinsmen in the flesh all Israel might be saved, yea if a man in the
earnestness of his love, may wish contrary to that, which he sees already
come to pass, as appears in S. Paul, when he would he were with the
Galathia^s, whereas he then was absent, and in that very instant could not at
once be present; we see not, Galath. 4.20.
but a man praying against sudden death, may be far from just reproof,
specially, when a man knows not ought to the contrary, touching himself, and
if he did know, or notwithstanding this particular clause should die
suddenly, yet his, prayer made in what manner the Church gives direction, is
not so much distributiuely in his own person, as collectiuely in the name of
the whole congregation. For the soote of the auswere is not deliver me good
Lord, but deliver us. The effect of which petition howsoever some one person
may miss of in the particular of sudden death, yet the greater part does
not. And although he that dies suddenly, may have his prayer trustrated in
that one point, yet some other way it takes place, namely that he be never
unprepared for death. So as in a word to cut off all controversies, and meet
withal exceptions, this may give full contentment to a peaceable, honest heart,
that when we pray against sudden death we pray against unprepared death. And
howsoever it may prevent a kindly opportunity for ministering of comfortable
instructions to our selves, and others, which we might yield upon respite
given by sickness, yet the substance of that clause is, that sudden death
may in no case prevent us of the glorious inheritance prepared of God for the
Saints.

Chap. 20. Also the often repetition of good Lord deliver us, and that saying,
we beseech thee to hear us, is against the Commandment of our Savior. Math.
6.7.
FOrasmuch as the Letanie is the a^^^, whereupon these objections are thus
hammered one after another, it shall not be amiss to make known out defense
in this behalf. The Letanie a greek word (the same which Rogations, is in
latin, solemn, set supplications, in english) to our understanding is well
sampled to y^ body of prayers, supplicatio^s, intercessions, and thanksgiving
mentioned by the Apostle ^. Tim. 2.1. Phi. 4.6. and interpreted by the Fathers,
Hilaric, Amb. Austin, Cassian, 2. Tim. 2 1. Philip. 4, 6. Hilar. in explicat.
Psalm. 140. Ambros. de sacrament. lib. 6. c. 5. Aug epist. 59. ad Paulium etc.
Bern. and Theophilact. For all those four sweet companions namely prayers,
supplicatio^s, etc. interchangeably sort together. Prayer in the entrance,
appealing to the glorious persons in the blessed Trinity. Supplications for
fear of enils to come, wherein the soul humbly deprecateth and prays
against them, and no other cry for the time is heard, but this: Good Lord
deliver us: Intercession, as that by thy holy incarnation, by thy holy
Nativity, and circumcision, etc. All which delivering the articles of our
faith in the form of a prayer, is like to the heigh of devotion, when our
communicants treb^le their try, O Lord God lamb of God, Son of the Father,
thou that take away the sins of the world, etc. Lastly, Thanksgiving is in
that Letanie also mentioned, but because of our humiliation, the requests we
make are much intermingled: yet intermingled as they are, they may easily be
discerned: Some that travail no such way, as directs from the heart to the
throne of grace, think it hereby and often enough said, though but once said,
Good Lord deliver us. But others of more experience (and believe their
experience) hold it not sufficient to send one but another, and after him a
third, and the more the more company, and all with one note, Good Lord deliver
us. And the note is an eight, so often the same message is done for fear, it
should not be thoroughly well done. And if all be eight as some have thought,
when a man has faid all he can, (...).
he can say but all, and eight times he remembers to fall with his petition,
but raising his hopes, good Lord deliver us, long, and ever, and only may this
contrary fancy, be theirs to mislike such zealous repetitions, who can soon
satissie themselves; with a luke warm, perfunctorie bleak, cold duty in so
chill manner persormed, as if a North-winde blew out of their months. Haec
dixi, vt no^ putetis repetiti onem in verbis sanctae lingua lo quacitatis esse
appetitum sape^bi repetitio habet vim. Paratum cor meum alio loco dicit sustine
dominu^ viriliter age etc. Psalm 74. Innumerabilia talia sunt etc. Quod
obseruetis in omnibus similibus. Ibid. Hoc puto non iustuen est, illud male,
rectius istud Persius. Isa. 24.16.
This I have said that you should not think all repetitions in words were an
appetite to babble much. For repetitions have their force, my heart is prepared
O God my heart is prepared. Again, wait on the Lord, quite thee like a man,
let thy heart be comforted and wait on the Lord: Innumerable such like through
all the Scripture, but in these, says Austin, It is sufficient to commend this
kind of speech, which you may observe in many the like. Let others in a
contrary course pare as much as they will under a pretense of that common folly
(This is not, as it should be, that is amiss, and I would have it thus.) They
can skill to pull down (so can every fool) could they as well restore, or
preserve, and busld vy with the fewest and wisest only can do well. Be
repetitions and often repetitions so harsh in their quaint ears, whose eyes are
acquainted with that which they read, Isa. 24. my leanness, my leanness, woe
is me, the transgressors have transgressed, yea the transgressors have
transgressed a sore transgression. Be these repet^^ions so offensive with them,
whose hands have handled the history of the King, when he cried, O Absolon, O
my Son Absolon, O Absolon my Son, my Son? The reason of which doubled,
and multiplied exclamations in the same words, or in others to the same effect,
argue our thoughts are not idle, but prove rather, that our affections double,
and multiply in us, yea so long as they hold out, they show what a delight we
take to be heard in that which he prayed for. As if tongue and heart had made a
vow not to give over, but once, and once, and once, and again, and more, and
more, and more they did strive with God, in the earnestnes of our soul, that
he would be pleased to deliver us troin that which we stand in fear of: yea
the reason of these doubled, and multiplied exclamations proceeds from such a
mind as (for the time) was in Peter. It is good dwelling here: Let us build 3.
tabernacles, and if they be not enough, let us make other 3. more, yea and if
two more may outhid them, two more put we to. So well we like to say it,
because we know the Lord as well likes to hear it, good Lord deliver us. The
matter is sometimes important, and serious as Pharao his dream, which, that it
might not slip away in a dream, was doubled upon him. And is not the
blessing of deliverance, a matter of worth, and therefore well worth our
petitious and repetitions. But ill best owed are their prayers, that labor to
mislike them, whither they be in the same words, as these instances made, do
witness, or in other words to the same effect, Genesis 41.32. (...). Aul. Gell,
lib. 13 c. 23. (...). Duplex cadem compellatio admonitionem facit intentiorem
Phauorinus. Pro. 31. Philip. 3. Pro. 4.14. Ier. 22.39.
for so are they sometimes: As that of one, when he said I come and am coming.
The grace of which speech is more plain in the original as they know, that
understand the margent. Not much unlike a dissuasine to a couple, that they
should not war, nor fight. Where one well notes that the verse did not so much
require it, as their own violence (Who because they continued fighting) the
speech the rather continues dissuading. But whither repetitions this or that,
one, or other some would reprehend, such they are, which as men use to
themselves like that of esaias cap. 24 before mentioned, so are there which men
use to others as those words of Lemuels mother what my son, what the son
of my womb, and what a son of my desires, or that of Saint Paul when
sweetning the ear of the Philippians he writ the same thing, which it grieved
him not, and was a safe thing for them, that he should so do. For much seed
otherwhiles miscarrieth, and he that hears not at the first knock, or
heareing is loath to rise, yet through importunity opens at the last. And as
there are repetitions by men to men, so are there from God to men, and from men
to God. From God to men though in deskant, yet the very plain song of that,
whereto it keeps deskant: enter not into the way of the wicked, walk not in
it, go not by it, turn from it, and pass by. Some times in the same words,
as that in Jeremy: Earth, earth, earth he are the word of the Lord. Of man to
God in variety, but to the same purpose, as al those preambles of Abraham
praying for e Sodom, Genesis 18.27.
which are little other in substance, then this good Lord deliver the. Behold
(says he) I have spoken to the Lord, and am but dust and aslies what is this
but this, good Lord deliver them. 29.
And let not my Lord be angry and I will speak again, as if again it were
ye same in another suste, good Lord deliver the. And once more I have begun to
speak, as it that once more ye inmost powers of his soul were shaken, and he
desired to remove ye judgment with was in substance like our cry good Lord
deliver us. 30.
And once more, let not my Lord be offended, as if still it were ye voice of ye
church but yt he was one, and we are mainie; And whither one or many al is one:
we beseech thee to hear us good Lord and good Lord deliver us. Repetitio^s of
this kind, whither of God to man, or of man to God neither are in vain: Not in
him for they check ye dulnes of our understanding, ye slackenes of our memory,
and withal are a just reproof to our drowzy attentio^: Nor in us to him in
vain, O quam dare valt qu^ se inquietari taliter taliter patitur suscitari: O
qua^ necessitatis quod suae potestatis est. Petrus Chrysolo. sermon. 36. O quam
non ad ^anuam ^^an tum dominus sed ipse ianua
for God takes a delight to be importuned, and it is his pleasure to try if we
will give over at ye first, second, or third repulse. O how glad, and feign is
he to grant that is so willing to be disquieted, and suffers himself to be
raised our of his bed? O how it seems, be makes it a matter of necessity,
which is in his own power? O how desireous was he to meet thee, as thou
know that has placed his bed close to the door? O how un willing was he to
deny, who made, as if it were wrung from him against his will? O how the Lord
was not at the door only, but himself the door: I am, says he, the door,
who, when all the rest were in bed a sleep, both only, and principally heard
the necessity of him, that did knock. In brief to give a full answer to what
either is, or may be said against repetitions used in the letany if new
prayers, and requests may have Amen, still renewed upon them, else how do we
give our assent, then surely this cannot be misliked, Psalm. 72.19.
which in effect is as much as a continual Amen, and sounds like that in thee
Psalm. So be it, so be it, which was the voice of Benaia, and the Lord God
of our king ratify it: Only this good Lord deliver us, and we beseech thee
to hear us good Lord is delivered by way of variety in other words, because
our ear is like a queasie stomach, that must have diverse meats presented
unto it, or the same diversely handled, because one is many times over fulsome,
and cloyeth. Deuteronomy. 27. from the 15. to the 26. verse fresh imprecations, Deu.
27.15.26.
and still fresh acclamations, but in one and the same tenor. Amen even 12.
times, here but eight times good Lord deliver us: And Psalm 136.26. times for
his mercy indureth for ever: here but 20. times, we beseech thee to hear us
etc. no offense to scripture in those and is it in these?

It is against the commandment of our savior Math. 6.7. when ye pray use no
vain repetitions as the heathen for they think to be heard for their much
babbling.
Do such doubt makers rightly understand the place in Saint Matthew 6.7. where
ancient and late writers all concur in this, with the words of the scripture
that our savior condemns the manner of the heathen, who as without faith,
because they were heathen men, so two other errors they were subject unto; the
first was, they thought, that if they prated much, and told God a fair tail,
that they should be heard for that much talk; the second was, they had a
conceit, (...)
that they instructed God, as if he knew not what they needed: Yes says our
savior your father knows whereof ye have needs before ye ask of him: Math.
7.8.
Now in repeating these words good Lord deliver, and we beseech thee to hear
us good Lord, let it appear that our Church prays without faith, or that
she thinks to be heard for much babbling, or that she holds that God is
ignorant till she inform him, and then we will confess our error in using
this clause before mentioned. But herein we may see how men to advance their
own credit care not what account they make of their brethren, Syrtace.
as if they judged no better of us then of heathen men, infidels and the like.
For that which they should attribute to the feruencie of spirit uttered in the
public assemblies with an audible voice in giving asse^t to, what is prayed
for they call by no better name the idle babbling, or battologie: Whereas that
fault of battology is an idle trifling with God, holding off and on, playing
fast and loose as if we would or could deceive God. -- Sub illis montbus (in
quit) era^t, er a^t submontibus illis -- and me mihs perf^de pro dis me mihi
pro dis ait Ovid. Metam. lib. 2. (...) vel (...) quod significat idem quod
(...) exiuit, et significat eos qui delectantur mul toisermones proferre, et
quo rum ore multa prodeunt verba gallice babillards. Tremel in Math. 6.7. Absit
ab cratione multa loquutio sed non desit multa pre catio, si feruens perseuerat
tute^tio. Aug. epist. 121. ad proba. Multum precari est ad eum quem precamur
diuturna and pia cordis excitatione pulsare Ibid. multiloquium adhibers, non
cum di^ precamur sed cum ci trafidem et spiritum verba multiplicamus
persuasin^s propter numeru^ verborum audiri posse. P. martyr in 1. Sa^t. v.
12.(...). Luc. 6.12. Math. 26.^4.(...). Luck. 18 32.
For so did one Battus whence this name is. Who being demanded for one, which
way he went, nothing could be got of him more then this, he was under those
nils, so he was, that he was, whom Mercury taking tardie, reproves in the
like accent: Thou perfidious false fellow do thou betray to my self? to
myself do thou betray me. In which speech of both sides, there is iugling,
and inuerting of words, as if the parties were in dalliance to and ^^o,
playing wily beguile one with another. A thing not untrue of the heathen men,
and of their parley with their Idols, and of their Idols with them, but
untruely, and vnaptlie conceived of the faithful and their prayers to God, or
bis gracious answer to their unfeigned supplications. The siriack translating
this word calls them such as delight to be gabling and babbling. No such
heathnish delight is in Gods children, whose holy affection inliueth their
words, which else like an abortiue would soon die in their birth. For their
practice answers agreablie to that counsel, which Saint Austin gives. Let
prating (says he) be absent from men's orizons, but let not much prayer be
wanting so there be a fervent earnestnes with perseverance of mind. For to
patter much is when we use superfluous words but to pray much is, when we are
set on with a long and godly stirring up of the heart. And much speaking or
babbling is not, when we pray long, but when we multiply words without faith
and spirit, persuaded (as Peter Martyr writes) that for the very number of
words we may be heard. Otherwise Christ prayed long even a whole night he
continued in prayer. And where exception is taken of repetitions of one thing
often, it is wellknown Math. 26. that he repeated one prayer in the same words
three times. Which a blind man did also Luke 18. crying Lord Jesus thou son
of David have mercy on me which seemed a fault in the ears of the people,
but his necessity and earliestnes would not to be answered. For he cried the
more. O thou son of David have mercy on me. Words repeated so far from
reproof that they make access to our savior, and have success in their
petition. So that a short conclusion may serve for all. Neither reciting the
same words upon urgent occasion with earnest devotion, nor long prayers do
deserve this rough hewed censure, but pattring with the lips, and the heart a
far off, thinking belike to be heard for their talkatiue prating. Admit we not
this interpretation which yet is the meaning of the scripture, and Saint
Augustine, Battologia, est nugacitatet loquacitas ea qua non vtilia poscimussed
temporalia vt ^oa nores diuitias etc. Theophilact. in Math. 6.7.
after it, stand we to the judgment of Chrisostom and Theophilact, no
advantage have: any for confirming themselves in their wrong opinion. For these
Greek writers (as may appear by him self and by Chrisost. in that ordinarily
he is an abridgement of Chrisost. call it babbling or battologie, when we over
earnestly busy our selves in praying specially for things not profitable, but
trifles, as riches, honors, and the like. Now (unless spiritual graces such
as accompany salvation, and temporal blessings in their commendable
furderance to sanctification go for trifles) an humble, and penitent heart
cannot deny their assent to this multiplied petition in the letanie. Wherefore
such must take heed that they grieve not the holy Ghost, and less it is not,
to wrest of purpose the holy scriptures from that natural sense, wherein they
are penned. Be it in weakness of knowledge, that some thus eagerly reproach
the burden and fall of our prayers, when thus burdened and humbled we do
multiply the same request, yet we entreat the Christian reader so often, as his
eye lights upon these errors of theirs that ever and anon as he comes to a
new strain, that his heart in silence will let fall some such request to
Godward, as this, Lord forgive them their ignorance, and though they for whom
such prayer is, think it an idle affirmation, yet our request is, that
whosoever shall read these critical demurie, his love will not be sparing to
say it, and to say it for them Lord forgive them, they know not what they
accuse.

Chap. 21. The book has three orders of ministers of the word and sacraments
against the word, which has but one.
WHat one syllable in Gods word for this one order, or how can it be an order
if but one? When allegation shall be forced to appear in scriptures, more
particular answer shall be then made. Plain it is in the new testament whence
the names we use are taken: evident also it is in the after histories:
Tertullian thus? Quum ipsi authors idest ipsidiaconi, praes biters, et episco
pi fugiunt, quomodo laicus etc? Tertull. in fuga Quatuor genera capitu^su^t in
ecclesia episcopo rum praesbytero rum, diaconoru^ fidelium. Optat lib. 2. Quam
mul^os episcoposoptimos viros, sanctsssimosque cognoui, quam multos
praesbyteros, quam multos diaconos and huiusmodi ministros diuinorum
sacramentorum. Aug. de moribus eccles. lib. 1. cap. 32.(...). Socrat lib. 1. c.
2 Varios in ecclesia esse ordines ministrorum aliosesse diaconos, aliot
praesbyteros a^ios episcopot quibus institutio populi Confess Anglic. artic. 5.
when the principles themselves namely the Deacons, Presbiters, and Bishops
fly, how shall a lay man forbear flying? When the leaders run away, which
of the soldiers stand. Optatus writes distinctlie of them by name (as our
church does) but of many places we will allege this one. There are 4. sorts
of persons in the church Bishops, Presbiters, Deacons, and the faithful:
Augustine more expreslie. How many Bishops most excellent, and holy men have I
known, how many Presbiters, how many Deacons, and of this sort ministers, of
the word and divine sacraments? Socrates speaking of the times, wherein
Paphnutius lived, and withal entreating of those, whom we now mention
Consecrated persons, I mean (says he) those that are Bishops, Presbiters,
and Deacons. The apology of our own church (as it is set down in the
harmony of Confession toward the latter end by way of supply of such
things, as thorough forgetfulness might seem to be omitted) mentions
diverse orders of ministers in the church. Some are Deacons, others Pastors,
some are Bishops to whom the institution and care is committed. In the
articles whereunto by act of Parliament every minister at his ordination does
subscribe he does accept of thee 32. and 35. Which in effect require as much.
Compare the objection, and any of the authorities now cited whither of the
anncient fathers or of our Church, at these times, and what argument is there
think you? They say diverse, this admits but one. If diverse, then not one
only, and if only one, then not diverse. But their joint consent one with
another and the judgment of our church must be of more prize with us then any
straglers obstinate contradition.

Book of Consecration. Chap. 22. The Bishop says to the new made minister
receive the holy Ghost. It is great presumption etc.
PResumption it is, yea great presumption to do, what episcopal dignity
admits, but resisting of authority and re, fusall of obedience to wholesome
laws is no presumption in the world, no not a little much less any great
presumption for a prickeard saucines is no presumption, more then the reprobate
Angels sin was noe aposticie. It is presumption for our spiritual fathers in
God to take what the Lord afordeth them, but no presumption for these
venturously to challendge, what upon good warrant is commendablie performed.

It is great presumption that the Bishop will offer to give that, which is not
in his own power, yea that which God alone can do. This is against God and
his word.
Presumption great or small, more or less, if they call this, their speech is
fearefullie pitched in dangerous places and may soon tilt unless a helping
hand support with the soonest. For in the extent of these words (as they sound
at their first hearing) what is there in man's power to give, or what is it he
has not received? if he have received why then are these words as implying
ought in his power. This jealous interpreting of words well delivered is a
copy they set us. Shall Moses do ought in things pertaining to his office,
and will not 3. brethren in evil Corah Dathan, and Abiram say he does that
which is not in his power, or it is more then he can do and he takes too much
upon him. Why then? this captiousnesse is a stale slander, and a wonder it is
(that being ready to dote thorough time,) it has so much as a snag, or stump
to fasten upon episcopal authority. To receive the holy Ghost is to give
that, which is not in any man's power: Be it as they say he gives that, which
is not in his power: so every ambassador considered as himself a private
person John, or Thomas, when he draws articles of peace twixt nation and
nation, does a thing not being in his own power but by virtue of his embassy
from that great monarch from whom he is sent. The power to ordain a minister,
and to lay hands on him with solemn prayers upon serious and due
preexamination is no private action, but an authority given from above. To
remit sins the scribes were not so blind, but they could see, and say it is
blasphemy for none can forgive sin, but God only: The peace of God was not
at the 70. disciples beck, yet their peace it is called. Math. 9.6.
Little are the Prophets in comparison of John Baptist, Luke 10.6.
little John Babtist, and all the faithful ministers of ye gospel in respect
of Christ, yet all are called light to shine amongst a crooked generation, and
give light to the world: John Baptist a burning, and a shining lamp, and the
prophets in their time, some such whose labors the Lord used to give light to
them that sat in darkness. May Ismaell lift up his hand against all, and
none return him like for like? May all his words go for truth and this among
the rest vncontrolde. None can offer that, which is not in their own power.
Then may none offer to pluck up, root, destroy, build, plant, save a
soul from death, Nemo dat quod non habet.
hind up the broken, Baptize, beget in the Gospel and the like for none of
all these are in a man's own power. The foundation of which argument is both in
Philosophy, and Divinity very weak. Nihildat quod no^ habet elech. I.
In Philosophy both Moral, and natural. Moral for a servant who many times
has not a halfepenny of his own does many times deliver from his Master many
crowns at a time to some other man at his Masters appointment. In natural
Phylosophie our disputants know this proposition is much wronged. For what
form of a chair has an Axe, Chrisill, or Saw, yet these are instruments to
some such purpose? and in arguing of the Suns influence, of the elements, and
the compounds thence, this proposition is made overmuch pliable: so in the
question of the Sacraments for their dependence from the Minister, what
violence has been offered by the like, every young Student of reasonable
pains is sufficiently instructed, or may be, if he make recourse to Austin in
his Books of baptism against the Donatists. Nor their only ground it was,
but the Nouatians also, building upon this principle denied the Ministers power
to forgive. Because as they said they gave the Lord reverence, in whom they
held it was a case of reservation, Aiuntse domia no refer reuerentiam cuisoli
remittendoru^ criminum potestatem deferu^t. Ambros. lib. 1. de poeniten c. 6.
and none else could give that, which was not in his power. For God had power
only to forgive shine. Many like inferences have been writhed in upon
supposall of this premise None can give that, which is not in his own power.
Which simply proposed may be acknowledged for truth, but all the error is in
application. Injuriously therefore do they by whom the use of these words
Receive the holy Ghost is hailed into obloquie, to the reproach of our Church
and as we judge to no small prejudice unto others. For in the manner of
imposition of hands ordinarily observed in the Churches of France it is
decreed that these very words of Saint John. La maniere de imposition.
Receive the holy Ghost should be at that time in the election of their
Ministers repeated, and stood upon, as also those other following, whosoever
sins ye remit, etc. Then after follows a prayer, which usually compriseth
the contents of their Sermon, beseeching God for success in that work in hand
of ordaining Ministers. Thus far the words in use with them, not only
recitatiue rehearsing that history, nor precatiue with prayers accordingly,
but ordinatiue in ordination, wh they use their authority and power to ordain
or design Ministers as our Savior did his Apostles.

Our Savior might give what the Bishop cannot.
True if Christ had not sent them as the Father sent him: True if in ordination
men did take upon them to give, Ioh. 20, 2^^
as immediately from themselves in their own persons, as Christ did in his:
True if they prayed not that God would give what they think necessary to
speak of: True if the Bishop did mean the person of the holy Ghost: True, if
that God did never take of the spirit of his servant, and give of it unto
another, as in Moses when the Lord took of the spirit which was upon him, and
gave unto the 70. Number. 11.17. yea sometimes doubling it upon one from another,
Number. 11.17.
as 2. King. 2.9. that of Elia upon Elizeus. 2 King, 2.9.
Surely, surely were a caueller but modestly affected in handling this point,
he would no more repine at these words. Receive the holy Ghost, then at those,
which every Minister uses the Lord be with you, Chrisost. homil. 33. in cap 9
Math. (...).
or at that which the people return as in S. Chrysostom his time the manner
was, and yet is (and with thy spirit). Besides at such times what imply these
words but authority in him that consecrateth? And they that are consecrated
are given to understand they have power being thus ordained to intermeddle in
spiritual, Ghostly, and holy occasions, so as they are in the words remembered
warranted by their public function, that they are rightly and lawfully called,
and are no intruders, hereby giving us and others to understand, what reverence
is to be yielded them for their sacred function, which they now discharge. So
as retain they sins, or remit sins, excommunicate, or pronounce
absolution, Preach, pray, admonish, exhort, counsel, reprove, baptize, or
administer the holy Supper of the Lord, in all these they are to be esteemed as
the disposers of the mysteries of God, and their words sentence, judgments,
censures, acts, or deeds are not hence forth theirs, as of a private man, or
of man at all, but the words, counsels, and deeds of the holy Ghost, and men
disobeying or resisting disobey not, nor resist them, 1. Sam 8.7.
for who are they in the view of a carnal eye, but they disobey and resist the
holy Ghost, N^m. 16.11.
in whose name their commission has so great power, as that it is not from
earth earthly, but from heaven heavenly. For when it is (thus says the Lord)
it must be thought that the Prophets also did then speak. So little reason had
any to trouble himself, or the Church with these occurrences, which are no
sooner moved, but as soon answer for themselves.

Another Paper makes exception thus. We cannot subscribe to the Book of
ordination as is required, because the Bishop is appointed in ordaining of
Priests and Bishops to use the very words receive the holy Ghost, which Christ
our Savior used at the sending forth of his Apostles, which he did because he
being God was able and did extraordinarily give that which he willed them to
receive.
Though sufficient have been already answered concerning this point, yet
because some renew their complaint we also return them, if possibly a more
ample and full answer. In the ordination of Priests according to the form
established by law in our Church after sundry exhortations, instructions,
admonitions, prayers, protestations, and promises to, for, and by the party to
be made Priest, the Bishop with the rest of the Priests that are present laying
his hands upon his head uses these words Receive the holy Ghost, whose sins
thou do forgive they shall be forgiven, and whose sins thou do retain
they shall be retained, and be thou a faithful dispenser of the word of God
and his holy Sacraments, In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the holy Ghost, Amen. At the ordination of Bishops and Priests in the Apostels
times the holy Ghost was given to such as were ordained by imposition of hands
as in that Epistle to Timothy, I put thee in remembrance that thou stir up the
gift of God, which is in thee by the putting on of my hands, 2. Tim. 1.6.
Seeing then the Apostle knew that Christ in the ordination of ministry did
bestow the holy Ghost upon such as they laid hands on, what other form of
words can any man probably conjecture, they should use, when for the ceremonis
of insufflation they laid hands on she^, but those which Christ himself by his
own example has taught namely Receive the holy Ghost, whose sins ye remit
they are remitted, etc. If any man can tell us, what words they used, he shall
do well to declare them, or if he cannot, it is our duty to think they
followed Christ his example.

How then comes it to pass that the Bishop does not first blow upon them
before he says, Receive the holy Ghost?
Alexander Alesius borne in Scotland in 1501. a Preather, Professor theologus
celebris and excellens etc. Admonis. Christi. de authori Lutheri p. 234. Est
su^ma ministerii laus quod in eo vere donetur spiritus sa^ctus: nam hae verba
insufflauit et dixit Accipite sp. sa^ctu^ accommoda^ da sunt ad ordinationem,
vel collationem ministerii. Alex. Ales. in Johan. in qua confertur potestas
docendi and administrandi sacramenta etc. Ac optandum esset, vt ad impositione^
manuum he simul accederet. etc. id quod dus obseruatum fuit in ecclesia and
body adhuc obseruatur apud episcopos, sic enim et po pulus doceretur per
ceremoniam de dignitate ministerii cum quo donatur sp. sanctus, and maiori oum
reuerentia accederent. ld.
and a famous excellent professor in Divinity (as appears in his answer to
the defense, of the Louain articles set out by Ruardus Tapper) and buing at
Basil, when the authority of Bishops was tumultuarily suppressed, and withal,
this form (we speak of) in ordaining Ministers quite abrogated, writes on
these words. Receive the holy Ghost after this manner. The highest commendation
of the ministry is herein, that the holy Ghost is truly and verily given in
it. For these words he breathed and said Receive the holy Ghost, are to be
applied unto the ordination or collation of the ministry: And we must know
that it is a calling to the ministry, or ordination, wherein is conferd a
power to teach and administer Sacraments but withal, with this ceremony the
holy Ghost is bestowed upon them, that come worthily to ordination. And it were
to be wished that to imposition of hands were appointed also to breath and say
Receive the holy Ghost, which is a thing has a long time been observed in the
Church, and to this day is yet observed among Bishops. For so the people might
be taught by this ceremony of the worthiness of the ministry, wherewith the
holy Ghost is given, and men would come unto it with greater reverence. This
was his judgment. But the former part of this action expressed by our Savior,
our Church has not thought good to retain, because the Apostles, when they
would use some (...) to^he not this of insufflation (...), Cum vellent ad
hibere aliquem ritum inordination^ non sump seru^nt symbelu^ insufflationis
etc. Chemni^t exam co^etl. de sacrament. ordinis page 240. sed sumpseru^nt
alium ^s tum indiffere^tem imposit. etc. Christus vt. often deret a se
procedere spiritum sa^^^um sicut and a patre insuffla^s in discip^los suos
accipite spiritum sanctum. Aug. de Trinit. and vnitate des. c. l.
^^ast it should be thought that Christ gave commandment to use it, but they
took another indifferent one, of imposition of hands (no doubt by Christ his
warrant) and used it in ordination, but not the other of breathing: because the
signification hereof did not fit any mortal man. For Christ (as the Author
under Saint Austin his name witnesses) to show that the holy Ghost did
proceed from himself, as also from the Father, breathed upon his Disciples
and said. Receive the holy Ghost. Sufficient it may be our Church retains the
latter clause which is no more blasphemous for the Bishop to say, then to say.
They baptize, they absolve. This is my body. I have begotten thee in the
Gospel. For in execution of these particular offices he is but the minister of
God, who does himself, in or by his ministry beget us, feed us, absolve us,
baptize us, and gives the hohy Ghost to such as are ordained.

But there is no commandment given by Christ for Bishops in ordination of
Priest^ to use these words, Receive the holy Ghost, as there is for baptizing,
absoluing, and the like.
The examples of Christ and his Apostles are in many tales sufficient rules to
be followed without any precept, and if so why not in this? Secondly, many
things may be lawfully done according to the analogy of Scriptures, for which
is neither express commandment, nor example of Christ as amongst others, in
that the Church receives ^omen to the holy Commu^ition. 3. Why may we not
affirm Christ his example in saying Receive the holy Ghost, should be as well
continued in ordaining Ministers without any far^er express commandment, as
ordination it self, which is not there by name prescribed. 4. These words This
is my body, and this is the blo^d of the new Testament, which Christ used at
his last Supper are generally held to be the words of the holy institution, and
yet there is no commandment, that the Minister should use ^^ein in celebrating
that action, but because the action if self is commanded the words of the
institution are therein withal implied. So stands the case with ordination of
Priests, Receive the holy Ghost, are the words of their consecration, which
although it be not in express terms prescribed to be continued, yet the
ordination being deduced from Christ his example, the same form of ordination
is thereby included, which he meant should continue as a perpetual succession
in the ministry. For in the words mentioned one is no plainer then the other.
By these very words (faith Master Calvin on this 20. of Saint John) Christ
after a sort does inaugurat his Apostles unto an office, His Verbis Apostolos
swos que dammodo inau gurat Christus in officium cui cis pri^t destina ^erat.
Calum. Ioh. 20. Neque profan a fuit in angera it is ritus ille etc. Id, in 2.
Tim. 1.
whereunto he before had destinate and appointed them. And upon 3. Timoth. 1.
This rite and ceremony was not any profane inauguration invented only to get
authority in the eyes of men, but a lawful consecration before God, which is
not perfited, but by the power of the holy Ghost, whence we may thus reason.
That which Christ gives by imposition of the Bishops hands to the party, that
thereby is ordained Priest, the Bishop in Christ his name may will him to
receive. But Christ gives the holy Ghost by imposition of the Bishops hands to
the party that is ordained Minister or Priest. Therefore the Bishop in Christ
his name may say unto him, Receive the holy Ghost.

In vain and idly are these words used, Receive the holy Ghost in ordination
of Ministers, because unlearned asses being made Ministers by theirs, return
no more learned from the Bishops, then when they went first unto them.
This objection might have preindiff the Apostles, Mira fuit illerum r^ditas,
quod tam absolute, tantaque curae per trientum edocti no^ minorem insciriam
produnt. Call. in Act. 1. Totidem in hae ^uterrogations sunt errores quos verba
Ibid
who notwithstanding their ordination were no better learned then to ask, when
Christ would restore the kingdom of Israel, etc. Where Master Calvin notes
marvelous great was their rudeness and ignorance that being so exquisitely
taught, and with so great diligence for three years they show no less want of
knowledge, then as if they never had heard word. So many errors are therefore
in this their interrogatiue. Secondly, Saint Paul giving rules unto Timothy
and Titus does describe what manner of persons, and how qualified they must be
before they (...) ^o ordination namely, bl^^^lesse, pr^^^t, ^ha^^, (...), ^oly,
(...) is tenth and (...), upon ^^^asion of which note ^ha^geth them they should
^ay h^^^s o^r none (as near as they could) that were not first in^ued with
these virtues and gift^, which had not been so necessary a precept, if the
said virtues, or gifts, or any of them were then first to have been given by
unpos^tion of ha^^s in the ordination of Bishops and Priests. So as neither
gift of learning, g^dlinesse, ^^^ome, or any above last mentioned were either
bestowed upon the Apostles when Christ said unto them, Receive the holy Ghost,
nor upon Timothis, nor any other that was ^^is three ordained.

Many lewd and insufficient men there are over whom these words are pronounced,
and yet not gifted or graced by the Spirit for ought we can see.
This objection strikes at two sorts of men, one for want of knowledge, the
other for want of a virtuous life, but while is so does, it shameth the
persons, it cannot aimihslate their calling. For Sacraments are the same
administered by them and no ^^^ng defective, though themselves be. As for want
of knowledge. We are to understand it either comparatively or absolutely:
Absolutely, that there is no knowledge at all to be found in a man ordained,
and called to that function were strange, and indeed unlike: comparatively,
want of knowledge in respect of others, may be the best man's case compared with
a better then himself at one time or another, in one place or another, yea it
may so fall out, and does in our daily experience that men growing in years are
much inferior to themselves of that, Sitanto est m^lius quod accipitur, quanto
est melior per que^ traditur, tanto est in accipienti bus baptismori^^
^farietas, quan^o in ministris di^ersit as meritorum. Aug. Cometra Cresco^.
lib. 3. cap. 6.
which they were in middle age, when memory, voice, and invention served them
better then now it does, and yet they cease not to be Ministers, at what time
they are so disabled. If the Sacrament (faith S. Austin^) be so much the better
to him that takes, adhe^^ is the better by whom it is delivered, there is by
so much, a variety of Baptismes in the receivers, as there is diversity of
worth in Ministers. Such ^^re must he had (and we hope is s^ as Paul requires
in Timothy) not to ^ay (...) rashly on any. Which very ^^^^at arg^eth that if
the Bishop shall ordain any ouerhastily, the calling is lawful, (...) may be
done by such a man in his place. For it is ordination by imposition of bands
that makes a Minister, without which let his sufficiency in toongs and other
learning be admirable, yea incredible, we may and do hold him learned, but we
do not account him a Minister, whose duty stands in this, that being
ordained, he is, to baptize. 2. To Catechize. 3. To instruct publicly, and as
occasion shall serve privately. 4. To offer up the prayers of the people. 5. To
remit the sins of the penitent, and to bind and to retain the offenses of
the obstinate. 6. To consecrate and distribute the blessed Sacrament of the
body and blood of Christ. 7. To visit the sick and to comfort them. 8. To
bless those who are joined in Matrimony. 9. To praise God for deliverance of
women after childbirth, and lastly, to bury the dead in a godly manner as the
order of our Church requires.
Among all which preaching has a special use, whether memoriter by heart at
times upon just occasion, Si prasbyter als quis infirmitate prohibente per
scipsum non poterit pradicare, sanctoru^ patrum homilia recitentur. etc Council.
vasense. can. ^.
as God shall enable a man, or else (a man being not so well provided by reason
of sickness or some other lawful hinderance) reading some homily warranted
by authority of our Church. For so it is required, and of ancient time has
been practiced as appears in the days of Theodosius the younger. If a
Presbiter or Minister (through sickness hindering) cannot preach of himself,
let certain homilies of the holy Fathers be recited.

Lewd and licentions men are not gifted and graced by Gods spirit.
We confess with tears that a wicked Minister though his tongue be plausible,
if his life be not agreeable, the insamie of his losell demeanor blemisheth the
glory of his best doctrine, such is the weakness of the people in taking
offense, though they should not so do. We acknowledge such may be compared to
Noah's workmen that made the Ark to save others and themselves perished in the
(...) But this (...) answer; who say. In the eye of the church it is not a man's
learning, nor^^^^^^ of life (for these are qualities in common with other men)
but ordinanation with imposition of hand^^ which makes a minister. Ambrose
upon Timothy. Imposition of hands are mystical words, Manus impositi ones
verba su^^ mystica, quibus confirmatur ad hoc opus electus, accipient autho
vitatem testa conscientia sua vt andeat vice domius sacrifici um deo offerr^
Ambros. in. 1 Timoth. 4. Baptizaut quantum atti^et ad visibile ministerium boni
and mali, inuisebiliter autem per cos count est and visibile baptism, and
inuisibilis gratia. Aug contra Crescon. lib. 2. cap 21. Nazia^. ^r^t. de
baptis. An solis (...) ^^per (...) diff^^^^^ (...) contra (...) Aug (...)
temperies and (...) contra Cescon. lib. 3. c. 8.
by which he that is elected is confirmed unto the work receiving authority
his conscience bearing witness that in stood of the Lord he^ d^^eth (...)
offer to sacrifice unto God. Upon his peril be it that will attempt to deceive
God or man. If he live well thou have what to follow, if he live profanely,
do what he teaches but not what he does. As concerning the outward and
visible ministry both good and bad do baptize, but invisibly he does baptize
by them, whose i^ i^ both visible baptism, and invisible grace. Iud^^ did
baptize, yet not he but Jesus Christ baptized with the holy Ghost. Neither hi^
calling nor message deserve dreproch, though the man did. A seal of wood may
give the stamp of Cesars image, as well as a ^^^^ed of gould. The light of the
some is not stained, though his be (...) reach to Baals draughthouse. It is
Saint Austins similitude against the Donatists. A pardon is worth accepting of
their parts who need it, though a sorry fellow were the ^^ellenger of such
glad tidings. When man^het is upon the tai^^^^ man ^ue^^oneth whither the
husbandman where he sowes the seed^^, (...) a leprous hand like Na^^an, it
contenteth so the seed be good, the ground battle, the time seasonable, the
heavens kindly with their first and latter rain.

What remission of sins is to be hoped for, where the minister himself is
wretched and impenitent?
Such men are to be lamented, Si (...) plain intustot and Actione^^ subsannans
etc (...) dub^te (...) and calicemillius manuporresta, ver a (...) esses
orporit and. sanguinis Christi pigwor^^. Calvin. antiders Council. Triden sos.
7. ^an 11.
yea more they deserve to be deprived and thrust out, yet be the minister an
epl^^e inwardly to himself, dividing the holy action of the sacrament. I
cannot doubt (says M. Calvin) that the bread and cup reached unto me by h^^
(...), are unto not the true pledges of the ^odis and blood of Christ.

If not to be able to preach make a man a dumb dog, the doubt is bo^^ that
ordinatio^ may be good, which sets apart such ones to the work of the
ministry.
This frame of words fee^^eth to take many things for granted, as that a man
not able to preach is a dumb dog, and that such a one his ordination is not
good. The first of which propositions needs explication, the second requires
farther proof, the^ only a bare affection. In the first we doubt what is
meant by preaching, secondly who are these domb dogs. By preaching mean they,
making a sermon upon a text, expounding of the words for their depentance and
fence, raising of the doctrine with their several uses, ane due application to
time, person, and place, by instruction, reproof, confutation, and the like,
and all this done without books, co^d by heart, and uttered with an audible
voice in the ears of the congregation, we easily confess an inestimable
benefit comes to Gods Church thereby, and men thus sufficiently able are
worthy of special in^enragements for maintenance of learning (...) religion,
but then are they a very few, that must beheld forable minister^, and (belike)
because others not thus able to preach must be reputed no ministers, which is
undoubtedly a very dangerous, and false consequent. That some are so
qualified, able thus to preach, is a singular blessing of God upon both our
famous universities, and his rich mercy which he has vouchsafed unto our
church, but that other are not therefore lawful ministers, Qui been pronu^tiare
possunt, quid autem pro^untie^t excogitare non poss^^t Quod si ah a lies sumant
elo quen ter sapienter que co^scriptum, nemo riaque co^me^dent at que ad
populu^ profer ant sieam personam geru^t, no^ improbe facions. Sic enim (quod
vtile est) ^ult^ pradicatores (...) mu^t^ mag^^tr^^st (...) verimagestri id
ips^um die an^ ^^^ia, et ne^ sunt in iis schismata, Aug. de doct. Christia.
lib. 4. c. 28.
nor their ordination good who cannot do so much, we dare not so judge. For
some there are as S. Austin well observed in his time, that can pronounce well
(or as we english it) are good churchmen, but cannot so well invent, neither
for matter, nor words, but if they take of others, what is well penned (as
homilies or sermons) and pronounce the^ to the people, if they sustain that
person they do not amiss. For so (which is a profitable thing) there are many
preachers, but not many masters, if so be they speak all things of that one
true master Christ, and that there be no schisms among them. Where we may
note 1. the way to have many preachers, secondly that they who take other men's
labors to use do a profitable work, 3. that they are not reckoned dumb dogs
or unpreaching ministers, but preachers and publishers of the truth. But let us
proceed on as we began. Some there are whose invention serves welinough, and
upon due meditation have apt words at will, and can accordingly fore their
places, and quotations for every necessary proof, which they do allege and
yet their memory is weak, and for their hearts they cannot deliver without
book what they have penned in writing. These also must be put out of the number
of ministers, as not able to deliver their message, and threefore being not
able to preach, their ordination is not to be held for good. But by these men's
patience who so dispute, we prefer other men's judgments before such ouerhastie
censures. For Zepperus and Bernard Textor (though otherwise known
disciplinarians) give their verdict otherwise. Tyr^nibus aliquid sub imitie
conceds potest et indulgeri, vt vel adverbe^l ma moriteredisca^t, veles
chartale gant etc. Zeppen Art. habend. concion. lib. ^. Breus, memoria
subsidnum in charta, not at (...) and in libre repositum se^finum Bernar.
Texter. Pandect sacra. ^om^to^^. En^angelizare enim perpance (...) rum est
baptizare antem cuinslibet ^^de sacerdotie figatur Chrisest. in 1. Corinthians. 1.
Nune quidem prasbyteris qui in habilteres some hoc momustradimus Ibid.
To young divines at the first somewhat may be fanourablie yielded, that either
they con without book, or else to read their sermons out of their paper.
B^^nand Textor distinguishes of preachers, some are of a bad memory, some of a
good. They of a bad memory may have help from their notes in their paper book,
as it lies before them. 3. others a gain there are that can, neither invent,
nor dispose, nor remember, and therefore not able to preach in the sense here
delivered of preaching, and yet were reckoned for ministers in the days of the
Apostles. For so ancient and late writers understand that place in 1
Corinthians where Paul says he was sent not to baptize but to preach For
(says Chrifostome) preach a very few can, but baptize every one may that is a
Priest or minister. And then after recording how the custom of the Church in
his days differed not from the Apostles times. Now truly (says he,) we give
this office to presbiters that are more ^nable. Maiusest ^n an gelizare quam
baptizare. Non emnisqui baps tizat idoneut est eua^gelizare. Ambros. in 1. Corinthians. 1. Perfect baptizare etiam mi nus decti possu^t perfect autem
euangelizare multo difficili^ ris and rarioris est operis. Ideo doctor gentium
pl^rimis excellentior enangele zaremissusestuo^ baptizare, quo. niam hoc per
mul^or fires pot^ rat, illud per pa^cos, inter quireminebat. August ^o^rra
titer. Petils, lib. 3 c 56. Cu^ pa^coru^ esset docare, pluri but autem
baptizare datu^ foret. etc. Calum in 1. Corinthians. 1.17. Baptismune fere aliis
ma^d^runt q^i ad pradication^^^ for tassis ^i^^s ido ^ei erant Gualter. Ibid.
M^^^s tingends cuiuis in ecclesia co^mitti potest, no^ ite^ munus euangeliza^
di. P. martyr. Ibid. Ag^^scimus quor^^da^ inecclesiaveteri pastoru^
^implicitatem innocuam plus aliquand^ profecisse eccle (in, qua^ quor^dam
er^dition^ variam exquisitam, delicatamque sed paul^ post fastu osiorem v^de we
bodiee quide^ re^ici^^ds ^imphcit^^te^ quoranda^ priba^ nee tume^ (...)
imperita^, Con^es. (...).
Upon the same place Saint Ambrose has these words It is a greater thing to
preach then to baptize. Not every one that baptiseth is fit to preach. Some
such note Saint Austin makes. men of less learning may perfectly or
sufficiently well baptize, but to preach well, or perfectly is a work more
rare and difficult, and therefore the doctor of the Gentiles being more
excellent then many, was sent to preach the Gospel not to baptize, because
that might be done by many, this could be done but by a few, among whom Paul,
was eminent and chief. Master Calvin notes upon that 1. Corinthi^^s in this
manner. The Apostle enters not this comparison to detract aniething from
baptism. But because very few were able to teach, but to baptize was given to
many etc. Master Gualter to the like purpose. Other Apostles that were
employed in continual teaching followed this course of Saint Paul, they
commended baptism to many others, who perhaps were less fit^ed to preach.
Peter Martyr has some such observation upon the same text. The office of
baptising may be committed to any man in the church, but so may not the office
of preaching. We speak not of Hemingius, and others, whose indgement agrees
hereunto Only we will content our selves with the confession of Heluetia. we
acknowledge (says it) that harmles simplicity of pastors in the anncient
church did profit the church a great deal more, then some men's various
exquisite, and delicat learning, but a little to proud and disdainful:
wherefore we reject not at this day the honest simplicity of some ministers so
it be not too unlearned. 4. to conclude if by preaching they mean the spending
of an hour idly, to no^ ^urpose, or schismatically or out of order, or like
bold baiard, the^ we grant such as can exhort, say service, ^e^ebrat ye facr
aments, read at times some s^odlie sermons which themselves have penned, or
some others for them, to be no ministers, because they cannot preach in that
scandalous manner of preaching.

Dumb dogs.
As touching this appellation. Vocans mutos canes obiteit illis ignauia^ and
socordiam Call. in Esa. 56.10.
The Prophet calls not those dumb dogs who are utterly unable to do their
duty, for of them he spoke in the words going before, but those he so names
which are negligent and sluggish being able and not doing it 2. he calls not
them dumb dogs that did read the law, administer the sacraments, and those
legal ceremonies with other such duties as became the priests though they all
could not make farther proo^e of their memories invention, audacity, utterance,
learning and in a most paineful manner spending their spirits aforehand to be
provided, and after meditation to deliver it by heart fitly and agreeable to
the wholesome doctrines handled and the persons in presence: for such able
Priests were always very rare, but those they are, whom he calls dumb
dogs, that did nothing at all, appertaining to their office but only bearing a
name were altogether idle and slothful 3. neither does the Prophet reprove
only those to whom the function of teaching was committed, but (as Master
Calvin notes) he understands judges governors, and kings, Sedetiam indices
praefectors, acreges, qui rite omnia administrare debuerant. Ibid.
who ought to have administered all things orderly. Now then as in civil
policies; ignorance, and some defects make not a judge, magistrate, or king his
office void nor frustrateth the election (for that granted will draw on many
absurd, rebellious, anabaptisticall conclusions) so neither does want of some
more special commendable perfection make a nullitie of the minister his
calling or canonical ordination.

Yes but it does, For it is required he be able to convince the gainesaier.
Surely it is to be wished that all our ministers could perform their office
in the best and most excellent sort, but we must do as we may, when we cannot
as we would. He that carries a hod on his shoulder, and bears brick or
mortar is many times a good maison though not so expert, as the architect, and
chief builder: he that handles a spade to cast up the mould, is other whiles
a good gardener, though not so cunning as he that draws the knot. He may be a
good minister that wants as we read a fore memory, utterance, audacity to
instruct by the pen or by reading his own labors, and the approved labors of
other holy men, though he be not of dexterity to conceive or confute as some
other of his brethrenican. And certain it is, many there are, who because
they will shun the reproachful name of dumb dogs are readiest to fling a
stone at the head of others more sufficient then themselves. For of these
untimely, rathripe, unlettered, unpreaching preachers, some have been found so
able to convince the common adversary, that they have not blushed to disclame
the knowledge of the latin tongue (as forsooth and great reason the mark of
the beast) nor ashamed to thank God they defile not their studies with those
antichristian controversies, and as for writing of the fathers they have wished
them all on a light fire, not any thing better affected to the study of the
arts and philosiphie, accounting them all vain and curious, and our university
learning but pedagogicall, nor our sermons other then metaphysicall school
preaching. Such ability it is these men have to convince the adversary that in
steed of confuting him, they distract our own forces, and when they should
strike at his head they are nibbling at our beeles, and where they should fight
for us, it is either with us or against us.

The Apostle 1. Tim. 3. and in Titus 1. expressing the duties of a Bishop or a
minister does write they must be apt to teach etc. not left arbitrarie, but a
matter of necessity. For he must be so, and so.
The word must is a word of conuenience not simply absolute, (...).
meaning that Bishops, as near as they can, ought to make choice of such men
as are so qualified. For else by the like reason, no man may be a Bishop, or
minister unless he be a father of children. For the word must there used
includes that particular. But the holy Ghost neither thinks, writes, or
commands any thing, which is not simply and in every respect absolute and
perfect, only proposing the idea or pattern of a perfect minister not that
always there can be such a one. S. Ierom against Iouinian asks a question not
amiss to our present purpose. Nunquid, quia tuenercitu ferti sun us quisque
eligendus est, ^d circo non assumentur, etc. Hieron lib. 1. aduers. Iouinian.
Sic in descriptione episcopi, and in little expositione quaescrip ta sunt, etc.
Hieron ad Oceanum epist. 83. Quod dixit irreprehensibilis: aut nullus, aut
rarus. Idem. aduers. Blags^nes lib. 1. c. 8^ Illud certe (...) qui possit cum
cateris virtutibus difficulter inuenies. Ibid. Maximeque illud vt potens sit
aduersariis resistere and per uersas opprimere at que superare doctrinas. Ibid.
Ita fit quodin alio primum aut totum est, in also in part versetur, and tamen
non sit in crimine, qui no^ haebet omnia nec condemnetur ex eo, quod non habet,
sed iustificetur in co quod possidet Ib. Non suscip^unt magis and minus. Topic.
lib. 6.
What (says he) because in an army the valiantest must be chosen, shall not
therefore weaker persons be accepted of, since all cannot be alike strong? And
again, writing to Oceanus. As Orators and Philosophers (says he) when they
describe what kind of orator, or philosopher they would wish to have, do no
injury to Demosthenes, or Plato, but describe the things without persons, so
in the description of a Bishop, and in the exposition of those things, which
are written, there is set before a mirror of the priesthood. And the same
father against Pelagius writes upon these words of the Apostle In that he
says. He must be irreprouable, such a one is not at al or very rare, and that
other which follows apt to teach with the rest of the virtues you shall
hardly find. Anon after. That he be accused of none, be well reported of them
that are abroad, and free from evil speeches of the adversaries, I think it
be hard to find such a one, specially so mighty as that he can resist the
adversaries, and oppress or overcome perverse doctrines. Again He is either
none, or rare, that has all which a Bishop should have. A little before so
it comes to pass that, that which is excellent, or perfect in some, is in
others, but in part, and yet he that has not all, is not in fault, neither
condemned for that he has not, but approved for that which he has. So that
the best sufficiency is a grace, but it is not the essential form that
gives life and name to a minister. Now we speak of the office it self, not
of the execution thereof which we hold must with all diligence and
faithfulness be performed. Let him be as learned, grave, discreet, virtuous
as the times shall yield and the place may require. For we do not think
that all places require men of like gifts and graces, but those which are of
smaller note, circuit, and reward may stand content with men of inferior note.
Which very truth manifestly proves that ability to preach is not the
definition of a minister for definitions do not rise and fall, like a bow that
is strong and weak, but men's sufficiency to preach after what exact manner
they take preaching, Mixtum ad po^dus aquale. Aristot. de generat. and corrup.
(...).
whose temperature is not gould weight, as if a grane could not turn the scale
of every man's sufficiency, but if it be in a meaner degree of fitness, as our
health commonly is, it may serve the turn.

If the Bishop could as well fit them for the calling as admit the^ into the
calling, there were no doubt but he might use the words Receive the holy Ghost.
We do not say It is the Bishop that does fit him to the ministry,
Spiritus sanctus in ecclesia praepo sito vel ministro soc inest, vt si fictus
nonest, operetur per cu^ spiritus sanctus and adeius mercedem in salute^
sempiternam et ad eorum regenerationem and adificationem, quiper cum etc.
August. contra epist. Parm. lib. 2. cap 11. Nonest aqua profana and adultera
super quam nomen Dei innocatur, etiamsia profanis and adulterisinuocemur etc.
August de bapt contra Donet. lib. 3. c. 10.
but God in and with the ordination given him by the Bishop, in which party
so ordained the holy Ghost works (says S. Austin) that if the party
admitted be not a counterseit the holy Ghost works by him both to his own
reward for eternal salvation, and the regeneration of others to whom he is
sent. And if a counterfeit it is his own loss, but yet the holy Ghost
forsakes not his ministry, because by him he works the salvation of others.
For as he witnesses in another place be the minister an adulterer or homicide
etc. the water is not prophaine, nor adultered upon which the name of God is
called. The function is sacred and holy assisted by Gods spirit to the good of
others, if not to his, that is thus ordained.

To be ordained a minister by menis no (...) or grace at all.
The ministry or office whereunto we are by men ordained, is a grace or gft.
First because freely given without respect of any merit before God in the party
ordained 2. a gift of the holy Ghost, that thereby it might be understood to
be an authority proceeding from God himself, though externallie collated by
man 3. to distinguish it from other callings in the world 4. because such a
singular and divine gift has ever annexed unto it in the true execution of
duties thereunto belonging, a powerful presence, assistance, and operation of
the holy Ghost. In respect whereof it may not only be said, that when Bishops
or Priests do those things which they are commanded according to Christ's
institution, it is not they, but Christ himself that does them, but also in
such an office so assisted with the holy Ghost, as that it is therefore called
the ministry of the spirit they do therewith in like manner, specially if
they fear God, receive sundry graces of his spirit, whereby there labors are
made profitable unto others. The Author of the questions out of the new
Testament much auncienter then Saint Austin witnesses that where it is read,
Illud etc. accipi te spiritu^ sanctu^ ecclesiastica potestas collata in
telligituresse August, tom. 4. Qq ex nouo testamento c. 93. Quia omnia in
traditione domi nicaper spiritu^ sanctum aguntur. Ibid. Idcirco cum regula it is
and for ma traditur buius disciplina dicitur it is accipite spiritu^ sanctum
Ibid. Non dixit accepistis sed accipite spiritu^ sanctu^ etc Chrisost in Ioh. c
20. homil. 85: Potestatein quandam and pratiam spirita lem cos accepisse Ibid:
Sed vt peccata dimitterent dof ferentes enim sunt gratia spiritos, quare
addidit. Quorum remiseritis peccata. etc. ostendens quod genus virtutis
largiat^r Ibid. Theophilact Ibid.
that the Lord breathed upon his Disciples, and said receive the holy Ghost, he
implies the Ecclestasticall power that is given and collated, and that for
these reasons Christ in bestowing this power did use these words, 1. To teach
us that all things, which are to be ministerially done in the name of Christ
are really performed by the holy Ghost, because in the Lords ordinance all
things are wrought by the holy spirit. 2. That hereby he might leave an example
to his Apostles and Ministers.
Therefore the rule and form of this discipline being delivered to them, it is
also said unto them Receive the holy Ghost. S. Chrysostom notes that our
Savior said not, Ye have received the holy Ghost but receive the holy ghost,
because they received a certain power, and spiritual grace not to raise the
dead and show miracles, or virtues but to loose sins. For they are differing
graces of the spirit wherefore he added whose sins ye remit, they are remitted,
and whose sins ye retain they are retained showing what kind of power it is
be gives. The like sense and construction is made by Cyrill, or the Author
under his name who interprets this, Receive the holy Ghost, for, Take ye the
power to forgive sins, and to retain whosoever sins ye remit, etc. To the
like effect has. Theophilact and that almost in the very same words with
Chrysostom. Wherefore these words, Receive the holy Ghost, is in effect as
much as Receive the gift of God bestowed upon thee by imposition of hands,
whether to remit sins, or retain sins. And thus much be spoken for
clearing of doubts, that arise by occasion of this sentence.

Chap. 23. Homilies against the word. In the first tome of homilies. Of
swearing: By like holy promise the Sacrament of Matrimony knitteth man and wife
in perpetual love.
THe Book from whence this grieuance springs is taken out, is the Book of
homilies set out in the days of King Edward the sixth, of which times and Book
Doctor Ridley Bishop of London, who afterward suffered for the Gospel, gives
this judgment. The Church of England then had holy and wholesome Homilies in
commendation of the principal virtues, Master Fore page 1940.
which are commanded in Scripture, and likewise other homilies against the most
pernicious and capital vices, that use (alas) to reign in the Church of
England. How the times are altered. Then that good Martyr saw nothing in them
dangerous to holy and wholesome instructions, now every smattrer in Divinity
can find intolerable untruths. But to be brief. The Author of the Homilies
takes the word Sacrament for mystery, Sacramentum militia Cicero. Lib. 1. de
officiis Credimus ne b^^ manum sacramentu^ diuino. superinducilicere and in
aliu^ dominum post Christu^ respo^de ^e. Tertul de corona militis.
as Saint Austin and Ambrose do with other of the Fathers. Secondly, in this
place somewhat more particularly for the faith plighted twixt couples, which
was the ancient signification of the word in foreign writers Tully, etc. who
call the oath given by the Captain to the soldiers, the oath and Sacrament of
warfare. In which sense Tertullian uses the word we think (says he) a
question may be made, whether warfare be fit for Christians, and whether we
believe a humane Sacrament may be added over and above the Divine Sacrament.
The Churches of Heluetia in their former confession so take it speaking of,
what is due to the Magistrate. Huie not etia^st libers simus etc vera cum fide
subiiciendos esse fidelitatem ^o sacrame^tu^ prastate scimus Heluet. confess. 1:
artic. 26. Idest ^usiura^ dum quosuis magistr at thus obstringuntur obseruat.
2. Ibid.
To him we know we are to perfou^^e fidelity, and the Sacrament upon which
place we read this observation Fide litie and the Sacrament (that is) the oath,
whereby subjects are tied to their Magistrates. Now the meaning of the homily
to be some such thing appears both by the title (of swearing) as also by the
words following in this place of holy promises, vows, and covenants made, and
thereupon presently is inferred this scruple here.

By like holy promise the Sacrament of Matrimony knitteth man and wife in
perpetual love that they disire not to be separated for any displeasure or
adversity that shall happen.
An evident place to show what they intended who pend that Homily, taking the
word Sacrament either particularly for a solemn promise vowed, or generally
for a holy state ordained of God, as Doctor Whitakers notes Saint Austin took
the word, who honested Marriage by the name of a Sacrament, Sacramenti no mine
matrimonium. Aug. coh^ nestauit quando cius dignitae tem contra que rundam
criminationes defendit quod in illo li^ro ^octissime acsanctissime fecit What.
co^tra Durau^. p. 6^6. St hoc inquam a pontificits ageretur facile posset de
apellati one conuentre Chemnit. de Matrim. p. 256. Quia coniugtum est sanctum
vita genus divinitus institutum and commend atum libenter et tri busmus nomen
sacramenti, Confess. Wittenberg.
when against certain men's false criminations he defended the dignity
thereof, as he did in that Book most learnedly and holily. That which was done
learnedly and holily in Austin his book, we live to the times to hear it
censured, and condemned as done corruptly in the book of homilies. Chemnitius
could be content Marriage were called a Sacrament so it might be an
advertisement of she whole doctrine thereof against the doctrine of the devils,
and of the heathen, if this were intended we might easily yield to the name.
The confession of Wittenberg says. Because Marriage is a holy kind of life
ordained of God and commanded by him we willingly give it the name of a
Sacrament. Take we first or last of these interpretations, we shall easily free
these words in the Homily of that weight, with which some delight to burden it
withal.

It is directly contrary to the 25. article of Religion, which says there are
but two. The other five falsely so called.
The article has no such words (five falsely so called) but thus commonly so
called after which manner so they are, because the word Sacrament is more
generally used but to speak strictly (...) what manner Baptism and the Lord
his supper are called Sacraments, the book does not so take marriage. For in
the 2. tome of homilies speaking of matrimony there is not so much as a syllable
that sounds to this purpose, where was both time and place to give it the
name of a sacrament if there had been any such meaning. But their opposing the
book of homilies to the 25. article is as if a man would by their example
knowing they allow but 2. sacraments make them contrary to themselves who call
imposition of hands as it were a sacrament or set M. Calvin against himself
because in his institutions he allows but two sacraments baptism and the
Lord his supper as we do, Manuum signu^ hoc and quasi sacramentu^ vsurparunt
eccles. discip fol. 25. Quantum ad verum presbyte ri^ 0536 0 munus liben ter
eoloco habeo Institut. lib. 4. c. 19 sect. 28. Quod 3. in numero non posui, eo
factum est quod non ordinarium nec common, sed ad cer tam fu^ctionem specialis
ritus Ibid.
and yet willingly accepts of the sunction of the ministry to have that name,
yet reckons it not as a third with baptism and the Lords supper, because it
is neither ordinary nor common with the faithful, but a special rite for a
certain function. To take advantage against that learned writer were very
injurious, and can it be honest and godly dealing to entreat our church thus,
since in both we know their mind alike. For though beside two sacraments M.
Calvin mentions the office of the ministry, and our homily makes matrimony
one, taking the word at large, yet as generally necessary to all the faithful
there are two sacraments only. which are express words, which our Catechism
uses, as before (cap. 15) has already been handled.

Chap. 24. Plurality of wives maintained in the fathers. In the second tome of
homiles 1. sermon of diverse places of scripture. It was permitted to this
godly fathers to have more wives then one, by a special privilege or
prerogative. This is directly against the word.
WHereunto the answer we make is two fold, one in general concerning the
second Book of Homilies, the second is in particular as touching the very
place here stumbled at. In general it plainly appears that these men
Subscribe not to the Book of articles as they should by a Statute, Elizabeth
13. Where among the rest, the 35. article is thus: The second Book of
Homilies, (the several titles whereof we have joined under this article) does
contain a godly wholesome doctrine, necessary for these times as does the
former book of Homilies. In particular to the place this answer we give,
wherein this course we observe. First, we set down the words in question what
they are, that it may appear to such as have not the book at hand. 2. We will
show what reasons there are to approve these words of the homily. 3. The
judgment of our old and new writers shall be alleged.
For the first: these words the Book has. The plurality of wives was by a
special prerogative suffered to the Fathers of the old Testament, not for
satisfying their carnal and fleshly lusts, but to have many children, because
every one of them hoped and begged of God oftentimes in their prayers that,
that blessed seed, which God had promised, should come into the world to
break the Serpents head might come, and be borne of his stock and kindred.
Where is to be noted that the question is not of the times of the Gospel, nor
of the Law, nor of the first institution of Marriage, when man and woman were
created but of the time, before the law was written in Tables and given by
Moses. Now that it was no sin unto them, as they used it, of whom the homily
there speaks may appear by diverse reasons, which the godly learned did
give. First, a brother was to raise up seed to his brother that died without
issue: Secondly, children borne of both wives at once were legitimate, which
could not be if poligamse (that is) plurality of wives at once had been the
sin of adultery. Thirdly, the Jews had answered little, Ioh. 8.33.37.39.56.
when being accused to be an adulterous generation they replied they had
Abraham to their Father, not only in a spiritual but a natural propagation.
For Abraham had more wives at once. Genesis 31.51, 1, Ioh. 3.9,
Fourthly, Jacob had Labans two daughters, and Laban charged him he shall take
no more. Fifthly, in as much as these words are the words of truth, that a man
borne of God sins not (that is) continues in sin, a very offensive speech
it is to say that the Patriarks, Abraham, Jacob, etc. did continue in a sin,
successively, continually without repentance, Non licuisse patribus simul
plures vxores habere, nisi ad delineandum mysterium Instin. mart. in Tryph.
Deum illis primis temporibus polygamian: exegisse. Clem. Alexan. lib. 4. Strom.
Permissum fuit cum duabus etc Chrisost. homil. 56. in Genesis Vt humanum genus
propagaretur and pietatis incrementu^ caperet. Ibid. Eo tempore nondum
adulteriu^ lege prohibitu^, and amore posteritatis non ardoris libidine id
factum, and de consens^^ vxoris ad aliquid significandu^ quod futurum erat, vt
in Agar. 3. Sara. Ambros de Abra. et. lib. 1. c. 4.
and therefore it may well be thought, that the Lord of his special mercy, did
bear with them, and what is that but a rule, which we may not make general.
If so, then surely a special privilege that it was permitted. Countenance to
this sentence give the ages aforetime, and since. Aforetime Justin Martyr,
Clem. Alexandrinus, Chrisostom, Ambrose, Ierom, Austin, etc. Justin Martyr. The
fathers might not have many wives at once, but to shadow out some mystery.
Clem. Alexandrinus. God did in those former times exact poligamie. Chrisost.
Because then were the beginnings it was permitted to be coupled with two or
more wives at once, that mankind might be enlarged, and receive increase of
godliness and virtue. Ambrose. At that time adultery was not forbid by law,
and what they did, was for love of posterity, not through heat of lust, and
with consent of the wife, and to signify somewhat was to come as in Agar and
Sara. Ierom thus. Seiebat Apostolus lege concessu^ and exemplo Patriarcharum,
ac Moses familiare populo nouerat in multis vxoribusliberos spargere. Hiero^ in
epist. ad Ocea^ Sufficienda prolis causa erat vxorum plurium simul vni viro
habendarum inculpabilis consuetudo Aug. de doctrina Christiana lib. 3. c. 12.
Ibid. cap. 18. St naturam co^sulas non lasciutends causa vtebatur, si mere^ etc
contra Faust: Manch, lib. 22. c. 47. Nulli vnquam licitum fuit si^ne diuina
dispe^ satione plures simul vxores habere. Innoc. 3, c Gaudemus, de Diuortiis.
Polygamiam Deus inter Isra elitas probauit, Melanct. epitom Ethicor. Specialis
casus fuit patrum polygamia quae peculiarem rationem habuit. Heming. de diuort.
page 36. Polygamia vsurpata patribuscitra culpam, nobis nullam legem
co^stituit. Bullin. decad 2, serus, 10. Deum illis lege^ suam remisisse quia
cos non videmus vspiam ea de causa reprehendi, Pet. Mart. 1, Sam, 25.
The Apostle knew it was granted by law, and by the example of the Patriarks,
and Moses also was not ignorant, that it was familiar with the Jews to have
children by many wives. Saint Austin in diverse places, with more then these at
this time we will not trouble our selves nor our Reader. An unblameable custom
it was for one man to have diverse wives. And then one might with a more chall
mind have had more, then now some one can have but one. Speaking in defense of
Jacob the Patriarch against one Fa^ustus an Heretic. Sins some are against
nature, some against custom, some against the Commandment. If you consult
nature, not for wantonness, but for generation sake he did use more wives, if
you respect custom at that time and in those places it was the fashion, if you
ask what Commandment, it was by no law forbidden. Innocent. He says, It was
never lawful for any to have more wives together at one time, without some
Divine dispensation, or privilege. Of later times, All the best approved
writers speak in behalf of it, some more some less, and how ever with some
difference, yet all in favor thereof. Philip Melancthon, Hemingius, Bullinger,
Peter Martyr, Beza, Perkins, and Bucan professor of Divinity in Lausanna. The
first of these that are named says, God approved among the Isralites the
having of many wives at one time. Hemingius. The case of the Fathers was
special in having many wives at once, and there was reason for it. For God did
wink hereat in the people of Israel, that by this means he might make way for
his faith he had given them, that an innumerable multitude should spring up
from a very few. Bullinger writes, Marriage of many wives in the Fathers
without fault in them, is no law for us. Peter Martyr in diverse of his Books.
It is manifest unto us, that God did remit and slacken his law to them, because
we nowhere find they are reproved by any of the Prophets, etc. Again in the
same place. Nolim co^ nimium aggranare. Ibid. Viti^ ne vertas fuit enim tempore
illo huiusmod^ res libera and adiophora Idem. in Gens. c. 29.27. Deus
tollerauit in populo su^ polygamian. Bez. de polyg. et diuor. Potest tame^ ex
cusari quia ad propagationem humans generis velsalte^ ad propagationem ^cclesi^
pertine bat. Perk. Ar^ milla. ^urea. p. 78. Arm^tto^ 600000. e Iacobi familia
duccutum annorum spatio. Id. prolegam, Chronol. Polygamia qua quis Vuo tempore
plures habuit Vxores patrobus indulta suit, non casciuienda sed gignenda pie
sobolis gratia, tum quia iam erant tum temporis mores politici, tum vt esse^
aditus quidam, quo Deus promissions suade innumerab^^i sobol^ expauets oritura
locum daret Bucan. Institut. loc. 12
There is no doubt but the Fathers had faults enough, yet when they may be
safely defended, I could not lay on load. And writing of Jacob having two
sisters his wines at one time. Reprove him not. For then such a matter was
free and indifferent. Master Beza, his sentence is, God tolerated Poligamie in
his people. Master Perkins our countreyman. The Marlage of the Patriarchs with
many wives, though it cannot be so well defended, yet may it be excused,
because it did rather pertain to the increasing of mankind, or at the least
to the increase of Gods Church. And in his preface to his Chronologies he
observes the increase by Polygamie such, as 600000. fighting men were sprung
up of Jacobs family within the space of 200 years. Bucanus writes of those
times of many wives to one man: Polygamie (says he) Wherein a man had many
wives at one time, was of special favor granted to the Fathers, not for
wantonness, but for increase of a godly issue, as also because of the policy
of that time was such, and another cause that God might make way for his
promise in raising up an innumerable multitude of so small a company.

That can be no reason neither the one nor the other. Not the first, as that it
was the propagation of mankind for then it should have begun with Adam.
Because his times had most need in that respect when there was no more but
'hee. The other is no reason that it was for increse of Gods Church. For then
should it be permitted now, because the true professors of the Gospel are but
few to speak of, inrespect of Atheiests, Papists and other enemies of Christ
his Church.
This reply is made by some great friends to this accusation undertake against
the Communion book, but how weakly an indifferent Reader may soon judge. For
first in the days of Adam it might have seemed most needful to have given
this liberty if so the Lord had created more then one woman, which be did not:
As for the other that came after by propagation they were his daughters or
nieces, and therefore herein appears a let: Secondly God the lawgiuer, from
whom kings and princes take direction for their best laws knew well, a law is
best kept, when it is first made. Now to dash it in the prime by a contrary
practice at the first, and to stifle it in the birth had been with the
soonest. These as others also best known to the Lord might be the causes, why
at the first that was not approved which was after borne withal. For the other
clause of their objection where they infer. If for spreading and increasing
Gods Church, then it should be now in use. That sequel is no good conseque^t
Because the worship of God is not within the place of Jewrie now, as it was
then. But the sound of it is gone throughout the whole world, and every place
fitteth for the Lord his service in respect of what it did then. Now (says
Saint Austin) of all sorts of men, and all nations the members may be gathered
to the people of God, and the city of the kingdom of heaven. Ex omni hominum
g^n^r^, atqu^ omnibus g^^ tibus, adpopul^^ Dei et ciuit ate^ regni calorum
^embra colligi possunt. August. de virgm. cap 9
Besides these there is are others given by the fathers why the Lord did be are
with his people. They whose leisure it is to view what has been cited for
testimony herein, may be entreated to lay these reasons together which our
fathers and brethren grave, as also the manner of speech they grace this
question withal: Exacted, required, approved, tolerated, dispensed withal,
wincked at, permitted, granted. For all these they shall find as these also:
usual, lawful, mystical, a custom no way culpable, without blame, free,
indifferent, a special case, and say the most against it. Such a one it is, as
may be excused and a reason given for it. All which speeches diligently
perused, let men say whither the book of homilies might not well deliver that
sentence as it does.

It is directly against the word of God and his first institution of marriage
Genesis 2.24. Malac. 2.15. Romans 7.10.1. Cor. 16.6.1. Cor. 7.2.
The place in Genesis we will answer anon. The other of Malachy and the Apostle
are against s^eshly and carnal lust in their time, why are they the^ urged
against these patriarks y^ were long before, and beside were not guilty of ye
carnal sin condemned by those scriptures Saint Paul inff^^icteth the Romans and
Corinthians in their duties and liberty in marriage. What is this to the
Patriarks and their fact. But by one of this dumb show brought forth, take a
taste of the other. Let Peter Martyr be heard in his notes upon 16. or cap. 7.
which is the place the obiector vr geth. Verba hae aliqui putant face re
aduersus polygamia^, quod mihi non displicet, modo hinc non inferatur. Patres
qu^ in veteri lege habue runt vxores, no^ vsos fuisse tusto matrimonio, sed
potius adulteros indicandos. Nam cum ea de causa insacris literis non
damnentur, om nino putandum est it is tum tem poris licuisse. Martyr in Cor. 7.
Leuit. 18.18.
These words (says he) some men think make against plurality of wives,
which things mislikes me not, so it be not hereupon enforced, that the
fathers, who in the old law had many wives, did not use lawful matrimony, but
were rather to be judged adulterers. For since they are no where condemned in
holy scripture, we must think it lawful for them at that time to have so
many. Ju which sentence these two parts would be noted 1. that the words in
this 1. Cor. 7. (and the reason is all alike for the other epistle) makes not
against poligamie of the fathers; secoudlie nor does any other scripture
alleged, and therefore this their heaping up of scripture, when it proves no
such thing is a manifest breach of the commandment, wherein he straightly
forbids false witness bearing against the truth. A sin the more grievous,
as the most innocent truth (for so are the scriptures) is forred to dispose for
that, whereof they have nothing to gain say. Great use there may be of them
for the times of the Gospel, or of Malachie and after that the law was written
in tables, whereunto Leuiticus, 18.18. as Tremellius translates may, have
reference; and we have delivered our judgment in writing unto my Lords grace
of Canterbury; but the instances remembered in the homily are most of them
taken out of the book of Genesis where is added in the close an example of David
and Solomon, but with a Cave at in these terms for our use and understanding
which things we see plainly to be forbidden us by the law of God and are now
repugnant to all public honesly. To treat with ye libidinous humor of carnal
men, who either challendge the examples of the patriarks that they may do the
like, or condemn them for doing it, or protect ignorance of the scriptures,
because such examples (say they) are scandalous.

I, but this is directly against the word of God and his first institution of
marriage.
I, but (says Ludouicus Lauater) God who made that law; has also power to
release it Besides it is a cortine peculiar, Sedenim qui l^gem sanxit De u^
cande relax ands potest are^ habet Pecuitare quid damest, quod ^e mo temere in
ex plum, quo prod^giosam (uam lea bodinem excuset, traxerit. Lauatur. in
Easter. homil. 11. c. 2. page 22. Certis de causis largitus est plu rescodem
tempore Vxores habere. Id homil. 10. page 20. Tam abest vt hac ceniugia
culpauerie Deus. vt etiam fortunaucrit. Id de vita and obit. Nabal. hemil. 10.
page 12. Duas sim^l vxores habera simpliciter lege Mosis vetitum no^ fuit.
Drus^n Ruth. 4.5.
which no man may rashly draw in to example to excuse his own prodigal lust by.
And alittle before in yt 10. homily God (says he) for certain causes
granted it as a larges and faucur to the Isralites to have more wives at once.
Again in his treatise of the life and death of Naball God (says he) was so
far from blameing them that he gave them great success. Their peculiar and a
Larges special to them and their great good success hereupon, what other
sonse bears it, then that common euglish which our homily by some unjustly
tared safely delivers, specially much more being added by others, as
appears in the several quotations before, and this among the rest of John
Drusius. Simply forbidden (says he) it was not by the law of Moses to have
2. wives at once.

I but what warrant for this more then these authorities
Arguments strengthened in this sort no discrete godly wifeman but does and
will reverence, for we receive and so must the witness of men. But yet to
think that some privilege those patriarchs had, though not so expressly set
down this may be the reason. For dispensations and privileges are as laws
yea privileges are not held necessary to be written where laws be. 1. Ioh.
5.9. Qualis lex, tali^ despensatio Priutlegium dicitur guodema not contra ius
commane in fu^ ro^^m aliquam personarum Glos lib. 6. de Rescript. c: verse in
Printlegium quasi prin^ta lox.
As at this day we observe in Acts of Parliament such favors as concern some
few stand unprinted, Because laws belong to all, privileges to some few. For
a privilege is some personal or particular law, which either dies with the
person, or must not be made common; If so as we know this to be true. How much
less may we expect any record thereof before Moses and the law written. For
those more specially the book of homilies speaks of. Wherefore as a law they
had in their minds and consciences for ^i^ngle marriage by special
inspiration, so by a special inspiration, a toleration and favor was enough.

An advertisement to the Reader.
Presently after this treatise finished, there was sent us from an honorable
personage these notes following, as it seems an abridgement methodicallie
drawn together by some of Deuon. and Cornwall. With their preface, and
reasons, greatly accounted of among the ignorant, which we have thought good to
set down returning every of them a brief answer with reference to those
places, wherein they are handled more at large.

We protest before the almighty God, that we acknowledge the churchs of
England, as they be established by public authority) to be true visible
churches of Christ: That we desire the continuance of our ministry in them
above all earthly things, as that without which our whole life would be
wearisome and bitter unto us. That we dislike not a set from of prayer to be
used in our church: Finally Whatsoever follows is not set down of an evil
mind to deprave the book of Common prayer ordination or homilies, but only
to show some reasons, why we cannot subscribe unto all things contained in the
same book.
THat man his pretestation is in vain, Protestatio ^u^ contrario act^ (...)
releuat: Vel no^ Valet protestatio vbi protesta^s per co^trarium factu^ direct
obuiat sua protestatio^i Glos. in Caluinde constitut. verb. sine praindicie,
conferen. page 26.
whose deed agrees not with his protestation. And a decree of a very ancient
counsel prouides that no man should be admitted to speak against that
whereunto he had formerly sub scribed, as is alleged in the conserence before
the king page 26. But leave we this their fair glosing, and examine their
reasons.

To the book of (...) prain (...) subscribe because there (...) is something
(...) of which (...) make ^^ie reasonable sense.
Neither sense, nor reason are fit auditors of a business of this Argument.
For if they were, what sense is there to put on love, or where reason is there
to put on the bowels of compassion? Is that which we know more inward then the
inside of the gown, for it is the life of she body so we esteem of the
bowels, and is the life of the bowels, body, person and al (for so is love
wrought by a holy says and compassion proceeding from both) as a garment that
a man puts of and puts on, or is the Lord Jesus any such manner of attire,
which is the cause of all to be likened to apparel, if so what reason, and if
no reason what sense is there so to argue? A natural man (and we think such a
one has sense and reason) perceives not the things of God neither indeed
can be, no marvel then if he stumble at such places as these following.

The first reason therefore is, that it contains things without sense. As 1.
whatsoever is manifest, the same is light Ephesians 5.13. in the epistle readon
the 3. Sunday in Lent.
Whatsoever is manifest the same is light. Not without sense, neither in it
own words, unless the greek and original may be thought so, nor in the
proposition it self (for viuinitie and Philosiphy acknowledge it for a truth)
nor in erperience, for what ever is manifest, ye same is so by reason of the
light (either in it or upon it) nor in the coherence of the place (for ye
Apostle she weth how al points of darkness, whither in judgment or practice
mani festly are disconered by ye light) nor is it without sense in the
understanding of godly interpreters. The Greek scholiast rendereth it so, and
M. Beza commends him for it. Scholiasles (...) passive interpretatur vt sit
se^sus. Quicqu^d manifestum fit lucem (s) essel^^ cidum fires co^^e nit. 11.
Beza. M^h^tamen simplicius videtur vt expositionem quam posui retineamus.
Muscul. in Ephesians. 5.13.
Some of our brethren (says Musculus) take this word (...), not only
passiuely is manifest, but actiuely to, does manifest. They have truly their
thoughts not untrue, But in my conceit it is more simple and plain that we
keep the exposition I follow, namely, That which is manifest is light: We must
know a translater his office is when he comes to a place somewhat indifferent
in the original (as this word (...) of the mean to see, (...) vocis media
partly active partly passive) to commend either interpretation to the godly
wisdom of the learned teacher, who at more leisure upon better opportunity
may farther expound it in handling his set lecture. Lux active, passive so is
(...) active passive
It is light actiuely giving it, or it is light passiuely receiving it. Both
ways since it is, both ways may the word be, actiuely does manifest, or
passiuely is manifest. Either way true, neither way dangerous, heretical, nor
senseless.

2. It is without sense to say. In the power of the divine majesty to
worship the Unity.
These words in the Collect for Trinity Sunday are not with out sense. For we
worship the unity in the power of the divine majesty (that is) one in
power, deity, and majesty. Three epithets, or words of attendance, because
3. persons, and yet all but one, and one essence; for as says Fulgentius or
Austin (the book is diversely quoted) unity has relation to the nature namely
that one, Vnitas refertur ad naturam. Fulgent. de fide ad Petam. c. 1.
who is God blessed for evermore. All which is answerable to those ancient
verses good for memory, sound in divinity. Like majesty of persons, Like
power of the same, but the deity common to all. So has Victorious, and before
him Saint Basil in his bexameron the tenth homily. Far maiestas personarum.
Par potest asest earum. and communis deitas. Victorious. Id vnitatem co^cernit
potentiae, vt vna^ in diuinis reimeat gloriam and maiestatem. Basil.
bexamero^s. homil. 10.
Concerning the unity of power to retain one glory and majesty in the divine
persons etc. Glory majesty and power in these divine persons, yet but one God
to be worshipped.

3. It is without sense. Every parishoner must communicate thrice a year and
also receive the sacraments and other rites.
Answer hereunto read this second part cap. 13.

God is sade to be the father of all that is called father in heaven Ephesians
3.15.
Our translation speaking of originally one greater then another, Read on the
17. sun. after Trinity.
and of God above all, chooses to speak of the primitive namely the father
rather then of the diriuatiue, and those that descend of him. For if God be
their father, then also must he needs be the father of their families.
Secondly where others call this word Parentela, Paternitas, cognatio, tribus,
(...) interpretatur (...) quatenus de he minibus dicitur qui pregeniteres
appellantur (...).
familia, and the Greek scholiast progenitors, and so differ. but the
translation in the communion book giving the name Father reconcileth all these
diversities. 3. as the Apostle uses an allusion or holy destant in the Greek,
so the translator seems to keep it in our English by a grace of speech,
translating the name father, thereby understanding fatherhood, and implying
there is no father in heaven or earth whither Adam, Abraham, etc. but God is a
father of them, and because of them, therefore also of their kindred,
generations, and families that come after.

5. It is without sense. This is the sixth month, which was called barren.
In the Epistle read on the annunciation to Mary, those words are taken out of
Luke 1.36. The lesser Bibles render it thus. This is her sixth month, which
was called barren. Her put in, which is no more in the Greek, then in the
English, as for the word following both translate it alike (which) for (she)
not meaning the month, but the woman Elizabeth, which was called barren. actus
actiueril sunt in patiente praedisposito.
This ambiguitie is shunned no more in one then in another. The sense is plain
howsoever, and if without sense, surely then only to those who understand not,
and that willingly.

6. It is without sense. Or ever your pots be made hot with thorns, so let
ind ignation vex him, even as a thing that is now. Psalm 58.8.
The difficulty in this place comes hence, Quia vox hebraa and ollas et
spinas significat subobscurus est hic locus, etc. Marlor. Vulg. Marlo. Tremel.
Stephan et alii.
because one and the same word signifies a pot, and a thorn. Before the
thorues shoot up, or as a thing that is raw suddenly took out of the pot,
ere the thorns crackle under, both which interpretations (given by learned
men) give aim to one and the same mark, showing the speediness of Gods
judgment by two similitudes in one verse; herein our vulgar english
translation is to be thought no more senseless, then that which Marlorat and
Auias Montanus follow; unless men, whose exceptions these are, intend to
disgrace the original, who is in this an example to our communion book, and
either both are free, or both accessory to this senseless imputation.

7. It is without sense. When the company of speere-men and multitudes of the
mighty are scattered abroad among the beasts of the people, so that they
humbly bring pieces of silver, and when he has scattered the people that
delight in war Psalm. 68.30.
words no more void of sense then are other translations This here delivered
by way of prophecy, the other have it by way of prayer. This only in a third
person, that other in a second, and a third. As for the sense it is plain to
any man's reading, that the verse speaks of subdueing the enemy, not the
multitudes only, and basersort, doing homage in bringing pieces of silver, but
their Captains to, and all those, whose delight is in warxe.

Ratio secunda. That forasmuch as we are able to discern, that there is
contradiction
1. To the book of Articles, which denies that confirmation has any visible
sign: Where as the last prayer in confirmation, makes imposition of hands to
certify the children of Gods favor, and gracious goodness toward them.
Nor has confirmation any visible sign, as the word visible sign is taken
for a visible element, which every sacrament has: namely in baptism there is
water, in the Lords supper bread and wine but Confirmation has no such thing.
For imposition of hands is a cirrumstance of action, not a matter of substance,
as in a Sacrament every visible sign is. To this sense speaks the 25.
article. Confirmation has not like nature of a Sacrament with Baptism and the
Lords Supper, for that it has not any visible sign or ceremony, (that is any
visible Element for sign or ceremony) ordained of God. In which words it
means by sign a Sacramental sign consisting of an outward, earthly Element
and substance, so confirmation has no visible sign. As for that other of
imposition of hands it is a sign of Episcopal action, namely to certify
children (confirmed upon the prayer of the Bishop) how God has been favorable
and good unto them, in that they are borne of believing parents, baptized into
Christ, brought unto the knowledge of his grace and will as is found by
examining them in the principles of their holy faith, etc. Wherefore the Bishop
prays over them for increase of grace, and uses withal imposition of hands
to certify them by this sign of Gods favor and goodness toward them. By
which ceremony (says Master Iunius) the holy Apostles, and Orthodox Fathers
of sound judgment would have signified that a Christian man endued with
repentance, Qua cerimo^ia sancti Apostoli and orthodoxi patres significatu^
voluerunt Christianu^ hominc^ resipiscentia, et fide praditum, atque ecclesia
insitum vbilegi time probatus esset, mancipari domino, and consecrari ad voca
tionem suam sancte and relligiose obeundam etc. Iun. Paral lib. 3. c. 6. Libers
Christiancrum statim post partum vt membra ecclesie baptizaba^tur, and post
quam no^nihil adeleuissent institueban tur, and impositione mannum
confirmabantur, ac dimittebantur ex coetu Catechumenorum; ita vt liceret illis
deinde adcaena^ accedere. Vrsin. Proleg. Catechis. page 3.
and faith, and ingrafted into the Church after he has been lawfully approved
of, is given in service to the Lord, and consecrated to go thorough his
calling (whether generally as a Christian, or particular this and that) in a
holy and religious manner. Answerably unto this use of the Fathers, and
received by our Church. Master Vrsinus speaking of persons to be Baptized has
these words. The children of Christian parents (presently after they were
borne) as members of the Church were baptized, and after that they were pretily
shot up, they were instructed, and by imposition of hands confirmed, and were
dismissed out of the company of the Catechized, so as they might after wards
lawfully approach to the Lords Table. This holy ancient custom to fore
commendably used, our Church at this day continues. But see more of this in
this second part. Cap. 11.

2. Contradictory to it self, by affirming in the Catechism that there are
but two Sacraments, and yet ascribing to Confirmation all things that are
required to the being of a Sacrament either in that Book, or in the Book of
Articles.
It the Catechism affirm there are but two Sacraments, how are these
exceptions at variance with themselves that men knowing and acknowledging so
much, yet both before in this Book, as also in the fourth reason here
following in the fourth instance, seem to enforce by their sophistications,
that the Catechism implies there are more then two. Again it is false, where
it is said, the Book of Articles ascribes to Confirmation all things that are
required to the being of a Sacrament, as may appear in the point before
handled, and the 25.27.28. Acticles expressly show to the contrary.

Ratio. 3. That in our best understanding it contains in it some untruths.
The third maine reason is to purpose, if it can as well prove as it is ill
alleged. But let us examine the allegations as they are brought in order.

1. Innocents are said to be Gods witnesses, and to have confessed and showed
his praise not in speaking but in dying.
This sentence here charged for an untruth the Church of God has taught
heretofore, Fro Christo trucidatos infa^ tes inter marty res coronart. Bern
sermon. 1. de Innocent. Si quaris eoru^ apud Deum merita, vt coro narentur, qua
re and apu^ Herodem crimina vt trucidarentur. An forte minor Christi pietas
quam Herodis impietas. vt ille quidem potuerit innoxios neci dare, Christus non
potuit propter (e occises coronare ibid. Audi quod ini^ ria non affectisint sed
doronas m^ruerunt. Theophi. in Math, cap. 2. Quod pueri prodommo oceisi sunt,
significat per humilisatis merstum ad c^ron a^martyrit esse ve^iondu^. Haimo
part, hyem desanct. Innocen. Iudaet martyru^ sanguine redu^dante. Hilar. Can.
1. in Mat. Hercdis furor, and infantum mors populi Iudates in Christi anos
sausentis est forma, etc. Beatorum mar tyrum caede pos^ se etc. In aternitatis
profectum per martyrii gloriam efferchantur, Ibid. Pro Christo potuerunt pati
quum nondum poterant confiters. August. ^m Epipha. ^erm. 6. inserm. 23. de
tempore. Non habebates atatem qua in passurum Chrustum crederet^^ sed habebatis
carnem, in qua pro Christo passuro passionem sustineretis. Ib. Non ^rustra
infantes illos, qui (cum ^ominus Jesus necandus quareretur) occisilunt in
honorem martyrum receptos commend it ecclesia Id. de lib. arbit. lib. 3. c. 23.
and epist. ^^. Hier. Homil, de sanctis and lib. 2. de symb ad Catechu. c. 5.
as the ancient Fathers witness. Bernard who was some 5. hundred years since
has these words. Can any doubt that the infants which were slain in Christ
his steed, are crowned among the Martyrs? And meeting with an objection that
might be made. If you ask (says he) what they deserved at Gods hands that
they were crowned, ask also what fault they had done that they were murdered,
unless peradventure Christ his piety were less then Herod's impiety, that
the tyrant could put harmless infants to death, and Christ could not crown
them, who were killed for his sake. Theophilact who was some 900. years after
Christ writes thus. That Herod his malice may be shown, must injury be needs
done the little ones? Hear therefore, they were not iniuried but justly
obtained crowns. Haimo some 800. years after Christ writes in his Postilly
upon this feast day of the Innocents. In that the children were slain for the
Lord Christ, it implies that by the accepted work of humility the way is to
the crown of Martyrdom, etc. Hilarie who was some 400. years and upward
after Christ in his exposition upon Saint Matthew, speaking of these babes, and
their death says, Iewrie did abound in the blood of Martyrs. And presently
after thus. Herod his fury and the death of the infants is a form or pattern
of the people of the Jews raging against the Christians, and thinking that
with the slaughter of blessed Martyrs, they can extinguish the name of Christ.
And speaking of those words in the Prophet: Rahel would not be comforted
because they were not, etc. They were carried up into the advancement of
eternity by the glory of Martyrdom. Saint Austin (who was somewhat before
Saint Hilarie) The infants (says he) could suffer for Christ, though they
could not as yet confess him. Again in another place, ye were not of age to
believe in Christ, who was to suffer, but yet ye had flesh of your own wherein
ye could endure the Passion for Christ who was to suffer. And in his third
Book of free will. The Church does not in vain commend the infants received
into the honor of martyrs, which were slain by Herod etc. Which very self
same sentence he remembers verbatim in his Epistle to Saint Ierom. Copious in
this argument are his Homilies of the Saints in four senerall Sermons, calling
the Innocents Martyrs and their death Martyrdom, and in his second Book de
symbolo ad Catechumenos the fifth Chap. etc. Before him Saint Origin homil. 3.
makes mention of them after this manner. Horum memoria semper, vt dignum est,
in ecclesits celebratur: secundum integrum ordinem sactorum vt primorum
martyrum etc Origin: homil, 3. in diuersos. Been and secundum voluntate^ Dei
little memoriam sancti patres celebrari ma^dauerunt se^ piternam in ecclesus,
velut pro domino morien tium. Ibid. Ecle paruuli esti, quos hostis natura,
crudelitatis monstru^ Herodes occidit subito fiu^t mar tyres, and dum vice
Christi and pro Christo. Cypria^. de stella and Magis. Testimon^igrave;um, quod
non potera^t sermon, per hibent passione Ilid. Spangenberg. Postil. Ista tam
tristi tragaedia cruen tam ecclesiae Christ's imaginem delintauit Centur. 1:
lib, 1, cap, 3. Vt Abel prim^s veteris testamenti ^artyr fuit, cuius sanguis ad
Deu^ clamauit it a isti primi in nouo test amento propter Iesum Christum recisi
sint and gloriosa mar tyris corona redimiti, vitam hanc mortalem cum immortali
commutauerunt, and cum ill^ nunc in coelis viuunt. Gualter. homil. 18. in Math.
2.
The memory of these infants always is celebrated in our Churches as it is
meet, according to the entire order of the saints, that Bethlehem it self
where the Savior was borne, may seem to offer unto the Lord the first fruits
of the Martyrs. Anon after. Well therefore and according to the will of God,
the holy Fathers have given in charge that there be celebrated a perpetual
memory of them as dying for the Lord. No new devise in his time but long
before as it appears by his writing. Saint Cyprian or the Author under his
name. Behold these little ones, (whom Herod the enemy of nature and and
monster of cruelty did kill) are suddenly become Martyrs, and whilst in
steed of Christ, and for Christ pulled from their mothers breast and slain
they bear witness by suffering, what they could not by their speech. All
which testimonies as they are nothing, if Scripture were against them, so the
Scripture no where gainsaying, we shall do ill to gainsay the testimony of so
many ages succeeding one another, and that for many hundred years confirming
what (but lately) is denied without sufficient proof to the contrary. And yet
though lately denied by some few among us (not to speak of our own Church here
at home) other our brethren in the same faith learned writers of these times
approve the order we do. Spangenbergius as may be seen in his postill they of
Merdenburg in their Centures note that God by this heavy Tragedy has
shaddowed out the bloody image of Christ's Church. Which history of theirs
would not fit to such a purpose, if their were no comparison twixt them and the
Church of Christ. Master Gualter in his 18. Homily upon Saint Matthew writes
thus. As Abel was the first Martyr of the old Testament, whose blood cried
unto God, so these infants were the first, which were slain in the new
Testament for Jesus Christ and crowned with a glorious crown of Martyrdom,
have changed this mortal life for an immortal, and now live with him in the
heavens. Beside all these ancient and late authorities this argument may
justify what our Church does. They in whom Christ is persecuted and put to
death may be held for Martyrs: But in those innocent children Christ was
persecuted and put to death. (For such was the tyrants purpose, and so Christ
accounts what is done to little ones for his sake as done unto him.)
Therefore may they be thought blessed Martyrs not in speaking, for they were
infants, but in dying, Non pro fide Christ's, nec pro iustitia occub^^^ ru^t sed
pro fide Christo (id est) loco Christ's. Ludol.
not properly Martyrs such as are voluntary professors of the faith, but yet
so to be esteemed because for Christ, that is, Christ was among them sought to
be slain. Thirdly, the scripture it self thus far confirms the point, in
that the Prophet Jeremy is alleged cap. 31. Rahel weeping for her children,
Shaddowing thereby the Church of God mourning as a desolate widow for those
that she bare unto God. For so the verse following does minister comfort. Thus
says the Lord. Refrain thy voice from weeping, and thine eyes from tears,
for thy work shall be rewarded says the Lord. As for that our Church calls
them Martyrs (which seems to be some men's grieuance) because Herod's son was
then slain, is no denial of the name of Martyrs to the others the children of
the faithful in Bethlehem. For if any were, it was sufficient, Voluntate and
actu vt S. Stephan voluntate non actu. Johannes. Actu no^ voluntate, vt in
nocentes Bernar, sermon, de Inno, Cutus vice suppleuit quod deerat voluntatis
Ibid.
and that some were, the allegations before prove sufficiently So needless are
some men's peremptories they send forth to wound this truth like Herod his
executioners to kill those little ones, that so he might be sure to put Christ
to death. To conclude this point. That difference of Martyrs our Church
allows of, Some are Martyrs in will and act, that is, both suffer and are
willing to it, so Saint Stephen was, some in will ready co dye, though happily
they dye not, so John the Evangelist: Some in act, not in will that is, they
can but suffer and do, though they have no will, nor understanding to know
what they do, so did these infants, in whom what was wanting to their will
Christ graciously supplied.

2. It affirms that Faith and Repentance are required of infants that are to
be Baptized. And that they perform the same by their Suerties.
Two branches in this exception. In paruulis qui baptizantur, sunt qui nega^t
omnem actione^ et operationem spiritus sancti. Chem. de bapt. Hic dico quod
omnes dicunt aliena fide eoru^ qui offeru^s eos paruulis succurri, etc. Luther.
de captiv. Babylon. Sicut verbum Dei potens est, dum sonat etia^ impis cor
immutare, quod non minus est surdum and incapax quam vllus paruulus. Ibid.
The first of these against such as think God works not at all by his holy
spirit in children baptized. The Catechism not meaning that they have au
actual faith, namely a feeling that they do then believe, for so they do
not, that they live, yet they do live. But they believe (that is) they have
the spirit of faith and repentance. As for the second branch namely that they
perform faith and repentance by their sureties, is to be understood of that
present profession and promise then made, whereby the God-children are bound,
as effectually in baptism, as if themselves were then presently able, and did
actually believe: Luther disputing of this point. Here I say as all else do
that children are succored by the faith of others, that offer them to
Baptism, etc. Again afterward. As the word of God is mighty, when it
sounds, able to change even the heart of a wicked man, which is no less deaf
and incapable then any child, so by the prayer of the Church offering the
child in baptism, the little one is clenfed, changed, and renewed by faith
infused into it. But for answer to the doubts herein look the first part,
cap. 30. page 173. etc.

3. That children Baptized have all things necessary unto salvation, and that
they are undoubtedly saved.
No more untruth then that of the Homily, That infants being baptized, and
dying in their infancy, are by his sacrifice washed from their sins, brought
to Gods favor and made his children, Homil. salvation of makind. Perkins on
the Creed. page 25.
and inheritors of his kingdom of heaven homily of the salvation of mankind
only by Christ etc. No more untruth, then that, which Master Perkins writes.
That infants dying in their infancy, and therefore wanting actual faith,
which none can have without knowledge of Gods will are no doubt saved by some
other special working of the spirit unknown to us. But an argument to prove
this Rubricke true may be thus briefly framed. To whom the promise is made,
Act. 2.39.
how God will be their God they are undoubtedly saved: But to our children
baptized the promise is made. Therefore our children baptized are undoubtedly
saved. But hereof see at large part. 1. cap. 25. page 165. 166.

4. Untruth. That we have a sure and certain hope of every one to be buried
that he shall rise again to everlasting life.
We are not required by the book of common prayer to have a sure and certain
hope of every one to be buried, because not of every notorious impenitent
malefactor cut off by law, or a murderer of himselse, or dying excommunicate,
all which are buried, but of every one living and dying in the fellowship of
Christ his Church, professing the same faith, pertaking the same Sacraments, of
whom we hope the best, but no farther, nor otherwise then thorough Jesus Christ,
for in the burial we profess that to be the bond of our hope. If any minister
be sure to the contrary, discretion may be used, which we hold safest when it
is with direction from the Bishop, as in such cases of doubt the Book well
prescribes. See more, part. 2. cap. 1.

5. Untruth. That nothing is ordained by it to be read in Gods service, but
the very pure word of God, the holy Scriptures, or that which is undoubtedly
grounded upon the same.
No untruth. Because there are left out as the preface of the Book shows
many things, whereof some be untrue, some vain and superstitious, in
consideration whereof this sentence prefixed there follows. Nothing is
ordained to be read but, etc. And for any instance is given to the contrary
it is, but their idle surmise.

6. That in the course of reading appointed so much as possibly may be, the
reading of the holy Scripture is so set forth, that all things shall be done in
order without breaking of one piece from another.
It is no breaking of one piece from another to read chapter after Chapter, as
time shall serve, and the Minister or Church does see good, that so the whole
Bible, or the greatest part thereof may be read over once in the year. But the
preface calls that breaking one piece from another, when uncertain stories,
legends, Responds, verses, vain repetitions, commemorations, and smodales come
between, so that commonly in the beginning of a book to be read, three or
four chapters were read and no more at all. And therefore no untruth in those
words prefixed, but in them, that do purposely misconstrue.

Ratio quarta.
That it contains in it doubtful matters.
1. Doubt
1. It affirms that there are Archangels, and that Michaell is a created
Angel.
A Sadducie might father this exception. For this denial that there are Angels
overthrows at once both these branches of Archangels, and of Michaell, and
faith in effect as much: though a Sadducie flatly deny, and this Author
doubtfully deliver it: which manner of writing many times differs no more
then heresy in the shell, and when afterward it is fledged. It this name
Archangell be such a stone of offense. as because where it is, that Book may
not be subscribed to, After the proper Preface. Homil. obedience to Rulers and
Magistrates. 1. These. 4.16. Saint. Iud. v. 9.
(for so some reason against the Coma union Book and the Homilies where it is
in both,) then may we not subscribe to the whole Scripture because of these
places, 1. Thessal. 4.16. and Saint Jude v. 9. for there it is in them both,
and in the latter of these two Michaell is called an Archangell, and therefore
may well be thought a created Angel. For this word Archangell does no more
deny him whose name it is to be an Angel, then a word of like composition
Archbuilder does deny one to be a builder, 1. Cor. 3.10.
but rather inforceth by way of necessary consequent because a chief or
special one, therefore a builder: so because a chief Angel therefore an
Angel. Apocal. 12.7.
And although in the twelfth of the Apocalips some are of opinion, that
Michaell signifies Christ, yet diuersare of another judgment taking Michaell
and his Angels in their proper signification, for administering spirits to help
those, which are inheritors of eternal salvation, Heb. 1. Other objections
they make, as first that Michaell signifies Christ, because it signifies who
is equal to God. ^ut ye is no more argument, why Michaell may not be a created
Angel, then to reason from the name Gabriell, who signifies the strong God or
strength of God and yet is a peculiar name given to a created Angel. Luke. 1.
Luc. 1.26.
or the word Daniel, which signifies the judgment of God, and yet was it the
name of Abigails son, 1. Chron. 3.1.
as also the names of that excellent prophet whose prophecy we have. Rather
it well follows this name Michaell is as Gabriell the name of a created
Angel, 2. Pet. 2.11.
in this sense, Composita hutusmods nomina habent Angels vt intellig^ museos
non habere potectate^ separatam a Deo, sed princia patum sub nomine Dei gere re
vt totum Deo tribuatur. Marlo in Luc. (...). 19.
arguing that Angels though mighty in power, and none among the creatures like
unto them, yet even they carry these names as a remembrance to the sons of
men, that their power is borrowed of the Lord, and their heutenancie, or
principality is under him. For whoels is the mighty God, and who is equal
unto him? The second argument (some use that Michael signifies Christ, and
therefore is no created Angel) is of no consequence at all. For Isaacke,
Sampson, David, Solomon, did signify Christ too, yet were they men, distinct
persons from him. Their third reason is because Michaell is called one of the
chief Princes. In saying this we keep to the words of scripture. Dan.
10.13. Aliud est specta re caput secun dum ordinationem nature cu insque in suo
ge nere, aliud secu^ dum ordinationem gratia. Iun. Contro. 3. lib. 1. c. 9.
One thing we know it is to speak of creatures as creatures, whither men, or
Angels in their frame of creation, another thing to speak of them, as they are
the elect confirmed in grace. Of men, as men, Adam may be their chief, and of
the Angels in their nature some one or other continually, or by course, and at
times their chief as the Lord will, yet that no let, as they are the elect
Church of God but Christ may be and is their only chief and head. That there
are Angels, and among them Archangels, such as are chief, we need not doubt,
Angelorum qua Angelicaput aut princeps esse potest, Veru^ qua electa eccle sia
sunt, capus vnicum est Christus Ibid. 11.
because there is order (not confusion) even in hell the place of confusion
much more in heaven, which is the beauty of all and the glory of our God. The
diverse names of throns, dominions powers, principalities, show diverse
degrees, for they are not idle names. One Angel brings glad tidings to the
shepheardes, the residue anon after accompanig him called an army of heavenly
soldiers singing praises unto God, show there are some first, and others after.
Colos, 1.16.
As for the quotient that there are 9. and just 9 orders, Luc. 2.9.13.
or rancks we inquire not, much less do we determine. Sure we are of this,
Exercitus (id ect) varies as or dinu^.
that the Angels are an army where are diverse ranks, and Michael we find a
chief one in the Lords host. Thus far proceeding we offend not, yea this
we would know, what injury is it unto Christ, to say there are degrees of
comparison among the Angels, so long as we take not upon us boldly to
marshall them, but contenting our selves, (with that we are taught) give the
sovereignty of all unto Christ? Were there not among the Lord his worthies
that did fight his battles, 1. Chro. 12.14
some able to resist a hundred, some a thousand, all Captains in the host,
yet a greater then they all, that did slaie his ten thousand; in respect of
whom, they were but soldiers and yet Captains they are compared with the rest
of the army. 1 Samuel 18.7.
Stars there are in the firmament but not all of one magnitude; 1. Cor. 15*41.
one star differs from another in glory. God has given the rule of the
day to the Sun, of the night to the Moon, his own power in the mean while
nothing diminished, for he rules day and night Sun, and Moon, and all
else. The priesthood of the law was a looking glass, Heb. ^.3.
or as the author to the Hebrews speaks made after the pattern of heavenly
things. If so, as it is most certain, then look, how in the priesthood some
were common, and ordinary Priests, others of more eminency, and chief above
the rest, for there were Levites and Priests and a high priest, so may we
undoubtedly conclude of that other in heaven and those celestial Angelical
spirits, that some are common and ordinary, others chief and more special
as the word Archangel does import. But will we know, why it pleases some to
doubt there are Archangels, their reason is because where Archangell is named,
Christ (say they) is to be understood. which opinion if it be priuatlie
theirs, and spread no farther the less dangerous is it but yet dangerous. For
the places of Saint Jude and 1. Saint Jude. v. 9
Thessalonians 4. prove the contrarte. 1. These. 4.16.
And though they shuffle off that in Saint Jude, yet can they not that in the
Thessalonians. Nor in deed can they that in Saint Jude. For being an history,
and histories Saint Jude relates plainly in their letter as the fall of the
Angels v. 6. Sodom and Gomorrah v. 7. we must judge the like of it, which
literal plain sense while men have left, they have dug them pits that hold
noe water, and have made strange interpretations more intricate then the text,
some understanding the body of Moses for the law, some for the Gospel, others
for the people of the Jews, others taking Moses put for Joshua, all which cast
a mist before the Sun, and no marvel then, if we easily mistake. Non hoc
dico quod praedecesso res meos morde am aut quicquam de his ar bitrer detrahen
dum. Hieron. Sophronio.
This we speak not to bite our predicessors, or that we would detract ought
from them. The letter of the history is plain that Michael a chief Angel in
the Lords host appointed by God (as sometimes one is for one business,
sometimes another for another) resisted the devil about the body of Moses,
when Satan would have made it a stumbling block for Israel to commit
Idolatry, (as they were forward enough) so highly they esteemed of him, and
no maruill. For not a like Prophet was there in Israel, whom the Lord knew
face to face. Deuteronomy. 34.10.
A history (this is) not found in other scriptures, 2. Tim. 3.8.
no more is the name of Iannes and Iambres, Iud. 14.
nor is that of Enoch prophesying in those words Jude 14. nor many such like
which the Jews might have by tradition from their fathers by word of mouth,
or by some other books which recorded diverse other matters of truth not
mentioned in Scripture. For we doubt not that the fathers told their children
many things of fact, such as were true and done in the generations aforetime,
not set down in Gods book, yet this no warrant to conclude insufficiency of
Scripture, as if there wanted any thing necessary to salvation, nor gives it
countenance unto popish traditions, that do contrary to the Scriptures. As
for the other place in the Thessalonians it distinguishes expressie the
Archangel from Christ. 1. These. 4.16.
The Lord himself Christ shall come from heaven with a shoot, and with the
voice of the Archangell, and with thee trumpet of God etc. Archangelu^ no minat
quasi d^^ cem exercitus Archangelus praeconis ossicio fu^getur. Quan qua^ enim,
etc. Tamen vt in ordinihus fieri solet primariu^ ftatuis vnum, qui al^is
pracinat, Marlorat. in 1. These. 4.16.
Where the Apostle names the Archangell, Captain as it were of the host. The
Archangell shall perform the office of a crier. For although it be common to
all the Angels Matthew 13. and 14. yet as in orders the Lord sets down one
chief to e governor unto the rest, and to blow before the^ Beside all this we
have spoken, more we might add out of the fathers, councels, scholasticall
writers. But we have been already long enough in this point and therefore
this shall suffice.

2. Doubt. It affirms baptism in an house merely private, and seems
hereby to nourish the superstitious opinion of the necessity thereof.
Look the answer before part. 1. cap. 32. page 191.

3. Doubt. It allows the minister to use conditional baptism in the public
congregation after the child has been priualie baptized in this form in the
name etc.
The book says not that the child after it has been privately baptized
shall be baptized publikly, but contrariwise in these express terms. If thou
be not baptized already. N. I baptize etc. And why this order is misliked we
know not, neither does the authors give a reason. For if it be meet to
speak of things as they are, then of doubtful things we may speak
doubtfuly. And yet this practtise here mentioned being seldom or never for
ought we hear, it is rather set down by way of prevention, then that we
know any such thing is done, and as it is a supposition so upon supposition
only proceeds.

4. Doubt. It says there be two sacraments only as general necessary unto
salvation, wherein it is dangerously implied that there are more then two.
In the second reason and the second instance thereof it is confessed that in
the Catechism there are but ^. which is a truth. And how suddenly men are
changed to deny so much, or captiously to enforce the contrary. But see
before part 2. Chapter 14.

5. Doubt. It allows private Communion between the minister and the sick
people.
Read hereof before part 2. Chapter 10.

6. Doubt. It affirms that our ceremonies tend to edification, and are apt to
stir up the dull mind of man to the remembrance of his duty to God by some
special, not able signification, whereby he may be edified.
Not amiss so to affirm. For our speech, gesture, behavior, attire and the
like (ordinary as they are) put us in mind of our selves, how much more may
those rites, cereinonies, apparel and the like, which the church of God does
ordain for time of divine service? But see more hereafter.

7. It calls ministers Priests, a thing avoided by the holy Ghost in the new
testament as belonging to sacrifices.
The holy Ghost giving the name (...). to our minister, which is the original
(whence Priest is derived) gives no other name, but what the communion book
calls them by; See before part 2. Chapter 6.

8. It appoints the minister to say to the sick person: I by Christ his
authority committed unto me do absolve thee from all thy sins.
Well may it. For the order prescribed is thus. In visitation of the sick the
minister begins with prayer in general for the whole Church and then more
particularly doubleth, trebleth, and multiplieth his prayer in behalf of the
person thus visited, exhorts him to a godly patience in bearing his sickness,
to an unfeigned repentance for his sins, a solemn promise of amendment of
life, to a settled confidence in the mercies of God thorough Christ, to an
earnest begging of God the forgiveness of sin, to an humble thanksgiving for
the Lords fatherly chasticement, as for all other blessings vouchsafed, with a
full bequest wholly commending him self to his blessed will whither in
remouall, or continuing, increasing or deminishing his pain, whither health or
otherwise life or death, what ever may come. Afterward she minister proceeds
to a more particular examination of the sick man his faith, how he stands
resolved against the terrors of death etc. satisfying him in such doubts as
shall then be ministered; And if the party have made a general profession of
his faith and sorrow for sin, then is he moved to a more special
confession, opening his grief more particularly if he feel his conscience
burdened therewith. And satisfaction being given this way, the temptation
subdued, the wound cured, the terrors of death vanquished by spiritual and
wholesome doctrines of the Gospel, Videmus ministros ipsos vt de remissione
peccatorum certi^res reddant co^ scientias, testes ac sponsores. Call. Institut.
lib. 3. c. 4.12. Nec minor is efficati^, aut fructus est priuata absolutio, vbi
ab it is petitur, qui singula ri remedso ad infirmitatem suam subleuandam opus
habe^t Ibid. 14. Secretum animi valnus aperuerit, atque illam Euangelii vocem
pecu liariter ad se directam audi^rit Tibi, etc. Ibid. Animum confir mabit ad
se^iritatem, illaque qua prius astuabat trepidatione liberabitur. Ibid. Priuata
absolutio in eccl^ si^s retinenda est, quanquam in confessione non sit
necessaria omnium delectorum confessio. Aug. confess. artic. 11. De confess.
priuata facienda pastoribus, affirmam^s ritum priuata absolutionis in ecclesia
retine^dum, and constanter retinemus propter multas gra^ts causas. Confess.
Saxon: 1.
the minister, who is in Gods steed a pledge and surety for further securing a
troubled soul, shall apply these words. Our Lord Jesus Christ who has left
power to his Church to absolve all sinners which truly repent, and believe in
him, of his great mercy forgive thee all thy sins in the name of the father
etc. Private absolution is of no less power, and efficacy then the public,
when it is sought for by them, who have need of this singular remedy for
easing their infirmity. For when the party shall have laid open his sore, and
shall hear from the mouth of the Lords minister the words of the Gospel
directed peculiarly unto him. Thy sins are forgiven thee. Be of good
comfort, it will establish his mind in security so as he shall be delivered
from that torment of fear, wherewith with before he was miserably vexed, and
disquieted. This Godly and comfortable practice of our Church of very great
use (if it were in more use) Master Calvin much commends, as the marginal
quotations may prove, and so do other Churches, as appears in their
confessions. Private absolution is to be retained, although in confession a
particular recital of all and every particular sin be not necessary.
Again the Churches of Saxony thus. Concerning private confession to be made
unto the pastors, we affirm the rite and manner of private absolution to be
retained in the Church and we do constantly retain it for many weighty
causes. Afterward it follows. As David was confirmed heare^^g of this
absolution. The Lord has taken away thy sin 2. Reg. 12. so thou may know
that the voice of the Gospel preaches unto thee forgiveness of sin, which
in absolution is by name expounded unto thee. Qua in absolutione tibi nomi
natim exponttur. Ibid. In specie homini peccatori in nomine Sanct. Trinit
dicitur^ Tibi remissa sunt peccata o^nia: Priuatam absolutionem recitanit
Christus paralytico. Luc. Osian. Institut c. 8. Prituata absolutione absoluit
Christus. Ibid. Priuata confessionis vsut apud nos seruatur, etc. Chem^it. de
Confess. page 216. Remittuntur peccata per Dei verbum, cuius Levites ^nter pres
quidam and exequutor ^st. Amb. de Cain. and Abel. lib. 2. c. 4. Per spiritum
sanctum peccata donantur, homines autom in remissionem peccatorum ministerium
suum exhibent, non iusalicuius potesta. it is exercent. Neque enim in sua nomine
sed, etc. Illi rogant, sed diusnitas dona^: humanum enim obsequium sed
munificentia superna est potestatis. Amb. de spiritu sancto. lib. 3. cap. 19.
Lucas Osiander in his institution says Private absolution bringes very
exceeding great comfort to afflicted consciences, when in special it is said
to a sinner in the name of the holy Trinity, All thy sins are forgiven
thee. Christ recited private absolution to the man sick of the palsy. When he
said be of good courage thy sins are forgiven thee. And in private
absolution Christ absolved the woman a sinner, saying thy sins are forgiven
thee. Chemnitius confesses the like in these words. The use of private
confession is preserved with us etc. Infinite other allegations might we
produce to witness this truth. But the conclusion we make with 2. places in
Saint Ambrose. the first is in his second book of Cain and Abel. sins are
forgiven by the word of God whose Leuite is a certain interpreter and
exequutor thereof. The other place is in his third book of the holy Ghost
cap. 19. Sins are forgiven by the holy Ghost, but men do proffer their
ministry in forgiveness of sin, not that they exercise a right of any power,
for sins are forgiven not in their own name but in the name of the father, son
etc. They ask, the godhead gives; It is man's service, but ye munificence is
from a higher power So as the sum of all is answerable to the beginning
mentioned in the Rubric. The minister does absolve but not in any absolute
power as of his own, for to God does, but in that power which is committed unto
him, namely ministerial; for so as the minister of God, and interpreter of his
will he may well do.

Ratio quinta.
That the holy scriptures are disgraced by it.
We cannot, nor dare commend, much less may we subscribe to such a book which
disgraceth the holy scriptures, and therefore we shall do well to see into
this accusation, that if it be true, we may do so more, if false it may
return to the disgrace of the penman whither one, or mo that thus complain.
The proofs follow in order, which are thus particularized.

1. The name of the holy scriptures are given unto the Apocrypha, which are
named parts of the old testament.
No more disgrace intended, or done the Canonical scriptures by our reverend
fathers, which drew the form of the Communion book, then was either done or
intended by those ancients, who many hundred years ago did give that name to
the book, we call Apocriphall. And sure we are neither of them have disgraced
the scriptures of the Hebrew Canon, by this appellation as they and we
understand it. The reason wherefore they did call these Apocripha holy
scriptures is threefold, Tribus de causis maxim, occasion, argume to, vsu.
Iun. Contro. lib. 1.5.4. Quod cum Iudei in duotordines diuisi essent Ibid.
(...). qui alibi agentes vbiuis locorum, etc. Ibid. Ecclesia Christ's an a
prisca diuersum can^ne^ a ludais accepit, etc. Ibid. Gr^acam scripturam ab
eccle sits Iudaeorum hellenist arum auctam si resecuissit, etc. Publicu^ autem
offendere religio erat, etc. Ibid. Quamobre^ isti libri vt traditi fuerant
permanserunt. Ibid. Horum libroru^ argumentum de rebus sacris ac non profanis,
etc. Ibid.
that is to say namely because of the occasion 2. the argument 3. the use. The
occasion was this, because, when the Jews were divided into 2. orders, some
using their hebrew tongue and abiding in Iewrie kept the hebrew text of the
scripture pure without any addition at all, others of them speaking Greek and
living in other places abroad and not in Iewrie, used the Greek scripture, and
translation, hence was it that the ancient christian Church had from the Ie
was a diverse canon one hebrew and another Greek, which canon the Christian
Church made not, but received it made, as the Jews delivered it, which in the
Greek tongue so enlarged with the rest of the Bible, if the ancient Christian
should have cut out, they had done two injuries at once to the Jews, from
whom they received them, and to the Christians to whom they were delivered,
and they made conscience to offend thus publicly, hereupon these books
remained as they were delivered. The second reason is their argument, because
they entreat not of things profaine, but sacred and holy. The third reason
because of their use and place. They were still bound next after the scriptures
in hebrew and stand as a partition wall or merestone twixt the old and new
testament. So as they have the name of sacred and holy Scriptures, partly
because always in the Greek Canon, partly because they teach us to live soberly,
godly, and righteously in this present world, which is the direct purpose of
the scripture, partly because they should distingiush from the profane, partly
because read in ye Church public to prefer them before other ecclesiastical
writings of the Fathers, always providing they know their place not before, but
after the other Canonical Scripture of the old Testament, which their veris
name Apocripha puts them in mind that they so do. Our brethren (knowing this
to be the judgment and interpretation of our Church) might have eased
themselves of this toiling objection and endured the name of holy Scriptures
given to those Books being (as it is) given (...), humanitus, humano iudicio,
graeco canone for these speeches Master Iunius uses of, taking holy Scripture
in a signification at large for the reasons before mentioned, and among those
reasons this we are not to hold the least of them, because these books as it
appears have been thought to fore (though not Canonical) yet so far
forth as they agree with the Canonical, as a kindly issue, and lively
branches or stemmes of the other. Now as the Apostle says in another case we
shall not unfitly apply here. If the root be holy the branches are holy, Romans
11.16.
ever remembering this withal that the root bears them, Romans 11.18.
and not they the root. Wherefore without offense be it understood in this
construction, if anywhere they be (as the information here pretends) named
parts of the old Testament, the meaning is in no other sense, Hi omnes hodie
ad vetus testamentu^ spectat. Drusius. epist. 107. Qq per epistolam.
then as they are called holy Scripture and as Drusius a very learned,
painful, and diligent Reader of antiquities delivers in other terms to the
like effect. viz, That they all at this day belong to the old Testament. But
hitherto of this point Read more part. 1. cap. 10.11.21. page 97.125. etc.

2. Disgraceful. Because they are read rather then holy Scripture when any
holyday falls on a Sunday.
This phrase rather then holy Scripture as if in no sense they might be so
called is a speech very disgraceful and prejudicial. As for reading them on a
holy day, when it falls on a Sunday is no matter of inevitable necessity,
but left to the discretion of the godly, peaceable, discrete Minister as
appears part. 1. cap. 20. page 124.

3. Disgraceful. Because certain whole Books of holy scripture are left
unread by appointment, as the Book of Canticles, both the Books of
Chronicles, and Apocalypse.
Hereof read before. part. 1. cap. 22. page 125.126.127.

4. Disgraceful. Because sundry Chapters of the Apocryphal are read twice in
the year, and none of the Canonical Scripture is read so often.
The Psalms are read once through every month, diverse Chapters, Epistles,
and Gospels, every Sunday and holy day, beside other Scriptures at other times,
as in Baptism, at the Lords Supper, at the solemnization of Marriage, at the
ordination of Ministers, at Churching of women, at burial and the like.
Wherefore this untruth returns home to the shame of the Author.

5. Disgraceful. Because likewise the Genealogies of our Savior Christ both
in Matthew and Luke are forbidden to be reads in the Congregation.
True what Optatus well faith, The choler once up, an easy matter it is for
angry persons to cast forth reproachful speeches. Liuore interus niente facile
act tratis iacta re conuitium Optat. lib. 6.
The genealogy of our Savior Christ is commanded to be read on the Sunday
after Christmas day, and is then read. How then dare men thus audaciously
write, it is forbidden to be read in the Congregation? But read more. part. 1.
cap. 22. page 125.126.

6. Disgraceful. Because certain Chapters appointed to be read out of the
Apocrypha contain manifest untruths. Tobi. 12.4.15. Judith. 42.10.13.
The places here set down are falfly quoted. But because they seem to be
those, which others have alleged we refer the Reader. part. 1. cap. 13.14.
page 104.110.

Ratio. 6, Because it contains some prayers whereof the latter part depends
not upon the former.
Were this true, that some prayers the latter depends not upon the former, yet
that is no just exception against the Communion Book. For it is no strange
thing in all discourses historical, thetoricall, poetical, sacred or
profane, sometimes to interrupt the maine purpose principally intended, like a
ship that is bound a great way off, yet turns in here, and there by the way,
though out of the way in regard of the last end whereunto it falls. And this
artificial handling of a treatise the learned call, (...).
as the margent may tell you holding it the very secret of their method. Now if
thus in a narration, Epistle, or the like where the Authors thoughts are
stayed, and may treatably deliberat, how much more may such a spiritual, holy,
inward secret be lodged sometimes in prayer, where a broken heart yields broken
thoughts, and abrupt sentences, which another not so deeply affected cannot
tell what to make of, but accounts them as ropes of sand, or prayers where the
latter part depends not upon the former. But that be their ignorance whose
exception it is. Let us examine their instances here following.

1. The Collects upon Innocents day, The third Sunday after Easter, the
Epiphanie. The first Sunday in Lent, The Sunday before the Easter, Trinity
Sunday, The fiftenth Sunday after Trinity, and other prayers that are not
warrantable. No dependence.

Though a many dislikes are here shuffled together, yet we will take them one
after one. The Collect upon Innocents day is thus. Almighty God, whose praise
this day, etc. Where the dependence is excellent by way of relation, that as
the babes did die a violent death, Christ being sought for in them, who were
witnesses of his name not in speaking but in dying (so the prayer runs)
mortify and kill, etc. That we also may dye (not a natural death but) the
death to sin mortifying and killing all vices in us, that in our conversation
our life may express his faith, which with our toongs we confess, etc. Which
coherence what man among us can justly mislike, but only such as discipline
better fitteth then disputation, and a sharp reproof rather then any larger
instruction.

The Collect on the third Sunday after Easter is, Almighty God, which show
to all men that be in error the light of thy truth to the intent, that they may
return into the way of righteousness, grant unto all them that be admitted
into the fellowship of Christ's religion, that they may eschew those things,
that be contrary to their profession, and follow all such things, as be
agreeable to the same, etc. When we say that the Lord shows to all men the
light of his truth, Ioh. 1.9.
etc. It is as that John 1.9. 1. Tim. 2.4.
The true light that lightneth every man that comes into the world. And 1.
Timoth. 2.4. Who will that all men be saved and come unto the acknowledgement
of the truth. As for the dependence it easily clears it self. For since none
can come to the light of the truth but by the Lord, and that light is to
conduct in the way of righteousness, the prayer of the Church is for all them,
to whom the light has appeared, that their course may be the course of
godliness and sanctification eschewing things contrary, etc.

The Collect on Epiphanie shows the Dependence of the prayer in proposing for
the argument thereof Gods mercy vouchsafed the wise men by the leading of a
Star, Res quibus fru endum est. Pater filius and spiritus sanctus Aug. de
doctrina Christiana. lib. 1 c. 5.
to the finding of Christ Jesus his bodily presence, that we also who have the
Starre-light of faith may after this life enjoy his glorious Godhead which
inioying is well called fruition, because we shall then see him as he is, when
he shall be God all in all unto us, Res quibus fru endum est beatos nos faciunt
istis, quibus vte^ dum est te^den tes ad beatitudinem adinua. mur. Ibid. c 4.
1. Cor. 15.28. And that whereas other things in their use do but now tend
unto him, then we may possess immediately himself who is true happiness and
bliss filling us with grace and glory for evermore. For now though he be all
in all even in this life, yet is he not immediately but by outward means and in
a small measure.

The Collect on the first Sunday in Lent is, O Lord, which for our sakes did
fast forty days and forty nights give us grace to use such abstinence, that
our flesh being subdued to the spirit, we may ever obey thy godly motions in
righteousness, and true bolynesse to thy honor and glory. Who can justly
charge this as having no dependence, but they whose understanding (as it
seems) has no dependence upon the truth?

The Collect on Trinity Sunday is a little before ranged in the number of
those particulars, which they can make no sense of, there it is charged to have
no dependence, because speaking of a true says in the Trinitis and Unity it
concludes thus, We beseech thee that through the steadfastness of this faith
we may evermore be defended from all diversity. Where the dependence of this
prayer sufficiently appears to all those whose faith depends upon this
article that there are three persons, but one God, the very substance and sum
of all Christian Religion, as Master Perkins well notes in these words, Master
Perkins on the L. prayer. page 31.32.
Whereas we are taught to come to God as to a Father, and therefore in the name
of his Son our Savior Christ, we learn to lay the first ground of all our
prayers in the holding and maintaining of the Union and distinction of the
three persons in Trinity. This being the lowest and the first foundation of
prayer, it is requisite that all, which would pray aright should have this
knowledge rightly to believe of the Trinity, and to know how the three persons
agree and how they are distinguished, and the order of them, how the Father is
the first, the Son the second, the holy Ghost the third, and therefore how
the Father is to be called upon, in the name of the Son, by the holy Ghost.
Vbi quaritur vnitas Trinitatis pater filius, spiritus sactus, nec alicubi
periculosius erratur, neclabor^osius aliquid qua ritur, nec fru^ctuosius aliqui
and inuenitur. Aug de Trinit. lib. 1. c. 3.
Hence it is manifest that ignorant and silly people, which do not so much as
dream of the Union, distinction, and order of the persons in Trinity, make
but cold and stender kind of praying. And long before him Saint Austin
resolves thus, that as in no article the error is more dangerous, so neither
is the truth more laborious to be sought out, nor more commodious when it is
found out. Now if faith be our defense, yea more our victory, whereby we
overcome the world, then surely grounded upon a principal stay, as this point
is, needs must it be a truth of great coherence as before is delivered namely,
we beseech thee that through the steadfastness of this faith we may ever be
defended, etc.

The Collect on the Sunday before Easter is thus: Almighty and everlasting
God, which of thy tender love toward man have sent our Savior to take upon
him our flesh, and to suffer death upon the Cross, that all mankind should
follow the example of his great humility, mercifully grant, that we both
follow the example of his patience, and be made partakers of his resurrection
through the same Jesus Christ. The dependence of one part and of the other in
this petition may appear, 1. Pet. 2.21.
1. Pet. 2. where the Apostle exhorting to suffer wrong, and to take it
patiently follows it thus, Hereunto ye are called.
For Christ also suffered for you leaving an example that ye should follow his
steps. And he was the only president of humility. For he humbled himself to
the death of the Cross. Many such applications are made in other places. So
little cause have men to mislike the dependence of this prayer.

The Collect on the 15. Sunday after Trinity needs no defense. It
sufficiently speaks for it self. Keep we beseech thee O Lord thy Church with
thy perpetual mercy, and because the frailty of man cannot but fall, keep
us ever by thy help, and lead us to all things profitable to our salvation
through Christ our Lord. As for exceptions taken at other prayers, that they
are not warrantable they also in their place follow now to be examined.

2. We desire something that our prayers dare not presume to ask, whereas it
is no presumption to ask any lawful thing in Christ his name.
No presumption (happily) to ask any lawful thing in Christ his name, if men
do always know what is lawful in general, in special, in particular, which
since the fewest know, yea noue always know, the most for whose sake this prayer
is penned, may well pray thus without any danger at all. Grenchams lectures on
the Psalm 119. page 612.
I know (says Master Grencham) there be many, who think it a preciseness to
be much afraid of our own weakness, and to be watchful, and wary of our
own affections, yea and oftentimes in those things which to judgment are
lawful, yet absteu^eth in life and practice. But blessed be that fear and
happy is that preciseness, which is so careful over our own infirmities, and
so much suspecteth our own wants and weakness. But say it be no presumption to
ask any lawful thing in Christ's name, which is not every petitioners case to
know, yet as in our actions of indifferency many things yea all things (says
the Apostle) are lawful, yet not all things expedient; so in our prayers we
may safely resolve the like, namely that howeuer all lawful things may be
craved of God in Christ his name, yet we had need also wisely to advise our
consciences, that the things which we sue for be expedient. And what if a man
walk never so innocently in his ways, Meliora sunt inuenta peccan ta cum
humilitate quam in nocentia cum superbia. Optat lib. 20. Contra milleformes
damonum incursut quis innocentia sua fidit August. de civit. Dei. lib. 22. c.
2^.
and (as Saint Paul says) he know nothing against himself, yet herein is he
not instified. Rather of the two (says Optatus) it is better to sin with
humility, then be proud of a man's innocence. And yet considering the manifold
shape, which Satan takes to encounter us withal, who is he that puts
confidence in his own innocence? But in a word to end this point: Grant it
be no presumption to ask any lawful thing in Christ his name, yet because no
man knows as he ought to know, and therefore prays not as he ought to pray
for our prayer must be according to knowledge, hence it is we style our prayers
not ^aring to ask, etc. See more of this point. part. 2. cap. 3.

3. We pray for that we dare not pray for, which is a contradiction.
No More contradiction then that of S. Paul, Philip. 3.20. 2. Tim. 4.13. Putasne
Apostolum eo tem^pore quo hac scribebat (Porulam affer) de calestibus mysteriis
and no^ de us, qua vsus communis vua necessaria supt cogitasse. Hieren. lib. 3.
aduers. Pelag. 1. Cor. 6.15.9. Phi. 3.21. Por, 26, 4.5. Maro. 9.24.
how his conversation was in heaven: yet remembers his cloak he left at Troas
with Carpus. Think you (says Saint Ierom upon this point) the Apostle at what
time he writ this. Bring my cloak, etc. that he thought of heavenly mysteries,
and not of those things, which are necessary for the use of our common life.
Here a wrangler might pretend contradiction: But no more then that our bodies
are the members of Christ. 1. Cor. 6.15. and the temples of the holy Ghost, v.
19 yet Philip. 3. they are called the bodies of baseness or vileness. No more
contradiction then that Prove. 26. Answer a fool according to his
foolishness, answer not a fool, Ioh. 4.1.
etc. or that Mark 9. I believe Lord help my unbelief, Romans 4.18.
or that John 4. Jesus baptized, Jesus baptized not, Act. 11.18.
or that Abraham hoped against hope or that, Act. 11.18. They held their peace,
1. Cor. 10.13.
and glorified God saying: or that God suffers us not to be tempted above all
that we are able. 2. Cor. 1.8.
1. Cor. 10. 13. yet Paul was pressed out of measure passing strength, 2. Cor.
1.8. And a many the like. But see before at large. Part. 2. cap. 3.

4. Because it inioyneth Ceremonies which we are persuaded are unlawful (viz.)
the Surplice, etc. being human traditions, and inventions, without any
warrant from God his word, of mystical signification, defiled with
superstition, scandalous, of no necessary use, appropriated to Gods service
which ought to be according unto the truth without ceremonies.
Sans ceremony belike as the French Proverb is. Surely no Church but ever had
some ceremonies more or less. As for multiplied complaints against ours,
Human inventions.
till men aforde more then bare words or affirmative has strength comparable,
yea far beyond their negative. In the mean while because this exception
breaks the rank for his fellows, like Judas, who was a guide to them that
took Christ, pardon us if we stay a little upon this strain. This therefore
it is that we answer hereunto. Be it granted that they are human
inventions, yet that no sufficient reason to condemn them, unless an argument
may be thus framed, but ill framed then it is. All human inventions are to be
condemned. For some such general must be the support of this unsupportable
conclusion. But see we first what are human inventions, and so with more ease
we shall the better speed this present business. Human inventions, are the
inventions of man whether natural, moral, or a Christian man. For every of
these ways some Inventions there are by the light of nature, by experience, or
in such and such a religion true or false. By natures dim light some things are
espied, which are corrupt and afterward may be helped, some things again not
corrupt but are sufficiently well at the first. Saint Austin upon the 102.
Psalm man a sinner: Homo, peccator duo nomina no^ sunt s^per flua, etc.
August. (...) Psalm. 102. Aliud est homo aliud est peccater. Ibid. Gratia no^
tollit naturam sed perficit, nec natura gratiam repellit, sed suscipit.
two names not superfluous. Two names, one is man, another is sinner. Somewhat
he inuenteth as man, somewhat as an ill man. As a man naturally to eat, to
drink with convenient means how, as a wicked man badlie thus, and thus. The
first may be retained, the second must be reformed, and so both may be used.
Grace takes not nature away, but perfiteth her, nature repelleth not grace,
but imbraceth her. somewhat is good in a corrupt nature notwithstanding the
ancient corruption has sowred the whole lump. And though discovered by the
blind eye of nature, yet nature was not blind in that discovery. Somewhat
again there is, which an ill man finds not as man but as evil, that may be
corrected by art, which we call before by the name of usual experience: Which
experience is not idle for want of employment, but willie contrineth many
things, which a mere natural man cannot ordinarily attain unto. 3. many
things are found out in religion yea even in a false religion, which true
religion is not to abolish, but may well make a good use of. For howeuer a
false religion, and so called, yet in that particular she is not false nor
deceived. All this we need not wonder at all, do we conceive what we must
needs. That no religion, no not a false, but has some truth in it, which must
not be rejected, because it is blended with falsehood, but wisely to be
distinguished from a heap of falsehood. Now to turn back upon that, which
we have spoken, and resume the first head of this argument: As there is nature
and experience, so is there a religion true and false, and as experience
receives some things from nature well, and other some which are not well, she
does well to reform: so a natural religion (for so we call superstition that
comes nearest to our natural sense) does and has invented some good thing
which yet by the true religion must be allowed of, so far forth as it is
well, and may be well used: None dare affirm that nature is quite lost, but
that she is mightily decaide all men confess, and though the print of her
knowledge be almost worn ^ut, or as the scraches in the face, that hinder the
beauty, yet a print there is, and a face there is, and some sparkles remain,
though they be as the sparks of a broken diamond. And howeuer now in her
decay, yet that at some such time (as she was much better then now) that
nothing has been found out by her mother wit, plainly nothing at all were
much to her shame, and indeed to speak plainly a plain untruth. Witness
most of the Gentile learning whereof we make daily use, where is found the
remainder of that first light dimmed in Adam, yet a light, much of it helped as
a lamp with fresh oil by the information of Noe, to Iaphet, and those of
Iaphets posterity, much again succored by traffic with the Jews, and by
books which the Gentiles might, and did read otherwhiles, and therefore
inventions thence taken are good, and wholesome, whither the inventions of
Poets, and of their poetical brain. Let Aratus, Menander, Epimenides, be as
they are. They may be and are known to be poets, and their sayings not worth
repetition by any, far inferior to Paul, much less by Paul himself, if they
were not truth nor agreeable to truth. If ye gentile learning of the Egyptian
were void of all use, and all their inventions to be condemned, what does
scripture commend Moses for a man that was learned in all their wisdom Act.
7.22. If natures school yield no instruction? Act. 7.22.
why does Paul ask the Cor. as touching their behavior in publik prayer? Does
not nature teach you 1 Cor. 11. if a man have long hair etc. If an humain
invention be a matter of such offense, 1. Cor. 11.14.
what is the inflectio^ of a nowne with such and such articles, the coniugating
of a verb in such and such a manner, the Gra^mer rules, in hebrew, greek, and
latin, and ye construction according to these rules, are not al these the
inue^tions of me^, some Jews, enemies to Christ, others Pagans, othersome
popish, as also their dictionaries in this and that method, without al which
neither scriptures could have been translated, nor our common people so edified
by understanding the^ read, as they now are in their own language. If
sufficient it be to dash a thing out of use because heathen, or human, what
think we of our months, and days, and their several names January,
February, March, April etc. and monday twesday etc. If we may borrow no helps
from human inventions for the policy of God his people, and their better
ordring, why did Moses take aduertisment from Iethro? Consider the persons and
it might have been said. Moses the man of God faithful in all that he has to
do shall stain himself and his reputation, which may otherwise grow unto
him, if he make himself beholding to Iethro. We all know this Iethro what he
is and that his counsel is but a human invention. But it may be objected by
humain inventions they mean. Inventions of the Bishops of Rome, of freers and
of me^ popishly and heretically minded. Nor is this true not ye first. For the
use of godfathers and godmothers was invented by Higinus which yet Peter Martyr
approves in baptism for a profitable institution. Vtile sane infli tutum.
Peter. martyr. I. oc. com de padobap c. 8.5. Dion^sius compla, caemiteria and
parochias diuisit. Polyd. Virgil. de inuet. rer. lib. 4. c. 9. Non sine num^ ne
factum put a bimus quod no^issime hoc mu^ di senescentis sac^lo ar^^^
typograph^ca^ repererunt vir^ industrit qua and amissi done inguaru^ iacturam
maxima ex part sarcit, etc. Gualter in Abac. c. 2.
The deu^ding of parishes, churches, churchyards an invention of a Bishop of
Rome, whose name and time we know. About the year of the Lord 268. Dionysius
deusded the bounds and limits of churches, churchyards, and parishes. 2. nor is
the invention of Freers to be condemned. For the art of printing, whose
invention was it? but as some think a freers, or as other think a knights one
John Cuthen berg (who ever) a popish invention it was, if we style our speech
as the objection is framed. Invention human, or popish, or what you will,
this commendatio^ it has be and. Gualter we must not think (says he) it was
done without the power of God, that in these last times of this aged world
industrious me^ have found out the art of printing, which makes up very much
the loss of the gift of tongues, and in spite of the enemies, spreads
abroad the doctrine of truth with admirable success to the people which are
most remote and farte of 3. nor is ye invention of me^ popishly affected to be
condemned; for ye inhibitio^ to disturb a man in his sermon was a law made by
act of parlame^t in ye days of K. Philip and Q. Mary, whose religion what it
was, no man but knows, yet who ca^ mislike this order of theirs but they who
are en^mies to al good order. Abac. c. 2.
4. nor if sound out by an here ticke is it to be condemned. The papist we take
it thinks no better of us, the^ we do of the^, here ticks at the least we
call one another: yet in an exposition of scripture which is more then yt use
of a garment they can be content to borrow light from our commentaries, as
Ferus out of Pelican Genesis 26.1.2. verbatim Penar de^tius out of M. Calvin v^d
Ionat cap. 1. v. 9. verbatim so in the 10. v. Page 142 ^in 18. and v. 11. out
of M. Gualrer: likewise upon Esther he takes whole sentences out of Ludouicus
lauater, so Bellarm. out of M. Beza and Iansenius his harmony is framed out of
M. Calvin, share many other their writings, and it may be granted ye same of
us otherwhiles are beholding to them for obsetuations one or other, if we be
not, men compareable to us have received directions from ^reticks. So did
Saint. Austin from Ticonius the Donatist choosing his interpretation rather
then Cyprians a man of sounder judgment. Aug. Retract. lib. 2. cap. 18.
An easy matter to have said unto that great divine. A human devise, an
heretical invention. Away with it, we cannot endure it. But should any have
stained that good father for he was likely enough to have answered as in an
other place he does. In aru^dine sterili atque arida vel alligata jolet vua
pendere. Aug. de bap con. Don. lib. 6. cap. 1.
Upon an unlikely stalk fruitless, and whithered so, metimes a grape is
found And a truth is a truth wheresoever we see it. Let the devil say (as he
did) that Jesus is that Messiah that some of God, in an over flowing of out
gall, we must not say the contrary. He said it to a shiffter end, and with
an evil mind. Let us say it with a better and to fitter purpose, but yet let
us make bold to say it notwithstanding. The advice which Saint Jerome gave
Pammachius well sorteth with this occasion, where he counsels. Si
adamaueris captiuam muli erem id est sapi entiam sacularem, etc. Haeron. ad.
Pammachium su per obitu Paulinae. Multos tibi foetus captiua dabit, ac de
Moabitic de essicietur Is raelitis. Ibid. Adquam studi osus and fidelis Thamar
declinauit, indeque genuit Phares and Zaram qui in Euangelio memorantur. Clem.
Alexan. lib. 1. Stromat.
If Pammachius be in love with men's inventions, and secular wisdom to do as
the Isralite did with his captive woman taken in war, shave her head, pare
her nails, strip off her gaudie attire, and then new apparreled took her to
wife: So must the wisdom of arts and human learning be entreated:
whatsoever it has, dead, idolatrous, erroneous or the like shave and pare it
off. Then taken captive and thus handled she may bring forth many children
unto God, and of a Moabitish become as one of the daughters of Israel yea as
Clem. Alexan. makes the comparison: Be she Thamar, and what Thamar was we
read of, yet Judas (that is) the faithful, godly, studious may turn in unto
her, and beget Phares and Zara spoken of in the Gospel. Such use there may be
of nature, and natural inventions, that though as a neglected stock may hear
some graft comparable with the best. First that which is natural, then that
which is spiritual. In some such order grace and nature are partners other
while, that nature being her inventions, art shapeth, grace sanctifies. Then
are they not barely plain dunstable human iuentions, but Mara must be called
Naomi because now made serviceable to holy uses. And therefore if any please
to call them human yet not merely human, which happily is their meaning,
that make this objection hereby intending as (man) in scripture is other whiles
set against God, like that our of Savior. Take heed of men, or that of Saint
Paul: If I please men, I were not the servant of Christ. But so we understand
it not, nor must they Human, if they will, yet thus far divine withal, as
tending to the preservation of Ecclesiastical order and such as acco^panie
other duties then publikelie to be performed. This, would men did as readily
confess, as they sufficiently well know, that they have no warrantable
president to call the institutions of Gods Church a mere human invention as
wicked or carnal which are opposite to God and godliness: Profane men that
hold both the power and form of Godliness in a scorn may imply some such
contemptible signification, Miletia fueru^t sapientes sed se cerunt qualia
insipientes.
but others, that are sincerely minded (unless they be like the Milesians
who had wisdom but did unwisely) are to speak in all reverence of those
commendable orders which the Church inioineth specially in these licentious
days, wherein Atheism debaseth the due estimation of Gods Church and sacred
policy.

They are without warrant of Gods word.
1 Express warrant for every particular we need not look for: Iter Sabathi a
lege prascriptu^ non erat, Mar. Math. 28.20. Tremel, in Act 1, 12. Syria, Iuni.
Ibid. Aras bice. Hieron: ad Algasiam. Ioh. 10.22.
A Sabbath days journey was not prescribed by Gods law, but either appointed,
(as Master Calvin thinks) by a council of Priests, or (as Tremell and Iunius
think) by a tradition of the fathers, whom Saint Ierom takes were Rabbis,
and names them Atriba and Simon Hely yet the observation of this point was at
no time taxed by Christ, or his Evangelists, notwithstanding opportunity
offered to do so. Likewise there was no warrant expressed in the law for
celebrating the feast of the dedication of the temple, which our Savior
afterward present, solenmized. No word in Gods law for the cerymony of odors
used about the bodies of the dead, yet our Savior was content his body should
be so imbalmed. 2. P. Martyr. Ho^ per^. Bucer. John a Laseo.
Again we answer in things indifferent, whose nature is to be used, or not
used, as they are no where commanded so are they no where forbidden: Bucer.
John a Laseo.
3. we may know it easily quieteth every good conscience, what the Apostle
writes. To the pure al things are pure, and every creature is good with
thanksgiving etc.

They are made to be of mystical signification.
Some what (Mystical) it is, what these obiectors mean by Mystical
signification. Ritus qui venerationem rebus sacris concilient etc. Talibus
admini culis ad pietate^ excitemur. Call. institut. lib. 4. cap 10.28. Ad
sacrorum misteriorum reuerentiam apiu^ 29. Vt sit idoneum ad pietatem
exercitium Ibid. Non sine fructu Ibid. Vt fideles admo neat quanta mo destia,
religione, etc. Ibid. Non licet prina re ecclesiam ea liberate vt no^ possit
suis actio nibus ac ritibus aliquid significare, P Martyr Hoopero. Ea liberate
vsus est Apostolus cum docet, etc. Vt illes signis admoneantur sui officti.
Ibid. Rerum significationes reuotal nobis in mentem quidnos deceat. Ibid.
Ministri magis memores simi offictisui and in maicre Veneratione. Ibid.
If hereby they understand a decent and reverent intimation, or admonition.
First we hold every godly ceremony to have some such profitable use as may
move and procure reverence to holy things etc. that by such helps we may be
stirred up to godliness etc. Fit for reverence of holy mysteries, and a meet
exercise unto godliness, or at the least that which shall beautify and adorn
agreeablie to the actio^ in hand, yet so as not without fruit but that it may
admonish the faithful with how great modesty, religion, obseruancie they
ought to handle sacred and holy things. Which self same judgment Peter
Martyr gives of the surplisse, adding withal how it were wrong imprisonment
to restrain or deprive the Church of her liberties, that in such rites, and
ceremonies she must signify just nothing. 3. whereas all our actions even
they that are civil signify somewhat, how much rather, such as are
ecclesiastical in the public service of God to his glory 4. The Apostle
uses this liberty when he taught the Corinth. in time of prayer, the men to
be uncovered, the women covered in remembrance of their duty: fifthly the
significations of these things bring to our mind, what becomes us that are
ministers, and others (which are not) to think more reverently of our calling
etc. And where it pleases some farther to urge.

Our ceremonies have been defiled with superstition.
In this case we answer with the learned: It is a bard task and a point not
easily proved. That the impiety of Popery is such that whatsoever it touches
is so utterly polluted, Tantam Papatus impietatem vt quicquid atting it prorsus
reddat contaminatum que bonis and piis sancto vsui concedi non possit. Ibid.
as the godly and the Saints may in no case use it to holy purposes For then
neither may we use glass windows nor Church, Pew Cup, Challice, Patien,
Cushion, Gran^st one, Aliquid esse nota^ antichrists. in nulla re inest In hoc
enim mul lares condita su^t a deo, sed pe^^ det totu^ a co^sen su in
Antichristianism^^ and eius professione^ Quo consensis quaque professione
commutatis in co^sensum. etc. Bucer John a Lasco. Nihil potest in rebus ipsis
harere nota Antichristianismi Ibid. Distributionem panis and vint sacrificulis
damonibus celebrarunt Ibid. Preceptum est vt decorum seruetur. Ibid.
nor ground either in Church, or Churchyeard. To be a note of Antichristianism
is in no manner of thing (says one) for to this end nothing is created of God,
but wholly depends upon our consent to Antichristianisme, and the profession
thereof: Which consent and profession being changed into a consent and
profession of true christian religion, there connot any note of
Antichristianisme cleave unto the things themselves. The bread and wine which
Pagans offered to Devils (as Justin Martyr and Tertullian remember) were no
hinderance why we should not use the like ceremony. For which as the
commandment is express, so is it thus far in general, that al things be
done for comeliness, preservation of order, etc. Where it is farther objected.

They are scandalous.
They mistake that call that scandalous, which grieueth some one or other. For
then we shall never have done. Mark we, who and how many are offended, and
upon what ground and who has taught them so: If the minister be the party
that taught them, and then afterward he complain that such and such in his
parish will take offense, he must thank himself and he shall do well to
vnteach them it, but a great deal better if he had never so taught them.
Again, a man thus weakelie disposed though otherwise well given, must hold
other men's judgment comparable to his own, they being as well affected to the
gospel as himself, and those many, who take offense as deeply on the other
side, and let him think it more convenient, for so it is in all reason, that a
few should yield to a greater part, as namely one to a thousand, rather then a
thousand to one, specially where the thing commanded has authority for it,
and is not simply evil in it own nature, but indifferent as the Surplice,
etc. For in things indifferent, none deny but authority may command where
the word soundly taught, remoueth all other doubts and scruples that may arise.

Of necessary use.
If they mean unto salvation we easily grant what they say, but else
necessary we hold them for order and preservation of peace in token of our
godly obedience, and of great use as the times now are, to meet with two
sorts of men. The one such as their poverty permits them not to have fit, and
decent attire, so bare and low they are driven, how we enquire not, but God
knows and the world may lee with grief. The other are some fantastically who
(as they bring in fashions, or take them from the vanity of an unsettled humor)
are as changeable in colors, cuts, iags and the like as other fondlings, so
that if they might have their own will they stick not to bring into the house
of God new tangied attire at times of divine service, and the public
administration of holy duties. A sin we are not the first have felt, but
ask our fathers, and they may tell us, how some offended herein, as Sisinius
the Nouatian and Eustathius of Sebastia in Armenia, which examples if we had
not to learn wisdom by, Socrat. lib. 6. c 22. ld. lib. 2. c 42.
yet God has not so disfurnished us of understanding, but that our Church
does, and may duly provide, against all these inconveniences, not only
reforming disorders in this kind, but also prescribing a conformity of
uniform attire (for color, form and use) very meet and decent.

Appropriated to Gods service.
This with some is a matter of grieuance. But no otherwise appropriated to Gods
service, then aforetime in those days, when they were used only for
distinction of the minister from the people, and for grace and reverence to the
divine service then in hand. We well know how our adversaries have exceeded
that way, so as we cannot see fruit for leaves, but yet this we must
confess, in as much as they did not rise to this excess all on the sudden,
but step after step yea many ages helping thereunto, we take it we may
safely have an eye to those times wherein as they were fardest, so they were
freest from superstition. Therefore not to speak of the last 300. years,
wherein Bonauenture and Innocentius much busy themselves for justifying the
multitude of their superstitious garments, nor of a hundred years before when
Rupertus wrote his book of divine duties, Rupert. de diui n offici^ liber est
qui sine b^ nore and titul^ iacuit annis s^re 400. Bellar. de Euchar. lib. 3.
cap. 11. Council Bragaren. 1. can. 27. Council. Toles. 4. can. 39. Council.
Cartha. 4. can: 41. Quae sunt rogo inimicitia contra Deum, si in nicam habuero
mundiorem? Si episcopus, presbyter, and di aconus, and reliquus ordo
ecclesiaflicus in ada ministratione 07 sacramentorum candida vest^
pracesserint. Hieron. lib. 1. ad uers. Pelag. c. 9. Religio 0725 diuina alterum
habet habitum in ministerio, alteru^ in vsu, vetaque communi. Idem. in Ezech.
c. 44 Apprehe^sa auu^ culs manu hanc inquit tunicam qua vtebar in ministerio
Christi, mitte dilectissim^ mihi at ate patri, fratri collegi^, Hieron ad
Helioder.
knowing Bellar. his censure of it, that howeuer thought written so long ago,
yet but late found out, and as a book of no great account has lain almost
400. years without honor or title given it nor purpose we to stay upon 300.
years auncienter, when it seems Rabanus Maurus writ upon this argument.
These last 1000. years we will cut off and look to the times before. Which
if we do, it appears when they were much more sparing, they yet had some one
garment or other distinct from others, which they used only in public offices
of the Church. Witness the council of Brage, and before it the council of
Toledo, and before them both the council of Carthage in the days of Saint
Austin. Of which time Saint Hierom (for he was not much elder then that
reverend Austin) writes, that some garments were distinctly appropriated to
Ecclesiastical and public use: Which may be seen in his first book against
Pelag. who cauilled at such attire as contrary to Gods word. What offense
(says that good Father) is it if a Bishop, Presbyter and Deacon, and the rest
of that Ecclesiastical order go before in a white garment at the
administration of the Sacraments. Which if any shall think, that other
Christians (not Clergiemen) did wear, his words upon Ezech cap. 44. manifest
the contrary. Divine Religion has another atttire in the ministry, and
another in a common use and life This himself proved in his own practice. For
one Nepotian a Presbiter dying left him a garment, which he used as he says
the ministry of Christ. The history is this, Nepotian taking his Uncle by
the hand; this coat or garment (quoth he) which I did use in the ministry of
Christ, send to my well beloved, my Father, for age, etc. meaning Ierom by that
appellation. Where it seems no usual and ordinary attire, but some choice
and special one: for he intends it as a pledge of his last love and
kindness, which he did bequeath unto him: secondly, we may note, it was such
a one, as he did not continually wear, but at times in public duties of his
calling, for he was a Presbiter and in the ministry of Christ he did use it.
But proceed we on forward; much about this time in the Greek Church some-
uniform attire was also received among the Clergy, as Chrisosotome remembers
in diverse places. In his homilies to the people of Antioch, Hac vestra dig
nitas est, hac ou^ nis corona, non vt albam and splendentem tu nicam
circumeatis amicti. Chrisost. homil. 60. ad populum Anticchen. Haec est
dignitas vestra, haec stabilitas, haec corona, no^ quia tunicam induts
ca^didissima^ per ecclesiam ambu latis ld. homil. 83. in. Math. Trecenti
circiter anni, etc. Auctor quaestio^. vet. and nous Testam. c. 44. Quod mulier
non sit creata ad imaginem Dei. Qq. 21. quod Melchisedech foerit spiri tus
s^nctus Q. 1091, quod Ada non habuerit spirituns sactu^ Quast. 123. Idolatria
ad misit per quod peccauerat in Deum, etc. Q. 8^. His in vrbe Roma. Q. 115.
Quasi non b^die Diacons Dal^^ a ^icis induantur sucut Episceps Id. cap: 46.
Vtea cir^^^^amictus ministerium sacri baptismatis adimpleret. Tri part^^.
histor. lib. 5. cap. 35.
and in his homilies upon S. 0725 Mat. For blaming the priests or Ministers for
their negligence, not caring who received or how, but admitted all to the Lord
his Table without difference. This is your dignity and crown, etc. and not to
go about in your goodly white shining garments, etc. Again, in his Homilies
upon Saint Matthew to the like purpose in words not much differing. This is your
dignity, this your constancy, this your crown, and not because you walk up
and down in the Chruch in your white coat or garment. About some 300. years
after Christ (for it seems to be no more by the Author of the questions upon
the old and new Testament, cap. 44. for after the birth of Christ, about some
300. years were run out) then is witnessed that a distinction of
ecclesiastical garments (from others) in the public service was in use. That
author we call him and not Saint Austin, both because of the times wherein he
lived was somewhat auncienter, as appears before (because but 300. years
after Christ) as also because of diverse opinions not soundly delivered as
quest. 21. that the woman was not created after the image of God, that Adam
sinned the sin of Idolatry, quest. 83. that Melchisedech was the holy Ghost,
quest. 1091. and that Adam had not the holy spirit, quest. 123. etc. yet
notwithstanding these dangerous points handled contrary to Scripture and Saint
Austin, Beside another prose there is, because the Author of this book quest.
115. lived at Rome, so did not Saint Austine, yet we say notwithstanding all
this, (he may be credited in a matter of fact as to say what was done, for
therefore we allege him namely that Bishops and Deacons in his time did
wear Dalmatish garments, that is, a kind of ecclesiastical attire before
this time. In these hundred years wherein the Church had breathing after her
sore long wasting persecution we have farther proof in the days of
Constantine, who (good Emperor) gave a distinct holy garment to Macarius to
wear in administering Baptism, and Theodoret recording the same, reports an
example of a Stage Player, who for bringing this baptizing garment upon a
Stage to dance in it, fell suddenly down and dyed. Qua indutus (quidam canta
torscenicus) inter saltandum collapsus interist, etc. Theodor. lib. 2. cap. 27.
Eusebius in his Ecclesiastical story the tenth book and fourth Chapter,
chronicling the great joy which was among Christians in good Constantin his
reign pauseth his style in the gratulatorie triumphs which were made at the
solemnizing the dedication of a Church built in Tire of Phoenicia, where a man
of good account prepared a grave, godly exhortation in the presence of Paulinus
(that holy and reverend Bishop) with a many other Ecclesiastical persons
then assembled in their ornaments and sacred attire reaching down to their
feet. (...). Eusebius. lib. 10. cap. 4.(...).
It may be no such store of proofs can be yielded for the times within the
300. years after Christ. And no meruasle good Christians they had no open
Churches, but secret places to serve God in, well content if they might have
then but food and raiment with the small liberty of the Gospel, which they
inioyed no otherwise then as a man that eats stolen bread. Yet so far as the
Records of that time may deserve credit, so we find that 60. years before
the days of Constantin a peculiar vestiment was appointed for celebrating the
oCmmunion. Singulari vesti tu (que^^ sacra tum dixerunt) indui licuit sa
cerdotibus in Eucharistia. Centur. 3. cap. 6. page 146.
This decree the Protestants of Meidenburg in their Centuries refer to the
times of Stephen Bishop of Rome, who afterward, as did many else his
Predecessors and Successors, for it was in those best times, laid down his
life for the testimony of the Lord Jesus. Higher then 200. years after Christ
we cannot well expect many witnesses in this argument. For by reason, of the
persecution many monuments are lost, and men had small joy or leisure to apply
their thoughts for the Pen, or both thoughts and Pen to writing, (...). Eusebius
lib. 3. cap. 21. Hieron. de scrip turis ecclesiast. verb. Polycrat.
Phylosophicum habitum. Enseb. lib. 6. cap. 20.
yet one and that on shall supply in steed of many others. Eusebius in his
third book quoting Polycrates his Epistle to Victor writes that Saint John
was wont to bear a plate on his forehead, such as the high Priest did use.
This self same history is remembered by Saint Ierom in his Catalogue of
Ecclesiastical writers. To be brief for answer to this exception of theirs.
Why not some ornament as well appropriated to Gods service at times, as to the
Minister some garment approptiat fitting him at all times for ordinary attire
distinct from others. As that of Heraclas of Alexandria whose garment though it
be not set down what it was yet scholasticall it was, of some such fashion as
the learned then did were. As that also of Cyprian, who being to be beheaded
stripped himself of one of his garments, Expoliaeit se birrho, and trade dit
caruificibus Dalmaticam vero tradidet Diaconibus Po^ tius Diacon, in passion
Cyprian So quis propter continentiam, etc. quasiper hoc habere se iustitiam
credeus, and despicit eos qui cum reuerentia bir his and alusco^. munibus and
solitis vtuntura. nathema sit. Council. Gang. can. 12.
and gave it to the executioner, but his Dalmatish vesture he delivered to the
Deacons Both which were such attire as did belong to his Ecclesiastical
calling: The first of these his birrhus, the attire so called is mentioned in
the Council of Gangres, where the Canon establishing the use of it decrees
against all newfanglednesse to the contrary. The second of these the Dalmatish
garment remembered in the Councels and other allegations before. And if
Christians newly converted from Paganism did wear a kind of short cloak, not
for any holiness in the garment, but only in token of their Christian
profession to distinguish them from Gentiles, and this they did by a private
consent among themselves without warrant of Gods word (for Gods word no where
gave them express commandment so to do) we see not but the like cause may
prevail with us, (where Gods word says no more for it nor against it then
it did, or does for that conuerts attire) specially being agreed upon not by a
private consent of one or two, and so drawn on by example, but jointly by
authority of the Church and for such reasons as may well lead her thereunto.
If any shall say Conuerts did it to distinguish them from Gentiles, our answer
is, so do we, though not from the Gentile, yet from among our sulues because
of order to audide confusion of degrees. For if there be reason to differ in
general from others, because of a general difference in the calling of a
Christian, so may there be, and is reason to differ in special among our
selves in the particular, as we are of such and such a particular calling, as a
Citizen from a husbandman, a Merchant from an Artificer, which are civil
distinctions, so a teacher from a scholar, a minister from the rest of the
people, which difference as he is a subject may be called civil, but as he is
an Ecclesiastical person in respect of his office may bear the name of an
Ecclesiastical difference. If any shall say, Ye have no warrant out of Gods
word: no more had those new conuerts to differ in attire from the Gentiles. Nay
more the word of God is so far from commannding so to do, that if themselves
had pleased changing their opinions, they might have kept their Pag^n attire.
This is Saint Austin his judgment. Nibil s^^^ ad (...) am pertions ci^itatte^,
q^^^ habita vel more vi^oudi, si no^ est contra diuis no pracepta, etc. Vnde
spsos phylolophos, qua^do Christian su^t, non habitum vol co^smendinem victus
qua nithil impedit religio no^^, sed falsa dogmata muta re compellis, August,
de ciustate Dei. 19. cap. ^9. (...). Hiero^, ad Furiam, B. Rhinan. in Tuttu^
pras. de pallio. Dicterio locu^ apud Carthagi nenses. A toga ad pallium. Tert
de pallio. Insignia gereutium publica munera conferunt aliquid ad retimendam,
augendamque authoritate^, sicatera no^ desint, quibus vera reuerentia his per
so subsistis. Bucer^^^^ a Laseo.
Tru^^y it nothing appertains to this City of God, in what attire, or manner
of life any man follow the faith whereby we come to God, so it be not against
God his Comandemets. Hence it is she comyelleth not the Philosophers themselves
(when they become Christians) to change their habit or manner of diet (which
does not hinder Religion) but their false opinions. But to go forward in
examining that course of those punie Christians, and the comparison of our
practice with them. If any shall say (as it has been often said) Ye are never
a whit the holier nor any whit better now you wear any such raiment, then when
ye did not, or then others, that do not. A brief reply is sufficient: no more
were those Conuerts any thing the holier after they changed their apparel. If
it be told us (which some use for an objection now a days) ye shall be
divided in so doing. Our answer is: that must be no let to us more then it was
to them. For what more common by word at a Christian for being so attired then
this. An old imposter, because be imposed or put upon himself such a garment,
slily insinuating withal that such a one was but an imposter or mere
coosiner. And among the Carthaginians when they met with a lately professed
Christian, who in token of his Christian profession was attired, as other
Christians, they had a flout at him for his cloak (for such a kind of apparel
it was) which a new Convert did wear. But he did not respect, no more should
we such thredbare and ouerworne flouts. We have as sufficient means to comfort
us in our uniform vestiment as any those times aforded young nonices for their
habit, which they altered? But drawing to a conclusion this we may know. In all
our common or more special use of any garment, which Ministers put on, there
is none so appropriated to Gods service, as made a cause of holiness, or part
of Gods worship, though some gull their weakelings and make them temporize with
this forced and forged imputation. It was well said by Master Bucer in his
Epistle. The ensigns of men in public office do advantage much and intrease
the authority of their lawful power, other things want not, which of
themselves deserve due reacrence. Signs, are signs, and not the things
themselves, yet how much they avail to adinonish, Signa quide^ su^ signa, non
res Quantum valant ad mor (...) dum, ac etiam mouendum any mot. ibid. Nibil
Antichri stianitatis illarum vestium vsu esse renouae tum. 2. magistratibus
obeds endum, etc. Buc. Cra^mero. Licere ritibus pie vti, quibus alii impre
abusi sunt. Ibid. Suspictonem su isse visandam nos irreligsosa-leuitate and
malitta common tos coscuncta etc. Id. Quod aliquid significet and alicutus
admoniat.
yea and to move the mind, God vouchsafing the increase, he will marualle
that shall observe it. Now because those aduertisements which the learued give
in this case are necessary for people and Minister, they both must be
entreated to accept them, as worthy their best observation. The people thus. 1.
That no Antichristianitie is renewed by the use of these garments. 2. That
Magistrates are to be obeyed. 3. That the peace of the Church must not by them
be disturbed. 4. That every creature is good: 5. That those rites may be used
in a godly sort, which other have impiously abused: 6. That our high Court of
Parliament had no purpose to nourish, nor does nourish superstition. 7. That
such garments were in use before Popery. 8. That we are bound to clear our
selves of that odious imputation, namely. That of an irreligious lightness and
malice we reject all things yea even such as have a good use. 9. That by such
attire good thoughts are justly occasioned for heavenly matters. 10. In as much
as Ministers must wear one garment or other they should wear that rather,
which signifies somewhat, and to such end may well admonish them.
As a people must be thus instructed, so the Ministers must also do this.
First, not contemn these arguments, nor preach against them. Secondly, they
must commute, and change the Popish abuse into a Christian use to the glory of
God, and the honor of that power, which under God in this case may, and does
royally command. Thirdly, they must show by their practice, that to the holy
and ^ure all things are pure. 4. That neither Devils, nor any else can so
stain or pollute any creature of God, but that good men may well use it to
Gods glotie, Ad gloria Dei etiam ad vsum significationis Iaem. Artificium
Satane vt peccata faciamus qua non sunt, and qua sunt peccata reuera in nobis
min^s obsernemus. Id.
yea and that for signification. Lastly, both Minister and people must remember
this. That Satan by his artificial sleights causes men to purrle themselves
in making those, which are no sins to be grienous, and others the whilst,
which are sins in deed, to escape unespied. But hoping this caneat as also
the other answer may give much contentment. Proceed we to the rest.

5. Because we Subscribe to the reading of we cannot tell what videlicet, All
Homilies that hereafter shall be set forth by common authoritis (others make
their complaint thus.) Because we subscribe as it were unto a blancke, wherein
afterward may be written, whatsoever shall be pleasing unto the vrgers of
subscription.
The Homily after the third part of the sermon against Contention delivers
these words. Hereafter shall follow Sermons of fasting, praying, alms deeds,
etc. naming a many more, and then closes thus: with many other marters as well
fruitful, as necessary to the edifying of Christian people and the increase
of godly living. Hereunto the second tome of Homilies having reference
intitleth the beginning thus. Of such matters, as were promised and entitled in
the former part of Homilies. And the Book of Articles that we may know what it
is, both not only name the particulars severally in distinct order, but she
weth also the quotient of them just 21. and no more, whereunto Subscription is
required and no otherwise. But grant that more Homilies either are already or
shall be hereafter set out, yet the vrgers of Subscription can neither make new
Articles of Religion, nor does the law intend that they can. For it lies not
in the power of any Bishop within his Diocesie, as of himself without warrant
of a more plenarie and full authority to publish or set forth any Sermon or
Homilies to be enjoined any his ministers for public use in our Church, but
with correspondence to the doctrine already agreed upon, profitable to
edification and proportionable to the analogy of faith. And of a truth who in
his right mind would once imagine that those godly men (who permed that
clause) being as they were special instruments of Gods glory, and enemies to
superstition, meant ever to make way by such a Rubricke to bring in, whatsoever
some one man at his pleasure would devise? Whereas it did only provide for a
time, and at that time to give men contentment, who happily at the first
setting out of those other homilies did look for more, but because they could
not then be all upon the sudden, their expectation was entreated on to a
farther time. Notwithstanding the equity of this known truth, see (we pray
thee good Reader but be wail what thou see) how uncharitably some
indgements are employed.

6. Because the Collectes, Epistles, and Gospels on the first Sunday in lent
savor of superstition by making them Religious fasts in regard of the time in
which they are appointed.
As much savor of superstition in the use of Collect, Epistle, and Gospel, as
there is store of great love toward us in them who make this accusation. An
evil mind distasts all things be they never so good, or commendadle. If
Scripture savor of superstition because of Religious fasts at that time, what
are many of these men's Sermons, Scripture, and prayers which are commonly in
use at such times in Lent, when they call their meetings at a market town by
the name of a fast, though before and after Sermon, they have well fed, and few
of them abstain from any thing, more then what they cannot have to eat. But
for fear that superstition may surprise us at unawares, they that thus
complain, would they did show us why that Collect, Epistle, and Gospel on the
first Sunday in Lent are called in the plural number Collects, Epistles, and
Gospels when there is but one of each, or may they be entreated to give a
reason why they think that Collect, Epistle, and Gospel read on the first
Sunday in Lent sauoureth of superstition more then that of the first Wednesday
in Lent, or let them inform us what smacke of superstition is in the 2. Corinthians. 6. from the first verse to the tenth and Saint Matthew. 4. from the
first to the 11. both being scriptures appointed for that first sunday, more
then is in ^oel 2. from the 12. to the 17. and Matthew 6. from the 16 to the 21.
If it be said as here is pretended that they savor of superstition be making
them religious fasts in regard of the time, by that reason they may condemn
all the scriptures as sauouring of superstition which for 5. or six weeks
every sabbath are so applied: Their supposed argument urged against this, may
as rightly be urged against the others. But to satisfy doubts here occastoned,
this brief following we desire may be well noted. Men that observe any thing
now adays of what is done abroad in the matter of fasting, will easily
confess with us these few things. First that a great number (of our
christians so called) spend much of their time in gluttony and bellie-cheare,
never once knowing so much as what the name of a true fast means, unless it
be to eat fast and drink fast. 2. our experience shows that a great cause
of this evil proceeds hence, for that men are left to their own choice, and
hold it (they say) free for them, as if they needed not unless themselves
please 3. if any do task himself we may note it is but his private
denotion, others bear the world in hand they se no cause, or take it for no
cause, and so a good work is negligently omitted 4. if we think, that only
a time to fast, when God visits a land with plague, pestilence, famine, or
sword, a man sometimes may live many years together, and see no such cause. 5.
or seeing it but seldom, will in his godly zeal humble himself more often,
even for fear of some judgment though no such be either present or imminent:
6. and therefore in respect of the times as on such days of the week in such
a season of the year command himself or be commaun^ed by sacred authority
to deuote his soul, and body though at all times, yet then specially in more
solemn and (if possible) more earnest humble manner. 7. and as commanding
himself because a law to himself, yet he does it freely, so if commanded by
others, yet his freedom and liberty is no way hindered.
For our obedience to God and our King what is it, but commanded. Yet we hope
being chearefullie performed may he thought, and so is free and voluntary.
Now for the observation of Lent it is ^onew invention, but a godly ordinance
commanded at the entrance of the spring and ^^^lly continued in an entire
course for 1500. years, (the superstition only excepted which was but of a
later time) and now intended (though not principally) for a sparing use of the
creature in some kind, in other some denying the use of any at all for a time
(without special cause) not for conscience simply of the meat, as if it were
damnation to eat, touch, or fast, but for conscience sake to a good order well
established for increase of cattle, maintenance of nanigation, which under God
are the riches and blessing of our land, as also for our farther instruction to
know that God is rich in mercy not from the earth only, but from ye great
diep, furnishing us with abou^dance from the sea, that we may be truly
thankful unto him. This divine godly course thus wisely intended, what honest,
good heart but will commend? holding it his duty to think, as the magistrate
requires a politic use in the fast, so himself intends a religious use
thereof in sanctifying this restraint from some kind, and moderately using
other creatures with praise and thanksgiving, spending the fundaies and other
hours in the week in holy exercises of prayer, private, and public reading
and hearing the word preached, liberally ministering unto the Saints all which
though he do at other times, yet then (so far as in him lies) raising his
decayed thoughts to a farther humiliation preparing himself every day somewhat
against that great and memorable day, which our fathers called the holy time
of Caster: For it cannot be denied, but as our bodies have their several
seasons, so our souls may therein have their several solemn instructions.
For why should it be said of us, what was said of the Jews. the Storke in
the air knows her appointed times, Ierem. 8.7.
the Crane, Turtle and Swallow all observe the time of their coming etc. Yes
let men know that in the spring time as our blood rises and multiplyeth: so
it has need of subduing, and that as the flesh begins to pamper it self (for
so it will do naturally at some times of the year) so a fit time and very
expedient it is, to check it with some holy counter-buffe, chastning,
mortifying, bearing, and beating it down, least where it should be the temple
of the holy Ghost it become a vile instrument of much wickedness. Thus we
are to bestow our time in Lent. And their moderation of judgment to be
commended herein, who thus advisedly do qualify the question. Which Master
Zanchius and some others do, Est tempui 40. dierum vsque ad sanctune pas cha
ex pia vete^ris ecclesia ordinatione consi^atutum, in quo fi deles diligetius
quam vllo tempore alio tum ie tun^is tum precibus t^^^ auditione verbi. etc;
Zanch, in 4. precep. page 634. Eoque ad cana^ domini in paschate dignius
sumendam pr^parantur. Ibid Si sic definias quis eam queat merito improb^ re.
Ibid.
calling it a time of 40. days immediately before Easter continued by a godly
ordinance of the pi^nitiue Church, at which season the faithful more
diligently then at any time else, both by fasting, prayers, hearing the word
and other godly exercises are stirred up to repentance, and so prepared to
receive at Easter the supper of the Lord more worthily. And at the end of it
thus concludes. If you thus define it, who has cause instlie to mislike it?
By the doctrine of our Church all superstitions are abolished, as that there is
holiness in meats, or any liberty for excess in the use of other creatures,
fish, wine, oil etc. or that fasting is meritorious, etc. p^lgrimages,
invocation of Saints, praying in an unknown tongue, all which accompany the
popish fast and are r^ghtlie called superstition we utterly condemn. If
notwithstanding all this, any superstition be thought to remain because we
have some set prayer, and epistle, and Gospel, at that time, who knows not
scriptures are then fitly ordered, when the argument is agreeable to the
season? But some mystery there is in it, that men do mislike scriptures of
fasting applied to a time of fasting, and show not a word of dislike to
scriptures of joy applied to a time of rejoicing. And with as fair a gloss
they may challendge all the Collects, Epistles, and Gospels from Easter to
Whitsuntide, with is a time of 50. days as these or any of these from after
Qinquagesima to Easter: Unless peradventure they can be content to hear of
fasting and triumph, but not of fasting and humiliation. Well howeuer this ado
men make about little, for we see few ye fast as they should, know that other
churches of our age (as Hemingius, Spangen bergius, and Chitraeus witness)
apply themselves to the like public practice sorting out scriptures for
epistles, and gospels as we do. Perkins. refor. Cathol p. 221.
The conclusion we make of this point in this argument. A religious fast is
when the duties of religion, as the exercises of prayer and humiliation are
practiced in fasting. A civil is, when upon some particular and politic
considerations me^ abstain from certain meats. But our time of Lent is so
intended and purposed; therefore a civil and a religious fast, not a
superstitious unless religion ^he superstiti^o^ And if any shall say either
openly in ye hearing of others or secretly in his own heart, but a very few yt
so keep it: we answer no falt in y^ intent of the godly institution but if
ante fault this way, it is all long of such gainsaying as here is used. And
thus much be spoken to this point.

7. So also does the Custom of open penance in the beginning of Lent the
practice whereof is approved, and yet the restitution of an other wished in the
Commination.
Strange times that Collects, Epistle, Gospel, Prayers, Scripture, open
confessions of sin to our own shame and of Gods vengance to his glory, that
all these savor of superstition; Were proofs as near at hand as slanders,
men would prove more and slander leffe. The restitution of another is wished
in the Commination, but not rep^grant to this, nor this contrary to Gods
word. A goosle discipline the book speaks of, which what it was in the
primitive Church, and how far forth necessarte for these times would ask a
larger discourse then that which follows will permit. Some such their was and
in steed thereof this (which they speak of) is in use, which is the general,
though not so speriall as the book wishes and may indeed rather be wished
then easitie accomplished. Whither sincerity in this case speak or bear a
truth, the truth we speak and would have heard is this: No one sentence in
that whole argument, but they may subscribe to, unless they mean because we
come not so near as is wished, therefore we must not come so near, as we
may, and as our Church boldeth expedient.

8. Because it permits any of the Communicants to make the public confession
of sins, which also contains apraier in the name of the rest, which only
belongs to the minister, as his special office he being the mouth of the
people, and in that case a public person.
Read the answer before part 2. cap. 12.

9. Because it contains diverse corrupt translations of holy scriptures by
leaving out some words.
This 9. proof is bounded under the general head disgraceful as enforcing
that our communion book because it contains diverse corrupt translations of
holy scriptures by leaving out some words. So that their argument is to this
effect. That which contains diverse corrupt translations of holy scripture
is disgraceful to scripture: But our communion book contains diverse
corrupt translations ergo it is disgraceful. This they sceme to confirm in
this manner. That which leaves out diverse words contains diverse corrupt
translations of holy scripture. But the Communion book leaves out diverse
words, ergo the communion Book centaineth diverse corrupt translations and so
by consequent is disgraceful to bolie scriptures. How far forth the book
does leave out a^^e thing is our next work upon instance to be given. But the
question is now of this first proposition the falsehood whereof is plain in
this because many translations, Chaldee, Syriacke Arabic, yea the Greek it
self of the old testament which the Apostles received in their time, all these
in diverse places leave out some words, as to particularise would clogge the
margent, yet never read we that either the Apostles, or Mauter Iunius and
Tremellius accounted these translations disgraceful to holy scripture,
neither would these two latter have employed so much time in translating the
Chaldee, Syriacke, and Arabic, if they had so thought. But proceed we to the
Instances.

1,. These words are left out Higaion, Selah, and all the titles of the
Psalms.
Higaion, Selah, in the 9. Psalm verse 17. the Psalter in the Communion book
mentions not, because not translated. For they are hebrew words originallie.
And as good omitted as not understood. The most learned and auncientest that
know their own hebrew tongue, know not what to say herein, and therefore no
shame for our countrymen to confess their ignorance. 2. other Churches did
follow this course at what time the Psalms were first translated 3. they that
do render the words do not render all, nor do they make any necessary
certain construction 4. Doctissimiviri obseruant titu lis Psalmorum nonesse
temere fidendum. Hieron. Guadal in Osean. praefat. page 8. Dum in anbiguo adbuc
resest properandum videtur ad certa. Felin. praefat. in Psam.
the papist himself is not so blind but be sees, and seeing ingenuously
confesses that very learned men do observe that we may not over hastily
trust the titles of the Psalms. Wherefore not hacking nor sticking upon
doubtful and disputable titles not of the substance of the Psaimes themselves,
they heldit (as Felinuts says) wisdom to hasten presently to the Psalms
themselves, where all things were and are plentiful and certain. But more of
this Par. 1. chap. 24. Page 133.

2. Because it leaves out the conclusion after the 72. Psalm, and these
words praise ye the Lord at least 17. times.
The conclusion of the 22. Psalm is, Let all the earth be filled with his
glory so be it, so be it, or as our Communion book has Let all the earth be
filled with his majesty A men A men. And therfeore false where they say it is
left out. After the Psalm, fully finished there is in a smaller letter put to
in other books. Here end the prayers of Dania the son of I shai, which because
other Psalms follow as the 101.108.109. etc. all carrying the titles of the
Psalms of David, made our translators to forbear (as it seen eth) in respect
of the weak, least hereby they should mistake being no part of David's Psalm
as in deed it is not, but added by some other (as the learned acknowledge)
whither Solomon or some else that put the Psalms together into one whole
volume. Of the words Praise ye the Lord read before part 1. cap. 24. Page 134

3. The conclusion of the Lords prayer is left out every where those rough the
service after the popish manner.
It was left out by she fathers of the western Church before popery was
hatched. And the reason here of we have touched in the 1. part cap. 25.
Whereunto this may be added The latin Church used it not in the form of
prayer, because it is not a petition, Doctor Fulk. prefac. to the Reader. 38.
but acknowledgeing of the power and glory of God, to whom the petitions are
directed, as also because it was a thing commonly known and daily rehearsed of
every man. But here of see part. 1. cap. 25. Page 135.

4. In the reading of the commaundewent these words are left out I brought
thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.
We are wisely to consider the drift of a place, where, or when a sentence is
cited or left out, and accordingly we must tudge. Math. 19.17.
Wil^on our Sausour teaches the young man the commandments he pauseth on the
ducles of the second table not mentioning the first, so the Apostle Romans 13.
Romans 13.9.
not corrupting or disgracing the scriptures thereby, but teaching us by their
example to stay upon that, which we hold most needful and omit some other as
not so pertinent at that time. The like is done in this place here alleged I
brought thee out of the land of Egypt etc. They are the words only of a
preface not of the commandment, and their purpose is, that penned that part
of the communion Book, to propose unto the people not the whole chapter of
Exodus, but only so much, as are the particular commandments. And therefore
intending that principally, as also to help young memories, are to be thought
fa^re from doing ought, which may argue a corrupt translation, or any way be
disgraceful to the scriptures.

5. In the epistle on the fifth sunday after the Epiphanie these words are
left out Holy and beloved. Colloss. 3.12. others call the leaving out of these
words. A gelding of the Scriptures.
This dealing with our communion book is no better the^ that of the Cardinal
Doctor Eureux with the Lord Plessis. Iuciting places out of the ancient
fathers, the Lord Plessie desirous to be liver that, wherefore he quotes the
authority, sometimes leaves out half a sentence more or less, not that he
would corrupt the sense, which he then avoucheth it for, nor but that there may
be use of it in due place, but at that time and for that purpose so much, and no
more was then needful. The like may be said for the last and this particular
here alleged. For neither the whole 20. cap. of Exodus nor ye third to the
Colloss. are appointed to be read quite out but only so much by derectio^, as
ye manner is. In the first ye author God spoke these words, and then the
commandments, which because the Church specially intended therefore omitteth
that other. And so it may be said for this appellation holy and beloved,
which more significantlie are in other places of scripture expressed, and the
words here used (As the elect of God) the translator held enough to entreat
them by. All which the minister may do because his principal aim is
(videlicet) to exhort, to put on tender mercic and forgiving one another, and
so sparing those communia as Erasmus calls them, drives unto points which are
more necessary for the Church of God to learn. Beside it is not unknown,
that diverse translations follow diverse copies, whence arises diversity, or
some such small difference. But to be short whither read, or not read, no
corruption either way. For the word elect necessarily implies the other,
because if elect then holy and beloved. And therefore no meaning was there to
geld the scriptures, though some please so to speak intermes neither fitting
the dignity of their persons who write thus, nor the majesty of the sacred
argument whereof they entreat, nor the truth of the cause which they undertake
to defend. For the vigor and strength of the Apostles current is not in the
titles which come in by the way, but wholly in the maine exhortation which he
earnestly presses.

The holy scriptures are disgraced by putting to of words.
So they be indeed, if such words as the analogy of faith and of the place
will not bear. Otherwise many translations Chaldee Syriack, Arabic, have
their commendations and it is but their due as might be seen by many
allegations, but that we fear to be troublesome. It falls out very often
that supply must be had, when the original can bear the want but the
translation will not. But do we a while ex amin the particulars.

1. Three whole verses are put in Psalm 14.
Our Church does, so read the 14. Psalm with those additions because so
alleged by Saint Paul and placed together in the third to the Romans: Read
more Part 1. cap. 9. Page 95.

2. A whole verse in the end of Psalm. 15.
There is no such thing.

3. This word (O) added corupteth the text by applying that to Jacob as spoken
of him, which belongs to God Psalm. 24.6.
The Hebrew is word for word thus verbatim and no other. This is the generation
of (them that seek him) of them that seek thy face Jacob. Where the figure
Apostrophe makes this (O) be put in because the speech turns from the third
person to the second. But whether this (O) be exprefied, or omitted, the true
sense is nothing hindered and the translation answerable to the Hebrew is (thy
face Jacob) which some fill up for more plainness with these particles O
Jacob or in Jacob or this is Jacob, Musculus. Geneua. Tremel.
or the generation Jacob all expletiuely making up the sentence with some one
word or other; wherein because he that aduentureth least, may be thought to do
best being upon an adventure to add any thing for explication, the translators
taking neither five sillables (Generation,) nor a syllable (In,) but as little
as they could, even a letter, since every one put in somewhat, they attempted
this little without danger at all. So then the Interpreters of this verse
understand by Jacob either his God, or his children after the promise. For his
God and so it is rendered thus, This is the generation of them that seek him,
of them that seek thy face Jacob that is the God of Jacob: For his generation
after him, taking the word Jacob nominatiuely, vocatiuely, or
epiphonematically: Nominatiuely by way of explication. This is the generation
of them, etc. this is Jacob: vocatiuely by appellation calling to Jacob, or
epiphonematically by way of a shout or cry with an acclamatorie demonstration.
O, This is Jacob, the generation of them that seek him, of them that seek thy
face. Now though the first and last of these intend the same sense, yet our
translators in this ambiguitie thought it safest not to venture too much, and
therefore put in with the least, as we may observe in this comparison which so
little as it is, stands sufficient to preserve the truth of this interpretation
and in nothing deserves to be challenged but they rather that do thus
complain. But should we grant, that spoken of Jacob which belongs unto God,
Eua^gelicta ausus est Propheta verba ad De^ transfer personam, H^eron, ad
Pammach.
yet no corruption is it of the Text, For it is usual to put one person for
another, and to apply that to God which was first intended of some other as
lerom notes those words, Zachar. 13.7. Smite the sheaperd, which words of the
Prophet* the Evangelist is bold to translate to the person of God. And shall we
call this a corruption?

4. And said Damoisell arise. Math. 9.25. Here is a corrupt translation of
Scriptures by putting to these words.
These words are read the 24. Sunday after Trinity. But free from corruption,
unless the harmony of the Gospel be charged herewith, for it says as much,
unless also the scriptures in S. Luke c. 8.54. and S. Mark in Syriack Talitha
Cumi cap. 5.41. for relating the same history he found guilty of this sin,
yea unless also they that urge these things against the testimony of S. Mark
and S. Luke be able to tell us upon their credit, that not only now no
ancient Greek and Latin copies have it, but also heretofore none ever had it,
which we assure our selves they will never dare. For it seems the Latin
follows some ancient copies that had it, though (peradventure) since these
copies are now perished. But leaving probabilities, what false doctrine is it
to read for Gospel what S. Luke and Saint Mark have in supply of the
history mentioned in S. Matthew?

5. With wisdom. Ierem. 23.5.
These words are read the 25. Sunday after Trinity prophe^ying of Christ. He
shall ^aigne or bear rule, and shall prosper with wisdom. This (with
wisdom) is neither too much for Christ, (...) Vtrunque significat. Calvin
Prudenter vel prospere aget, Ibid,
as if it were more then true to say so of the Messiah, nor is it more then the
word signifies. For (Shacal) in this place signifies both: and therefore
Master Calvin expresses both in his Text wisely and prosperously he shall do.

6. Thou would take heed, Luke 19.42.
All writes note this speech of our Savior over Jerusalem to be abrupt and
very passionate, as offering some what to be understood. Which he does not
express, which Euthimius supplyeth thus, thou would not perish, Austin, Non
perires. Euthym. Forsit an perm^neres. Aug. epist. 79. Hieron. and The ophil. O
quam fesix esses. P^scas. r. Fleres alas. apud Erasamu^.
peradventure thou should yet continue. Hierom and Theophilact, I could have
wished thou had known. Piscator, O thou had been happy, others as Erasmus
observes, Thou would have wept, or as in the Communion book thou would
take heed, which also is the exposition of the ancient 0695 0 (Curares) thou
would have seen to it. And are all these supplies corruptions? What then
shall we judge of most men's labors in this kind, who in translating are
forced to make supply with words not found expressly in the letter of the
original, but yet are couched in the grace of a passionate tune, and sought
out by that spirit whereby they were first conceived, wherein for so much as we
no otherwise judge of this place here thus translated, it is but a sorry amends
some make those translators (who ever they were) to call the helps they aford
us by no more gracious a name then plain Corruptions.

7. It is I: fear not. Luke 24.36.
These words are read on Twesday in Easter week, and were such as our Savior
used after his resurrection, ^isdem verbis eo^ alloquutus est post resurre
ctionem. Marle. in Math. 14.27. Apparet huc transcriptum ex Euangelio Iohannis.
Erasmus in in Luc. 24.
for so it is noted in Marlorat upon Math. 14. With which no more reason have
any to be effended for being used in this place of Luke 24 then with that in
verse 38. (why are ye troubled,) which if we go by thinking (Erasmus says)
is taken out the Gospel of Saint John, and put here. Our blessed Samour said
the one as much as the other and (by Erasmus his judgment) Saint Luke has one
as much as the other, Both belike corruptions. But to what end is this captious
quarrelling, at words, since we cannot deny but this form of speech was very
much in use with Christ: And the Syriack, and Latin beside the ancient Fathers
Saint Ambrose and others do read these words, It is I, fear not, Luke 24.36.

8. Be sober, 2. Timoth. 4.5.
Words put in, which other Bibles (peradventure) have not. But yet no offense
to be taken hereat. 1. Considering this may come from diverse copies, some
having the words, some omitting them. (...).
2. As also from the word here (Nephe) which in Scripture sometimes is
interpreted he sober, sometimes watch. 3. Neither is it misbesceming the Apostle
Paul to teach, nor his scholar Timothy to learn so much.
And therefore all this remembered might entreat of us a more favorable
construction then to stain the ceedit of this, and those other places with the
reproach of Corruption.

By perverting the meaning of the holy Ghost.
Grievous if true, but odious because false. Saint Peter notes them for
unlearned and unstable that pervert Scripture and they do it says he to their
own destruction. 2. Pet. ^.16.
Surely unlearned, and unstable our translators were not, but settled in the
truth, of great knowledge in the toongs, men reverend in their times, when they
implored those fruitful pains to publish the scriptures, nor shall the malice
or Satan now prevail to their disgrace, as it seems this bitter inuectiue
does forciblie intend. But draw we to the instances.

1. Because of men's works done against the words of my lips etc. for Concerning
the works of men by the words of thy lips. Psalm. 17.4.
The difference is twofold. Solens Hebrai causarum omne genus interdum
exprimere praefixa litera
1. Against the words, etc. instead of, By the words. 2. Of my lips, etc. For
thy lips. Of the first: this we are to know that the letter in service here is
Beza (...) Luc. ^.1.
which the Hebrews manner is to employ in the front of a word to express all
sorts of causes.
And the learned in that tongue well know that it sometimes does signify
against as Exodus 14. he shall fight for you against the Egyptians the Hebrew is
this letter in the Egyptians. Exodus 14 25. (...)
Sometimes it signifies (by) as here some render it. And whether way (in a
diverse relation to the person) no dangerous interpretation. In the first
person of David, so it has coherence with the third verse In the person of
God, so it has coherence with the words following. Now in other tra^slations
besides our English, take the Arabic, the Siriack the Chaldee, the Greek, and
ye may note the like difference, yet not any of them for ought we observe, is
charged to pervert the meaning of the holy Ghost. As for the exception taken at
the Communion Book, which translateth in the first person my lips what
others read in the second person thy lips, the reason may be thus, First,
because the translators read * not, (...)
or else took the termination to be Paragogicum. Secondly, Because the two
xerses both this where these words are, and that going before, deliver the rest
in the first person; for a little before in the third verse the Prophet spoke in
his own person, I am utterly purposed that my mouth should not offend, as also
in this 4. he follows it in his own person, I have kept me from the paths of
the destroyer. These and some such like motives led on our predecessors thus to
English it. Good men, we say but well to say and think so, for he that
praises Athanasius prayseth God, or as the Apostle speaks they glorified God
in me, Galath 2.23.
God was glorified in them, good men therefore we shall and do call them, and
their memory be blessed good men they little thought, or did, (though now
falsely accused) pervert the meaning of the holy Ghost.

2. With the froward thou shall learn frowardness, etc. For with the froward
thou will show thy self froward. Spoken of God. Psalm. 18.26.

Nay spoken indefinitely, not determining whether God or man, videlicet with
the froward any one shall learn frowardness, meaning with the froward it is
the next way for one to be as froward as he.

God cannot be said to learn frowardness.
No more can he be circumuented, for he knows our hearts and purposes a far
off: Ose. 11.12. Psalm. 78.36. Infantilia. Aug de Trinitate. lib. 1. cap. (...)
(...). Hac c^nia Deus habet per essectum non per naturam. Ber. sermon. 4. in
Cautic. Luc. 19.22. Leuit. 26.23.
yet Ose 11. Ephraim circumuenteth or compasses me about with lies, and Psalm.
78. The Israelites dissembled with the Lord with their mouth. By which words
vttred in a lisping manner, as nurses to their children, we are taught to
conceive that such speeches are delivered of God which are found in the
creature but not in God. For God has none of these by nature, though many such
effects are found in him and from him. For as when a Master hearing his
scholars stammer, stut, or the like, does the like after them, that in the
Master, the scholars may see to amend: at which often pronou^cing, or saying
after his petties he may seem to learn after them, when yet in all this he
does plainly reprove the^, so the Lord when he takes the words out of the
mouth of his servants, and judges them by them, 24.27 etc. Joel. 3.4. Pro.
1.24.28. Deuteronomy. 32, 21. Isa. 49.25. Pro. 3.34. Obadia. 15. Luc. 6.38. Non
iniquita it is ad intquita tem sed paenae ad culpam.
so when they walk stubbornely he will walk stubbornly against them, and if
they recompense him, he will recompense them, and if he call, and they will not
hear, they shall call, and he will not hear. If they Deuteronomy. 32. move him to
jealousy, he will provoke them to anger. If they contend with him, he will
contend with them, and Proverbs 3. with the skornfull he skorneth, and as they
have done, so it shall be done unto them. In all which places the measure which
God afordeth giving like for like, is not of iniquity for iniquity, but of
punishment of sin, which yet in regard of the iniquities as frowardness,
anger, revenge, and the like, the word in this place of the Psalm expresses
by a term of art, to show it is not natural in God, (...)
but forced in a fort upon him, or learned by him. (...)
For the word used here, and in 2. Sam. 22. is all one except only the
displacing of a letter, but both to the same purpose. Translata 2. radicali in
loc^^ primae (...) posito an^e (...) Coniugatio Hythpael nen semper veram sed
aliquando fictam actionem denotat Elias in ^ram, Heb. orat. ^.^.13. sect. 2.
For the verb here is in such a conjugation as does not intend a very natural
action, but by imitation after once counterfeiting to do it, making a show, as
if he were to learn. All which points jointly concur in this point of
doctrine for our uses, that as when we read; God mocketh or laugheth man to
skorne, a man is taught to read such a Scripture with tears, so in this or the
like that God learneth frowardness of the froward, or is froward with the
froward, for both drive to one end we are taught to be patient, and meek, and
gentle, that so making our selves a glass for the Lord his actions, he man
return the like upon us. As if all were sununed up in this. 2. Chro: ^ 15.
The Lordis with you if ye be with him, and if ye forsake him, he will
forsake you. And to conclude as we began. If ye be froward ye take the
readiest way to teach the Lord to be as froward as your selves are: Which is in
effect according to the vulgar English: with the froward he shall learn
frowardness. Wherefore so many as have had a finger in reproouing this
translation may be entreated to understand what they did reprove.

3. He makes them to be of one mind in an house, etc. For he makes the
solitary to dwell with families. Psalm. 68.26.
Among all those which have the vulgar latin translation in chase none we
find so sharp set against Bellarmin to charge this sentence as a text that
peruerteth the meaning of the holy Ghost, how much less should our brethren
thus hotly entreat ours, which is much better then the latin. No doubt when
this place heretofore was had in examination, our ancients (whose labors many
of us vntbankfully accept of) did next after the original look into other
translations, Greek, Latin, and the Commentaries of the Fathers upon them,
(...). Apollina. interpret. psalm. Vnius mor^^^.
where finding in the Greek (...) and in an ancient paraphrast upon the
Psalter Apollinarius, who was about 380. years after Christ a man very
skillful in the Hebrew and Greek the same very word retained, and the like in
the vulgar latin (of one fashion) and all this with a joint consent did not (it
seems) willingly forgo on the sudden what was so commonly approved.
Icchidim the Hebrew word signifies Single, (...).
and a single word it is, not expressing whether persons or affections.
Hereupon diverse have diuersely thought. But howsoever we take it: No such
difference that we, who are challenged herein, should be challenged for no
less then perverting the meaning of the holy Ghost. Whereas (...) vnire.
signifying to make one may intend it either of persons or of affections, the
first of these, these opponents will bane it, the second of these our Communion
book has and either of both one or other no way preiudiceth the truth of that
sentence.

4. They were not obedient, etc For they were not disobedient. Psalm. 105.28.
Read before the answer. Part. 1. cap. 1. page 78. 83.

5. Phineas prayed, etc. For Phineas executed judgment. Psalm. 106.30.
Suppose it granted that the word in Hebrew signifies to execute judgment
and not to pray, whereas we have showed the contrary, what difference is there
more in these two actions (which may be and are copartners in godly men) then
in that of the Proverbs cap. 3. God skorneth with the skornefull which Saint
James and Saint Peter following the Greek, Pro. 3.34.
render, God resists the proud. To skorne and to resist are as much contrary
for so they will needs call it, as to pray and to execute judgment. But they
are not contrary, neither is this a perverting of the meaning of the holy
Ghost. These speeches proceed of overmuch eagerness of stomach against
discipline, doctrine, and translations which our Church proposes, as if there
were cause enough to dislike eo nomine because she likes and approves it. But
for a more ample answer to this their objection, we refer the good Reader to
the first part. cap. 2. page 84. 86.

6. Though he suffered them to be evil entreated of Tyrants, etc. For he
powers contempt upon Princes. Psalm. 107.40.
They are deceived, that think these words in the communion book are a
perverting of the meaning of the holy Ghost (for that is still ye head of the
race, whereunto these allegations make recourse, Brentius and some others
before and after him propose it in the same sense as the communion book does.
Dominus suo^, etc. and multae acerba patiantura crudelibus tyra^nis, quieos
premu^t seruitute, and paucs fiant. Bre^^.
The Lord (says Brentius) vouchsafes outward peace to his children, yet so
as they be afterward aflicted, and endure many bitter things at the hands
of cruel tyrants, who oppress them with bondage, that they become few. etc.
As for the other words. He powereth contempt upon Princes though they are not
expressly mentioned, yet may well be understood by coherence of the rest.

7. The rod of the ungodly comes not into the let of the righteous etc. for
the rod of the ungodly shall not rest on the lot of the right teous Psalm
125.3.
Comes not; for Resleth not (that is) comes not to rest. No great
difference, but agreeable to the hebrew, whose manner of speech is to the like
effect. And it more then seems that the translators followed some copy which
had (...)
for reading Beth for, Iabo pro Ianoas (...) pro (...) omissan
Nun omitting the last letter But cheth which way soever the sense is agreeable
to scripture and to this place: For the rod of the ungodly is in judgment; so
comes it not upon the righteous; the rod of the ungodly is from God in
judgment so comes it not upon the righteous: to harden and obdurate so
comes it not upon the righteous: for a farther condemnation so comes it not
upon the righteous: as a fertunner and taste of everlasting torments so comes
it not upon the righteous. And therefore all this considered the translation
may be well endured,

8. Yea I will pray against their wickedness etc. for within a while I will
pray for their miseries Psalm 141.6.
This translation hardly appears, but to their discredit who have served it
with a writ at this time. For before it come to answer it may take exception
at the lesser bibles, which in this case are not to be judges against it, but
to be tried by the original as it self is. The word in this very is rightly
here wickedness not miserio, and so the smaller bibles though not here, yet in
Ierom. 44. translate it. Ierem. 44 9.
Have ye forgotten the wickedness of your fathers, Quaecu^que ma la feram ab
us non exacerbabunt animum meum Tremel, in Psalm. 141.2 p^ter, 2.7.
and the wickedness, etc. 5. times together in this english, Secondly Tremel
rendereth it in their evils not of misery which themselves endure, but of
wickedness which they commit vexing his righteous soul as S. Peter speaks
Now let any man but of competent knowledge give sentence whether this be to
pervert the meaning of the holy Ghost, seeing that he who prays for evil
men's mileries, because they are in misery, well knows he must pray against
their wickedness which is the cause of miseries, yea even a misery it self.

9. Israeli remembered, etc. for he (that is God) remembered. Isa. 63. Read on
monday before Easter.
Here upon supposall of a true information that Israel is put for God, yet the
adventure we think over bold to say it is a per uerting of the holy ghost.
For if is not hard to note as great a difference as this comes to Ose. 11.
Ose. 11.12.
Judah is faithful with the saints, so our lesser Bibles and Tremellius reads,
but others of another judgment read Judah is faithful with the holy one, taking
him for God not for his saints thus does Quinquius Aben Ezra, among the
hebrews, so does Oecolompad. and some others of our late interpreters. Shall
they herevpo^ that incline this way or that way condemn each other (after the
example here given) as peruerters of the meaning of the holy ghost, because
some attribute it to God othere to the Saints upon earth: yet by as much reason
may they as in this course which they undertake? Nay with far more
probability. Strange therefore we may justly deem it, and so do we that men
will dare thus bouldly stain these words (so translated) as wresting the right
purpose of the holy Ghost. Is it true indeed: must it not be Israel, but God
for Israel. The person in that place after the manner of the Hebrews the third
put indefinitely for some one. Now whither God or Israel hereon depends the
question. Oecolompadius proposes it both of God that he brought the days of
old to their remembrance, and of the people, Vterque sensus verus eit.
Oecolompadius.
namely that Israel calls to mind the wonders of old to their great shame,
and thereupon concludes either way interpreted neither way erroneus. How then
comes this peremtorie conclusion? If we say Israel remembered it is a
perverting of the meaning of the holy Ghost. Would we deal as strictly, as
we have these men for an ensample, we might use our terms flat negative,
Recorda^us est Israel quod (...) intelligendum est. S^epfius. in Isatam. Quod
nonnull^ ad Deum referunt etc. videtur esse asper^usac nimis ^enootum. Call.
and say it must not be God but Israel. Theodoricus Snepfius in his
commentaries does not only so translate as our communion Book in the place
named has but writes this withal. This word, Israel is to be understood in
common not only of the mercy but of the power of God. Master Calvin upon the
same place approves not only ours, as it is, but also utterly mislikes them
that will needs have God put for Israel, holding it to be very harsh, and wide.
If our home borne Critics repine hereat let us entreat that Master Calvin and
Snepfius his judgment may ouerballance their prejudice, if neither shall, let
a third no friend to the cause nor our religion, Subauditur populus
Israeliticus verbasu^^ E saiaedice^tissuo te^ pore recordatu^ suisse populum
Iudaicum illius antiquae faelicitatis, etc. Pint^s in Esai. 6^.7.
Pintus upon Esaias be heard whose words are. He remembered the old time of
Moses and his people. This (he) is to be understood for the people of Israel.
They are (says he) the words of Esaias saying that in his time the people of
the Jews remembered that ancient felicity, when God by wonderful signs
delivered Moses with his people from the bondage of the Egyptians. etc. So that
by the judgment of these men our translation deserves not to be challenged in
this place.

10. Whom they bought of the Children of Israel. etc. for, Whom the children of
Israel valewed Matthew 27.9.
Read on the sunday before Easter for part of the Gospel. And omitting diverse
points in this clause worthy our sarder inquiry as (...) which the Syriack
followed be the fitter word for this place. 2. in this (...) or (...) or some
such expletiue be understood to come between 3. whither (...) be to be
referred to this (...) or so (...)? 4. whither (...) and (...) be the third
person plural, as it is commonly thought, or the first person singular
according to the Hebrew and Syriack? all which doubts might be cleared with
good advantage to the reader, omitting we say all these, and taking the place,
as it is here proposed without more ado, we may resolve that neither of the
interpretations peruerteth the meaning of the holy Ghost. Both come to one
pass. For if Christ were bought, then was he valewed at a price. Since to buy
and to value are such as imply one the other, and in the hebrew phrase of
matches or pares, Posito vno verbo intelligitur consequens He bra^s.
by one we understand both Like that in Psalm 68.19. thou receiuedst gifts
for men which in the Ephesians 4.8. is of the same person he gave gifts to men.
One tert sa^eth he received, another citing the place renders it he gave; Both
true because he received to give etc. So little cause was here to produce this
quotation.

11. Hail full of grace. etc. for freely believed Luke. 1.28.
The lesser bibles are not to be vnipire in this point, but the original
greek, which if translated thus (freely beloved) M. Marlorat censureth with
this marginal note that it is ouerfreely, Quidam liberius. Marlorat.
or somewhat too bouldly attempted to interpret it so: And had not some wrong
conclusions been drawn from abusing the word full of grace, many hereupon
taking the blessed virgin for the fountain of grace, praying to her, calling
upon her etc. (as if what she had, she had not received) the word had never been altered in Latin nor English. For gracious or full of grace here implye no
more which very self same word full of grace the Syriack retains. And that
place Ephesians 1.6. he has accepted us, (...). gratiosos effecit nos Ephesians.
1.6. Pisca.
Piscator translates he has made us gracious, and therefore in this Luke 1.
he rendereth it graced or gracious, which he does, and in deed the rather is
to be done, because the Angel stands upon the word with a grace in two
reasons: for the Lord is with thee 2. thou have found grace verse 30. showing
whence and how she is to be thus graced, or in grace or gracious, or full of
grace. Which last wisely understood (as in preaching, now God be thanked it
is) indangereth no more then that of other the Saints. Act. 6.3.5.7.55 cap.
11.24:
Stephen and the rest Act. 6.3. full of the holy Ghost and wisdom, full of
faith and the spirit verse 5. full of the holy Ghost Act. 7.55. chapter 11.24.
etc. no whit confirming ere the more any such opinions formerly maintained of
the blessed Virgins ow^ merits, and freedom from orginall sin, or directing
prayer unto her more then unto Saint Stephen or other of the Saints, of whom
words in the places quoted before are deliuerd at the full as fullness of the
holy Ghost, of faith wisdom etc. To say therefore and translate as the Syriack
etc. as the ancient Latin fathers do in that sense which our Church receives,
and the word it self well understood bears, is no perverting the meaning of
the holy Ghost.

The lowlines of his handmaide etc. For the poor degree Luc. 1.48.
This word humility or baseness as it signifies an humble estate, whereinto
one is cast, so yet does it signify a contentment in that estate with
patience bearing it willingly, not murmuring, nor repining. For so was it our
Saviors case Act. 8. (...). Act. 8.33.
who was debased, and in his humility his indgement was exalted, where
humility signifies not only his poor abject degree but withal a lowly,
submisse, and modest cariadge, which if understood of the virgin Mary's
modesty, as peradventure the english word lowliness implies, it is no
advantage for auouching works of merit and desert, psalm. 34.15.
more then any other like speeches, wherein we learn That the eyes of the
Lord are upon the righteous. Psalm. 34. Genes. 4.4.
or that God has respect unto the prayers of the Saints, or where it is said
Genes. 4. that the Lord had respect unto Abel and his offering. In all which
places we confess that the prayers of Gods children, their actions, works, and
sacrifices come up before the Lord; yea and the Lord looks down from Heaven
upon them, not that they do demerit Gods favor, but that he is well pleased
with them; as no doubt he was with the holy Virgin, whose low estate as he
pitied so her lowly accepta^ce of that estate and patient abiding he did
highly respect. 2, These. 1.6.7.
For it is a righteous thing with God to recompense rest unto them that are
troubled; Heb. 6.10.
and God is not unjust to forget the works of his children, not that he or
she, the Virgin or any other begins unto God, but he begins and perfects the
work in them until the day of Christ. And this manner of speech, He regarded
the lowlines of his handmaid, yields no other matter for suspicio^ of any
Pelagianisme or popish semipelagianisme then that, which is in sound of words
and substance for sense Psalm: (...). psalm. 138.6
138. The Lord iron high yet beholds the lowly, but the proud he knows a
far off. Where in all our english bidles, little or great, Geneua, or any
other have no word else but lowly, and therefore may well be here the lowliness
of his handmaid. So as under correction of better advertisement they are fowly
deceived that call this translation a perverting of the meaning of the holy
Ghost. But might none of all these proofs be alleged as we see they are
upon better ground in our defense, then of the contrary part by them that take
offense, this we will say for farther satisfaction. Be it that our church intend
not Lowliness and humility in this place for the virtue which the Grecians
call modesty, but abiectnesse or baseness of condition according to that
which is sung in the Psalms so base estate of his handmaide* why may not we
suffer the word lowliness stand and distinguish it as Chit^eus does humility
rather then upon so small cause to wound the credit of the translation and our
reverend aged translators?

13. Should be cast away etc. for should be reproved 2 Cor. 9.27. Head on
septuages. sunday.
In deed the lesser bibles so so translate as these ^orrectors of the communion
book give direction. But what reason, that they herein should be a squire for
this, then this for their translation Or what is it contrary to the meaning of
the holy Ghost, if we keep it as it is, (...). Romans 1.28. 2. Cor. 13.5.6.7. 2.
Tim. 3.8. Titus. 1.16. Ipse reprobui fiam. Piscator. Ne Deum piece. tris suis
ossenderet, at que it a causam damna^ di sui praeberet. Ibid.
Suro we are word, there in question ((...)) bears so Romans 1. he gave them
^ppe into a reprobate mind^ 0779 0 2. Cor. 13. cap. 6.7. except ye be
reprobates; we are no^ reprobates, we be as reprobates; Reprobates 2.
Timothy 3.8. concerning the faith. Titus r.' to every good work reprobate. In
all which places ^^te render it, no other then the lesser Bibles do, nor then
it self signifies; so as they should rather keep then change this
translation. Piscator writing upon this place gives it, least I be a
reprobate, and in his notes thus what then did he fear least he should be
damned? No but this be feared least by his sins he should offend God, and
so be condemned. Thus far Piscator with us, and for us

14. Agar in Arabia bordreth against Jerusalem G^lat 4.25 etc. for answers
unto Jerusalem that now is.
Read for part of the epistle the 4. Sunday in Lent. Look before part 1. cap.
8. page 94.95.

15. Christ was found in apparel like a man etc. for In shape like a man
Philippians 2.7.
These words are read for the epistle on the sunday next before Easter. All
this while observe we that no other is brought to check our communion book,
but the lesser bibles, which must it self be content to be judged, as well as
the translation here challenged. The Apostle had a little before used both
these words Shape and likeness, and therefore the text varying, the traslator
thought good also to vary. Now we would for out better instruction gladly
learn, what perverting of the meaning of the holy Ghost this is, to say
Christ was found in apparel like a man? The fathers compare his manhood to a
garment: Ignatius says of Christ that he was clothed with a body subject to
affections as wear; Cyprian has the like phrase; (...). Ignat. ad Tral.
epist. 2. Carnem induitur. Cyprian. de idolo. vanit. (...). deitatis Athan
sermon. ^on. Arris an. Cum induit hominem. Ambros.
Athanasius calls the body, which Christ did take unto him a cloak (such as a
man casts about him) of the godhead; Ambrose has thus when he put on man he
did not change the substance. the reason why they so speak: 1. because
apparel neither ads to nor detracts from the body, so neither is ought added
to, or detracted from the godhead 2. as apparel has honor for the body, so
the manhood of Christ for the godhead 3. as a man is known by apparel so the
godhead by the humanity, 4. as yt garment changes for yt body so the humanity
and not the godhead. Unto which allusion of the fathers the authors of this
present translation might respect.
For they were learned, and did much eye what language was in use before their
time, that if (safely) they might retain it, they would as it seems here
they did. (...). 1. Cor. 7.31. (...).
For the word habit (which in latin interprets the greek word) sigufieth an
habit or attire or kind of raiment 2; when it is said, yt fashion or figure of
this world passes away, Psalm. 102.26.
what is it but an attire or garment which wears every day, for so the
prophet calieth it Psalm 102. and the author to the Hebrews cap. 1.12. as a
vesture shall thou change them. (...). Heb. 1.12.
Thridlie shape, likeness, etc. were words used immediately before, and
therefore this word coming next to remembrance, upon these considerations was
accepted of without prejudice to the meaning of the holy Ghost, for Christ his
humanity was a garment, and his aparell a garment, and in them both he truly
man 4. Though ye word be not (...) which properly is apparel, Q. 83. q. 73.
Author sub Ceril. in Ioh. lib. ^1 Haimo. etc. Indumentum.
or a garment: Yet saint Austine and the author upon saint John under Cyrils
name, Haimo, Aquinas, and some of our own writers by habit understand
apparel: Which to say of Christ is no untruth, for he wore apparel like a
man as his unseamed coat shows, and where the word habit signifies many
ways. S. Austin aforenamed rendereth it apparel, as our Communion book
both. By which name we are to understand that the word is not changed by
taking the manhod, Quo nomine ^portet intelligi non mutatum esse verbum
susceptione hominis sicuti nec menbra vest induta mutantur. Aug. Q. 83 Q. 73.
Humana fragilitass assu^ptor. Illa susceptio.
no more the^ the parts of our body by the raiment which we put on. And a
little after. So far forth as men's words may befitted for ineffable things,
least God the taker of man's frailty be thought changed, it was chosen that
this susception, or taking should be called in greek (...) and in latin habit.
Lastly supposing none of all these answers might be made, let men press what
they will to their uttermost, this testimony of theirs fitteth not for that
purpose, wherefore it is produced, namely a perverting of the meaning of the
holy Ghost.

16. The high priest entered the holy place with strong blood, etc. for other
blood which is not his own. Heb. 9.25. Read on wednesday before Easter.
At the first view of this quotation half an eye might see it was an escape in
the print strong put for strange. Wherefore recourse made to the late communion
book, (...)
and finding it strange blood and not strong as the accusation pretends; we
examined the former impressio^s, in the days of our late renowned soueraign,
and in neither greater nor less so many as we light upon, can we find any
such thing as strong put for strange. Now that the word signifies strange
though we might appeal to the greek dictionaries for proof hereof, yet we
will keep us within the limits of scripture and take one place in stead of
many. In the seventh of the Acts it is said Abraham his feet should be
so^ourners in a strange land. Being therefore no error in the print, (...). Act
7.6.
nor in the signification of the word, this exception here taken may return
back with a shame enough to the other, who has enforced it to appear.

17. When the long suffering of God was looked for, etc. for the long suffering
of God waited. 1. Pet. 3.20.
This we read for part of the Epistle on Easter even; Reasons why we should so
continue the reading, and not vary. 1. The verb is put intransitiuely without
an accusative case, (...). 1. Pet. 3.20. m^ dia vocis. Exemp. Consta^.
2. The word is active and passive, did expect or was expected. 3. Other latin
copies as that of Constance, and that of Erasmus translate it passiuely as our
Communion book has it, and we trust they knew the force of so much Greek as
this verb. 4. They that translate actiuely did expect must make a supply of
some thing else, and tell us what it did wait or expect or look for: 5. Grant
it actiuely translated did wait, or make an abode, what advantage is herein
more the^ in the other, or how is the meaning of the holy Ghost furdered in
this and perverted in the other of the Communion book.
For to this purpose it is alleged, but to this purpose can prove nothing.

Because it misapplieth many matters to the countenancing of errors and
doubtful matters.
1. To those children whom Herod caused to be murdered, whom the Collect there
calls Gods witnesses. Revel. 14.1.
That which Scripture proposes in common to all Saints, and so intends may
he understood with some allusion to others and at other times. In triumph for
the coronation of our gracious King, that Psalm or the like which concerns
David, Solomon his or their times, and God his special mercies upon them, our
Church and the Divines thereof by application draw homeward to personal use,
sitting their own thoughts and their auditors to the same day. The like may be
thought in defense of our practice for reading the 14. of Revelation which
because we find it comes nearest in respect of some allusion, though it were
not the maine scope (perhaps) of the Evangelist, we use as this day to read it
publicly in solemnizing the memory of those harmless innocents. For diverse
points in those few verses read at that time sort with those children. 1.
Virgins for so little ones as those may be called being two year old and
under, though we deny not more is meant in that name Virgins. 2. In their mouth
was found no guile. 3. They are called first fruits unto God, and the lamb,
because immediately upon the days of our Saviors birth these poor infants
were first put to death. 4. Origin, or one in his name among his works a very
ancient writer calls them the first fruits of the Martyrs. Primitiae
martyrum. Origin. homil. 3. in diuers^s.

To conclude, if it may not be allowed to read such Chapters in way of some
correspondence though not altogether in the exactest manner, this course must
be condemned (not in our Church alone but) in others also who in times of
famine, pestilence, triumphs, funerals and the like have not a Scripture
expressly for every occasion, but come as near as they can. As for example, in
that memorable public thanksgiving unto God throughout all our Churches for
his merciful discovery of the odious and execrable treason intended the fifth
of November, Prayers and thanksgiving for the happy deliverance of his
majesty, etc. Nouemb. 5. in 1605.
(against the Kings highness our dread sovereign, as also his dearly beloved
both his other self the Queens most excellent majesty, and those lovely
branches of his royal body, the young Prince and the rest of that regal
issue, with the Lords of his Majesty's most honorable Council, and the
choicest of our estate Ecclesiastical, and Political) what other Psalms have
we read by way of application, but the Psalm 35.68.69. for Chapter 1. Sam. 22.
and part of Saint Matthew 27. for Epistle Romames 13.1.2. and Gospel Acts 23?
And our trust is that none will be offended, who have cause to thank God as
deeply as our selves, for so they have, that by Gods direction we make choice
of such Scriptures, as may be thought fittest for that holy business. As for
the clause annexed that our Collect calls those innocents Gods Martyrs. Look
before in this appendix.

2. The time that Christ, etc. For the time that Christ abode in the grave. 1.
Pet. 3.17.
What our hot burning reprehenders would say, we cannot conjecture. For their
sentence is imperfect as you see. But this we do the Reader to understand that
this Scripture is read for the Epistle on Easter even. And wherein, or how
misapplyed because read as that day we know not, specially being as it is a day
of memorial of the Passion and sufferings of Christ, who in that Chapter is
set down by the Apostle for an example of a holy patience and godly
contentation.

3. To Michaell at a created Angel. Revel. 12.7.
Look the answer before in the appendix.

We cannot Subscribe to the Book of ordination as is required for those
reasons. First, because it contains in it some manifest untruths. For it
affirms that it is evident unto all men diligently reading holy Scriptures,
or ancient Authors, that from the Apostles times, there have been these
orders of the Ministers in the Church that is Bishops, Priests, and Deacons.
They are set down all three in the new Testament, and by consent of the ages
following they have been from time to time distinguished orders of Ministers
in the Church as we have showed before, and might farther enlarge by more ample
testimony.

It says that God did inspire his holy Apostles to choose Saint Stephen to the
order of the Deacon set down in that book, and that Deacons then to be ordered
are called to the like office, and administration.
That God did inspire his holy Apostles to choose Saint Stephen; Meminisse
Diacons debent qu^nt^m Apostolos (id est) Episcopos and praepositos Dominus
eligit Diaconos aeutem post ascensum domini Apostolisibi constitue runt
episcopa ^ussus and ecclesia ministros. Cyprian. lib. 3. epistola. 9.
to the order of Deacon set down in that book is a truth warranted by
Scripture, and afterward by the Fathers as Saint Cyprian among the rest.
Deacons must remember that the Lord has chosen Apostles (that is) Bishops and
Prelates: But the Apostles after the ascension of the Lord appointed Deacons
Ministers of his Bishopric and Church. And that they are called to the like
office, and administration may appear in this, because as they preached and
baptized so likewise do ours. Secondly, As they ministered upon tables for
relief of the poor, so herein thus sarre ours are serviceable to such
purposes, namely at times if need require and other order be not taken to give
notice of such sick and impotent, as relief may be more conveniently provided
for them.

Act. 6.2. The Apostles thought it too great a burden for them to give
attendance to the office of teaching, and to manage the business of
distribution to the poor. So that if Stephen and the rest chosen with him,
were chosen to such an office, by which they were tied to both, it argues that
they were of better sufficiency, then the Apostles, or that the Apostles would
lay a burden upon others, which they found to be too heavy for themselves.
In the Act. 6. there is no such word as that the Apostles thought it too great
a burden. But this there is, that they thought it not meet or pleasing, (...).
Act 6.2. Act. 12.3.
or that they took it not to their liking for so Act. 12. the word does
signify. As it is not liking to an Emperor to take particular knowledge of
some inferior grieuances among his subjects to redress them in his own person,
though he have so done, but translateth that care over to others, yet that no
argument of his insufficiency, as if he were unable, but of inconueniencie
that he thinks it not meet at some times. For it is well known that he has
done it heretofore and since. Right so fares it in this high function of the
Apostles. It was not meet they intend both, but yet they were able; for they
had done it before and did it again after that the Deacons were appointed as
appears, Act. 11. Where relief was carried by the hands of Paul and
Barnabas, Act. 11.30.
and not of the Deacons. So as it argues not that the Deacons were of more
sufficiency then the Apostles. For though the Deacons did preach and minister
to the poor, yet their preaching was not comparable to that burden of the
Apostolical calling. And therefore it is plain that the Apostles did not lay
a burden upon others, which themselves found too heavy for themselves. Beside
the Deacons were not strictly tied to both offices at once, but as the times
sorted they did apply their several endeavors.

That Stephen disputed with the Libertines, and made an Apology for himself
it does appear, but that he preached it does no way appear.
It does not appear de facto that Saint Stephen did distribute, yet that he
did de iure we may and do grant: So were it not expressed that de facto he
did preach, yet de iure of right he well might, for being ordained with
imposition of hands, furnished with gists of knowledge and utterance, full of
the holy Ghost and wisdom, he was no private person, nor so enabled but for a
greater work then only ministering at tables. But the truth is he did preach,
unless because a man stands upon the defense of Gods truth, mightily
conuincing his adversaries by Scripture, therefore it shall be said he did not
preach. Whereas even in Sermons a man disputes, by very forcible arguments
conuinceth the gainsaier. And Saint Peter Act. 2. his apology there made call
we it an oration, Act. 2.14.
or what else, we cannot deny it was a Sermon. Upon this sixth of the Asts now
questioned, Master Gualter writes thus. Quamuis de public^s concionibus.
Gualter. in Act. 6.
Although nothing be spoken of his public Sermons, yet notwithstanding it is
evident by the contents of the history that he had these both often, and
effectual, and very serious. wherefore we may see that the Deacons of the
primitive Church were not all together estranged from the ministry of the
word but although they were chiefly occupied about the dispensation of the
churches goods, nevertheless they employed their labor so far as they might
in the other ministeries of the Church, that by this means according to the
sentence of Saint Paul, they might get unto themselves a good degree 1. Tim. 3.

As for that of Philips preaching and baptising at Samaria it was not the
Deacon but the Apostle there named.
It was Philip the Deacon that did preach and baptize and those may be two
arguments to prove so much: First, Philip the Apostle was among the Apostles at
Jerusalem who were not dispersed; Aretius in Act. 7.5.
but this Philip was among the dispersed, and therefore not Philip the Apostle.
Secondly, this Philip could not give the holy Ghost, and therefore John and
Peter are sent to the Samaritans. Hereupon Aretius concludes it was Philip the
Deacon. Gualter in Act 8.
Master Gualter writes thus, It was that Philip, not he that was the Apostle
but he before, that was reckoned up among the Deacons, etc. For although it was
the Deacons part to bear the care of the common goods of the Church and of the
poor notwithstanding it was withal permitted unto them to undertake the
preaching of the Gospel, if at any time necessity so required. And perhaps
there was not so great use of Deacons at Jerusalem, when the Church was
dispersed with the tempest of persecution, and therefore they, which dispensed
the public goods of the Church gave themselves wholly to the Ministry of the
word. Docuerunt ecclesiam de singulis doctrinae christianae capitsbus pure and
sincere Ibid, Communia A postolorum and Prophetarum, Euangelistarum, pastorum,
doctorum, Praesbyterorum, Diaconrum haec fuerunt opera Ibid. De ratione ac
for^a gubernationis. page 510.
The Centuries witness as much, that they taught the Church purely and
sincerely, interpreted holy Scriptures, divided the word aright. For these were
the works common to the Apostles and Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, teachers,
Presbiters, and Deacons. And the Apostle 1. Tim. 3.9. requires so much where
it is their duty to have the mystery of faith in a good conscience. 2. In
that verse 13. it is the means to a farther degree. 3. And gets them great
liberty in the faith.
All which are not so necessary, if the Deacons office be only to carry the
bag and to distribute. For thereunto so much learning is not required, but
faithfulness that he rob not the poor, but give as there shall be occasion.

Though they did preach, it proves not that they did it by ordinary office.
Whether by ordinary office, or not ordinary: do men grant that the Deacons
did preach they grant the point in question, and what of a long time they have
heretofore denied. Ordinary it was to wait at the Tables while the goods of
the faithful were sold, and all held in common, but that cause ceasing, and
the Christians every one retaining the propriety of their goods, lands, and
houses, and the civil Magistrate providing other and more convenient relief,
we must not think that these men called to the offices, of Deaconship were
utterly disabled, as if there were not any use for them in the Church.
Ministrare me^ sa Hi^rosolymis, dum ibi co^munio erat bonar^^. Act. Centur.
The Deacons office was (say the Centuries) to minister at tables. Act. 6. as
if during that time and that occasion, but not else. So that, as long, as they
had to minister unto the poor, they did forbear that other part of their
office, but when that ceased, then did they intend this other of preaching, and
so still found themselves employed. And therefore it may be concluded for a
good argument, that Deacons did not only minister upon tables in the times of
the Apostles, because there were Deacons at Philippus, at Ephesus, epist. to
Timothy, Philip. 1.
and in Crete as it appears by the Epistle to Titus. In all which places the
Christians did not live in common as they did at Jerusalem, that they should
need any ministration after this sort. Beside see we into the practice of the
Church immediately after those times whereof Scripture speaks: Ignatius who
was in the days of the Apostles, and might know their mind (whose Epistles are
much cite^ by Eusebius, A thanasius, Ierom, Verum etiam and aliis expo was vt
Des athl^ta. Ignati us ad Herone. diaconum suu^. Eos qui sunt in Tarsone ne neg
ligas, sed assiaue visua con firmans eos in E^angelio. Id. Nihil sine Epis
copis aga^ sacer dotes enim sunt tu vero minister sacerd^tu^. Ill^ taptizant,
sacrs faciunt, ordinant, maz nu^ imponunt, tu vero its ministras. vt Hie
r^s^lymis Sact. Stephan. lacobo and prasbyteris. Idem: Justin martyr. ap^l. 2.
Batizandi quidem tus babet summus sa cerdos, qui est Episcopus; deinde
Prasbyters and Diaconi, no^ tamen sine Epis co^t authoritaz te propter eccle
sia honorem, Tertul. lib. de baptis. Apud Diaconum exomelogesin facere delicti
sai. Cy^. lib. 3. epislola 17. Solennibus adimpletis calice^^ Diaconus offerre
praseatibus e^pit, etc. Id sermon. 5. de lapsis, Si non fuerit inprasenti 01 vel
Episc^ pus ve^ Praesbyter tune ipsi proferant and edant. Con. Nicen. can. 14.
Quo^ ad pradic ati^nis ^ffictum e^em^synarumque studium vacare congruebat.
Greb., lib. 4, epist, 88.
and Theodoret) writing to Heron the Deacon beside his care of widows,
orphans, and poor, commands him to attend reading, that he may not only
understand it himself but also expound it to others as the champion of God.
And in another place. Those which are in Tarsus do not thou neglect, but
visit them daily confirming them in the Gospel; Again, Do thou nothing
without the Bishops: For they are Priests, but thou art the Minister of the
priests. They baptize, do the sacred and holy things, ordain, lay on hands,
but thou do minister unto them, as at Jerusalem Saint Stephen did to James
and to the Presbyters. Thus far Ignatius. Within a hundred years after
Christ, Justin Martyr witnesses that Deacons in his time did deliver the bread
and wine to the people. Tertullian some 200. years after. The chief or
highest Priest which is the Bishop has the right to baptize, next the
Presbiters and Deacons, yet not without the Bishops authority for honor of the
church. Cyprian who suffered some 259. years after Christ, writes that the
people did make confession of their fault before the Deacon. And in his fifth
Sermon concerning such as fell in time of persecution, it appears that the
Deacon did offer the Cup to such, as came to communicate. Which the council of
Nice also witnesses. If the Bishop or presbiter be not present, then let the
Deacons bring forth the bread and eat, etc. Some 600 years after Christ,
Greg. the great finds fault in his tune with some who were Deacons that they
being appointed in their Deaconship did intend the tuning of their voice, where
it was meet they should intend the office of preaching and the care of
distributing the Alms. Thus we may see by the practice of the Churches in
several ages that Deacons did teach and preach, yea also that in the absence
of the Bishops they did some other duties before mentioned. All witnesses
according in this, that they did more then barely attend upon tables as
practiced in preaching the w^ide etc; that then afterward being well and
thoroughli^ tramed therein, and having given good pr^ofe might come forward to
the degree of a pres^^iter and minister, as Bullinger, Gualter, and Heming.
upon 1. Tim. 3. ingenuously do confess. In the discipline of France we
find, till of late years, their Deacons were allowed to catechize publicly
in their reformed congregations. Discip. du Fra^c^. Ex perpetuo ecclesia vsu.
Beza confess^c, 5. aph^ ris. 25. Quamuis (ape Diaconi in his rebus suppleuerint
past^ris vices Ibid. Doctor Fulk in Act. 6.1.
Master Beza does acknowledge in times past ex perpetuo ecclesiae vsu Deascons
by a continual or perpetual use of the Church did in times past preach and
pray, under which duties he comprehends the administration of the sacrament
and the blessings of the marriages, although oftentimes in these thing es they
supplied the parts of the pastor. Master Doewr Fulke in the answer to the
Rhemis^s testament dremeth not but that the Deacons ministry was used to other
purposes as teaching, baptizing, and assisting the Apostles and other
principal pastors in their spiritual charge and ministry. Anon after It is
certain by Justinius that Deacons were used for the distribution of the Lords
supper. And to close this point Whereas our eye is strangely affected with that
which other Churches do rather then our own, compare what is done by others
contrarily minded, and our practice for Deacons, then will it easily appear
which of us comes nearest the first and primitive times of the Apostles and
Apostolical men: ours teach, preach, and baptize so may not theirs, ours may
remember the minister of relief for the poor, and do those other duties,
theirs only collect for the poor, Corporale officium non sparituale
ministe^^um.
ours is partly spiritual, theirs entirely a corporal office, ours are
trained up in learning applying themselves to the study of divinity, and are
commonly scholars, Bachilers, and masters of art, able to dispute, and handle
an argument schollerlike, theirs are laymen, handicraftsmen tradesmen: the
calling with us is an entrance to the other degree of the presbiters, theirs is
merely oeconomicall or civil, and the persons unlettered: Our Deacons take the
cup of the Bishop and the minister but give it them not, theirs reach the cup
to the minister which is flat against Can 14. of the Nicen council. Lastly
theirs is annual and yearly and so in end they become lay men again, which
is like the complaint Optatus makes of the Donatists. Ye have found Deacons,
presbiters, and Bishops, ye have made them Laymen. Inuenistis Di^ aconos,
Prasbyteros and Episco po^. fecistis Lai e^s. Optat. lib. 2.
And therefore of the two, theirs or ours, good cause is ministered to approve
rather then reprove those words that our Deacons are called to the like office
and administration unless because of some changeable circumstance we may not
so write. And if so then must they be but 7. for number: secondly they must be
men immediately illumined by the holy spirit and no less measure then fullness
of wisdom and the holy Ghost may be required of them: 3. the election of them
must be by the whole multitude. 4. to make a correspontence throughout they
must be chosen after men's goods are sold, and that the propriety of them is
lost that the Deacons may take the charge.
All which whole practice neither they, nor we follwing neither have we nor
they Deacons after the example of the Apostles. Otherwise if they hold these
and some other points changeable as in deed they are, it will appear that
our Deacons are likeliest to the times of the Apostles and Apostolical men as
has been showed. But let us proceed.

2. Because the Book of ordination contains some thing that is against the
order that God hathordained in his Church. For.
1. It seems to make the Lords supper greater then baptism, and
confirmation greater then either, by permitting baptism unto the Deacons, the
Lords supper unto the Priests, and confirmation to the Bishop only.
It seems, and only so seems. For rather the contrary may be hereupon
inferred, namely that the dignity of the sacrament depends not on the dignity
of the person: For a Deacon may baptize though inferior to the other. And with
as much probability it may be argued a linen coife is better then a velvet
night^cap, because a seruient at law wears the one, and every ordinary
citizen (almost) wears the other. Or thus in the Presbiteries, the minister
distributeth the bread, the elders deliver the cup, ergo they make one part of
the sacrament greater then another. But of this read before.

2. Is prefers private prayer before public prayer and action.
It is false: This reproof is sufficient, where the accusation is brought
without proof.

It permits the Bishop to order Deacons alon^, requiring no other to join
with him in laying on of hands, which is not permitted in the ordring of the
Priests.
The difference of their office allows a difference in the manner of
ordination, and therefore the Bishop is alone in the first, in the other he
may take other ministers or Priests unto him; There is no prescript
commandment in scripture to the contrary, and therefore no such advantage is
given this accusation as some do imagine.

3. Because in it some places of holy scripture are misapplied to the
countenancing of errors, for.
1. Act. 6.17. is misapplyed to warrant ordination for our Deacons.
We answer first there are not so many verses in that cap. but 17. is put for
7. Again, where they say that chap. in that part beginning at that verse is
misapplyed, we have their negative without proof. More in that point we see
not as yet to answer.

2. The Bishop is appointed in ordring of any Priests or Bishops to use
the very words Receive the holy Ghost, which Christ our savior used at the
sending ferth of his Apostles.
They are thought the firtest words ^i the ordination of ministers, because of
the spiritual calling and office whereunto they are disigned by the Bishop,
after whose words then used with imposition of hands as Saint Ierom
witnesses, Ordinatio ^ou s^lum adimpre cationem v^cis, s^deriam ad
impositi^nem imple^ur (...). Hin^^^^^ in cap. 5^. Isai^.
the ordination is complet and finished not that the Bishop gives the holy
Ghost or conferreth grace for (as Saint Ambrose writes) so is it the judgment
of our Church, Homo manum imponit, and Deus largitur gratiam. Ambros. de
dignita tate sacerd^t. cap. 5.
man lays on his hands, but God gives grace. But for a more ample and full
answer in this point look before. cap. 22.

We cannot subscribe unto the book of homilies for these reasons; Because it
contains sundry erronius and doubtful matters.
1. The Apocrypha are ordinarily in it called holy scriptures. And the place
of Tobie the 4. containing dangerous doctrine being alleged it is said That
the holy Ghost teaches in scripture.
This exception stands upon two branches. The first is handled in this
appendix already before, (...) and communi opinione. Iun. de verbo Des. lib. 1.
cap. 7. Romans 6 6. (...). Metaphora na ta ex opinione rudiorum qui quicquid per
se subsestis corpore um imaginantur Fisca. Ibid. Lequitur in scripturis
spiritus sanctus Cyp de Elemos. Iun. com. Bell, 1.11.
and in the first part cap. 10. Page 97. The Apocryphal are called holy
scripture according to the common opinion and the received speech, not, but
that our Church puts a manifest difference by nameing it Apocryphal. And with
as great show of argument a man might except where the Apostle calls the
power of sin or rather sin it self by name of a body Romans 6.6. taking
the phrase from the opinion of the rude and simple, who imagine what soever has
a being that the same is a body or bodily substance: The second branch here
calls a sentence in the 4. of Tobie a doctrine which the holy Ghost teaches
in scripture. Which manner of phrase the book borrows out of Saint Cyprian.
For he alleging the same quotation graceth it with this attendance: The holy
Ghost speaks in scripture. Which phrase and sentence Master Iunius in his
answer to Bellarus cap. 11. is far from deeming to be dangerous, that he
does not once so much as dislike, much less tax it, howeuer now it please some
to traduce it. As for the interpretation of the sentence, look before part. 1
cap. 12. Page 100. 103.

2. It is said that though manslaughter was committed before, yet was not the
world destroyed for that, but for whoredom, all the world (a few only
excepted) was overflowed with water and perished.
These words are (in the homily against adultery the third part of the
sermon) delivered by way of a parenthesis showing that the displeasure of the
Lord, though kindled before, because of murder etc. yet did not smoke out, nor
break forth, till the iniquity was brim-ful, then the viols of the Lord his
heavy wrath were powered down. For the scope there is of that homily: in
amplifying the hainousnes of adultery, and the heaviness of the punishment,
intending thereby that a latter sin added to a former brings on judgment,
though God do not, as he might punish, always with the soonest. So as these
words (the world was not destroyed for manslaughter but for whoredom) imply
(not for manslaughter only, as the alone and sole cause of that universal
deludge upon the earth)

3. It exhorts (homily 2. of fast) after Ahabs example to turn unfeignedly
to God.
Had the homily intended what the instance affirms, they who penned it, did
look to the mercy of God which followed upon Ahabs external humiliatio^ and
thereby intended to shame us if we would not turn unto God, Video and Ahab
regem maritu^ Iezabel, reum idololatria, and sanguinis Nabothae veniam meruisse
poenitentia nomine. Tertul, adners. Marciou. lib, 4.
and to encourage us if we did, because Ahab found faueur at the Lords hand as
appears in the history, and as Tertullian notes it I see that Ahab the King
Iezabels husband guilty of idolatry and the blood of Naboth, by the name of
repentance obtained pardon. But the homily though it propose this example, and
their is great use to be made of it, yet concludes with the Niniuits and after
their example, (for so it speaks) not his example, exhorts the people to
turn vufainedly unto God.

4. In it the fact of Ambrose in excommunicating the Emperor is justified.
[This history is in the title of the right use of the Church, where it is no
farther justified then all our writers to against the common adversary. Look
the Bishop of winchester his most learned answer to the Jesuits apology etc.
Iunins against Bellarmin, B. Bilson p. 3. page 373. Iun. contro. 3 lib. 5.
artie. 3. Danaeusad 3. co^ tro. c. 7. page 547. Lubber. de pap Romans lib 9. c.
6. D. Sutcliu, ac po^ tif, lib, 4, c, 11, page 393 Sitales haberemus episcopos
quales Ambres, In vita D, Ambros, Erasmi, Theodores, lib, 5.7 Sozomen lib. 7,
c, 24,
Danus cap. 7. Lubbert. Doctor Sutcliff and sundry others who all commend the
good Bishop that he did not suddenly admit the Emperor to the Lords table
after so great an outrage was committed. Erasmus commends them both saying if
there were more such Bishops of sincerity and courage, there would be more
Emperors and Kings such as. Theodosius. Look the history more at large in
Theodoret his fifth book chap. 17. and Sozomen Lib. 7. cap. 24.

5. In is Judith is said to have a dispensation from God to use vanity of
apparel to overcome the vain eyes of Gods enemies.
In the homily against excess in apparel. These are the words By what means
was Holofernes deceived, but by the glittering show of apperell which that
holy woman did put on her, not as delighting in them, but she ware it of pure
necessity by Gods dispensation using this vanity to overcome etc. Apparel
simply of it self is not evil unless the manner of it, Iudithse, vt
adultero placeret ornauit quae tamen quia hoc religione non a more faciebat
nemo eam adul teram iudica uit. Ambros^d virgin. Judith. 10.4.2, Reg. 10.18,
25.26. Dispensatione Des pio delo trucidantur o^nes. P^llica. ibid. Instinctu
diuino viam tuadendi centauit, Pellic.
or the end of it be evil. For if natural beauty be no fault, how much
less when it is graced with commendable attire fitting the person and her
estate. Judith, (says Ambrose) trimd her self to please an adulterer, yet her
self no adulteress, because she did it for religion and not for lust. Yet
vanity of apparel it is called for that she usually wore no such, nor took
delight therein. That she now used it to overcome Gods eninne was no more
unlawful in her then in Iehu, who with a slight took all Baals Priests and
put them to the sword, of which fact Conradus Pelican witnesses thus much by
a dispensation from God with a zealous craft they are all slain. In the first
of Samuel. David before Achish dribbles upon his beard scrabbled upon ye wall,
disfigureth himself as herein contrariwise Judith. did grace her self. Which
fact of his P. Martyr though he make it no example to imitate, but peculiar to
him so he rather defends it then otherwise. And Pelican upon the same place By
a divine instinct he attempted a way for to escape. Pomeranus writes thus.
The Saints when there is need fall in to these counsels they seek them not,
nor hold them to be followed. Nor must we make laws hereupon. Sancts inci^u^t
vbi opus est in ista consilia no^ quarunt, nec po stea ducu^t imitanda, etc.
Pomeran. Quia omnis co^ trouersia non parum (...). pendet. Pet. martyr in
Iudic. 4.
This befell David, some other way it shall befall thee by Gods appointment, if
he see it good. etc. In the 4. of the Judges the history of Iahel what she
did to Sisera compared with the circum stances of Judith what she did to
Holofernes; will satisfy the exception here taken. For whereas all such
controversies do not a little depend upon the circumstance of persons
considering that she was a holy, virtuous woman, devout in prayer
strenghthened by the hand of the Lord to preserve his truth and people, we have
no reason to the contrary but we may safely judge that God himself did direct
her heart to this politic stratagem: And if we make no doubt, but she might
take Holofernes head from his shoulders he being the enemy of God as he was,
Quadam mala male fiunt. Quadam mala been fiunt. Optat. lib. 3.
and she enabled by his spirit thereunto, neither need we suspect these words
that by Gods dispensation she put on such apparel as was to ye oppressors
wante^ eye, like the wedge of gold to Achans covetous eye. For any default else
herein, or in any other circumstance it might be, as some things that are good
be ill don, so again (says Optatus) some things that are ill may be well
done. But well or ill lawful or unlawful, in general or particular: this we
may resolutely determine, if any man shall hold it unlawful and that in her at
that time, yet no fault to say that God who was rich in mercy to grace and
adorn her with so many gifts of his holy spirit did graciously dispense with
some point of circumstance: which is no common rule to be practiced by any at
all adventures. Thus much and no more is intended by the words in the homily.

6. It affirms that plurality of wives was by especial prerogative suffered
to the fathers of the old testament, that they might have many children,
because every of them hoped and begged oftentimes of God in heir prayers that
the blessed seed might come and be borne of his stoke and kindred.
A special prerogative etc. that is howsoever then done, yet noe warrant for
our times (though some have so thought) to do the like, and to this purpose
the homily adds which things we see plainly to be forbidden, us by the
law of God, and are now repugnant to all public honesty. These and such like
in Gods book (good people) are not written that we should, or may do the
like following their examples, or that we ought to think that God did allow
every of these things in those men. In all which coherence of this argument
not a word that deserves other censures then all the religious learned of
former times have thought justifiable whose judgment in this question we
refer the reader to, at large before cap. 24. Page 73.74 etc.

7. It there affirms that Every concubin is a lawful wife.
Those words are in that book (as in this place) delivered by way of
objection from such, as are offended at some places of scripture. And thus
far it may be granted for a true speech as it means not now she is or
was in the first institution of marriage, but a lawful wife in that
construction which the scripture makes of that age when diverse holy men had
more then one wife at a time. So as this word (is) must be understood not for
this present age as if now, but is spoken historicallie what sometimes it once
was by a figure that puts a present tence for the time past. A very usual
thing in a matter of relation, specially being in form of an objection as
this here mentioned, and the answer in that Homily does at large express.

8. It affirms that Aconcubin is an honest name.
True after the phrase of scripture, for so it is added withal, in relation to
those times whereof mention is there made. For it understands by that name
such a one as was coupled to a man without scrip or scroul, An cilla vnita viro
absque sers ptura, (id est contractis) et sponsalibus, vera tamen vxcrim sacris
literis vt palam est de Celura qua dicitur vxor, Genesis 25.1. Pagnin. in Thesau
Pet, mar. Jude, 8. and a. Sam. 5.
that is to say without contract or bridal, yet a very wife in scripture, as
it is mantsest of Cetura who is called a wife, Gen 25.1. and 1. Chron. 1.32. a
Concubine not implying hereby that shameful name of harlot, strumpet, etc.
which are names of dishonestie and disgrace, but noting only a difference in
right of possession or inheritance. Otherwise in the case of legitimation no
difference at all. After all these orderly, disorderly, howsoever handled as we
may see a few Psalms and Collects more following are put to by others, as if
men would never make an end of wrangling.

Psalm. 28.8. He is the wholesome defense of his anointed, etc. For he is the
strength of the deliverances of his anointed.
The lesser Bibles follow the Hebrew phrase: our Communion book respects our
own language, and whether of them we take unto, the sense is all one. For what
is the strength of the deliverances, but as our English has a wholesome
defense, yea the strength of saluations which Tremellius calls salutare robur
a wholesome strength. But these points are not so fit for a vulgar
understanding, neither do they concern every mean capacity. Sufficient it
is for the people, if they rightly apprehend the true sense which either
transtation sufficiently delivers.

Psalm. 37.38. As for the transgressors they shall perish together, and the end
of the ungodly is, they shall be rooted out at the last, etc. For transgressors
shall be destroyed, and the end of the wicked shall be cut off.
His speech that said He could not away with men too diligent may well be used
at this time. Odi nimium diligentes.
For it seems some have too much laisure, that can bestow pains thus idly
in reproouing where is no just cause at all. For if one translation be true,
how is not the other? Defectores pers di pariter fine^ improborum excindi.
Trem, Transgressores delebuntur, su^^l finis impiorum excindetur, id est, impii
tandem excindentur. Moller.
We entreat thee good Reader mark them both well, and then speak thy mind.

Psalm. 68.16. Why hoppe ye so ye high lids, etc. For why cast ye your seluss
down.
It is hard to judge of the propriety of this word here used, Nusquam nisi hoc
in loco scrip tura vsurpat (...) ideo diffusie est tudicare de pro prietate
husus verbs. Moller. In re obscura se quor commune^ doctiorum interpretum
sententiam qui verbo subsiliendi aut exiliendi reddiderunt. Ibid. Quasi
diceret. Quid superbitis aut effertis vos vestracelsitudine? Nibil omnia illa
ornamenta vestra si ad Sion comparentur. Ibid.
because it is only in this place, and no where else. The Greek has what
think ye? Saint Ierom takes the word (...) to contend. R. Moses and Solomon
Hadarian, to lye^ in wait. Others conjecture otherwise but our translators do
herein as Mollerus writes he did. In an obscure point I follow the common
sentence of the learneder interpreters, who render it by the word to Leap,
Skip, or hop. But busy must have a hand, or else they will never let a thing
alone when it is well. The Prophet under the name of Basan etc. implies the
bravery of the wicked, as if he would say. Why are ye proud, or why lift ye
up your selves so high? All your trim ornaments, and glory, when they are at
the best are nothing to Sion which is Gods hill.

Ibid. Verse. 27. Give thanks O Israel unto God the Lord in the congregations
from the ground of the heart, etc. For praise ye God in the assemblies and the
Lord; ye that are of the fountain of Israel.
In deed the lesser Bibles have it thus: wherein as they follow some learned
men, so the Communion book has diverse, whom it follows. Hoc de cord ex
ponunt, quia 07 scimus fictas lauds quae tan tum in labits personant cora^ Deo
maledictas esse. Calvin.
There are (says Master Calvin) that expound this of the heart, because we
know that fained thanks, which sound only in (or) from the lips are accursed.
Of which doctrine he makes this profitable use, namely, that our thanksgiving
must be from the heart, hearty and unfeigned, else they are an abomination to
the Lord. 2. The word it self signifying a Well or deep ground (which we use
to dig up) may have reference to the heart which is a fountain or deep Well
whence good or evil springs: here in this place good because thanksgiving
from the ground of the heart. If any shall say the word heart is more then is in
the original, so is the supply which the lesser Bibles make, when they add
(ye that are.) For in the original these words are not. But usual it is,
neither can we otherwise choose in translating, but make supply for better
explication of that, which else we could not make tolerable English: And the
construction in this place so made ministers not any doctrine, but what is
wholesome and good in the judgment of godly well advised.

Psalm. 75.3. When I receive the congregation I shall judge according unto
right, etc. For when I shall take a convenient time.
Whether of these interpretations we follow no danger at all. Vterque sensus
non male quadrat vocabulu^ (...). interpretari possumus vel cu tum ipsum vel
tempus constis tutum. Calvin. Moller. Post quam po^ pulus Israeliticus coeperis
me agnoscere suum regem seque mihi adiungere. Nam quamuis a Sam. vngeretur
tamen mansit id Hebron donec omnes tribuise contungerent. etc. Moller.
The word bears both significations namely a congregation and a convenient
time. When I receive the congregation (that is) when the people of Israel
shall join themselves unto me and follow my directions. For though he were
anointed of Samuel yet he stayed in Hebron seven years till all the Tribes
did resort and join themselves unto him. And therefore the word bearing it,
the sense also agreeable, what mean our brethren to be offended thereat? But
an evil mind has an evil meaning.

Psalm 76.5. The proud are robbed, they have slept, and all the men whose
hands were mighty have found nothing etc. for The stout hearted are spoiled,
they have slepte their sleep, and all the men of strength have not found their
hands
Both these drive to one end, Nohilo magis ad pugnandum idones, quam si mutila
and tru^^ catae fuissent ip sorum manus. Moller.
implying the enemies were no more fit to battle, then if-their hands had
been lame or cut off. The Psalter in the Communion book takes help from the
Greek which is not amiss sometimes, for the Apostles have so done
otherwhiles, citing thence as they find the translation rather then the
original it self.

Psalm. 93.1. The Lord is King, and has put on glorious apparel, the Lord has
put on his apparel, and girded himself with strength, etc. For the Lord
reigns, and is clothed with Majesty. The Lord is clothed and girded with
power.
No difference but only in the words and number of syllables. The Communion
book says, The Lord is King. The Heb. says. the Lord reigns. Are not both
these twins of one signification? The Communion book says, He has put on
glorious apparel. The Hebrew. He is clothed with majesty? What odds? Habere
in c^rpore sanguine and non crubescere. August. Introducit cu^ tanquam indutum
regio and splendido vestitu. Moller.
Are they not both to one and the same purpose? Surely we may marvel, as Saint
Austin said of the Donatists that men have blood in their body and blush not.
In both translations (as the true meaning of the place is) the Prophet brings
in God as clothed with royal and glorious apparel. And therefore exception
being taken here without any show at all no farther answer needs at this time.

Psalm. 119.21. Thou have reb^ked the proud, etc. For thou have destroyed the
proud.
The word in many places of Scripture signifies both, and though happily as
Master Calvin thinks the word destroy be a fitter word yet in effect and
substance the matter (he says) is not great. Aptius perdendi verbum qua^ quam
ad summam rei paru^ refert Calvin, Quid hoc nisi minutias consectari. Dan. co^.
Bellarmin.
It is little material whether we take. And yet so little material, as it is
very material we hold it that men observe with us whether Danaeus his words of
Bellarmin upon like occasion prove not true. What is this but to make hue and
cry after every trifle.

Psalm. 119.122. Make thy servant to delight in that which is good, etc. For
answer for thy servant.
This branch interpreters expound diversely. Hoc membrum vary reddunt
interpretes, Moster.
The Greek is, Accept of thy servant: Others as our lesser Bibles have Answer
for, etc. Iustinianus tenders it. Let it be sweet unto thy servant. Musculus,
Delight or make thy servant to delight: Muscu^. (Active) oblecttasernum tuu^.
Fac ut ^ou^ oblectetur. Paganim. Du ce fac ^eru^ Munst.
Pagnin. Make thy servant to delight. The reason here of may be as Mollerus
gives because they read (...) for (...), and the Chaldee as Munster
interprets Make that, which is good become sweet, which is the same in
sense, with this place make thy servant to delight. And in diverse other places
the word yields the like signification: needelesse therefore we may well
reckon their pains that will prove this translation contrary to truth.

In a prayer before Baptism it is said. That by Baptism of his well-beloved
Son, He did sanctify the flood Jordan and all other waters to the mystical
washing away of sin. This is to be reproved because not found in the word of
God.
Not expressly found in so many syllables, yet the same in effect, namely, that
God in submitting his Son to be Baptized in Jordan by John Baptist has
manifestly made known that the Element of water, whether in Jordan, or in any
other fountain, or river may at the appointment of a lawful Minister be set
apart from his common use to be a visible sign or Sacrament of Baptism to
represent and seal up the inward, spiritual, and mystical washing away of
sins by the blood of Christ. So any river or water is sanctified, etc. As the
Eunuch said to Philip. See here is water what does let me to be baptized? Act.
8.36. Caro Christi mu^ditias aquis tradidit. Tert. de pudicitia c. 6 De sancte
sanctificata natura aquarum. Id. de baptis. Nulla distincti^ est mari, qui^ an
stague, flumine an font, lacu, an alueo diluators Nee quicqua^ resert inter
tes quos loh^^^es in Iordan^, and quos Betrus in Tyberi ti^xit, Ibod, Nou ille
necessitatem habuit abluendi, sed per illum in aquis abluttonis nostra erat
sanstefi^^da porgati^, Hilar, in Math. Can. 2.
Hereunto the Fathers agree in their several writings. Tertullian The flesh of
Christ gave cleanness to the waters. Again, the nature of the waters was
sanctified by the holy one. Anon after more plainly. No difference now whether
one be baptized in the Sea, or in a poole, in a river or in a fountain, in a
lake, or in a brook, nor it skilleth not, twixt those whom John baptized in
Jordan and those whom Peter baptized in Tybris. Hilarie upon Saint Matthew:
Christ had no need to be baptized, but by him in the waters of our baptism
was the purgation to be sanctified. (...) drous works of God, which is the case
of every good Christian both to do and crave of the Lord that they may do
with all thankfulness. Thus whither way soever we take it, and one of these
it must needs be this prayer cannot be thought scandalous.

On the 19. Sunday after Trinity the Epistle Ephesians 4. 19. Because of the
blindness of their hearts, which being past repentance etc. for being past
feeling.
(...) the word is. Where (feeling) is the same that repentance is, and both
translations standing, the one in the lesser Bibles, the other in the communion
book may minister a helping hand each to other. For no doubt a man that has
done forrowing, or greeuing for his sin committed, Non indolentes, sed
dedolentes. (...). Aliud est peccare cum sensu ac dolere conscien^ia et abud
peccare sine vlloco setentia morsu. Muscul. Conscientia stupida and insensata.
Ibid. AEgre sperari potest poenitenti am aliquando locum in eius^ modi
peccatore inuenturam. Ibid.
that man has done repenting. The Apostle says not (...) men without
feeling, but (...) (or as some copies had, which the vulgar latin and ye
Syriack follow) (...), out of hope, for ever repenting and sorrowing truly for
their sins because of the hardness of heart, which is impenitencie or as
Saint Paul has a heart that cannot repent, where he coupleth hardness of
heart withal, as if past repentance, then past feeling, and if past feeling
then pastrepentance. And Musculus upon this 4. to the Ephesians. It is one thing to
sin with feeling and grief of conscience, another thing to sin without
remorse and grief or feeling, where is a feeling, and sorrow for sin there is
some place for repentance, but where the conscience is become stupid, dull and
blockish, that albeit sin be committed, there is no compunction nor pricking
in the heart, there it can hardly be ever hoped that repentance will find
place in such a sinner. This therefore past repentance here signifies not, as
if sometimes such a sinner did ever truly and unfeignedly before repent, more
thou that he had any true feeling, and sorrow of heart for sin, but this
it implies, that such a one yields small hope of ever coming to a true
feeling, and repentance of his life past because his heart is hardened, and
cannot repent, or as the Apostle in another place terms it, he has a
cauterized and seared conscience.

On the 25. sunday after Trinity stir up we beseech the O Lord the will of
thy faithful people, that they plenteously bringing forth the fruits of good
works may of thee be plenteouslie rewarded through lesus Christ our Lord. Here
a reward is asked in recompense of good works.
A reward is promised and therefore may be craved not of merit but of mercy.
Pro. 19.17. Retributionem dates. 2. Cor. 9.6. Quisquis semen tem facit hac spe
facere comprobatur, vt pl^ra acciptat, qua^ sulcis commendat, Marlor. Ibid.
Neque enim tantum in Caelo remuner atur Deus beneficentiam fidelium sed ettam
in h^^^^do. Ibid. Qu^ nullius indigens est Deuteronomy in seassumit be na^ operationes
nostras, ad boc vt prastet nobis retrib utionem bonorumsuorum operum. Ire^.
lib. 4. c. 34. Deus coronat dona sua in nobis August. Debitcrem se fecis non
accipioud^ sed promittendo. No^ es dic read quod accepicti, sed read quod
promisitt^. Aug
For he that has mercy upon the poor lends unto the Lord, and the Lord
will recompense him that which he has given Proverbs 19, Accordingly hereunto
is that 2. Corinthians. 9. he that sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly, and
he that sows liberally shall reap liberally. It is every man's case
Sarcerius notes in Marlorat that whosoever sows seed, he does it in this
hope to receive more then he commends unto the furrows. Anon after. This
harvest must be expounded of the spiritual reward of eternal life as well
as of earthly blessings. For God does not only in heaven reward the
liberality of the faithful but also in this world. For godliness has the
promises of this life and of the life to come. So as being the Lord his will
that they which sow plentifully should reap plenteously, we may well pray,
that the Lord will make good this gracious promise. And therefore no matter of
just dislike. God who wants nothing of ours (says Ireneus) takes upon him
our good working and al to make good unto us the retribution of his own
works. And God (says Austin) has made himself a debtor, not in taking but
in promising: Say not to God. Give what thou have received, but return what
thou have promised.

Farther we are not to wade at this present. All we find we have set down
truly, as the copies were sent unto us. Now in lieu of their methodicall
exceptions to be seen before, we present unto thee (good Reader) a brief
drawn out of their communion book, which they would obtrude upon our Church,
and in their own teemes propose it after their example.

We cannot subscribe unto their book of Common prayer, not only hecause it
is not authorized, nor has given us any good proof, what acceptance it may
deserve, but (were it in place authorized) even for these causes we cannot
subscribe viz. because there are in it mauie things doubtful, disgraceful,
untruths, misappliing, leaving out, putting in etc. Of all which only a taste
for we desire to be short.
Doubtful.
First their interpretation they make of Christ's descending into hell, namely to
be his sufferings in his body hell torments upon the cross. This we doubt
whither be the proper and true meaning of the words in the Creed.

2. Obedience to the Magistrate. For in the same confession they say, we must
render to yt civil Magistrate, honor and obedience in all things which are
agreeable to the word of god, So as if any be disposed to wrangle and say, This
or that I am required to do, is not agreeable to the word of God, there shall
follow no obedience. Whereas learned, godly, wise Divines, would style it thus
(In all things not repugnant to the word of God) Besides they would add this
wholesome instruction, in such things as are repugnant, the magistrate must be
so honored and obeyed, as that we submit our selves in all dutifulness to
the penalty enjoined.

3 These platformers imagine their own devises to be the only ordinance of
Christ, and all other forms of government of the Church to be the wisdoine of
man, covertly seem to exclude all else (that are otherwise affected) from the
kingdom of heaven, where they say in the end of their confession. Then we,
which have forsaken all men's wisdom to cleave unto Christ, shall hear that
joyful saying Come ye blessed of my father etc.

4 These men do mislike in us to say Have mercy on all men, yet in their
prayer for the whole estate they pray not only for the faithful already, but
also for such as have been held captive in darkness and ignorance. Now
faithful and not faithful are contradictorie, and conse quently we doubt
whither they have such cause to reprehend our prayers, as they see me to
pretend.

5. In their order of Baptism they have these words. The Sacraments are not or
dained of God to be used, but in places of the public congregation and
necessarily annexed to the preaching of the word as seals of the same. Where
occasion of doubt is given us, that they mean no preaching is effectual,
where Sacraments are not so administered, and in effect argue. No Baptism nor
Supper without a Sermon.

6. In their administration of the Lord his supper they say: Our Lord requires
none other worthiness on our part, but that unfeignedly we acknowledge our
wickedness, and imperfection. If this were in our Communion book, we doubt,
we should be thought to exclude faith, charity, purpose of amendment of life,
and wholesome instruction concerning that holy mystery and Sacrament.

2. Disgraceful to the Kings Majesty, In his title, and in his Authority.
In his title. No part of the style mentioned, but Queen Elizabeth in their
Communion book. And no other ceremony, nor order being to be used (as they
crave in their bill exhibited) inforceth that no man must use any other form
at all in his prayer, Part. 1. page ^8.
but only the bare name of King James without mentioning all the other parts
of his just title accordingly as in our Uniuersities is required, and in other
godly faithful prayers is duly administered.

In his Authority. For speaking in that book of the civil Magistrate, they
attribute not any direction or government for Ecclesiastical either orders or
persons, but only reformation at the first planing. 2. In their Rubric before
Baptism, Authority is given the Minister by consent of the Presbytery to
appoint a public meeting, L A. Nullo. C. de fer^ss.
which we call a holy day, and which has been a prerogative which Kings and
Emper ors always had.

3. Untruths.
As when they call it publishing the contract. For asking the hanes is too
old, and may. (perhaps) be accused of superstition, yea what if the parties be
not contracted, nor mind to be, till solemnization, as it often falls out by
consent of both parties, shall the Minister nevertheless peremptorily affirm
that they have contracted matrimony. Again, in distribution of the bread they
say of the people, who shall distribute, and divide it among themselves, that
all may communicate. This ceremony it seems they urge of necessity. For
they say (who shall) yet no such thing to be gathered out of Scripture, but the
contrary when it is said; He brake it and gave it, not that they did break
and give it one unto another. As also appears by the Rituall of the Jews,
their Calmud, and their very custom at this day. For the Master of the family
in the feast of sweet bread (which is celebrated after the Paschall Lamb is
eaten) does take a piece of sweet bread and giving thanks (per concepta verba)
there set down, does dip it in the sauce provided to eat the sower herbs, So
aliger. de emendat. temp. lib. 6.
which he does eat and then break so many pieces as there be persons sitting
there, and gives to every one a piece to be eaten saying. This is the bread of
tribulation which our Fathers did eat in Egypt, etc. Many other such points we
might note, which if they were in our Communion book should bear reproof.
But go we on a little farther.

Misapplying Scripture as that in the Commandment. Six days shall thou
labor. Therefore no holy day to come together in public but only on the
Sabbath. And yet herein seems a contradiction, Contradiction
because with consent of the presbitery (as may be seen before) yt Minister may
appoint a public solemn meeting. etc.

Misinterpreting. For they translate that in Genes. It is not good for man to
be alone, thus, It is not good for man to live alone, implying it sin to live
unmarried. This license they take for translating, not enduring any the smallest
liberty unto others to do the like.

As where having spoken only of the persons, the Father, and the Son they
conclude. Leaving out.
To whom be all praise. In our Communion book such words would have borne
exception for leaving out the holy Ghost.

As in the Action of the Lords Supper. Take eat, This bread is the body of
Christ. Putting in.
Had it been in our Communion book we should have been challenged for adding
these words. (This bread) more then is in the Evangelists, or in the Apostle
Saint Paul. In all which alleged (beside many else we might add hereunto) as
men use to beat a cur-dogge in presence of a Lion that the beast for all his
greatness of stomach, may the rather be tamed, so have we thought good at
this time in mentioning these doubts, disgraces, contradictions,
misapplications, etc. to bring down their cursed heart, who wilfully
misconstrue, what they otherwise know was, and is the right godly meaning of
our Church, that they who are so ready to find fault, may themselves see their
own writings are not free from their own intended exceptions. And not to
multiply farther instances for that would be infinite. Generally in all their
book this may be worth our observation, that albeit themselves cannot deny,
but many points are singularly set down in our leiturgie, yet their spite is
such unto it, and themselves so wedded unto innovation and self love, that
(excepting the exhortation before the Communion they have not transserd any
thing from thence into their book.

Conclusion.
By this time we hope it sufficiently appears what defense our Church makes,
notwithstanding oppositions intended against it. How far forth it preualleth
we know not, but that grave religious advertisement which Saint Ierom gives
shall be our conclusion for this present. Quaeso lector ve recorder^^tribis
nalis Dommi, and de iudicio tuo te intelliga^ iudicandum, not m^hi nee aduer
sario faueas, sed causa^ iudices Hieron. aduerserro. Ioh. Hier^sol.
We pray thee good Reader (as thou art upon a closing point) understand what
our defense is and remember the tribunal of the Lord, how we must all come
before the judgment seat of God. Do not thou favor one or other more then
truth, but truth more then all. For what will it advantage a man to win the
whole world, and loose his own seule, or what can he give to redeem it.
Prejudice not thy understanding, determine this. For this is the substance of
all, If all things here objected be contrary to the word of God, as some make
show for, in steed of our yea, write nay, and for our nay write yea: Then
indge whether such a course be not the overthrow of thy faith, a perverting of
thy ^^^gement, and the hazard of thy souls salvation. God forbid it should so
be, and we pray the Lord and thy self that thou apply thy heart to wisdom,
least thou be deceived. And deceived thou art, if thou so think or write. But
let thy censure be, as God shall direct thy heart: in judgment fear it is, if
thou continue obstinate, in mercy know it is, if thou incline to this counsel
given. And that thou so do, the Lord grant thee his spirit of wisdom and
humility, that (as Saint James speaks) thou receive our exhortation in
meekness of wisdom: More expect not at our hands. For we cannot possibly
wish thee more, but grace in this life, and glory in the life to come. Our pen
may be tired, and our wish at an end, but no end we wish of thy good. For the
good we wish, is thy endless salvation.

(...).

