DE MORBO GALLICO.

LONDINI IN AEDIBVS THOMAE BERTHELETI. M.D.XXXIII. CVM PRIVILEGIO.

The preface of Thomas Poyne^ chanon of Marten abbey, translatour of this book.
NOt long agoo, after I had translated into our english tongue the book
called Regimen sanitatis Salerni, I happened being at London to talk with the
printer, and to enquire of him, what he thought, and how he lyked the same
book: and he answered, that in his mind: it was a book much necessary, and
very profitable for them that took good head to the wholesome teachynges, and
warely followed the same. And this much farther he added thereto, that so
farforthe as ever he could here, it is of every man very well accepted and
allowed. And I said, I pray god it may do good, and that is all that I desire.
And thus in talking of one book and of an other, he came forth and said:
that if I would take so much pain as to translate into Inglysshe the book
that is entitled De medicina guaiaci, et morbo gallico written by that great
clerk of Almayne Vlrich Hutten knight, I should, said he, do a very good
deed. For saying hit is soth, as this great clerk writes of this medicine
Guaiacu^, (For he him self has had the very experience thereof) how needful
and how beneficial to the common wel^h were it? For almost into every part
of this realm, this most foul and peynfull disease is crepte, and many
soore infected therewith. When he had said thus his fantasye, and that I had
bethoughte me and well aduysed his words, I answered: If I thought it would do
good, I would take the pain with all my very heart, and hit were much
greatter: and yet (said I) I fear me, it be as much or more than I am able
to accomplysshe. For I doubt whether I may come to the clear understanding
thereof or not: It is in ernest a matter strange enough to translate, not only
for the names of herbs and other diverse things therein contained, but also for
the phrase and eloquent style. But what so ever answer I made him, I finally
determined to translate the said book, as I have done in deed, not so well I am
sure, so plainly, and so exquisitely as many other could, if they would
vouchesafe to take the peyn: but yet I trust I have not much erred from the
true meaning of the auctour. And I say not the contrary, but sum words
have I left barely englysshed, and some not at all, but they be such, as are
by those names in latin usually known to physicians, without whose counsaylle
(specially those that be approved and known to be syngularly learned in
physike) I would counsaylle no man to be to bold either to practice or receive
any medicine.

At Marten Abbey. an. dn^i. 1533.

The table of this book.
THe beginning of the french pockes, and why it has diverse names. cap. j.
fo. 1. The causes of this disease. Cap. ij. fo. 3. Into what diseases the
french pockes are turned. cap. iij. fo. 4. How men at the beginning
resisted the french pockes. cap. iiij. fo. 6. What help the author of this
book used in this syckenes. cap. v. fo. 8. The description of the wodde
Guaiacum, and of the fyndyng and name thereof. ca. vi. 10. Of the ordering of
Guaiacum in medycine.
The beginning of the french pockes, and why it has diverse names. Ca. i.
IT has pleased god, that in our time sycknesses should arise, which were to
our forefathers (as it may be well coniectured) unknown. In the year of
Christ. 1493. or there about, this pestiferus evil creped amongst the people,
not only in France, but first appeared at Naples, in the frenchemennes host,
(whereof it took his name) which kept war under the french king Charles,
before hit appeared in any other place. By which occasion the french men
putting from them this abh^rred name, call it not the french pockes / but
the evil of Naples / reckenynge it to their rebuke, if this pestilent disease
should be named the french pockes. Not withstanding the consent of all
nations has obtained / and we also in this book will call hit the french
pockes, not for any envy that we bear to so noble and gentle a nation, but
because we fere, that all me^ should not understand / if we gave it any other
name.

At the first rysynge thereof some men supersticiously named it meuyn syckenes
of the name (I know not) of what saint. some accounted it to come of Job
scabbe, whom this syckenes (I think) has brought in to the number of seyntes.
Some i^ged it to be the infirmity / wherewith the monk Euager was grieved,
through immoderate cold and eating of raw meats, when he was in desert.
And therefore he also was sought from far countries, with great resort of
men, offryng gifts habundantly at his chappelle, which is in Vestrike. And
because the name of sayncte Euager was not known among^ the common people of
Almayne, they called it Fyacres sickness for Euagers. Not enquerynge what the
^rues of these were, but only believed that these could help them. Such
opinions had the people, and thus they did rise: There was images offered
and hanged before saint Roche, and his old sores were new remembered, which
thing if it were done of a godly mind / I do not repro^e / but if it were
done, that those might get aua^tage that were the inuenters thereof, I marvel
that disceyte should have place in so great discomforte and sorrow, and in so
miserable destruction of mankind.

But the deuines did interpretate this to be the wrath of god, and to be his
punysshement for our evil living. And so did openly pr^ache, as though they,
admytted into that hye counsaylle of god / had there learned / that men never
lived worse, or as who says in that golden world of Augustus and Tiberius,
when Christ was here on earth, most myscheuous diseases did not begin: or
as who says, that nature has no power to bring in new diseases, which in
all other things makes great chaunges, or as who says, that within short
time in our days (because men beth now of good fyuyng) the remedy of Guaiacum
is found for this sickness. So well these things do agree, which these men's
minds that declare god (as they think) do preach unto us. Than began the
physicians business, which search not what should take away this disese, but
what was the cause thereof, for they might not abide the sight of it, much more
they abstayned from touching. For when it first began, it was of such
fylthynes / that a man would scarsely think this syckenesse, that now
reygneth, to be of that kind. They were byles, sharp, and stondynge out,
having the similitude and quantite of acorne^, from which came so foul
humors, and so great stynche, that who so ever ones smelled it, thought him
self to be enfect. The color of these pusshes was derke grene / and the sight
thereof was more grievous unto the pacient than the pain it self: and yet their
peynes were as though they had lain in the fire.

This disease (not long after his beginning) entered into Germania, where it
has wandered more largely than in any other place: which thing I do ascribe
unto our intemperaunce.

They which than took counsel of the sterres, prophisied / that evil not to
endure above.vij. years, wherein they were disceyued, if they meant of this
disease and all the iuel that comes thereof: but if they me^t it of the forsaid
most filthy kind, which comes of him self / and not only of enfection, but
through the corruption of the air, or the ordinance of god: than were they not
disceyued. For it tarried not long above the.vii. year. But the infyrmitie,
that came after, which remains yet / is nothing so filthy. For the sores
at some times beth little, not so hye nor so hard. And sometime there is a
certain broad crepynge scabbe / for his benym enters deper, and brings
forth more diseases.

It is thought this kind now adays to grow in any person, but through
infection by defilynge of him self, which thing especially happens by
copulation. For it appears manifestly, that young children / old men, and
other, which are not given to the bodily lust, beth very seldom enfected
therewith. And the more that man is given to wantonness, the sooner he is
infected. And as they live, that beth taken therewith / so other it shortly
leaves them, or long holds them, or utterly consumes them. For it is very
easy unto the Italians and Spanyardes, and to su^he as live soberly, but
through our surfetynge and intemperate living, hit does long continue with
us, and greuousely does vex and chafe us.

The causes of this disease. Capitu. ij.
THe physicians have not yet certainly diffined the secret causes of this
disease, although they have long and peynfully with great variete serched
therefore, but in this thing al do agree, which is very evident, that through some
unwholesome blastes of the air, which were at y^ time / the lakes, fou^taines /
flodes, and also the sees were corrupted, And thereof the earth to receive
poison, The pastures to be enfected, venemus vapors to come down from the air,
which living creatures (in drawyng the breath) received. For this disese was
found in other bestes like as i^ me^. The astrologers fetch ye cause of this
i^firmite from the sterres / saying, yt it proceeds of ye co^iu^ctions of
Saturn and Mars, which was not long before, and of.ii. eclipsis of the son, and
they do affirm, yt by th^se signs they might perceive many colerik, and
fleumatike infirmities to follow / which should long continue, and slowly
depart, as Elypha^cia / lepre, tetters, and al ill kind of scabbes and boils,
and what so ever evils deformeth and vnfasshioneth the body, as the gout,
palsy / sciatica / joint ache, and other like dangers. And that these things
should chance rather in the north part by reason of this sign Aquarius, wherein
fell the first ecclypse: And in the west part by reason of this sign Piscis /
in the which fell the last eclyps. But the physicians affirm this syckenes
to come of ill and habundant humors, as of coler black advst yelowe and
fleume salt or advst, and that of one of these alone, or of certain, or else of
al these mingled, whose sharpnes streking out to the outward parts of the body
/ burns and dries the skin, and fylleth it full of scabbes, but that which
comes of raw heuye and gross humors / they say is driven into the joints,
and causes greatte peine in them, and to arise knobbes and swellings, and
knottes to gether, and the skin to ryuell. And moreover the heed to ache,
whereby ye beauty of the body is clean altered and gone. Some breuely co^cluding
say, that this infirmite comes of corrupt, burnt, and enfect blood. And al
these things were in doubtful disputation, ye nature thereof not yet known,
but now it is known, they be also approved. for in mine opinion this sickness is
no other thing / but a postumatio^, and rotting of vnpure blood: the which
after it begins to dry, it turns into swelling and hard knobbes, the
which thing proceeds of the liver corrupt. To know more of the nature or
qualities of this infirmity should be very tedious and hard to judge. For we se
in our time, what diverse concertatio^s / and opinions have be^ to boldly
disputed: and what pain the physicians have taken therein, sens the beginning
thereof. The physicians of Germaynie, for the space of ij. years, meddled with
such disputation, and yet when I was but a child, they undertook to heal me:
but what profit came thereof, the end has showed, not withstondynge they were
bold to meddle with strange dregs and spices, and to myngle and minystre many
things / which they should not have ministered. And I remember / they forbode
me to eat peasen. For in some places there grow certain worms in the^ with
wings, of the which hoggeflesshe was thought to be in^ected, because that
best specially was deceas^ed either with this, or else with an other not much
unlike unto this.

Into what disese the french pockes are turned. Ca. iii.
THe peynes of this disease all redye rehearsed are esteemed in manner as no
peines: for this disease tourneth it self into great inconuenie^ce and pain
that naturally it has of him self: In so much that all manner of syckenes,
having or causynge any pain in man's joints, seems to be contained therein.
For first there is sharp ache in the joints / and yet nothing appears:
afterward the gatheryng to gether of humors causes the members to swell,
but after that such vile matter is waxed hard, that a man shall feel the
vehemente peynes thereof. This is the first coming thereof. For it seems to
edifye and fortifye a castelle, there to rest a long season, and thens to
disperse and cast into every part of the body all manner of ache and peynes.
And the longer the said swellynges tarry fro rottynge^ and rypynge / the more
pain shall the pacient suffer. And above all other peynes of this infyrmitie,
this is the viole^test, and that troubles man most. I my self had such a
little knobbe, and swelling above my left hele in the inner side, the which
after it was indurate and hard, by the space of.vij. year, could by no power
of oyntementes or any manner lappynges and cherysshynges be made soft / or
caused to putrify and rotte, but continued stylle like a boon, until that
by the help of Guaiacum it vanysshed away by lyttel and little. This thing as
touching women rests i^ their secret places, having in those places little
pretty sores full of venomus poison, being very dangerous, for those yt
vnknowingly meddle with the^. The which sickness gotten by such infected women,
is so much the more vehement and grievous, how much they be inwardly poluted and
corrupted. By this the senowes (at sum times) do slack and wax hard again,
at sometime they shrink, and some time the sickness turns it self into the
gout, or into the pal^ey or i^to apoplexi and infecteth many one with lepre.
For it is thought, that these infirmities be very neighbors one to an other.
And yt for many resons, which are come^ to both evils. They that be taken with
pockes, often times become lepres, and often times through the sharpnes of their
peynes they shake and queuer as men in a fevre.

After all this there buddeth out and appear small holes and sores, which turn
the^ self into ca^kers and phistuls, or continual sores: and the more they
putrify, the more they diminishe ye bone. And wha^ the bones be putrified and
corrupt, the pacie^t through long co^tinua^ce of siknes, waxes lene, for the
flesh consumes awey / and there remains but only the skyn to cover the
bones withal^ and through this many a one cha^seth to be thisiques, the which
inwardly be full of corruption. Beside all this, out of this infirmity flows
an other, which some men do call cacesia / the which fylleth a man's flesh
and also his skyn full of water: Sum have sores in their bladder, and often
times many men's liver and stomach is utterly consumed by this infyrmite. And in
this thing their opinion is false that say that the gathering to gether of
humors and swellings, wrinkels, and knottes come not of the nature of this
infirmite, but that it chanced only to those that have been rubbed and anointed
with oyntme^tes made with quick silver. I am sure, the most part of the
physicians of Almayne be of this opinion, but yet they have been disceyued in
this sickness, as they be in many other. For I know it for a surety, there be
some, that have had these infirmities and sicknesses, which were never noynted
with quick silver, as I have had experience in my father Vl rich de hoten.

How men at the beginning resysted this infyrmitie the french pockes. Capit.
iiij.
When the physicians were thus amassed, the surgio^s came forward in the same
error, and put to their hands: and first they began to burn the sores
with hot yrons. But for as much as it was an infinite labor / to touch them
all, they went about to aduoyde them by oyntementes, but diverse men used
diverse oyntementes, and all in vain, except he added quick silver thereto,
they beat for this use the pouders of mirre, of mastique / of ceruse, of
beyberies, of alam, bolli armenie, cinaber / of veermelon, of coral, of burned
salt / of rusty brass, of leddrosses, of rust of iron, of Rosen, of
Turpentyne, and of al manner of best oils, oil of bey / oil of pure roses and
terebinthiu^, oil of gyneper, of greatte effect, oil of spike / swynes
grease, fat of ox feet and butter, made specially in may, talowe of gootes
and hearts, virgins honye, powder of read worms dried into duste, or consumed
with oil and beaten, camfere, enforbiu^ and castory: and with.ij. or.iij. of
these foresaid things myngled to gether / they anointed the sick man's
ioyntis, his arms, his thyes / his back bone, his neckebone, with other
places of his body. Some anointed them ones a day, some twyes, some thryes,
some four times. The paciente was shut in a stufe, kept with continual and
fervent hete, some.xx. and some.xxx. hole days: And some were laid in a bed
within the stewe / and anointed, and covered with many clothes, and were
compelled to sweat. Part of them at the second anoyntynge began to faint
meruaylously. But yet the ointment was of such strength and effect, that what
so ever disease was in the hyer part of the body / it drew into the stomach,
and from the^s up into the brayn, and the^s the disese avoided both by the nose
and the mouth, and did put the pacient to such pain, that except they
took good head, their tethe fell out, all their throtes, their longes / their
roffes of the mouths, were full of sores, their jaws did swelle, their teethe
were lensed, and contynually there avoided the most stynking skome and matter,
that could be, and what so ever it ra^ne upon, by and by it was polluted and
infected / whereby their lyppes so touched gathered sores, and within forth
their chekes were grievously peyned. All the place, where ^hey were, did stink.
Which manner of curyng was so peinful, that many had lever die tha^ so to be
esed. How be it sca^tly the hundredth person was esed / but shortly after fell
down again: so yt his ese dured very few days. whereby me^ may esteem, what I
suffered in this disese, that proved this manner of curing a.xi. times, with
great ieoperdie and peril, wrestling with this evil.ix. years. And yet in the
mean time taking what so ever thing was thought to withsto^de and resist it.
For we used bathes and herbis lapped about the^, and dri^kes and coresies, And
for this we had arsnicke, ink, calcantu^, verdegres, or aqua fortis, which
wrouzt in us so bitter peyn / yt they might be iuged very desirous of life, yt
had not lever die tha^ so to prolo^ge their life, but tho curingis were most
bitter and peinful, which were made with oyntme^tes, And was also so much ye
more da^gerus because the ministers of it, knew not ye operation thereof. For
ye surgions only did not use it, but every bold fellow went about playing the
physician, gyuing to al manner of me^ one ointme^t, either as he had seen it
ministered to other, or as he had suffered it him self. And so they heled al
men with one medicine, as the proverb says, One s^oo for both fete. If ought
happend amiss to the sike, for lack of good counsel, they wiste not what to do
or say. And these me^ tormenters were suffered to practice on all persons what
they would while the phisitio^s were done as i^ an universal error and
ignorance. And so without order or rule, with torment of heat and sweat
ple^tie, al were cured after one facio^, without regard of time, habit, or
co^plection. Another these ignorante anointers had not so much knowledge, as
with laxes to take away the matter, which caused the evil, or to diete them, or
appointe any diversity of meat: but at length the matter must com to this
point, that they should lose their tethe, for they were losed, their mouth was
all in a sore, and through coldness of the stomak and filthy stench, they lost
appetite. And although their thirst was i^tollerable, yet found they no kind of
drink to help the stomak, many were so light i^ their brain, that they coud not
sto^d, and some were brought into a madness and not only their ha^dis tre^bled
and shoke therwt, but also their fete and al ye body: some mu^bled i^ their
speking as long as they lived, and cowd have no remedy. And many I have seen
die i^ the midel of their curing. And one I know did so his cure, that in one
day he killed.iii. husbandme^, through immoderat hete which they suffered
patiently, shut within an hot stewe, trustinge that they should the sooner
obteigne their health / tylle through vehemente heat their hertes failed
them, and and perceived not them self to dye, and so were wretchedly
strangled. Other I saw dye, when their throtes were swollen in the intrie,
that first the filthy matter, where they should have avoided in spyttynge /
could find no way out, and at length their breath was like wise stopped, and
an other sort, when they could not piss, Very few they were / that gatte
their health / and they passed through these ^ieopardies, these bitter peynes,
and euyls.

What help I used in this sickness. cap. v.
AS often as I was anointed / to keep these euylles from my mouth, that
customably came, I used only alam, which I kept in my mouth rollynge it from
one side to an other, until it melted. And when I went about to wrappe up my
sores, and comfort my members, I used these herbs, absinthio, camomilla,
hyssoppe, pulegio, arthemisia, sage, and other such boiled in wine and water.

And ones for my sores I made an ointment by the counsel of Eytelvolfe, of
alam vardegrese, purist honey / and vinegre by equal portions.

And afterward I learned of a soldier in Italy an other oyntement, made of
lyme and water / after this manner. I put well water or river water into a new
pot, never seasonned before with any lyquor / and sod it therin^ and when it
boiled fervently, I powered it upon vnsleyt lyme (that is it / that no water
has touched) in a basin or a clean vessel of wodde, before not occupied with
any lycour. And when the lyme was dissolved, and after a little rest lay in
the botom: I took away the skome that swom above, and mouinge not the lyme /
powered out the clerest water / and kept that for my purpose / when I would
occupy it: I took a sponge or a lynnen clothe / and depped hit in the water,
sum time rolled, as I moughte, and often times warmed and moysted my sores
therewith, washing and wypynge away all the fylthynesse. Thanne I took a piece
of clothe, so moysted, and lapte it about my sores. And with this water my
peynes were eased. and the swellynge swaged, the sores were clensid, and the
heat and enflamations driven away. which thing is to be meruaylled at,
seeing the nature of lyme otherwise is to kendle. I found nothing like this:
And me thought I was well helped therewith, and had avoided the destruction /
that was at hand. In so cruel assautes of this disese I used also cassia, if I
would be laxatiue, and did often times sweat / and let go blood drawn out
with gourdes. And when I was in Italy monysshed, that to eat in the morning
the quantite of a walnutte of rasins terebinthia, should be of great efficacite
to amend the fautes of the blood, what manner of thing it is I know not / and
to make the belly lanke, and help the stomak, which both things I found
true, I used the same. They said also, that it did help no little thing
the synowes, and strengthed the joints and members. And by this means and
abstinence of meat and drink, and good dyete, I avoided many things / which
moughte have utterly distroyd me in so long and injurious seson, for the
most part wandrynge abroad in the world, and through pouerte driven to
much aduersite, never at rest and quietness, but always vexed and troubled.
And have so preserved my self, that all though my legs were eaten with so
many deep and grievous soores, yet was there not one synewe hurt / nor one bone
perysshed. And if at any time the disease took my face, no euylle happened in
my mouth and tongue, so that the inward parts were preserved: For I voyded
away those things, that might hurt my stomach, and with a rare help
defended my lyghtes and lounges: and by these helps I moughte suffer and drive
forth this disease, but clearly put hit away I could not: which thing was
the easynge of pain, and not the cuttynge away of the cause of pain, the
differryng of evil, and not the taking away thereof. A better remedy came of
Guaiacus, ye of that only came health, which I do intend now to discribe.

The description of Guaiacum and the finding thereof, and name. Cap. vi.
IF we ought to give thanks upward unto god, both for good and euylle: how
much are we bound for the gift of Guaiacum? ye how much does the gladness
and joy of his benignite toward us, pass the sorrow and peyn of that
infirmity? The use of this wod was brought to us out of an ylond named
Spagnola, this ylonde is in the west nigh to the country of Amerik set in that
place where the length of Amerike, stretchynge into the north / does end: and
was found af late days among the new lands, which were unknown by the
old time. All the inhabitauntes of that ylonde sometime be diseased with the
french pockes, likewise as we be with the mesels, and small pockes. Nor they
have no other remedy for it but this.

A certain noble man of Spain, being tresaurour in that province, was
grievously troubled with that infyrmitie: And after the people of that land
had taught him that medicine, he brought the manner and use thereof into
Spayn, showing of what power and virtue it was in those parts. The phisitio^s
would not allow it, perceyuyng that their profyt would decay thereby / not
withstanding at length they took in hand to cure with the same wood, but with
such arroga^cie, attributyng so much to their precepts and order, that except
they were observed, they affirmed / this wood should be spend in vain.
Which thing I marvel they could persuade to any man, and make him believe
it. saying it is plainly known / that in that ylande were never physicians.
And yet has this wood Guaiacum always been there used. But in this cure what
besynes is mete for the physician, I will here after declare. Now I will
speak of the thing intended. They have given it this name Guaiacum. For so the
Spaniardes write it with latyne letters / following their own manner of sound:
which word the people of that ylande pronounce with open mouth Huiacum.

And Paulus Ritius showed me at the city of August / that he hard say of a
Spanyarde / which had been in that yland, that the first syllable Gua, of this
name / was not pronounced of the Spagnolenses with G, but that his own tongue
did require it so to be written. And they of that Ilonde sound it with, V,
puffed out, as though it were Huiacum, a word of.iii. syllables with them /
and not Guaiacum. We may give unto it some excellent name, calling it lignum
vite / as Philo the physician called his dregs the hands of god: and thi^
day the physicians with great boste call their co^fections manus Christi,
apostolicu^ / gratia dei, Antidotum, Paulium, and many other such superstitious
names. They say it grows like an ash with us in height / and is round /
bryngyng forth a nutte much like a chesse nutte: his tymbre is oil and fat,
in color like box, but somewhat blackyshe. And they judge that the best, that
has most black: but that which is like to box, differs from that / which
is black. For this is with in / and the other without: or to speak more
plainly, the black is as hit were the heart and marowe. The wodde is
meruaylous heavy / for the leest piece of hit, cast into the water, synkethe
streyghte to the botome. There is no wodde so hard / as it. For hit is so
hard, that hit will not cleue: another hitherto have we seen any, that was
chyned. And they that selle it say, it will in no wise yane or chappe. When hit
bourneth and flameth / hit makes a sweet ^dour: and there follows fro hit /
when it burns / a go^me, which we yet know not, for what purpose it
serves: This go^me is somewhat black / and shortly after it is fallen away, it
is very hard. The bark is not so thick, but is meruaylous hard. which tokens
well marked, I thynk he that shall cou^terfete this wood / can not deceive the
byer. For be it a man may be deceived in the color, how is hit possible all
these things to be in one / a fatnes, smellinge, somewhat like rosen / such
weight as no wodde has beside? Than the go^me that comes from it / wha^ it
flameth? such hardness that may sca^tly be cut? And the lest piece cast into the
water will not swym above? And the taste ones known will never suffer a man to
err, which as it is to al men unpleasant, so is it to me ye very pleasant. They
say it continues not after it be sodden / but paulleth / in the summer
after.iij. days, and in the winter somewhat later. And therefore we must chose
the fattest and weyghtiest thereof. For that which is old / is light and lean.
Upon this description let the physicians, if hit please them, draw out the
causes of such efficacite by their long disputations, as for me I more
rejoice, that it is, than I search what manner of thing it is. How be it I
grant them worthy of much thank / that shall first show unto us the nature
thereof through out known: But now there be some, that wey and esteem the
strength and virtue of this tree by these known ma^kes as though they had
suffered it in all poyntes^ which thing is done, as me seems, very hastily
and tymely, thinking that the cause and reason of such efficacy and power
ought to be serched for in this tree, after his nature and use is known,
likewise as it is done generally in all other medicines. But now of his use,
and how it ought to be prepared unto medicine.

Of the ordering of G^aiacum in medicine. cap. vii.
IT is orderered after this manner. The wod must first be made as small as may
be / which thing some do, at a torn, and than without any more ado / they
lay the shauynges a water / And some do first broile or stamp them in a mortar
so much that they bring them into powder and duste, ^o the intent they may the
sooner be through soked, and their strength sodden out. But I wot not,
whether that make any matter / I have seen some, that have cut it first with a
saw, and than raped the pieces with a rape / and have taken and put them
into water. How so ever it be / whether it be turned / raped, or beaten to
duste / they soke a day and a night one pound weight in eight / of water,
taken either of a well or of a river, or as I did / of a pyt: than they sethe
it in a new glased pot, and clean was^hed, with a soft fire of coals / by the
space of six hours, and more / until it come to the one half, with great
head taking and diligence, leefte hit run over through much heat. For that
which over runs loses (they say) much of his virtue, and is of less
power. And therefore it may not be sodde^ in the flame, but it requires few
coals / and a pot not filled all most by the.iij. part. The skome that
flows above, they taken away to anoint the sores with: for we know it to
have much power to dry. After it is thus sodden, they streyn it / and power
it in to a glass. And than they put to the grondes eight pound water and sethe
it again (as before) as it were a second messhynge. This thynner they give
them to drink with their meat: the first is drunk in the stead of a
medicine. And this is all to gether, that delyuerethe us from so great and
grievous disease, this deco^tion is it. This is the chief point and anchor of
our health. And it has so little need of any other thing, that it will not
abide any manner mixture, or mynglynge, as I will shortly after declare. Sum
would, that light water and clear should be gotten for this purpose. Some
admytte all manner sweet water indifferently, because in sething what so ever it
be, it is purified. All would that good diligence and head should be taken in
time of sething, that it ru^ne not over / or boil to fast, and they bid that
the pot be close stopped, that nothing brethe out: but wha^ the skom is
perceived to rise, it must be softely opened, and the skomme taken out, and so
covered again. They put this decoction (when it is strayned) into a glass /
only because it should be seen, and because a glass of al vessels is purest
and clennest. The color of this decoction is somewhat like muddye water, when
hit is somewhat troubled. Wete lynnen in it, and it wexeth grene of a
meruaylous show. The relesse thereof at the first tastynge, is some what
sour, but to him that uses hit, by little and lyttel it waxes pleasant. The
physicians were so bold, as to put, to a pound of this.iiij. ounces of honey.
Which thing, as I do not improve, so do I deny it to be necessary. And I
would nothing should be added unto such a thing, being of such power,
where as it needs not. For what needs a man there to bestow his labor,
where as no need is: And to say the troth the relesse of Guaiacum is not so
grievous that it requires to be tempred with honey: Yea were it not for my
masters the phisytions all men would be contented therewith. How be it what
needs me to name phisytions, when I speak only but of tryflers? For they that
be connnynge and expiert, as is O most noble prince, Stromer thy physician
(and through frendeshyppe mine also) and thy other physician Coppus, such I
say, understood and knew, how hit is not conuenyente, either to meddle it
with unknown things, and myngle them / or else to add ought unto these
things, which as yet are not perceived to lack ought. The which thing as
hit chanced us to have communycacyon of this wood Guaiacum, at the city of
August, when many had auysed me to commyt my self to this manner to cure: and
I, for newnes of the thing would here none of them: Stromer speaking after
this manner of this wodde with great gravity of words said, that he feared
leest the health some and excellent power of Guaiacum should be diffamed through
the superfluous additions of unlearned physicians: which thing if hit were not
done, nothing could be found better against this syckenes. And with his word
is caused me straight without any taryeng to cast my self hedlynge into this
experience of Guaiacum. And therefore I would this, now ones spoken, should be
generally understand, that as often as I shall compain in this small treatise
of physicians, al men should think me to mean them, that have no erudition
nor experience: and that boste them self amongst the common people / of the
title and name of their doctorship, which they bought, that knew another greek
nor latin / and yet no science requires more erudicion or knowledge of the
tongues than phisike: the which being most ignorant, do lightly abuse the
simple people of Germaynie, saying there is no doubt made of his learning,
that is ones garnysshed with the name of Master doctoure. But why have I used
in this thing so many words? Verily to make my cause good with the, excellent
prince, and to defend my self against them, that by this occasion might
accuse me, as one that spoke words more snappysshe than besemed me. Which
thing when sum of the lawyers and divines did of late, against whose
learning they said I inueyed without good manner, when I did snybbe but only
the unlearned, and them which were sore grieved and were bitter ennemies unto
such good learning, they caused many a good manne to think, that I was
against them, and yet was that thing far from my manners, and also the purpose,
wherein I than was occupied. which thing saying, I perceive your excelle^tnes
to know well enough, I will leave these run agate anoynters, and theuysshe
physicians, and also these vntaughte doctors, and come unto Guaiacum: the
which in medicine must thus be used.

The manner of curing. Capitulo.viij.
THe pacient must be kept in a close chamber, without air or wind / where
fire must be nourysshed contynually: or else he must be in a stewe, after the
manner of Almayn, which shall not need always to be kept hot, but must be
close, and defended from air, that no air blow upon him for the time of
this curation: he must also beware of cold. Therefore if he be cured in winter,
or in Autumn, he must soke, that he have fire in his chaumber, erely in the
morning specially before day: for than is the cold feruente: he must cause
the cleftes of the wyndowes, if any be, to be stopped with plaster, or other
like matter: and upon the chaumbre door must he hang carpettes, or other
like things, within and without, that no cold or air enter into the
chaumbre / or comme out. when he is thus ordered, his meat must be
dymynisshed. First the fourth part of that he was wont to take, and than
the third part, and shortly after the one half, that he may learn to bear
hunger^ and his wine must be well watered. Thanne must he take a pourgacyon,
other with regard that hit be such a one as shall be thought sufficient to
cut away the cause, or take away the matter, that norissheth the disease,
other such a one without any regard at all, as may emptye the hoole bealy.
For that thing, as I perceive, only is required, which thing done, thanne
may ye thervppon begin this work after this manner. The docoction which was
first sodden and is strongest, must be ministered unto him twice a day milk
warm, a gobblet or cyat ones in the morning at.v. of. the clock, or there
about / and again at night, at viii. of the clock, we call a ciates, a cup
that will receive half a pound, whereof we may gather, seeing.viii. pound of
water is required to the seething of one pound of wod, and the one half
thereof must be consumed in the sething, that so there must.iiii. pound
remain, and must drink thereof twyse a day, that the decoction of one pound
of Guaiacum is suffycient for four days. For hit is now a commen manner with
physicians, to measure their syquores by weyghte, and they have clean cast up
the names of measures. It must be drunk at one draughte without any brethe
taking, After he has drunk, let him rest more than.iiii. hours, and let
him the first.ii. be covered / that by the help of heat this medicine may
be digested abroad into the members, and the pacient may sweet out that that
noyeth. which thing to do how profitable it is, I will declare when place
comes. And it shall not hurt, if he be close covered one hole hour before he
drink, that he may be hot.

Some will not in any wise he should rise from his bed in five hours after
he has taken his ciates of drink.

He must take his meat in the myddaye, and not before, and than as little as
may be, for this medicine above all things requires an emptye bealy. And
therefore he must eat, not to fill his emptynes, but to bear up the life,
not to gather strength but to keep him self from feinting. Another is there any
ieoperdy to be feared. For Guaiacum has great strength in it self both to
refresshe, and also to comfort, not such as be full / but only those that
are emptye. Ye they say, that none faylleth, eat he never so little, so that
he drink faithfully this decoction. In the mean time, he shall not be
anointed in the out side, except he have soores or swellynges. And for this
there is a white ointment made of Cerussa, rose oil of rosis, with camphire,
which is laid on with a lynnen clothe. Some anoint them only with the skom of
Guaiacum, or else dry it into powder, and cast it upon them. And besides this
skomme / there is nothing of this decoction occupied in the out part. Some be
healed in short time / and some in long. The most part in.xxx. days. They
command him to be pourged again the.xv. day. For this reason I think,
because as Alexander Aphrodicius thinks / they that hunger and receive not
their meat as they were won^ to do, fall away / and gather a certain sharp
matter and eger / so that such matter must be avoided, that the body of the
sike may be empty. This decoction shall not be dronken that morning / when he
receives his purgation: but at night let him take it again: and after that
day, he may eat more largely. And again the.xxx. day more liberally: how be
it this more liberally, and that more largely must be very lyttell^ as I shall
show you in the next chapter. But some, lest any impediment should be to
let the operation of this medicine / have kept one order of eating equallye
through out the.xxx. days: and truly the stronglyer a man abides to hunger,
the better and more quyckely he shall be healed. And although the desire of
eating grow daily more and more, yet must he remember to absteyne, comfortynge
him self with the surety of health, if he so do. For the body being so
wasted and emptied, not only with hunger / but also with sweat, ye being long
time as a deed body, through the greuousnes of this evil, shall high fast
to the appetyte of meat and drink.

When this cure is comme to an end, ^o that the sick is almos^e ready to go
abroad, he must than take again some medicine to purge him with, but so that
after that purga^ion / he may drink again as he did before.iiij. or six
days space, wherewith they make up the hole cure. Some will not that he should
go out of the chamber, where he lies, before he be through hoole. Some
think.xxx. days suffycient to keep his chamber: and that he may than go
forth, but yet warely by little and little, and not straight in to the open
air: but first he must walk in the same house, from chamber to chaumbre, and
than to some neighbors house, not far of: until he be used to suffer the
air. For there may be no sodeyne change / but must use him self to all
things by little and little. And that which remains of the syckenesse
they say will lyghtely be hoole / after he ones stere abroad. And that to be
true I have proved in my self. For when the.xxx. days were passed / the
soores of my legs were not yet closed, and therefore I kept.x. days more.
And when these.x. days were gone / yet was not I hoole. Wherefore, feryng the
cold, because winter than begone, I intended to keep in other.x. days: but I
was compelled by the physicians counsel to go abroad, and put it in adventure /
which thing happed not amysse. How be it the soores that I had than, were not
deep in the flesh, or swollen outward: but only in the hier part of the
skin, and lacked nothing else but skin to cover them with: which they had
scantly the.xl. day after I went out. And I that time, in very sharp winter,
made my iourneye from Vindele into France. The causes of this slow healyng I
did coniect this to be. The physician suffered me to eat more mete (as I after
perceived) than I should have done, and also he sodde my drink thynner than he
ought. For I occupied not fully.v. pound of this wodde, where as other
o^cupye.viii. and some.x. wherein my physician was deceived. For he, saying my
body weke of nature / and moreover extenuated and consumed with the long
contynuance of this grefe, thought that a little thing was sufficient to
drive away the disease / and for that cause fed me the largelyer, fearing
soore leeste my strength should fail me: which was double error. For so
much as he ought not to have looked what my body was thanne, but what manner
body it was wont to be, and again the nature of this medicine is such, that
it will suffer none to faint for lack of strength. Wherefore be they never so
weke, they ought not therefore to ministre the less, but rather somewhat the
more. For it does nothing suddenly, but werketh health by little and litel. And
therefore I allow best that decoction, that was longest at the fire / and is
comme to a little of much wode: so that I would counsaylle them, to the
intent hit might be the stronger, to sethe hit often times to the third
part.

And if any would be lose belyed, that is wont to be bound / they will him to
take the powder of Guaiacum sodde^ in the water, and to drink half and ounce
thereof in the morning. And if that help not at the first, to go th^^vnto
again. But this framed not with me / no not when I took it again.

How a man must live and diet him self in this cure. Capitulo.ix.
THere is yet much a do for the ordering of a man, as touching his diet.
Some think best to ete nothing but bread, which Galenus calls the
cleannest fedynge with a few rasins: which breadde they give to the weight
of.iiii. ounces, without salt or other sauce. And they think best to absteyne
generally from all manner meat, except it be a little brothe made with a
chekyn: which they are contented he suppe or eat with his bread moysted
therein ones a day. For at night they give nothing but a few rasins / and an
ounce of breadde. Other will that he have half a chekyn, if it be yet young and
tender: but if it be any thing grown, they think a quarter enough, which
must be sodden in clean water. Whereunto they put another salt, another other
sauce, but sum put a little sugar thereto. Of breadde they give.iiij. ounces
at night, as before, a few rasins, with an ounce of breadde. But as long as he
is under cure / he must take heed, that he never so much as taste salt. They
allow white bread / made of wheat / well bulted, which made for the nones,
they season with sugar. Which thing is not evil. There be some that add to
this feding (not so much in the place of meat as of medicine) a lyttel borage,
other of the leaves only, or (if there be any) of the flowers, which he shall
eat sodden in water alone, or with his chekyn. And this is the order of
fedynge that some do keep continually / some think.xv. days sufficient for
this dyete / and tha^ they will his hunger to be eas^d: and the.xx. day they
give him meat twyse. But let them take h^d^ / that follow that. For truly
this medicine requires, that the pacient be made as thynne with hunger as may
be possible. How be hit sum chance to be through healed within.xv. days,
and yet that not withstanding they put to a few days more thereto. They drynk
unto their meat of that second decoction / not warmed but cold. And this is
all the fare, for hyderto none durst pass this measure. Not withstanding I
dispyse not the physicians, that dispute of the dangers, that may chance to
dry and hot bodies, if they be driven to this strayte dyete / bringing for
them Galen and also Hipocras, which seem in many places to be against this
exquisite dyete in fedynge. But of these that used Guaiacum / I saw as yet
none in ieoperdye, and I gather at this time precepts and monitions out of
experience, and not doctrine out of books. And also I my self am of dry and
hot complexion, and yet this hunger brought me another into a ptisike nor
etike: which thing they seem to fear.

For as much as it is thought wysedom to provide for all things, I will that
if any man fear him self / that he get physicians to keep him, and that this
is sufficiently spoken of this thing. I will now go forward with other
things.

In the time of this cure, the pacient must forbear all busynes, and cut
away all sad thoughts, and rest from al care. And therefore they command
rest and quietness from consultations / and also studyes: so that the mind may
utterly be ^ree from al motions and workinges, and give him self holly to
ydelnes and rest, losed from al trouble and care: which thing must be
understand of al manner of men, but most specially of them, that be naturally
melancoly: They must also beware of anger: for that, as Galene says, kendleth
chefly the colerike matter, And more over we must take heed, that nothing
happen in that time / that may move us to heaviness. Let the sick person here
syngers and minstrelles, and give him self to sportes, pastymes, and music,
and some time delight him self with merry talking. But to company with woman,
how much he must eschew that, I will show hereafter. I took great pleasure
in redynge and making merry things. And the physicians spoke against hit, and
not without a cause, saying they believed it to be labor and busynes unto me:
but I took it not as my study, but as a pastyme, and for my recreation. But
yet would I not this to be to other for an example.

Now ^ome begin to wax very hungry after the syxte day: but I felt no grefe
before the.x. day. And in this case this is the only comfort / not to se
other eat, nor to see meat, nor to smell the savor thereof. Never the less
when any perceyueth him self to faint, and wexe feeble for lack of meat, I
would not that he should by and by receive meat or strange confection, to
comfort and bring again his strength, but to refresshe his spirits with
odours and and pleasant smelles: for even with the savor and smelle of such
odors Galenus thinks the spirit and life to be nourysshed and comforted. Yet
in thi^ thing as regard must be had, what every man's complexion requires,
le^te like things be ministered to them, that be dry and hot, and unto them
that be moist and cold, or things of one quality be ministered unto them
all, that be of both extremes.

As I do more allow through out the things, that grow among us / as familiar
and nygh to our nature: so by the example of Democritus, who with the vapor of
hot bread made his spirit even than departing to tarry hole.iii. days,
think I that we should help them that faynte other with that breed / or else
with a roasted oynion hold to the mouth? For I plainly know / that in an
oynion was sometime such virtue and power. Which thing is also proved to be
done with the odor of wine. For therewith Philip the physician did recover
Alexander / as we may se in Quintus Curtius. And by the traditions of the old
physicians we ^e his power and virtue in this purpose preferred above all. But
by all means we must norysshe the spirit with the sweet savors and smelles:
for so much as that is the life, and above all th^nge the odor of old sweet
wine is praised in this thing: Next is the smelle of honey, specially rose
honey: also of appuls, of the which thing Stromer never ceasseth to monysshe
me, affermynge that he knows, how strong / and how helpyng they be in this
thing. Of these some prefer orenges: other prefer cotonia mala. Vinegar is also
praised / but specially vinegar made with roses: and musterde is well allowed.
For these things, say they, do refreshe the wits, and sustain the
strengthes. As for cynamom / nutmegges, styracke / citrous / saffron, a
gisoflower, musk, camphire / and such costly ware, I leave to deinte fellows,
But cummin, anesse, coryander, lauander, amarake, roses, mynt, rue, rosemary,
violettes, sage, castorye, with other growing among us, none of the
physicians that have any iudgemeut, improueth: but they affirm these to be
good for this purpose. And I oftentimes do use such helps to the great
comfort of my health. The sick man may also use rubbynges, so that they be
softely done, by all the time of his said lyinge: which as they are for other
things profitable, so I believe they would not hurt in this thing. Let his
heed be rubbed with a warm clothe, and combed with an yuory comb.

That Guaicus will not be myngled. Capit. x.
FVrdermore this medycine will abide nothing to be put to hit. Where at the
physicians be commenly astonished: which would we should have none other
medicines in price, but such as receive their power from the.iii. parts of
the world, which thynk that they should lose al their auctorite, except they
joined to gether for us in their poticarye compositions Indie, Aethiope,
Arabie, and the Garamantes / that dwell in the extreme part of the world.
For what will they allow, that is not dear and costly? And I beseech god,
that their counsel be never hard nor obeyed in the using of this wodde
Guaiacum. And that Stromer may be in this thing as a prophet, and in my
judgment a true. For he fears, and that very wisely, leest they at length
will put their hands thereunto. Th^rfore let all men believe me / that have
proved this medicine, that it is sufficient to heal this disease: and that of
it self without any other thing. But as I said, a purgation in the
beginning, and again a little the.xv. day: and than in the last end, which
thing I would have done with somone thing, not with any medicine made of many
things. For I verily believe, that the physicians look than to their own
profit and lucre, and not for the health of men, when they say, they must
search, what takes away the cause of t^is infyrmytie: as though this wodde
did it not. And verily this is evident, there is no other cause to use such
purgations, but to cleanse the belly, and again with abstinence and hunger to
draw out and empty the holle body: But what say ye thereto? In that rude
country where this Guaiacum grows / are no physicians: no strange nor
ferfetched ways nor rules of phisike: But perchance men use there some herb
or rote to purge with, and all do use one thing / not to take away the grefe,
but that when the belly is emptied Guaiacum may the better work. wherefore in
this my counsel is, that ye tourment not your belie with things costely
prepared / and specially to avoid the compositions made of many things.

In this mind I stycke surely, that I would suffer nothing to be poured into
me / but only cassia by it self, and yet they offered me gladly many things,
and I was also wont before to pour in not only Re^barbarum but other things
also more barbarous than Re^barbarum, but my counsel came to a very good end.
which counsel if any will follow, he has an exaumple, commandment he has
none. For we teach not these things being our self taught of other, but we
monysshe you / that which we have proved / which thing I would al should
remember / that I teach nothing here rasshely, but that which I have learned
by mine own experience and prove, I deliver unto other. And if I had learned
ought else, it should not be kept close, but now saying by diligent search and
studious labor I have found out the power and virtue of Guaiacu^, which if
I do not well perceive, it is a fault. But if I have learned it, as it is in
deed: I do not greatly covet reward ne land / I will show you all the hole
faithfully. For that has this medicine deserved of me, except I would be
unthankful for so great benefits. And therefore seeing many well liking men
of nature are corrupted through the diversity of medicines, yea and some of
them utterly distroyed: my sentence is, that nothing shall be added to help
this medycine, for this wodde of hit self is suffycient to pluck up this
disease by the roots. If any thing be put unto hit, specyallye of these
things, that are inwardely received, this medicine takethe no help thereof,
but rather is corrupted and let from his workynge. This thing must be added
hereunto, that they, which drink of this Guaiacum, of whatte so ever state
they be, in this sycknes have so litel need of bathes, that they be utterly
forbede by them that be expert, to wasshe so much as their heed, as long as
they shall be in this cure, and are permytted very seldom to wasshe their
hands / but never with cold water.

What place physicians have in this cure. Capitulo.xj.
But now I know, that some suspecteth me to be of this mind, that I would no
physician to be used in this cure, which thing is far otherwise. For my mind
is / that sum, that is well learned and wise, should be gotten, which is not
bold ne liberal in po^rynge in of poticarye ware. his custody and also his
order, if he have learned the use of the admynistracyon of Guaiacum, I would the
sick person should use. And these myscheuous busy fellows, which are so
glad to offer to us this strange waare, and medicines / if any be brought
from the heedes of Nilus, of which / the more they cost, the more they make
of the^, aua^syng them above the moon, these I say I would have driven away /
and in no wyse^ to se the sick no not through a latis. I have proved this
thing even so to be as Asclepiades judged, which thought all manner drenches
vnfrendely to the stomach. And Celsus also says, that medicines for the most
part hurt the stomach / ye and moreover that hap^ened to me, that the same
author showed before should happen, that medicines received into the body, when
they had been kept in the lower partis, were driven back again into the heed,
and caused great pain, which thing let all remember that will enter into
this cure, that they commit not them self rasshly to such tourmenters, not
only because the nature of this wood is not yet well known / but also because
it is their manner never to knowledge ignorance, but always to command
somewhat, to ministre and give some what, unto whom a man shall at no time
show his water, how well and helthfull so ever he be, but they will make
their bylle to the poticaries, recipe, recipe take, take / saying that other
they suspect^ some sycknes to be begone, other else that the which is now at
hand / must be prevented or it come, except thou swallowe this (say they) or
drink that, thou haste the axes. O myscheuous men^ if they may be called men,
and worthy to be hated of all the world. But what so ever they be, they have
been bold to take upon them many things of late about the administration of
Guaiacum / thrustynge in them self, unto that work, the sellers thereof
helping them forward through some conuention and bargayn made between them I
believe. For wha^ they saw, that by means of this rude, vile, and contemptible
medicine there should be hereafter no need of their disceptations, and yet
durst not / for I know some that would withstonde so favorable and good a
thing. And of the other side, when the marchantes feared, leest they should
selle but little, if the physicians allowed it not, for no man would lightly go
unto a medicine, that came from so strange a place, and was ministered so far
from the commen manner of medicines, than they agreed betwyxte them, I believe,
that this should be spredde among the commen people, that the physicians
labor was necessary in this cure: So that they selling a remedy approved of
the physicians, moughte get as they were wont, and the physicians in the
mean time shu^de lose nothing of their stipendes, seeing that they were
called unto this cure.

I know certain physicians of a better sort, that went into Spain in the
emperors name / and in the name of a bishop here, only to enquere and search
for this thing. And these, when they were taught of them that learned and knew
the thing in Spagnola, told nothing in manner otherwise than our experience
has: but that they added of their own brains, what medicines, upon what
days, with what observations ought to be received, and by a mathematical
dyete, how they should behave them self in eating and drinking: which
thing I believe, they did of no evil mind, but ^ft^r their manner, and
supersticiousnes used of some good physicians, which are so ^esyrous t^ help
the sick, and are so tender toward them, that sometime they do more than they
should. Their good minds I do allow, but yet I think it daunge^ous, to agree
unto all men in all things. But to return again to these if minded
phisitio^s. I think they be agreed with the marchantes, that they may he
admitted into part of the lucre and gaynes. For I my self did se a certain
physician, if we vouchsafe to call a rude and an unlearned ass by this name,
who with many words dispreysed this wodde Guaiacum, as a vain thing / and
nothing worth: but that the marcha^tes fained it to do these things. But
shortly after this lewd dispreyser was called unto the cure of a certain
rich man, and shortly after to an other^ And when the man began to smelle
the gold, and saw great gaynes to comme through the multitude of such sick
men / he began first to be more gentylle, and to diminishe his cruelnes and
malice more and more, and within a while preysed this wode, and greatly auanced
it, and said: Now at the last, I my self have proved the meruay^lous power
and virtue of this wodde. Nay nay ass / but now thou haste found thine
advantage therein.

And after this manner this medicine seems to come into their canons / likewise
as all other medicines have done: which thing if it be done by the auctorite
of the wise / expert / and learned physicians, I improve it not: how be it my
mind gives me, and I verily believe, that they can not do it as yet: And
again I think it not very necessary. For either in Spagnola, where are no
physicians / somewhat is lacking unto this medicine, or else it ought here
likewise to be ministered without such supersticiousnes and formalities. May
there any man be ^o light of believe, as to think that the physicians can handle
this business more counnyngly, than they which knew it by experience in them
self, considering how that Guaiacum has not continued so long with us,
that they might in that space have serched and learned his nature. And to speak
in few words, men do yet marvel at the thing / and is not as yet come unto
perfyte knowledge. Therefore can hit not be under their canons in this short
time, or any cause of his operation showed.

Let this therefore stycke fast in all men's minds, that they think this
simple dyete sufficient to cure and heal them, which we teach by experience,
in our self. Let them be seen and looked upon, of the sober and learned
physicians: but let them leave the dregs and spices of this other sort.
Let them bid farewell for ever and adaye to these, that go about to restore us
from diseases with their disputations. These are they / which, as I said,
allow nothing that is vile and of small price / and which think that I
tell fables, when I say that I have driven away the axes mo than eight times
by drinking of mine own water / by and by at the beginning: and with no other
medicine. And that I have seen men in Saxony / which have quenched al manner
diseases with drinking hot buttred beer. And again they will not believe me,
that there is a servant of my faders, which with.iii. certain herbs sodden in
wine, has healed a man's brain pan broken to pieces: and many sore and evil
wounds has he heled with a few herbis of our own growing, sodden in wine or
water, and that within.x. or.xii. days, without any fear of fever. But this
they think a vile medicine / saying it is not done after their canons. And
the same thing do they judge of Guaiacum, whose nature and power / how
clearly they understand, and what manner words they use to have of hit: we may
perceive by the answer of a certain noble physician, not now young, that he
should begin to practice / but of extreme age, that it is very lykely he
fealeth Auicen, Mesuen, and other authors of phisike, as well as his own
nails. This physician when I was wrytinge these things, and taking my journey
from Frankeford, where he was writing his recipe, was asked of a certain
friend of mine, what he thought of Guaiacum: I have not seen it / said he, but
what so ever it be, the weight / the color, the savor, must be considered in
qua^tite and qualite. Than said I, his weighte is very heavy, and synketh in
the water, how little so ever the cuttynge be: and has the same color
almost that is in box, and it smells fayntely / somewhat of rosen: do
thou know now by this, what the nature and power of Guaiacum is? Than he
thinking to face me down with words, chattered I wot^e not whatte / out of
Aristotels predicamentes. Than said I, It may be, good fader, saying the
disease is new, and this a new medicine, that the holle matter is yet
unknown unto you. Thou art deceived said he, it is no new disease, saying
Plini writes thereof. Than I, being desirous to know, what he knew in Plini,
that I knew not, asked him, what name Pliny gave unto this disease? Mentagram
said he, quia vexat mentem, that is to say, because hit vexith a man's mind.
Than said I / why and do not other infirmities and sycknes than tourme^t and
vex a man's mind? or does not frensyes, madness, the falling evil, and other
rauysshynges of the wits this thing more than the french pockes? As he was
interpretynge I can not tell what: good old man, quod I, learn against an
other time to answer more wisely / and specially in such things as
apertaigne to man's health. For if ye had read Pliny / ye would not say
Mentagram to come a mente, but a mento. For in the chynne that disease first
began / which thing declares it to be an other syckenes than the french
pockes. And who could forbere to rebuke this mischeuous mad ass heed? But
let us pass over these rascal physicians, of the which we se a great part
rich in words / but in the knowledge of things very poor: and let us
return to our purpose, whereof this is the pythe, that physicians shall be
taken in this cure, not as ministers of medicines or healers, but as kepers. And
these to be, as I have often said / chosen, wise, and well learned, and most
expert, and such as had lever be wise by them self, than err with the
common sort: And such as if they could heal a ^ycke man with eating beans,
would not seek for any costly, and especially strange medicines.

Whether concerning this cure there ought any regard to be takyn of thage of
the sex / or the quality of bodies. Capitulo.xij.
When they, which I told you went into Spain / to know the use of Guaiacu^,
enquered, whether children, and great aged persons moughte be helped with this
remedy. For seeing they were weak, it was in dout, where they could abide this
diete: answer was made by them that had be^ in that ylonde, that they never
saw children by this remedy delivered from syckenes: But the men of that
ylonde showed them, that children were wont so to be cured, and women likewise
without any difference, and old men also very often. Whereupon I remembered the
notable saying of Hipocras / that old men may well away with fasting, but men
in strong and steadfast age scantly, young men much wors, and children worste
of all, specially they that are of a forward and quick mind. How be it
Galenus will not old men there to be understand men of the last cast.

Furdermore it is well known, that they that are of a sanguine qualite of
body, may abide hunger better and longer than the colerike. For in the sanguine
the humors that nourysshe the body / are more abundant and plenteous, the
hete is temperate and less burning: for it is myngsed with moisture to make
hit slacker, but in these other, all things are thynne and dry, and nedy of
humors. Now who doubts, but they that be fleumatike may best abide hunger,
saying they have more moisture than them needs: Which things marked and
parceyued, none that will take this matter in hand can lack counsel / in
what age or complexion so ever it be, but he shall know how to diminysshe the
meat, and how to enlarge it: and again how to bring in strayte fasting /
and how to lose it. Another that only, but also how much or how little of
Guaiacum ought to be spend. How be it in this thing I think little
regard to be taken, because this decoction to apperteyne to the Germayns, I
will open unto all men.

They of Spain think, this medycine ought to be like wise ministered in all
places for this disease, saying it has nothing, but that that al men may use
every where indifferently, and also has been proved among the people of.v.
diverse nations. First it came from Spagnola in to Spain, and than other
nations about them sought what profit would come there of. And when they
understood, that many had used hit prosperously, the Sicilians received it.
From thens it came into Italy: and shortly after we of Germany have learned
the power thereof by experience. And of late we herd say, that by the help of
this wodde, many be cured in France. Which thing saying it is so, and saying
we live under that air, which is not so much subject unto sickenessis, as
the cou^treie of Spain and Italy are, through the subtilnes of the air, and
therefore nedelesse to fear those yuels, which may other wise chance, as the
fevers, stytches, and such other: And again saying we have strong bodies,
that may well away with labors, hunger, and thirst. And also the minds of
the Germayns, for the most part, are meryly set: what should cause v^ to
think, but that our region and men be very apt unto this medicine? Which
thing Paulus Ricius, a physician of pure judgment and high erudition,
approves, and more over affirms / that he knows by plain experience, that
no nation is more apt unto this dyete. But if we had not seen some restored
unto health through the help of Guaiacum, and now should begin to prove hit:
we ought not believe, that god were so much set against us, that he would
either keep this helthfull medicine from us, or defraude us of the virtue
thereof, seeing it was brought from Spagnola into Spayn, and had the same virtue
there, which hit had at home: except a man will say, that Guaiacum
disdayneth to be carried unto us / his nature first not changed, or when it
comes to the Germaynes / that than it suffers that great and mighty power
and strength of his, to be taken from him, and no where else. And it is
plainly known, that with us his help is very present, and peradventure more
present than else where. And our men, as they be much given to surfetynge, so
can they, if need require, abide very long and strongly both hunger and
thirst. And more over as our bodies abunde with heat, so are they very
strong. For after the judgment of Aristotle, they that inhabit cold
countries, have much natural hete in them, and they that have much heat,
for the most part are of great strength. And because the Almayns use much
eating and drinkyng, Ricius the physician was demanded of late, what he
thought, whether it were best to remyt some what unto them in this cure of this
skle^der and thin dyete, and he said: No by sayncte mary, not thus much,
but rather handle them the strayter, let these great belyes used in eating
and drinking be driven to a much thynner dyete than these thynne and lean
Italians. And he showed me him self, that he had punysshed with hunger one
of these fat fellows.x. days longer than he ought to have done, because he
would have nothing remain that might let the operation of Guaiacum.

This thing and such other I do gladly rehearse by Ricius, and do make often
mention of Stromer, that such as shall read this book may understand, whom I
call good and right physicians, and how unworthy I think these comen tormenters
of me^ of the dignite of this title and name. And that strange countries may
know, that Germaynie has some good and excellent physicians. And that I
delight as much in the learning and amity of them, that be good and well
learned, as I hate these unlearned and fool hardy fellows, which after they be
for their money ones made doctors, straight profess / that they can reuyue
the deed, and restore life to them that are buried. But I will return unto
these.ij. which be of an other sort, of the which two Stromer, when I asked
him the last year a medicine to pourge me with, said / Do not vex thy
stomach with medicines in this age of thyn / in which nature is able of her
self to do all things much better. For as he is very scarce in pourynge in
of medicines / so brings he all sick people unto a very strayte rule of
diet. Wherefore when he had taken in hand to cure one in the city of August
after these ways, and he said, that he feared, lest he could not absteyne him
self from women: Seeing than (said he) thou haste decreed to dye, thou have no
need of my help, and so forsook him, and left him to his intemperancie.

Of this sort there are two physicians moo, of excellent name: whereof the one
is thy physician, most noble prince, named Gregory Coppus / which has
helped me no little thing in the writing hereof: the other contynueth in the
archebysshoppe of Colyns court, called James Ebelly, a man of so great
authority / that four year before / that he was made the commen physician, all
physicians were they never so counnynge, gave place unto him. The other was
had in great honor of all the chief learned men of Papia. where this study
floryssheth, as well for his knowledge in phisike as for other good learning:
which he had joined unto phisik. But this is no place to reken up the
excellent learned men / but my purpose is to write mine experience of Guaiacum.
And therefore in this place I repete this to conclude with, that I verylye
think, that this wodde will help al manner of men, where so ever they be
become, brought up, or continue.

what time is best to take hereunto. Capilo.xiiii.
IT semethe for sum causes that follow, that it is better to prove this cure
in summer than in winter. First because (as Galene says) the moisture in
summer increasethe and runs in all the body, and does goo and comme: and
therefore the pestilent humors may lightly be separated from the good, and
they may be expelled and banysshed: and these that be wholesome and good kept.
Secondely because all diseases in winter do fasten their rotes deper and take
surer hold / and in summer contrary wise, the humors be still mouynge, and
the body is apt unto all chaunges. But these considerations appertain
generally unto al diseses: But as concerning this our cure of Guaiacum, for as
much as a great part of hit stondethe in dyete and sufferaunce of great
honger, therefore it is most expedient to begin in summer. In that season a
man may better away with this dyete thanne in winter, when men are very
hungry. For if the body, being hot and boylynge of it self / as it is in
summer, should moreover be loded with meat / hit would lyghtely be dissolved
into diseases. But in the winter it woll not so^ / for so much, as Hipocrates
says / that in winter a man's body inwardly abounds with natural heat,
and outwardly lacks it, for so much as than in auoydeth and flees from the
sharpenes of the cold, wherewith the body outwardly is compassed / into the
inward parts, as unto a strong hold and castle: and there closes it self
up: but contrary wise in summer the same natural heat in man's body
follows, as Aristotle thynkethe, the nature of the air, and therefore puttethe
forth it self, and flees out to the extreme parts of the body. But so i^
is, that the very nature and propretie of this medicine is / to reduce into the
body, and bring home again such natural heat as is lost. And therefore this
it seems vnconueniente to go in hand with, or put in experience this cure
in the winter. For tha^ is it thought dangerous, when the hete of the outward
parts is drawn unto the inward parts, le^te the outward lymmes be forsaken
and left empty of their strength and power / specially in them that be cold
of nature, which otherwise in the winter lose their heat, and have their
bodies slain through the violence of cold, and be like unto deed folk.

But here may we not pass over that, which Coppus admonysshethe, saying,
Guaiacum moves a man to sweatte, casting out the evil humors, that be
noyfull to the body: Therefore says he, the summer is most apt for this cure
/ when the humors are more subtylle / and the skyn thynner. And in the winter
the ways and poores, by the which the sweat should have his course, and be
expelled: are stopped, and the humors gathered to gether, and clodded. But on
the other side for so much as in this cure done by Guaiacum, the sick are
grieved with nothing more, than with thirst it is thought, that the syck may
worse absteyne from drink in somer than in winter. wherefore in Spain, and
where the heat is vehement, they durst not hitherto prove this experyment in
the summer. Furthermore in winter (after the mind of Alexander Aphrodisius)
there ingendreth on man through much eating. (For than have men much better
appetite thanne in other seasons) an humor called pituita, that is fle^me,
which thing might be avoided, if this cure were than in hand: in which,
great abstinence must be observed and kept. These things we have spoken as
touching the times of feruente heat and fervent cold, and now we will speak
of the other two seasons that be betwyxte both, of the which two, Autumn
seems the worste of both. For than is there great abundance of all manner
syckenes, and the humors wax worse and worse, because this time of the year
is unequal and without order, always chaungynge and inconstant / bryngyng in
many kinds of diseses. For as Celsus affirms, Autumn kylleth many a one.

Furthermore the french pockes are very noyfull to the synowes, and the said
author teaches, that winter and Autumpne be not mete nor apt times unto
medicines / for the resolution of the synowes. But these are the reasons of
them that dispute generally and speak not only of the use of Guaiacu^.
Wherefore this I think, that summer (at the left ways in Asmayne) may be
best taken: but that is that part of summer / that begins when vere
ends, as in May, for than there is not here so much heat, but the sick
may well abide and suffer thyrste: And in winter the cold is very fervent,
and likewise in vere and Autumn the cold is sharper, than the sick may abide
in this cure. For it is one of the chief points for him that is restored by
Guaiacum, with all diligence to eschew cold. And as for such incommodities /
as may happen in the summer, to the intent they may the less be feared, I
have spoken of before, and shall repete them again, when place shall be. And
never the less at this time I do affirm, that this drink of Guaiacum does
meruaylously stere up the naturalle power and strength, and has power and
might to quycken and to make lusty the body / which for lack of natural
heat is weak and consumed: Which things if they were not as I have said,
and had not Hipocrates in a certain place / if I well remember me, said: that
Vere and Autu^ne are the most aptest times to let blod and minister medicines:
verily the counsel of Celsus should than have seemed best, which says: that
Vere is the holsomest time to go to phisike / and next unto that winter, and
that is very dangerous, and Autumn most dangerous of all.

That we must utterly forbear wine and wommen in this cure. Capit. xv.
ANd may I not boldly affirm, this medicine to be given us of god, saying
hit never helps, except a man be given to holiness of life? Verifye where as
we be brought into the favor of god by two virtues specially, that is by the
chastity of body, and abstinence of meat and drink, as the laws of christen
people bear record, let him be sure except he bind him self straytly in
these bonds, he shall not only come unto this medicine in vain, but shall go
forwards also in the same wi^h no little danger. In so much that it is plainly
know^n, that he shall dye without remedy, that uses any woman before the.xl.
day after the cu^e is begone, either because the body so emptied, is not able
to suffer the injury of that act, or else because god will not that any man
should use such his great be fy^e vnpurely. And therefore among all them that
proved this wodde in Almayne, it happened one fellow to dye, and that through
this fault, as they that were present affirmed by their oaths.

And next unto this the use of wine is known most pestilent, an must be
avoided in this cure. For it loses the joints of the body, and hurts the
synowes. And for as much as it has vehement power to enter into the lymmes,
and shake all the body / it is thought, that this decoction of Guaiacum shall
not profit in his body, that uses wine, but shall rather put him in ieoperdy
and fear of death, when these things Guaiacum and wine, which are most
contrary, mete and come to gether. Therefore some there be, that monyssheth to
absteyne from wine an hoole month after the time of this cure be paste, for so
much as this medicine keeps his course of workynge many days after it is
dronken. And therefore left any thing should stop or set it, they take away
the use of wine, and he that flees the voluptuous pleasure of the body must
take heed, that he give no place to glotonie. For the old proverb witnesses,
that hunger never begets adulterye. And again it is said / that Venus
waxes cold without bread and wine. Aelianus writes, that Zaleucus the lawyere
of Locrense, forbede sick men wine under pain of death with out the phistions
counsel. But be it the nature of Guaiacum might suffer this voluptuous act, and
did not abhor wine? yet does the physicians books with full mouth make
mention that they are very hurtful and grievous unto that body, which is take,
with this sickn^s, and principally for the joints. Wherefore Celsus reports,
that there were some that were vexed with ache in their limbs, which through
one years abstinence from wine and women have been safe all their life. And the
same Celsus concludes / that such as are borne chaste / or be gelded, or
children, or ever they fall to woman's company / and likewise women, except
them that have their flowers stopped, are seldom tempted with this disease. And
Alexander in his problemes says, that such as drink water only, are quycker
in all senses than other. For wine stops the ways of the mind / and
dulleth the senses. And Cicero says / that for so much as wine profits the
sick but selde, and hurts very often, it is much better not to give it,
than under the hope of doubtful health to run into open ieoperdie. And Venus,
in what so ever state a man be, coldeth the belly, and dries it, if Aristotle
be true. For in such couplyng / the natural heat departs, and through the
euaporation that than is made / drynes is caused and engendered.

Lo sobernes and chastity two holy ordynances of life, be the principal
observation in this thing, the highest precept / the chief point of health,
which diligently kept, no ieoperdye can rise. For be it they tarry the
medicine or utterly stop and let it, yet they put not a man in
ieoperdye of his life / when they be neglected.

That salt must be eschewed in this cure. Capitu. xvj.
Among all the things that must be avoided / sum men do marvel, why
salt is forbidden to be used for the space of this dyete, consyderyng there is
other times nothing more wholesome for man's body: and they say, that they can
not perceive, how any hurt should comme thereof in this disease. The which
comes all together of the corruption and putrefaction of the blood, saying
only salt most of all things preserves and defends from both these. And
more over the nature of salt is to make fast and dry up, to bind and
cleanse: which proprete were thought most metest and necessary to be
ministered, to pluck up this disease by the rotes. First because the body
infected with the pockes, is loosed and shaken: secondly because the humors
proceed and flow out from one matter: Thirdly, which is the chief point of
al, because the corrupt and infecte blood is yet within the body vnpourged.
For this syckenesse is no other thing / than a certain order and state of the
body changed through the trouble of the blood: Even as it happens in a city,
when a sedition and partakynge enters into a commen welthe, and the common
people be moved in their minds: than are all things skattered abroad without
order, and moved out of their places, nothing hangs to gether, nothing
stands, nothing abides, no quietness, no peace, but all full of trouble, unto
the which change of the body, motion of members, and shaking of joints,
with all such troubles, there must come some sad and wise father, a man of
high authority in the commonwealth: for his godlynes and good deservings
toward all men (who as Virgyll says) may govern and rule with words their
hearts / and quiet their stomakes. So in like manner is it in salt / which as
I said, through fastnyng, dryinge, bynding, and purgynge / does put to
quietness things, that are moved, does unite and knytte things that are
broken, does bind to gether things that are plucked aparte, does make caulme
and quiet things, that are troubled: and brings quietness and sauegarde unto
all things: yea how greatte a thing and how necessary thought Pliny
salt to be, saying without salt a man's life can not endure? And therefore say
they, how can that hurt in this syckenes / which in other diseases conserueth
all things? And for as much as in this cure we must take heed, that no
corrupt humors be abunda^t, and salt resolves and cleanses all filthy
moystnes / and also keeps down and restrayneth the flowynge of the body: it is
thought we should be more plentuous of salt herein than else where. Not
withstanding these reasons / we must have an other consideration herein. And
first of all as much as appertaynethe unto this disease, how the sick must
forbear salt meats, not all manner, but only such as are very sharp: Let
it be asked of the physicians, which have long before time prosecuted that
matter to the uttermost: for this time, seeing the medicine of Guaiacum is
specially entreated of, we may say, that though al physicians know the use of
salt, except it be very little, to be noyous and hurtful in all other
passions of the synewes, and in such diseases as spring of corrupt blood,
and of yelowe and black color, or salt fleume, for so much as with his
tartnes, it sharpeneth coler, and burns the bloudde, and with his na^iue
dryenes causes the humors and nutrime^t of the body to dry up, and by that
means distroyeth all things, that should help unto health. Yet never the
less about the administration of Guaiacum they forbede utterly all manner use
of salt, for the same consyderation they forbede all sharp things, and
moreover all things penetratiue: and among these, spices, and wine. For so
much as all such through their sharpenes and persynge power, do open all
poores and entreyes / and go deep: which violence runnyng through the body,
cum can have no place to work. If these resons do not satisfy those men's
minds / I will say unto them, as the philosophers say of the stone Magnes,
if it be anointed with garlycke, it draws not iron to hit, so likewise
Guaiacum has a certain secret virtue / and can not tell whither it be as yet
known, to abhor specially the use of salt, and which power is lost if
salt ones come unto it. And this have we spoken of the forbearynge of salt in
this cure. Now will we speak of the sklender fedynge and hunger, wherewith
the body must be weakened and made lean, whervppon all the matter of this
dyete hangs.

Of sklender fedynge, and hunger, necessary in this cure. Ca. xvij.
ALthough we spoke before of the small and thyn fedynge, that the sick must
use, and how his meat must be diminished, and he brought to hunger / yet we
think it very necessary to warn you ones again of the same thing, in this
place: not only because this medicine requires a void and an emptye body /
from all manner fulness / but also because I would declare / that in old time
the^e was a like manner to cure the like. And we may also read in Diodoro, that
the Egiptians did heal their sick other with fasting or else with vomit.
For they affirm, as he recyteth / that sycknesses are engendered specially of
the superfluite of meat: And therefore they thought that way of curing to make
most unto health / that takes away the first causes of the disease. Let not
therefore these dronkerdes, these intemperate fellows, given to surfetynge / be
grieved with this dyete, which as Persius says, delyteth only in delitious
fedynge, and may live scantely half a day without meat: whose bealy as the
prophet says, is their god, and all their mind and life is nothing but
fedynge. Let such fellows, as I said, cease their grudging against this
dyete / seeing that thereby so excellent and so good a thing is obtained, and so
great an evil is avoided with so little labor. And let them not than in this
thing speak of the great ieoperdye, which may comme of weakness, through
long abstinence: as who says, that he may faint, that eats after this
manner. For Pliny says, that none dies for lack of meat before the.vii.
day: and may continue until the.xi. day. And al be it he writes, that in his
time there was a woman in Germani, which lived sometime full twentye days
without meat: and sometime.xxx. And that he saw a man, which continued.vij.
weakes without meat, drynkyng every second day only water. Pliny also
says, that he knows for a surety / that the Scythians having certain
herbs in their mouths, abide hunger and thyrst sometime.xij. days. And some
also say, that the christen philosopher Amonius / never eat but only tosted
bread / which thing if any man greatly marvel at, let him remember / that
this is also written in the stories, that certain of the mages lived ones by
meal and herbs only. And that Diodore writes, that the old Egiptians meat
was herbs and rotes. And Hesiodus monyssheth / saying, we should live and eat
Malus and asphodelo. And Plato writynge of the laws makes mention, that
Epimenides was contented sometime so to live. If any man will set these things
before his eyes, and consider the^, tha^ shall he perceive, yt we live very
deinteously in this diete and do take in a manner more than needs. But if it
were a very hard thing to absteyne so from meat, what is he that loves him
self so little, but he would to get his health, suffer this grief? or that
had not lever suffer.xxx. days hunger, than to be s^cke as long as he
lives? or had not lever pass over so many days with stronger hunger / that
he may live the resydue of his life holle and sound of body / than to avoid
this little grief, and to be tourmented all the days of his life with
intolerable sorrows, and to have runnynge from him stynkynge and filthy
matter? I have told you: that this is no new manner of curing: for always the
best physicians have commanded abstinence to the sick. Of the which nombre
is Asclepiades, who, as Celsus says, writes, that the most soueraygne
remedy against the fever is, as he has proved it, to diminysshe the strength
of the pacient with much watch and abstinence, in so much that at the first
beginning of the syckenes, they should not so much as wasshe their mouth.

Abstinence, says Eusebius, both keeps the bodyly health / and the
shamefastnes of mind. Whereby it appears, that lyttel and perate fedynge is
profitable to the flesh and the soul, as witnesses Timotheus, which being
on a season with Plato at supper, having before him such meat as he was
wont to have / turned toward his friends and said: They that Plato receives
to souper, shall be well at ease long after, meaning that after much eating
of diverse and abundant costly dysshes, deynteously dressed, there followed
evil and raw digestion, and greatte grefe of the stomach. Wherefore afterward
when it chanced him to mete with Plato, he said unto him: Ye Plato do ete
this day rather for to morrow than for the time present.

And in Lucian Gallus the cock Pithagory iugeth it a great benefyt of god given
to Micyllus, because he could always with hunger avoid all fevers. And for that
cause was without such disease. Now what shall we say to that, which as
saint Hierome writes, that certain diseased with the joint ache and the
gowte, after their goods were gone, and were fro them, and were brought to
poor fare and simple meat, they did recover their health? For they (says
saint Hierome) took no thought nor care for their household, and the habu^dance
of meat and drink / which do break both the body and the soul. And anon
after he says: There is nothing that dullethe a man's mind so much as a
full bealy: rysynge and tournynge hyder and thither, blowynge out wind with
baskynge fysting and fartynge.

This story may be a learning unto many men, which is read of a certain
great belyed and fat abbot. As he was carried unto certain bathes, hit
fortuned him to mete with a gentylman, who asked him, whyther he was going?
the abbotte made him answer and said, that he must go unto the bathes. Why
(quod the gentylman) are ye sick? Nay (quod the abbotte) I am not sick, but
I have no manner appetite unto my meat. I go ther^ore now unto the bathes to
get again mine appetite / which I did of late lose: for they are holsomme
therefore. Verily (que the gentylman) In this thing I can be a better physician
unto you. And took the abbot with him, and put him in to a deep and dark
dongeon, where he fed him certain days hungerly: and than at last he asked
him / whither he had an appetite to his mete? Ye ma^y (quod the abbot.) I faith
(quod the gentylma^) than is it reason that thou give me a reward for my
medicine, and made him pay.ii. ho^dred crowns / and sent him away in good
health, with such an appetite, that he could have eaten both beans and lekes:
where as before he refused all manner meat / were it never so deyntie: And so
was he well ordered / seeing he sought not mete with hunger, but hunger with
meat. But paraduenture we have spoken more than enough of this thing:
therefore let us go unto other matters: But first I must tell you (to make
an end of this chapter) that Guaiacum requires not a bealy that is
replenysshed with variety of meats, or troubled with wind in the inward
parts / but purified and cleansed from all rawnes and grosnes of humors.

How hunger may easily be suffered. Capit. xviij.
ANd this scarsenes of mete can not only be borne, but also may easily be
borne, and that through the virtue of Guaiacum: which after the body is ones
brought down, does both preserve the life and also causes that the sick
shall not need to eat any thing at all. Therefore did I not without a cause
give warning, that the syck should absteyne from meat as much as may be. And
if he wax feeble or faint, he may not be helped with meat, but with the sweet
sa^ours, which I speak of, as much as is possible / put to his mouth, and
specially with hot breadde. But if any feel him self to be wasted and redye
to slide away through weakness. Which thing how it should chance in any
manne, I can not tell: for in me there happened no such thing at all, that I
neded any manner help: Than I would counsel him to use these things, which
Pliny thinks eases hunger, and quenches thyrste, when they be very fy^tell
tasted of, that is butter and lykeresse, reclisse lykoresse. Orels in this
thing we must follow Celsus, which says thus: This one thing must always
be ob^er^ed, that the physician be often times caused to sytte by the patient,
to consider what ^^rengthe he is of, and to cause him as long as he has any
strength to wrestle and fight with hunger. And if he begin to doubt of his
weakness, to help him with meat. Except any had lever follow that, which
Gellius says, that Erastrate did write / that the Scythians / when they for
sum cause must needs suffer hunger, do thruste together their belly and bind
it round about very straightly with broad ^wadlyng bonds, thynkyng that by such
pressynge to gether of their bealy, hunger may be put away / or the easelyer
borne. For seeing, as he says, hunger comes of emptynes, and is caused of the
voydnes and holownesse of the intrayles / and of the bealy, than when the bealy
is gyrde in hard, so that the emptynes is filled / and the holownes joined,
there can be no hunger where as these things be not, and utterly forbearynge
of meat / may lightly be born. But why say I, utterly forbearynge of meat /
which can not be in this cure? I may well call it honger / what so ever it be,
that any abides. For it may be suffered well and easily / though a man take
nothing in the world to help it. But unto these deynteous sick persons
what thing can be light? which can not only suffer no hunger, but also not
to have a stomach unto meat, they think it intolerable. For the which if at
any time they be sick, we might pray god, that they never recover /
considering they esteem hit a greatte grefe to bye health with a little
sufferynge.

Of these manner persons if I speak some what largely, I do it after mine
accustomed manner, specially when I perceive many of my country men the
Almaynes, to err in this behalf.

The praise of temperaunce in spite of ryotte. Capit. xix.
But I beseech almighty god / that this nation may ones know it self. Which
thing I do not desire so much, because it is uncomely, that the people that
rulethe all the world, should so live, as for that, that such intemperancie
and ryotte is an occasyon to us of great euyls, and also to be greatly
despised. If other people should eat and drink as much as they could, they
think they should pass the law of nature: but when we cromme in so much /
that we can not bear it, we look after laud and praise. What meneth these
stryues and contentions of our valyant drynkers? When he that drynketh is
received with triumph, when it is glory to overcome in drinking, and no
shame to be drunk and cast it up again. O countray, o empire. As for the
Polonia^s, or if there be any other that passethe us in dronkennes, I regard
them not, but this nation I say ought to remember them self, and have regard
to their dignity: except it seem, that other nations are comen under this
em^ire, not for the reverence and opinion, which they had of our noble
forefaders, but to despise and mock us. Verily it must needs be, that they
were far other men / that had such honor given unto them than we be, that are
thus despised. Is there so much as a child in Italy, that knows us by any
other name, than by the name of dronkerdes? Saying that thanne other strange
nations do speak sooner of our vice than of our humanity or virtue: shall ^e
not change our lyuinge? Shall we not fere to lose this honor to our great
rebuke and shame? Or shall we not think / that it is more shame to us to lose
the title and profit of the empire, that has been a glory to receive, when it
was offered unto us? Or that sober men and reasonable will be content to be
under the rule and dominion of a dronken and barbarous nation, being without
all good humanite. But if hit can not happen into the brains of our men to
understand their own shame, yet at the le^t let them know their own
destruction. And if we set so little by the loss of our glory, and the
rebuke and shame of our voluptuous mind, that we will not leave for that our
unthrifty living: l^tte us at the least wise have so much wit as to care
for our bodily health, which must needs be troubled and brought to naught in
such festynges, surfetynges, and drinkynges: about the which, as the satirike
poet says, leapethe and skyppeth in greatte companies of al kinds of
diseses. But Germany has lost his wit and understanding, and has
forgotten it self, not all Germany, but many in Germany. These be they that
draw their dyners unto soupper, and their suppers in to far night. These be
they, which through their mysorder, have caused a strange poet, but yet not
an ylle poet / for he seems to hate ill men, to write to the greatte sclaunder
of this countreye / saying: Bacchus sytteth at the deyse, And Appollo is cast
out of all company. For all the life there is nothing else but drinkyng, that
is, they set more by drinking than by wisdom. How be it these dronkerdes /
that err through madness and lyghtnes, might lightly be despised: but these
that with their deynteous fare, and nyce and wanton apparel cast them self
heedlonge into the mydmayne see of voluptuousness and pleasures. These I say,
be worthy to be hated of all the world. These be they, that lie upon their
pyllowes of down heped to gether, that consume what so ever may be gotten by
land or see, not to susteyn their life, but to delyght their sweet ^outhes,
that must wear the fyneste lynnen, that must be robed in purple, that
rejoice, to be wrapped in soft myes skynnes, not so much to keep them from
cold, as for delicacie and wantonness. These be they, that may not touch
commen clothe, whose skyn can not suffer but the fynest and softest thing that
may be gotten: that take their counsel in quaffynge and in their counsels
quaffe, that meddle with no sad matters, but led all their life in
feastynges.

These things are not used (I say ageyn) through all Germany / but specially,
which thing is to our great shame and rebuke, among the chief and the nobles
of Germany: which pamperde up daily with all manner deyntie fare, exercisynge
dyners and suppers meat for popes, in them they bankette, in them they bring
one to an other, and therein have such pleasure / that they had lever dye, than
to be plucked from hit. They have none other care, but to fylle the bealy: by
whom Salust if he had suspected such bestes ever to com in Germany, might well
have spoken this his saying: Many men given to fedynge and slepynge, have
passed even as strangers their holle life, without knowledge and learning. But
let a man cast with him self what opinion the Romans had in these days of
the people of Germany: and thanne set before his eyes, what a monster, and
how ha^eful this cherysshynge of our throtes, that we now use, had been than?
In the which when we have spente a great part of our life, and have received
thens those things that must needs follow that kind of life, that is
innumerable kinds of diseases: than do not we co^fess^ nor knowledge our fant,
but do accuse god of cruelty. And though hit be we our self, that get and
bye with great cost and expenses the seeds of all our syckenes / and norysshe
with all our heart our own mischief and destruction / cherysshynge our euyls
with the lost of our holle patrimony: yet when we be ones down / and set
up with quosshens and pyllowes heped round about us, not able to move hand
nor foot: than we blame nature, and say, we may thank god of all our euyls
and peynes. For no glottons do otherwise, than they did, which Iuuenall
speaks of, which believe, that god in his fume and wrath does cast these
diseases upon their bodies: and therefore call them the gonne stoones and
weapons of god. But would to god we would return to our oten porage, and be
covered as we were in time paste, with wolle^ garments, so made that every
lymme and part of us might be seen, and to wax weary of this sylke, and hate
these garments so full of playtes. For what other things are all these, but
first the wasting of our patrimony, and than the purchasyng and incresse of
all euylles and diseases? Verily our ancetours / being very nyggardes in this
things, did great acts and excellent things with high glory. But when
did we, that to fulfill our pleasant affection receive venom in the stead of
meat / any thing worthy the honor and glory of Germany? It was far
better for us to be called and counted barbarous, when our living was homely
and rude, than now to have in this ryottous life, and this shame / the laud
and praise of wits and good learning.

What would great Charles say now, if he came again to us, and saw our princis
in their utter garments of sylke: saying that he him self wore a shert of
habergyn? Or what would one of the Othons say, which stretched out and
enlarged their virtue and valyantnes in duste and durte^ when our men anoynte
them self with strange and costly bawmes?

There is a notable execration of Chrysyppus against them, that use oyntmentes
voluptuously to the pleasure of other. The devil take these delycate fellows,
says he, that have sclaundered so good a thing: the people that were wanton
and given to pleasure used it in times paste. But it was never thought / that
the Germayns should ever come to this point, to smell of oyntmentes and bawmes.
And now we call for poma^ders, muskeballes, dam^ske pouders, and all manner
sauers / as things necessary to our life: and think it great honor to us to
smelle of such strange savors. Another is hit women only that are in this
faut, but men, specially princis and priests.

Solon forbade oyntmentes to be sold in a cite of Greece: And the Lacedemones
expelled them from their city, saying: that they corrupted and marred their
oil.

And Lycurgus took away from the same Lacedemones bankettynge, feastynge, and
costely dyners. And Socrates (as Xenophon says) did grenously rebuke such
ryottous abundance.

Truly the old Germayns minded no such voluptuous plesures, and they thought
it a very strange thing / to live any thing wantonly or nycely. I have hard
some old men say / that when they were young men, it was a suspecte thing to
wear a gown: when we now a days do honor and worship purpull. And
therefore we may well cry, O corrupted and wretched world. They were covered
with the skynnes of wild beasts, and lay in their feldes under the sky /
and were made stronger with contynnall labor, where we that be wantonly and
nycely clothed, and take our pleasure under our gaye gylted houses, be through
all kinds of ryotte and voluptuous pastymes utterly weaked, and of all manly
stre^gthes deprived. And may any man thynk, that this manner of living can
lightly have an end, seeing the chief and principal example thereof comes fro
them specially, that be called prestes? What they be in deed god knows, and
they only / to whom it has pleased god to give trewer eyes to se with. These
do not use al manner pompes and excesses in things appertainyng unto the
service of god, but every one of them must swymme at home in his house in all
manner of costly and deynteous dyshes and cups, and they call eating and
drinking living: or if they do not so call it, yet verily they so esteem it.
And therefore seeing they do so, other men think they may do the same.

And this the laudable and naturalle custom and fascion of Germany is
banisshed. For we be so far gone, that we excede all other nations, be they
never so evil, in such abundaunce and voluptuous pleasures. It had more
becommed us to have driven these things out from the mids of us, and as
Diogenes did to the Tartis and fine manchettis / so to have said to this
strange ryottous manner: O gueste go and get the hens quickly. Ye the
examples of strange nations ought ones to have taught us. And saying to
bankette and surfeit most largely is now adaye counted most kyngly, why do we
not here the answer of Menedemus the philosopher, which he made to Antigonus,
askyng him whither he should go to a deynteous and costely f^ste or not? Have in
mind (said he) that thou art a kings son. And Antisthenes, to a certain
person praysynge delicious fare, said: I would our ennemies fared delycately.
The words also of saint Paul ought to be written in our hearts, saying:
Meats are given to the bealy, and the bealy to meats: but god shall make an
end of both. The same Paul when he condemned the works of the flesh,
among whi^he he nombred excess of drinking and eating, he addethe to these
words: Of the which things I now warn you, like as I have before times
warned you, that they, which commytte such things / shall not be the
inheritours of the kyngedome of god. But they now do the same things, which
ought to be our gides into the kingdom of god / priests, chanons, bysshoppes,
and prelates, in so much, that it is now come into a proverb through out all
Germany: Let him be made a man of the church / that loves to live
pleasantly, as though such a life were meteste for them.

The frugalitie of my grandefather Laure^ce Hutten / which is worthy to be
written, ought to move us unto much glory, who all though he were rich / and
much oc^upied in greatte matters of our princis, both in war and peace: yet
would he never admytte into his house pepper, saffron, gynger, nor such other
strange spyces, nor used garments but only of our own woll, al though there
were sometime precious vestures given unto him for the well doing of ^is
busynes. And he did not only this him self, but also among his equalles he
rebuked greatly the fascions and manners of men, saying: We seek ever strange
things / as though we had not growing with us, wherewith our meat may be made
delica^e. If we will please and delight our taste, or as though the great price
of our garments did increase the qualities of the mind. But I will cease to
speak more of this man, leest I should seem to covet mine own glory. If I had
first told you this one thing me thinks it is not so goodly a thing to be
borne of this my stock and familye, in the which be sum causes besides
this, whereof I may glory, as to be borne his neuewe, that thus has lived.
Our predecessors, and such as I my self have seen old men, when I was but a
child / when they did keep, in their mete, drink / and clothyng such
temperance, they were of good liking of body, and through great labor were
hardened against hunger and thirst, heat and cold, where as we at the first
frost, sheuer and shrink together both hand and foot: and as soon as winter
begins we be treble furred, and be shut up in our hot houses, out of the
which we go not until mydsommer / when the son and heat bourneth and
parcheth all things. And as I say, where as now scantly the.x. person of the
noble men can be found in Germania, but he has either the gowte in his fete,
or in his hands, or is grieved with the dropsye, sciatica, or lepry, or is
tourmented with this french evil, which brings these greattest euyls with
him.

But at the last let us return and enter into that life, which is metest for
this nation and empire of Germany, and which even they, whom I told you
lived wantonly, can be well contented to here praised. For I think there is
not one of these, that give them self to such delycate and ryottous life, but
he hates the same in other, except he be so blinded through inte^perancie,
that he loves these vnthryftie manered Sardanapales, and Heliogabalos, or
does hate the persimonia of many, which be of the contrary facion. Truly
virtue seems very amiable even to them that does little follow or regard
hit.

It was an old meat of Catos, poradge made with chese and eggs. And Pliny
rehersethe, that gruelle made with otemelle grootes was ones the meat of the
very and true Germaynes, as it is yet of many unto this day. But we feed
upon strange and beyond see victuals, thinking that we have so much need
of them, that every house holder has decreed to selle these things, that
grow with us, to bye the other with: which one thing has enryched the
Fuchers: which in the mean season, that we thus nouryshe our bodies, have all
the money, and like wise all the excellent goodly places in Almayne. For they
being the ministers of our voluptuous living, are so increased, that there is
no prince in Almayne able to compare with them in riches. So far be we gone,
and so little perceive we, what things Germany deuoureth and consumes.
Wherefore I think that he was of excellent wisdom (if any such was) that
feared in times passed, lest such voluptuous and delycate life should enter
into Germany: whereof (as every man may plainly see) spryngeth so much
pestylence, and so many diseases: and ageyn perceived, that they should live
quietly / that could be contented to lack such pleasures and delyciousnes.
For they that dress our herbs, and live with them (as there be some true
Germaynes yet remaining) they are of good health and bodily liking: but they
that be spyce fyngered, and belche synamom, and smelle all of cloves, and have
all their pleasure in goodly array, these be they, that are subjects to all
kinds of diseases and euyls. How properly therefore did the Satirike Poet
call the gowte Rich? For it medleth not with them that are poor, and drink
no wine, but hit is a companion for rich men, dronkerdes, surfetours and
delycate lyuers: which (as the same poet says) to get sweet morsels, leave
no place vnserched.

And so, though this countreye bring forth that that is necessary for the
life, yet as though nature had utterly forsaken them, they ron unto strange
things, fetchyng their garments, their meatis and medicines from Hercules
pyllers, from the ilonde of Taprobana, from the river of Ganges, and from
places farther of than these, even almooste from the heed of Nilus.

The wrath of god light on these deed men's heedes, ye first received these
euyls in to Germany. For they have done a thing unworthy for the grauite of
the Germains Truly they, our forefathers, were none such: the which
preferred the labors and peins of Hercules above the flesshely lusts, above
the delycate meatis and soft beds of Sardanapalus. But O lord Christ, how
delycate, how holsomme fedynge is breadde made of rye or whete, and gruelle
made of millio, oriza, ptisana, and otemele porage? Add thereunto so many
kinds of herbs, and so many diverse garden spyces, as anyse, coryandre,
cynomum, fenell, musterde, neppe, oynions, lekes, garlyke, and specially if we
will believe Pliny, persley has a singular good grace, to season meats with.
And for drink we have ale and biere. And for the rich men there is wine,
which is the pure and clean drink of the earth, as Appollonius judges: so
that it be used scarsly, whether it grew in France, or upon the banks of
Rhenus. We have also of our own beestes flesh both tame and wild, which
are not of unpleasant taste. We have fruits of trees, not to be despised, how
rich is Germany, how plenteous of all meats, how abundantly does hit
ministre all things necessary for the life of man? Wherefore my chief desire
and vow is, that they never lack the gowte, nor the french pockes: that can
not live without pepper: And I pray god / they may ones be brought to extreme
hunger, which now search in all places, not for meat to live with: but for
delycates and deintees, wherewith they may stere up their sweet mouths and
provoke their appetites. How justly did Galenus envy health to such fellows,
wha^ he forbode al phisitio^s from the curing of dronkerdes, and of them that
are given to the bealy? If such at any time were sick, for they by and by
(says he) through intemperate living hepe up again gros^e and undigested
humors, so that they be cleansed and purged in vain.

The necessite of nature is lightly contented, says Hierom. Cold may be
expelled with course clothing, and hunger with little meat.

When Anaxerses the king of Perse was brought to that necessite, that he eat
dry fygges and barley bread, than he beholdynge his fortune, and such a
greatte change, said: O what pleasure is this / that my regal abundaunce
kept me from? By the which example we may know, that they only live in
knowledge of their own life that live scarsely and soberly: And on the other
side, they that be given to the norysshynge of their bodies, and the pouryng in
of all things, be as men erryng in darkness, and perceive not their own life,
so far are they from the life of pleasure. How be it within short space,
when they be ones fallen into diseases, than they begin to feel and perceive,
what life they have chosen, and what is the reward of the same. For as Persius
says, when the hard and stony gout, the branches of their old surfetynge,
has broken their joints: than they mourn, that they have passed their days
so grossly, and consumed their life so fylthely, and be so sorye to late of
their life to comme.

Do we than doubt, what is the cause of all the syckenes, that the Germayne
have? seeing we may yet remember, that this pestilence and mischief of the
body did enter with that rank and riottous life. For here we do now so give
our selfs to whores and pleasures, that we seem to strive with other strange
people for the maystry of filthy living, as men do in games for the best
wager. And for this purpose we have certain ministers very expert. These
get and conueye unto us from the fardest parts of the world prouocations of
glotony. These bring in from far, with meruaylous delyght / both to eat, to
drynk / and also to clothe our selfs with. Wherein seeing they have long and
many days continued, to their own (as I said) great advantage: they have
made some so delicious, that wha^ they be here in Almayne, they must drink
wine of Corse, they must have meats out from Italy: and contrary wise, when
they be at Rome, they use wine of Rhene, or that which Neccarius brings
forth. O peruersed custom of living. O myschieffe / worthy to be hated of
all men: even so much the more that they be bysshoppes / which do these
things, and are the ring leaders thereunto. Such manner of persons I believe do
desire of god / as Aristotle writethe of Philoxenus, to have the necks of
cranes.

Aristophanes reproves the tables of the Syracusanes, and the voluptuous
abounda^ce of the Sibarites. If at that time he blamed such things, what
would he say, if he now lived / and saw our bankettynge and feastynge, our
quaffynge and drinking? Therefore as many as coueyte virtue and knowledge,
let them take heed and harken to Pythagoras, which says: that a man, that
ryseth above man, can not taste or atteyne any high thing, that is to say, as
long as a man lives vnchastely and dissolutely, he shall never do any great
thing with wit or mind. The most holsomest fedynge for man (says Pliny)
is one manner meat, the heapynge of diverse tastes is pestiferous, and sawces
are worse than that.

Persius well perceived these things when he thus spoke in great mode: Thou
would have lyttie joints, and a hole body in age. Ye but the full dysshes,
and the fat denteous, will not suffer the gods nor Jupiter to grant
thereunto.

And Cicero brings in Cato saying: that a libidinous and intemperate youth,
makes age very feeble. And he aduyseth and counsayleth us to eat and drink so
much as may sustain the bodyly strength, and not oppress it, thynkyng that
nothing can be so vnfrendely unto the mind of man, which he callethe an
heavenly reward and gift, as voluptuousnes is. Nor as long as lust and
pleasure bears rule, Temperance can have no place: Neither virtue may bear
any stroke, where lust and pleasure reigns. And therefore he judges, that we
ought to give great thanks unto age, which causes that we list not to do
that thing, which we ought not. For voluptuousnes, says he, being an
enemy unto reason, stops and lets all good counsel, and blyndeth the
eyes of the mind, and medleth nothing at all with virtue. And therefore he
thinks, that old men are happy, which when they lack feasts, full
dysshes, and the cups often walking, they lack also dronkennes, rawnes of
stomach, and be not combred nor vexed with dreams, which manner of things,
accompany them that are given to such wantonness. For Hierom says, that
diseses come of to much eating.

There is a pretty ieste, of a certain physician of this country, which had
a syke man in cure, that had rounnynge legs, and that not withstanding was
given to bank ettynge and drinking myghtily, and yet complained that his
medicines prevailed not, And that his soores ran faster, than they did at
the beginning: Truly said the physician, they would cease rounnynge out, if
thou would cesse powrynge in.

Galenus affirms, that the great chuffes, whose life and occupation is
fedynge, may neither live long nor be helthfull, and their minds be so
wrapped with over much blood and fatnes, even as it were with myer, that they
have no manner heavenly meditation, but do always think upon eating,
drinkyng, fartynge, and shytynge.

The old Romans called that fedyng^ necessary, that was slender and
sparynge.

And among the greeks litell meat was much commended by the writing of many.

The Effees, which were a certain sort of philosophers among the old Jews,
are landed of Josephus, because they had turned their daily abstinence into a
custom, and an another nature. The same Joseph preyseth the contine^cie of the
Phariseis. He that would ones have had us distroyed, I think has desired /
that this custom of living might enter among us. And therefore saying Marcus
Cato (as hit is written in Pliny) did take great care and fear, leeste the
Greeks should invade Italy, with their wanton and voluptuous living: which
of our forefathers has provided / that none of these spycis and sylkes should
be sold in Germania? farewell pepper, farewell saffron, farewell sylke. Or if
there be any use thereof among other nations, I pray god that this nation never
know it, or se it. And Christ send our country men this mind, that they
may call home again the frugalite of their elders, and facion them selfs to
their honest sparynge.

With what stout stomach does Anacharsis bost the order of his living? Unto
me (says he) hunger is a sweet morsel / the ground is my bed / a cloak of
Scithia (that is a beasts skin) is my garmente. Sober Demosthenes drove
dronken Aeschines out of the city. Socrates hatyng the tavern haunters, and
such as have al their delight and pleasure in their throtes, said: Many men live
to the intent to eat and drink, but I eat and drink to live. O, very wise
man / and worthy so to be taken by Apollos commendation.

And this saying of a greek poet is to good to be forgotten: Thou thy self
must rule the brydell of thy belly.

What say you? Whatte manner fellow think you Epicurus was? Whom all the
world persecuteth, as a fellow of pleasure / which put the highest felicity
in pleasure? Truly what so ever it be, that he made so much of, he meant in
the only use of bread and water, and did much commend slender living, and
such as may quickly be gotten. And writing unto a certain friend of his, he
says: Send me a lyttel chese of Cithridi, that I may, when I woll, fare
somewhat more deynteously.

Anaxagoras said: He that eats sauourly, needs but lyttel meat. Porphirius
wylleth the mind to be cleansed and purged with abstinence. And Philostrate
wrytethe / that Porus, the king of Ynde, was exceeding strong and mighty, not
withstonding he never fed but upon bread and water. Masinissa lived. lxxxx.
year without any manner deilcate fedynge. And Mithridates, king of Ponte, which
kept wars with the Romans.xl. years, used to eat his meat standing: so
far he was from our facion, that he would not sytte down on a soft
quoysshon.

Titus Li^ius writing of Anniball says: He measured his mete and drink after
the need of nature, and not after pleasure. He had not the times of watchinge
and sleping destincted by the day and the night, but when his besynes might
spare him, than took he his rest, and yet not such as is caused with a soft
bed and silence.

And among the lands of Augustus Caesar, this is the chief / that he was
content with little meat and drink. But we had lever order our life after
the facion and manners of glottons and pleasant fellows, living contrary unto
nature, to the destruction both of body and soul / tha^ to the preservation
of them both to set before us these examples of life, so noble and so
helthefull. And I pray you / the Turks and other / that are not of this our
religion / will they ever desire to become christen men, when they se us thus
to live? But I trust that our nation will ones at last beware and wax wise
again, being taught with our own harm.

Now again unto our purpose. And for so much as I have spoken of abstinence
and sklender fare, I will show whatte I think of him, that orderethe him
self after this dyete, whether he may be restored, which some men do think,
even without the drinking of Guaiacum.

Whether a man may be restored by this dyete only, Capi. xx.
OF them that be good ought to be none evil opinion, neither suspicion: but
trewely these comen phisitio^s be sore grieved, that this medicyne can do so
much / and that it alone can do it, even without their meddling. They fume very
sore / that so many in every place be sodeinly helped, of whom they trusted to
have had a perpetual stipende and continual lucre. Wherefore they strive very
styffely, fearing lest in time to comme it shall take away the trust that
men have in them. They have spoken of late certain trifelynge and vain
words, which if they spoke as they thought, must be ascribed to their
ignorance: but if they spoke it of envy, unto their mischeuous mind. They
say, that a syke man may be recovered only by this dyete and order of life,
which is prescribed in this cure of Guaiacu^, though he never drink of this
decoction of Guaiacum, another receive any other medicine. And I my self have
seen them, that have promised, that they would sethe the shauynges of Juniper,
and of oak, or asshe, or pine tree, or al these together, and they douted not,
but that they would with these help men of such diseases, as well as with this
decoction of Guaiacum. Where unto (all though I suspecte their malicious
intent) yet I pray god send them as good fortune as they would wysshe. For
what could be a greater commodite unto this nation, than to have such a remedy
growyng in our own woddes / which must else be fet from so far? But I greatly
fear, lest they go in vain about this their rash promise, both because I
think this to be a greuouser disease than may be put away with hunger, without
any other medicine ministered, specially after it has fastened his roots
depely, as for the most part it is wont to do. And also if these trees, which
I spoke of, could do any such thing, their virtue and power I think should
not so long have gone unknown, saying they grow here among us. Never the
less I am content, they make a proof. For what other thing has a physician
to do, but daily to find out somewhat / and to know by experience, and to
search what will help every grief and sickness? But this thing I would all
should be admonished to believe / whereof I spoke before / that the help of
frugalite and scarsenes, as hit is great in other diseases, so is it, and that
specially, in the french pockes: but yet not so great that it may amend the
blood that is infected and corrupted through the venom of this disease,
without such medecines, as have their power and strength to do it. As by
example. If two kept war together, and the one of them obtained of me / that
I should not help his adversary: verily I may impute unto him, that I hurt
him not / but that I have help him, I may in no wise. And likewise the
absteynynge from meat and drink, as it does not take away the disease, so
does it not norysshe. As one might say, that he another bound a person when
he might, another losed him when he might not.

I have showed you / that many have been restored to their health from the gowte
and joint ache / when they brought them self to a more slender and a sobrer
diet, and absteined from wine and women: but I never thought so of the french
pockes / and the maladies that follow thereof. For that enters so deep that it
can not lightly be plucked up, and spredeth so broad / that it can not with a
little thing be brought to gyther, but it so infecteth the hole body, on
which it ones catches hold, that it can not be taken from any part alone / but
when it is driven out from the hole, as at one brayd or pluck. Believe me,
that have proved many things herein to my great hurt, if any man moughte have
avoided this evil with sobre and scarce living / I had avoided it long syns.
For by the space of.iii. hole years I kept my body as low and as lean as
could be / in so much that in that space I felt no grefe of my disease, but
yet I was not clean rydde from it. Never the less go to ye noble promysers /
sethe ye asshe / make ye ready Juniper and pyne tree, and take box to, if hit
please you, and horn beam, and plane tree, and ye shall get right great
thank of all men, if through your diligence we may have here at home, that we
must else seek so far of. Ye and ye shall do much more for us, than the
Fuchers should, though they made pepper or cynamum to grow in this country.
And so gladly as I would receive this thing at your hand, if ye would ever give
it forth: so before ye give it, I will not believe, that there is any such
thing in you, no I will not so much as hope for it, saying I have gaped so
often times in vain lokynge for those golden hills.

How a man must order his belly in this cure. Ca. xxi.
ALL the time of this cure the bealy a^oydeth very little and hard, and that
with much ado, and that is not only by cause he eats litel but also by
cause the nature of this medycine is to dry and bind. How be it I have hard
say, that this thing happens not to every man a like. For some say that anon
after the beginning they were lose belyed, and some were so continually:
Whereof I did marvel. For in these.xl. days it never went from me so much
as ones, but as it was compelled. For in this diete it may be kept to the.v.
or.vi. day. without any ieoperdie: And than in the morning the shauynge of this
Guaiacum soden in water must be dronken to the mayntenaunce of half an ounce.
And if it move not at the first, it must be given again the next day, and so
the third day, and if it help not, so ye must than pour in clysters
underneath or suppositoryes prepared for ye nones. For the belly must needs be
losed. And if a man will lose him self by drinking or eating Cassia, I think
he does not much amiss so that this be done but ones, and that morning
let him not drink Guaiacum: I would not that he should be eased with
vomitis: for they make the body cold: and (as Pliny says) they be evil for
the eyes, and speciallly for the tethe. There be many things in this cure,
that stop the bealy. First because the body is emptied in the beginning with
a pourgation, and than because there is little meat received. But as this
place is closed and shut from eiections, so is there somewhat in the mean
season, other by sweating, through the strength of Guaiacum that expels
things hurtful and superfluous, or else in the urine, the which is more
moist than that comes of the meat. And one thing is greatly comfortable,
that in the time of this cure there chances no swellynge / nor there are no
peynfull throws or aches felt / nor the taste comes not bitter, nor there
ryseth no lothynge of meat, nor vapors breathe not lightly ascendynge from
the stomach to the heed, as in other diseses. And that the pacie^t is pourged,
it is easily perceived by making of water: nor to the intent that should be
done / none other prouocacyon should be sought. Now will I speak a little
of sweating.

How in this cure one may be mo^ed to sweat. Capi. xxii.
IF the pacient can not sweat, sum think, that means should be sought to
provoke him thereto. And therefore they cast on him many elothes, and let him
lie three or four hours covered hot. And though this among all things that
we suffer, be one the hardeste: yet I felt even to the very feyntynge, that so
chances no fayllynge, all they that were cured with me, endured it most
grievously, and they said, that this was the hardest thing in all this cure.
But if I might laufully say my mind here in (all most I dare not show that
that I have learned) I would no man should be pro^oked to sweat, save that the
pacient shall as the thing requyrethe, keep his bed three or four hours,
and pass not, and let him be covered, but not with over many clothes, nor to
lie over stylle and stere not: but in any wise let him not be put to much
vexation.

And I think verily, that as well in this cure as in other, the physicians of
my country do many things fondly, which ought not to be done. For as this
medicine of hit self causes one to sweat, even so hit will not abide
compulsion. Whereof this may be a dew proof, that I perceived my self no
sooner to sweat, when I was covered with three or four furs, than when I
had to wrye me but one couerlede. But this I would ye should understand, that
the pacient must needs sweat, and if it will not come naturally, than it must
be provoked meanly. For I allow nothing that is forced. And I warn you, that
ye eschew those, that are wont to toste the bodies at the fire, or that would
have the stews over hot. For such hea^^^ ^^^roye the bodies, and dry up
the humors that nourysshe the strengthes. And where I said swette must be
provoked meanly, or easily, must be thus taken: that if one be wryed with the
clothes of one bed, so that the loode of the clothes grieve him not or erke him:
I suppose through the operation of Guaiacum, he shall sweat enough.

How this medicine shall help, and whether it heals men suddenly, or at
leisure. Ca. xxiii.
But now, I suppose, hit is high time to declare, how the effect of this
medycine may be perceived and understand, and when the pacientis begin to
mende, and whether this curing be sudden and swyft, or late and slow.
Wherein, as I use in all other, I will open to you those things, that I my
self have both seen and known: but this I warn you of before, that if it
have chanced otherwise to any manne, thanne I write, that he lay not the
blame in me.

I have learned, that Guaiacum helps by little and little, and not ^odaynly,
and gothe forward fair and easily, and not violently. For it is so far from
the truth, to think that it helps one suddenly, that ^ometymes, from the
first day to the.xv. the disease comes so sharp, and the pain and ache so
augmenteth, and the foores so enlarge, that a man would think him self in
worse case during those days, than ever he was before: either because than the
disease is rooted up and drawn from the inner partis, and the rootynge up is
peynfull, or else that the alteration / which than is caused in the disposition
of the body, breaking out with a great violence and shaking, puts a man to
grievous pain. For undoubtedly this medicine drawethe out this myscheuous
disease by the rootis: and that does it unto some forth with after they begin
to take it, and to some other it tarieth a longer time: but hit does so to no
man before the.vii. day: and to many (as it did to me) after the.xx. day: if
it tarry longer er hit work this effect, than the defaute is other while in
the pacientis, when they will use excess in fedynge. In me (as I said before)
the fa^te was in sithynge of Guaiacum / for by reason that the physicians in
preparynge thereof, made it smaller than they should have done, I was the longer
er it wrought on me. And I have hard physicians say, that according to the
co^plexio^ of the bodies it works sooner and slowlyer. And this is sure and
certain, which thing Stromer often affirmed unto me, that if they, the whose
wit is more subtyle, and are right attentively g^uen unto study / hap to
fall sick / their diseases shall be more vehement and longer continue. And
many think, that it skylleth greatly, as well in this disease / as other, in
what placis of the body the syckenes should chance, for the right part is
more healeable than the left: Because, says Alexander, by larger exercise the
matter is stopped, and made more apt to heal. Also they say, it is more
harder to heal the vttermoste partis, because they be far of from the body,
it is long er they can be nourysshed and fed. And there it is to be taken
head, whether the grefe does ascend or discende. Celsus says, that what so
ever grefe gothe downewarde, is the more curable. And again. All grefe, which
proceeds upward, is worse for the medicyne to come unto. And that such
diseases, that chance in our secret partis / as they are most peynefull and
sharp, by reason of inflammation (whereunto those partis are specially
subjects) so are they forthewith and soonest healed. Which as in all other
medicines they may be moved, so for the new use brought up of Guaiacum, I
wot not whether it be always so or no. But this let every man take heed of,
that where so ever the grefe be, and with what so ever kind of the pockes they
be peyned, that they prepare well Guaiacum / and after they have drunk so long
thereof that it be spredde and rounne into the veins: thanne ye may be sure
their ache little and little goth away: And otherwhyle the ache comes again
/ and is more sharp and peynefull: and goth away again. For after it ones
begins to swage, and than waxes soore and peynfull, it endures not long.
And they that have soores, shall have the flesh eaten away about the soores
of a greatte breadth: And that is a token, they begin to heal. For unto me
it cha^ced, as it never did before, that about the.xxv. day my legs wear
eaten so bare, that ye might have seen the bone the breadth of a man's nail,
which thing put me in great fear: but without any difficulty, within a
few days after the flesh grew and was restored again. And by this I
perceive well, that the nature of this medicine is to purify and cleanse the
soores underneath, and under the flesh to prove and show first the virtue
thereof. Hitherto have I seen few or none, whose soores were clean healed,
that were kept close till they held. And therefore I have hard many expert
therein say, that than Guaiacum makes an end of his operation, when the
pacient returns to his meat and in every thing takes again his old
custom of living. I told you before / that it was necessary for me to keep
in, till the.xl. day. All things well pondered / I perceive, that this
medicine requyrethe a long season to work perfectely. For the nature of this
medicine is not to break, or pluck away the blondde, but by little and
little to amend and purify hit (in which blondde being corrupt, rests
all the force and strength of this disease) and to expelle and divide from the
body the hurtefull humors, thht are norisshementes of this disease, from some
in their urine and sweatynges, and from other some in their sieges. And when of
this disease a man begins to wax whole, than the first operation of ^uaicu^
is to make a man to (...), and secondly by the passages of the urine it
purges: by which means it fetches out and voydeth marvelous foul
fylthynesses. And than the hands and feet wax meruaylous cold, in so much
that they seem to have no heat in them at all. Whereof physicians say this is
the cause, that than this medicine draws the heat from the utter parts to
the inner: the which inward partis after they be warmed and made hot, tha^
the hete spredeth it self into the vtward partis. For this, without any doubt
is proved, that their lymmes, that be healed with Guaiacum be most hot.
And.vi. or vij. wynters next following my legs and fete would be so cold,
that I could never get them warm enough, though I wrapped them in never so
many clothes: now they wax so warm, that with a very thynne hose or such
like garment / I put away the cold. These things thus understand and
known, we must comme to this point, that is, to know the operation of
Guaiacum / and against what sycknesses it helps.

What power Guaiacum is of, and what sycknesses it helps. Cap. xxiiii.
THe most principal and the chieffest effect of Guaiacum is to hele the
french pockes clean / pluckyng them up by the roots, but specially when a
man has been diseased with them of a long time. For I have seen them, that
many a day lay soore peyned with the pockes, sooner and better restored unto
their health, tha^ they, on whom the scabbes began newly to appear. Not that
on those, newely diseased any thing should be left unhealed, but that the
curing goth forward more hardly, and the disease stycketh faster and is more
grievously plucked out. For Guaiacum does resolve and destroy meruaylously
swellynges / getherynges to gether of ill matters, hardnesses / bumpis, and
knobbes. Fluxions or runnynges it utterly takes away / either consumynge or
tournyng the same an other way. It causes the soores to impostume, without
any manner of grefe. And if any thing lie hid within, it rooteth it out. And
so of some (as it did to me) it makes the bones bare, of some hit shows the
synowes, and breaks the veins, or eats most depely in, and it heals
these partis that be infected with this disease, and with such stynche and
fylthynesse / that the sauoure can not be abyden. And therefore the physicians
say, that the virtue of this medicine is to heat, to dry, and to amend the
fautis of the blood and of the liver: but it works all these things with
such a temperance, that indifferently, whether the cause be hot or cold it
eases the patientis. Wherefore with the drynes thereof it restreyneth the flyxe,
destroyenge the hurtful humors that flow out, or else plu^keth up by the
roots the cause of their beginning, and restorethe again the good
disposition of the body. It does extenuate fleme / and the poores or passages
of the urine, that chance many times by pervnctions to be shut, and also
other in this disease hit opens, ye and provoke and compels the urine to
make and have way. For the which skylle some think it helps them that have
the stone, and that it compels the stones to issue out of the bladder. I
have experience, that hit greatly minysshe black colere. And therefore it
makes a man more gladsome, and quenches anger. Undoubtedly hit has a
greatte virtue against Melancolye. And hit takes away runnynges and
droppynges, and it lyghtneth his heaviness, by heatynge (as it may be thought)
the brain. It is said, that hit amendeth soores, which were before ill
healed, how so ever they came, and cuttethe again the scarres. It amendeth
the leannes, which has long continued in the body. And therefore when this
cure is done, me^ wax very fat al their life after. They say it has a
meruaylous virtue against the stynkyng of the mouth, and does amend the grief
of the brethe, which also comes through the fa^te of an^yntynge. It helpethe
the inward parte^, and specially the stomach, the which hit holle renews,
and makes the brookynge as good as ever it was before. His effect is
excellent for the members that be fallen away and diminisshed, it increases
them and fylleth them up, it stretches forth the synowes, that are shronke,
and those that be loose it fastneth and makes strong. It is also proved, that
such partis as through this disease be made deed and without felyng, are
again quickened and brought to their old feeling and lustynesse^ I said
before / that as touching the bealy it varied. For some it did bind, and
some it made laxe till they were weary. And again some it did bind in the
beginning, and afterward it losed them, and made them lanke belyed. And that
the very shauynges broken as small as could be, to the mountenaunce of half
an ounce, was given in drynk to provoke a siege. I have also said, that the
measure thereof is not given after the proportion of his strength, that
receives it. For hit makes not one weaker when it is mynistred. And now this
one thing I affirm, that if it be.iiii. times sodden, yet is not all the
virtue gone out. Wherein I do not believe other men, but I my self have proved
it. How be it I deny not, but the first brothe is much stronger. Some there
are, that steadfastly believe, that it is very good for fistuls and cankers, and
for the parts that be eaten with cankers. Certain hit is, hit helps them
that fetch their wynd with pein, and can not breath, if that fault com through
this sickness, or through an oyntyng.

And for as much as I have showed before, what euyls come with this syckenes, it
^ere but labor in vain to repete them / which all it takes away,
distroyeth, and vanquyssheth, as I before told: and that (if they be old)
very lightly. And in like manner it helps the gowte. For I my self have seen
two restored to health, which were sore vexed in their feet: but yet the
physicians say, that it helps only those, that have gotten the gowte
through cold, which thing I leave to them to complain of. It is also an
helthefull remedy for the palsy, and especially when it is new and lately be
gonne. For than it quenches and drives it away: which thing I do write
upon the report of faithful and sad me^, that have knowledge thereof. For as
for me, I did never hitherto se any that was so delivered.

Ricius told of a leper, the which though he were not clean delivered by this
medicine, yet was he made much better and cleaner, and such a man as men
might suffer his company: so that Ricius judges, that this medicine is able
to hyde and stop leprosye, though it can not take it clean away. But if this
cure were used ones again or often, than he believed, that the great hurt of
that disease should be put of for a long time. And more over he had great
hope, that if this syckenes were thus prevented in the beginning, it might
utterly be purged and cleansed, and the syke restored. And for as much as this
medicine has virtue to dry up, some go about to minystre hit for the water
betwyxte the flesh and the skin, which is called the dropsye, the end
whereof we look for. It is well known to be profitable against the falling
evil, as the physicians say, if the disease be of a cold kind. I have seen
them that were inwardely diseased and grieved with many other syckenesses, that
were of an evil and corrupted stomach, and could but badly digeste, and when
they would recover them selfs from their long feebleness and sycklynes, and
repair again their strength and health, have prepared them selfs unto this
cure, the physicians not aduysynge them the contrary. And Ricius approves the
same in many. For so much as he knew (as he said) that a hoole man, or but
little acrased, might come unto this cure without any hurt: and he did
perfectly believe, that the good liking of the body was kept, preserved,
defended, and confirmed therewith. Let it now content you, to have hard
spoken these things of the helps of Guaiacum, of the which if any man will
ask me the causes, I will send him to the physicians that be expert. For as
for me, I profess no such thing. Neither yet did I begin this book / to
thentent that I would by and by give a reason of these things that I would
write, but this thing I promised what so ever I found of Guaiacum, and
perceived by experience, other in my self, or in other, and what so ever I had
either seen or hard of other, that would I faithfully and truly put in
writing, leaving an occasyon to many after me, to declare the thing as it is
worthy. And now that all men may know, what Guaiacum has done in me / I
will show in what parts of my body, and after what fascion I was diseased.

What diseases this remedy has taken from me. Cap. xxv.
BY this one chance hit is known, that we ought not to dispeire in any bodily
disease; though we be brought never so nere to deaths door. For how many were
we, after the physicians had given us up, that were restored to health through
the sodeine and (as a man would say) the heavenly help of Guaiacum?

I knew one / my very sure friend / which when he saw me so bytterly vexed
with this siknes, that for pein I could another rest by night, another eat by
day, aduysed me to kylle my self, saying there could no remedy be found, and
my body seemed to drop away in fylthy matter, to my great pain and sorrow /
and no hope at all of recouerye: saying to me, It becomes the to be
delivered from this evil, whether hit will or not. But he had forgotten,
that we were christians, and remembered to well, that we were friends and lovers.
For hit is our part to behold all things in them that wytnessed in times
past, whom we now call martyrs, unto the world, our savior Christ manfully
sufferynge for his sake great tourmentes and peynes: How be it if any thing
may cause a man to long for death, truly it is the tourment of this sycknes.
For I utterly deny, that ever the father of Licinius Cecine, suffered any such
sorrow or pain, when he flewe him self with the iuise of Papauers, Or that
ever any other, which did likewise, felt so intolerable euyls, as this
syckenes causes. For this pestilence besides all his vexatio^s and tourmentes,
(which pass far all other) only with his fowlenes and lothelynes is able
to make one weary of his life.

When Speusippus the philosopher was ones plucked and drawn with the palsy,
that he dispeyred to escape, and then met with Diogenes, and bad him well to
fare and good health: Diogenes (they say) answered, saying: And thou likewise
farewell in no means, saying thou art such one and can be content to live.

The same Diogenes, that was wont to be so styffe a philosofer, what trow ye
would he have said, if he had behold and seen me, wha^ I was likewise vexed, as
they yt had the palsy: and besides that was so loathe some both in (...) and
savor, that al were grieved with me, and some did hate me? And yet I did live
and had some hope / although I had been oftentimes deluded and mocked through the
great promysis of the phisitio^s. And left any man should think that my disease
was either light, or in one part only: I will show in what taking I was.
First I could do nothing with my left foot, for there had this evil
dwelled.viii. years and more, and in the mydlegge, where the shynne is covered
with flesh very thynne, there were soores inflamed through the inflammation of
the flesh, rottynge with greatte ache and bournynge, and as soon as one
waxed hoole, an other brake up. For there were many, here some and there sum
/ which could by no help of the phisitio^s be brought to gether in one. Over
them was a knobbe so hard, that a man would have thought it a bone, and in
that was exceeding pain and ache, beatynge and pryckynge without ceassyng.
There was also very nygh to the right ancle above, a certain swellynge and
gatherynge / which was also hard like a bone, and was the oldest of all /
where in remained the remenantes of this pestilence fresshe and new risen.

When the physician went about this with iron, with fire, with hot yrons, or
with any other instrument, they profited nothing: sometime it was swollen very
vehemently, with great pain and akynge, sometime it aswaged and was gentyller.
And it grieved me less when my foot was hold toward the fire / and yet would
it not suffer to be covered with much gear: it ran so that a man would have
thought hit would never have been stopped. And as often as I would rest or
stand upon my foot, my pain was intolerable: than upward the calfe and
the knee were meruayllous cold, and as things deed. The thygh was clean
worn away and consumed to extreme lennesse, and the skin was so thynne, that
there seemed nothing else left to cover the boon with. Moreover the joints
were so louse, that long time I had much adoo to stand hilone: and to be
short: the one of my buttockes was but a thing wethered away. In my left
shulder there was such pain that I could not lift up mine arm: the extreme
parts of my shulders were weke and woxen very styffe: in the mids of the
brawne of mine arm there was a swellynge as much as an egg, and as for the
rest of mine arm even to the very hand, was clean worn away. And on the
right side a little under the lowest rybbe, there had I a sore, which was not
in deed peynfull / but it boiled out certain foul and stynkynge matter / and
issued very fylthyly after the manner of a fistule with a narowe mouth
outward, and inward it was of a large holownes. And above him there was also
an other as though a bone had been bredde there upon a rybbe. And to conclude
I did plainly feel a streme and issue come down behind from the top of my
heed unto all these. And where it began the leeste touch in the world made my
heed to work as though the brayn pan had been broken^ another might my face be
turned backewarde, but as it was turned with the hole body. This one thing
yette wolle I not pass, where from if Guaiacum had delivered me, and done
nothing else, yet ought I to have lauded and preysed his virtue greatly, and
that is noone sleep, which I coueyted so deedly, and was so much given
thereunto, that almooste in.vi. years space there escaped not one day / when
the physicians cried out upon me, saying: that was the cause of all my
diseases, and yet I could not refrain my self from it. But now is that gone
so far from me, that I trow if I should enforce my self to sleep in the day
time, I could not. With all these, and so great euyls all though I was so
maystred, that all men dispeyred my health yet my good angel (I believe) wylled
me to tarry and look for somewhat. And lo through the help of Guaiacum I am
bold now to ^yne / and to draw brethe again. Which mind god give to all
good men, that they never cease to hope and trust. As for me I repent my
self in nothing: and if by any means long life might be granted unto me, I
have greatte hope that I should live hoole, sound, and lusty. And of this
disese, and of the remedy of Guaiacum / I have written these things that came
to my mind very faithfully, truly, and as my lernyng would suffer me: and
here would I make an end, if I thought it not necessary to admonysshe them,
that shall read these things, how after this cure, the sick must be
ordered, as touching the order and manner of their living, which thing I will
perform and that breuely.

As touching the order of living after this cure is paste what is to be
observed. Ca. xxvj.
I Gave warnyng before, that after this cure is paste, and the pacient is
departed owte of the cloister of this medicine, wherein he was close kept he
must use consequently in his living a certain diet and order by the space
of.iii. or at the left.ij. hole months. And now that we be come to the very
propre place to entreat of the same thing / I say that it is so necessary to
be done, that who so ever has recovered his health, except he afterward take
good head, diligently observing many things, and live for a space under a
certain rule, as though he were yet shut up: I say plainly that his health
shall not long endure. And therefore three months are appointed unto such as
were either greattely consumed and low brought in their syckenes, and had
many issues, and avoided much, or else were sore hurt in there synowes and
lymmes, or be so weakened, in their body, that a little time can not be
sufficient to gether up perfitely: their cro^mes again. And on the other side,
they that be strong and not so far gone, nor broken, unto such, ii.
months after their setting out ar enough as it is thought. But by cause I
would provide surely for them that will follow me, I will advise them to
observe and keep this prescripte very long, and to begin with, they shall
absteyne them selfs long time from the flesshely act: Because they that be
recovered through Guaiacum, have their bodies very tender and utterly weak as
yet, as though they had been lately new borne? And therefore if they should
have the company of woman, whereby the new gotten strength is weke and grene,
and not yet ryped: it would by and by dissolve and destroy the strength and
myghtis of all the members for ever. And for as much as the use of carnal
copulation brings into peril not one membre by him self but all the hole
body at one choppe: What other thing may we say, he pretends, that medleth
carnally with women (being so febled) tha^ wyllyngly to ^lee him self, or at
the left spedily to distroy his natural strength, and plainly cast his health
away?

And if some be forbodden the company of women, which be never the less of
good liking in body, and have no disease at all: How much ought they to
avoid and flee it, that thus have lost their health and might, and must labo^r
all that they can to repair the same again? And if before, xiiii. year of age
none is strong enough unto that act, because his strength is not full
furnyshed to put so ieoperdous a thing in experience: How than ought he to
beware and take heed / that is thus new borne again, and has so young and
tender a body, that he offer not him self to be rasshely plucked and toore^
before he have received his strength, and is well hardened therein.

andThe next point here unto is this, that though they shall have a gredye and
sharp appetite to meat, being emptied with continual hunger, yet they must
resyste the same, and as much as may be to behave them self very soberly and
scarsely in their fedynge. And therefore they must first use very little
meat, and afterward some what more, goinge forth by little and little, so
that there may be a good space er that they come to their old custom of
eating, exercysynge them self softely, beginning no new thing hastily or
suddenly, utterly absteinynge fro al wynes except it be first delayed with
much water, and be also of hit self small and of good savor and clear, and
yet so, very moderatly: Let him also, that is cured, be well fensed against the
violence of the air, and specially in those times that be grievous with cold
wind and rain, or else let him goo forth abroad very seldom. He may take
meat twyse aday, but at euentyde very little: and all that time he may never
follow his appetite, but must avoid fulness, as the greattest evil, that can
be. He must also above all things forbear fysshe, and feade upon young and
tender flesh, such as is of light digestion, and nouryssheth purely: which
they be ye may know by the physicians teachynges. And these things must have
place, in the said two or.iii. months, for other things which shall be
further observed, may be serned more plainly in the things following. For now
I will advise and monysshe with few words, not only them that are recovered
by Guaiacum, but other as well from what so ever disease they be delivered, if
they tender their good health and welfare, and desire to be long in
prosperity, whatte things they shall follow. And here hit is chiefly to be
noted (how be it all does now know it) that this one thing is it that makes
this sycknes to be very grievous, because there is great difficulty in
dyetynge. For when this disease is overcome, hit is not one only that must be
observed in the order of our living, but many things: and diverse must be
reckened upon. In so much as what so ever things there be, whether they be
with or against all the diseases, which I said before followed this syckenes,
he that is recovered, must set them before him: endeuorynge him self with
all diligence to obteyn them / that make with him, and to avoid them that be
against him. Wherefore he must be always very careful in his living, that
all thing may be done ordinately. Not withstondynge if this medicine have
saved any, there is for them great comfort, because they that are expert
thereof, plainly think, that after the pacientes have ones received their
health, and the time of observation, which follows this cure be past, nothing
that is not contrary to their old manner of living can put them in any
danger, so that they used not before to live without order utterly. For that
same order shall serve him, that is thus restored, as shall serve them, that
never had the sycknes. Wherefore they think it not so much to be regarded, what
a man eats, as how much he eats: And there fore no kind of meat to be
forborne, no choice of meat to be had, concerning the quality of fedynge,
nothing to be cared fore, but that which is known to apperteygne to the
commen conservation of health, and to the universal avoiding of all maladies
and diseases. Wherein that that Celsus teaches, perchance shall not be the
leeft, which is, that every man take heed, left while his body is in
prosperity, the aids and succor against aduersite be consumed and wasted.

Health is preserved (as the same Celsus says) by diet, by medicines, by
oyntynges, by frictions and rubbynges, by baynes, by exercise, by caryage
about, by clear and pleasant reading: which things how they ought to be
considered fully and holle, I leave you to ask of him. Here will I breuely
touch a few things, and such as apperteyne to dyete. This I think they
must feed pleasauntely and moderately / and take such meats and drynkes as
be of lyghtest digestion. For as Paul says, The chiefes^ point of education
is, that the meat be such as will lightly digeste and nourysshe well, not
slow in digestynge, nor clammye / nor plentuous in superfluities: and the
drink to be small wine / white, pure, and a little delayde with water. And
Celsus says: Se your meat be not fatty, clammy, nor wyndy. And by his
counsel ye must absteyne in all such diseases from all manner salt meats,
sharp, sour, and bitter. For the same reason I think, whereof I made mention
before. And Paul says, In eating, the greattest fawte is satietie and
fulness, For all though the bealy digeste well / yet the veins to much
replenysshed, labor soore / they swelle, they break / they be stopped and
filled with wind, and plain it is, that the worst diseases of all comme of
sacietie. He thinks this only to be avoided, that no man fylle him self.
And I judge the same but not only, for I would more over nothing to be dressed
deinteously, nothing to be sa^ced curiously, and that many dysshes of diverse
kinds be not set before us / another will (as these rich men use) six.
or.vii. or sometime.x. meases at one soupper to be brought in: For a man would
not believe, how much these things hurt, not only the stomach, but also the
holle digestion. And therefore I will repete again this thing which is spoken of
the same author: Variety of meats is greatly to be avoided, specially when
contrary operations and virtues be in them. For when they be so thruste in,
they resist digestion. And the same thinks Galene, and A^icene / and as many
as be of pure judgment in physic.

Cato (as Tully writes) commands so much meat and drink to be received,
as may refresshe the strength and power of the body, and not oppress it.
Wherefore by the counsel of Xenophon, we must make for the most part a small
dinner, that there may be a place for the supper.

Plainly this disease is of that sort, that Galenus thinks to come of fulness:
which thing is thus to be understand, not that I think all that lives in
surfetynge, straight way to be cast into the french pockes (al though such
shall not escape diseases, no not most grievous) but if any have been vexed
before with them, and than healed, eat and drink intemperately, he must needs
fall again into them. And therefore the meat that is received, let it another be
diverse nor much, that the stomach be not loded, and digestion let. And
again let it be (as I monysshed) easy in digestynge. Pliny says, All manner
sharp meats, all that is to much, and all that is hastily received be hard
in workynge / and harder in somer than in winter, and harder in age than in
youth.

It is written in Tully, he that medleth not with exquysite meats, looded
tables, and often cups, shall not be combred with dronkennes, rawnes of
stomach, or dreams. But for as much as wha^ this cure is done, we must
provide, how the body, that has hitherto been emptied and made lean, may
be brought ageyn unto his old state, therefore peradventure those meats must
be used / that increace and fylle the body, not with noyfull humors, but such
as Celsus rehersethe in the.iij. chapter of the first book.

Pliny also says, The bodies grow and increace with sweet and fat meats
and with drink: they diminisshe and go down with dry, lean, and cold
meats and thirst. But this must be wisely understand, for those things
which I have often before monysshed. But saying Galenus warns us in all
things to take heed to the bealy, For what so ever, says he, is corrupted, in
that it is a cause of rot unto all the body, and so of diseases: I think hit
best to take those drynkes and meats, as Celsus teaches, which do both
norysshe and make the bealy soft.

But if any, through the dyuess provocation fill him self, and lode his
stomach with mea^e, more than it is able to bear: if he list to seek help by
sleep, let him here Pliny, saying. To digest in sleep, it makes more for the
corpulentnes than the strength of the body. And therefore the physicians would
have the great fat wrastlers to make their digestion by walking. But if he had
lea^er ease him self by vomit, as many do counsel, and Paul specially
teaches, for through vomites many euyls oftentimes have been stopped and
withstonde: let him read his doctrine, showing how one may lightly vomit.
And if another of these be regarded, or to late proved, than peradventure he
must go to phisike, whereunto if the sick be compelled, I can give him none
other commandment, but even the same which I have oftentimes spoken, that he
commytte him self to a sober and learned phis^tion, or to a well expert,
rather than to one that is of high exquisite lernyng and to him that powers in
no medicines, but of very co^stranite ye and those medicines that be simple and
not compowned and myngled with many things, and as much as may be ministers
the things of our own country growyng, and not things far fette. And if
such a physician counsel you to take a laske, than see ye remember that
which Paul teaches: which is that ye do it not often, le^te through often
prouokyng, nature forgette the office of clensing of the body of her own
motion.

As concerning meats, which be wholesome, and which vnholsomme, and how
every kind of meats helps or hurts, except a man declare it to the
uttermost, it were better speak nothing thereof: And therfore^ I would have
the authors read, as Celsus, which entreats shortly of the kinds of
meats. And Paulus which handles at large in.xxiiij. chaptres the natures and
virtues of meats: or else Galenus which by him self is sufficient for all,
pretermyttynge nothing in the books of nourysshementes. And so would I now
have made an end of feadynge, if there had not chanced to come to my mind
certain things worthy to be noted. And first I will admonysshe you of eggs.
There is no meat (says Pliny) like eggs that noryssheth in syckenes, and
lies not heavy, and that is instead of wine and meat both. And Aui^ene
affirms, that the yolks of eggs of a hen, of a partrige, or of a
phesaunte do pass all meats for them that have their blood diminished or
their heart faynted. Alexander Aphrodisens thinks that it conteyneth in it
self the qualites of all the elements, and to conclude there is in an egg a
certain show of the world, both because it is made of the four elements,
and again because it is gathered round in sphere fascion, And has a lifely
power. Eggs fried many do forbydde: among the which are Paulus and
Galenus. And does not allow the food of herbe^. And many other do forbid the
same, although Marcus Cato praises brassica^ above the moon. He that eats
daily his fylle of ptisana, his nutrimente Galenus thinks can by none other
meats be hyndred. And the same thing would I say (says he) by beans: if
they filled not with wind. Of the use of milk both in meats and also in
medicines, Paul does entreat very goodly. Alexander says, milk is light
in digestynge, and nouryssheth well. For that may lightly go into bloudde, that
is made of bloudde, and in a manner hit is blood made white.

Of many things I have showed you a few, but yet he that desires to have
health, ought, says Paul, to know how great power wine has. And the same
says, if wine frete any man, he must drynk cold water. And the next day
drink the iuise of wormewode, and walk upon it: he must rub his body and
wasshe it, and than refresshe him self with little meat. Wynes that were
lately must, and also wynes that be to old must be avoided, says Galenus. For
these heat to much, and the other nothing at all. That fedynge faith Paul,
that keeps a man bare and sklender is much surer for the health, than that
which makes one fat. But for as much as little meat gives another strength
nor stedynes unto the body, therefore he after addethe saying, Such meats as
are of a mean nature, are the chief nourysshementes of all. For they engender
bloudde of a mean substance. And as such are most metest and convenient for
our bodies, so be they that bring forth ill humors most noyfull, and therefore
must they always be avoided. This says Paul. And he teaches more over /
that rye breadde nouryssheth more than all other, and that wheaten bread is of
hard digestion and wyndy, and that barley bread is of little strength. He
that will know the vttermooste of fedynge, let him read this Paul and
Galenus as I sayde^ we in this countreye never used annoyntynges, in Italy
they have used them, but now they be almooste left. And Galene co^mendethe
rubbynges of the body above all things, inculcatynge oftentimes and many
things thereof, and specially in his books of preserving health. And the same
does Asclepiades hyghly a^ance, and Hippocrates also very greatly, whose saying
this is which was after him repeted of many. Through rubbing, if it be
vehement, the body is made hard, if it be soft and easy, the body is made
soft, if it be much, it diminissheth, if it be mean, it fylleth.

In our days that high learned man Erasmus Roterodamus, using thus daily and
specially in the morning at his vprysynge, thinkith therbi that he preserves
his health, the weakness of his body (which is very great) not withstondynge.
And has warned me diligently, that above al other things I and all other
students should use the same. I follow the counsel of my friend, and find
ease therein. Sum forbydde wasshynges and all manner bathes, and they say,
that they be vnholsomme for all such as be recovered from this disease. I
think by cause they mollify the synowes, and lose them, and therefore they
will not that water should touch them: and yet they do not, saving for that,
improve sweattynges, water hurtethe the synowes though it be warm says
Alexander: not because it is warm, but because it is moist. Paul commendyng
warm wasshyng says thus: It takes away werynes, it shakes down fulness, it
heateth, it mitigateth, hit mollifieth, it disperseth, it provoke slepe^ and
makes all the body fat. And is very commodious and agreeable both to man and
woman young and old, so says Paul. Not withstondynge the Italianes now a
days wasshe not but very seldom, whereof I do not meruaylle, saying in times
paste they used it daily as writing testifies, and also the tokens of the
b^thes remainyng at Rome, which were buyld^d like unto cities.

In exercises Galene teaches, that mesure must be kept and observed,
saying, Immoderatenes I reprove every where. He likewise says: As exercise
before meat is ye chiefest thing to preserve health, so is al manner motion after
meat most noyful. For the meat is scatered out of the belly before it be
digested, and thereof gadreth many gross and raw humors in the veins, whereof
all manner diseses are wont to be engendered. Paul aduyseth us, so long to
exercise our self, until the body begin to swelle and wax reed, our
motions strong, equal, and easy, and the swette seem to be mixed with
vapor: than first to rest, when any of these begynnne to change. They
monysshe also to give rest and quietness unto that membre, which was lately
restored to health. And Hipocrates says: The remedy of the foot is rest.
Whereof Alexander gathers that that, which is heled again must needs have
rest. For motion (says he) causes flowynges of the superfluous matter,
which may reyse and styr up inflammation. The worst thing that can be to him
that has akynge knees, is to ride, says Celsus. He also thinks hit not
good for them that be gowtie. The old men exercised them self also in voice
that they moughte sing and also read more clearly.

I said I would entreat of these things, as occasyon gave, not much
regarding any order, but as every thing, worthy to be noted, should com to
mind. And therefore let no man look for any greatte thing here, if there be any
that would know, I have showed in what authors what things he shall find.
But loo here comes an other to mind, he that will preserve his health, must
take heed (says Galene) to.ij. things specially: one is, that the meat be
agreinge and mete for him: an other is, that there follow good brookynge, and
clensynge of those superfluities, that are left of the meat. It is recyted by
Paul, that the old men thought it was sufficient to defend and preserve
health: if the bourden of the belly and bladder were daily vnloded well and
without fault, according to the portion of the meat and drink received.
Galene as concerning the use of Venus, has left nothing untouched,
affirmynge that act to be an ennemy unto the health of all them that are dry
of complexion, and specially of them that are also cold. For Venus (says he)
is vnhurtefull only unto them that be hot and moist, and be abundant of
sede. And again he says: They that have their bodies well tempered and
without fault, ought not utterly to absteyn from Venus, as they that be cold
and dry ought. Also Paul says: dry copulations hurts all men, and most of
all if cold be joined to dries: so that they only / which be hot and
moist, may use it without ieoperdye. As labors are profitable unto health, so
are also copulations if they be used with mesure. This one thing ought all to
know, that al they that have had the french pockes ought with great care, for
love of their synowes to avoid carnal copulation. Paul judges it well done
to exercise children, that through the labor of body and mind, they may be
brydeled and restrained from the violence of bodily pleasure. Hipocrates
compares that act unto the falling sycknes. Alexander Magnus was wont to say,
that copulation and sleep were two the greattest tokens of mortalite.

The holsomes also of the air must be looked upon, which is a good post of
health. That air, says Paul, which is infected with evil vapors, puffynge
out pestilent blastes, or is nygh unto a synke or draught, or is mustie / or is
kept in a vallie, compassed round about with hills hurts al ages. And the
best air is most wholesome. For unto a temperat body a te^perate air is
profitable, says he, and a distempred is for him that has a contr^ry
temperature. Sickness is nothing else, says Galene, saving a motion without
nature. Tha^ he says: The physicians understood him to be hole, al whose
me^bres be according to the course of nature: and contrariwise tha^ to be syck,
if any part go out from his nature. It is forbidden by the doctrine a^ the
physicians, that no man drink straight upon chafyng. They say also, that al
sodayn changes are dangerous. This is also admitted for troth, that contynuall
idelnes is most contrary to good health. And contrary wise, Mean exercise is
great aid and socour. Galen says, deep rest of the body is the greattest evil
that can be for the preseruyng of the health, as moderate labor is the
greattest good. As perteynyng to sleep, when it ought to be taken and how
much Paul teaches abundantly, and also what commodities follow, when it is
well taken in time. With noone sleep there is none that holds. For such as
be of a sad nature, or be troubled with thought and care / the physicians
iugeth very good to call for some manner pastimes and mirthe, to find out by some
means, whereby the heart may be chered, and the sadness of mind eased.
Pensi^enes says Paul, must be driven away with the swetenes of soundes.

He that is in good health (says Celsus) and at his own liberty needs to
care another for medicines nor oyntmentes. Which thing as I do allow, and would
not them that be of good liking and health to be bound greatly to any manner
rule of living: so think I it needful for them, that have been sick, or have
syckely bodies, or do follow such kind of living, that they can not well
defend the bodyly health, to have a rule of living, to order them self by.
For Galene monyssheth, that a law and rule of living is in no wise
superfluous. For dyete, says he, is a very medicine.

These things that I have here written, most noble prince, I repute most
profitable to this purpose, both by mine own and others experience, and also
by the teaching of them that were hyghly learned. The which things I have
written unto your excellence, not because ye should your self make a proof of
them (from the need whereof I beseech our savior Christ to save and keep your
magnificence) but that they may be ready, if any of your court chance to have
need ^f them. And of such things as I have written, ye shall use the judgment
of Stromer, as I said before. For your other physician Gregory Coppus has
seen those things already, and did help me in some of them, but that was
incidently, wha^ from him I spedde me to Moguncia, for business that I had
there. But if it had so fortuned that I might have been in your court with him
(For than ye were away in Germany) I should have entreated more warely of all
these things, and set forth my book more perfectly. But how so ever it be
now, I pray your excellence to take hit well in worth. And I present hit
unto you for a gift and token of this new year, which I pray god may be
lucky and prosperous unto you, And as fortunate as your own heart woll desire,
without disdain or envy of any person. Thus I commend me unto you, most
noble, most worthy, most benign, and excellent prelate, whom almighty god
long keep in good health and prosperity. Amen. Written at Moguntia with mine own
hand.

Thus ends this book De mor bo gallico, compiled by Vlrich Hutten knight.

