1593.

DAVID'S SLING against great GOLIATH: Containing diverse notable Treatises, the
names whereof follow next after the Epistle to the Reader: by E. H.

Mat. 26, 41. Watch and pray.

Printed by R. Yardley and Peter Short.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

To the Right Worshipful Sir George Calueley knight, High Sheriff of the
County Palantine of Chester: increase of worship, etc.
THe earth being the common mother and milch nursse of al living creatures
(...) gently (...) yeldeth a (...) more plentiful crop of increase, (...)
possibly be measured, than, ever at the (...) of the husbandman in sowing
(...). A pithie persuasion to thankfulness, and such a notable motive to
dutifulnes, as a better, no not the like (...) devised or imagined.

The consideration whereof, (...) Worshipful, sinking into mine understanding,
and compared with the manyfold courtesies, which continu^ly have issued from
you, to my no^mal comfort and commodity has incensed and set me on fire,
though not as I would, yet as I could, to show some manifest sign and
argument, that I have your Worshippes goodness in fresh and daily memory:
which although I dare not vow to requite, yet will I do what I can in some
respect to deserve.

Vouchsafe therefore, Right Worshipful, in the mean time, since I have no
precious mines, to accept and like well of this my simple mite: simple I
confess in common valuation: but precious I dare a^o^ch, in sound judgment
and reason. A book it is which a kinsman of mine, not so near as dear unto
me, at my urgent request bestowed upon me in writing for my private use, and
peculiar exercise.

Whereof when I had marked the commodity, and saw that to communicate the same
unto the flock of the faithful, were much better, and more thanksworthie,
than to keep it at home in my cofer impounded as my proper possession, and
portion of my patrimonye: I was won and persuaded, at the importunate suit and
instance of sundry my trusty friends, who upon circumspect perusing of the
same, gave it due and deserved commendation, to consent and agree, Authore agree
serente, and prosus inuito, that it should be published for the common
benefit of the multitude.

Very loath I was, I speak my conscience, to offend my kinsman and friend in
any point of presumption: and much more loath, I utter my secret thought, to
grieve any godly and devout soul, by detaining any thing, the use whereof
might increase their comfort. But being assaulted, as I was, incessantly, with
ve hement persuasions and not able with all my five wits, to withstand their
weakest reason, I became willing to be ordered and ruled, as they by
discretion might dispose me in so honest a request.

The same not in writing, Right Worshipful, as I had it: but in printe, as you
have it, being the firstlings of a Cheshire wit, gathered in a famous seedeplot
of great learning and profound knowledge I present unto you with such
submission as beseems an inferior to his superior, a clyent to his patron,
a welwiller to his benefactor.

Beseeching you, of your accustomed courtesy, that as you have from time to
time been, not only an earnest sauourer and furtherer of godly and zealous
men, but also a supporter and mainteyner of virtuous and Christian meanings so
it would please you with your title of credit and countenance, as with a
shield, to defend this religious work, against the darts of the malicious:
that underpropped with so strong a pillar, and armed with such fu^^iture of
munition and defense, it may have safe conduct and free passage, even through
the midst of Gods enemies, and so come to the hands of the well disposed and
devout.

Thus abruptly concluding, I commit your Worship, and al yours, to the ^uition
and safeguard of him, who never fails his, the Lord God almighty, who as
hitherto he has, so hereafter he will, even until the day of your death, I
doubt not bless you with the dew of heaven, I mean his grace: whereunto I say
Amen.

Your Worships for sundry causes most dutifully bound, WILLIAM BAKER

The Epistle to the Reader.
Our adversary the devil is so watchful a lion to devour man, that (as Peter
speaks) he roreth and runs about seeking by all means possible to deuou^e
him. Thus his gre^^^nesse to swallowe us ought to be a sufficient motive to
make man wary, and a forceable mean to raise him out of the dangerous bed of
sin: wherein we daily, yea, and almost (...) commit spiritual fornication
with the (...).

^^sides this, at baptism our sureties in our ^^halfe, did make their
protestation before God the father, and mother Jerusalem, that we should leave
the wh^^r^sh embracings of Satan, and marry our selves in holiness of l^fe unto
Christ no less carefully than be in the virtue of (...) covenant mercifully
did offer himself (...) all his preti^us ^ewels at baptism.

The marriage was solemnlie celebrated by God the father, in the womb of the
virgi^^ Marie: but at baptism, we in our own per sons do as it were ratify
it: protesting that Christ shall be our husband, and that from that time we will
take our farewell of the dyuell, the world, the flesh and al our enmes.

Thus being married before such witnesses, we cannot reclaim our league of
chastity, unless we will have God himself, and our mother the Church, and
Christ himself with all his holy espouse, to bear witness of condemnation
against us, to the joy of Satan our capital adversary.

And therefore where the deuel is called a Dragon with seven heads for his
subtilty^: and ten horns, for his cruelty: and now is dust and ashes by
nature prone to evil, and therefore unable to withstand him: it behooves him
to take that for his weapon which may keep (...) safe from the invasion of
Satan: and use that remedy, whereby he (...) preserve himself from perjury,
and that (...) prayer.

Wherefore, when man is environed with enemies, when a guilty conscience
warreth against him, when the world by falsehood, and the flesh by her
allurements is about to deceive him then is stands him upon to take prayer in
hand, that he may be able to conquer al those monstrous Hydras or rather
deceitful whors, which (...) and furnish themselves some way or other, to make
Christ our Savior a ^^dowe.

And truly of that man would deeply consider with himself, either that he
is a peri^red person that gives place to the Dyuell: or that he does to his
power make Christ a weeping widdowe, as curssed Jerusalem did: or that Satan by
trapping him in his whoorish tricks did utterly undo him: it would not
only inuit him, but even enforce him to prayer, which is the only means
that is able to keep us true and faithful wives to Christ Jesus.

And therefore the Lord our gracious Savior weighing with himself not so much
man's naughtiness, for the which be deserves a diuorcement: as Satan's
woonderous pollic^e, and his mothers womb wherein he married us, and baptism,
wherein he does apparel us with his righteousness, as glorious brides, least
that we should play the harlots to cur own harm, whom he had bought with his
precious blood, he wills and as it were beseeches us, to take prayer, and so
to take assistance, that we may live chaste from al sin, even his for ever.

Come unto me, says he, al ye that are heavy and laden, and I will refresh you.
Behold, not withstanding our diverse and sundry fornications committed with
Satan: yet the Lord our gracious husband calls us unto him, as not willing
to divorce us: and inuiteth us to prayer, that knowing and acknowledging our
own weakness, to withstand the whoorish intiseme^^s of the Devil, we may
desire him our h^d to help and assist us.

And truly, as for prayer, we ought so much the more readily to use it,
because by it we pearse the heavens, because by it we come into the Grooms
chamber, and fly as with wings into the lap of our loving husband Jesus. And
what honest wife would not fl^e to her husband, when an harlot seeks to abuse
her?

Since therefore Satan even from the womb by harlotish trippings seeks to
withdraw us from so loving an husband as Christ Jesus, who shead his own
precious heart blood to redeem us: then, whenever he attempteth to trap us,
it shall be our best safety to leap into his wounds and to run into his
bosom by seruent and faith full prayer, that being married to him in the
virtue of the covenant, we may continue chaste to the end.

Otherwise, if being tempted we suffer him to ouertempt us: we show our selves
not only despisers of his blood, but also prophaners of so holy a marriage,
which was kept by the blessed and glorious Trinity in the womb of the virgin
Marie.

And with what face shall we present our selves before so loving an husband as
Jesus Christ at the day of judgment, if that we yield here to the i(...)sing
Devil, and do not by continual and hearty prayer ask assistance that ^e may
continue as chaste wives, to live with him in joy for ever.

Wherefore, where Christ our husband cries Come: if we will be counted his
wives, and no whores, let us without lingering, always repair unto him in
faithful prayer, and let us talk with him in his glorious chamber, and
beseech him, as he is a loving husband, that he will take pity upon us, and
bestow upon us the gift of spiritual chastity, that so we may be defended
from the whorish Pharao, who goes about by all means to make him a desolate
widow.

But if man be stricken down with the law, and the temptation of his
unworthiness withdraw him from presenting his prayers unto the Majesty of God:
then must he consider the curssed Can^anite, who being a cur dog, by the
testimony of Christ, yet making her appeal un to him, found some crunis of
comfort at his hands, and so was exalted to the childrens table: look upon
this example, and let this suffice. The use of the book I commit to thy
discretion, to apply the same unto thy soul, for the succor of the same in
necessity, and to thy body, as occasion is ministered

Farewell in Christ. E. H.

THE NAMES AND NVMber of the Treatises comprised in this book: and where they
are to be found by the page.
1 David's Sling against Great Goliath. page 1 2 A Sword against the fear of
death. 173 3 A battle between the Devil and the conscience. 113 4 The dead
man's School. 225 5 A lodge for Lazarus. 243 6 A retrait from sin. 285 7 A
prayer unto Almighty God, that the use of this book may be for our profit,
made by A. F. page 329.
DAVID'S SLING against great Goliath.
The 1. Morning prayer.
O Most Gracious GOD, the Father of all happiness, and fountain of al goodness O
welspringe of mercy that art wont beyond merit to displaie the banners of thy
favor, and unlock the closet of thy benefits, not only to the needy Adamite,
but generally to all: I am a curssed Canaanite, even a dog un worthy to sit
at the table of thy children, or to wait for the crumbs and of skum of their
meat O Lord. But notwithstanding all this, my Lord and my God, I hope thou will,
not whip me out of thy house, but of a dog make me thy d^ild by adoption in thy
son Christ, who came into this thornie world like a morning star, to guide
al straieng dogs to their masters palace. The woman of Canaan, she confessed
her self a dog. Paul was a Saul, such a cur dog as sought by his teethe to
tear the lambs of thy pasture, o Lord: both these dogs did wander in the
night of error, and straie from thee their master, to Satan thine enemy, and
their adversary. But thy son, mine only joy, of mere mercy became a star
to conduct them again unto thee: and so I trust thou will deal with me, O
God of com fort, and father of mercy. I do not doubt but that as I wander in
the field of vanity, so thou will recall me by the light of thy Gospel, by
the beams of thy sun to thine house, there to dwell with thee for ever, Amen.

The 2. Morning prayer.
WHat is this world, O Lord? it is evil, it is a palace of vain pleasure, a
cage ofiniquitie, or rather a lump of myserie. And what am I Lord? what am I
but a friend of this present evil world, and an enemy to thee? what am I
but a child of wrath and son of darkness, so glued to sin, and lymed with
iniquity, that my body is a body of sin? What then shall I do? shall the
mountain of sin oppres me? or the world with the baits of vanity so choke
me, that I shall never like an egle fly to the carcass? nor be able to cry
for help to thee the only morning star, which art wont to spread forth the
beams of comfort unto the needy in time of extremity? O Lord give me wings
of faith to fly unto thee, and power upon me the dew of thy blessing, that I
may bud and bear the fruit of holiness, through the operation of thy
gracious beams. Give me thy grace that I fail not in my vocation that I may
do good, and eschew evil, and so make good that vow, which I made unto thee
in baptism before beloved Si on. Save me from falling, and stay my feet from
slipping, by thy holy word, which is the glass of thy will, and a lantern to
all them that walk in dark nesse, that being guided over this mistie world,
I may ariue at the land of promise and palace of rest in a lively faith, Amen.

The 3. Morning praisr.
QWretch that I am who shall deliver me from this body of sin? oh what shall I
do? shall I say with Caine that mine iniquities are greater than can be
remitted? shall the mist of mine iniquities choke me? shall the surging waves
of mounting sin drown me? or shall I sink in the pit of desperation? noe: I
will not. For the sun of mercy can disperse the thick mist and great cloud
of mine iniquity: the parching beam of thy sun O Lord, is not only able to
calm, but also to dry up the angry flood of sin: and so to dash the ship
of Satan that devilish pirat against the sands. So that no storm of the Devil
shall ouerturne me, no raging blaste of sin shall dismaie me, no
thundercracke of biting conscience shall sink the little bark of my weak
faith, which is grounded upon a rock, and overcomes the world. Indeed if I
were left to my self, then were there noe way but sinkinge and shipwreck:
but thanks be to thee O gracious god for it, thou have not left me to my self
to wade in the Gulf of desperation: but thou have spread forth the beams of
thy mercy, and by the heat of thy charity dried the gulf, and kept me from
danger: to thee therefore be al glory, Amen.

The 4. Morning prayer.
THe glorious facc of the sun, which shows it self, and casts his beams
over the whole world, I take it for an argument and earnest penie of thy good
will toward thy children: in the number of whom I account my self, though
chief of sinners, and not worthy to lose the latchet of thy sons sh^^e. For
if we enjoy such a benefit in this strange country together with thine
enemies: then what joyous sightes, what store of thy goodness shall we reap in
our natural country, the blissful land of Canaan, where we shall not behold
this worldly sun and eye of the world, but thee, even thee, good Lord, face
to face, the sun of glory, and only star of majesty? Such joys, O
Lord, shall we have in the beholding of thee, as neither eye has seen, nor
ear has heard, nor heart ever conceived. Such ioys I say, as pass the reach,
not only of man, but also of Angels and archaungels to esteem of. Blessed
are the door keepers of this house of joy, where thou, O Lord, the sun of
righteousness do most clearly spread forth the beams of thy divine
majesty. Ah! how long shall I live in prison? how long shall I journey in this
body of sin, before I see thee? Lord, let thy kingdom come. Come Lord
Jesus, come I beseech thee; Amen.

The 1. Evening prayer.
O Lord, it is of mercy without merit that I am a branch of the vine Jesus:
that I am thy house, and temple of the holy Ghost. It is of justice that thou
haste appointed thine house to be a place of prayer: and of duty therefore
that we should pray unto thee. For thus O Lord I thank thee, that thou have
made me thy child to lodge thee, and I acknowledge that of duty I am bound
to serve thee. But give me O Lord, the grace of thy spirit to conduct me in
the way of thy will, cleanse or create a new heart within me, that I may be a fit
lodging for thee, and yield up the sauourie sacrifice unto thee, which thou
requirest of every Christian; I mean the sacrifice of prayer the sacrifice of
the heart, which sauoureth sweetly unto thee, And at this time in hope of the
assistance of thy spirit, (...) thee, that as thou (...)cie covered me this day
under thy wings of safety: so thou will defend and keep me this night from
storming Satan, who is wont, not only by day but also and that especially by
night, to undermine man, when his senses are fettered in bands of rest. But I
do hope good Lord, that as I am then most unable to withstand the buffets of
Satan, so thou will be most ready to succor me: partlye because thereby thou
shalt unlock the rich chest of thine infinite mercy, and partlye because
thou love every thing which thy hands have made. I will lay me down
therefore in hope of thy protection, to whom be al glory, Amen.

The 2. Eueuing prayer.
O Most mighty and wise God, power into me abundantly the oil of thy grace
vnfetter my stammering tongue, that I may utter, and vnrippe the strings of my
blind and want heart, that I may sufficrentlie conceive the infinitenes of thy
favor unto me. But what should I say of thine infinite goodness, which thou
haste showed upon me? where shall I begin, or where shall I end to
discourse of thy mercy? I was nothing, and what did move thee to make ^^e a man endued with reason and why not a tree, a frog, a beast? I am brought to
a nonplus, O Lord what shall I say? I did disgrace thy goodness, and do
deface by my daily sins the image of innocence, so that I was not only
borne wrapped in damnable estate, but also daily incur the danger of dam
nation: and yet do thou underprop me in the promised seed, in that blessed
seed of Abraham, even thine own and one only beloved son Jesus Christ, by
whom thou have redeemed me. My body and soul were maruelously eclipsed for
want of grace, and are daily filthied in the puddle of iniquity, the reward
whereof was death. But what moved thee I being a cast a way, even thine utter
enemy to wash and bathe me in the stream of thy sons precious blood? I
cannot tell good Lord, it was thy mercy: to thee therefore be the glory both
now and ever, Amen.

The 3. Evening prayer.
O Good GOD, the sun is gone down, the web of this day is spun almost, and
night is at hand. After day suc cedeth night, after light darkness, after fair
weather a(...)die firmament and frowning element. There is a mist(...) locked
in this, good God; for thereby thou do lesson us of our mortality. Our
birth and life is like the day: our Death is like the night: as the day
perishes, so does our life vannishe with the vapor: and as night succeeds
the day, so death follows life, the term and period of these our days. o
sweet Jesus of thy mercy beat this lesson into my head, and root it firmly
into my heart, and take away the veil from my mind, that I may not only
know and acknowledge, but hourelye remember that I am mortal. For it would be
a bridle to restrain and keep me from raunging licentiously, and a spur to
incite me to live holilie all the continuance of this my pilgrimage. Thy
spirit has spoken it: saying, Remember thine end, and thou shall never perish.
Give me therefore thy grace that I may remember faithfully the night of this
my body, when I shall sleep in the bosom of the earth, til ye trumpet shall
sound and call me to judgment. Help me Lord before this night. Lord save me
or else I perish Amen.

The 4. Evening prayer.
O Loving Lord of laboring and laden hearts, look down with the e^e of thy
pity, see the altar of the cross, where thy son, thine only (...) is
slaughtered. (...)there of heaven his (...) bored, his head crowned with
thorns, his thirst quenched with vinegar, his side wounded and streaming
blood; attend dear father, the cry of his bloody sweat, his long fasting,
his great patience, his body racked and crucified, all cry unto thee for
mercy, for mercy: father, O father favor and pardon him. This is the
trumpetor of joy, this is he that blows the blast of comfort and souls
solace: hear him hear O Lord: attend not my life, mark not my steps, for my
life is unsavory and my steps are crooked; let the cry of thy bleeding babe
move thee to mercy and put thee in mind of thy covenant, that in him all the
nations of the world should be blessed. Bless me, O Lord, better me with the
dew of thy blessings, and let the drops of thy sons blood by a liuelye faith
distill into my heart, and fructify it with works worthy repentance I
beseech thee, Amen.

A prayer for all times against the power of Satan.
THe Devil O Lord, like a roaring Lion, runs about in every corner, he
lurketh, and ever he gapeth to devour the lambs of thy pasture. He is an
enemy not only ready to devour us, but also able to catch us in the snare
of iniquity against thy divine majesty. For daily do we eat the sower grape
of nature, and savor of unseasoned and rotten Adam, in whose sinful act we are
wrapped by desert in condemnation, and become bond slaves of Satan, unless
thou, O Lord do season our hearts with the oil of thy grace, and wash us in the
water of thy mercy, that being cleansed from sin, and made as white as snow
with the merits of thy son, the devil may lose his title, and forget his
obligation that he had against us, and we be quitted from his tyranny. We
beseech thee therefore, o gracious father of Heaven, with thy power to bridle
satan, and in thy mercy to bear with us, with thy might to master him, and
in thy grace to graffe us in Jesus the lively vine of mercy, that growing in
him no storm may be able to toss and ouerturne us we beseech thee, Amen.

Another.
DAielie, O Lord, do we pass the limittes of thy will: we sin at the least
seven times a day and pledge mother Eve in the dregs of nature. This is the
frailetie of the flesh, and this is the weakness of al Adams issue: a
miserable case, o Lord, unless in thy mercy thou will wrap us and cover the
nakedness of nature with the white raiment of grace, that we being thine may
never despair for any brunt of storming Satan, be it never so perilous. LORD
save us, in thy mercy save us, have pity and compassion upon us, and mark
not our steps, which are crooked, but cast the eye of thy favor upon thy son
Christ, who was content to suffer the bleeding pains of the cross to satisfy
thy wrath, and to deliver us from the stinge of an hellie conscience. We
beseech thee therefore O loving Lord, not to observe our iniquities, but to
wash us from the guiltines of sin in the flood of thy mercies, and so to save
us, that being dead in iniquity, and yet saved of thine infinite pity, we
may give all glory unto thee, and sing with our mother the Church, that
salvation only belongs to thee, Amen.

A prayer for all afflicted Christians.
GReat are the troubles of the righteous, O Lord, and many they be that arise
against thee and thine an nointed, like wolves to tear them and butchering
Herod's to behead and dispatch them. Even for thy sake, O Lord, are thy children
brought to the slaughterhouse, for the testimony of thy truth are they tied
in bands, and beaten with wandes daielie. Up Lord, arise and strike thine
enemies upon the cheek bone, lift up thy rod of iron, and dashe the
unsavory and sower vessels of iniquity in pieces, with thy sanne scatter the
chafe, and gather thou thy corn into the garner of joy, Let it be beaten,
but let it not be broozed with the thresholde of this tyrannous Wolf, that
being freed from the chafe of Nature, and severed from the cocle of evil and
wicked livers, it may be found with the lost groat, and laid up in thy
treasure of eternal pleasure for ever. Do thy good will, O gracious God beat
them, beat them and buffet us sharply, O Lord, so thou save us of thy
mercy, and pluck us out of Danger by the hand of thy mighty power, proppe
us with thy power, that we may magnify thee of thy mercy, Amen.

Another.
THE mountains of this wicked world are many and mighty, O Lord, and little
is the flock of thy sheep. The mountains are even partched with fury
against thy congregation, to press with the weight of their tyranny the babes
of thy family. Awake up therefore O Lord, sleep not, slumber not, but awake
and defeat their ima gined mischief, as thou have promised, that they that
trust in thee shall be as mount Sion, which cannot be removed. Suffer them to
beat us, y^ we might live godly in thee: but so let them buffet us, that they
never ouermaster us, that according to thy promise, as mount Sion we may not
be moved. Give us grace to trust in thee whatsoever betide us, and never to
start from thee, whatsoever smart we suffer that continuing to the end we may
be blessed with thee for ever. And for the mountains of this world, either even
them with the valley and babes of thy family, or else pare and partch them with
the beams of thy judgment. Thy will be don O Lord, thy kingdom come, and
save us we beseech thee, Amen.

A prayer for the Queen.
O Loving God, we thank thee for the great care, which thouhast over thy
Church. She has been tossed with the waves of this world, and the preaching
of thy word did suffer shipwreck: but now O Lord, now of mere mercy thou have
repaired the broken heart of Jerusalem, and gladdened our hearts with the wine of
comfort. For thou haste appointed a mother over Sion, to cherish and defend her
from al her storming adversaries: so that by her means we are freed from the
slavery of the Romish Pharao, and salued from the sore of heresies, wherewith
thy dear espouse was most gree uouslie troubled. O Lord continue this
weede-hooke in her hand, that she may thoroughly cleanse thy garden. Let thy
will and gracious pleasure be her scepter and target, against the frowning band
of cloudie Saules. Always erect and pitch about her the tents of thy favor,
that no evil betide her, or danger annoy her. Clippe her in thy sweet arms,
and kiss her in mercy, and be not thou angry with her, but continue her a
favorable nursse to little David, that he may grow in all faith and
holiness, until he be a perfect manne in Christ Jesus. Lord save her in thy
mercy, and deliver her from al evil, Amen.

A prayer for all Magistrates.
CRooked is the way of al flesh, O father of heaven, and over ple^tious would
the harvest of weedie nature be, unless it were lopped and minished by the
weedhooke of thy maiestrates, whom thou have appointed as gods under thee to
keep thy garden clean from all noisome and stinking herbs. Cleanse them, O
Lord, and plant a new spirit within them, that above all things favoring thy
Gospel, they may bend al their endeavors to the d^erishing of thy holy Church,
and maintenance of the truth, without the which no man shall live and see thee.
Give them grace to labor diligently in thy vineyard, to mow down the
harvest of sin, and nei(...)er for fear or flattery to starte back from
their duty: but without all discouragement to use thy will as an axe, to cut
down the root that withers and bears nothing but a perished stock and
barrayn branches: that the ded boughs of iniquity being broken off, the
branches of thy son Jesus may without let or hinderance spread forth the
sweet leaves of thy sauourie grace, and bear in heart the fruits of
thanksgiving, which is pleasant and acceptable in thy sight, Amen.

A general confession of sins.
FAther ADAM, O Lord, gave the first onset, and none of us his children have
broken the arraie. The serpent counseled, Eve gave the apple to Adam, and so
both sinned against thy divine majesty. As for us the natural branches of
this rotten stock, one of the same stamp shall speak: We are borne in sin,
and conceived in iniquity, so that we be damned by merit, before we be borne.
But yet, o Lord we con^e^^e it, to our comfort and thy glory, that thou have
concluded all under sin, that thou might have mercy on all, and al glory
be given to thee. We confess our selves lost, we are lost grotes, and lost
sheep: but this is the sole joy of our hearts, that thy son came to seek
and to save that was lost. So that though we be lost in our selves, yet we are
found in thy son, who came into this world to s^ue sinners. This is thy
vnde^ (...)ued goodness O Lord, to love thine enemies, to save us that have even
from the womb rebelled against thy divine Majesty, even before we were borne
to save us, by the death of thine only begotten son, and to prepare a joyous
kingdom for us, before the beginning of ye world Therefore O Lord, what shall
we cry but shame, shame upon us, an axe to the root, and an axe to us all the
withered branches of rotten Adam by desert. For glory and power dominion and
Majesty, salvation and mercy is only thine, and of thee: of the which
mercy save us we beseeth thee, Amen.

Another.
WE are all publicans, O Lord: open the ears of thy favor unto our cry, and
have mercy upon us, have mercy upon us. We sin daily, but yet save us of
thy pity, save us, oh save us, and show thy compassion upon us. Let us not
die a Judas death, let us never tune the doleful song of Cain: but ingraue in
our heart, a full and lively faith in thee, that never doubting of thy bountious
mercy, we may with a free conscience set Satan at defiance and all his
hellyshe band. Pitiful Jesus hear this our cry, and fense us with thy grace
against the gaping devil, who roreth of cruelty and lurketh in every Corner
of malicious subtlety, to trap and to snare, to take and to tear us with the
Claws of his fury and merciless envy. Fence us with faith against him, O
Lord, lay the plaster of comfort to our wounded consciences, and cover us
with the wings of thy favor that we may live and die in thee and so be
blessed, Amen.

A prayer for humi(...)ie.
IT is thine own Leslon, O Savior Jesus: Be humble and meek, as I am: it is
thy word also: My sheep hear my voice. But Lord, what shall I do? the
flesh is proud, I daily rebel against thy holy will, I envy my superiors,
I love not mine equals, I despise mine inferiors. This is the fruit of the
flesh O Lord Death, death: but thou art love and life, O loving Jesus. And
therefore I beseech thee of thy tender love to pity me, to indue me with the
spirit of humblenes, that being poor in spirit, I may with the little ones of
thy kingdom be blessed and live for ever. O Lord, for the auoidance of pride,
give me thy grace to consider, that by it an Angel became a devil, and man
was excommunicate from the paradise of pleasure. Desire of souereigntie begat
the devil, sin, death and damnation: so that out of it, as a most filthy
puddle issued a whole sea of mischief and misery. Of this cup of pride father
Adam drank when by his disobedience he lost thy favor, and by the taste of
an apple thought to be thy comate in knowing of good and evil. Give me thy
grace not only to consider this, but also fully to digest it, that detesting
it as a venomous viper, I may in humblenes of heart serve thee holilie and
soundelie without hypocrisy, who art a pattern of lowlines, and a mirror of
humility, continually to be looked upon, and truly to be followed. O life,
and lover of souls, give me grace always to hear, and hearing thy words to
follow thee, Amen.

Another for charity.
O Infinite charity, thou son of God, to whom the father has surrendered all
power in heaven and earth: I have offended thee most grievously, and inda^gered
my self desperately. For, charity, O charity thou shall judge the world in
equity, and I have not charity biding within me. I love for gain, I hate mine
enemies, I pray not for the^ that curse and speak evil of me, I have enough
of thy benefits, and yet have I spared nothing for Lazarus, and therein I have
sinned against thee, o eternal charity, and incurred the peril of thy just
judgments. Is there no remedy O charity, but must judgment be given against
me? is al thy blood spent? are al thy tears dry? have thou none to wash me?
Correct me not, O charity, in thy judgment or fury, neither chastise me in
thine anger, but deal with me acor ding to thy wonted mercy. In charity, in
thy love vnmerited, O blessed Charity have mercy upon me, and quit me from a
repliyng conscience, and the court of the Devil. For else, o charity, will mine
own life reclaim against me and crave damnation for mine uncharitable
conversation. Piteous God therefore, I beseech thee, for thy bloody sweat, in
thy bottomless pity, drown my transgressions, adopt me thy brother, and give
me thy holy spirits testimony, as a gage and earnest of mine adoption, that
being freed from sin, I may serve thee with a free conscience in hope and an
vnwauering faith in thy mercies, Amen.

A prayer for the mortification of the flesh.
O Lord, the kingdom of the flesh is very strong: so strong that I am not
able to withstand it. For in me, that is in my flesh, dwells no good thing:
and so infectious is the palsy of the frail flesh, that unless thou O Lord
do season it, there is no way but to incur the peril of a mortal plague. I
beseech thee therefore O father of heaven, in the name of thy son Christ, to
deliver me of this terrible reward of sin, to qualify with the salt of thy
grace our unsavory flesh, and to sweeten our viperous and vile nature with
the oil of thy spirit, that fighting manfully under our captain Michaell
against the Dragon, we may not only wage battle or subdue, but also
crucify the old man, hand, foot, head, heart, even the whole kingdom of Satan
the prince of utter darkness; that the devil being battered down and the old
Adam driven out of our hearts, we may offer up our bodies as lively
sacrifices unto thee, without any sent of stinking nature. For this O Lord is
acceptable in thy sight, that being transformed into thee in newnes of life,
we may be fit temples for thy holy spirit, to dwell and abide in. Mortify
therefore the flaming flesh, O Lord, and appease the waves of our wanton
nature, that we may be even as thou willest: holy as thou art holy, Amen.

Another.
WHat shall I do, O gracious God? for I am borne of flesh, the very affection
whereof is death. Shall I die? shall the frame of thy hands be destroyed? no,
Lord. For thy mercies sake remember thy promise: Ask and have. I ask, O
Lord, I ask: mercy do I ask, I desire thee in the bow else of thy Son Christ
to regenerate me a spiritual man, that being borne anewe, not of flesh, nor of
blood, nor of the will of man, but of thy spirit, by the power of thy word, I
may be consecrate a priest unto thee. O Lord and lover of holiness, guide me in
the way of thy will, that I wander not in vanity, which thou abhorrest and
can not abide. Thou hate sin and all the workers of iniquity: and unless
we repent, as father Baptist said; we shall al for our sins suffer the rod
of thy justice. Give me therefore the sword of thy spirit, that I may cut off
the ear of Malchus, and then be healed by the plaster of Grace. Apparel me
with thy heavenly truth, and arm me with thy holy word, that in time of
combat I may be able to cut off the desperate assaults of the sinful flesh:
Amen, O Lord, Amen, I say unto the words: Ask and thou shall have. In mercy
perform thy promise, O eternal verity and give me grace not to doubt thereof,
Amen.

A prayer for the obteining of grace.
O LORD, I am thy sheep, thy hands have facioned me: a lost sheep I am, that
have wandered past the pasture of thy will into the broad field of vanity. As
thou have framed me therefore of thy goodness, so recall me from straieng by
the voice of thy mercy. Give me grace to hear thee, hearing to come unto
thee, coming to follow thee, and following thee the way to heaven and door
of glory, ever to bear about me the pearl of grace, and never to decline
from the rule of thy will. Keep me from the pit of sin, underprop me from
falling into the ditche of iniquity by the hand of thy favor, and fense me
with grace, the buckler of thy mercy, that I may defeat Satan's wiliness, and
repel the blows of frowning sin and a cloudie conscience. O Lord, let grace
through the pipe or channel of thy mercy distill into the vessel of my barren
heart, that being moistened with the dew of thy gracious blessings and
softened with the spirit of thy goodness, I may lodge thee the blessed Trinity
linked in an indissoluble knot of unity, to the reparation of the image of
grace and recovery of disgraced nature, Amen.

Another.
IT is thy gracious will, O God of mercy, that all men should be saved. It is
not thy will o pitious Jesus, that any sheep of thy pasture should be deuouted
or any Creature perish, which thou of thy goodness have framed. And therefore
O lover of man, and love it self, I a poor wretched sinner, that have a long
time pastured in the broad way of iniquity, yet hearing thee continually, and
that of mercy calling: Come unto me, do come unto thee for grace and mercy
against merited condemnation. Grace Lord, grace is almy suit. For I am a plain
castawaie: and by thousands more wretched than the crawling Worm of the earth,
unless thou bedeck me with the garment of Grace, and marry me in thy mercies
promised to the house of David. Lap me therefore, O Father of Heaven in thy
white raiment, and apparel my nakedness with the wouen coat of thy grace, that
Satan finding no seame in my wedding garment, may not be able in any respect
to rip up my faults before thee at the day of thy visitation. This do O
gracious Jesus, clippe me in thy sweet arms, and bow down thy head to kiss
me in mercy, and be not angry for my sins, but drown them in thy precious
blood, for thine own sake I beseech thee, Amen.

A prayer for patience in affliction.
O Fountain of comfort, O streamie welspringe of undeserved mercy: behold
most gracious GOD and loving Father, I beseech thee me thy poor creature.
Behold Lord, I am a worm and no man: the bulls of Basan impale me round
about, the devil like an hungry Lion to reth and gapeth to dispatch me, and
the flesh like a venomous viper seeks to stinge me. Good God behold, behold
me and fortify thy servant, thine own handie work, against the stormy
blasts of the enemy. Patience, patience O Lord: adorn me with patience, and
seal up in my heart the remission of my sins, by the testimony of thy holy
spirit, that being holden up by the anchor of a lively hope in thy sufficient
merits, I may be able to endure the end of this my combat, which under thy
banners I presently do sustein. Most mighty Mychael, fence thy child against
the traitorous rebels of this world, which do nothing else but dismember the
babes of thy family, and pro phane thy precious passion. Be thou upon my side,
that no enemy may prevail against me: Lord in thee have I trusted let me
never be confounded, I beseech thee for thine own merits, Amen.

Another.
THere is no victory without fighting, nor any crown without victory: give
me therefore power O Lord, that fighting valiantly, I may be crowned
gloriously in heaven, with thee to live for eeuer. Minister strength unto me
that I may ouermayster mine enemies, and give me the spirit of patience, that
continuing to the end, I may be found and taken as a faithful soldier of
thy son Jesus, and so be blessed. Let me not faint in fear but let me fight
in a lively faith which ouermatcheth the whole world. Plant me a natural
branch by the power of thy word, in the vine Jesus; and make me able to endure
every crack. Let no canker of sin eat me, let no worm of a burnt
conscience gnaw me, let no blaste of the world ouerturne me: but stay me up
with thy mighty hand, and be ever at mine elbowe, that I may be crowned,
though I be crossed, and saved though now sowsed in extreme tyranny. In this
is all my hope, for surely of my self I am but a vapor, a worm: I am borne
of a woman in sin a sinful child by nature, and to my power wage battle
with Satanne against my self, to mine utter undoing O Lord, unless thou
regenerate me and assist me with thy spirit, to mine ability always to
resist the devil: which do o gracious God I beseech thee, Amen.

A prayer in time of persecution.
O Lord, whither shall I fly? or to whom shall I go? I am in Peter's ship, the
winds rage and blow, the seas rise and roar, the surging and angry waves
dashe against the ship. Oh, what shall I do? for thou art asleep, O Jesus: O
master arise or else I perish, Pharao is at my heels, the red sea before my
face: how shall I escape? whither shall I fly? O gracious Lord, make me a
way through the sea before I perish: and drown Pharao my deadly Saul with
all his company. Remember thy covenant O God of truth, that thou would be
with me, and al thy tender chickens to the end of the world, to cover and save
me and them from the roaring lion, under the wings of thy mercy. This is the
wing that holds me up in the air of comfort, that I may fly like an Egle
aloft to the carcass in time of necessity. Lodge me, o Lord in the bosom of
comfort, and embrace me between thine arms in safety, that thou being with
me, no man may prevail against me: no not the Dragon with his Angels, whom
thou the true Michael did not only encounter with but also ouermatch in
heaven, as a valliant Captain: that I trusting in thee, and faithfully
fighting under thy banners, may not despair of the Conquest. Lord and gracious
captain, give unto me strength to abide valiantly all bruntes of this world,
and never to shrink from thee with fainting Peter, Amen.

Another.
O Gracious god, look down upon me with the eye of thy mercy. For I am paled
about with misery, and compassed with waters of persecution. Assist me O
Lord, with thy holy spirit against the fury of the enemy, that I never
fearing the tosting or butchering of this mine earthly Tabernacle, may ever
for the term of my days fear and kiss thee least thou be angry with me,
who art able and may of thy justice, not only destroy this my body, but
also cast my soul into the pit of hell. Give me grace that I may present my
self boldly before fleering Herod: being persuaded of thy divine providence,
that thou will never forsake me but be with me during this my pilgrimage. I
am better than a pennieworth sparrowe O Lord, who cannot die without thy will
and pleasure. Guard me therefore with the spirit of boldness, that being
asserteined of thy mercy; I may without fear confess thee before men, and so
be confessed again before thine Angels in heaven. Let no smart of misery
dismaie me, let no thornie Saul discourage me in the race of my profession,
let no sparks of cruelty or smoke of biting tyranny, choke the confession of
thee; but pitch about me the tents of thy grace, that being underpropped I fall
not from thee: do this O Lord for thy names sake, Amen.

A prayer against the enemies of the truth.
O Lord and gracious GOD, look upon the face of thy Church: Judas does kiss
her, and al to betray her or rather make havoc of her. Behold Lord, the
tears have almost choked thy corn, and the cockle-sower looks for a
plentious harvest. Thou see this O Lord, thou see it: awake therefore and
take rhy fan in thy hand, to divide thy corn from the chafe. Gather thy
corn into thy garner, and with a blaste of thy mouth scatter the chafe.
Purge thy garden O Lord, let no weed grow among thy Lillies, let no thorn
hedge in thy sauourie rose, but fill thy church with the grace of thy spirit,
least being the fairest of all women, she touch the pitch, and so be defiled.
Burn up the le^^ned and sour dough of iniquity: but specially of heresy,
which the cocle-prophetes seek to bake, that we may not only eat it but
also digest it, to the great eclipse of thy word and our own damnation. O
Lord convert them, or else restrain them with the bridle of thy judgment.
Father forgive them if it be thy will, or else mow them down like hay and
let them wither with the grass. If Judas will continue in his treachery, or
Iulyan in his apostasy, if the wandering sheep will not hear the voice of thee
her shepherd, but still wander in the desert of wickedness, give her to the
mouth of the Lion O Lord, least turning to thy little flock, she corrupt the
rest. Grant this for thine own name sake, Amen.

Another.
IT is thine own lesson, O Lord: Take heed of the leaven of the Pharisees,
because it sowreth and corrupts the marowe of true religion. O Lord, thou
know it, and I acknowledge it, that I am a sprigge of withered nature, a
dead branch of the rotten stock of Adam: what shall I say? a natural man I am,
so blinded with the mist of ignorance and ouershadowed with the cloud of
blindness, that I cannot do well, or will well, no not think well: so unable I
am to aspire to the knowledge of thy revealed Gospel. And how can I then O
Lord, take heed of leuened doctrine, who am altogether leuened and bent to
the worse by force of nature? O louinge Jesus thou art the eye of the
faithful, thou art wisdom it self to defeat Satan's wilines, the sun of
righteousness to consume the gross vapors of ignorance, which drowneth our
understanding: so that thou art the only star which show us the deep
dungeons of heresies: and the only touch stone by which we may discern good
dough and sowred leaven, that we may beware of them both. Endew me therefore
with knowledge from above, that I proving the spyrits whereof they are, may one
lie cleave to thy holy will, O gracious God, to whom be al glory, Amen.

A prayer for the sick.
ODeere Father, look upon me with the eye of thy merciful pity and pitiful
mercy: behold I am thy handie work, a poor Creature of thine, I thank thee
for my former health, and I thank thee also for this thy visitation, which I
take as a fatherly correction. For I have swarued from the paths of thy
commandementes, and in my life renounced my vow at baptism made unto thee
before thy Church, and therefore least as the witless sheep I should straye
and so fall into the mouth of Satan, I take this thy visitation as thy voice,
or a sermon of thy grace, whereby thou criest: Come unto me, O gracious Jesus,
this is thy woonted goodness toward the children of men. I am but dust and
ashes, no better than a worm, a stained clout, no better than a shadow, a
vapor or bubble in the water: a very wretch I am good Lord, borne in sin, by
nature wrapped in iniquity, and so thine utter enemy, worthy to perish
everlastingly. But see thine own goodness, sweet Lord: thine hands formed me
being nothing: thy mercy has preserved me till this day being naught. And
even now sweet Jesus, thou have sent thy purseuant sickness to bid me put off
the old man, and put on the garment of faith, that I being ready for the
marriage, may come and marry thee in the covenant of thy father, wherein all the
nations of the world by promise are blessed, Amen.

Another.
Loving Jesus, pitiful Jesus, blessed Trinity have mercy upon me. Behold, I
am sick Lord: justly buffeted for sin, the mother of every mortal
infirmity. Yet Lord, loving Jesus pity me, pity my case. Loving father
purge me with Isop, cleanse me from my secret sins, dry up the puddle of
iniquity with the beams of thy mercy, and cleanse me in the poole of thy
precious blood that this sickness and infirmity, the just reward and penalty of
sin and iniquity may cease and finish. Beat me, O God, o gracious God, O father
of heaven, beat me in favor, and not in judgment: kiss me with the covenant
of grace, and be not angry with me. O loving Jesus, full of pity and pitious
compassion, I would be clean: and if thou will, Lord, thou can make me
clean. Behold Lord I am sick, the palsy of sin shakes every part, the
leprosy of mine iniquity has over run al my soul and body: but yet good
Lord, and gracious Jesus if thou will, thou can make me clean. For thou
art my father Almighty, with whom nothing is impossible. Lord I ask thy
grace, give it me: I seek it, let me find it: I knock for mercy: open O
Lord the chest of thy goodness, and enrich me with the jewels of grace, that I
may reign with thee in glory, Amen.

A confession for the Sick.
MY thoughts, my words, my deeds, al cry unto me: Thou art a sinner. And
this do I confess unto thee O Lord: I cannot so much as think a good thought,
much less can I speak, much less can I do well. I confess that in me that
is in my flesh, dwells no good thing: even so vile a Creature, so wretched
a caitife, that Satan might justly have claimed my life in the swathecloth,
being borne the child of wrath and heir of damnation. I am a cankered branch
of mother Eve that ancient stock of sin, whose heritage is nothing but
iniquity guarded with an infinite sea of misery. For out of sin as out of a
filthy puddle or stained fountain issued the rivers of sickness, death and
damnation, with such a stream, that they ouerranne and drowned the whole race
of Adams curssed progeny. So that as I confess my self a sinner, so do I
confess that I am justly visited with this rod of sickness, wherewith thou art
wont of thy justice to beat wanton Adam, that old man of sin, when he will
not be ruled Beat me therefore, beat me O Lord, to better me: and sinite me
enough, so thou save me, as I do put my trust in thee. Let Satan have no
power to harm me, nor the world with the baits of vanity to snare me: but
defend me from al evil I beseech thee, Amen.

Another.
O Bleeding Jesus, O slaughtered Lamb, O sweet babe of the virgin Marie, and
only beloved darling of God: behold, here I lie sick in body and sore in
soul, whom thou have bought with thy precious blood. Help me, save me from
sin, the fountain of sickness, O fountain of mercy. For I am a grievous
sinner by nature fettered with iniquity, wherein I was conceived and borne. O
Jesus, O Christ thou son of David, O gracious samaritan and piteous shepherd
have mercy upon me: have mercy upon me, call me, cleanse me, save me, salve me
with the merit of thy passion, against the palsy of sin and iniquity. O
lamb of God, thou have taken away the sins of the world, thou have
crucified the devil: confirm this faith in me loving Lord, I beseech thee:
I beseech thee increase my faith and renew a right spirit within me.
Remember Lord, remember sweet Jesus thy crown of thorns and bruzed head, thy
boared hands, nailed feet and crucified body. Remember the pearsing spear,
thy wounded side, and thy precious blood that did spin and gush out. Remember
thy bloody tears, thy great thirst of my salvation, and gall and vinegar
which thou did drink to save me, and for thy mercy save me, and cry to thy
father; Father, father, forgive him. O Jesus be mine advocate: pray, pray,
sweet Jesus pray for me, and bestow some drop of thy blood to wash me, Amen.

A prayer against desperation.
O Lord, I am a grievous sinner, I have passed and broken the banks of thy
commandments; from the womb til this day I have with the pirat Satan sailed
in the ship of iniquity, so that I may say with Paul: I am chief of all
sinners. This must I needs confess to thee, O god of justice, and this worm
of conscience biteth me. What then good Lord? shall ye worm devour me? shall
this snake of conscience sting me to death? what, good Lord? is the stream of
thy mercy stopped? are the rivers of thy grace dried up? is there no drop of
thy blood left to wash my seely soul? do thou not call me? saying: Come
unto me. Yes good Lord, and therefore despair I will not. It is not thy will
that any sinner should perish: and thou have not only said it, but sworneit,
that thou willest not the death of a sinner, but rather his conversion and life.

Behold therefore dear Father, I come unto thee being a grievous sinner, in
hope of pardon in the name of Christ thy son, who by his own testimony came
into this world to save sinners. He was content to blot out that obligation
which satan had against me, by the flood of his precious blood which issued
out of his glorious side. In this poole he has washed away the leprosy of
sin, were it never so desperate. And in token that he is ready to receive a
sinner, he stretches forth both his sweet arms, as ready to embrace, and
boweth down his glorious head, as willing to kiss the prodigal child that
craves pardon for his missespent days. O Lord and gracious God, I have wasted
my days in vanity, I have from time to time trodden under my feet the pearls
of Christyan profession, even from the womb have I been a rebellious traitor
to thy majesty, a friend to this world, to godliness an enemy: but now O
Lord, I cry unto thee; forgive me, forgive me. Now I come unto thee, as thou
have called me: now there fore cover me with the wings of thy mercy, and
tender me as the hen does her chickens, least Satan clawe me, and so I
perish. Good Lord accept the blood of thy son, the merits of his manhood for
a satisfaction for my sins, drown them in the stream of thy mercy, and cast
them behind thee, good Lord I beseech thee.

O sweet Jesus lodge me in thy precious wounds, and look upon me with thy
piteous eye, least that be destroyed which thou of thy great goodness have
made, and Christ thy son of inestimable love and infinite charity has
redeemed, thorough his bitter passion. This is the total sum of my suit unto
thee Lord: mercy, mercy o father of mercy: mercy is the thing that I beg:
have mercy upon me, have mercy upon me I beseech thee loving Lord, have pity
upon me. Be thou my shepherd to defend me, my Castle of defense to save me
against the gaping devil. Thou have store of mercy for them that ask it: O
Lord therefore even for the wounds of thy dear son, have mercy upon me,
let not sin sting me to death, but lay to my sore soul the salve of thy
mercy, of thy mercy, one drop of thy sons blood, a little dew of thy
blessing, good Lord, I beseech thee, Amen.

Another.
O Lord, my thoughts, my words, mine actions have taken weapons and waged
battle against me: and Satan that old rebellious traitor takes part with
them to overthrow me thy poor and impotent soldier. He raises up the snake
of my conscience to sting me, and the poison of an evil life to infect me with
the desperate plague of Cains blasphemy: and I am but flesh unable to
withstand the fury of this dragon. Oh what shall I do? I am a Sinner, as
Satan says, and my conscience tells me, and the reward is death as thy
word does teach me. What then shall I do? shall I die as Judas, O Lord? is
there no remedy? surely my Lord and my God, I despair in my self, and
confess my self the child of wrath by naturs voice: but yet O Lord, it is thy
voice, it is the voice of grace, that thy mercy is above al thy works: in
token whereof thou came into the world to save sinners. This is the pillar
that vpholdeth me from falling: this is the rod of iron that dasheth sa tan
out of countenance, and defeateth the arguments of my sinful conscience.
Arm me with this buckler of faith in thy meritorious incarnation, life and
passion, that I may not be given over as a prey to the dragon, but crucify the
snakie persuasions of Satan and his company, Amen.

Another.
AVoid Satan: thou shalt not tempt the Lords servant: thy works are destroyed
thy bands are broken, thou shall not take or bind me. Avoid sin: for thou
have lost thy sting, thou wast condemned in the flesh, nailed to the cross,
and crucified with my Lord Christ upon the tree. Avoid death, for thou art
dead: and hell, for thou art swallowed up in victory. Avoid thou dragon and all
thine angels, for Michaell has beaten thee, and broken thy head: he has
freed us from sin, and led away captiuitye captive: even he Satan has
ouermastered thee, that cries out unto me, Fear not, for I have overcome the
world: even he that has promised to be with me till the end of my
pilgrimage, and cries out: that if he be with me, no man can be against
me, no not hell gates to prevail against me. Fight therefore Satanne as long
as thou will, thou shall be at length put to the foil: for the mighty lion
of the tribe of Judah tells me, that there is no condemnation to them that be
in him, that Jesus is the conqueror of the whole world, and vanquisher of
thee, fight and rage thou never so much. There fore avoid I say away from me,
for in Christ have I passed the sea of my sins, thy cursed army: and if thou
follow to pursue me, thou shall be drowned in the red sea of Christ's blood,
to whom be all glory, Amen.

A prayer for the auoidance of Gods wrath.
QTender hearted Joseph, have mercy upon me. Great is the flood of mine
iniquities, so great O God of mercy, that unless the banks of thy grace
repress it, it will ouerrunne and so drown my see lie soul. Drown my s^^s
in the poole of thy mercy, cast them into the sea of thy bottomless pity, least
the smoke of my wickedness do smother me, and the rod of thy judgment break
and brooze me like a potters vessel. For the bag of mine iniquities is so
stuffed, and the stinge of my sins so poisonous, and the sent of them so
unsavory in thy nostrilles O Lord, that if thou will observe it, who may
abide it? the surest pillar of thy Church would shake, the fairest rose would
wither, the best lamb should abide the slaughter, if the beams of thy mercy
should not partch and burn up the ripe and plentious harvest of our
iniquities. O Lord therefore have mercy upon us, and beat us not with the rod
of thy fury, but under prop the ship of our weak faith with the anchor of
thy mercy, that believing in thee, we may not perish but have everlasting
life. Thou have apesed, o sweet Jesus, the wrath of thy father against sin
conceived, by thy meritorious passion, that I might with the holy ones be
holy as thou art. But I have profaned thy passion by my daily faults such is
the frailty of the flesh, for the which I just ly may be refused. But yet
Jesus one drop of favor bestow upon me and cry: For my bloody passion
father forgive him I beseech thee, Amen.

A prayer for remission of Sins.
O Lord, what do I daily but wander in the field of vanity? what is my heart
but a filthy prison of corrupt thoughts? what is my mouth but a stinking
channel of vain words? what are my feet but chariots to bloodshed? what are
my hands but battellers with charity? what is my head but a castle of wicked
devises? and what is my life but a fardell of iniquity? I am nothing better
than a dead tree, the root is perished, the bough withered, I am fruitles and
good for nothing but for the fury of the flame. What then, good Lord, shall
it be so? I am no better than a dead tree, but what? shall I burn sweet
Jesus: O save me for thy name sake, and quicken me: create a new heart within me,
ingraffe me in the true Olive purge me that I may bring forth much fruit,
and for ever flourishe like a tree planted by the rivers side. O power the oil
of grace into my defiled heart, and season it with the salt of thy mercy, least
the sum of mine iniquities ascend up to thy nostrils, and provoke thy fury
against me. Power down some drops of thy precious blood from the clouds of thy
mercy, to quench out the angry flame of sin, which I my self am not able to
put out by the virtuous water of any merit. Purge me therefore with Isop, O
Lord and then I shall be clean. O lamb of God, let me eat thy flesh, and
drink thy blood, that I may live by thee, and cloth me in the wool of thy
mercy, that no winter of storming sin do pinch my seely soul. This do O
Lord, for thy mercies sake, Amen.

Another.
O Lord, like a witles sheep I wander in the perilous wilderness of sin: I am
lost, o my God in the field of vanity where Satan seeks to trappe and
deceive me with the flattering bait of finfull pleasure. Good Lord leave thy
ninety nine, and look for the lost sheep till thou have found her. For I
am lost good Lord, and must needs perish, unless thou save me: Draw me, up to
thee in the bucket of thy mercy, and place me in thy safe pasture of grace,
the only sting that ouermaistereth Satan. Choose me into the college of joy,
that I may sleep in the lap of thy word, which is thy power unto salvation.
Do this O Lord, for thine own sake, that thine angels may have occasion to
rejoice, and to set forth thy glory. Look for the lost groate, O gracious
God, and find it out with the candle of thy mercy, and lock it up in the
treasure of joy: even me O Lord, that thou thy self in great joy may call
thine holy angels and heavenly company to rejoice with thee, because thou
have found me a lost groate, and strayeng sheep. Be thou my Jesus, even for
thine own sake, wash away the leprosy of sin, that being cleansed, I may
return in joy, to found out the praises of thy holy and undeserved dealinges
with me thine enemy, Amen.

Another.
BEnd down thy piteous eye O Lord, from the palace of heaven, and look upon
me thy poor and wretched creature. Behold, I thy handiwork thine own
workmanship am disgraced, nature has wrapped me in sin, the devil has
defaced body and soul, so that I am nothing better than a lump of iniquity.
The evil gardener has planted weeds in thy garden, the evil husband has
sown tares and cockle in thy field. O Lord with the sword of thy mercy dig
up the weeds of sin: and with the beams of thy pity partch up the cockle
and tares of Satan, that I may flourish like a branch of thy son Jesus and
grow like a flower in the pasture of grace, by the dew of thy blessing.
Scatter away from thy face with the wind of thy mercy, the chafe of
iniquity, and gather thine own corn into the garner of glory. Let me not
starve for want of grace, but feed me with mercy, and make me a simple dove,
that having the wings of a lively faith, and faithful conscience, I may fly
up to the beacon of the cross, there to eat the merit of thy Son Christ,
my mighty Jesus. O Lord wrap me in his passion and death, that no storm of
sin do touch me to my utter condemnation, Amen.

A prayer for increase of Faith.
WHat man, O God, was so fettered in the snare of sin, that he could not by
any means deliver himself, and therefore was for ever to lie bound with the
chain of Satan in hell: it pleased thee o Lord, to work means of delivery,
by thine own son to unloose the shackles of sin, that man might be set at
liberty. For this I give thee most hearty thanks O gracious God and father of
mercy. For what a thing is this? Man was lost through his own folly. Judas
for money, but Adam for an apple forsook thee, and so deserved not only to be
forsaken, but also like an utter enemy and rebellious traitor, to be executed
in justice and judgment. But behold O ye sons of men, where man was unable
and angels not sufficient to work recovery of grace, and delivery from
Satan's slavery, he spared not to shed the blood of his son for the
redemption of man, and satisfaction of his justice.

Behold and wonder: God has but one soune, his dear son, his only joy,
his own image, his express substance, and yet does he send this one babe,
like a Lamb in this evil world among foxes, to be torn and cruelly
butchered, that by the drops of his precious blood he might wash the filthy
face of our souls, and with ye wool of his passion, the merit of his
slaughter, so cloth us, that noe storm of raging sin might dismaye us. The
streams of thy sons blood, unless we bathe our selves in them, unless we
wash us in the poole of his blood, his passion O father of heaven, shall
nothing avail us. Give us therefore good God a full and sound hand, that we
may receive the blood of thy son Christ to our salvation. Increase our faith
in us, give us a winged faith, that we may fly unto Christ thy son and our
Savior, standing on the beacon of the cross to purchase there demption of the
whole world.

But especially in time of extreamitie, when Satan does seek to choke us
with the smoothering smoke of sin, and like a wily pyrate seeks to sink the
ship of our weak faith: then O Lord, when he raketh our sins out of the
ashes, and calls a parliament of his hellish angels to accuse us before thee
and thine holy company, that being convinced of treachery to thy majesty,
we may abide the rod of thy fury: even then O Lord, give us a feathered
faith, that we may fly above the reach of Satan and rest in the wounds of thy
decre^ son in safety, without peril of shipwreck, be the waves of sin
never so outrageous, or the winds of iniquity never so tempestuous. Cover us
with the wings of thy favor, guard us with the hand of thy power, and pull us
out of the deep mire of our secret sins, that being drowned in thy mercy,
we may in a lively faith spring out of the puddle of misery, into the sea of
thy merits for our endless safety, Amen.

A prayer for preachers.
O Thou good sheepherd of our souls, have mercy upon us: thou have appointed
us as Vicars and Deputies under thee, or rather for nurses for thee, to train
up the babes of thy family in the love and fear of thee. Give us, we beseech
thee, the pure milk of thy Gospel to feed them: but especially the light of
honest conversation, to guide them out of this vallie of darkness, unto thee
the true morninge star, and sun of righteousness. Arm us with the buckler
of thy truth, that we may not only bicker with, but also put to flight Satan
that ravenous Lion O Lord, who seeks by subtlety to trapp and devour the
lambs of thy pasture. Wepon us with Scriptum est, It is written O Lord, which
is thy power unto salvation, and the only buckler whereby thou didste defend
thy self in thy threefold combat with Satan. Take from us the leaven of the
Pharisees, the sowred dough of heresies, being the very canker of Christian
profession, and the only pitch that defiles the table of thy Children, that
we may feed thy children only with the word of thy mouth. This do O Jesus
for thine own sake, Amen.

A prayer for the increase of Preachers.
SAtan, O Lord, sayleth upon the seas of this world, to hinder and keep back
the propagation of the Gospel; kiling by sword, boiling in fire, and choking by
the darnel of his cocle gospel the babes of thy family. So that now thy
Church O Lord, is harrowed, little is the flock of thy beloved Steeuen, we
have a great derth of preaching Ieremies, and a very small number of crieng
Esayes to conduct thy children, the tender sucklinges of thy Gospel, from
danger to safety, out of the rough wilderness of this wicked world. O look
upon thy little flock, let the Fox no more fleece them, but send shepherds
to feed them with the pure milk and sound meat of thy Gospel. Send us no
woolues to tear, but send us dogs to defend the sheep of thy Pasture,
against our woluish Pharao, that continually gapeth to devour thy beeloued
Israel. O Lord have mercy upon us, and let the rivers of thy word have free
course in every chanel: let no puddle of filthy doctrine, or quagmire of
damnable heresy trouble thy little flock and sweet babes, least they tasting
thereof, drink their own destruction. But send down thine Angels to cleanse
the poole of thy word, mingled with the water of heresy, that we liyng sick
at the gate of thy mercy, may descend into it, and so be healed. Grant this
for thine infinite mercies sake, and for the glory of thine eternal Godhead,
Amen.

A prayer for the Schoolmayster.
WHere shall I begin, O Lord, to rip the unseamed coat of thy benefits? O
that I were al heart to conceive or al tongue to utter them; For where we had not
only lost the inheritance of paradise, but also the integrity of Nature,
through father Adams folly: thou have set down precepts, and elected
governors over youth, that being ruled by tutours, and living well by
precepts, the children of Adam might recover the disgraced purity of nature,
and at length (of thy mere favor) be exalted, not to an earthly paradise but
to an heavenly inheritance, to enter and inherit the palace of an heavenly
Jerusalem. And whereas, O welspring of all goodness, thou have appointed me to
view and ouersee the natural man, not only to train him up in learning, but
also in living: give me thy grace that I may first of a wild olive become a
branch of Jesus, that awaking my self with the wings of thy mercy, I may
crow the better to stumbling Peter, not only in delivering precepts, but also
examples of godly life and honest conversation. Give me ye true knowledge of
thy word, that by it as by a lantern I may guide my self and them the better,
from wandering in vanity, into the way of sanctity. Give me also grace to
do my duty faithfully, and imprint in my heart the last day when I shall
render an account of my calling, so that always remembering it, I may the
better fulfill it. O Lord show thy mercy, Amen.

Another.
O Lord, give me grace to be faithful in my vocation, to be diligent in my
calling to train up youth: but before al things to serve thee. School me, o
gracious God, in the way of thy will, and teach me the way of thy
commandementes, that I may not only live by thee, but in thee for ever. Plant
me like a branch of grace in the gardeyn of thy gracious pleasure, that I may
grow in thee, and not in the broad way of iniquity, or wide field of
vanity. Order thou my ways with the rule of thy will, and guide my steps by
this lantern of life, that neither for fear or flattery I swerve from the
lessons of thy holy spirit: but ever may walk with the warrant of a good
conscience in thy law and testimonies. For this O Lord, shall redounde to the
profit of thy Church, whereof by Baptism I am a member: as also to the
bettering of youth which is better schooled by examples of a godly life, than
by precepts of learning. Therefore, O Lord, that thy Church may be unspotted
and without wrinkle, I beseech thee in thy sons name to have mercy upon me
and al my brethren, which live in faith and fear of thee, that our good lives
may glorify thee our father in heaven: and spur the babes of thy familye, to
the perfourmance of their vow, by the power of thy spirit, Amen.

Apraier for Scholars.
O God, we are a cursed progeny, by nature lapt in the bands of sin, and
fettered in the chain of death, the due reward of sin and iniquity: but of
thy mere mercy thou have drawn us unto thee out of the jaws of our
spiritual Pharao, by the death of Christ thine only son, that mighty lion
of the tribe of Judah, that being delivered from the hands of our enemies, we
might serve thee in him all the days of this our life. But because we cannot of
our selves, and by our selves, aspire to the end of our redemtion: we give thee
thanks O Lord, that it has pleased thee to help us by this means, to wit,
by placing us under tutors. Thou have thoroughly sifted our nature: thou
know that there is continual battle between the wanton flesh and the
spirit of sanctification: and therefore to repress old Adam, and to crucify
the kingdom of the wanton flesh, thou have put this yoke upon us to be under
tutors and governors to crop the crooked boughs off, and to mow down the
ripe harvest of wicked nature, that they might by precepts of life, with the
assistance of thy spirit, graffe us in the true vine Jesus, and also printe
the stamp of Christian knoweledge in the tables of our hearts: that being no
base metal but pure and fine silver, we might (and yet of grace) be weighed in
the balance of thy mercy as current coin, to be placed in the storehouse of
thy joy for ever. To thee as only good, be al glory, Amen.

The mothers prayer for the good education of her youth.
O Gracious God, in knowledge that thou love all things which thou have made
of thy goodness: and that thing cannot perish, which is committed to thy charge.
Now I come unto thee with my ten der children, committing them into thine
hands, and desiring thee to cover them under the wings of thy provident
mercy. Hew and square the rough table of their hearts, of stony make them
fleshie, that being softened by the dew of thy blessings, they may bear the
seal of adoption in thy son Christ. O Lord guide them in this dark vale of
vanity, with the light of thy favor, that escaping the dungeon of sin, they
may walk in newnes of life, and lodge always in thine holy will. Imprint in
their hearts faith, hope, humility, and charity: that following thee they may
be humble and meek as thou art. In due them with the spirit of fear, that
they may kiss thee in faith and live lie obedience, thou being never angry
with them, but loving them, as the mother does her tender sucklings, Amen.

The Fathers prayer.
O Father of all Fathers, have mercy upon me, and give me thy grace, not
only to be thankful for this thy gracious gift, but also dutiful to use it
after thy good will and pleasure. It is thy will O father of Heaven, that
children should come unto thee: yea, that all men should be saved, and come
to the knowledge of the truth. Fill the cup of thy mercy, O Lord, and let me
drink of it, and my children pledge me, that we may together be wrapped in
the garment of Grace, and at length be married unto thee into the kingdom of
glory. Take my tender babes O Lord, into thy family, that as children of thy
house, together with me, they may sit with father Abraham Isaac and Jacob, at
the table of joy in joy unspeakable, and in pleasure inconceiueable. Give them
the spirit of thy favor, that they may cry truly unto thee, Abba, Father,
assured in their consciences, that they are thy children, and coheires with our
Savior Jesus of life eternal. O father show thy mercy for thy mercies sake,
Amen.

The Child's prayer.
IAm borne a natural child, O father of Heaven, weak in body, blind in
soul, in all parts maimed, and as it were lapt in bands of myserie. O Lord
renew me wholly, make me a babe of thy family, that I may suck the paps of
thy word, which is of power to save body and soul. Lop the tree of nature, O
gracious God, and restrain me within the banks of thy will by the bri dle of
thy spirit, that I never passing the limits of thy good pleasure, may of thy
mercy be taken as worthy to sit with father Abraham in the restefull land of
Canaan. Regenerate me O Lord, and make me a new creature, that having put off
the old manne, I may be transformed into thee the second Adam, in newnes of
life and be freed from albruntes of storming nature and blows of tyrannous
Satan, that I may sleep in the lap of thy Church in safety for ever. O sweet
Jesus, let no tempest of sin, or thunderboult of Satan or his mynisters
ouerturne me thy poor Creature, sailing upon the foming seas, beset and bea
ten with the surges of this present world: but guard me with thine hand, and
let thine holy Angels pitch their tents about me, least the brickle bark of
my body being broozed with the waves of wickedness, and the ship of my
soul shaken with the tempests of iniquity, I utterly come to naught and
become a castaway. In all dangers therefore, give me grace to cry unto thee
with a loud voice, Help me, thou that can still the roughness of the sea,
or else I perish, Amen.

The Husbandmans. prayer.
IA pore husbandman O lord GOD do come unto thee for succor. Jesus thou son
of David have mercy upon me. Thou art the true vine, and GOD thy father the
husbandman and a branch ingraffed in thee by grace, and nourished by the
juice of mercy. O Lord, when the pock of my corrupt nature breaks out, and
the wild Olive shows it self: then of thy favor lop and crop me: purge
me, that I may budde in thee, and bear fruit worthy repentance. Give me thy
grace, that I tie not my heart to this world nor lock my thoughts in the chain
of vanity: but free me from the slavery of the devil, and unloose the
desperate knot of my sinful conscience, that sin being disiointed by
remission, and my conscience un linked from sin, I may serve thee in holiness
and righteousness all the days of my life. Aid me O father of heaven, when
the branch of sin will ouerwantonlie flourish, and old Adam pass the limits
of thy holy will. Do this, O father, and only good husbandman, for thine
own sake, Amen.

The Maydseruants prayer.
AL estates O Lord, depend upon thee, King and beggar: Magistrate and
Clergieman, master and scholar: al come of thee. And me thou have made a
poor handmaid, which I do not only willingly bear, as knowing thou haste
allotted me this calling: but also very many ways I have to thank thee for
it. For thou have not only delivered me from the slavish service of Satan, but
also dooest (by this my yoke) restrain the wanton relics of stained nature,
preserved me from the pampering of the old man in pleasure and idleness.
Secondly, that I am not servant to any Heathen, Turk, or Saracen: but unto a
Christian, in such a place, where thy Gospel is preached freely, and fully.
Thirdly and specially, because thou have called me unto such an estate of
life, as wherein I know I do well please thee. For who lives after thy
Gospel, if not I, who get my living with the sweat of my brows? I do not
glory here in vain, but to thee be the glory, who have turned the curse
into such a blessing. O Lord give me grace to consider this, that I may be
more diligent in my calling, more earnest in serving thee than ever I have
been heretofore. Forgive me all that is past, and guide me in things to come,
that I may never haulte in my vocation. Give me a sound and perfect faith in
thy sons blood O father, wherein he has washed (of his great mercy) my poor
soul, that notwithstanding I serve a mortal man, yet above him in all things,
I may serve thee, to whom be all glory both now and for ever, Amen.

A prayer for a woman with child.
IN the beginning of the world, O father of heaven, after thou had formed man
of the slime of the earth, and yet prince over all creatures; it pleased thee
of thy goodness to create a woman of his side, as well for his solace, as for
the continuance of his seed. It was thy word unto them, Increase and
multiply. This increase was easy, but mother Eve has made it hard (by passing
the bounds of thy will) to al her posterity: so that the woman conceiueth and
brings forth in great pain, and dangerous travel the fruit of her womb: in
so great pain O Lord, in such extreme pangs, that unless thou quench the flame
of her sorrows with the water of comfort, it is impossible for her to bear
that into this vale of misery which thou of thy goodness have fra med, and
she conceived. Wherefore thou GOD of woonders, and Father almighty of Heaven,
as thou have by the slaugh ter of thine only lamb, taken away the sins of
the whole world, and condemned sin in the flesh: so take away the pangs of
childbirth, the fruit of sin from all womankind, especially this woman, that
bearing joy fully, that which she has conceived fruitfullie, and thou have
fashioned graciously she may glorify thee most carefully, and praise thee
most thankefully, the only stay of her estate in all extremity, both now at
this present, and hereafter everlastingly, Amen.

A prayer for a woman in travel.
Lord save me, or else I perish. Lord have mercy upon me a sinner. Pitiful
Jesus show thy mercy unto me, and let the light of thy countenance shine upon
me, that I be not swallowed up in grief and sorrow. Lord, sweet Lord, thou
sendest thy servants to call me to the marriage: thy fatlinges and oxen are
killed, and Dinner is ready: Lord give me grace to come unto thee, that
being freed from sin, and eased of sorrow, the fruit of sin, I may mary
thee in the covenant of thy mercy, and banquet with thee face to face at the
table of joy, in thy heavenly Jerusalem. Lord, loving Lord and gracious God,
bless the fruit of my womb, and take it into thy famylie. For I believe
Lord, that thou becamest of God the son of man, to make it and all other,
whom thy father has given thee, the Children of God thy heavenly Father.
According to my faith therefore O Lord, be it unto me. Open the door of thy
mercy and lodge my child in the virtue of thy covenant, that being my God and
the God of my seed, I may glorify thee both now and ever, and offer up the
sacrifice of praise, the fruits of a joyful spirit unto thee. Lord and Father
of heaven, it is thy will that al men should be saved: thy will be done, and
save me by thy mercy I beseech thee, Amen.

A prayer for the prisoner.
O Living GOD and louinge Father of Heaven, I have stood in the way of
sinners, and wasted my days in iniquity, for the which I am justly tied in
bands, and shall suffer the shippewrack of this frail and fading life. O Lord
comfort me with thy holy spirit against the terror of death: and so root in
me the hope of salvation, that I may look in steadfast says after the night
of my passion, to suppe and to be with thee in heavenly paradise. Evil has
been my life, even from the womb have I warred with evil nature against
thee, and to my power sought to destroy my self, and to crucify my Jesus again
most villanouslie. But yet O. Lord and father of mercy, I believe verily
that al thy sons blood is not dried up. I am persua ded that there are some
drops of grace reserved for all laden and laboring publicans, and therefore
coming unto thee I cry and call: Lord have mercy upon me a sinner: Lord, O
Jesus thou son of David have mercy upon me. Remember thy bloo die passion, and
with the testimony of most thy holy spirit seal up in my heart my salvation,
that I may die in thee, and so live with thee for ever, Ame^.

A prayer to be said at the hour of death.
FAther of heaven into thy hands I do commend my soul Lord increase my
faith, strengthen my weakness, fortify my soul with the Testimony of thy
favor, against the fear of death, which is dreadful unto me. O gracious God,
look not upon my merits, for they are none: nor upon my life, for it has
been very naught and abominable, but look upon Christ thy deer son and my
louinge Jesus: who being slaughtered upon the altar of the Cross, cries unto
thee for me and my brethren: Father forgive the^. Thy son O Lord, died to
deliver us, was bound to lose us out of hellish Egypt, that being freed by
him, we might always and solie serve him. But mercy Lord, mercy is all my
suit: for I have profaned his precious passion by my evil conversation, and
done what lay in my power to crucify him again: but notwithstanding Lord,
thou art always merciful and of great pity: and I believe verily, that thy
sons mercy is not abated, who cried for the butchering Jews, Father forgive
them. Loving God therefore bury mine iniquities, and accept thy sons cry as
a satisfaction for my sin Lord have mercy upon me a sinner, Amen.

A prayer for the truth.
Heresy, O Lord, is the spur of dunghill cocks and hirelinges, which faint
and will not fight in thy quarrel against the wolf, for the sheep of thy
pasture. Let not this spur blind the eyes of christians, let it not shut up
the window of thy will. Thy truth defend O Gracious God, and with the whippe
of thy judgment scourge al penie gospellers, and scowre thy fathers house,
which must be a house of prayer, that thy word may be truly preached, which is
thy power unto salvation. Grant unto us the pure bread of life, let it not be
sowred with the leven of unseasoned Rabbis, least thy truth being eclipsed
with evil doctrine, be utterly buried, and so thy Lambs for hunger starued.
The babes of thy family do hunger and gape for meat: they daily cry unto
thee, Father of heaven deliver us from evil: Come Lord Jesus, come: for thou
art truth, and the only teacher of truth. Root up out of thy garden the
weeds of heresy, and hinder the blaste of slaundering Trumpetters, who do
nothing else but bark against thy truth, and bite the good names of others,
and al to the defacing of thy Gospel, Amen

A prayer for the ploughman.
IT is thy just reward, O GOD, to man for his treachery and disobedience
against thy majesty, that he should get his living by the sweat of his brows.
I confess therefore O thou just God and loving father, that I have merited
this bondage, that thou may be justified when thou art judged. Give me thy
grace O Lord, that I may be diligent and faithful in my vocation, to do my
duty, not so much for fear as for conscience. Give me thy grace, that I may
serve with a willing mind, and a free conscience, that being subject to a
Christian in body, yet I may bear rule over sin and Satan in a steadfast
faith, and fear of thee. Guard and defend me with thy grace, and fense me with
thy favor. Uphold my feet from slipping, stay me that I fall not, and if I
fall, raise me up that I may not lie in the mire of desperation, when sin
shall assault me. Plow my heart with the threats of thy pearsing law, and
harrowe it with a grievous memorial of my omitied duty: but so O Lord, that
thou in the end do so we in it the seed of thy Gospel, the bread of
immortality, that I may live in thee and by thee, now and for ever, Amen.

A prayer for the blessing of his labor.
SVch was the fall of Adam, O gracious God, so great was his rebellion against
thy divine majesty, that of desert thou may forsake him, and stay the hand
of thy boun teous liberality. Notwithstanding Lord, because that thou have
commanded all men to ask, and allured them to crave things necessary by thy
promise, that he that asks shall have: therefore, O Lord, in hope of thy
wonted and offered mercy, I come unto thee in the names of Christ thy beloved
son and my louinge husband: desiring thee, in the streams of thy bloody
tears, to wash me from my sins, to bury them in the bottom of the sea, and
to scatter them as chafe before the wind, that I being taken into thy favor,
and reconciled to thee in the blood of the immaculate lamb, may look in
assurance for thy fatherly providence. Bless, O Lord, the curssed earth: so
fructify the barren earth with the deawe of heaven, that we may have great
cause to glorify thy name, and sufficient for nature against extremity, to
relieve us with thy store in time of necessity, Amen.

A prayer for peace.
AP pease, O gracious God, the surging waves of this present evil world: cut
down the angry makebates, and grant unto us the peace of thy spirit: that
living in one mind, and bearing about us one will grounded upon thy gracious
pleasure, we may, be gathered into one sheepefolde, and live in brotherly
love and unfeigned unity. O loving maker and God of peace, it is a pitious
thing to see the malice of the world: it is a myserie to behold how thy members
disioint themselves in ceremonies and beggarly elements: it is a hell to
consider how mighty Saul rages against little David: to see the beastly
cruelty and tiger like tyranny of the Pharaos of this world, who not tendering
their own case, not regarding the end of thy passion, or full and sole
redemption, do rack and rent the babes of thy Church, thy beloved wife.
Redress all this gracious God: either cut off our enemies or else convert
them, that we may together wage battle against the devil our archaduersarie.
Season the hearts of our brethren, that will for a trifling ceremony, renounce
thy verity, and break the bands of Christian unity. Continue the weak
nouices of thy school in the liberty of thy Gospel, that all offense being
taken away, we may serve thee the God of peace, even charity it self, in
Charity, Amen.

A prayer in time of War.
O Lord and only peacemaker, link us in unity that are divided, join us
in love that have sundered our selves, and so transgressed thy holy will. If
our cause be evil, good Lord amend us and reconcile us with the peace of thy
spirit: if it be good, defend us O Lord, and turn unto us, or else confound
our enemies Gracious Jesus, thou knotte of peace, which have joined God thy
father and man, not only in favor as friends: but also coupled us in one
brotherhood with thee, as his children: we beseech thee to sow the seed of
concord in us, that we may live in thee as fruitful branches now and for ever.
O Lord give us thy grace that we purchase no envy, nor be the fathers of
sedition, of war, or any insurrection: but imprinte in our hearts thus much,
that thou art love, who shall come to judge the quick and the dead. Charity
shall judge the world, and confound al bruers of tumults. Ingraue this lesson,
O Lord, in the tables of our hearts, and for give us all that is past, and guide
us in that which is to come, that we fall not but stand fast in the way of thy
will, Amen.

A prayer for the Captain.
DEfend the righteous cause of thy servant: assist me with strength against
mine enemies, with the wisdom of thy spirit against the policy of man, that
being wholly guided by thee, I may fight manfully in thy quarrel, to the
building of thy Church, and utter rebuke of her adversaries. Without thee, o
fountain of goodness, and God of mine estate I can do nothing. Arm me
therefore with thy grace, with the buckler of thy word, that I may be able not
only to war with, but also to ouermatch Satan my deadlye foe, and al his
hellish band, setting themselves against thee and thine anointed. Enriche me
with thy mercy, that I may be able to put upon me the white raiment offaith,
and being clothed with it, may stand sure against the foming minysters of the
devil, that no storm may ouerturne or dismay me. O Lord keep me from al wrest
ling affections, from inordinate motions defend me, O Lord. Let al discord be
removed, whereby thy pelican children may be disseuered. But nourishe O God
of love, thy babes with the spirit of patience, that I and they being of one
mind, may do our endeuoures, and bend our whole strength to the reedifieng
of mother Sion, which traueleth with sorrows, and sinketh in the mist of
heresies, unless thou pull her out by the hand of thy mercy: which do O
gracious God, I beseech thee, Amen.

A prayer for the soldier.
THis world is nothing else but a sea of trouble, here the devil stormeth,
there the world frowneth, on every side the flesh assaulteth us, so that our
life may well be termed a warrefare, and our days a treasure of dangers. O
Lord, with the anchor of thy mercy uphold us, that we sink not in the sea of
this troublous time: but guide us with thy holy spirit, that our lives may
please thee, and we in our death praise thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Plant the tree of peace among us, let it flourishe to the gladdening of our
hearts; that al dissension cut off, we may be linked in one knot of Christian
unity, gathered into one sheepfold, and guided by thee our only and one
shepherd. Let nothing sunder the members of thy body, but cherish and
nourish them with a full persuasion of brotherhood, in the unity of our
Savior, and thee our one and only father, Amen.

A prayer in time of dearth.
O Mighty God and maker of al things: thou art just, and in justice have thou
scourged us: we confess it, O Lord. Our lives have deserved thy whip, the
excessive riot of sin has merited the famine and want of thy gracious
benefits: but not withstanding loving Lord, bury our iniquities in the
multitude of thy wonted goodness, and bless us with the store of thy mercy,
that as we may now declare thy justice revealed against sin: so likewise
we may preach and blase abroad to the world, the bottomless pit of thine
infinite pity. O gracious Lord, thou gave thine only son our Jesus to the
death, even to the death of the cross by his bitter passion to purchase our
redemption. As thou have given him: so good Lord give us all thy benefits with
him, that as thou have by him redeemed us, so we in him may be sustained,
during this transitory life, with fullness of thy grace, till the day of his
great visitation, when meting him in the clouds, we shall be set on his right
hand, to live with him in sulnesse of joy for ever. Desend us, O Lord, from
extreme needines, and correct us not in thine anger; but store us with
sufficient in thy mercy. Food and raiment, good Lord we ask no more. Give
us and grant us this our petition, and give us grace therewith to be content,
Amen.

A prayer against the fear of death.
THy hands have ramed me O lord. And whereas to the ble(...)she of all his
posterity, father Adam made himself thorough folly worse than nothing, a
curssed caitife, even thine utter enemy: it pleased thee of vnmerited goodness,
to leave the college of thy Saints: the ninety nine just sheep, the band of
thy blessed angels, to seek the straieng sheep, the groate that lost that
royal stamp of a pure nature, to the utter disgracing of all his progeny.

Man, this lost sheep thou soughtest O Jesus, thou foundest sweet Jesus, by
death thou foundest her, by bleeding pains thou foundest her, by nailed hands
and bored feet thou foundest her, by a sharp and thornie crown, which pear
ced thy glorious head, by sheding of thine own blood, by drinking of veneger
in thine extreme thirst, by suffering the most violent death of ye cross thou
foundest her: and so fo undest thy lost sheep, man, lost man, sinful man,
the child of wrath O Jesus.

O loving Jesus and tender hearted Samaritan, that of a sick have salued, of a
sore sinner have saved him, of a wicked Creature washed him clean in the
stream of thine inestimable mercy. O Jesus, O gracious Jesus, thou have sought
lost man, and found lost man, by condemning sin, by breaking the bands of
the devil, by conquering hell, sin, death and devil, in the flesh.

Since therefore thouhaste, O loving Jesus, pitiful Jesus, of thy mercy, shed thy
blood, not only for my first father Adam, but also for me, even for the
whole world, that as sin ouerran al men to condemnation by one man: so in
thee all the nations of the world might be blessed. And since thou have not
only made a full purgation for my sins, being the slaughtered Lamb that
haste taken away the sins of the world: but also soong a conquest over
sin, which has lost his sting, death which was dead, and hell which had lost
the victory, and the dragon which thou ouercammest in heaven, by preaching
liberty to Captives, and leading captivity captive, there is no cause why I
should faint and fear death.

Arm me therefore, O Lord, with this faith, that thou have dashed Death in
pieces with the rod of thy merits, and drowned the devil in the rivers of thy
precious blood, that no torment or biting pain of the flesh sunder me from
thee most loving Jesus: but imprint in my heart thy grace, that in greatest
anguishe I may be so far from the fear of it, as rather to cry with thy
Saints Come Lord Jesus, Come: and desire to be dissolved with Paul, and to be
with thee my loving husband, than by any panges of death to refuse thee. O
Lord do thy good will, Amen.

Another.
Our Father which art in heaven, thou art life; how shall I come unto thee?
there is no way O Lord, but thy self: no man comes unto thee but by thee.
There is no remedy but this vessel of earth must be broken, before I shall see
thee face to face even as thou art in fulness of glory. Dust to duste, ashes to
ashes, claie to claie, earth must return to earth, to pay this borrowed
tabernacle to earth where of it came. Grass must wither, the flower must fade,
the vapor vanish, I must be dissolved before I shall be joined fully to thee
my head and only vine, wherein I live. Thy purseuant sickness must visit this
body of sin, and death must row me over the seas of this world, unto thee
in the bark of faith, by the anchor of thy couena^ts made to the house of
David. O Lord therefore give me grace to welcome death, by which I must pass
to life, that dieng in thee I may be blessed, and live in the storehouse of thy
joys for ever, Amen.

Another.
O Loving husband, mine only Jesus, sleep not, slumber not: but awake my
joy, awake my comfort, and lose the bands of my misery. Death, death O Lord,
thou have nailed to the tree, by the precious passion, and drowned Satan the
prince of darkness in the streamie flood of thy blessed blood. Sweet Jesus,
loving Lord, and husband mine, lock up the faith of this thy merit in my heart,
and clip me in the sweet arms of thy woonted comfort. Kiss me, kiss me,
pitious Jesus, pity me, and be not angry with me. Divorce me not O
merciful Jesus: but marry me in mercy, and call me in thy favor to the
marriage of grace, that being thine by the testimony of thy spirit, I may
singe with a brazen face: sin, where is thy sting? hell where is thy victory?
Mercy O Lord, mercy, love, loving God, love is thy nam(...) mercy is my
suit, O bottomless pity: thy love I labor and cry for; Lord, Lord, Jesus
thou son of David have mercy upon me, and spread forth the banners of thy
comfort, that I may know that I am thine, and knowing it, may never distrust
thine inestimable mercy, Amen.

Another in form of a confession.
IN thy name, O Lord, Amen. I acknowledge to the publishing of God his glory,
and the comfort of my soul, that I am God his own child, that he has
created me of nothing, redeemed me being lost, and preserved me from the womb
till this time. In him have I only trusted, and never shall be confounded.
Beloved friends in the Lord, for your comfort and mine own duty, hear my
confession, which every christian is bound to make. I acknowledge there fore in
the face of GOD Almighty, before you all, that whether I live or die, I am
his. He has suffered death to save me from death, he was crowned with thorns
to crown me with glory: he was bored and nailed to the tree, to nail and to
crucify the sins of the whole world. He was content to be pierced and goared
with a spear, yea so pearsed, that the blood gushed out, and for nothing else
but to wash me clean from the sore of sin, in the streams of his mercy. For
this with one consent let us cry, Our souls do magnify the Lord, and our
spirits rcioise in God our Savior. Sccondlie I confess, that though Christ
in his precious blood has cleansed me from the filth of sin, that
notwithstanding I do nothing in this present life, but heap sin upon sin,
and hourde up trespass upon trespass, so that this day is worse always than
yesterdaie, by increasing as days, so sins: and therefore the indignation of
God against me. But yet those of hell shall not be able to prevail against me.
For there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus my Savior.
Thirdly I confess that as my life is sinful, so it is short; like a smoke,
like a shaddowe, like a warrefare, like a flower that fades, grass that
withers, a word that soon passes, it is like a bubble in the water, a
weauers shuttle: it is a span long and no more. Again it is not only short
but also miserable. For it is an exile, a vale of misery, it is a wilderness,
it is stuffed with sorrows, a cage of enemies, a sea of myseries, a dungeon of
gronings and grievous sobbings: it is a storm, a tempest that wonderfully
trobleth the people of our heavenly father: believe me, it is no better than a
woman's travel, and that is extremely miserable: and therefore, as not only
short but also wretched I am willing to forsake it. Yea death, welcome death;
sickness, sickness of all messengers welcome art thou. Adue vile life, farewell
life, sinful life adue, and welcome death the purseuant of my loving Savior:
for by thee my misery shall end. From war to peace, from this stormy world
into the calm country of heaven: from gronings and sobbings, from this vale
of fighings, to the palace of joy: from earth to heaven, from sinful men and
wild beasts to beloved friends, by death I shall pass to life, to have the
company of holy Patriarchs, and blessed Saints, to have the sight of the
glorious Trinity, to have and inherit such joy, as neither eye has seen,
nor ear heard, nor heart ever conceived. By death I shall have liberty without
imprisonment, health without sickness, joy without sorrow, pleasure without
pain, in such security, eternity and perpetuity as passes all thoughts.
The holy ones of GOD my father, the blessed Angels and Archangels they have
atteined it, but never can they sufficiently esteem of it. So that O death,
thou art welcome: welcome sickness for my Lord Jesus has new sent thee to fetch
me from this prison to his palace, from a strange contrie to my home, from this
place of tears and mourning to the day of marriage, sweet Jesus to marry thee
in thy mercies for ever. Hear dearly beloved, hear and rejoice with me.
Sickness is com, death is in coming as a purseuant from my loving Jesus, to
cite me to appear before him, that he may appoint me a man sion in his fathers
house, to sit with him at the table of joy for ever. O the great joy and only
joy of a Christian; Now I shall lie noe more in this prison: now I shall have
Paul's wish: for I shall be delivered from this body of sin: now shall I
depart in peace with Simeon to have that peace that passes all understanding,
and surmounteth al thought. Now now shall I see the amiable tabernacles of my
Lord: now shall I enter the courts of my God, where one day is better than
a thousand elsewhere: now shall I be a doorekeeper in the house of mine
heavenly father, now shall I appear before the presence of God, now does his
kingdom come, now Lord Jesus, now thou co^mest to carry my soul into joy,
Into thy hands therefore I commit my spirit. Beloved brethren this is my
testamente, which I leave unto you, it offers great joy, and no matter of
Tears. Shead therefore no tears, for better is the day of death than the
day of birth. I entered my life with a cry, it cost my mother pain and
tears to bear me, but yet it cost my loving Jesus his blood to save me,
you, and all the world. Envy not therefore my luckines, that now I shall pass
from you out of this vale of tears, unto him who died that I with him might
live in joy for ever.

If you will mourn, mourn for your own sins, mourn for your selves, that
you shall not so soon sup with God my father as I shall do: and mourn not for
me, for you shall shortly follow me, and lose me but for a time, when you shall
see in heaven for ever. For blessed are the dead that die in ye Lord, whose
name for ever be glorified, Amen.

A prayer for the rich man.
THou art the Welspring of all good things, O louinge Lord: thou art the
rich store house and cheste of mercy for all naked Adamites O Love
inestimable; We are born into this Vale of misery not only wicked in soul,
but even also naked in body: a deserved entrance for us by father Adam,
through desire of souereigntie: but an undeserved thing it is, O good GOD that
notwithstanding our merited poverty and deserved nakedness, by rebellion
against thy Majesty, thou should thus cloth me with thy benefits: with
plenty against penury, with friendship against enimitie, with health against
sickness, with store against needinesse. This O Lord, is an vnmerited
benefit, for the which after my bounden duty, I give thee hearty thanks. But
what shall I say? what sufficient thanks shall I render unto thee? for thou
have not only armed me against poverty (...) but also chosen me as a
steward to unlock the chest of thy benefits to needye Lazarus, that as thou
have loved me, so I should tender thee in him. O Lord give me thy grace, that
I may be thy steward, by clothing the naked, by feeding the hungry, lodging
the harbourles, and defending the fatherles: that I may be able to render a
faithful accoumpt of my stewardshipp unto thee i(...) the day of revelation.
Grau(...) this O Father, for Christ his sake, Amen.

Another.
O Father of Heaven, and rich God of mercy. Behold thy poor creature, in sin
rich, in grace poor: bestow upon me some mite of thy mercy, cloth me
with the merits of thy son Jesus, and bathe my naked body in (...) precious
blood: satisfy my hungry soul with a crum of thy gracious blessings, that
being clothed with the armor of his meritorious passion, I need not to fear
the naked, the desperate corruption, or rather wages of nature. Moisten my
heart with the honyedew of thy great and rich grace, that as thou have enriched
me beyond my desert, being by sin an enemy unto thee: so I may continue
rich in good works, to the profit of my neighbors, to the comfort of mine
own soul, and to the manifestation of thy glorious majesty. O Lord, thou
art a zealous God, Such a God as wishest my health, and the safety of thy
Creatures, have therefore mercy upon me, bless me with faith toward thee,
with love toward my neighbor, and a godly care toward my self, that thou
in thy self may be magnified, and my conscience reioise in the testimony of
a good life, whose reward in thy son Christ is life eternal, Amen.

The Beggars prayer.
O Mighty Lord, and provident GOD, ye stewardes of thy plentious storehouse are
not moved to feed the hungry, to cloth the naked, and lodge the poor
Pylgrime at his piteous cry, but notwithstanding all this their tyranny,
Father forgive them, and pardon me, as I forgive them that have trespassed
against me. Rake the fire of charity out of the dead ashes, and quicken it O
Lord, that I may warm me in thy family, in time of extremity: and they be
ready in thy great audit to render a full account of their stewardshippe unto
thee. But first of all do I beg grace of thee, that I may ever seek thy
kingdom, and so be persuaded in heart by thy word, that I shall want nothing,
but that all other things shall be added unto me. This do I ask of thee, O
father of Heaven, that ever criest, Ask and have. Give me faith to ask in
certaintye, that I may look without doubt for this thy craved mercy, o Lord I
beseech thee, Amen.

Another.
LAue mercy upon me: O Lord, and pardon mine offenses, the rich men of this
world will scarce look upon me, or vouchsafe to relieve my necessity with
the crummes of their ouer-streaming tables. But yet O Lord, I beseech thee
forgive them, and deny me not the crumbs of thy grace: but look upon me with
the pitious eye of thy loving countenance. Assist me so O Lord, with thy holy
spirit, that being always content with my calling, I may seek to serve thee
in holiness and pureness of living without fear all the days of my life. Beat
me with poverty, beat me O Lord, strike wound, do thy good will, o loving
God: so thou save me of thy mercy, wherein lies all the joy of my soul. Give
me thy grace, never to misdoubte thy providence, that never doubting of thy
fatherly care, I may with a gladsome heart endure the end of my warrefare. Give
me a contented mind, let thy will be my will, and my will always answerable to
thy will, that I never offend thee, but do my duty in loving thee, and
wishing well to all the world, Amen.

The Widows prayer.
O LORD, I thank thee that thou have scourged me with the death of mine
husband. He was bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh: he by the covenant of
matrimony was made one body with me: thou gave him unto me, and thou haste
taken him from me: blessed be thy name for ever. The bands of death have
sundered me from him: but I hope O Lord, by the power of thy holy spirit,
that nothing shall be able to separate me from thee mine only Jesus, the
only joy of my soul, put the axe of thy mercy to the root of wanton
nature, and cut it off: that I do not marry the vanity of this wicked
world: but put upon me the garment of innocence, and tie about my heart the
jewel of faith, that I may only marry thee in the covenant of thy heavenly
father, loving Jesus, and have nothing to do with the adulterer the Dyuell,
the father of deadly fornication. This is the only bed of joy wherein I will
sleep O Lord, and the only arc of comfort, where in I will sail, till I shall
see thee face to face. To whom be praise and honor both now and ever, Amen.

The Tenants prayer.
I Thank thee, O father of Heaven, that thou haste made me after thin own
image. Thou might have made me a frog, a worm, a tree, but thou have not
done it, O Lord? And what was in cause? surely not my merit, for I was not
before thou made me: it was thy mercy, good Lord, the true mother of all
mankind. Thou have not made me a king, a ruler, a lord: no Lord, but I thank
thee for it thou have made me a tenant of men, but yet in thee, that ever I
might acknowledge thee i^ them my chief Lord in heaven. Give me grace O Lord,
to thankful for this thy will, and dutifullie to walk in my voca tion, and
give me thy grace, that as I am a tenant to man, so I may always be a tenant
to thee, to do thee service, to pay thee yeerelie my hourly rent, which is a
thankful heart for all thy benefits. If man would have me to do wrong against
right, Lord give me of thy grace to consider, that better it is to be thy
Tennant than man's. If the devil and the world entising me to walk wantonly
seek my destruction: give me grace O God, to consider, that al things are sub
iect to thine universal power: and shall not they obeie? how then can they or
dare they assault me to hurt me, fastening the anchor of my faith upon so sure
and firm a rock? if the flesh make war against the spirit, to make me
serviceable to sin, minister strength unto me O Lord, that being thy tenant
and a child of thy family, I may win the field, and fighting valiauntlye,
may be crowned eternally with thy son Jesus my blessed Savior, Amen.

The fatherless childs prayer.
O Lord, so narrow is the mouth of charity, so consumed is the firebrand of
Christian love, that although the foxes have their holes, and birds their
neastes, yet have we no place to rest our heads on. As Pilgrims we wander
from place to place, and are driven with the winds of pinching poverty upon
the seas of this world to seek relief: but alas and woe to the world for it.
The rich man deuoureth all superfluity, or else hourdeth up to fill his
Garners niggardlie: so that Lazarus may not only walk amid the streets
naked, but also lie begging at the gates full sore, and yet go without the
crumbs which fall from the Table, to ease the tune of his necessity. O Lord
therefore do I fly unto thee: have thou mercy upon me, for it is only thou
which fillest with thy blessing every living thing. I am better than a
farthing sparrowe O Lord: thou know it and I acknowledge it to my comfort.
Feed my soul with the flesh of thy son, and set me drink of his blood,
that seeking first thy kingdom, I may in the end be crowned with glory, and
sit at the table of joy in heaven with thee. O Lord grant this, I beseech thee,
Amen.

A Sword against the fear of death. Wherein is lively declared, with what
weapons a Christian soldier should fight to hold and keep his own: made by
the said E. H.
The first weapon: Consider thy self.
MAN does consist of twoe parts, an earthly body, and soul spiritual. Thy
body what is it? It is a case of thy soul, such a case as is a prison, and
therefore Dauyd desirous of life eternal, and the sight of his master Christ,
cried out; Oh, how long shall I lie in this prison? Yea this case of the soul
is such a cage of filth, as a man of God has said, that no Bocardo, noe
dungeon, no sink, no puddle, no pit is in any respect so evil a prison for
this body, as the body is of the soul. For it is such a case, as stinketh in
the sight of God, a body of sin is this cage of the soul, and therefore
cried Paul out, oh wretch that I am; who shall deliver me from this body of
sin?

Behold dear Chrystians, such an heavy burden was the body to the soul,
that Paul was willing to give this world a farewell, and with father Simeon he
wished that he might depart in peace. Oh that we had this courage of Paul! or
were as godly wise as David, to lock that up in the closet of our hearts,
which they had fully digested. For then we should have a wished famine of
mourning Christians, on rather unchristian Painims, who do weep and wail
for the dissolution of this earthie and frail tabernacle, which David longed
for, and Paul with father Simeon desired.

David that father of the faith full and mouth of the holy spirit, he was a
man after GOD his own heart, whom God had spiced with grace, and made of his
mercy a vessel of honor. He was a pillar of mother Sion, he lived in the
childhood of the Church, when the cloud of the law did yet ouershaddowe the
appearance of the sun in fulness of comfort. He desired to se the day but
could not see it, which is now paste, wherein the son of God has opened
fully the storehouse of joy: and yet being weary of the burden of his body,
and willing to forsake it as a most stinking prison house, without fear of
death he cries out, Oh how long shall I lie in this prison?

Paul ioineth hands with father David, even Paul, that notable Organne of the
holy Ghost, who said of himself: It is not I that live, but Christ that
lives in me. He that in body saw the Lord, and knew that as a vapor his
life should vanish, and so he in a small space should suppe with his master
Christ in heaven, after his ascension: yet carriyng about himself this case
of the soul, accounts himself wretched, and therefore cries out: Oh wretch
that I am? who shall deliver me from this body of sin? As if he should have
said, I know that the time will come when men will faint in faith, and broch
infidelity: when this life shall be more loved than wisely lothed, and this
body more esteemed than godliness will suffer. I know foolish parents will
be so be witched with the immoderate love of their children, that they will
grudge at the will of God, when he calls them, and sorrow and sighe a long
time after their departures, which is both sin and folly. But I tell them
that they ought to reioise, because they are rested from their labors,
because they are passed from Death to life, because they are blessed. For
wretch, O wretch that I am! who shall deliver me out of this body of sin?

The body which you have lost, is but a body of sin, it is but a prison of
the soul, as father David speaks, it is but a burden of the soul: so that
by Death they are delivered from sin to safety, from imprisonment to
liberty, from a yoke of myserie to endless felicity: and therefore, oh wretch
that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of sin? Paul indeed knew that
this world was an exile, and Heaven his country, that he was a pilgrim, this
world but an Inn, and heaven his home: nay at a sight of his own Country
when he was rapt, he saw at his own home, whence by sin he was banished in
Adam, such joys as eye never saw, nor ear heard, nor heart ever conceived.
These are the joys which shall endure for ever, for number unmeasurable, for
durance perpetual, and without end or period. And therefore let every
Christian be ready and willing, in joy of spirit to welcome death, and in
token thereof learn to cry out with Paul: Oh wretch that I am, who shall
deliver me from this body of sin?

Let us account our selves wretched, as long as we carry this weed of earth
about us, until our souls be uncased, and we delivered from this body of
sin. But if examples will not be of force to school us, yet let nature
speak and prevail. The second causes whereof you are made, are the four
elements, which concur to the constitution of every mixed creature, and being
ever at combat, do also naturally work the shipwreck of the same, according
to the common axiom and rule of nature. The causes of corruption are all one
with the causes of gene ration: and therefore unless we will deny nature, and
be un thankful to God for our creation, we may not in any case fear death,
which is mothered upon nature our common and general mother. But if neither
example nor Nature will or can prevail, yet let the authority of our
Heavenly Creator, and his wisdom compel us to welcome death, and to accept
willinglye the condition of our bodies.

Our bodies and souls God created, he made them by the power of his almighty
hand, and has lent them unto us but for a time to use, til mother earth
require the body, and he our souls. For, as of earth we came: so into earth
we must return again: and therefore unless we will be unthankful to nature,
and rebellious to God, we must be willing to pay our debts unto him, least
if we do it not, he cast us into prison, til we have paid the uttermost
farthing. So much for thy body.

Now consider thy soul. As thy body is a prison, so is thy soul during this
pilgrimage a prisoner; as it is a body of sin, so is thy soul lodged in a most
stinking prison: as it is of earth earthy: so is thy soul an exile from
heaven, heavenly: and there fore to fear death, it is to fear the delivery of
thy soul from prison, which is mere folly: it is to wish a stinking lodging
and a filthy cage to dwell in, and ever to carry it about thee, which is a
very hard and extreme misery: it is to wish thy continual banishmente from
the ioyefull realm of heaven, thy natural country, which is extreme madness.
So that unless you will be counted foolish, wretched, careless and mad, who are
willed to be as wise as serpents, you must in no case fear death, which is
the best ghest that ever came to the godly. For now there is not condemnation
to them that are in Christ Jesus, but blessed are the dead that die in the Lord.

The second weapon: Consider thy life.
IT is short, uncertain, and miserable. It is short: for man that is borne of
a woman has but a short time to live: the days of man are the days of an
hyrelinge, yea wind, and nothing: as father Job tells us. A man in his time
is but grass, and flourishes as a flower of the field. For as soon as the
wind goes over it, it is gone, and the place thereof knows it no more: as
the prophet David teaches

There is a time to be borne, and a time to die. And man is like a thing of
naught, his days pass away like a shaddowe. It is the proclamation of the
Lord, uttered by Esaias, that al flesh is grass, and all the glory of man as
the flower of grass. And it is told us by Paul, that here we have no
continuing cyttie, but we seek for one to come. This is it which is shaddowed
unto us in sundry similitudes. Saint James says: Our life is even a vapor
that appears for a little time, and then vanishes away. Our days on the
earth also are but as a shadow, and there is none abiding. They are like a
bubble in the water, like a weauers shuttle, like a smoke, they are like a
thought, soon conceived, and soon ended. Daily experience does teach us
thus much. For we see, that by some storm or other, the green apple falls
before the mellowed fruit, the lamb is brought to the slaughterhouse as well
as the sheep, the chicken is killed for the broth as well and sooner than the
cock: young men pass away as well as old, our days are short, our life is as
the shadow.

Now therefore reason with me. Shall we fear death for the loss of a shadow?
shall we by sighs and sobs storm against the Lord for the loss of a vapor?
nay, shall we not rather be glad to forgo the shadow, and by death desire to
be knit more fullye to our body Jesus, whereof we are members in faith and
hope? O ye of little faith, cry unto the God of hea uen: Lord increase our
faith. Be content to leave this vaporous life, and welcome death, and cry in a
full belief. Come Lord lesu, come, shorten these latter days for thine elect
sake and save us. Save us, O Lord save us, have mercy upon us, and help us,
help Lord, and by a blessed death cite us to appear before thee. For one day
in thy court, is better than a thousand elsewhere, Amen.

Secondly, consider that thy life is uncertain. For death is like a thief
that comes at uncertain hours, he is like a thundercracke, that sounds on
a sudden: yea, this life is so uncertain, that death may ask his due in the
swathcloth, and none be able to resist him. He is always a prince, he rules
not only in the harvest, but also in the spring time and summer Young men and
babes old men and maids, green and ripe, al are one: death excepteth no
persons, he never regards our years, but with his sharp sith on a sudden
he cutteth al down. So y^ our life is like a ruinous house, always ready to
fall: like a thin thread, always ready to rotte: like a running cloud, whereof
we are uncertain, where and when it falls. This cloud sometimes melts in
the cradle, somtims in the chair. Death is like the sun, whenever it
shines, it melts our cloudie life, be the cloud thereof never so thin or
thick in years.

Our life now being as uncertain as the weathercocke, which turns at every
blast: or like the wave, which mounteth at every storm: or like the reed
which boweth at every whisteling wind: why should we love it, and not rather
loath it, in comparison of the euerduring life of the heavenly citizens,
whereunto by death we pass in mercy, Oh that al Christians would ingraue in
their hearts, the wavering days of this uncertain life, and consider and look
for in a full faith, the certainty of that joyful life, whereunto death does
bring us; For then would we, that sail as pilgrims on the waters of this
world, and are tossed dangerously by diverse pirates, the flesh, sin, and the
devil, desire, and with hearty prayer crave of the Lord, that in the bark of
a lively faith, by his mariner death, he would carry us to the certain and
blessed life of his saints.

If we were thus godly wise to consider the uncertainty of this momentanie
life: or so happy, as to ponder the eternal felicity of Jerusalem, and
restful Cannaan, we would rather joy and be merry, when sickness and death shall
visit us, than mourn and sorrow for it. For they are the Lords ambassadors,
which are sent to bring us tidinges that dynner and supper is ready, and the
banquet of glory to be minystred: and that we must come without tarrieng to
marry him, and to enjoy him face to face even as he is: and (...)fore with
willing mind t^ ^aie our debted bodies to mother earth whereof we borrowed
them: and to him our souls, that he may marry them in the covenant of his
Eternal mercies.

We are borne into this world naked, our heritage is sin and myserie, our life
is labor and sorrow, we our selves are but tenaunts under mother earth,
concerning our bodies: and under GOD, concerning our souls: which God, our God
of joy and father of comfort, by his own son, has bought us an inheritance
immortal, and undefiled for ever, unto the which by sickness and death, as the
messengers of his will, he calls us.

Is all this so? and shall we fear death? no: for shame let us bid adieu to
this short and uncertain life, and receive death in joy of spirit, as an
accomplishment of the obligation of his covenant, wherewith he bound himself
of his mere mercy, beyond any merit of ours, that we should never see
death, but have everlasting life.

Unless therefore you will mourn against death, because by it you pass from
an uncertain, to a certain life: from these sorrowing and wavering days, to
an everlasting and incorruptible inheritance: and so show your selves rather
willing to have the fleshepots (...) Egypt for ever, than to pass to heaven,
and to eat of comfortable manna, not in the wilderness, but in new Jerusalem:
see that ye fear not death, but love it, and welcome it, whenever the Lord
will send it unto you.

Thirdlye, consider thy life is miserable. It is not only short, but also
miserable: yea, I may well term it a kingdom of misery. Newborn babes do
what they can, to persuade us of the truth of this matter. For they begin not
this life with smiling countenance, but with weeping eyes. By their cry what
else does nature sing or signify unto us, but that thorough our sins, our
life is become a continual warfare, and the world our enemy, even (...) vale
of misery, besette with thorns to prick us on every side.

Righteous Abell found in his life time a thorn of his own blood to trouble
and molest him even Caine his own brother to bache his blade in his blood, and
villanouslie to murder him. John Baptist, the bright dayestar, and forerunner
of Christ, the sun of righteousness, he found a thornie Herod to behead
him, and holy Stephan stony Jews to dispatche him. Yea, what is this life
but a fardle of misery, wherein Christ our blessed savior tasted of nothing,
but of the sower grape of persecution? For, no sooner was this lamb of God
come into the world: but Herod, by the decree of his hellishe convocation, was
ready to deuo(...) him: this was a misery to mother Marie. And marvelously
does it paint out the mysery of this life, that the honey babe Jesus, the very
lamb of God and light of this world is so welcomen into the world, which
intended mischief.

And where he by the providence of his heavenly father, escaped the snare of
the ravenous fowler, yet for his sake do the children and sucklings of
Bethleem and the coasts thereof, as many as were twoe years old and under,
preach unto us the misery of this our life. The voice that was heard in
Ramah, moorning, weping, and great lamentation. Rachell (...)eeping for her
children, with out all comfort, because they were not, teaches us, and cries
out upon the miserable life of man.

If al careless Epicures would ask the judgment of Father Job in this case, he
would expound the mystical cries of tender sucklinges, that man which is
borne of a woman, has not only a short time to live, but also a miserable
life to lead: that his life is a warfare, continual labor and sorrow. This
judgment of Job, without all doubt was rooted in him and his brother Jeremy.
And thereof it came, without question, that they did curse, not only the day
of birth, but also him that brought the message to their father, that a child
was borne. They had fully considered the degrees of their misery. Their birth
place was but a foul and filthy dungeon, they themselves were but a substance
of blood and instruments of their mothers: their nourishment little better than
venom, and their birth not without extreme pains of the dear mother, and
violent offense of their tender bodies.

They knew thoroughly that they were conceived in filth and uncleanness, born
in sin and care, and nourished with pain and labor. They did know
themselves to have bin like cralling worms, and that at their entry into this
world they were apparelled with blood. And therefore considering their
miserable condition they curssed the day of their wretched birth.

Yea, this made father Jeremy to wish, that his mothers womb had served
for his tumbe: and father Esaie to bewail his birth, and to murmur against
the knees that held him up, and also the breasts that gave him suck. They
had fully conceived, that man was made of the slime of the earth, conceived in
sin, borne in pain, and at the last made a prey for worms. This misery of
man's life had they fully digested, and therefore wished to have died before
they were borne.

Come hither now, beloved Christians: we are many an ace short of Job,
Jeremy, or Esaias, in life and in judgment. One, after a through sifting of
this miserable life, wished that his mothers womb had been his tumbe: another
murmured at the paps that gave him suck the third curssed the day of his
birth: and not only that, but him also that first declared it. Did they so
little set by this miserable life, as to curse it: and so little love the
pappes that norished them, as to murmur against them: yea, the very knees that
held them up, and by reason of this wretched pilgrimage, to be so weary of
this life, as to wish they had been buried in their mothers womb? and shall
we fear death?

They wished they had never lived: and shall we, for fear of death, wish ever,
or a long time to live? they curssed the day of their birth, who were holy
men: and shall we weep for the day of death, the very end of their wish?
did they murmur against the paps that gave them suck, and shall not we welcome
death, when the Lord sends him? nay they murmured even against the knees
that did bear them up: and shall not we be willing to surrender head, feet,
hands, heart, knees, and al, to mother earth, and to salute death in joy of
spirit?

Fie for shame! and out upon us! if we do not willingly and merrily wish,
and cry: Thy kingdom come, o father of heaven! Come Lord Jesus, come. Let us
deny the old man, and cherish our hope that we have in the full merits of
Christ: that when the Lord shall call, we may come unto him, without any
rebellion. And as for death, account of it but as a most blessed end or
period of this wretched life, and an axe that cutteth off al miseries: and
therefore fear it not.

The third weapon: Consider the commodities of death.
WE are tossed and turmoyled upon the seas of this world, with many a
dangerous tempest: even till we be we arie, or at least should be with holy
Paul, of our short, uncertain, and miserable lives* and then does the Lord,
even of mercy, call us to rest and joy with his Saints in heaven (...) that
resting from our labors, we may continually pray se him with the band of his
holy Angels.

By death he delivers us from danger, and therefore to arm us against the
fear thereof, it pleased the holy spirit to call death a sleep: by the which
being dispatched of all adversities, we are brought to our graves, therein to
lie, as it were in a soft featherbed, and in a sweet sleep, abiding the coming
of Christ our lord, when he shall knock at the bedd^ and call us up, to live
for eue^ with him, and his holy Angels.

Death therefore does not swalow up our bodies, though for a time they must lie
in the belly of mother earth. For death is a sleep, and is impossible as it
is, that a whole man being in a sound sleep, should not wake up again: even
so impossible is it, that a Chrystian should continue in Death for ever. And
as for this sleep, it is but a short sleep: for the day is at hand, and the
time of iudgmente draws near, when dead bodies shall arise, and the earth
shall render them up, that be in her, that meeting and appearing together, with
our beloved friends, and set upon the right hand of his blessing, we may as
lively members be fully knit in our body Christ Jesus.

So that death is but a sleep, and a short sleep, out of the which, we, and
al our brethren sisters, and friends that are departed in the Lord, shall
rise, more fresh than ever we were, to leave this frail and earthie body, and
to have it made like to the glorious body of Jesus Christ.

And who now would fear death? or who should grudge at the Lord for castinge
us asleep? Death is a sleep, the earth is the Christian man's featherbed
where he must lie^ till the trumpet shall sound to awake him and call him unto
judgment. Who will murmur against this necessity? or rather against this
mercy? for mercy it is, that we die but for a time, or rather sleep for a
time: where of merit we should die for ever.

And therefore unless by your gronings and sighings you will exclaim against the
mercy of the Lord, by the which you are saved, do not fear Death, or murmur
against him: but bles him with father Job, and thank him heartily that he has
granted thee thy daielye petition, wherein thou praiest, saying: Our Father
which art in heaven, thy will be done, deliver us from evil.

For, as for the first, his will is done, whenever any man dies. The very
farthing sparrowe can not fall without his providence: the hears of our head
can not perish, without his will: much less dies any man without his will,
who far surpasses all farthinge Sparrowes. So that to wish them alive that
are departed in peac it is to wish, that God his will were not done: and what
is that, but to wish that GOD were no God? For if God be God, his will is
just, and must needs be done.

But as for many, they will acknowledge that the will of God is done: again,
that hi^ will was just in calling for their children, whom he had but lent
them for a time: and yet will carry a biting sorrow in their hearts, and so
will they go near to bring death upon themselves. But to such mourning
mothers I say, Why do you mourn? this life is a warfare, death is asleep.
Why do you mourn? this life is short, by condition and full of myseries: by
death they are blessed, and rest from their labors.

Why do you mourn? this life is a vapor: by death, for a vapor, they
possess an heavenly and ever during inheritance. Why do you mourn? do you
not think that heaven is better than earth: that the company of angels,
archangels, Patriarchs, Prophete^, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, Virgins, and
the holy ones of God, is better than the fellowship of men, and the company of
beasts.

Do you not believe, that joy is better than sorrow? that life eternal is
better than this short, vain, and vile life? that it is better to see God face
to face, and to follow the lamb Jesus in heaven, in fullness of joy to
possess him at his Heavenly table to banquet with father Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, than to dwell with you? all our fare in this world is dung in respect of
the heavenly meat, which Christ does set before them that are passed by death
to life: and why then do you mourn?

Mourn not for them, for they are happy: happy and thrice happy are they.
But as I say, mourn for your selves that be not so luckie as they; to be taken
from this vale of myserie to the storehouse of felicity, as they are. For by
death they are not dead, but by death they are passed to life, to such a life
as passes all understanding, the joys whereof do surmount the conceit and
thought, not only of man, but also angels and Archangels.

But miserable are you, which do yet carrye about you this earthie Tabernacle:
yea even in this one thing you are miserable unless you repent, that you
mourn for the death of your friends or children. For in that you deny the
will of God to be just, for that he has made man of earth, earthy and mortal.

Mourn for this your unbelief, mourn for this your sin, weep for the sins
of your youth, for your secret sins: and desire God to wipe and to wash your
soul from all infection of sin, that being prepared by death to follow your
friends and children, you may with willing hearts in a lively faith, give a
farewell unto this world, and be ready to marry Christ Jesus in glory: to
whom be all glory, Amen.

A battle between the Devil and the Conscience: Wherein all true Christians
are taught how to oppose and set them selves against the assaults of their
Archaduersary Satan, made in form of a dialog, by the said E. H.
Satan. THou art a Sinner, and therefore the child of wrath.


Conscience. I am a sinner Satan: I confess it, that in me, that is in my
flesh, dwells no good thing, which may move my Lord to take pity upon me:
but yet I deny thy consequent. For though I be a sinner, yet shall not my
sins prevail against me. For behold, says John, The lamb of God has taken
away the sins of the world, he has condemned sin in the flesh, so that
now there is no comdemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus.


Satan. I grant that there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ, but
such are in Christ, which walk not after the flesh as thou dooest,
continually boording up trespass upon trespass against the day of judgment.


Conscience. Thou lie Satan. I walk not after the flesh, but with Paul I
will the thing that is good, though I be not able to perform it, by reason of
that combat which is between the flesh and the spirit. Indeed at the least I
sin seven times a day: but notwithstanding, avoid Satan: for John tells
me, that if any manne sin, we have an advocate, with the Father, Jesus
Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for the sins of the world.


Sat. But how know thou that he will be thine advocate? For he is a
righteous mediator, and therefore he will not deal for thee (...) most
miserable sinner.


Con. I know it Satan, that he will be mine advocate. For so his holy word
preaches unto me, which is the word of Christ the everlasting truth, which I
by his grace will never misdoubt. And herein thou show what thou have been,
even from the beginning a lier. For John tells me, that If any man sin,
yet there is an advocate, and a righteous advocate, even Jesus Christ the
righteous.


Sat. Yea, but how dare thou look up to heaven, and fly to this advocate,
thou being a vile sinner, and he a righteous God?


Con. In a full faith of his mercy, Satan, I dare go to him, For he cries to
all laden and laboring Christians: Come unto me. And why then should I fear to
go unto him? especially, since he has promised to refresh me, If I come
unto him.


Sat. Thou may go unto him, but thou shall find him a judge. For he will
never refresh thee with mercy, but punish thee with deserved judgment and
reward thee according to thy deserts.


Con. Avoid Satan: for thou lie. I will go to him in assurance of his mercy:
for he is truth, and cannot fail in his promise. He will indeed reward me
according to my deserts: but what deserts? Christ his deserts are my deserts:
he by his death deserved life for me and all the world, not for himself, but
for us, according to the saying of Peter. He bare our sins in his body. And
therefore, since Christ by his full obedience has deserved life, my desert in
him is life. And therefore will I dare to go unto my Lord and my God, for I am
sure of mercy.


Sat. I am the prince of darkness, and al sinners belong to my kingdom. For
the reward of sin is death, and therefore assure not thy self of mercy, for
that is in vain.


Con. Avoid Satan: For what though thou be the prince of darkness, yet do I
set thee at naught. I am a sinner, but what of that Satan? my sins have lost
their stinge, and so may thou gape for a prey, and go without a reward. For
in the blood of Jesus Christ am I purged from my sins, yea from all my
sins, the sins of my childhood, my youth, my old age, committed in
thought, word, or deed: whatsoever they have been, are, or shall be, they are
drowned in the bottom of the sea, and so covered in mercy, that the Lord will
never remember them.


Sat. Thou lie conscience. For the Lord is just, and therefore he will
remember them, that he may punish them.


Con. The Lord is righteous, thou foul devil: just, and true are all his
ways, but yet thou lie in thy consequent, for it stands not with his
justice, to remember our sins, that he may punish us, whose sins he has
punished in his son Christ. Christ Jesus, by his death has delivered us out
of debt to the wrath of his heavenly Father, and purchased us remission of
sins. And therefore I am sure that as God is just: so he will not remember my
sins to punish them in me again, since his son has paid his debt for me.
For it is against justice, that any debt should be twice paid, or twyse
required.


Sat. Though Christ once died, to save thee from sin: yet have I thine evil
life to lay against thee, for the which thou art and shall be mine.


Con. Christ indeed died to save me, and by his own death has he fully bought
me from the wrath of his Father. And I confess Satan, to my Lord, that I have
not lived after his law, but many ways transgressed his holy will: but what
then thou foul spirit, am I thine? no Satan no. For the Lord has mercy in
store for every Publican when he craves it, be he never so ill a liver. He is
at this point with us, Ask and have. I will therefore ask mercy of God, who
gave his own son, by his bloody Death to save me: and I am sure that I shall
have my suit. For he has spoken it, and can not lie. Thou lie therefore for
I am not thine. But thou say that I am, and shall be thine. Avoid Satan,
avoid like a coward. For he that is with me has broozed thy head, even the
mighty Lion of the tribe of Judah, that has promised to be with his church
even til the end of the world: he is with me, and if he be with me who can
be against me? do not therefore crake of this Satan, that I am an evil liver,
and therefore thine. Give over thy combat, for if thou do not I will call
upon my Captain Michael, by the power of his Angelike band to dashe thee out
of countenance, who did beat thee in Heaven, and all thy hellish army.


The call of Conscience in conflict for succor against present danger.
THe devil, O Lord, like a ravenous lion does seek to tear the lamb of thy
Pasture; and unless thou helpest there is none other way, but to the
slaughterhouse, It has been a continual practyse of his, even from the
beginning, to rob thy children of the riches of their redemption, wrought and
accomplished by the blood shed of thy beloved son.

He someth like a bore of the desert, and seeks by violence to break into
the vineyard of my soul, which thy hands O thou heavenly husbandman, have
planted. Up therefore and arise O gracious god and good shepherd of my soul.
And as thou have promised, so be thou with me in time of this my skirmishe,
that I may give Satan the foil, and sleep fafelie under the wings of thy
mercy, with whom is store of mercy. To thee be al glory both now and ever,
Amen.

The dead man's School: Wherein Death teaches all Estates and degrees, from
the Prince to the beggar, many notable lessons, most necessary to be learned:
made by the said E. H.
Approach ye sons of Adam, you that are as I was: and shall be as I am.
Draw near and learn those things diligently, wherein I shall instruct you.

First I would have you to learn this lesson, that as sin, came in by Adam,
so by sin death as a due reward followed. And therefore, when you look upon
me, remember whence you are fallen in adam from grace into sin, from sin into
death: and thereupon sorrow for your sins, and prepare your selves to death.
For it is the way of all flesh.

There is a time to be borne in sin, and a time to die for the same: al
flesh is grass, ye must all wither and fade with the flower. This natural
death which follows the combat of the Elements and sin, shall creep upon
your mortallims: for as the sun has an east to rise in, so he has a West to
fall in: even ^o you shall all dance with me one day, and this day is
uncertain, noe man knows when it shall come. For it shall come at unawares
upon you, and therefore do good, and eschew evil, sin not, least a worse
thing than this natural death do happen unto you. For if you do still
wallowe in sin, answer me, What if death suddenlye strike you with his dart as
he does many men: how would you be able to stand in ye judgment of God?

Therefore leave off in time, and live like Christyans, that GOD yet at the
least, seeing your lives are so wicked, may find a good will and purpose in you
toward a godly conversation. Do we not still hold the same pace like old
carthorses, but repent and amend, for the kingdom of God is at hand.

Secondly, when you see me remember the spiritual death of Adam, wherein you
are all wrapped, by nature borne in sin and children of wrath. Dead you are in
Adam, stark dead in your sins, until the Lord do regenerate you anew with
his holy spirit, and water your barren nature with the drops of his grace.

And herein see that you do acknowledge your weakness, or rather your misery:
that by sin you are dead, even without life by nature, and without any power
to attain unto life, as I am and shall be, until the Lord do knock at my
bed and raise me from death to life, to live with him for ever.

Avoid sin therefore, as your deadly enemy, which would rob you of life,
and fetter you in bands of eternal death; and cry unto the Lord for help.
For without him, against this enemy, you can do nothing. Cry with the
prophet David, Create, O Lord, a new heart, and renew a right spirit within
us, that being quickened again by the dew of his blessing, and strengthened
with the armor of grace, you may be able to withstand the fury of Satan, and
constantly to endure the battle of a raging conscience.

Thirdly, when you look upon me, remember whereof you are, even of earth: no
better than duste and ashes, to the which I now return. And therefore to the
lofty minded manne I say; Dust and ashes, why art thou proud? for earth thou
art, and to earth thou shall, and become a prey for knawing worms.

Deck thy body never so gloriously, tie Jewels about thy neck, lade thy
fingers with ringes, sit at thine ouerrunning tables and make merry, despise
al men: yet I tell thee, thou art dust, as I am, so shalt thou be.

Thy body shall stink, which now thou embaulmest: thy lofty look shall be
humbled, the worms shall feed upon thee. Look upon me, and think upon thy
self, be not as thou art: but think upon me, and what thou shall be, and
follow him that is able of dust to raise thee to life, and cries unto thee: Be
humble and meek, as I am

If thou refuse this exhortation, remember that pride shall have a fall: that
earth is heavy by nature, and falls: that he that exalts himself shall be
humbled, and he that humbles himself shall be exalted.

Acknowledge therefore that earth is thy mother, which is the basest of al
other elements and follow Christ thy master, and only guide to his father in
joy: that out of earth he may raise thee to heaven: and after thy
resurrection, for thine earthie and stinking body, give thee a glorious and
immortal body that thou may shine with him like a star in the kingdom
of glory.

Fourthly, let all covetous persons look upon me, and amend their evil
lives. For as I came naked into this world, so did they: and as I carrye
nothing with me but my winding sheet, even so shall they. Their riches, the
pelf of this world shall they leave behind them, which they have gathered in
pain, and hourded up with greedy minds.

Oh you hungry lions! you are always gaping for ye prey, you are ever
hungry, and never satisfied: get you never so much by hook or by crook, by
violent injury, or biting usury. But look you upon me. For an eln of earth
now shall serve me, and so must it serve you, whom nothing may suffice in this
world.

Sorrow therefore, and amend in time. For you were not borne to gather
worldelye substance: but to serve poor Jesus, who of God made himself poor
to enrich you. You were not borne to continue in this world.

No, you have no continuing city here, but you must look for another, even
Heaven, whence you are now exiled: and therefore you must seek the things
that be above. Your conversation must be in Heaven.

You must not tie your hearts to the earth, and hourd up the pelf of this
world, lest the very moths and rust of your tresure cry for a plague upon and
against you in the day of vengeance. For die you must one day, and be as I
am, and so rest in the bellye of mother earth, until the day of accou^ts, when
God shall reward every man according to his deserts.

Fifthlie, let all envious persons, and evil willers behold my heart: let all
bloodshedders look upon my feet, all backbiters, slanderers and curssers,
mark my tongue: all robbers and Usurers view my hands: all covetous persons
note my winding sheet: all selfelouers and proud men gaze upon my face and
hollow eyes, let all men look upon me and amend their lives, for as I am,
even so shall they be.

Sixthly, let al Christians look upon me, courtiers and country men, high and
low, rich and poor, young and old, noble and unnoble: all, let them look
upon me, and remember their end Die they shall al: this (...)l remember, that
they may never sin.

Let all swearing belly gods, al selfelouers, men or women, that monstrously
disguise chaste nature, and paint their bodies, which are stinking toombes of
their seely souls, with intolerable vanities, let all that care for beawties
hew look upon me, and judge of their own vanity, and condemn themselves,
least they be judged of the Lord.

For their broydered hair, their faced and defaced apparel, their superfluous
lasings, their sumptuous Veluetes and silks, their golden caules, their wrought
clothes, their ringed fingers, and their costly fare in this world, which
Lazarus wants, they are all vanity, neither shall they redeem them but to
earth they shall, and vanish with the vapor.

They shall al sleep with me, and they shall be one day no better than I am:
worms meat, stinking carcases, duste and ashes they shall be, whatsoever they
do appear to the foolish world.

Kings and princes, magistrates and subjects, scholars and masters, rich and
poor, al may look upon me. For I am able to teach them a lesson, which they
forget daily: That earth they are, and unto earth they must with me one day,
and noe man knows how soon. Disdain not to learn this at me: for I teach
you the truth, which one day you your selves shall approve to be very true.

Seventhly, let all mourning mothers and sorrowing friends, let them give
over weeping and vnchrystian wailinge. For that cannot help them, because it
grudgeth and complai neth against the will of God: but rather let them be
merry and reioise.

For behold, this life is a warfare, even a continual warfare, as Job calls
it, and death is a sleep, a sweet sleep, so that by it I rest from my
labors, I am delivered from danger to safetye, from labor to joy, from
travel to rest, from pain to pleasure, and lie in the earth as it were in a
bed, till I must rise to judgment.

This is the lucky estate of them that are dead in the lord. And therefore did
father Simeon desire to depart in peace: and Paul counted himself a wretch
because he was not delivered from this body of sin.

So that you have no cause to mourn for your friends, who by death are
passed beyond death: even to life, to live with GOD, and to see him face to
face, even as he is. But rather you have cause to rejoice, because by death
they are taken into joy, to be where Christ Jesus is.

The dead man is but a sleep, he is not dead but for a time, and at length he
shall awake, even by the sound of a trumpet and cry of an Archangell, to see
his redeemer in heaven, where he with thee and thou with him, and the Heavenly
army of Angels and saints mailiue for ever.

Look upon me, and remember this, al you that mourn for the death of your
friends. For blessed am I, and thrice blessed. This world is an exile, Heaven
my natural country: and so by death I am delivered from exile, and herein I
am very happy.

This present world is evil, in heaven are joys that pass sense and
conceit. And so by death in the Lord I am freed from evil, and placed in joy:
and heerin I am happy.

This world is no continuing city, but another, that is heaven, which when I
lived, in faith I looked for: so that by death I am set in a permanent place,
and herein am I happy.

This life is a pilgrimage, hea uen my home: and so by death of a pilgrim, I am
made a citizen, and herein I am happy.

To conclude, by death, from earth to heaven, from men to Angels, from war to
peace, from pain to pleasure, from grief to everlasting gladness, from vanity
and misery to perpetual felicity I have passed in peace: and herin I am
happy. So that death is not to be feared, nor yet to be lamented: but rather
welcome in joy of spirit whenever it comes.

And for this are al Christians bound to render hearty thanks unto the Lord,
that has turned the curse into a blessinge, and by his precious death upon
the cross made death no death but an entry to life, a passage to joy, a
delivery from misery. For this blessing, blessed be the name of the Lord, and
let al people say, Amen.

Imprint these few lessons in your memoryes, and engraue them in the tables of
your hearts. And thus farwell.

A Lodge for Lazarus. Wherein the poor and friendlesse are exceedingly
comforted in spirit against all kind of calamities incident to this temporal
and miserable life: made by the said E. H.
THere are two sorts of pilgrims in the world, some are rich, and some are
pore. Though the earth be the Lords, and the riches thereof his own
possessions, though al men be his subjects, and have deserved the like
condition of life: yet to blase his mercy and to open his judgments and
justice unto the world, it has pleased him to bless some with store of his
goodness, and to punish others with the want of his temporal blessings.

Thus with poverty he beats the poor to declare his judgment against
sin: and the rich man he storeth with abundance to the manifestation of
his undeserved mercy. By these his benefits upon the ritche, and these his
scourges laid upon the poor, he cries out to them: Sin no more, alluring
the one party by fair and gentle, the other by sharp and bitter means unto
safe repentance.

The rich man he makes his deputies on earth, or rather the stewards of his
family, or rather the paterns of his mercy, to take pity upon the beggar,
when he craves relief: even as he has taken compassion upon them, who never
deserved it. And that they may use them selves as shewers of his mercy he has
promised that they shall always have ye poor with them: this we see at this
day.

What a band of beggars be in every place? the poor do swarm in every
corner, the fatherles and widows, young and old, of all ages infinite do
groan and cry for very need. Some want cloth to cover their naked bodies, some
have not meat to mittigate their hunger, some noe drink to ease their thirst,
some lie under head ges in steed of lodginges, some are lame and cannot go, some
are blind and cannot see, some are deaf and cannot hear, some are dumb and
cannot speak, some are sick, some are sore, of all people to the judgment of
the world most miserable: and therefore do they seem to make this complaint
to God our Heavenly father.

O Lord thou have created us, thou have framed us: we are thy handiworke, and
thou the potter, that made our grandfather Adam of the moulde of the earth.
Was thy goodness such to make us when we were not gentle Lord, and will thou
beat us now thou have made us? O Lord, where is thy mercy? is the eye of thy
pity dim med? are the ears of thy won ted goodness sealed? what Lord? is
the hand of thy favor shortened? is the river of thy goodness dried up?

Shall we hunger? nay, shall we hungerstarue for want of thy blessings? what
now, good Lord? thy son taught us to pray, Our Father, Are we thy children,
and thou our Father? Oh! where is thy fatherly providence? for behold, O
piteous Lord, we are borne to nothing: besides, skin, flesh, and bones, we have
nothing in this world.

We post from place to place, and run from town to town, we go from house
to house, we cry for relief in thy name, we ask it for thy sake: but alas
good Lord, we can get nothing. If we be strong though we have charge of
children, we are whipped, we are stocked, we are imprisoned, and how not
abused? if we be lame, dum, deaf, sick or sore, we may cry: but alas,
charity is frozen, where one hears hundreds do stop their ears, and are
deaf at our suits.

O Lord, charity is drowned, the best friend which we should have: hard hearts
do reign, the stoutest enemy that we can have: with this enemy we are
assaulted almost in every place alas for pity! pity, sweet lord is our
request, have mercy upon us. Look upon Lazarus our king and captain: behold
Lord, he comes to the rich man's gate, there he lies, there he cries; Crumbs,
crummes he craves to ease his hunger, but he cannot get them, dogs have them,
but Lazarus cannot have them.

The dogs come to Lazarus and lick his sores: but Dives has no feet to
carry him, no tongue to lay the plaster of comfort to his earnest suit, no
hand to help him, not a crum to feed him. Behold Lord, dogs are better
unto us than Dives: nay, they are in better case than we are; for they have the
crumbs that falls from their masters table: but alas! Lazarus cannot come by
them.

O Lord, now where is thy wonted mercy? shall Lazarus want? shall he want the
crumbs of bread to ease his hunger? what? shall he cry for them, and shall he
not have them? shall he shout, but shall he not be heard? what good Lord?
shall he die for hunger, and Dives walowe in pleasure?

What Lord? have thou lost thy name god, which sounds as much as good? thou
art called Deus, quasi Dans, and yet shall Lazarus want bread to refresh him?
This complaint of the poor man does gnawe him: nay, sometimes it quyte
deuoureth him.

But to lay a salve of comfort to this sore of Lazarus: O Lazarus, why do
thou weep? why do thou cry out? why do thou seem to blame the Lord,
he has appointed Dives as a father to regard thee.

But what, dooest thou come to his gate, dooest thou crave charity, art thou
denied it? the Lord commanded it, and therefore is the Lord instified, when he
is judged. But Dives has abused his benefits, and therefore shall he answer for
it.

Let this be thy co^mfort: let this be thy lodge to rest in, from all
complaints, that one day God, who is charity, shall judge the world, the
greatest scourge that Dives shall have. Then shall he say, as accounting that
not done unto him, which was not done unto you. when I was hungrye, thou
gave me no meat, noe not the crumbs that fell from thy table: when I was
thirsty, thou gave me no drink: when I was naked, thou did not cloth me;
when I was in prison thou did not comfort me; when I was harbourles, thou
did not lodge me; give an accoumpt of thy stewardship. Then shall he cry
out, that he never saw him hungry or thirsty, or else he would have
refreshed him: not imprisoned, or else he would have visited him: not lodgles,
or else he would have harbored him.

But this is all lies, and therefore will he say unto him: Nescio, I know thee
not: Depart as cursed into everlasting fire, where shall be weeping and
gnashing ofteeth.

Come hither crieng Lazarus, thou that criest and showtest out upon the Lord,
and upon the tyranny of worldelings: art thou sick? art thou sore? art thou
deaf? art thou dumb? art thou naked? what? have thou no place to lay thy
head in? come hither, for here are palaces of pleasure to pastime in,
excellent turrets of joy to banquet in, and lodgelesse of infinite comfort to
harbor in. For what? have you not hadd meat, when you have craved it? or
drink when you have asked it? have you been in prison, and not visited? sick
and not comforted? sore and not eased? naked and not clothed? wanderers and
not succored?

Behold, in your behalf Christ will judge the rich and merciless gluttons of
this world: and in the day of revelation, you to your joyous conquest, and to
their utter shame shall testify and bear witness against them. This is the
first lodge of comfort.

But yet there is another besides this: enter into that. Behold, when you asked
relief, it was Christ that asked and was denied, so that in this world you
bear an image of Christ, who came unto his own, and yet was not received, noe
not known: who had not his nest, as the birds of the air have: nor his den
to fly unto, as the foxes have: no not so much as a place to lay his head on.

He sought once to harbor in Peter's ship upon a pillowe: but mark, how the
waves the winds disquieted the ship, it frighteth Peter, poor Jesus is
pinched at and awakened, so that he could not have a good nap to comfort his
weariness in his harboring place. Was this the estate of the master? then
rest in peace, and harbor in joy. For the scholar is not above his master.

Naie, does the tyranny of Dives pinch him, when it pincheth you? does he
hunger, when you hunger? does he thirst, when you thirst? is he na ked, when
you are naked? is he sick when you are sick? is he sore when you are sore? is
he harbourlesse when you be lodgles? what? does he smart when you smart,
does he cry for alms, when you crave: is it he that made you, he that saved
you, he that spent his life and shed his own precious blood to redeem you
from satan, and yet will you complain? let it not be so, but in patience lean
unto the loving Lord, and let him be a palace of joy to lodge and rest in.

There is a third lodge of comfort for all Lazars. For the uncharitable dealing
of Dives shall be his utter ruin. If Dives have shut his ear against thy cry,
and denied to relieve thee in time of needy extremity: if he have not opened
his heart to pity thee, nor stretched out his arm to raise thee, when thou art
fallen into mysery: hen woe, woe: a rod is at hand to beat him: O fool, this
night the devil shall fetch thy soul from thee. Here is a glorious lodge of
comfort for all Lazers

If Dives have his barnes filled with corn, his chests with treasure, his
table furnished with plenty of meat, if he have al things at will: yet shall
nothing redeem him from misery, if he will not attend the piteous cry of
Lazarus in time of extreme necessity. For he that will not hear the poor
when he does cry: when he cries himself, the Lord will him deny.

Has Dives now denied you alms? then will the Lord deny him mercy: will the
Lord deny him mercy, because he has not pitied your myserie? has the Lord
such care over your estate, that he will revenge it sharply if you be not
cherished: and will you yet complain? Fie, no, for shame, but let this be a
lodge for you to rest in.

God is your guard, howsoever it go with you: you are his little ones, his
dearlinges, and dearly beloved. If Dives do abuse you, if he do not cherish
you: behold how he loves you, for Dives for your sake shall suffer pains
for ever.

You want food on earth: but he shall want the bread of life in hell. You want
drink, but he shall want even a drop of water in hell to cool his flaming
tongue. You want in this world cloth to cover your nakedness: but he shall want
the white raiment of innocence: and therefore wallowe in myserie for ever: You
want lodging here, but he shall want the lodge of joys elsewhere. You cannot
be his ghest, but a worm for your sakes shall be his ghest everlastingly.

He had store of all things: what wanted he? neither silver nor gold to
have enriched you, nor meat to have fed you, nor drink to have eased you:
he had cloth to have covered you, crumbs of his table that would have relieved
you, he had lodges wherein he might have granted you harbors.

But see the judgments of God for your sakes. This Dives is not worth a drop
of water in hell: for all his pleasure he reapeth lasting pain, for his
melodious harmony, he hears howling and weeping, and gnashing of teeth. This
is the woe that they shall swim in, that with Dives neglect the cry of seely
Lazarus.

But yet view a fourth lodge of comfort, a princely lodge, you band of
beggars: approach and look up, what? was Lazarus clothed in sores? did no man
visit or comfort him? had he no physician either by word or by work to cure
him? had he noe surgerie, but only by dogs?

Nay, what? was he not only sore in body, but pinched in stomach? did he want
food? nay, did he so hunger, that he desired crummes of bread to please the
cry of his greedye stomach, and yet could he not get it?

What? are any of you in the same case? behold a lodge of comfort: look up,
and there you shall see Abraham's bosom and Lazarus therein lodged. See, he that
wallowed in sores and might have washed in tears such was his misery to the
eye of the world.

Behold, he that was not worth a crum of bread in this world, he that had
no lodge place to rest in, now lodges in Abraham's bosom, an harborough of
rest.

What now you beggars, you that wander from place to place, and have no
resting place to stay in: nay, you that wander, and for want of charity do
always hunger: be patient, bless God in your adversity, and rest in the
lodge of Lazarus.

Dives was above Lazarus in this world: Dives waded in plenty, but Lazarus in
poverty: Dives sat at his table, Lazarus at the gates: Dives healthie Lazarus
sick; Dives with a fulbellye, but Lazarus lived with an hungry stomach: and
yet look up, and now you shall see Dives below, and Lazarus above him.

Dives in this world had rich men for his comates, gentiles and potentates for
his ghestes: but now he keeps company with the devil and his angels. Lazarus
in this world had no company to comfort him: nay, he had none that always
tarried with him, but sickness and poverty: they were from time to time his
two ghests, and at Dives his gates the dogs too did visit and lick him.

But now behold, Dives byteth the bread of misery in hell: but Lazarus lodges
in Abraham's bosom, and now in heaven banketteth at the table of euerduring
joy, with the patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles Martyrs, and holy ones of God.

Oh! will the impatient Lazarus say: this is a heavy case, to be always
beaten with pinching poverty, always to bite of sorrow, and never to live at
ease.

Surely if this be thy case, as thou monest: yet I say, look up to the lodge
of rest, even Abraham's bosom: for though thou do swim in seas of extremity,
yet thou dooest banquet with Lazarus, who even in this world did suffer
pinching extremity, and yet now he does rest in peace.

But thou art beaten, thou say: thou art buffeted: so was Lazarus. Oh! but
thou art beaten sore, so was he. But yet thou singest on the same song: thou
art beaten.

Art thou beaten? then lodge in comfort. For better it is to be beaten with
Lazarus, than damned with Dives: it is better to be crossed, than not crow ned:
it is better to be beaten, than never to be chastised. For God receives no
child, but whom he scourges.

But yet thou criest: Oh my life is miserable! is it miserable: then lodge in
comfort. For misery is the high way to felicity.

Thou must be buffeted, if thou will be saved: for he that will live godly
in Christ Jesus must suffer persecutions. I am the way says he. But what was
his way to Heaven? A cross was his way unto the crown, and thus would he
lead thee to immortal glory.

What say thou now, Lazarus? have thou any thing to complain of? I hope
these lodges of comfort do please thee. But if they do not, yet harken a
little.

Is thy life a castle of misery, because thou art wrapped in poverty? art thou a
wretch of this world, because thou art clothed in sores? dooest thou sing of
nothing but calamitye, because health fails thee, or store of temporal
blessings? why then reason with me.

What if thou had the riches of Dives, his health, his wealth his garners,
his treasure, his lands, his cattle? yet vanity of vanites, cries the
Preacher, and al is vanity.

Vanity? what, Vanity of vanities? nay, what? is all vanity? riches,
health, treasure, pleasure, wealth: is all woe? nay, is al vanity? vanity,
what? worth a nit? nay, worth nothing: and yet art thou troubled?

The rich men of this world do fall into many temptations, in so much that
where they should be gods on earth, to help and to aid the needye, when
need requires: they prove themselves cages of un clean devils.

Some lords of lands do beggar their poor tenantes, they rack and impouerish
them to better their own estate: some hourde up corn for dear times, to
the utter beggering of the poor, some have catching hands, who though they have
enough, yet are always catching and snatching at the widows mite.

Usurers or rather robbers, who have enough but the rich? who want it but the
poor? why want they it, but because charity is dead, and the rich are snared
in deadly temptations? But yet they will be rich, they scrape and travel for
goods.

But what cry the proud and the rich men in the fifth of wisdom? Oh say they,
what has pride profited us? or what has the pomp of riches brought us?

Come hither Lazarus, art thou poor? desire not to be rich: for this is the
usual song of such as are rich in this world Oh! what has the pomp of riches
brought us? do not riches better a man? nay, does not the pomp of riches
bring any commodity with it.

What? can it not deliver us from dansing with death, from the gnawing worm,
from the bed of earth? no though we were as beautiful as Absolon, as long
lived as Methuselah, as eloquent as Cicero, as subtle as Aristotle: to end, as
rich as Cresus, yet we must needs become worms meat, and turn to dust and
ashes,

How now Lazarus? what if thou had courtlye palaces to lodge in? excessive
plenty of al things? even the pomp of riches? what should they auail thee?
nothing: yea nothing, and yet is poverty a burden unto thee?

It is the will of God Lazar that thou should be a Lazarus: and it is thy
daily prayer, that his will be done: and it is his will to save all men. But
what? is it his will, that thou should be poor? and art thou not merry?

It is his will to save thee? nay, is it he that can only save thee? nay, is he
wont to save us by crossinge us, that we should enter into heaven by many
tribulations: and will thou not yet lodge in comfort?

Nay what? do thou pray that the will of God be done? if thou pray for it,
as it stands thee upon, so thou dooest wish it. Now his will is to beat thee
with poverty: thou praiest for it, thou wishest it. What now? dooest thou wish
it? and yet art thou sad and pensive?

Men are wont to joy, yea and to rejoice when they have their wish? but thou
have it: and will thou be sorry? The Lord says, nay the Lord sweateth it,
that He will not the death of a sinner: and death is the due wages of thy sins,
the which of justice he might pay unto thee, but he will not of mercy.

Will he not thy death, which is due unto thee? and yet do thou complain of
pouertye, which is his will to lay upon thee? let this be thy lodge of
comfort, that his mercy is our safety: and that his will is nothing else but
his mercy: yea, though he do beat and buffet us never so much.

And to persuade us in this point, who are so incredulous of nature from time
to time, it has pleased him to scourge his children, or rather to scour the
vessels of their hearts, the lodge place of his holy spirit, from the dregs
of iniquity.

Caine was an heir, he possessed al, he was the child of this world: but
Abel the child of God, he had his name of vanity, his end was to be mur
thered, he received his deaths wound, even by hi(...) (...)wne brother.

Look upon the whole college of Saints, and we shall see some imprisoned
with Jeremy, some be headded with Baptist, some stoned with Steven, some
crucified with Christ Jesus, lapped in lothsom sores, wrapped in bands of utter
extremity with poor Lazarus: notwithstanding Dives the world ling wallowe in
all health and wealth.

How now Lazarus? look upon thy brethren, and be thou comforted: yea if thou
haste been rich, even as rich as Job, if thou have sat on the pinnacle of
pleasure, and mounted up with the highest trees: if thou haste flourished like
the glorious lilly, and yet upon a sudden wither away: if thou have fallen
from the top to the foore of a hill, that is, from prosperity to adversity,
and become a bare Job, yet behold the palace of comfort: I am sure, that my
redeemer lives, and that with these eyes I shall see him, says Job.

Who was this Job? a rich man he was, he had plenty of al things. GOD had
blessed him with children, and upon a sudden all is gone, Oxen, Camels,
children and al. His own friends do forsake him, he wadeth in woe and
sickness: and yet these clubs can not batter him down, but still he climeth to
the lodge of comfort, saying: I am sure that my redeemer lives, and that with
these eyes I shall see him.

What though this earthye mass our body, this dustie tabernacle bestormed and
tossed with the winter blastes of this world: what though our bellies feel the
gnawing worm of a plaining stomach, and our backs want cloth to cover it: yet
is here a lodge of comfort, which by faith we must take possession of, every
one saying with father Job: I am sure that my redeemer lives: and that with
these eyes I shall see him.

Though God scourge me, yet as a father to correct me, and not as a judge to
condemn me: for I am sure that my redemer lives, and that with these eyes I
shall see him. Though I do here want bread to quench the cry of hunger, and
drink to cool the heat of my burning stomach: though I have neither cloth to
apparel me: nor friend to comfort me, nor place to lodge in, yet behold, I
am sure that my redeemer lives, and that with these eyes I shall see him.

If thou be a spiritual Lazar, and want the crumbs of com fort, if the
devil lay thine own sins before thee, to the end thou may eat with him,
the bread of desperation: yet run to the lodge of comfort, and there sing thou
in spite of thy sins, of Satan and al his hellish hounds: I am sure that my
redeemer lives, and that with these eyes I shall see him.

In this lodge of comfort S. John does finger out to thy hungry soul the
food of life, saying, behold the lamb of God that has taken away the sins
of the world. But what? was this lamb crucified? did he not die? yes, and rose
the third day a conqueror over sin, death, hell, the devil and al his angels.

But yet perchanse thou will not believe it: if thou do not, come hither
Thomas, says Christ, and thrust in thy finger Dooest thou not believe it?
then come hither and try, try and then trust. This side of Christ is the
sole lodge of rest for all spiritual Lazars, that hunger and thirste after
their salvation.

Marie Magdalen, that was possessed with so many devils: Peter that had once,
twice, yea the third time denied his master Christ: yea the thief on the
cross by faith leapte into this side of safety, and lodge of Christ Jesus.

This lodge is his wounds, which he had on the cross to heal us: which
wounds always are open, for all st(...)ng Thomasses to harbor and to lodge
in. For at what time soever a sinner will repent him of his sins, I will blot
al his sins out of my remembrance, says the Lord.

Here is a lodge for all Lazars, that groan in spirit. All such as are heavy
and laden, and hear and follow that proclamation of Baptist, Repent: all that
with father David weep, and learn to wet the couch of their hearts with the
tears of their groaning souls.

This lodge of comfort is open to all, it is denied to none that repent, have
they been never so grievous sinners.

Besides these two sorts of Lazars, there are some that are rich in temporal
blessings, and yet very Lazars in grace: covetous men and usurers, they do not
only want that they have, but by ever seeking more and more, they drown
their seely souls in sin, and for a lodge of comfort, they harbor in
hellish Egypt.

Thus was Dives the glutton a Lazar: he had plenty of all things, and yet he
was not so rich in grace as to bestow a crum of bread upon Lazarus: and
therefore does he now thirst for a drop of water, and cannot get it, to ease
the furye of his tormenting tongue.

Dives is the ringleader of the dance to al careless rich men that have
departed this life, as covetous wretches. But unto them that are yet alive,
although they have been a long time disciples of Dives, yet are the wounds of
Jesus Christ open to lodge them, against the storms of a frowning conscience.

Yea, it is open for all sinners, who are Lazars by nature, and want the very
crumbs of goodness: they gape to receive us, and they are always fresh and
green. Lo a fountain of Christ's precious and outstreaming blood, wherein all that repent are washed from their leprosy, and delivered from the sting of
iniquity for ever.

In the world there is nothing but misery, it is nothing but a kingdom of
calamity: and the wounds of Christ are a lodge of al rest, where there is no
pain, no sorrow, no vexation, no trouble, but all joy, even such joy as
passes al con ceipt, to the which the Lord of his mercy bring us al, Amen.

A retrait from sin: Wherein is sounded, as with a shrill trumpet in the
ears of all men, what damnable dangers depend upon continuance in sin,
neglect of repentance, abuse of the acceptable time of grace: and other
excellent means daily moving men to the amendment of their finneful life: made
by the said E. H.
COnsidering with my self the frailetie of man, and the dangerous trappes of
Satan, which he has laid in every corner of this wicked world, to catch us:
his crafty devises which he works con tinuallye to snare us, and the
drowsines of man, as careless to avoid them, I thought good to make this base
retrait from sin, that being called from straieng, we might come unto the
true sheepefold, and so be saved.

And here I might begin with wondering at the churlish nature of man, who being
so often called by the voice of God and his deputies, from sin: does yet
notwithstanding walow therein, like swine in filth and mire.

Duste and ashes! shall the Lord himself cry upon thee? Sin not: and will
thou not hear him? if not sinning be thy souls safety: will thou be so
unmindful of thy self, as to suffer thy gracious lord to have the repulse?

Shall the king command his subject, and be obeyed: and the king of glory
command thee not to sin, and not be obeyed? shall the good and trusty
subject be so dutiful to the king, who is yet but duste and ashes: and will thou show thy self so rebellious against God, who is the God of comfort, and
father of mercy?

O thou drowsy creature! awake, be wise. Consider if God being wisdom, do
call thee from sin, then is it folly to follow sin. If God being the father
of mercy, do call thee from sin the mother of endless misery, then o wretched
creature return, repent, least for mercy thou do reap the reward of sin,
which is death eternal.

But why should we by sinning make our selves thrall to so tyrannous a master
as Satan? and despise the call of so lo uing a Savior as Jesus Christ, crieng
unto us, Sin not.

The service of Satan is miserable bondage: the service of Jesus Christ is a
blessed liberty, it is a freedom, that passes al freedoms: and so much the
rather to be embraced, as the other is miserable and to be detested: yea, it is
with both hands to be received, for so much as our Lord Jesus Christ in
commanding requires it.

For being bondslaues of Satan, so vile a varlot, shall the Lord offer us his
service, which is perfect liberty, and shall we refuse it, and not rather
receue it? Eve did so much as obeie the lieng serpent in paradise, and shall we
deny obedience to Jesus Christ? she obeyed to sin, but her obedience wroght
her misery? and shall not we obey the Lord, that our end may be felicity?

For how can we, deserving eternal misery, be accepted to bliss, if that
by disobedience we provoke to wrath the only purchaser of mercy? I say
therefore, where Christ cries, Sin not, obeie him, and kiss the son least
he be angry: kiss him, and obey him; for if he be but a little angry, blessed
are all they that put their trust in him.

But to make this retraite to sound more shrill in the ears of slumbring
Adam: look upon the damned spirit of Dives, he burns in hell: but why if not
for sin? His tongue flameth, neither can he get a drop of water to quench
it: and why but for sin? The fire that he burns in is unquenchable: his
doleful music is gnashing of teethe, howlinge, weeping, and great
lamentation: his case is curssed for ever, and why but for sin?

If Dives had known, that the service of the Lord had been perfect
liberty, and that obedience to his commandments had been the pathway to
heaven, or that his sinful life would have wrought him such a web of woe, or
rewarded him with death for his wages in serving Satan: no doubt he would
have followed as good counsel, as he wished by the dead to be revealed to his
brethren: that is, he would have sought grace of the Lord, that he might have
obeyed him in holiness, and so be saved.

But mark o ye living, and learn of the dead. Dives was a sinner, he served
sin, and the old serpent, but his service wrought his woe, even a woe eternal.
Now what a tirannous master is that, that so rewards his servant? or what a
miserable servant is that, which reapeth nothing by his service but woe?

But O thrice miserable are we! if we will serve the same master, whose
service in Dives we see to be a slauishe thraldom, and our wages nothing
else but biting myserie. So that, if the Lord our Savior Jesus Christ, by his
loving call be not able to recall us from sin: yet let the bitter end of Dives,
and the flaminge torments of his soul damned for sin, be a sufficient
retrait unto us. Woe, woe, was due to him for sin, and therefore sin not.

This Dives was a rich man, God had blessed him with his creatures, and these
arguments of his love cried upon him, Come home by repentance, and to holiness
in conversation: he notwithstanding neglected, and still continued a servant of
sin, for the which his service, he does now lament in hellish torments, and
so shall do for ever. He shall always howl weep and wail, in pain with
out ease, in sorrow without comfort, in grief without relief, and that for
ever.

But, O miserable Dives! why did thou not repent and return from sin, at
the retrait of so many and so great benefits of the Lord? why did thou not
play the good steward of thy riches, in bestowing something upon needy
Lazarus? why wast thou more ungentle and unnatural than the very dogs, that
licked his sores? where was charity? surely it was frozen, it was dead: noe
better evidence than thine own confession, which thou make amidest thine
endless torments, crieng out and saying:

My life was sinful, mine obedience was to Satan, my paradise was the wicked
world, I neglected the retrait of so many benefits from sin, and therefore I
lie in pain, and so shall do, til I have paid the utmost farthing, and that
is ever.

Come hither now ye living, consider in time and be wise. Dives was a sinner,
and so are you: Dives neglecting the retrait from sin, and puttinge off from
day to day, was at length upon a sudden thruste down into hell: and surely,
if you do not in time repent, but follow his paths, then as his end was
torments, so shall yours be. For God is no accepter of persons.

Therefore, o ye living, consider and be wise: and if you have begun the race of
Dives, repent, return, awake, least Satan take you napping, and the Lord in
his just judgment suffer him to take your souls from you, and so rob you of
all joy for ever.

If Dives had known the tyranny of Satan, or the wages of his service, or the
dangerous extremities of carnal security: no doubt he would have awaked from
sin, and bin as wise before hand to have provided for himself, as he was to
late for his brethren.

And shall we, knowing the danger of deferring to repent, and the vilanie of
sin, not provide before hand against such a dangerous tempest, as Dives
abode, and walk wisely: but incur the danger of extremity by sleeping in
carnal security, and perilous service of sin?

O ye sons of men, be wise and repent, return from your wicked ways, give
the old serpent the slip, forsake your old master sin, bid adieu to all
iniquity, if you will not swim in the tormentorie seas of hell with Dives.

Besides this bitter retrayte from sin, there be other trumpeters of Gods just
judgments which ought continually to move, and effectually to persuade us
to forsake the service of sin and Satan. The whole world did serve Satan,
because it ouerflowed with sin, therefore behold, it ouerstreamed with water,
and all the world was drowned.

Here, if it please al sinners to put on the spectacles of discretion, they may
see what it is to serve sin, and what to neglecte the Lords retraite from
iniquity. The whole world having forsaken the lord God, went a whooring
after Satan, and married it self to sin, renouncing innocence of life, to
follow vice; but lo the end: when Satan by sin had gotten such a maysterie,
and by reason of iniquity was become a prince of this world, behold the end of
all his practices: the ruin and destruction of the world.

And surely this was the judgment of the Lord, to destroy them wholly, that
had neglected to hear his voice in the day of visitation: and this judgment is
bent against al those that continue in sin and will not repent.

Indeed the Lord has made a covenant, and thereof he has given us a certain
sacrament and earnest penie, that he for sin will never drown the world
again: but yet the covenant may breed in us no security, but rather it is a
retrait from sin, for so much as it is a covenant between the Lord and us,
between whom no covenant can continue for ever, unless we return from
sin.

For although he has promised not to destroy the world again for sin, and
this promise shall be performed, not because we deserve it, but because he
has promised: yet unless we repent, Omnes similiter peribimus. We shall al
likewise perish. He will drown us in woe for ever.

This flood of torments, and hellish lake, wherein the damned do wallowe, and
wade in unspeakable pain: this flood does pass the other, and unless we
repent, and by hearty repentance leap into Noah's arc, and so into the bosom
of mother Sion, there is no salvation for us.

Let us therefore repent, and lament our sins, and close our selves in the
ready arc of Moses, least being at the brink of death, the waters of hell
over swallow us.

But to come from the whole world to the part: behold Sodom and Gomorrha, the
twoe stews of Satan, wherein he daily committed fornication with the sons
of men. Those two, Sodom and Gomorrha, were as wanton Damsels of this world,
given to all lewdnes and lust, they (...)sed after sin, howsoever Satan piped.

They had renounced al godly chastity, and to marry the old serpente they
had broken their obedience unto the lord. But be hold, those two wild cities
were tamed, destroyed: yea burnt with fire and brimstone.

Now, O ye children of men, come and see the terrible sight of these two
cities burning and consuming with fire: repent and lament your own lives,
that you are not behind Sodom and Gomor in wickedness, but like miserable
wretches, have pledged them in the cup of spiritual fornication with sin
and Satan.

Let this fire and birmstone, like terrible Trumpetters of Gods just
judgments, sound so shrill in your ears, as to awake you from sleeping any
longer in sin, least a worse thing than this do happen unto you: yea
whenever you see water, fire, and brimstone, think upon the judgments of
God against sin, and sin not.

Consider that Sodom and Gomor were destroyed for sin, and that God, when it
pleases him, may execute his judgment upon thee, whosoever thou be unless
thou repent: and therefore return from sin, and sin not.

Consider, that where al creatures were made for man's use: yet ye Lord in his
wrath against sin, does use them as swords of vengeance, to cut him off. And
therefore, if we will not only have the Lord, but also his creatures to
profit us, so that we may use them to the end they were created, then where
not only the Lord him self, but also all his creatures do cry upon us,
Repent and sin not: it stands us upon to amend our faults, to reform our
lives, and to frame our selves to all good works, which God has prepared for
us, that we should walk therein.

But, o the lamentable case of Jesus Christ! O the unspeakable churlishness of
man! for if the churlishness of one wicked city Jerusalem, did wring tears
out of the glorious eyes of our Savior Jesus Christ, and made him to sigh and
sob, because she had dealt so vncurteouslie with him, so preposterouslie with
her self, as to stone his prophets, to refuse his clocking, and to serve satan,
and so to work her own destruction: then what year, what day, what hour:
nay, what moment do we not all make our Savior Jesus Christ, beholding our
iniquities, to weep and to sob, since that our sins almost do pass in number
the sands of the sea, and hairs of our heads?

Yea, O the churlishnes of man! yet by sin so to grieve our Savior Jesus
Christ, from the which to redeem us it cost him bloudye tears, even the
effusion of his most precious blood. But is it not a miserable folly in man,
by such churlish dealing to offend our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall come to
judge the quick and the dead.

Ye swearers, ye cursers, and railers, ye usurers, thieves, and murderers, ye
epicures, Papists, and carnal Gospellers, al ye sinners that lie in sin,
that know sin, and yet forsake it not, with what face will you present your
selves before this heavenly judge, out of whom you have wroonge so many sobs,
as you have committed sins in your life?

If you have used him so unthankfully, and wrought him such grief: how can
you look but for grief for your reward? But, O the mercy of the Lord! that
yet cries, Come unto me al ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will
refreshe you. Behold, notwithstanding your infinite offenses, notwith standing
your infinite sins: yet, if you will acknoweledge them, and be heartily
sorry for them, that in committing them, you have grieved the spirit of Jesus
Christ, he is ready to receive you: yea, and as one thirsting to receive you
into favor again, he calls unto you Come: promising, that notwithstanding you
be laden and clogged with sin, that yet he will ease you, if you will come
unto him. This is a comfortable retrait, grounded upon the promise of Jesus
Christ, that if we will come unto him, he will refresh us.

Now what is Jesus Christ? and what are we? we are sinners, and therefore our
due is death: but Jesus Christ is a savior: yea, salvation and life it self:
and therefore to go to him, and to leave sin, is to pass from death to
life, from sorrow of conscience to peace: yea, such a peace as passes all
(...)erstanding.

Yea, Jesus Christ is truth, and therefore if we will sin no more, but in a
contrite spirit repair unto him, then will he receive us: he will refresh us
with the deintie comfort of his holy spirit, and at length receive us into
joy, therein to live with him for ever.

Therefore, if we have stopped our ears at so many retraits sounded against
sin: yet let this one comfortable spech uttered by our Savior Christ, serve in
stead of many, Come: but and if this retrait of Jesus Christ be not able to
call thee effectualy to repentance, then turn thine eyes unto his cross, and
beholdinge the villainy of sin thy master, and Satan the subtle serpent,
repent and amend.

Behold the lamb of God, he that came in the similitude of sinful flesh, to
save thee by his death. Behold how the devil has handled him, behold how his
helhoundes have entreated him, and all for s^nne. Behold his holy body racked,
behold his holy feet and hands rent with nails, his head crowned with
thorns, his precious side launced with a spear. Behold his precious blood
dropping, yea outstreaming: behold how the only beloved son of God, our
loving and blessed Savior, lo how tyrannouslie the ministers of Satan have
used him.

But why are his holy arms outstretched? why does his holy head bow it
self down? why are his feet and hands so torn with nails? why does his
precious blood spinne out? why is this holy lamb of God so piteously
slaughtered upon the tree?

Surely O man, thou thy self haste ministered the cause, and thy sins have
wrought this cruelty upon this innocent Lamb Jesus Christ: so that if thou
either love Jesus Christ whom thy sins have torn so cruelly, or tender
thine own case, for whom he died so mercifully, beyond thy merit: sin no more,
but repent, repent, repent, and defy the devil, and al his tyranny.

Yea, and since his head, his arms, his hands, his feet, his side, and
precious blood do so cleerelie show the tyranny of sin: detest, abhor, and
avoid it. And whereas his thornie crown that tore his head: and the nails
that rent his hands and feet: and the spear, that pearsed his glorious side:
do all cry out upon us, that we have so rent and torn by our sins Jesus
Christ our blessed Savior, let us for shame be ashamed of our villainy.

Let us lament, and repent our iniquities, least that the ve rye thornie
crown of his head the very nails that fastened him to the tree, and the
spear that pearsed his side, do testify a just condemnation against us, that
we did so unthankfully use them to destroy the son of God, and yet do commyt
sin, to our power seeking to slaie him again.

O ye butchers! consider this innocent Lamb, how he bleedeth, and sheaddeth
his precious blood, to cleanse you from sin, and so to save you from Satan:
drink up in faith the droppings of his blood, and moisten your souls
therewith: eat him and chewe him: for he is the bread of life, which whosoever
eats, he shall never hunger any more.

Bid war to old Adam proclaim battle against the subtle serpent, and fight
like good soldiers of Christ crucified, against sin: that death and hell
being put to the foil, by the strength of your valiant capitain, ye may at
length be registered among the blessed saints of God for ever.

But if all this will not move thee, O foolish creature, to repentance: neither
the miserable service of Satan, nor the horrible end of sin, nor the majesty
or mercy of Jesus Christ, nor the villainy that sin wrought unto him, which
all ought to be forcible motives, and sufficient retentiues from sin: yet
consider a while the condition of sinners, which of al other is most miserable.

For first, they are Gods enemies, even such rebellious enemies, as with open
arms in Satan's quarrel, under corrupt nature, as their sovereign, resist Gods
government: which thing, O sinful man, is of all other most horrible, to be
Gods enemy, to be at war with God to be hated of the most mighty, puissant
and omnipotente Lord of hosts.

Neither do sinners, by warring against the honor of God under sin and
Satan, only purchase the anger and hatred of God upon their heads: but also
they grieve the courtiers of Jerusalem, which is above and put the Angels and
Saints of God to great grief and sor row.

For if that they reioise at the conversion of a sinner, and be glad when
the lost groat is found, and the straieng sheep brought to the sheepfold:
then what grief, what sorrow, what heaviness do sinners purchase unto them,
when being lost, they will not be found: and being straieng sheep, they will
not be brought to the sheepefold of grace again.

And here it may please all sinners to consider, that as repenting we gladden
the Angels and Saints of God, and make the devil to repine and grieve: so,
when we commit sin, and decline from the right line of righteousness, then do
we keep wakes for the devil, then does he hop for joy, when we defraud the
good angels of God of their joy.

These irreuocable sinners, these the Lord does hate, as utter enemies: yea,
rotten and stinking carrion is more sweet before men, than is such a soul
before God and his Angels. And therefore let all such repent, not only
because they are injurious to God, and offensive to the good: but also because
they are stinking creatures and such as the Lord neither may nor will abide,
unless they return unto him in sackcloth and ashes: and therefore repent and
amend.

Secondly, those sinners that stop their ears against the retrait of these
motives, let them consider their woonderous folly. For sin is the dung of
the old serpent, and he that sins for the vilest thing that is, forsakes
the most precious jewel in heaven and earth.

For what does man's soul lose by sin? from whom departs she? from whom
does she separate her self? even from God her maker, her redeemer and Savior:
yea when she sins she forsakes salvation and her own safety, she runs
into the stinking lap of the devil her desperate adversary, and hasteneth
hirselfe un to hell.

Yea, by sin the kingdom of the devil is enlarged: for he that commits
sin is the servant of sin. And what if I say that sin makes man like to
Satan? for whatsoever deformity or filth is in the devil, that is by sin:
of the which if the Devil might be freed, he were a noble and excellent
creature. Even so the soul of man, by sin is made filthy and deformed like
the Devil. And what an injury is this to God, that by sin, of his own
image, we should make the image of the devil?

Repent therefore, and consider thirdly, that it gladdeneth the devil to see
us sin, because thereby we become his dwelling house. Now how cursed a thing is
sin, which makes the temple of God the temple of Satan? what folly: nay,
what madness is it to lodge the devil in our hearts, and to drive Christ and
his holy spirit out of doors?

Why should man deal so vnthankefullie with him, that being God, came from
the top of the heavens to this vallie of misery, to take man's flesh upon him,
that he might be his Jesus? or why should we sin, and by continual sinning,
bid adieu to the spirit of holiness, and harbor satan in our hearts? shall he, by
whom al creatures were made glorious, by sin be banished far from us? and
he, by whom all creatures were deformed, be wholly lodged within us?

But tell me, O man, Christ is salvation, life, joy, love, and all in all; the
devil is the father of death, a murderer, a manslaier, a tyrant, a prince of
darkness, the worker of woe. Now answer, do thou like better of death, than
of life: of pain, than of joy: of hatred, than love: of damnation, than
salvation: and of hell, than of hea uen? if thou do, then shall thou depart
curssed into the everlasting fire. But if thou do prefer Jesus Christ, with
his inesti mable blessings, before Satan: then why do thou wallowe in sin,
which is the only way to prefer Satan in this world, and to establish his
kingdom of darkness?

Wherefore, O miserable man repent and amend: consider that Jesus Christ, like
an euangelical hen, never cease clocking to gather thee under his wings
like a chicken: let him not clock and call in vain, neither be thou like unto
them that stop their cares against the charmer, charm he never so wisely.

Consider that God created thee wholly to serve him, with all thy heart, soul,
strength, and power: remember that thou at baptism did vow and swear
obedience to his name: remember that before GOD, and all the band of the holy
Angels and Saints, thou did renounce satan, and al his works, and repent,
unless thou will have God and all his heavenly Citizens, at the great day
of revelation, to give sentence of condemnation against thy perjury.

And why, O miserable man, should thou break thy faith given to God in
baptism? it is not an oath to be repented. For the service of the Lord is
only man's safety, as the service of Satan is the only cause of man's misery.

The gailor that held us in a slauishe and spiritual Egypt, was not Pharao,
but the devil, and that for sin: and therefore, if we covet to inhabi^ the
land of promise, and to live in liberty, free from calamity, it stands us
upon to return unto the Lord, who is only able, by his outstretched arm
to save and defend us, from the miserable servitude of so tyrannous a ruler.

Again, all the spirits in hell may curse the filthy bondage of sin, by
service whereof they are in torments, and shall continue in pains unspeakable
for evermore. The saints and holy ones of God are in bliss, in joy: yea in
such joy, as neither eye has seen, nor ear heard, nor heart ever conceived.
And why? even because they repented, forsook s(...)ne, and did the will of
God in heaven. For they only have entered, and shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven, that do the will of our heavenly father.

Therefore, since his will is our sanctification, innocence of life, purity in
conversation, vprightnes of heart, abstinence from the lusts of the flesh: if
that we hope to enjoy the (...) give ear unto his voice, conforming of our
selves unto his steps, as near as we could.

Let not the love of riches, the desire of any worldly promotion, or any
thing under the sun, be it never so glorious since the preacher cries out
and says that al is vanity, blind the eyes of your understandings, withdraw
your affections, or restrain and pull pack your hearts from thinking upon the
torments in hell, or the triumphs in heaven: the one ap pointed as punishmente
for wickedness and iniquity, the other assigned as rewards for righteousness
and innocence.

The Lord of his mercy so moisten our hearts, that al hardness being taken
away, we may with most willinge consents join hands with Jesus Christ our
Captain, against Satan, sin, the flesh, and the world: which enemies do
bitterly, and also continuallye war against us, and far exceed our strength to
resist them, unless that we forsake them, and shroud our selves under Jesus
Christ, to whom be al glory both now and for ever, Amen.

A prayer unto almighty God, wherein we beseech his divine majesty, so to
bless us with his grace, that the use of the prayers contained in this book,
and the wholesome lessons comprised in the same may take Christian effect in
us, to our great comfort even at all assaies, and esp^icially in time of
necessity. Made by A. F.
O Father of endless mercy, the fountain and welspring of all perfect happiness,
the giver of grace, the bestower of true blessedness, and felicity: here us, o
hear us for thy bottomless compassion sake, and grant unto us, we hum bly
beseech thee, whatsoever wants in us toward the acomplishment of our
calling and duty.

And because thy holy word the trumpet of truth, and treasure of great riches,
has in express speech threatened many stripes to that negligent servant
which knows thy will, and yet does it not: vouchsafe us, and as many of us
as are instructed and taught, and thereby perceive and understand thy heavenly
pleasure, endeuouringe to walk thereafter, may avoid that penalty of
negligence, which is denounced against the idle servant: thy grace preventing
us in all our actions and intents.

We can not deny, but that the saying of thy well-beloved son, the substance of
truth, and liuelye image of thine own majesty is undoubted, certain, and
infallible: namely, that not every one which cries Lord, Lord, shall enter
into the kingdom of heaven: but he which fulfilleth thy will: and forsaking the
world, and all worldly pomp, betaketh himself wholly unto the service of thee,
and submits himself a scholar in thy school; where learning sound and
substantial knowledge, he may be the more in love with the riches of thy
kingedome, and bid al earthly vanities auant.

Now, most merciful Father, for that the helps to holiness of life are
infinite: some, and those singular, consisting in thy Gospel preached: some,
and those notable, in sincerity of conversation, and examples of godliness
expressed: some, and those special, in exhortations tending unto Christianity
declared: some, and those heavenly, in prayers and supplications contained:
may it please thee, of thine unspeakable goodness, o merciful Father, to give
us grace so to imprinte them in our memories, and to have them sealed in our
hearts, that the course of our whole life may testify to the world, that thy
gifts in us are not void and frustrate, barren and fruiteles, vain and unused.
Least being otherwise, it chance unto us, as unto him that knitting up his
talent in a napkin, and hiding the same in the ground, had not only the same
taken from him, but was also cast into utter darkness for his idle nes and
unprofitable service.

Among al which helps, o eternal God, and faithful ouerseer of our souls, for
that this, which we have in hand, is not of least account, since thereout we
suck the sweet sap of com forte, the assistance of thy spirit being present
with us: we beseech thee with all submission, to direct our understandings, to
increase our faith: to confirm our hope, to kindle our zeal, to guide all our
affections, and to govern the whole course of our life: that exercisinge our
selves in this, or any other godly volume, published for the edification of
thy Church, we may use it and them with integrity and vprightnes of
judgment, with devotion void of hypocrisy, with faithful invocation, with
humility and submission: that in^ring our selves to prayer unfeignedly, we
may obtain that which we pray for effectualy, and for the same ministered unto
us in time of necessitye, with heart and voice extol thy most dreadful majesty:
to whom be all honor, glory, power and dominion everlastingly: To this let
all people say Amen most joyfully: Amen.

FINIS.
A Catalog containing the several titles of every prayer, and treatise
comprised in this book, easy to be found by the true number of the page.
1 THe first Morning prayer page 1 2 Second morning prayer. 3 3 Third morning
prayer. 6 4 Fourth morning prayer. 8 5 First evening prayer. 10 6 Second
evening prayer. 13 7 Third evening prayer. 15 8 Fourth evening prayer. 17 9 A
prayer for all times against the power of Satan. 19 10 Another. 21 11 A prayer
for all afflicted Christians. 23 12 Another. 25 13 A general Confession of
sins. 31 14 Another. 33 15 A prayer for humility. 35 16 Another for
charity. 37 17 A prayer for the mortification of the flesh. 40 18 Another. 42
19 A prayer for the obteining of grace. 44 20 Another. 46 21 A prayer for
patience in affliction. 48 22 Another. 50 23 A prayer in time of persecution.
52 24 Another. 55 25 A prayer against the enymies of the truth. 57 26 Another.
59 27 A prayer for the sick. 61 28 Another. 64 29 A Confession for the sick.
page 66 30 Another. 68 31 A prayer against desperation. 70 32 Another. 75 33
Another. 78 34 A Prayer for the auoidance of Gods wrath. 80 35 A prayer for
remission of sins. 82 36 Another. 85 37 Another. 87 38 A prayer for increase
of faith. 89 39 A prayer to be said at the hour of death. 123 40 A prayer
for the truth. page 125 41 A prayer for peace. 131 42 A prayer in time of
war. page 133 43 A prayer in time of dearth. page 139 44 A prayer against
the fear of death. 141 45 Another. 146 46 Another. 147 47 Another in form of
a confession. 149
Peculiar Prayers appliable to particular persons of sundry states and degrees.
1 A Prayer for the Queen. page 27 2 A prayer for all Maiestrates, page 29 3 A
prayer for preachers. 94 4 A prayer for the increase of preachers. 96 5 A
prayer for the Schoolmaister. 98 6 Another. 101 7 A prayer for Scholars. 103 8
The mothers prayer for the good education of her youth. 105 9 The fathers
prayer. 107 10 The childs prayer. 109 11 The Husbandmans prayer. page 111 12
The maydseruants prayer. page 113 13 A prayer for a woman with child. 116 14 A
prayer for a Woman in travel. 118 15 A prayer for the Prisoners. page 121 16 A
prayer for the Ploughman. 127 17 A prayer for the blessing of his labor 129 18
A prayer for the Captain. page 135 19 A prayer for the Soldier. page 137 20
A prayer for the Rich man. page 158 21 Another. 160 22 The beggars prayer. 162
23 Another. 164 24 The widows prayer. 166 25 The Tenants prayer. 168 26 The
fatherles child's prayer. page 170
Five notable treatises, and one devout prayer orderly placed as they follow
in the leaf.
1 A Sword against the fear of death divided into three weapons. 173 The first
weapon. ibid. The Second weapon. ^84 The Third weapon. 203 2 A battle between
the Dyuell and the Conscience. page 213 The call of Conscience in conflict, for
succor against present danger. 223 3 The dead man's School. 225 4 A lodge for
Lazarus. 243 5 A retrait from sin. 285 6 A prayer unto Almighty God, that
the use of this book may be for our edification, made by A. F. page 329
Glory to God: AMEN.

FINIS.
1593.



Imprinted at London by Richard Yardley and Peter Short, for the assigns of W.
Seres.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


