Follie's Anatomy. OR SATYRS AND Satyricall Epigrams.

With a compendious History of Ixion's Wheel.

Compiled by Henry Hutton, Dunelmensis.

LONDON Printed for Matthew Walbanke, and are to be sold at his shop at
Graies-Inne Gate. 1619.

TO THE READER, Upon the Author, his Kins-man.
OLd Homer, in his time made a great feast,
And every Poet was thereat a guest:
All had their welcome; yet not all one fare.
To them above the salt (his chiefest care)
He spewd abanquet of choice Poesy,
Whereon they fed even to satietie.
The lower end, had from that end their Cates.
For, Homer setting open his dung-gates,
Delivered, from that dresser, excrement,
Whereon they glutted, and returned in Print.
Let no man wonder that I this rehearse;
Naught came from Homer but it turned to verse.
Now where our Author was at this good cheer,
Where was his place, or whether he were there:
Whether he waited, or he took away;
Of this same point I cannot soothly say:
But thus I guess. Being then a dandiprat,
Some witty Poet took him in his lap
And fed him from above, with some choice bit.
Hence his Acumen, and aready wit:
But praises from a friendly pen ill thrive.
And truth's scarce truth, spoke by a relative.
Let envy therefore give her vote herein:
Envy and the Author sure are naught akin.
I Will personate had Envy: yet say so,
He lickt at Homers mouth, not from below.
R. H.

Ad Lectores.
TO stand on Terms twere vain. By hook and crook
One Term I was defrauded of a Book.
Now Readers your assistance I must crave,
To play at Noddy; to turn up a knave.
My foe at Tick-Tack plays exceeding well:
For Bearing (Sirs) beleeue't, he bears the Bell.
He Is of a bloodhounds kind, because his Nose
Vtters each new made sent; be it verse, or prose.
Could ye attache this Felon, in's disgrace
I would not bate an inch (not Boltons ace)
To bait, deride, nay ride this silly Ass,
I would take pains; he should not scot-free pass.
All filching knaves (be it spoken as a Trope)
Will once be plaide, displayed by a Rope:
And be this proud disperser of stole works
Once caught (that now in clanks and corners lurks)
Lest he delude some kind affecting Scholar,
Pray, have him twiched in a Hempen Collar:
Once burntieh' hand, he will example give,
To such Times turne-coats as by filching live.
TO THE WORTHILY Honored Knight, Sir Timothy Hutton.
NOblest of minds, unknown, I would inuit*
Rich Pyrrhus to accept a Codrus mite.
My lame-legd Muse, nere clome Pernassus Mount*
Nor drunk the juice of Aganippe's Fount:
Yet does aspire with Dedall's wings, appeal
To you, sole Patron of our common weal.
The foul maskt Lady, night, which blots the sky,
Has but one Phoebe, feuer-shaking eye.
Olympus azure clime, one golden light,
Which drownes the starry curtain of the night:
And my rude Muse (which Satyrists would rend*
One generous, grave Patronizing friend.
You this Maecenas are, peruse my writ,
And use these Metroes of true meaning wit:
Command; commend them not: such humile Art
Disclaimes applause, demerits no desert.
Value my verse according to her worth:
No mercenary hope has brought her forth.
Times puny, Penny-wits, I loathing hate.
Though poor, Im'e pure, from such aseruile state.
These works (fram'don the Anuile of my brain)
My free borne Muse, enfranchise from such shame:
In which large Calender, Timists may view,
I only writ to please the World, and you.
Your worships friend Nomine and Re: Henry Hutton.

SATYRS.
IVrge no time, with whipped, stripped Satyrs Lines,
With furies scourge whipping depraved times.
My muse (tho fraught) with such shall not begin
T'vncase, unlace, the centinell of sin:
Yet let earths vassailes, pack-horse unto shame,
Know I could lash their lewdness, evil fame;
Read them a Lecture, should their vice imprint
With sable lines, in the obdured flint;
Their Mappes of knavery and shame descry,
In lively colors, with a sanguine die;
And tell a tale, should touch them to the quick;
Should make them startle; fain themselves cap-sick;
But, that no Patron dare, or will maintain
The awful subject of a Satyre's vain.
WHat have we here? a mirror of this age,
Acting a Comicks part upon the stage.
What Gallant's this? His nature does unfold
Him, to be framed in Phantastes mold.
Lo how he iets; how stern he shows his face,
Whiles from the wall he passengers does chase.
Muse touch not this man, nor his life display,
Ne with sharp censure against his vice inuey:
For, since his humor can no jesting brook,
He will much less endure a Satyre's book.
Beshrew me, sirs, I durst not stretch the street,
Gaze thus on conduits scrowls, base vintners beat*
Salute a Mad-dame with a french cringe grace,
Greet with God-dam-me, a confronting face,
Court a rich widow, or my bonnet veil,
Converse with Bankrupt Mercers in the Gaile,
Nor in a Metro show my Cupide's fire,
Being a french-poxt Ladies apple-squire;
Lest taxing times (such folly being spide)
With austere Satyrs should my vice deride.
Nere breath, I durst not use my Mistrisse Fan,
Or walk attended with a Hackney-man,
Dine with Duke Humfrey in decayed Paul's,
Confound the streets with Chaos of old braules,
Dancing attendance on the Blackfriars stage,
Call for a stool with a commanding rage,
Nor in the night time open my Ladies latch,
Lest I were snared by the all-seeing Watch:
Which Critic knaves, with Lynxes pearcing eye*
Into men's acts obseruantly do prye.
Muse, show the rigor of a Satyrs art,
In harsh Sarcasmes, dissonant and smart.
First, to you mass of humors, puff of wind,
Which, Polipe-like, does enterchange his mind.
Note how this Timist, scratching of his pate,
Inuents a fable to advance his state,
Venting a Legend of Man, Devils lies,
Which in the ears of potentates must fly.
See how he squares it* takes a private stand,
To Gnathonize, to act it with his hand.
Behold his gesture, and his brazen face,
How stoutely he does manage his disgrace.
Lo how he whispers in his Masters ear,
In's Closet tattles lest the servants hear;
Winkes of an eye, and laughs his Lord to scorn,
By his attractiue fingers making horns.
His swimming brain, thus being brought to bed*
As motives to his wit, he rabs his head:
Then like a ledger at the Tables end,
Takes place for an inui^ed friend;
Applauding in discourse his Masters speech,
Admiring's virtue, ore the pot does preach:
Inueies against ding-thrifts, that their l^nds have spent
Detesting Riot more then thin cheekt Lent:
Censures base whoredom, with a Mustard face.
With a sour pis-pot visage, does disgrace
A Ruffled Boot, and will in no case stand,
In view of a (sir reverence) yellow band.
He rayles on Music, pride, and wines excess,
And from an Organ-pipe himself does bless*
Abhorres a Satin suit, or velvet cloak,
And says Tobaccho is the Devils smoke;
The thought of To* his intrailes more does gripe,
Then Physics art, or a strong Glister-pipe.
Go tell this slave, his vices shall not pass,
Such crafty colts, must feel the Satyrs lash.
The Lions skin a while may shade the Ape:
But yet his worship shall not scot-free escape.
Though he seem nice, demean himself demure,
The world perceiues, this Sycophants impure.
His Harpies face, dissembling Sirens voice,
Which in each corner make a whistling noyce,
Cannot be sconced with each male pretense,
Nor blind the world with some misconstru'd sens^*
We know his thought concurs not with his word*
His mouth speaks peace, his heart intends a sword*
None can discern whence Titan framed this mol^^*
Which, Gnato like, does blow both hot and cold*
O subtle Tyrant, whose corroding hate,
Depriues both life, and consummates the state
Of senseless Noddies, who repose in rest,
Foster hot embers, Serpents in their breast,
Which sparkling flames, to accomplish vain desire*
Makes fools, their subjects, fuel to the fire;
And like the Viper, fraught with spleenefull maw*
The Intralls of their Patrons states do gnaw.
NExt, lets survey the Letchers obscoene shame,
Rouse him from's squat, pursuing of the game,
Deprive this well mouthed dog of his intent,
Tracing each footestep, by his fresh made sent,
And pinch him with a scandald soul, impure,
Note him with Theta, for ay to endure.
Will It please you view this monster in his glass?
It best discouers a Fantastic Ass.
See how, Narcissus like, the fool does doat,
Viewing his picture, and his guarded coat;
And with what grace, bold actor like he speaks,
Having his beard precisely cut in the peake;
How neat's Mouchatoes do a distance stand,
Lest they disturb his lips, or saffron band:
How expert he is; with what attentive care,
Does he in method place each straggling hair.
This idle Idol, does bestow his wit,
In being spruce; in making's ruff to sit:
His days endeauours are to be complete,
To use his vestures nitid and facete:
For vulgar oaths, he raps forth blood and heart,
As coadiutors in the wenching art:
In's frizled Periwig, with bended brow,
Swears at each word: for, to confirm his vow,
He holds an oath's the ornamentall grace
Of venial discourse, befitting's place;
And does maintain, in's humor, To be drunk,
Is the preparatiue to love a punke;
A pipe of To. the indulgence of his brains,
Using Potatoes to preserve the Raines.
Pale horned Luna, sister to dark Night,
In Venus sport he uses for a light;
Thinking Earth's sable mantle hides his shame,
Depriues the terror of swift winged Fame.
When darkness does eclipse Don Phoebus rays*
When nights vast terror has expelld the days*
Then does this subject pase it to Pickt-hatch,
Shore-ditch, or Turneball, in despite oth' Watch*
And there reposing on his Mistrisse lap,
Beg some fond favor, be 't a golden cap:
Plays with her plume of feathers or her Fan,
VVishing he were accepted for her man;
And then at large in ample terms does show
His Cupids dart, and much endured woe,
Desiring cure to salve his languisht care,
TO expel the willow-garland of despair:
And that he may obtain his lust, compares
Her eyes to stars, to Amber her pounc't hayres:
Equals her hand to Cignets purest white,
Which in Maeanders streams do take delight:
Her sanguine blush, and ruby painted mold,
Unto Aurora's red, rich Indies gold.
Having earth's weaker vassaile overcome,
He bribes a Pandar with some trifling sum;
Does frolike with the Music in this vain,
Hearing the Diapason of their strain.
Perhaps he will cut a caper, neately prance,
And with his Curtail some odd Galliard dance;
Then glutted with his lust make quick dispatch,
Pretending he is in danger of the Watch:
So taking Vale, till some other night,
Must be conducted by a Tapers light,
Along the street to his polluted Cell,
Where this vile letcher does inhabit, dwell.
He thinks the secret quietness of night,
Which with phantasmes does possess each sprite,
Is a safe shelter to conceal his fact,
Having no witness to record his act.
O stupid fool! the Heavens al-seeing eye,
Beholds thy base frequented infamy;
And will repay thee treble, with a pox,
For the night-hanting of base Shoreditch smocks
ALl hail Tom Tospot: welcome to the Coast.
What Paris news can brag of, or make bost?
Thy phisnomie bewraies thou can relate
Some strange exploits attempted in the State.
I know thou have courted Venus lusting dames,
'Twas thy intent when thou tookst ship on Thames.
Let Us sympathize thy hap, enjoy some sport.
What art thou senseless, dead-drunk, alla mort?
Gallants, this abject object which you see,
Is an old picture of Gentilitie.
With Coriat he trauell'd has by land,
To see Christ's cross, the tree where Judas hanged.
Diuelin and Amsterdam his sea crab pase,
With other countries more, did often trace.
Earth's circled orb, he frequent trudged, went,
With less expenses then Tom Odcombe spent:
With fewer clothes, though furnished with mo shifts*
With sparing diet, few received gifts.
Tom had one pair of stockins, shoes, one suite;
But Tospots case Tom Coxcombs does confute.
For he has trauell'd all Earths globe a-foote,
Without whole clothes, good stockin, shoe or boot.
His ragged iournall, I bemone, condole;
Yet (God be thankt) he is returned all-hole.
Tom had assistants, as his books report:
But Tospot trauell'd void of all consort;
Having no creature with him whiles he slept,
Or walked; but such as in his bosom crept.
Tospot detests all clothes, hates new found form,
Unless it were no clothes at all were worn.
Which Method (I dare say) he would observe,
Go naked with his com-ragges, beg, and sterue.
He is no boasting Thraso which will vant
Of his adventures, penury, and scant.
Yet if you please to read my slender Muse,
I shall describe the humor he does use.
Tobaccho, Bottle ale, hot Pippin-pies:
Such traffic, merchandise, he daily buies.
With belly-timber, he does cram his gut,
With double iugges does his Orexis glut,
Swears a God-dam-me for the tapsters shottes,
And may pledge no health less then with 2. pots.
He has a Sword to pawn in time of need,
A perfect beggars phrase wherewith to plead
For maintenance, when his exhausted store
Is profuse lauisht on some pockie whore.
Tibornes triangle trees will be the thing,
Must send this knave to Heavens in a string.
MOunsier Brauado, are you come t'out face,
With your Mouchatoes, gallants of such place*
Pack hence, it is an humor to contend,
^n a brauado, with your nearest friend.
We Will not contest or squabble for a wall,
Nor yet point field, though you us vassailes call.
Invent some other subject to employ
Your gilded blade, your nimble footed boy.
Correct your frizled locks, and in your glass
Behold the picture of a foolish Ass.
Barter your lousy suits for present gain,
Unto a Broker in rich Birchin lane.
Compile a sonnet of your Mistrisse glove.
Copy some Odes to express conceited love.
Ride with your sweetheart in a hackney coach.
Pick quarrels for her sake, set fraies on broach.
Use Musicks harmony (which yields delight)
Under your Ladies window in the night.
Stretch with a plume, and cloak wrapped under they are*
Young Gallants glories soon will Ladies charm^*
S'foot walk the streets, in cringing use your wit^*
Survey your Love, which in her window sits.
Blackfriars, or the Palace-garden Bear,
Are subjects fittest to content your ear.
An amorous discourse, a Poets wit,
Does humor best your melancholy fit.
The Globe to morrow acts a pleasant play,
In hearing it consume the irksome day.
Go take a pipe of To. the crowded stage
Must needs be graced with you and your page.
Swear for a place with each controlling fool,
And send your hackney servant for a stool.
Or if your Mistrisse frown, seem maleconte^*
Then let your Muse be cloistred up, ypent.
Be love sick, and harsh Madrigalls express,
That she may visit you in such distress.
I Am sure you have some pamphlet, idle toy,
Which you rate high, esteem a matchless joy.
Where Is your Tobacco box, your steel and touch*
Roarers respect, and value these too much.
Where is your larum watch your Turkies Rin*
Muske-comfits, bracelets, and such idle things?
You Are nak't as Adam if you have not these,
And your endeauours cannot Ladies please.
If you the Gallants title will assume,
Go use th'Apothecarie for perfume,
Wear eare-rings, jewels, cordiuants strong sent,
Which comely ornaments dame Nature lent.
Fie, fie: you are to blame, which times misspend,
That for a trifling cost will lose a friend.
Do not contend in each frequented Lane,
With euere idle coxcombe, busy brain:
But your Mineruaes industry employ,
Your Ladies golden tresses to enjoy.
Record your name in some rich Mercers note,
That tradesmen may come pull you by the coat.
And in th'abysse of Vintners chalked score,
Shipwreck good fortune, run thy state on shore.
Diue in Mechanics books, till in the street
Seargeants arrest, convey thee to the Fleet,
And there in durance cag'd, consume with woe,
Beg with a purse, and sing Fortune's my foe.
WRite, Poetaster: fie for shame, your days
Will die without remembrancers of praise.
^Tis pity, such a pregnant witty verse
Should be intombed in the fatal hearse.
^onfine your Muse some tractates to compile,
^n scanned Meter, or condigner style;
That Earth's mild censure may applauding blaze
^our Phoenix quill, with volleys of great praise.
Why art so slow? the Trophies will be lost,
Unless you wright, all Fortunes shall be crossed.
What can thy style prohibit? gazing mute,
Where Earth's contending for the golden fruit*
You vilify your self with endless shame,
Imposing scandal to each Poets name.
I grieve he should be silent, in despite
Of all the Muses, which Sarcasmies write.
He does resemble Minstrells in each thing;
Invited once, he 'l neither play, nor sing;
Unbidden, will inuey against each friend,
Incessant write great volumes without end.
The amorist which does your wardrobe keep,
Admires your sluggish Muse is yet asleep.
He should a riming Madrigall compose;
And wanting you, must tell his griefs in prose.
The wenches they exclayme, cry out, and call
For Poetasters works extemporall.
The alehouse tippler, he protests, your Muse
Greatly dishonours him, with gross abuse,
Infringing promise: which you lately made,
Concerning Libells, that should touch the trad^*
He gave you earnest after you were wooed,
A dozen of strong liquor he bestowed,
To bathe your Muse, to make your fluent vai
Apt to despise a Satyrs taxing brain.
The idle Minstrell, he cries out of wrong,
Because you do his sonnets still prolong.
You iniure much his treble squeaking note,
Depriues him of the townships arms, red coat.
Such wrongs may not pass free: invent a theme,
Rouse up your Muse from her conceited dream.
Give him a cup of Ale, a pipe of To:
And let him to his private study go.
He Will break a jest, when he has drunk a glass,
Which shall for current among the tapsters pass,
And rhyme to any word you can propound,
Although a Meter for it, nere were found,
Wright Panegyricks in the praise of's friend,
Make complete verses, on his fingers end.
He has a subject he did late invent,
Will shame the riming sculler, Jack a Lent.
It Is writ in print; perhaps you will see it anon,
'Twas made of Robin Hood and little John.
'Twil be discouerd er 't be long; and ly
Under the bottom of a pippin-py,
Be pind to Capons backs to shroude the heat,
Fixed to some solid joint of Table meat.
Wish it be put to no worse service, then
To shelter the scorcht Caponet or Hen.
I pray 't may have such office, worthy place,
Yet fears 'tmust suffer vile rebuke, disgrace.
Jack out of office we 't ere long shall find
'^th house of office, being mewed, confinde.
Well though it be, yet for the Muses sakes,
He Will pen a pithie tractate of A-iax.
I wish he would reserve A-iax in mind,
Twill serve but for A-iax and come behind:
For men adiudge the volumes of this fool,
Worthy no chair, scarce to deserve the stool.
Let cease the clamor of thy hotchpot verse,
The stupid pots, or senseless streets to pearce.
The doggrell discord of thy long legd rhyme,
Defameth Poets, scandalize the time.
Your mock-verse Muse deserves naught but fire*
The beggars whipstock, or the Gallows hire.
In silence spend the relics of your days:
For being mute you will attain most praise.
Avoid each Satyrs lash, censures of times,
Which do deriding read pot-Poets rimes.
THe crane-throate hell, of this depraved age,
Earths belly-god, let us view upon the stage.
See how the squadron of his full fraught panch
Out-squares the straightnes of his narrow hanch*
Making his stumppes supporters to uphold
This mass of guts, this putrefied molde.
His belly is a Cesterne of receipt,
A grand confounder of demulcing meat.
A Sabariticke Sea, a depthlesse Gulf,
A senseless Vulture, a corroding Wolf.
Behold this Helluo, how he does glut,
Fill (like a wallet) his immeasurde gut,
Cramming his stomach with incessant load,
Like a stuffed bladder, hates big swelling Toade;
And rams his panch, that bottomless abyss,
As if to glut were legal, promised bliss.
All Is fish that comes to net, this Harpy's tooth
Eats what is within the compass of his mouth.
His table-talke hates hunger, more then vice,
Railes against fortune, cheating, cards, and dice,
Enuies'gainst actors, taxing such as fight,
Or in Tobacco do repose delight,
And thousand subjects mo exactly scannes,
Railing on cloakebagge breeches, yellow bands;
Wishing the fencing-schooles might be suppressed,
And all save belly-timber does detest.
This large discourse his gluttony does cloak,
Are motives his Orexis to provoke.
Which being fraught, till senses are a mort,
At noone tide to concoct he takes a snort.
His drowsy senses hudwinkt in a cap,
Leaning upon his chair do take a nap.
Confer his belly with his lower part,
And you will adiudge dame Natures rarest art
Made not this bulk, infusing life, or blood,
In such vnsquared timber, vnheawn wood.
He Is more misshapen then Crete's monstrous sin,
Deformed both without, and eke within.
His circled panch, is barrel like rotound,
Like earths vast concaues hollow, and profound.
His hanches which are locked as in some box,
With the straight compass of a Par a-dox,
He does into so little compass bring,
As if they should be drawn through Gyges ring,
So that he seems as if black Vulcans art,
Of diverse fossiles had compiled each part;
As if some tailor had bound on with points,
Nero's great belly, to starved Midas joints.
I could discipher this huge map of shame,
And lively pourtrait his abhorred name,
Were not that Critics would debase, revile,
Censure the sharpness of a Satyrs style.
It Is shame, such vipers, all devouring Hell,
Should be endured in our Coasts to dwell.
We can frame nothing of such naughty Earth,
Except a storehouse in the time of dearth;
Or beg this Minotaure, when he does die,
TO make dice of's bones or an Anatomy.
I Will therefore leave him in his pan-warm'd bed,
Resting on's pilllow his distempr'd head.
Were not for censures, I should make him pranc^*
Skip at the Satyr's lash, lead him a dance,
Unrip his bowels, and Anatomize
His filthy intrailes, which he does much prize.
But taxing times such proiects do confute,
Silence stern Satyrs, warnes them to be mute.
The golden days are changed, when Foxes sins
Pass scot free, marching in the Lions skins;
When corrupt times may complot wrong, or right
Without control, of contradicting might.
MY treatise next must touch (though somewhat late)
A woman creature most insatiate.
See this incarnate monster of her sex,
Play the virago, vnashamde, perplexed.
See Omphale her effeminated king,
Basely captive; make him do any thing.
Her whole discourse is of Guy Warwicks arms,
Of errant Knights, or of blind Cupids charms.
Her civil gesture, is to faigne a lie
In decent phrase, in true Ortographie.
Her modest blush, immodest shame, O fie,
It Is grand disgrace to blush, indignity.
She counts him hut a Nazard, half a-mort,
That will not iumble, use dame Venus sport.
To kiss, to ^^ll, t'admire her painted face
And do no more; ignoble, vile disgrace.
She likes his humor which plays for the mark,
Affects the man that is expert in the dark.
With costly unguents she depaints her brows,
Calls them the palace of chaste Hymen's vows.
And yet this statue for her honored trade,
With every vassaile will be vnderlaide.
Her sole delight is fixed in a fan,
Or to walk vsherd by a proper man.
Nature has polisht each external part
Of this vile dame with Oratories Art;
Making each limb an Orator, defense,
To mask her scandal with some good pretense.
Do but confer and note her private speech,
Her divine frame, will pass your humane reach.
She Will complement, pathetically act
A tragic story, or a fatal fact.
Lively discover Cupid and his bow,
Manage his savage quiver in her brow,
Court so compleately, rarely tune a song,
That she will seem a Dido for a tongue,
And by the virtue of all-conquering sight,
Infuse even life in him, that has no sprite.
Her golden phrase will ravish so your ears
With amorous discourse, pale lovers tears,
That you would judge her rarest parts divine,
Deem her a virgin of chaste Vest^es shrine.
Yet this proud Iezabell, so nice, demure,
Is but a painted Sepulcher impure.
She seems a Saint (in conference being hard)
Yet is more spotted then the Leopard.
Though she bestow her vigilancie, care,
In coining phrases, pouncing of her hair:
Yet are her Legends, golden mass of wit,
But like Apocrypha, no sacred writ.
All Is not authentical the which she pleades,
Or wholesome doctrine, that she daily reads.
Cease, austere Muse, this counterfeit to touch:
Y'haue spoke Satyricall, I doubt, too much.
I Will rather pity, then envy, inuay,
Their Calendar of wretch'nesse to display,
Shutting my Muse in silence, least she strip
This Saint-like creature with a Satyrs whip.
I blush, my quill with so immodest face
Abruptly pointed at her great disgrace,
Loathing the subject of a Satyrs style,
Discernes desert, which should this sect defile.
Pardon my Muse (kind sirs) she whips not all
Whom we in specie do women call.
It Is Corinths Lais, Romes confronting whore,
Which like the Hellespont we run on shore;
Such as resemble Dian in their deeds,
I mean in giving large Actaeons heads.
These are the Subjects which demerit blame,
And such we tax with earths eternal shame.
Applauding such chaste Philomels, whose love,
Idem, per idem, does most constant prove.
FINIS.
SHould I commend you Satyrs? faith no, tu^^^*
It Is an old Proverb, Good wine needs no bush.
If ye demerit earth's condigner laud,
Let grauer censures grace you with applaude.
If ye deserve no Poets Laurel stem,
Be ye base Orphans, I disclaim ye then.
To praise good works 'twere shame, indigne, and vile,
For none but counterfeits do praise their style.
Good, is but good; and no man can more say:
To praise the bad, makes Satyrists inuay.
Go seek your fortunes, be it good or bad
If bad, I Will greiue; if good, I shall be glad.
Henry Hutton.

To the Reader.
Hark, ye young Roysters, that with Inkehorn stuff
Delude the state, and rail the world in snuff:
Let me, in Court'sie, beg a friendly Q,
When you have spent your mouths upon the view.
Chop logic, chaw your cuds; some leisure give.
My Muse, which does at rack and manger live,
Must halt about the mark; for she is not flight:
And yet, though slow, she sometims speaks aright.
I f^are no colors: Let mad Satyrs write.
The Curres which bark the most, do seldom bite.
Let coxcombs curry favor with a fee,
Extol their brains, with Claw me, I Will claw thee.
I write the truth: If any fault you see,
Impute it to ill readings, not to me.
Dispense with my bold quill: if she be fell,
I do it for the best: I wish all well.
Conniue young wits (which on your humors stand)
I Will, with the Proverb, Turn the Cat it h'band.
And ere ye jar, for Peace sake give the way;
Since few, or none, with edged tools safely play.
SATYRICALL Epigrams.
Ad Lectorem.
Epi. 1.
REader, I must present you a Shrimp-fish:
I hope you will make no bones to taste this dish.
It is no Carpe, unless you giv 't that note:
Which if you do, I wish 'twere in your Throat.
Ad Momum.
Epi. 2.
MOmus, I wish your love, and humbly crav 't:
My suite is for the same; pray let me have 't.
If that you think, according be not best,
A Cording be your end: and so I rest.
Maltsters ill Measure.
Epi. 3.
SVch Maltsters, as ill measure sell for gain,
Are not mere knaves, but also knaves in Grain.
De Equisone.
Epi. 4.
CAn Equiso be wavering as the wind?
Faith no; for he is of a Stable kind.
In Caluum.
Epi. 5.
THe Commonty complain, Caluus of late,
By hook, and crook, by pouling gains state:
Yet he protests, he takes few bribed gifts,
And powling scorns above all other shifts;
Appealing to his barber, who does swear,
He is not worth one hair to reach one ear.
Then, since you tax him with this faultlesse ill,
He Will leave off-powling, and begin to pill.
Epi. 6.
Kind Kit disdaines that men him fool do call.
What is he else? Faith, nothing but Wit-all.
An action of the Case.
Epi. 7.
SHouldring a Minstrell, in a Lane, I broke
His Violls case, by an unlucky stroke:
Who swore he would co^plain, to vent his grudg.
And what care I, what any law will judge:
For why? I will maintain it, face to face,
'T can be no more, but the action of the Case.
Epi. 9.
TOm-Cobbler sold his tools, a matter small:
And yet unto this day he keeps Awl.
Epi. 10.
RObin has for Tobaccho sold his chair,
Reserving nothing but a stool for's lare:
Whence all men judge, this silly sottish fool,
Though seldom sick, goes often to the Stool.
God a-mercy Horse.
Epi. 11.
A Friend, who by his horse received a fall,
Made bold (he swore) in private for to call.
I made him welcome, as dame Nature binds
All those to do that bear affecting minds.
Yet since his steed did him unwilling force,
I thank not him, but God a-mercy Horse.
Epi. 12.
FRancisco vants he gave his wife the horn.
She frouns, she frets, and takes the news in scorn.
And though you did (quoth she) yet you, indeed,
Must wear the horn, because you are the Head.
De Caluo.
Epi. 13.
CAluus protests, for foes he does not care:
For why? they cannot take from him one hair.
In Purum.
Epi. 14.
PVrus does sermons write, and scripture quote;
And therefore may be termed a man of Note.
In Causidicum.
Epi. 15.
CAusidicus wears patched clothes, some bruit;
And must do so: for he has nere a suite.
De fabro lignario.
Epi. 16.
TOm Ioyner sold his tools, and clothes of's britch,
To cure the scab; and yet he has an Itch.
Epi. 17.
A Cuckold is a dangerous beast. Why so?
Nam Cornu ferit ille: Caueto.
De Vinoso.
Epi. 18.
VInosus is a Verb, his persons good,
And must be formed in the Potentiall mood:
In which sole mood, we find each drunken man.
For, commonly, they are known by the sign, Can.
Epi. 19.
WOmen by nature do a Nazzard spite,
Because he is a light-horseman and wants weight.
Epi. 20.
IAck-Cut-purse is, and has been patient long.
For, he is content to pocket up much Wrong.
Epi. 21.
TOm vowed to beat his boy against the wall:
And as he struck, he forthwith caught a fall.
The Boy, deriding, said I will auerre,
Y' have done a thing, you cannot stand to, sir.
Epi. 22.
IN an outlandish Port, where there were store
Of bloody Pirates taken on the shore,
The Magistrate did build (of squared stone)
A pair of Gallows, for to hang them on.
And being asked, why they so strong were made,
Replied; that wooden Gallows soon decaid,
They would not last one age; but now his care,
Had built strong Gallows for himself, and's heir
De Balliu^.
Epi. 23.
HOw dare ye with a Baliue squabble, broile.
Disturb the streets with vproares, endless coil?
Though he be poor, yet offer no disgrace:
Baliues are men of-Calling in their place.
Epi. 24.
BEll, though thou die decrepit, lame, forlorn,
Thou wast a man of Metal, I Will be sworn.
Crooktbacks payment.
Epi. 25.
CRookt-back, to pay old scores, will sell his state:
And though he do, he will never make all strait.
In Gallam.
Epi. 26.
GAlla, it is said of late, is brought to bed:
And yet in Hymen's rites she nere was wed.
Which makes the vulgar judge, and censure on her,
That she betimes begun to take upon her.
Tims wound.
Epi. 27.
AT quarter blows, Tim did of late receive
A bruise upon his head, that does him grieve:
Which, having issue, makes friends tax his deed,
And jesting say; Tim has a running head.
Epi. 28.
PHantastes chaf't to express his raging wit,
Because his stockins did not neately sit;
And strictly asked his man, what as he thought
Concerning's stockin he had lately bought
Who said, I think though 't seem too straight by half,
Twod fit; but that you are too great in the Calfe.
De Conspicilio.
Epi. 29.
AN aged man, which spectacles did use,
Having them filcht, begun one time to muse,
Fearing the thief would not his sights restore;
But rather plot how to deceive him more.
Fear not said one, the matter is but Light;
And ten to one, but they will come to Sight.
De Chirotheca.
Epi. 31.
A Friend protested he was strangely crossed,
Because (forsooth) his wedding gloves were lost
But on your gloves, I said, sir do not stand;
I warrant you, ere long they 'l come to Hand.
Trim's Care.
Epi. 32.
NEat Barber, Trim, I must commend thy care,
Which do all things exactly, to a Hair.
Epi. 33.
TOm Chamberlayne does from his guests convey*
The fired logs which they account for pay:
Now Tom may swear, and therein be no liar,
That all he has, is gotten out oth' fire.
Idle words.
Epi. 34.
OF Idle-words, no capital delict,
One was arraigned; by the laws convict;
Adiudg'd to lose his ears: which he denide;
Complotting to escape, But one replide,
The Pillory to escape spend not your wit:
When all is done, you must giue-Eare to it.
De Thaide.
Epi. 36.
THais, her Urine to a Doctor bore:
Who asked her, if she were a maid. She swore
^Twas so. My wench (quoth he) thou art beguild;
My Art descries that thou have had a child:
What kind of maid art then? She blushing said,
^nd't like your worship, sir, a Chamber-maide.
In Lesbiam.
Epi. 38.
THe sanguine die of Lesbia's painted face,
Is often argued for a doubtful Case.
^he color's hers, she swears: not so some thought it.
and true she swears: for I know where she bought it.
De Gallo.
Epi. 39.
Kind Cock is not a cock oth' kind, I fear.
His hen wud bring forth chickins, if he were:
^et she has none. Then surely, gentle reader,
He is no Cock; only a Capon-treader.
De Cornuto.
Epi. 40.
COrnutus did receive a hurt on's thigh:
Of which, I am persuaded, he 'l not die.
The wound's not mortal though it inward ble^*
Because the Sign rules most in Cornute's head.
Epi. 41.
Women are Saints: yet was not she a sp^^*
That almost slew her husband with (...)
The Case is altered.
Epi. 42.
TOm Case (some do report) was lately halte^*
If this be true, why then the Case is alter^
Ad Caecum.
Epi. 43.
CAecus, I pray respect your honest name,
Avoid the scandal of succeeding shame.
Y' have an ill eye, so some do often chat:
Amongst other faults, pray have an Ey to that
In Superbum.
Epi. 44.
SVperbus swaggers with a Ring in's ear;
And likewise, as the custom is, does wear
About his neck a Ribbin and a Ring:
Which makes men think, that he is proud of a string.
Tospots reckonings.
Epi. 45.
TOspot is chosen steward of the house,
To sum their commons; as eld servants use.
I think he 'l reckonings more completely cast,
Then any steward that this place has past.
For certain, after drinkings, or a feast,
He casts-vp Recknings once a week at least.
Epi. 46.
WIll squabled in a Tauern very sore,
Because one brought a Gill of wine; no more.
Fill me a quart (quoth he) I Am called Will:
The proverb is, Each Jack will have his- Gill.
Tom's Valor.
Epi. 47.
ONe hundredth gross of points Tom took in pay,
Of bankrupt Mercers which were in decay,
Whence some report, that knew his fearful ioints,
That Tom's grown stout, and stands upon his Points.
Epi. 48.
GVido does rage, because one jesting said,
That he of late had got a goodly head.
What man dare give me horns (quoth) he for'^ life*
No Man, said one: if any, 't is your wife.
VVhiles men you tax, the half man you exclude*
And she, the whole man does with horns delud*
De Milone.
Epi. 49.
MIlo does vant he is strong, and yet contend*
To take the wall of open foes, and friend*
Then sure he is weak, which will in discord fall*
For it; since none but weakest go to the wall.
EPIGRAMS.
Epi. 50.
A Proctour was to examine in the Court
A wench. And he, disposed to make sport,
Did ask the maid, what he should call her name.
Why, maid (quoth she) or else it were great shame.
Pray, speak advised, quoth this gibing clearke;
You must take Oath of it, and therefore mark.
The wench, selfe-guilty, to him blushing said,
Pray style me single woman, leave out maid.
To his inconstant mistrisse.
Epi. 51.
Feign would I praise, yet dare not write my mind,
Lest thou sholdst vary like the uncertain wind.
Ep. 52.
A Felon, judged to die for filching ware,
At his confessing did himself compare,
In Metaphors, unto the world; wherein
Contained is the Sentinel of sin.
The hangman, hearing this, when they had praid,
Began to scoff, and thus deriding said;
I may attempt what I desire, were 't Land:
For why? I have the world now in a Band.
De Crepidario.
Epi. 53.
SHoo-makers are the men (without all doubt)
Be It good or bad, that set all things on foot.
De Vitriario.
Epi. 54.
A Glazier which endeauours to reap gains,
Endures toil, is troubled much with Panes.
Epi. 55.
MIller, such Artists as thy pulses feels,
Affirm, thy gadding head does run on wheels.
Epi. 56.
FAt-back, you are too blame which friends will cross.
Go too: you show your self a knave in gross.
Epi. 57.
Tailors work much, beleeue't, and take great pain:
Yet, Masons work far harder i will maintain.
Epi. 58.
Does Jane demerit well? I pray, why so?
For her good carriage, which all men know.
Epi. 59.
PRay, pardon Praeco's compotations:
His head is full of Proclamations.
In Gulam.
Epi. 60.
BAse Gula, with his teeth, and nails does tear
The commons which he eats any where:
Now, we may say, What Gula does assail,
He will accomplish it with Tooth-and-Naile.
Epilogus.
WHat Satyrs write, or Cabalists do judge,
I weigh but small; since they bear all men grudg.
What Momists censure, or the roaring sect;
Be what it will, it is but their dialect:
And such applause, like to their threadbare coat,
Would but pollute me with some evil note.
I do refer my Muse, unto such eyes,
Which truly can their judgments equalize*
Such, will be means, to save her from the fire*
And if need stand, to draw Dun out in the mire.
H. H. D.

IXIONS Wheel.
FOrtune empaling Jove with honors crown,
Making him victor in the Titans fight:
Mars having trod perforce proud Saturn down,
Depriving Titan of's usurped right:
These cosupremes, which overrule the fate,
Enthronize him in Saturn's regal state.
Which grateful God, in honor of his name,
To Mars did dedicate the crowns of Bay;
And in Olympus did a feast ordain,
To solemnize the glory of this day.
Each sacred Deity, had free access
To be partaker of such happiness.
Hermes did trudge, a jolly foote-mans pase,
TO inuit the Rectors of the Spheres sublime.
He nimbly trips the sun-Gods circled race,
Commands each power, of the Olympic clime,
To celebrate this festival, in lieu
Of all the triumphs, which to Mars were due.
Which thankful Guests, their joint consents all
To gratulate their kind affecting Host;
And, of the store which they in promptu have gave,
(As a requital of his profuse cost)
Do, plena manu, regal bounties send,
Whiles to exceed in giving they contend.
Pan did the first fruits of his fold present.
Neptune sent Quails; and Bacchus foming vines.
Ceres did immolate, with like intent,
Autumn's rich Prime, and Terra's golden mines.
No God there was but sent, for love or fear,
Condign presents to augment their cheer.
At length, in vestures nitid, and faccte,
To Jove's high court, Heavens Synod did repair:
Whose brains were busied how to be complete
To place themselves in method, formal, square,
Whiles mayor powers, affect new forged shapes,
The minors aemulate like. Aesops Apes.
Wars austere God, with stout Achilles Lance,
And wrinkled brows, does Thrasouize it, rage:
Cornuted Phoebe, in her coach, does prance:
Bacchus, with Grapes, does stretch it on the stage,
Whiles this cup-saint, too lavish and profuse,
Embrew's his Temples in their liquid juice.
Apollo, Venus, Cupid God of love,
And chaste Aurora Goddess of the Morn,
With all the remnant of the powers above,
In royal vestures did their corpse adorn.
Thus they contend (if eminent in place)
TO exceed in gesture, vesture, decent grace.
Vulcan except, who from his Anuile hies,
Lymping unto the Trough, to scour his face,
And col^y fists; then, with his apron dries
The same, thinking them fit for such a place:
He, hating pride, vainglory, did not strive,
Or acmulate, to be superlatiue.
The Smith of Lemnos, malecontent, did grudge
That Dis should loyter for his shackling chains:
Yet, being jealous, he is constrained to trudge,
Lest, whiles he toil, some other reap the gains.
Curling his locks, he therefore, half a mort,
Does halting usher Venus to the Court.
Swift winged Hermes, did Ixion cite,
The last, to dance attendance at this feast:
Who, swollen with pride of his puissance, might,
Sat with the Gods as a coequal guest:
And though unworthy to assume such place,
Yet did his thoughts aspire for greater grace.
Earths Mortal, with Immortalls being placed,
Took Dedall, flight; with Icarus would climb;
With Phaeton the deities disgraced,
Deposing him, for his indecent crime.
Princes, in pride, attempt those vain designs,
Which often times their vmpires undermines.
While mighty Jove, with Orpheus sweetest hymns,
Aptly concording to Arions Lute,
With boauls of Nectar, crowned to the brims,
His noble guests does gratulate, salute,
This lusting king endeauours in despite
To wrong his Host, to casheer Hymen's right.
Bacchus moist vapors, which do sursum fume,
Ixions brain so much intoxicate,
That in his cup he did (too rash) presume
TO attempt the act: which he repents too late.
So potent are Don Bacchus nociue charms,
That they intrude into apparent harms.
Rapt with Queen Iunoes love, whiles he did fix
So princely object in an abject eye,
His joys with sorrows he does intermix:
For, sanctum sins do often soar too hie.
Which grand default, few Amorists can find;
Because the naked God of love is blind.
He languisht long, abhorring to reveal,
TO express his dolours in external show:
Yet they, more urgent whiles he would conceal,
Like Hydra's heads, did pullulate, renew.
For, shrouded embers, which cannot aspire,
Assuming force, become the greatest fire.
With chaste Adonis blush, at length in art
He did uncase those griefs which were represt,
And did the tenor of his cares impart:
For words yield solace to distempred breasts,
Assuage the deluge of eternal woe,
Which (Sea-like) alternatim, ebb and flow.
The prime allurement, which Ixion used
To rob this Matron of her prizelesse fame,
Were Mamons gifts; which women seld refuse,
Although in obloquie they drown their name.
For Fates decreed, each ^^^mans weaker power
Should not resist fair Danae's golden shower.
His crown of Thessalie, with Tagus sand,
And mineralls of Ganges golden shore,
He gratis did prefer into her hand,
Wishing such Orators might love implore.
TO enjoy base lust he would his life condemn,
Hazard his state, and princely Diadem.
The modest queen (which waxed red with same)
Like one that is planet-strooke, remained mute:
Collecting strength (to avoid succeeding fame)
She did repel his base, immodest suit:
Yet, more importunate, though she despise,
He non-plust once, again will rethorize.
Lady (quoth he) behold my harmless heart,
Which does, captived, in Sibyls durance live.
Like to Achilles Lance, my endless smart
You must recure, which did the anguish give:
Or I, poor Tymon, must my date expire,
Whiles Furies torture me in Cupid's fire.
Sometimes, in the Abyss of Love I freeze,
Like frigid places of the Artick clime:
Again, excessive heat those storms appease,
Scorching like Phoebus in her fiery prime
Thus I, whom Titan framed of ^ritt^e mold,
Both at one instant, burn, and am key-cold.
My passive humors, and distemperd thoughts,
Do stimulate proud Silla^s lre: debates
Vaine-hopes, which hot desires do bring to naught,
Fiercely pursues with Theoninus hates;
Waging such war within my soul divine,
That Trojan fraies, were plays, co^par'd with mine.
No Artists skill, nor deity above,
Can me restore to my desired bliss.
The Energia sole is fixed in love,
Which may recure my cares remediless.
At Love I aim; yet have no crosser foe:
Whose perverse wrath, my state would overthrow
Thus does he Syllogize, half malecontent,
With fallacies sophisticating tears;
And thus discourse, unkindness to prevent,
Whilst sighs unrip his melancholy fears:
Yet vain the king pursues a bootelesse chase,
His Dear does tappasse in a private place.
Whiles he acutely argued this hard text,
With writs of error trauers^ng his suit;
Jove's constant Daphne, timorous, perplexed,
His f^call arguments does still confute:
Yet forward love, which in extremes will err,
Uniting force, does wage a second war.
Now by authentic reasons he does plead,
Urging examples to confirm his case;
Corroborating his indecent deed,
With Corinth's strumpets, which their sex debase*
A subtle shist to curry-fauour's truce:
For, old examples women most seduce.
The Nymphs, to Vesta consecrated pure,
Which did (quoth he) their youthful days confine,
Like Ancors in a Cave, to live secure,
Only devoted to the vestall Shrine:
These trod their shoes awry, and did transgress,
Reputing it a frailty of the flesh.
The Sun-god Phoebus, subject, bowed to love;
Though he were crowned with a willow-with.
Fair Cytherea had (as records prove)
A leash of loves, beside black Lemnos smith.
And Vulcan spied false carding. What of it?
He was adiudg'd but Jealous, wanting wit.
Sole Monarch of the sky, whom Cupid's charms,
and fatal Quiver, did incite to lust,
(...) lovely Arethusa's azure arms
^id often repose; although it were unjust.
Latmus can witness, and Parnassus Plain,
She played the wanton with a shepheards-swaine.
Examine Hermes, if he loved, or no,
VVhiles he with Hearse private did confer,
He Will not disclaim his wenching acts, I trow,
^r that with Venus he did wilful err.
Thus loved the churlish stars. Then why should I
^oore Saturnist, a distract lover die.
^or were thou chaste, great Jove: the wedlock band
^n Hebe's, and Alemena's arms thou broke:
^indar's proud bride thou used at command;
Captived Calisto in a lustful yoke;
And with these Paramours have led thy life,
Wronging the pleasures of a jealous wife.
What if great Jupiter, with Lynx his eyes,
Should censure, that chaste Hera were too kind
With Hermes spells, I would conjure his spies,
Till I enjoyed the solace of my mind.
Admit, you should disclose in outward show
Apparent love, it were but quid pro quo.
Suppose, that Earth impanneld a grand Quest,
And that the Bar of Law should rack this act:
It would be thought a Quaere at the best;
Since affi-dauit of our concealed fact
Could not be made; whiles of each Gods know sham^
A sempiternall probate shall remain.
He urged the Queen too far: yet she excus'^
Fearing malignant times the fame would broach
And does object, that beautie's often abused,
Often scandalized with vulgar tongues reproach.
For, slander set on foot, though false, will run,
And current pass, in every Momists tongue.
Beautie's a common mark, apt to offense
(Quoth she) when roysters roue, or Court vnwi^^
Bad fame will blab, and forge some lewd pretense
Be amors nere so secret, or precise:
No fond suspect her jealous ear can escape,
For, she will colour't in a lively shape.
Should I, upon such terms, ere condescend,
I double, treble, should mine honor stain.
What essence then my error durst defend,
If true accusers should my vice arraigne?
In vain it were to fly from Argus watch,
If in the net, Jove, Mars with Venus catch.
The unchaste king, now silent, all a mort,
Abruptly interrupts her subtle speech;
And, vi and armis, must enjoy his sport,
Move her perforce to cuckoldry, spouse-breach.
He begd before; but now commands his lust:
And she consents, lest Jove their talk mistrust.
Who whilst they, pro and contra, argued thus,
Suspected misdemeanor in his Guest;
Yet did conceal, because he sat non plus,
Drowning despair in his disquiet breast.
Jove feared guile (Mendozas well can gloze)
And therefore urged Juno to disclose.
Who, putting finger in the eye, declares
This large discourse; which Jove unkindly takes
The lust seemed vile, such impudence was rare:
Which to defraude, he of a cloud did make
Chaste Iunoes like; a formal shape inuents,
Which, graphice, her stature represent.
Apollo's wagon, having left his sphere,
Drawing the st^rry curtain of the night,
This false Idea did in state appear,
To pay lusts king his long desired delight:
Whom he embraced (yet was deceiud God wot)
And of a cloud the massy Centaures got.
Obtained lust his breast could not contain:
In ^hrasoe's terms he vants this act obscene,
Falsely accusing Hera in disdain,
Making lusts Queen, corriuall with the Queen.
Such are men's faults; they cannot only horn,
But must divulge, and laugh the wronged to scorn.
The Irefull God, which was supposed, wrong,
To wear a cuckolds badge, an armed head,
All court affairs adiourneth, does prolong,
And coram nobis, scans this shameful deed.
Lest by delay truth should be staind, forgot,
He wisely strikes now whilst the Iron's hot;
And of high treason does the king indite
(For faults are great which touch a mighty foe)
Who by a quest of Quaere which judge right
(Too strictly sentenc't to eternal woe)
Was, by that Synod in Olympus held,
Condemned, contemned, and from his Throne expeld.
To plead, or to recant, it was too late:
The arraigned king condemned stands, convict;
Whom the three lusticers of Limbos state,
With new devised penalties inflict.
Hell's fatal judgment, is a just reward,
For such as Hymenaeus rites discard.
Fixed to the rigor of a tumbling wheel,
Which Furies move, and ever restless turns,
This type of lust, hells terror amply feels,
Whiles Serpents sting, and Hecats furnace burns.
Thus, by just doom, to Styx his soul did di^^
Being enrold amongst the damned five.
Great mirth did Dis, and Preserpina keep,
To give a welcome to this leane-chapt Ghost.
The triple-headed Cur awoke from sleep.
Caron, in have, his flaming Ferry crossed;
Who with the Furies, which then leisure found*
Salutes this guest, and hopt a merry round.
Tantal had lap enough: each ayry sprite,
And starued Ghost, had plenty of good-cheere.
Alecto skipt, with Bacchus being light,
And played the devil, void of love or fear;
Whiles grim Megaera tore the inuectiue scroles,
Chasing the fiends with euer-burning coals.
A greater racket was not kept in Hell,
When Hecat got the Devils leave to play.
So far this Chaos does the wont excel,
That former tortures are a civil day.
Stones, tubs, and wheels, do tumble up and down,
So that no Ghost escaped a broken crown.
And all this time, Ixion, in a maze,
Spectator like, beheld the Furies sport;
At length, ashamed to stand still mute at gaze,
Does spend his mouth, and revel in like sort;
Till level coil, which issued from the Pot,
Made hell, still hell, their quarrels were so hot.
(...) was shreudly (...) because the Ghosts
D^^^rb'd the Gods their their (...) coile*
Which Quorum Justice (...)
To chain each Fury to his former (...):
And (...) the stranger which in (...) did lurk.
By strict command; (...) unto his work*
Whose restless pains my poor (...),
With Agamemnon's veil, must rudely mask.
By Herc'les (...)
And from the (...), the ro^all of his ^aske*
(...) by ^ust in Limb o^ (...) he dwell:
Lust (...), his death, both Heaven, and Hell*
Henry Hutton. Dune^^ensis


