A Position Against vainglorious, and that which is falsely called Learned
Preaching.

1604.

The Position.
IN ordinary Preaching unto Christian Congregations to allege Authorities of
me^ whether Philosophers, Poets, or Divines; or to use Latin, or other
languages besides the vulgar, is unprofitable, unreasonable, and unlawful.

This is proved and confirmed by 7. Reasons.

First, the example of Christ is the best pattern for us to follow in all
works of our Ministry: yea if herein we willingly depart from this rule,
doubtless we can not want sin.

But their manner of Preaching who use Humane Authorities and Latin, etc. is not
like Christ's. For all men know Christ's whole course of teaching the Jews,
how familiar and plain, and yet how Divine and sound it was: even without all
show or suspicion of such lightness, curiosity, and ostentatio^, as some now in
their foresaid allegations and manner of teaching do use.

Therefore thus ought all Preachers to do likewise; viz. after the example of
Christ. And that other manner of teaching (which some use) wants not sin.

other points, so even heerin doubtless we ought to follow them, as we see that
they follow Christ.

But in that forenamed manner of teaching which some now use, neither is their
example and practice followed. For all their ordinary Preaching and Writing to
the Churches was in great simplicity, their words were all vulgar, their
Authorities were all Canonical: which the whole course of the Apostles Acts
and Epistles does testify. And particularly Paul witnesses the same of
himself, saying: 1. Cor. 2.1.
I came not to you with excellency of words or of wisdom, [but] showing to
you the testimony of God. verse. 4
Neither [stood] my word and my preaching in the intising speech of man's
wisdom. But this manner indeed he here insinuates to have been the^ the use and
manner of the false teachers.



Ordinary Preaching to Christian Congregations. In which, by thus doing this
profitablenes very seldom appears, or rather truly never. For in such
ordinary places so exact discussing of controversies has no use, as experience
shows us. Especially, that we should need to use many words in a strange
tongue.



which yet nevertheles was but very seldom, even this twice only. Otherwise in
all the multitude of his Preachings and Writings that are extant, he never used
any other Authorities then Canonical. Which teaches us, how rarely and how
unwillingly in doctrine we are to use any other allegations, then such as have
in themselves absolut Verity. That to the Corinthians 15.33. (though it be
found so written in Menander a Poet, yet) the Apostle cites it only as a
common Proverb, as a truth out of question, and vulgarly known: not as a
testimony from any Humane Author. 2. In those two places before objected he
deals directly with the Heathens and Unbelievers; that if any thing would
move them, they might be convinced by their own Prophets. Wherefore these
touch not our present question which now we have in hand. For now our question
is only concerning ordinary instruction to Christian Congregations. 3. He
cites these Poets in these 2. places in no other language then that only which
was vulgar, and which the common sort understood and knew right well. But with
us the common people understand not, only they admire and wonder at the deep
learning and incomprehensible knowledge of such rare Doctors.

Therefore it still remains, that this curious and vain ostentation of
strange tongues and Humane authorities ought to be shunned by all sound and
modest Preachers in their ordinary teaching of Christians. Contrariwise, the
Apostles plainnes and simplicity is to be always followed and embraced, which
was their constant order and practice.

If God (as it were) debased himself and would not speak unto us in

But thus Deuteronomy. 18 15,-19.
it pleased GOD (as it were) to abase himself in the teaching of his people.

Therefore, etc.



But the alleging of Fathers and Philosophers, etc. as being the best way of
ordinary teaching, is a strong inducement to make men think that the simple
word of God is not a sufficient rule, nor the best means for doctrine to
salvation. Which experience proves to much in a number of all sorts of men.

Therefore that use is very scandalous and unlawful.

When the hearers cannot prove Preached be so or no, then that order of
Preaching is bad and not to be used. For questionles in all sound and
profitable teaching that specially ought to be provided for, (which we see
Act. 17-11.
the Apostle had care of) that the hearers may be able by themselves to search
and see whether that which they hear be so or no.

But when strange toungs are used, authorities and sentences of Fathers and
Philosophers alleged, then the ordinary hearers cannot prove and see whether
those things are so or no, which are said.

Therefore this order of Preaching is evil, and not to be used.

That manner of teaching wherein by all, but only by some who are extraordinary
and learned hearers.

But when Fathers and Philosophers and strange languages are used, many
understand not that which yet they foolishly admire. Contrarily when the words
are familiar and the matter Canonical, then all understand, both the learned
and unlearned, and may receave edification.

Therefore this way of teaching is the best, and the other the worst.



Therefore in all reason it seems, the contrary use to speak Latin to us
English, to cite Authorities of men in ordinary Preaching, is a great fault in
Ministers, and in no wise to be allowed.

H.I.

If any speak, let him speak as the word^ of God.

1. Pet. 4.11.

