AN ADIOYNDER TO THE LATE CATHOLIC NEW YEARS GIFT, Or Explication of the Oath
of ALLEGIANCE.

Wherein Certain principal difficulties, objected by a very learned
Roman-Catholike, against the said New-yeares Gift, and Explication of the Oath,
are very clearly explained.

Published by E. I. the Author of the New-yeares Gift.



IHS.

Occultari potest ad tempus veritas, vinci non potest.

Truth may for a time be suppressed, but it cannot be overcome.

S. Augustine in Psalm. 61. Permissu Superiorum. 1620.

To the Reader.
1. IN the New of this year, I presented to your charities (Dear Countrymen)
A Catholic New-yeeres gift, or A brief, and clear Explication of the Oath of
Allegiance, partly upon occasion of the public acknowledgment, which Mr. Thomas
Green, a very learned Divine, and Religious Priest of the Order of S.
Benedict, made of his opinion concerning the said Oath, to wit, that in his
own private judgment he thought, that there is nothing in the Oath, which may
not, according to Roger Widdringtons Gloss, and Explication, be lawfully
taken by English Catholics; and partly to instruct and appease more fully the
consciences of you, my Catholic Brethren, concerning the said Oath, then you
were instructed by that false, and pestiferous Explication, compiled by I. E.
the Author of the Treatise commonly called, The Prelate and the Prince.

2. Now in the last end thereof, I am bold to annex, for your better
instruction, a little Addition, or Adioynder to the aforesaid New-yeeres gift,
upon occasion of a Reply, which a Religious Priest has made to a very learned
Roman-Catholike, in answer to diverse difficulties, doubts and scruples, which
he objected against the said New-yeeres gift, or Explication of the Oath. By
which Reply you may clearly see, that this difficult, dangerous, and
scandalous controversy, concerning the Popes authority to depose Princes, and
the Oath of Allegiance, is now in some sort brought to a final issue, for that
all the exceptions, which hitherto have been urged, or with any color of
reason may be alleged against the aforesaid Oath, are fully satisfied by
these four general assertions, which partly in the New-yeeres gift, and
partly in this Adioynder are made so plain and manifest, that no man of
learning and conscience can contradict the same.

3. The first assertion is, that it is a doctrine truly probable (it being
approved by so many learned Catholic Divines, and Lawyers, both ancient and
modern, confirmed by so many public Decrees of the Parliament of Paris,
grounded upon so many pregnant proofs, which are taken from the authority of
the holy Scriptures, the doctrine of the ancient Fathers, the practice of the
Primitive Church, and diverse other Theological reasons) that the Pope has not
any power, or authority, to depose absolute Princes, or to dispose of their
Crowns and lives, for any cause, crime, end, or good whatsoever. And this
assertion is so manifest, that the most learned and Illustrious Cardinal Peron
not only affirms, That the Pope does tolerate in France, those Catholics,
who hold against him in this point En Harangue autier Estat. page 98.
, and, That this controversy ought not to hinder the reunion of those, who
should desire to be reconciled to the Church In his Reply. ca. 91. p. 633.
, but also (which is more to be admired) he seeks to excuse Card. Bellarmine
himself See beneath Sect. ^. number. 9.
, as though he thought it absurd for any man to conceive, that so learned a
man, as Card. Bellarmine is, should publicly teach, that the doctrine for the
Popes power to dispose of all temporalls, is an undoubted point of faith, and
to which all Catholics are bound, to adhere under pain of Excommunication,
and Anathema.

4. The second assertion consists of these three points. 1. That a mere
probable, and imaginary power, to wit, which is only in the imagination,
conceit, or approbation of learned Catholics, and is contradicted by others,
is no true, real, lawful and sufficient power, or ground, to punish, depose,
or deprive any man of that; which he actually possesses, and to which also he
has a probable title. 2. That it is not lawful for the Pope, or other
Christian Princes, to dispossess by violence, or force of Arms, any lawful
Prince of his Dominions, under pretense of any probable title, which is
grounded upon an uncertain spiritual authority, especially supposing (which
is most certain) that Christ has left in his Church a peaceable way to find
out, and decide infallibly the truth and certainty of all such controuersed and
doubtful titles. 3. That it is most certain, and out of all controversy,
that a lawful Prince, who is in peaceable possession of his Dominions, may
lawfully defend himself, and his Dominions, against all such, that shall invade
him and his Countries, under pretense of any such probable title, which is
grounded upon spiritual authority, and that he may lawfully put them to
death, as Traitors, or enemies to his Crown and State, that shall in hostile
manner assault him and his Dominions, under pretense of any such uncertain,
and controuersed right and authority. And these two assertions do make clear
the Second Branch of the Oath, wherein is acknowledged, That the Pope has not
any power, or authority, to depose the King, to absolve his Subjects from
their allegiance, or to authorize any foreign Prince to invade, or annoy him,
or his Countries, etc.

5. The third assertion is, that every false doctrine, which is either directly
and expressly repugnant to the Word of God, or indirectly, vertually, and by a
necessary consequence deduced from two premises, whereof the one is expressly
contained in the holy Scripture, and the other evidently known by the light of
nature, is, both in the opinion of Protestants, and also of most Catholic
Divines, truly and properly heretical, and that the Church has not any
authority to make any Catholic verity, or heresy, but only to declare it,
when there is made any doubt thereof, and to make it known to all Catholics,
which before her declaration was not known to all, but only to some, more or
less, who saw the necessity of the consequence deduced from both the premises.
And by this assertion the verity of the Fourth Branch is made plain and
manifest, for that all the stiff impugners of the Oath, do ground all their
exceptions against that Branch, upon the word [hereticall.] So that by the
aforesaid three assertions are cleared all the particular Branches of the Oath,
for that upon the verity of the Second, and Fourth Branch, is wholly grounded
the verity and Justice of every particular clause, except only of the First
Branch, wherein our Sovereign Lord King James is acknowledged to be the
lawful and rightful King of this Realm etc. which Branch is so clear and
manifest, that no English Catholic ever durst be so impious and presumptuous,
as to take the least exception against the same.

6 The Fourth assertion is, that it is no disobedience, or irreuerence against
the Sea Apostelike for Catholics not to obey the Popes commandment,
whenever they have doubt, that it is unjust, Sotus de detegendo secreto memb.
3.q; 2. Vasques and others cited by Wriddringt. in the discouetie of Schulcken.
his slanders,. 15.
and in prejudice of a third person, who is in possession of his goods, and
good name, so that they do most humbly propound to his Holiness the reasons
of their doubt. This assertion is in plain and express terms set down by
that most learned and religious Dominicus Soto, approved by Vasques and many
other Divines, grounded upon manifest reason, and sufficiently confirmed by the
Canon Law it self, in Cap. si quando, extra, de Rescriptis, where Pope
Alexander the third gives this advertisement to the Archbishop of Rauenna,
that he ought either to obey the said Popes commandment, which he enjoined him
by his Breues, or else by his letters to yield a reasonable cause, why he ought
not to obey it. Whereupon observe, says the Gloss, expounding that Canon,
that the Superiors commandment ought either to be obeyed, or a cause to be
yielded, why it is not obeyed. Seeing therefore, that Mr. Widdrington has by
diverse public and printed letters signified to his Holiness in most humble
manner the reasons, why English Catholics think themselves bound not to obey
his Breues forbidding the Oath, as containing in it many things flat contrary
to faith and salvation, because they are grounded, by the bad information of
Card. Bellarmine, and his adherents, upon two very false suppositions, The one,
that the Popes power to excommunicate is denied in the Oath, which is
manifestly false, The other, that his power to depose Princes is an undoubted
point of faith, which is no less untrue; neither as yet has he, or other
Catholics received from his Holiness, or any other, any answer or
satisfaction of these their doubts, truly they cannot be justly taxed of any
disobedience, or irreuerence against his Holiness, for not obeying his Breues
in the aforesaid case, but contrariwise (as in a case not much unlike very well
observes and proves, that holy and learned Bishop of Lincoln, S. Robert,
Apud Matthew. Paris page 843. in vita Henrici tertij.
in answer to certain Breues of Pope Innocentius the fourth, which he thought
unjust) it were disobedience, irreuerence, and rebellion against God, and the Sea Apostolic to obey any such Breues, which are grounded upon false
informations, and suppositions, and tend to so great dishonor, and injury of
his Majesty, and the whole kingdom.

7 So that with far greater reason might be taxed with disobedience and
irreuerence against the Sea Apostolic, not only the aforesaid holy Bishop S.
Robert, for the cause alleged, but also that most learned and religious
Dominicus Soto, and other famous Diuins, for contradicting the Popes Breues
concerning their dispensations in actual, but not consummate marriage, and for
saying, that the Popes erred therein following the doctrine and opinion of the
Canonists, as having in it no show or shadow at all of probability, Sotus in
4. Did. 27. q 31. ar. 4.
then Mr. Widdrington, and other English Catholics, may be justly taxed of any
disobedience, or irreuerence against the Sea Apostolic for contradicting the
Popes Breues, which forbid the Oath, as containing in it many things flat
contrary to faith and salvation, and for saying, that he erred therein,
following the bad information and opinion of Card. Bellarmine, and other
Jesuits, which has in it a far less show and shadow of probability, then
has the doctrine of the Canonists concerning the Popes power to dispense in
actual, but not consummate Marriage: for that all the world now sees plainly,
that neither the Popes power to excommunicate is denied in the Oath, nor the
doctrine for his power to depose is an undoubted point of faith, but a great
controversy among learned Catholics, and which therefore ought not to hinder
the reunion of those, who should desire to be reconciled to the Church See
Card. Peron above number. 3.


Considering therefore, that the aforesaid four general positions are now
made so plain and manifest, that no man of learning and conscience can with
any color of reason contradict them, and that by them all the chief
arguments, which can be objected either against any particular clause of the
Oath, or against the Oath in general in regard of the Popes Breues forbidding
the same only in general terms, are most clearly answered, I beseech and
adjure you (my dear Catholic brethren) by the love you bear to God, by the
duty you owe to your Prince and Country, and by the care you ought to have of
your eternal salvation, that you will not any longer, for fear or flattery,
seek to impugn, especially by indirect, sinister, and uncharitable courses,
so manifest a truth, to the great injury and dishonor of your Sovereign, to
the great scandal of your Religion, and to the great danger of your temporal
and spiritual overthrow. For assure your selves, that Truth is great, and will
in the end prevail, 3. Esdr. 4
and rather then it shall be overcome, God almighty, the Author of all Truth,
yea and Truth it self, will raise up Babes and Infants to defend it, to the
confusion of the greatest Rabbis, that shall impugn the same: and into what
danger you cast your souls either by coining new articles of faith, or
concurring and consenting to the coyners thereof, and by seeking in that
respect to make a Schism and Disunion among your Catholic brethren, you may
with fear and trembling perceive by this, which the beloved Disciple of Christ
S. John threatens in the end of his Apocalypse, If any man shall add to these
things, God shall add upon him the plagues written in this book. For
undoubtedly whosoever shall add to the holy Scripture that which is not
Scripture, or to Catholic belief that which is not Catholic, or shall
believe with Catholic faith that which is not Catholic, or shall forge new
articles of faith, or consent to the forgers thereof, especially in things
belonging to temporal allegiance, and shall separate himself in
Ecclesiastical communion from those, who contradict such forgeries, and cause
a Schism or Disunion in regard of opinions which ought not to hinder the
reunion of those, who should desire to be reconciled to the Church, For so
Card. Peron expressly says about number. 3
can not in that respect be accounted a loyal subject, a true Catholic, or
right believer; but endangereth himself to be blotted out of the book of
life, and to be punished in the next world with Traitors, Schismatikes, and
Misbeleeuers, and in the mean time he will have much ado to clear himself
in this world from the guilt, penalty, and imputation of manifest Treason,
Schism, and Misbeliefe: of all which crimes (besides most manifest forgerie,
detraction, and slandering) those violent hot spurs, that exclaim so bitterly
against the Oath, and their Catholic brethren who favor the same, will to
their great shame and confusion, ere it belong, be publikly accused, and in my
judgment most clearly convicted, unless they speedely change their
uncharitable courses, and cease to make a Schism and disunion among Catholics
in regard only of opinions, which as witnesses Cardinal Peron, ought not to
hinder the reunion of those who are not Catholics, and should desire to be
reconciled to the Catholic Church.

9 And lastly, for my own part I protest unfeignedly, that as I have not been
afraid, in regard of the duty and obligation, wherein I stand bound to God
and Caesar, to my Prince and Country, and to the Catholic Religion which I
profess, to defend with my pen this manifest truth, concerning the
indissoluble bond g of temporal Allegiance, See the Protestants Apology for
the Roman Church tract' 3. sect. 5.
due to our Soueraign Prince by the law of God and Nature, although I foresaw
the great disgraces, which both in the Court of Rome, and also here in England
among our Catholic brethren, would come to me thereby, so I will (God willing)
be ever ready to confirm and seal the same truth, if need shall require, with
my blood, until the Catholic Church, which is the pillar and ground of truth,
1. Tim. 3.
(to whose censure I most humbly submit my self, and whatsoever has, or shall
be written by me) shall infallibly define the contrary, which as I am fully
persuaded, she never will (not to say can not) See Card. Caiet. in opasc. de
concept. B. virginis cap. 5. and Canus lib. 7. de locis cap. 3 who upon the
like grounds think assuredly, that the Church never will (though Canus says
expressly she can not) define, that the B. Virgin was preserved from original
sin.
define, for that in my private judgment, speaking with all submission, she
has no sufficient grounds, either from the holy Scriptures as they are
expounded by the ancient Fathers, or from any other undoubted rule of faith, so
to define; but that, if she will determine either part, she will declare and
define according to the true and universal doctrine of the ancient Fathers,
See the ancient Fathers in M. Widdringt. discovery of Schulkenius slanders 17
that absolute Princes are supreme in temporals, and therein subject to none,
but God alone, and also that the Ecclesiastical power, by the institution of
Christ, does extend to the giving of spiritual graces, not earthly kingdoms,
to the remitting of sins, not of debts, to the loosing of spiritual, not
corporal bonds, to the inflicting of spiritual, not temporal punishments,
and to the disposing of spiritual, not temporal goods.

This 27 of December 1620. Yours in all love, and duty, E. I. The Author of
the New-yeeres gift.

A brief SUMMARIE OF THE CHIEFEST things contained in this ADIOYNDER.
IN the first Section is showed, that to prove the Oath of Allegiance, to be
unlawful, evident demonstrations are required, but to prove it to be lawful,
only probable arguments, and answers are sufficient.

In the second Section is showed; First, that the immediate object of an Oath
must be morally certain to the judgment of the Swearer, and that it need
not to be morally certain to all others. Secondly, that in the second Branch
of the Oath is denied, both the Popes power to practice the deposition of
Princes, and also the practice it self in all cases whatsoever: and that
albeit the denial of some particular practice does not imply a denial of the
power it self to practice, yet a denial of all practices and effects, is a
vertuall denial of the power it self to practice. And thirdly it is showed,
that a mere probable power to depose, or punish is no true, real, lawful,
and sufficient power, and for practice, as good as no power at all, to depose,
or punish.

In the third Section is showed, that every doctrine which contains a
falsehood against the holy Scriptures, is truly and properly heretical, both
according to the doctrine of Protestants, who hold the holy Scriptures to be
the only rule of faith, and also of most Catholic Divines, who hold that the
Church does not make any Catholic verity, or heresy; but does only declare
it, and make it known to all, which before her declaration was not known to
all. Neither is it required in the opinion of Protestants, to make any doctrine
heretical, that it subvert the foundation of faith, ex part obiecti
materialis, or of the fundamental things, which are to be believed, which are
the general articles of our Creed, or Christian Belief, but that it contain
a falsehood (although it be in points of a less matter, then are the Articles
of the Creed) repugnant to the Word of God, which is the rule of faith: and
consequently, subuerteth the foundation of faith, ex part obiecti formalis, or
the formal cause of our belief, which is the infallible truth of God,
revealed to us in the holy Scriptures.

In the fourth Section is showed First, both by manifest reason, and also by
the testimony of many learned Catholic Divines, that every Theological
Conclusion, which is evidently deduced from two premises, whereof the one is
expressly contained in the Word of God, and the other manifest by the light of
Nature, is of faith, and the contrary heretical, and against faith, and that
therefore although it be not clear in Scriptures, expressly and directly,
that it is manifest wrong to depose a Prince, excommunicated and deprived by
the Pope, yet it is clear in Scriptures indirectly, vertually, and by a
necessary consequence, that it is manifest wrong to depose such a Prince, and
consequently to deny the same is properly heretical: and secondly, that maxim
of the Logicians, The conclusion follows the weaker part, is clearly
explained.

In the fifth Section is showed; First, that it is against the holy Scriptures
indirectly, vertually, and by a necessary consequence, and therefore against
faith, and properly heretical, that it is lawful to murder Princes
excommunicated, or deprived by the Pope. Secondly, that it is very false and
seditious, to apply the doctrine of killing manifest Usurpers, to the killing
of Princes excommunicated, or deprived by the Pope; for that manifest Usurpers
have no probable title to the Crown, but Princes, after the Popes sentence of
Excommunication, and also deprivation, have besides real possession, a true
probable title, and right to the Kingdoms, which they possess. Thirdly, that
albeit a Prince should yield up his Crown after deprivation, yet it were not
heretical, according to my Adversary his grounds, to kill such a Prince,
although my Adversary does grant it to be evident murder, and therefore
vertually repugnant to the holy Scriptures.

In the sixth Section is showed First, that the Author of the New-yeeres Gift
did not bring those examples, of taking a purse from one, who leads a wicked
life, or killing him with a pistol, to compare them to the deposing, or
murdering of Princes excommunicated, or deprived by the Pope; but he brought
them only to prove, that to make a particular proposition to be heretical, it
suffices, that it be contained in the general proposition, which is expressed
in the holy Scriptures, so that it be sufficiently proved, to be contained
therein. Secondly, that the comparison nevertheless had been apt and
convenient to prove, that to make any doctrine heretical it suffices, that it
be indirectly, vertually, or by a necessary consequence, repugnant to the
holy Scriptures. Thirdly, that no Catholic Writer, except only Suarez, durst
ever adventure to teach expressly, that a Prince after deprivation, may by the
Popes commission be killed by any private man; but because this pernicious
doctrine of Suarez is grounded upon a most false and absurd supposition, and
which all the world sees to be false and absurd, to wit, that the doctrine
for the Popes power to depose and murder wicked Princes, is most certain and
of faith, and out of all controversy among learned Catholics, his doctrine
being grounded upon a supposition so manifestly false and absurd, cannot by any
Catholic be accounted probable.

In the seventh Section is showed, that Mr. Widdringtons explication of those
words [depose, or murther] being grounded upon the nature of a conditional
disjunctive, is true, proper, and agreeable to the common sense and
understanding of the words, nor repugnant to His Majesty's intention, albeit
Mr. Widdrington does not rely only upon that explication.

In the eighth Section is showed, that according to the doctrine of many
learned Catholic Divines, and manifest reason, that rule of the Law, In the
like case the condition of the possessour is the better, ought to be
understood, not only of a true doubt, and when the mind does fluctuate, and
gives no assent to either part, but also of a probable doubt; neither can any
man with reason imagine, that when both parts have probability, the case is not
therein alike.

In the ninth Section is showed, that a Prince in keeping his possession, to
which he has a probable title or right, does neither wrong the Pope, Church,
or any other, according to that vulgar maxim, He that uses his own right,
does no man wrong, nor hinders unjustly any greater good, and the same is in
the beginning of the next Section confirmed by a most manifest argument ad
hominem.

In the Tenth Section is showed, that according to Vasques doctrine, which he
thinks to be certain, and the contrary false, improbable, absurd, and
pernicious, it is not lawful for any Prince only upon a probable title to
make war against an other Prince, who has not only a probable title, but also
possession: But this question is impertinent to the matter of this present
Oath, and to the right, which Princes may pretend to make war upon probable
titles, which are grounded upon the Popes power to depose Princes, as it is
more at large declared in the thirteenth Section.

In the eleventh and twelfth Section is showed, that a Prince, in keeping his
possession, to which he has a probable right or title, does no man wrong, nor
hinders unjustly any greater good, and that although a probable title be good
for something, and in some cases better then no title at all, yet forasmuch as
concerns the making of war against him who has both a probable title, and
also possession, it is in Vasques doctrine, which he thinks to be certain,
as good as no title, although we suppose the title to be merely temporal, but
if the title be grounded upon a probable spiritual authority, in all learned
men's judgment, and according to the approved grounds of Divinity, it is as
good, as no title at all, which is at large confirmed in the thirteenth Section.

In the thirteenth Section is showed a manifest disparitie betwixt the
lawfulness of making war upon probable titles, which are merely temporal,
and which are grounded upon a probable spiritual authority, for that there is
no assured and infallible way on earth to decide, or know undoubtedly, by way
of sentence and judgment, the truth of mere temporal titles, which are in
controversy betwixt two absolute Princes, who in mere temporal affairs are
subject to the judgment and sentence of none but God alone, but Christ has
left in his Church an infallible way to decide, and know undoubtedly the truth
of all titles, which are grounded upon whatsoever pretended spiritual
authority, to wit, the determination and decision of a lawful and undoubted
general Council: whereupon it is clearly inferred, that albeit Princes might
lawfully make war upon probable titles which be merely temporal, because
there is no way to decide the controversy but by war, yet they can not
lawfully make war upon probable titles, which are grounded upon a probable
spiritual authority, because Christ has left in his Church an infallible and
peaceable way to decide certainly by way of sentence and judgment, without
making of war, the truth of all such doubtful and controuersed titles, which
infallible and peaceable way he has now left to decide by way of sentence and
judgment, the truth and certainety of probable titles, which are merely
temporal.

In the fourteenth Section is showed, that Mr. Widdringtons last Explication of
those words [as hereticall] is true and proper, and agreeable to the common
sense and understanding of the words, nor repugnant to His Majesty's intention,
although he do not rely only upon that Explication.

In the fifteenth Section is showed, that the obligation of all declaratiue
Breues, as well belonging to faith, as manners, depends upon the fundamental
reason, and former precept, which they suppose and declare, and that therefore
the Popes Breues forbidding the Oath, for that it contains many things flat
contrary to faith and salvation, which is the fundamental reason of his
declaratiue prohibition, have not force to bind, because this fundamental
reason is grounded upon two suppositions, which are manifestly false, to wit,
that the Popes power to excommunicate is denied in the Oath, and that his
authority to depose Princes is an undoubted point of faith, nor in
controversy among learned Catholics.

In the sixteenth Section is showed, that the sixth Branch of the Oath is
lawful, to wit, that the Oath is ministered by good and full authority, even
to those Catholics, who are persuaded the Oath to be unlawful.

In the Last Section is showed, that the last Branch of the Oath is lawful, for
that every good and loyal subject may and ought to take it very willingly,
although great penalties be imposed against those, who refuse to take the same:
And lastly the Author, who has brought these exceptions against the Oath, is
friendly admonished not to make any Schism or Disunion among English
Catholics, for defending that doctrine, which the Pope himself tolerateth in
France, So satth Card. Peron ^n Harangue austiers estat. page 94. Card. Peron
in his last great Reply cap. 91. page 633.
and which (as Card. Peron well observes) ought not hinder the reunion of
those, who should desire to be reconciled to the Church, especially seeing that
it has been by many public Decrees of the Parliament of Paris in France
approved, and the contrary doctrine under pain of Treason condemned, for
false, pernicious, scandalous, and sedicious.

The Copy of a letter written by R. P. a religious Catholic Priest to M. B. a
very learned Roman Catholic, in answer to certain difficulties objected by
the aforesaid M. B. against the late Catholic New-yeares Gift, or Explication
of the Oath of Allegiance.
Worthy Sir:
THere was left for me, in the end of the last Trinity Term, and in my
absence, a letter with this superscription, [To the worshipful, and his most
respected friend E. I. give these] and the Party who brought it, said, it was
sent and meant for me. Which after I had opened, and perused the first
beginning thereof, I was a little grieved in this respect, that a friend, and
old acquaintance of mine, should seek, as then I conceived, to put a trick
upon me, in making me to be the Author of the late New-yeeres Gift, whereas
the Author thereof (knowing belike how displeasing such books are in the Court
of Rome) was desirous (as you might have gathered by the Inscription thereof) to
have his name concealed. Whereupon some friends, to whom I showed your letter,
endeavored to persuade me not to meddle at all therewith, but to return it
back to the Party, who brought it. Nevertheless, because I did not attribute
this your error to any evil affection, or meaning in you toward me, but
rather to some want of discretion, or consideration in you, and for that as it
seems, you are desirous to have from me some answer to your objections, I my
self, having also read and perused the said New-yeeres Gift with all
diligence, and not disliking the grounds and principles thereof (which I am not
afraid publicly to acknowledge) will in regard of our old acquaintance,
without more ado, or seeking any other Reply from E. I. the Author thereof,
take the pains to answer, according to Mr. Widdringtons grounds, to the
principal objections contained in your letter, which I will entirely, ad
verbum, and orderly set down, only dividing it into certain parts, or
Sections, without altering, or inuerting the order of your letter. Thus
therefore you begin.

Sect. 1. Objection.
1. WOrthy Sir, and mine old acquaintance: Having read and perused with all
diligence, your late book for the Oath of Allegiance, me thinks I find not
in it that fullness of satisfaction, at the least in all points, which was
expected, and I and others could have wished. And therefore I make bold
(presuming of our ancient amity) to trouble you with some few lines,
concerning the chief doubts and difficulties I find about your book, and
exposition of the Oath. Blame me not (good Sir) that I make thus bold to
trouble you in this business; for it is a matter, which concerns much both
my self and others, and such indeed as requires great discussion, and most
diligent examination. If the Oath might lawfully be taken, as you labor to
prove, and (whatsoever others think) as I am persuaded, with great sincerity,
zeal to God, and love to your Prince and Country, I should be glad, and none
more glad; for it would yield great content to our Prince, (a thing much to be
wished of all loving and loyal subjects) and no small comfort to our poor
afflicted brethren, wearied and almost wasted to nothing, for refusal of the
same. But if it cannot (as I much fear) at the least in that sense it is
exacted at our hands, no marvel if we, who have daily to deal with poor
men's consciences, labor what we can, to have it thoroughly examined. And this
I would have you assure your self, that whatsoever scruple or doubt you shall
find, that I do make about your doctrine, and exposition of the Oath, I will
not do it of any evil affection, contradictious spirit, or humor to wrangle
(for of that sort there has been too much said, and done already, and a happy
atonement were heartily to be wished) but merely for love of truth, and
desire of satisfaction to poor afflicted consciences, which through the Popes
Breues, on the one side, together with many other stiff defenders of that
doctrine, and your late exposition of the Oath, and the allowance thereof on
the other, still, God not, remain perplexed, and hardly know yet what to do.

Answer.
1. BUT first, I do not well understand, what fullness of satisfaction in all
points you did expect, and have not found in the late New-yeeres Gift. For if
you expected, that Mr. Widdrington, from whom the Author of the New-yeeres
Gift, has collected his Explication of the Oath, should have taken upon him in
this controversy of the Oath, (which is forbidden by the Popes Breues, though
upon false informations and suppositions, and also impugned by diverse learned
men upon the same false grounds) to prove it to be lawful by such clear and
evident demonstrations, as that no wrangling spirit, or stiff Impugner of the
Oath, could allege any doubt, difficulty, or scruple against his arguments, or
answers; you were herein greatly mistaken, neither had you any reason to expect
the same: especially if you had duly considered what he did observe in his
Theological Disputation In the Epistle n. 4.
; both for that to bring such evident demonstrations in any controversy
whatsoever among learned Catholics, is a very hard matter; and also because it
was sufficient for him to answer probably all the arguments, which could be
brought against the Oath, and to allege such probable proofs, grounded both
upon the clear principles of Philosophy, Law, and Divinity, and also upon
the testimony, authority, and confession of his chiefest Adversaries, which
might persuade any prudent, learned, and indifferent man, that there is nothing
in the Oath, repugnant to faith, or salvation, and consequently, that it may
with a safe conscience be taken. And whether he has sufficiently performed
this, or no, the learned Reader must judge, and you your self, by the answers
to your doubts, difficulties, or rather, as you well term them, scruples, may
easily perceive.

2. Secondly, I cannot blame you, for laboring to have this controversy of
the Oath, to be thoroughly examined, considering it does so nearly concern
our duty to God and Caesar; and consequently, the spiritual safety, or hurt to
our souls (to omit now all temporal losses) by taking or refusing the same.
But truly, in my conceit, if without all partiality, or overmuch affection to
either part, you would be as curious and careful to find out favorable
Expositions of the Oath, as you have been to invent doubts, difficulties, or
rather scriples against the same, you would easily perceive, that no conuincing
and demonstratiue argument can be brought, to prove the Oath unlawful. And the
variety, and diversity of the grounds, whereupon the stiff Impugners thereof do
chiefly insist, some disprouing the Oath for this clause, some for another,
some for this reason, others not for that, some for the Popes Breues, others
not daring to ground themselves on them, and few agreeing among themselves in
any one point (besides the silence, both of the Popes Holiness, in not
expressing as yet any one clause, or proposition in the Oath, which is clearly
repugnant to faith, or salvation, although he has been often most humbly
requested to declare the same, and the silence also of Mr. Widdringtons
chiefest aduerlaries, to whom he has replied, who, as it seems, have left
him in the open field) and moreover, the weakness of your doubts and
difficulties, which, after so long a discussion of this controversy, as the
most principal objections, you have singled from the rest, do sufficiently
confirm, that no conuincing argument can be brought to prove the Oath
unlawful. Now to your difficulty.

Sect. 2. Objection.
Well then (good Sir) the first difficulty that I find, Object.
is about your doctrine in the Exposition of the first Branch (you would say
the second Branch) of the Oath, how it can be true, which you seem to teach,
That we may lawfully swear not only our acknowledgement, but also the absolute
proposition, That the Pope has no authority to depose Princes, when the
contradictorie proposition, to wit, That the Pope has that authority, is
probable, and holden for such not only by the ancient Schoole-Diuines and
Casuists, who might peradventure not have marked all your grounds, but also by
our own modern Doctors, who, no doubt, have seen the reasons, and examined the
grounds on both parts, when, as you know, the matter of an Oath ought to be
certain, and when one part of the contradictorie is probable, the other cannot
be certain.

I mark well, how you say, for answer of this difficulty, that in the Oath
you swear, That the Pope has no authority to depose Princes, not meaning it
speculatiue, in speculation or conceit, but practice, for as much as
concerns practice: which is as much as to say, you do not swear, that the
Pope has no authority to depose Princes, but that he can practice no such
power upon any Prince being in possession, so long as it is but probable, the
Pope has that power; and this always is most certain, grounded on that rule,
In pari casu melior est conditio possidentis, In the like case the condition of
the possessour is the better; and so may be the matter of an Oath, and lawfully
sworn:

But this in my conceit will not serve the turn, for that the words in the
Oath in their proper signification can have no such meaning, but do signify,
that we swear not only that the Pope can practice no such power and
authority, but that he has no such power. And although Princes, or private
men, do little regard what learned men do speculatiue in speculation dispute,
or teach in Schools concerning their titles, so they may be secured of their
estates, yet when the words of the Oath in this Branch in their proper
signification import a denial of the power, and not of the practice; and the
controversy betwixt Popes and Princes has ever been of the power, and not of
the practice; and when by the Seventh Branch we are tied to take the words of
the Oath in their proper signification, and according to their common sense and
meaning, I can not see, how this Clause absolutely (making the denial of the
Popes power to depose Princes the immediate Object of the Oath) may be sworn
without perjury; Especially seeing it is most likely, that the intention of
the Lawmakers was, that we should by this Oath abjure not only the practice of
this power, but rather the power it self, which both might be and had been the
root and origin of the practice of such power; which if it were not, it were
graciously don of our Prince, to declare his intention to be otherwise, that
his Catholic subjects might know, how to comport themselves in these affairs:
For his Magistrates, and Officers, appointed to see this Law executed, do
seem to insinuate every where, that the meaning of the Prince and
Commonwealth is, that not only the practice, but also the power should be
abiured; And therefore if any chance to take this Oath upon frailty or
otherwise, they will not stick to tell him in open audience, that he has
abiured the Popes power, and consequently his faith As Card. Bellarmine and
other Jesuits have very falsely and scandalously declared the Popes power to
depose Princes to be a point of faith.
.

Answer.
1 But this first difficulty of yours is easily answered. And first, although
the matter of an Oath ought to be certain, yet it is to be understood of the
immediate matter, or object of the Oath, and also of moral certainty, and
that also not in respect of all men, but in respect only of the swearer, or,
according to the reasonable judgment of the swearer, as has been sufficiently
declared in the Newyeeres gift; In the first observation
for the same thing may be certain, or probable to the judgment of one, which
is not certain, or probable to the judgment of an other. From whence these
two things may be inferred.

2 The one, that Becanus houlding for certain, Becanus in controuersia
Anglicana anno dom. 1612. impressa page 102
that King James is the Soueraign Lord in temporals of his Dominions, might
lawfully swear the same, although some others improbably hold, that the Pope
and not King James is the Sovereign Lord in temporals thereof. And Vasques
houlding for certain, that it is not lawful so make war upon a probable
title against a Prince, who has not only a probable title, but also
possession (for he affirms, See beneth sect. 10 number. 2.
that the contrary doctrine has in his judgment no probability at all)
might lawfully swear the same. And likewise they who hold it for certain,
that the Pope has no lawful power or authority to depose Princes, or, which
is all one to practice their deposition, may lawfully swear the same. And the
reason is, for that the Verity, which is required in an Oath, is not to be
taken from the thing sworn, as it is in it self, or a part rei, but as it is
in the understanding of him that swears.

3 The other, which may be inferred, is, that if the immediate object of this
second Branch of the Oath be not this absolute proposition, That the Pope has
not any authority to depose the King etc. (as it has been sufficiently proved
by Mr. Widdrington, and also your silence, in not impugning that first
Explication of his, seems to confirm the same) then by this difficultly of
yours it can not be sufficiently proved, that this second Branch of the Oath
is unlawful: for when two answerers are given to one objection it is
necessary to confute them both, to prove the objection to be of force.

4. But secondly it is manifest, that also M. Widdringtons second Explication
of this Branch is very true, notwithstanding your objection against the same.
For all the force of your difficulty consists in your false glossing of
those words, The Pope has no power or authority, practice (that is for as
much as concerns practice) to depose Princes: Which is as much as to say (say
you) we do not swear, that the Pope has no authority to depose Princes, but
that he can practice no such power upon any Prince being in possession, as long
as it is but probable, that the Pope has that power. But this Gloss of yours
is very untrue, and also expressly repugnant to the words themselves. For the
plain meaning of these words, The Pope has no power or authority practice
(that is for practice) to depose Princes, is, that the Pope has no true,
real, sufficient, and lawful power, or authority to practice the deposition
of Princes, at any time, for any cause, crime or end whatsoever. And besides M.
Widdrington says in expres words, That the Pope has no power or authority to
depose, or practice the deposition of Princes, and not only, that he can not
practice their deposition, or, which is all one, depose them: as though you
would have him to grant, that the Pope has a true, and lawful power and
authority to depose Princes, but that he can not lawfully or without sin
practice this his authority.

5 Moreover, I can not perceive any difference in substance and effect, betwixt
these two propositions, which you would seem to distinguish, The Pope has no
power or authority to depose Princes, or to practice their deposition, and,
The Pope can not practice any such power or authority to depose upon any
Prince, seeing that whosoever denies all effects of any power, does vertually
and in effect deny the power it self, Frustra enim est illa potestas, and
proinde nulla (cum Deus and Natura nihil faciant frustra) quae nunquam
reducitur adactum: for that power is vain or idle (seeing that God and Nature
does no thing idly or in vain) which is never brought to act. Whereupon Suarez
from those words of the third Branch [notwithstanding any sentence of
deprivation or absolution of the subjects from their allegiance, made or to be
made etc. I will bear faith and true allegiance to his Majesty etc.] does
well conclude a denial of the Popes power to deprive Prince, and to absolve
subjects from their allegiance, to be vertually contained in those words, for
that the denial of all effects of any power does imply a denial of the power
it self.

6 Wherefore if M. Widdrington, and the Author of the New-yeres gift, had
denied the practice of the Popes power only in some particular cases, as M.
Blackwell did at the first deny the practice of the Popes power to depose the
King, for that rebus sic stantibus, things standing as they do at this
present, the Pope could not, without great hurt to English Catholics, practice
upon him his pretended power to depose Princes, and thereupon did ill conclude,
that the Pope had no power nor authority to depose the King, then indeed you
might well infer, that they did only deny the practice of the Popes power to
depose, but not the power and authority it self, which is repugnant to his
Majesty's meaning, who by this Branch of the Oath intended to deny the Popes
authority to practice his deposition, in any case, or for any cause, crime, or
end whatsoever, and consequently to deny, not only the practice, but also the
power it self. But considering that they in express terms deny both the
Popes power and authority to practice the deposition of his Majesty, and
consequently of any other Prince not directly subject to the Pope in temporals,
and also the practice thereof in all cases whatsoever, although the crime
should deserve deposition, and the Pope should have sufficient forces, and also
convenient means to put in execution his sentence of deprivation, truly you
had no reason, nor color of reason to say, that they denied only the practice
of the Popes power to depose, but not the power and authority it self.

7. But because you shall see, that my meaning is not to conceal, or obscure
any difficulty, I will urge this objection of yours against Mr. Widdrington
somewhat more forcibly in form and show, than you have done, in this manner.

Whosoever acknowledges, that the Pope has some power and authority to
depose Princes, cannot lawfully swear, nor acknowledge by oath, that the Pope
has not any power, or authority to depose them. But Mr. Widdrington
acknowledges, that the Pope has some power and authority to depose Princes:
Therefore he cannot lawfully swear, or acknowledge by oath, that the Pope has
not any power, or authority, to depose them.

The Mayor is manifest, for that in so swearing, he should commit manifest
perjury, in swearing, or acknowledging by oath that to be true, which he
acknowledges to be false, seeing that to have some authority, and not to
have any authority, are contradictories.

The Minor is proved thus: A probable power to depose is some power; But Mr.
Widdrington acknowledges, that the Pope has a probable power, saltem
speculatiue, at least in speculation, to depose: Therefore he acknowledges,
that he has some power to depose; And yet in the Oath we must swear, or at
least acknowledge by oath, That the Pope has not any power, or authority, to
depose the King, etc.

8. But this objection is easily answered. For the true meaning of those words,
That the Pope has not any power or authority, to depose, etc, according to
their plain, proper, and usual signification, and the intention of his
Majesty, is, that the Pope has not any true, real, sufficient, and lawful
power, or authority to depose, etc. But a mere probable power to depose, is
no true, real, sufficient, or lawful power, but for practice and effect it is
only an imaginary power, or a power in the conceit and imagination of some
Doctors* but in very deed, and for practice and effect it is no true, real,
lawful power at all, or which may be a sufficient ground to depose. For every
power has relation to the effect, and where there can be no real and lawful
effect, or practice, there is no real and lawful power to practice; for
power, and effect, or practice, are correlatiues, and one depends upon the
other. And this is so plain and manifest, that there needs no declaration of
his Majesty, to explain the same. And therefore I wish you to remember, that
when the words of penal Laws may, according to their proper and usual
signification, be expounded in a favorable sense, we ought not, contrary to
the rules prescribed by Divines, for the interpreting of laws, seek to wrest
them to an absurd and inconvenient sense. Neither can any man, with any color
of reason imagine, that his Majesty would have us to swear, or acknowledge
that, which he himself knows to be untrue, to wit, that the Pope has not
any power or authority to depose, so much as in the conceit, imagination, and
opinion of some Catholics, yea and of the Pope himself; but his meaning is,
to have us to swear, or at least acknowledge by Oath, that the Pope has no
true, real, and lawful power to depose, and which may be a sufficient ground
and foundation, to practice the deposition of any absolute Prince,
notwithstanding this their conceit, imagination, or opinion.

9. But perchance you will object, that both the power to depose, and also the
practice it self is approved for lawefull and sufficient, not only by the
ancient Schoole-Diuines, who peradventure (as you insinuate above) might not
have marked all Widdringtons grounds, but also by our own modern Doctors,
who no doubt have seen the reasons, and examined the grounds on both parts,
therefore the Pope has at least wise a probable, lawful, and sufficient power
to practice the deposition of Princes. But this objection has been answered
at large in the Neweyeares Gift Cap. 9. number. 9.
For those Doctors, who approve the practice of deposing Princes by the Popes
authority, do ground their doctrine upon a very false principle, and which
all the world now sees to be false and absurd, to wit, that it is certain
and unquestionable among Catholics, that the Pope has authority to depose
Princes; or else they did not observe the manifest difference betwixt the
lawful practice of a probable power concerning favor, and punishment. But
that doctrine ought not to be accounted probable in respect of extrinsecall
grounds, or the authority of Doctors, when it is grounded upon a principle,
which is known to be manifestly false, as is this, that it is not now a
controversy among Catholics, whether the Pope has authority to depose
Princes, or no. Neither can you allege any one ancient, or modern Doctor,
who holding the doctrine, for the Popes power to depose Princes, to be but
probable, approves the practice thereof to be lawful. For which cause they
have so much labored these latter years, to prove it to be certain, and of
faith, but all in vain. And therefore they have now thought it best to be
silent, then to write any more of this controversy, lest their further
writings prove the doctrine, which they in times past would have had to be
certain, to be now scarce probable. Yet I cannot but commend the ingenuity of
Becanus, who although some years past was as hot in this question, Becanus in
Tract. de fide. ca. 15. q 4.
as any of the rest; for before he affirmed, that it is certain at the least,
In Controuersia Anglic. cha. 3. q. 3.
that the Pope has authority to depose Princes, yet now having some occasion
to treat thereof again, is content to leave it as a difficulty, or
controversy. Certum est, etc. It is certain (says he) that if we regard
only the Law of God, or Nature, heretical Princes are not deprived of their
Dominions, or Jurisdiction, de facto: But whether a Prince may, by the Law of
the Church, and the Popes sentence, be deprived of his Dominion and
Jurisdiction, it is a difficulty. And therefore Card. Peron now in his last
book, cap. 91. p. 633. expressly affirms, That this controversy ought not
to hinder the reunion of those, who should be reconciled to the Church. In so
much, that he laboreth also to excuse Card. Bellarmine, and says, that Card.
Bellarmine has admonished his Readers, that what he propounded, concerning
the Popes power indirectly in temporals, he did not propound it as a doctrine
of faith, and whereof we must needs hold the one part, or the other, under
pain of Excommunication, and Anathema: which is as much as to say, that albeit
Card. Bellarmine did hold it to be a doctrine of faith, yet he did hold it to
be so only in his own private opinion, which others of the contrary opinion
were not bound to follow under pain of Excommunication and Anathema. As
likewise, although the Jesuits in times past held their doctrine de auxilijs
gratiae, to be of faith; yet because they held it to be so only in their
private opinion, they knew right well, that the Dominicans, who held the
contrary, were not bound to follow their private opinion, under pain of
Excommunication, and Anathema: and therefore they did not thereby cause a
Schism in the Church, by seeking to exclude them from Sacraments, and
Ecclesiastical Communion. Neither ought they now, according to Card. Peron his
doctrine, proceed otherwise in this controversy of the Popes power to depose
Princes.

10. And if you object again, which you urge beneath, Sect. 11. concerning a
probable title, that if a probable power to depose and punish, be not a
sufficient and lawful power to practice, it is as good as no power at all. I
answer, that for as much as concerns practice, it is in very deed as good as
no power at all, for that a probable power cannot be a sufficient ground to
punish, or deprive any man of that which he possesses, as Lessius, and P.
Kellinson well observed, yet speaking generally your consequence is not good,
for no power is good for nothing, but a probable power to punish and depose, is
good for this, to have the matter examined by a lawful and undoubted Judge, who
in respect of the deciding of the Popes power to depose Princes, can only be a
lawful and undoubted General Council, as has been declared sufficiently in
the New-yeeres Gift. And this may suffice for the clearing of this difficulty.

Sect. 3. Objection.
SEcondly I find (say you) another difficulty about your exposition of the
fourth Branch; for I cannot see, how any with safety of conscience can swear,
that the doctrine, which maintains, That Princes which be excommunicated and
deprived, may be deposed, or murdered by their own subjects, etc. is impious
and heretical, though we should take heretical in that sense, which you do
take it (which yet in my conceit is not so proper with us, nor Protestants, who
most of them hold that for heretical, which subuerteth the foundation of
faith, and not that which is contrary to Scripture.)

Answer.
1. BUT before I go any further, Answ.
to set down and examine the proofs of what here you say, it is strange to
me, that a man of your learning and reading should conceive, that the taking
of heretical in that sense, wherein Widdrington does take it, to wit, for that
false doctrine, which is contrary to the holy Scriptures, is not so proper
neither with us, nor Protestants. For the Protestants hold the Scriptures to
be the only rule of says, and consequently that to be heretical, or
against faith, which is contrary to the Word of God, which is the rule of
faith. And therefore every falsehood, which is repugnant to the Word, and
testimony of God contained in the holy Scriptures, is in the doctrine of
Protestants, and also of the most Catholic Divines, heretical, and repugnant
to divine and supernatural faith, though it be only in a point of some
historical narration, as to deny, Euod. 3.
that God appeared to Moses in a flame of fire out of the mids of a bush, and
that the bush burned with fire, and was not consumed, Job. 1.
or to deny that Job had seven sons, and three daughters, or such like: for
albeit these, and such like falsehoods, do not directly and expressly subvert
the foundation of faith, ex part credendorum, in regard of the material
object of supernatural faith, which is principally contained in the Articles
of our Creed, yet they subvert the foundation of faith, ex part regulae fidei,
and in regard of the formal object of faith, which is the infallible truth and
testimony of God revealed to us in the holy Scriptures: and so the auerring of
these fashoods make God a Liar, and do indirectly, vertually, and by a
necessary consequence subvert the first Article of our Creed, and destroy the
infinite power, knowledge, or goodness of God, and consequently God himself,
and therefore are truly and properly heretical falsehoods, or repugnant to
faith, both according to Protestants, and most learned Catholic Divines.
Whereupon all Divines commonly do put in the first place, or degree of
heretical propositions, those which are expressly and formally against the
holy Scriptures, and in second, or third place those, which are repugnant to
the definitions of the Church. See Cardinal Turrecremata in Sum. de Ecclesia
lib. 4. part. 2. cap. 10. Canus lib. 12. de locis cap. 7. Bannes 2 a 2 ae. q.
11. ar. 2. Franciscus de Christo did. 25. in. q. 3. de haeresi, in Excursu de
Catholica veritate. Directorium Inquit sitorum part. 2. comment. 27. in prima
regula, besides Alphonsus de Castro, and Couerruuias, cited by Mr. Widdrington,
in his answer to Mr. Fitzherbert, part. 2. Append. p. 69.

2. Veritas Catholica est veritas, etc. (says Franciscus a Christo) Catholic
verity is a verity delivered supernaturally, and made known by God alone;
Whereof there are four kinds. The first kind is of those truths, or verities,
which are formally and expressly contained in the holy Scriptures. And beneath
says he: Therefore the first degree of heretical propositions is of those,
which are against Catholic verity, or truth contained formally and expressly
in the holy Scriptures. The same says Turrecremata in the places above cited.

Catholicae veritates illae habendae sunt, etc. (says Franciscus Pegna in
Comment. 27. upon the Directorie of the Inquisitors part. 2.) Catholic
verities are to be accounted those, which are contained in the holy Scripture
of the old and new Testament. And a little above in q. 2. Illa propositio etc.
That proposition is he reticall (says Eymericus, whom Pegna glosseth) which
is against the holy Scripture approved by the Church.

3. And therefore (as well says Card. Turrecremata cap. 3.) Ecclesiae
determinatio etc. The determination of the Church does not make, nor can make
heresy, or an heretical proposition, as neither Catholic verity: because, as
Cas tholike verities without all approbation of the Church; of their own
nature are immutable, and immutably true, so immutably they are to be accounted
Catholic: And likewise, heresies without all condensnation of the Church are
heresies. The same says Castro and Couerruuias cited by Widdrington In his
Appendix to the second part of Master Fitzherbert. number. 206. page 69.
. Wherefore you must distinguish (as the aforesaid Doctors do well observe)
betwixt Catholic verities and heresies secundum se, and quoad nos, according
to their own nature, and in respect of us; for heresies without all
condemnation of the Church are heresies, although before the Church has
declared them to be heresies, they are not always known to all Catholics,
but to some more or less, who see, that either directly, or indirectly, they
contain a falsehood repugnant to the holy Scriptures. See also the definition
which S. Robert of Lincoln makes of heresy, related by Matthew Paris, in the
life of K. Henry the third. page 846.

Sect. 4. Objection.
FOR though it be (say you) clear in Scriptures, Object.
that none must do wrong, yet it is not clear in Scriptures, that the
subject, or other deposing the Prince after deprivation, does wrong. It is
only grounded on your rule, In pari casu melior est conditio possidentis, In
the like case the condition of the possessor is the better; which, though it be
true, and grounded on reason, yet it is not de fide, of faith, or set down in
Scripture, and consequently the doing against it not heretical. For (as you
know) when a conclusion depends on two premises, whereof the one is de fide,
of faith, the other not, when according to the Logicians rule, The Conclusion
must follow the weaker part, the conclusion cannot be de fide, of faith, and
consequently the contrary proposition to that conclusion cannot be heretical.
And so, though it be clear in Scriptures, we must do no wrong, yet, because
it is not in Scriptures proved, that it is a wrong for the subject, or other,
to depose the Prince deprived, but proved so to be by your rule, which is no
Scripture, it can not be sworn, that the doctrine so teaching is heretical.

Answer.
1. BUT this discourse of yours is far more weak, Answ.
and insufficient then the former. And first to show the insufficiency thereof
by some inconveniences; It is manifest, that, according to your principles, no
particular proposition is of faith, and the contrary heretical, although it
be never so clearly contained in the general proposition, which is expressed
in the holy Scripture, unless both the premises, to prove the particular
proposition to be included in the general, be expressly contained in the
holy Scripture. And so by your manner of arguing, it is not lawful to abjure
as heretical, any particular doctrine, which approves the dishonoring of
particular Parents, which approves any particular adultery, theft, or murder;
although they be never so unquestionable dishonouring, unquestionable
adultery, unquestionable theft, or murder. For to prove these particular and
unquestionable unlawful actions to be included in those general precepts,
Honor thy father and mother: Thou shall not commit adultery: Thou shall not
steal: Thou shall not kill: one of the premises is not contained in the holy
Scripture, but it must be deduced from natural reason, or humane testimonice,
which are not Scriptures. For although it be clear in Scriptures, that we
must honor our father and mother, yet it is not set down in Scriptures,
although it be otherwise certain, that this particular man, or woman, is our
father, or mother, but this must be proved by humane testimonies, and natural
reason, which are not Scriptures. And although it be clear in Scriptures,
that we must not commit adultery, yet it is not clear in Scriptures,
although it be otherwise unquestionable, that this woman is another man's wife,
and consequently, that particular abuse to be adultery, but this must be
proved out of Scriptures: And although it be clear in Scriptures, that we
must not steal from any man his goods, yet it is not clear in Scriptures,
although it be otherwise certain, that these goods are an other man's, but this
must be proved out of Scripture. And although it be clear in Scripture that we
must not kill, and consequently an undoubted lawful King, yet it is not clear
in Scripture, although it be otherwise certain, either that this particular
killing of a priuare man is don by private, and not by public authority, or
that part cular man to be a lawful King, or a King, yea or to be a man, but
these must be proved by principles, which are no Scriptures. Many other
examples may be brought out of the new Testament, as of Priests to remit sins,
of Popes to be the chief Pastors of the Church, of Sacraments to be effectual
outward signs of invisible grace, for that out of Scripture only we cannot
prove any man whatsoever to be a true Priest, any Pope whatsoever to be a
true Pope, or any Sacrament whatsoever to be a true Sacrament, but to prove
them to be such, one of the premises must be taken out of the holy Scripture.

2 But least you should object, that to draw one to an inconvenience is not to
solue the argument, Secondly, I answer directly, that it is very untrue in my
judgment, and also repugnant to the common doctrine of Divines, that to make a
Conclusion to be faith, and the contrary heretical, both the premises must
be expressly and formally contained in the holy Scriptures, but it is
sufficient, that one only of them be expressed in the holy Scripture, and the
other certain by natural reason.

Ad fidem aliquid pertinet dupliciter etc. To faith a thing belongs two ways
(says S. Thomas 2.2. q. 11. ar. 2.) one way directly and principally, as the
Articles of faith: an other way indirectly, and secondarily, as those things,
from which does follow the corruption of some article. Which words of S. Thomas
Bannes declares more plainly and distinctly in these words: Illa secundum D.
Thomam indirecte sunt fidei etc. Those things, according to S. Thomas, are
indirectly of faith, by the denying whereof, it follows necessarily by a good
consequence that to be false, which is affirmed firmed by faith. As if one deny
Christ to have power to laugh, does err in the Catholic faith consequently,
and indirectly. Because it well follows by a consequence known by the light
of nature, that Christ is not a perfect man.

3 Et notandum est, aliquam propositionem esse de fide duobus modis etc. And it
is to be noted (says Franciscus de Christo Page 23
) that a proposition is of faith two ways, one way, proxime, and immediately,
of which sort is every proposition, which is formally and expressly contained in
the holy Scripture, as that Abraham had two sons: the other way a proposition
is of faith mediatly, of which sort is every proposition, which by a good
consequence is deduced from that which is immediately of faith, as that Christ
had not power to understand, and that he had not a will etc. Therefore that
proposition, which is deduced from that, which is formally contained in the
holy Scriptures, is of faith, and the proposition repugnant to that is
heretical. Thus he. And Franciscus Pegna in his Annotations upon the
Directorie of the Inquisitours part. 2. Comment. 27. citing for the same
Cardinal Turrecremata, and other Doctors, puts in the second place, or
degree of Catholic verities, those; which are by a necessary consequence
deduced from the holy Scriptures. And a little after he affirms, that those
propositions are to be accounted heretical, which are repugnant to these
Catholic assertions. And therefore I marvel, that you should conceive that
proposition not to be heretical, which is deduced from two premises, whereof
the one is expressly repugnant to the holy Scriptures, and the other deduced
necessarily from the light of natural reason, or sensible experience, although
we should take heretical in that sense, wherein Widdrington does take it. For
according to your principles, M. Widdrington could not maintain, that it is
heretical to affirm, that Christ had not humane understanding and will, and
that, every Tyrant may and ought lawfully and meritoriously be slain by any
whatsoever etc. which nevertheless are expressly condemned by General Councels
for heretical; Because to prove these propositions to be heretical, one of
the premises is only deduced from the light of natural reason, which is no
Scripture.

4 And if perchance you should answer, that these propositions are therefore
heretical, because General Councels have condemned them for heretical, now
you fly from taking the word heretical in that sense, wherein Widdrington with
most Catholic Divines, and all Protestants do take the word heretical, who
hold that the definition, or declaration of the Church does not make any
Catholic verity, or any doctrine heretical, but suppose it, declare it, and
make it known to all Catholics, which nevertheless before any declaration, or
definition of the Church, was indeed Catholic verity, or heretical doctrine,
and also known so to be to diverse learned men, who evidently saw the
necessary consequence from both the premises. For also, as well writes Molina
a most learned Jesuit, Concursus, Molina 1. part. q. 1. ar. 2 disp. 1.
quo spiritus sanctus praesto adest Ecclesiae etc. The assistance, wherewith
the holy Ghost is present with the Catholic Church, is not to make any thing
of faith, which before was not of faith, but only that she do not err in
declaring those things, which mediately, or immediately belong to faith.
Wherefore, as in the Church there is not power and authority to make any thing
of faith, which before was not of faith, but only to declare to the faithful,
which is certainly to be held of faith, so also neither is there power and
authority to make any sacred Scripture, or to add to it any canonical book,
or any part, but only to judge betwixt canonical books, and not canonical.
Thus he, wherein, as you have seen above In the third Sectio^.
, he agrees with the common doctrine of Divines.

5 Now to that Logical maxim, That the Conclusion follows the weaker part,
which is the chief ground of your objection, I answer, that although it be
frequent in every man's mouth, yet you are not ignorant, that it is not by
learned men understood, and expounded alike. And first, if you will understand
it without exception, limitation, or declaration, how will you make good
Aristotle's saying in his first book of the Priors cap. 10. When the Mayor
proposition is necessary, and the Minor de inesse, the Conclusion is
necessary, and not de inesse, if the Conclusion do always follow the weaker
part?

6 Secondly, you know, that many learned Divines, whom Molina the Jesuit in
the place above cited does follow, expound it thus, That the Conclusion
follows the weaker part quoad certitudinem and euidentiam, in respect of
certitude and evidence, wherein the Conclusion depends upon both the
premises, non quoad supernaturalitatem, not in regard of supernaturalitie,
wherein it only depends upon Divine and supernatural faith. For to make an
act supernatural, it is sufficient, that one of the causes be supernatural,
as it is apparent in the acts of contrition, of faith, hope, and charity, to
which concur the understanding. and will of man, which are natural causes,
and yet they are supernatural acts, because they are produced by a
supernatural habit, for which cause they affirm, that a Theological
conclusion deduced from one principle of faith, and from the other known by
the light of natural reason, is supernatural, because it is produced by the
supernatural habit of faith.

7 Thirdly, others (who hold with S. Thomas, and the common doctrine of
Divines, that doctrine to be of faith which either directly and expressly, or
indirectly, and vertually is contained in the holy Scripture, and the contrary
to be heretical, and that the Church does not make Catholic verity or
heresy, but only does declare, and make it certainly known to all
Catholics, which before her declaration was not certainly known to all) do
answer thus: That the Conclusion follows the weaker part, principally,
directly, and immediately: but when the weaker part is necessarily connected
with the stronger, then also the Conclusion does follow the stronger part,
secundarily, indirectly, and mediately. And the reason hereof is evident; for
when one thing is necessarily connected with an other, that which follows the
one, must consequently follow the other, at the least secundarily, indirectly,
and mediately. Wherefore, seeing that all dishonouring of Parents, all Theft,
all Murder, all Adultery are against Scripture directly and expressly, it
necessarily follows, that every particular contained in the general, being
sufficiently proved to be contained therein, (of whatsoever kind that proof
be) is also indirectly, vertually, or by a necessary consequence repugnant to
Scripture. And hereby also appears the weakness of the application you make
of your argument to the murdering of Princes which are excommunicated or
deprived by the Pope, in these words following.

Sect. 5. Objection.
IN like manner (say you) though it be clear in Scriptures, Object.
we must not murder, yet it is not clear in Scripture, that it is murder, if
a private man go about to kill a Prince deprived, if he still usurp, when
Tyrannical Usurpers may be slain by private men, as all do grant. I say, if
he still usurp; for if he do not, but yield up his Crown, as some have done
after deprivation, it were evident murder to kill such a Prince, as all do
teach. It is only deduced out of your rule, In pari casu etc. In the like case
etc. to be murder; which rule when it is not in Scripture, as I said before,
the opposite doctrine can not be heretical.

Answer.
1 But first, although it be not clear in Scriptures directly and immediately,
Answ.
that it is murder to kill a Prince excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, if
he will not obey his sentence of deprivation (not to use your vnrespectiue
words, if he still usurp, seeing that a Prince, who has possession, and a
probable title, is by none accounted an Usurper) yet it is repugnant to
Scriptures indirectly, vertually, and by a necessary consequence, to kill such
a Prince: for that neither Excommunication, which depriueth him only of
spiritual graces, nor deprivation, which depriueth him only of his kingdom
(according to those that hold it for certain that the Pope has authority to
deprive Princes) and not of his life, can hinder, that the killing of such a
Prince is not included in that general, Thou shall not kill.

2 Secondly, I wonder that you houlding it probable (as I suppose) that the
Pope has not authority to deprive Princes, should so dangerously and
seditiously apply that similitude of killing Usurpers, to the killing of
Princes excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, seeing that the doctrine of
killing Usurpers is understood by all that approve it, of known, manifest and
undoubted Usurpers, and not of such, as have possession, and also a probable
title to the Crown, as have all those Princes, which are excommunicated or
deprived by the Pope, supposing it to be a controversy among Catholics (as
undoubtedly it is) whether the Pope has authority to deprive wicked Princes,
or no.

if 3 Thirdly, that which you say [that he yield up his Crown as some have
done, it were evident murder in any one to go about to kill such a Prince] is
very true, yet it is not clear and expressly contained in Scripture, but to
prove it evident murder, you must use the help of an argument, whereof one of
the premises is not formally and expressly contained in Scripture. And
therefore, according to your grounds, you could not abjure as heretical that
doctrine, which should maintain it for no murder, although you grant it to be
evident murder.

4 Fourthly, if you will call to mind the Histories of those Princes, who have
yielded up their Crowns after deprivation, whereof you can name but very few,
you shall find such stuff about the practice of this doctrine of deposing,
that any zealous Catholic may be ashamed thereof. Among those few Princes,
remember our king John, who rendered up his Crown after deprivation. But to whom
did he yield or render it? Not to the next heir of the blood Royal, who
after King John's deprivation was forthwith the true King by right, if King John
was truly and really deprived, but he gave it to the Pope. And how, I pray
you, could he give that to the Pope, whereof he was deprived, and
consequently had no right therein, if the Pope had truly authority to deprive
him? Or how could the Pope accept thereof, if King John when he gave it to the
Pope was deprived thereof, and consequently had no right to give that which was
not his. But let us on to the rest of your Discourse.

Sect. 6. Objection.
ANd as for the examples you produce to prove (say you) that these particulars
are contained in the generals, Object.
me think they are not so good and apt for that purpose, and in them I find a
great disparitie. For to take a purse from our neighbor, or to kill him with a
pen knife, if he lead a wanton life, are unquestionable theft, and murder,
and included in the generals; and that one lives a wicked life can no way be
excuse for the fault committed: But to depose or kill a Prince deprived, if
after deprivation he usurp, is with many questionable, and probably thought
by some neither theft nor murder: and so though to you, according to your
rule, they may be thought so to be, yet by others they are no more reputed
such, or included in the general proposition of theft and murder, then taking
a Cow or Horse from the enemy in time of war, when the cause is just, or
killing a Tyrant in call Usurper in a Commonwealth, which neither are Theft
nor Murder, nor can with safe conscience be sworn so to be.

Answer.
1 But first, you greatly abuse the Author of the New-yeeres gift, Answ.
in affirming, that he brought those examples to make a paritie or similitude
betwixt them, and the deposing and murdering of Princes excommunicated or
deprived by the Pope. For he brought them only to show, that it is not
necessary to make a proposition de fide, of faith, and the contrary
heretical, that it be formally, and expressly contained in the holy Scripture,
but that it suffiseth to be contained vertually, and by a necessary
consequence, and that no word, or circumstance expressed in the particular
proposition do hinder, that it be not included in the general proposition,
which is formally and expressly contained in the holy Scripture. Neither did he
apply them otherwise, as you may see, if you will pervse the place.

2 Secondly, although he had compared them together, as he did not, yet the
paritie is not so unapt, as you would seem to make it. For albeit there be a
great disparity betwixt them (as there is betwixt salt and sugar in taste but
not in color) yet they both agree in this, for which only purpose he brought
those examples, that they are not formally and expressly contained in the holy
Scriptures, but only by a necessary consequence proved to be Theft and
Murder; as also the deposing and murdering of Princes excommunicated or
deprived by the Pope, are by a necessary consequence proved by the said
Author to be Theft and Murder, and consequently comprehended in those
general words, Thou shall not steal, Thou shall not kill, as particulars in
the vniuersalls.

3 But to take a purse from his neighbor, or to kill him with a pistol, if
he lead a wicked life, are unquestionable Theft and Murder (say you) and
included in the generals etc. This is very true, and for that cause the
Author of the New-yeeres Gift brought those examples. But you can not prove by
Scriptures only, that they are unquestionable Theft and Murder, because they
are not formally and expressly forbidden in the word of God, but to prove them
to be unquestionable Theft and Murder, you must use a Syllogism, whereof one
of the premises is not in the Word of God, but grounded on the light of
natural reason, which is no Scripture. And so, according to the Discourse you
made above, although this Theft, and Murder be undoubtedly contained in those
generals, Thou shall not steal, Thou shall not kill, yet you cannot abjure,
as heretical, that doctrine, which approves them to be lawful. Nay,
according to your grounds, you cannot abjure as heretical that doctrine, which
holds it lawful to kill any particular man whatsoever, although it be most
assuredly Murder, for that you cannot prove by Scriptures, that he is a man,
but this premisse you must prove by natural reason, or evidence of sense,
neither of which is Scripture.

4 But to depose (say you) or kill a Prince deprived, if after deprivation he
usurp, is with many questionable, and probably thought by some, neither Theft,
nor Murder, etc.

To kill a Prince deprived by the Pope is by no man questionable, Suarez in
Defens. fidei Cathol. etc. lib. 6. ca. 4. number. 10.
unless the Pope, after deprivation, give a particular commission to kill him.
And in this case only Suarez among all that ever I read, durst adventure to
teach expressly, That if the Pope give such a commission to any private man,
he may lawfully kill such a Prince. But considering that this seditious, or
rather diabolical doctrine is, grounded upon a most false and improbable
foundation, to wit, that it is a clear point of faith, and out of all
controversy among Catholics, that the Pope has authority to dispose of the
Crowns, and also lives of temporal Princes in order to spiritual good, which
all the world sees not only to be a controversy among them, but also to be
condemned by the Parliament of Paris, for a false and seditious, damnable and
pernicious doctrine, it is manifest, that the conclusion, which is grounded
upon this false and improbable foundation, cannot be probable. And therefore
those your words [and probably thought by some, to be neither Theft, nor
Murther] are very untrue, and dangerous, and also the examples you bring in
taking spoils from the enemy in time of just war, and killing a Tyrant in call
an Usurper, are unaptly and perniciously (not to say seditiously, applied by
you to the killing of a Prince deprived by the Pope, or taking from him his
Crown: both for that deprivation does not take away the right he has to live,
neither is that Prince, keeping his Crown after deprivation, such a known and
manifest Usurper, as that he has not at least a probable title to the Crown,
of which manifest Usurpers only, those Divines, who approve the killing of
Usurpers, do speak. And that it is manifest Theft, to take from a Prince his
Crown, to which he has a probable right after deprivation, you shall see more
plainly beneath.

Sect. 7. Objection.
BEsides your exposition (say you) of those words [ depose, Object.
or murther] taken out of Widdrington in his Theological Disputation, to prove
the lawfulnes of swearing this Branch, seems to me not altogether so sound.
For though indeed such examples may be found sometimes, yea and oftentimes (as
he well does demonstrate) wherein for the truth of a conditional disjunctive
proposition, it suffices, that the one part be true, though the other be
false, and consequently we may swear the whole proposition, if the one part
be but true, yet hic and nunc in this Oath, and with these circumstances, with
the words going before, and the words coming after, adding thereunto the
intention of the Lawmakers, who no doubt would have us no less detest the one,
then the other, it cannot be, but they must by the Oath be both abiured as
heretical; and consequently, this evasion of the conditional disjunctive can
help nothing here to save from perjury.

Answer.
1. BUT first, Answ.
you are greatly mistaken in setting down Mr. Widdringtons doctrine concerning
the nature of a conditional disjunctive proposition. For he does not say, that
to the truth, but to the falsehood of a conditional disjunctive proposition it
suffices, that the one part be true, though the other befalse, and
consequently that we may, he does say, swear, but abjure the whole
proposition, if the one part be but true. But this your mistaking I do not
attribute to any want of you in the understanding of Mr. Widdringtons doctrine
in this point, but only to the error and hastiness of your pen.

2. Secondly, he does not only say, that sometimes and oftentimes, but also
that most commonly the conditional disjunctive proposition, to wit, when the
Conjunction [or] follows the Verb [may] is so to be taken; and that there
can scarce be alleged any one conditional disjunctive proposition, wherein
it is not so to be taken: and that therefore, according to the Seventh Branch,
we ought to take it so in this Clause.

3. Thirdly, I marvel, that you should so resolutely affirm, without
alleging any reason, that without doubt the intention of the Lawmakers is,
that we should no less detest the one part of the proposition, then the
other; especially, seeing that Mr. Widdrington has answered at large this
objection in his Confutation of Mr. Fitzherbert, who urged the same objection
more fully, then you have done, and yet you urge here Mr. Fitzherberts
objection, and take no notice of Mr. Widdringtons answer to the same. And is it
possible, that a man of your learning can imagine, that his Majesty does
detest no less (that is in the same degree of detestation and falsity) the
doctrine of murdering Princes excommunicated, or deprived of the Pope, then he
does of deposing them? Or, that he conceiueth, that the doctrine of murdering
the said Princes, is not more manifestly false, and against Scripture, then is
the doctrine of deposing them? If you had diligently perused his Majesty's
books, you might have seen, that against the doctrine of deposing Princes by
the Popes authority, he brings many proofs, both out of the old and new
Testament, but against the doctrine of murdering them, he does not so much
labor; for that he supposes it to be so manifestly false, that no Catholic,
or Christian Divine could be so temetarious, as to approve the same.

4. But howsoever his Majesty be persuaded, yet his intention (which in this
Oath we must chiefly regard, and not his belief, persuasion, or opinion) is
(for as much as by reason, and his Majesty declaration we can conjecture)
that we should take the words, according to the common sense and understanding
of them, as we are expressly bound by the Seventh Branch of the Oath, which,
as Mr. Widdrington has proved, is, that we are not bound to abjure both parts
for heretical. And truly I wonder, that whereas you may, and are bound to
expound the words in a favorable sense, you seek all euasions and devises, to
expound them in a sense most false and absurd, to the overthrowing of the
temporal estates of English Catholics, to the disgrace of his Majesty, and to
the scandal of the Catholic Roman Religion.

Sect. 8. Objection.
Moreover, Object.
the ground (say you) whereon the lawfulness of swearing, that the doctrine,
which maintains the Popes authority to depose Princes after deprivation is
heretical, is not so certain. For it is this sole rule, In dubio melior est
conditio possidentis, In a doubt the condition of the possessor is the better:
which rule seems to me to be understood rather in vero dubio, in a true
doubt, and when neither side has probability, as when the mind does fluctuate
betwixt two, and can yield assent to neither part of the contradiction, then
otherwise; but about the Popes power to depose Princes there is no such doubt,
or fluctuation, but both parts by you are thought probable, at the least
speculatiuely.

Answer.
1. BUT first, Answ.
albeit this rule be oftentimes cited by Doctors, In causa dubia, or In dubio
etc. In a doubtful cause, or In a doubt, etc. yet both the Canon and Civil
Law, and you your self above do cite it, In paricasu, etc. In the like case,
etc. And why do not you now cite it in the same manner as you did above. In
the like case etc. but, In a doubt. Is it possible, that you can imagine, that
when both sides have probability, non est par casus, The case is not alike?

2. Secondly, not only this rule, In pari casu etc. In the like case etc. But
also (besides that other rule, Cum sunt inra partium etc. When the rights of
the parties, who are in strife, are obscure, or not clear; the Defendant is
rather to be favored, then the Plaintiff,) The common doctrine of Divines,
whereof some are cited in the New-yeares Gift In the first observation. nu. 11.
page 43.
, who understand it not only of a true, but also of a probable doubt, and who
also in my judgment prove the same by conuincing reasons: And yet you bring no
other reason, or authority, that it is to be understood only of a true doubt,
but your own conceit [ which rule seems to me (say you) to be understood
rather in a true doubt, and when neither side has probability, then
otherwise] Is this (think you) a sound and sincere confutation of Widdringtons
doctrine in a matter, which is so injurious to the sovereign right of Princes,
and so prejudicial and dangerous to the souls and temporal estates of
English Catholics?

Sect. 9. Objection.
AND although Lessius and others with you seem to hold (say you) that none can
be deprived of his right upon a probable title only, Object
yet that must be understood first, if that right be not retained with the
wrong of others, or the retaining of that right be not the hinderance of a
greater good.

Answer.
1. BUT first, Answ.
why do you use those words [seem to hold] as though they did not in very deed
hold, that none can be deprived of his right to that, whereof he has
possession, upon a probable power, or title only, whereas it is manifest, that
they do expressly hold the same?

2. Secondly, why did you omit those words [vpon a probable power] whereas
there is a great difference betwixt a probable power to punish, and depose, and
a probable title, Lessius in his Singleton, part. 2. number. 38.
and Lessius speaks expressly of a probable power to punish, and to deprive
one of that; which he actually possesses.

3. Thirdly, Lessius proves the insufficiency of a probable power to punish by
a conuincing argument: For if it were any way doubtful, the person accused
might except against the Judge, and not obey him. And hereupon credit is not
given to delegates, to the prejudice of another man unless by an authentical
Instrument they show their authority, so that no just cause of doubt be
further left: And D. Kellinson In his Treatise called, The Prince, and the
Prelate, cap. 11. pa. 235.
with others prove the insufficiency of a probable title, without possession by
those two rules above cited, In pari casu, etc. and Cum sunt iura partium
obscura, etc. And Vasquez confirms the same, as you shall see beneath, Sect.
10. number. 2.
by other reasons in his judgment unanswerable. And yet you, without bringing
any authority, reason, or proof at all, affirm too too resolutely [ that it
must be understood first, if that right be not retained with the wrong of
others, by whom you mean the Pope and Church] whereas they understand it
generally, and also the former Authors speak expressly of the Popes power to
depose wicked Princes: where you falsely suppose a wrong done to the Pope and
Church, in resisting the Popes sentence of deprivation: For a Prince, being
deprived only by a probable power, does no man wrong by keeping his probable
right and possession, according to that maxim of the Law, grounded on natural
reason, Qui vtitur iure suo nemini facit iniuriam: He that uses his right
does no man wrong.

4. Moreover, your first exception [if that right be not retained with the
wrong of others] is frivolous, for that always in the case of rights to
temporal Kingdoms and goods, it may be presumed, that the right is retained
with the wrong, or rather detriment of others, because temporal Kingdoms and
goods, if they do not belong to the Prince, or person deprived, they must
needs belong to others. And besides, as it has been said above, a
probableright with possession is retained without wrong to any man. And lastly,
your second exception [or if the retaining of that right be not a hinderance
to a greater good] does savor too much of that false principle, over much
frequent in the mouths and actions of some unlearned Jesuits, Ad maiorem
gloriam Dei, etc. To the greater glory of God, etc. For good ends, and greater
good are not to be effected by bad means: And therefore, albeit the retaining
of that right should be an hinderance to a greater good, it little imports,
unless it be an unjust hinderance, and unless the Prince deprived by a
probable power only, in keeping his probable right with possession, hinders
unjustly a greater good: which to be an unjust hinderance, you cannot possibly
prove with any color of a probable argument, as more plainly you shall see
beneath.

Sect. 10. Objection.
AND secondly (say you) if they who contend about that right, Object.
have a Superior to decide the controversy, and determine unto whom the right
belongs: But if one, by retaining that right upon a probable title, should
wrong others, whose good is more to be respected, then his, who is in
possession of that right; or if those, who contend about right, have no
Superior to decide the matter, and to determine to whom the right belongs, I
see not, why one may not be deprived of his right upon a probable title. And
so we see, that Kings and Princes, who have no Superiors, but every one is
supreme Lord in his own dominions, oftentimes fall to wars, and one seek to
dispossess another only upon a probable title.

Answer.
1. BUT first it is manifest, that no man, Answ.
who has a probable right, and withal possession, does any wrong to another,
of what quality, condition, or state soever he be, by keeping his probable
right and possession: and that no good is to be procured by unjust means, and
consequently, that the retaining of a probable right with possession cannot be
an unjust hinderance to the good of any, whether it be the Pope, or Church it
self. For if to invade the Kingdom of a Prince, only upon a probable title
without possession, be no wrong, or any unjust hinderance of a greater good
(as you, in Vasquez judgment, very falsely, perniciously, and absurdly suppose)
much more it is no wrong, nor any just hinderance to greater good, for a Prince
to defend his Kingdom, to which he has not only a probable right, but also
possession thereof. And therefore that exception of yours [But if one by
retaining his probable right, should wrong others, whose good is more to be
respected, then his, who is in possession of that right] is idle, and cannot
be applied to a Prince, who justly retains his probable right, to the
Kingdom whereof he has possession, and consequently without any wrong to
others, whose good must not be respected, or effected by doing wrong to him.

2 Secondly, albeit you do not see why one may not be deprived of his right
upon a probable title, if those who contend for right have no Superior to
decide the matter, and to determine to whom the right belongs, yet you might
easily have seen a reason thereof, if you had called to mind the doctrine of
your Master Vasquez, who saw and yielded a reason thereof so clearly, Vasques
1.2 disp 64. c. 3.
that he feared not to tax this your doctrine not only of falsehood, but also
of pernicious improbabilitie, and absurdity. Immo semper existimaui hanc
doctrinam nihil probabilitis habere etc. Yea I have ever thought (says he)
this doctrine to have no probability, and to have bin in no little mischief,
and detriment of the Christian Commonwealth. And therefore he would not have
sticked to detest your doctrine, as false, improbable, pernicious, and the
contrary to acknowledge for certain: and he proves it by these reasons,
which, in his judgment, are conuincing: For war is an act of punitiue
Justice, inflicting a punishment, and chastising Rebels: and the nature of just
war consists in this, that by vindicatiue justice he be punished, who is
worthy of punishment in regard of some fault, either actually committed, or at
least wise justly presumed. But it cannot be justly presumed, that a Prince
commits any fault, who, by way of defense, retains his prohable right to
the kingdom which he possesses, against the pretensions of any one, who
claims only a probable right without possession. Et praeterea omnis
controuersia etc. And moreover every controversy, says he, which is in
opinions concerning some right, is not to be decided by powerfulness and
arms, but by judgment. For it seems to be the custom of Barbarous men to
decide the better right to reign in the more powerful arms. Quod si dicas,
posse duos illos Principes etc. And if thou say (says Vasques) that those two
Princes may make just war on either side, for that both of them are led by a
probable opinion, and think that the right to reign belongs to them, this
is manifestly absurd etc. which he does there, in his judgment, most plainly
convince. Nevertheless, as you shall see beneath Sect. 13. nu. 2.
I rely upon a more assured, and less questionable ground, then this doctrine
of Vasques; for this question concerning Princes making war upon a probable
title, which is merely temporal, I will show to be impertinent to our present
controversy, concerning the Popes authority to depose Princes.

3 Thirdly, albeit some few Divines do hold (which Vasquez accounts to be
manifestly absurd and improbable) that it is lawful for Princes to make war
upon a probable title, yet some of them expressly affirm, that those Princes,
who contend about their probable title, are bound, before they can lawfully
make war, Nouar in Sion. cap. 25 nu. 4.
to choose and admit Arbitrary Judges to decide the controversy, for that there
is no other peaceable way (they being both supreme Judges, nor the one subject
to the other, or to any other superior Judge in temporals) to end it but by
arbitrament: which if any of those Princes refuse to admit, then the other
Prince (say these Divines) may make war, but not in regard only of his
probable title, but for doing wrong in not admitting Arbiters, to end the
controversy in a peaceable manner, without making war, for that war must
not be waged, when the controversy may otherwise be peaceably ended. But
neither also with this controversy will I intermeddle.

4 Fourthly, whereas you say [that Kings and Princes, who have no Superiors
oftentimes fall to wars, and one seek to dispossess an other only upon a
probable title] you might for answer hereof have called to mind, what Card.
Bellarmine, related by Widdrington In his Apology for the right of Princes,
nu. 445
, answers to such kind of arguments, Aliud est facta Regum refer etc. It is
one thing to relate the facts of Kings, and an other to prove their power and
authority. And besides it may very well be, that the Prince, who begins
the war, thinks his title to be certain, and the others title not to be
probable. And moreover the title, for which they make war, may be merely
temporal, which belongs not to our case, as you shall see beneath. But let
us go on to the rest of your objections.

Sect. 11. Objection.
ANd if a probable title (say you) were not sufficient excuse for the
dispossessing of the right, Object.
which an other houldeth, it were as good have no title at all, as a probable
title without possession.

Answer.
1 But first, Answ.
your consequence is not good. For no title is good for nothing, but a probable
title without possession, in subjects is good for this, to call the title in
question, and to have it examined and decided by a lawful and undoubted Judge:
and in absolute Princes, who have no Superiors in temporals, it is good in the
opinion of some Divines to have the matter put to arbitrament or compromise,
which if the Prince, who is in possession refuse, the other Prince may
(according to the doctrine of these Divines, wherewith I will not meddle) make
war against him, for the wrong done him in not admitting Arbiters. Also a
probable title without possession is better then no title, for that it is good
after the decease of them who have possession, to have the matter decided by
the Kingdom or Commonwealth, to whom it belongs (as well observes Vasquez)
to determine doubtful titles, when none is in possession: As also, according to
the doctrine of all Divines, it belongs to the Church, or Spiritual kingdom
of Christ (which a general Council does represent) to determine and decide the
doubtful titles of two Popes, although both of them be partly in possession.

2 Secondly, your consequent, for as much as concerns the making of war
upon a probable title without possession, Vasquez would not fear to admit. For
it is not absurd to grant, that a probable title without possession is as good
as no title, for the making of war against a Prince, who has both a probable
title and also possession. As also it is no absurdity to grant, but rather a
most certain doctrine, that aprobable matter of Baptism is in some case, for
as much as concerns practice, as good as no matter, See Vasques 1.2 disp. 63
and disp. 64 cap. 4.
for that it is not lawful in some case to baptize with a probable matter, to
wit, when we may use a certain and undoubted matter: And a probable medicine
is in some case as good as no medicine, for that it is not lawful to apply to
one a probable medicine, when an undoubted medicine may be applied.

Sect. 12. Objection.
NOw in this contention (say you) betwixt the pope, Object.
and the Prince, though the Prince have a probable title after deprivation, and
also possession, it is houlden with wrong to the Church, and prejudice to
Christ's flock, whose good is more to be respected, then the private good of a
temporal* Prince. And so it seems, he may be deprived of his right upon a
probable title (though absolutely abstracting from such case it may not be
done)

Answer.
1 But this has been fully answered above: Answ.
For it is a most false and seditious doctrine to hold, that a Prince in
keeping the possession of his Crown, to which (as you confess) he has a
probable right after deprivation, does any wrong, or injury to the Church, or
any unjust prejudice to Christ's flock, or that the good of the Church, or of
Christ's flock is to be respected, or obtained by unjust means, and with the
wrong of any man, much less of Princes, who in using and defending their
probable right being in possession, do no man wrong: For if it be no wrong (as
you, in Vasquez judgment, falsely and absurdly suppose) for the Pope or Prince,
who has only a probable title without possession, to invade and assault an
other Prince, who has both a probable title, and also possession, much more it
is no wrong for this Prince so assaulted to defend himself. And therefore you
must not be so mindful of the good of the Church, or other good ends, that
you forget, that the good of the Church, and all good ends must be obtained by
good means, for as you know, Bonum est ex integra causa etc. Good proceeds
from and entier cause, Dionisius Areo page 4. cap. de diu. nom.
but evil from every defect.

2 Secondly, I do not well understand that exception you make in your last
words [though absolutely abstracting from such case it may not be done] For I
do not see, but that, according to the principles of your doctrine, if an
heretical or wicked Prince be deprived by the Pope, his Kingdom must always
be held by him with wrong to the Church, and prejudice to Christ's flock etc.
and so that exception of yours, whereby you would seem to limit your former
false assertion, is in my conceit to little purpose. And moreover, whether it
better for Gods glory, and the good of the Church, Leo sermon. 1. de SS. Petro
and Paulo
to have sometimes persecutions, Whereby (as S. Leo says) the Church is not
diminished, but increased etc. We cannot so easily know, and therefore we
ought rather to leave it to the judgment of him, who makes a man that is an
hypocrite reign for the sins of the people, Job. 34.
then over rashly to judge of the secrets of Gods providence.

Sect. 13. Objection.
Again, though in your conceit and opinion (say you) the Pope and Prince have
a Superior or head to judge the controversy betwixt them, Object.
to wit, a general Council, yet in the opinion of others, who hold, that the
Pope is above the Council, and consequently has no head, it seems the Pope
may (as other Princes may without injury) go about to depose a Prince
deprived upon a probable title, though in full possession of his right and
dominions.

Answer.
1 MY conceit indeed is, that it is very probable that a general Council
excluding the Pope is above atrue and undoubted Pope, Answ.
and that to conceive the contrary is altogether improbable and absurd. Now to
your argument: First therefore I have showed above, that according to the
doctrine of Vasquez (which he thinks to be certain, and the contrary
improbable, absurd, and pernicious) no Prince can lawfully in regard only of
the probability of his title, make war against an other Prince, who, besides
a probable title, has also possession.

2 But secondly (because I will not meddle with this question concerning
Princes making war upon probable titles, which are merely temporal, for that
it is impertinent to our controversy concerning the Popes authority to depose
princes) you may observe a great disparitie betwixt the titles or rights, which
temporal Princes do commonly pretend to the kingdoms which other Princes
possess, and the right or title, which any Prince can pretend, by virtue of
the Popes sentence of deprivation to the kingdom of an other Prince. For the
first titles or rights are for the most part merely temporal titles, nor
grounded upon any spiritual authority, and therefore they are not subject to
the determination of a General Council, or to the decision of the Spiritual
authority of the Church, which, by the institution of Christ, has infallible
assistance to determine and decide only Spiritual, and not mere temporal
causes: But the second right is grounded upon the Popes pretended authority to
deprive Princes of their temporal rights, which authority (if there be any
such as I am fully persuaded there is not) it being a Spiritual matter, and
depending chiefly upon the institution of Christ, delivered to us in the Word
of God, is to be decided, when it is called in question among learned
Catholics, by Spiritual and not temporal authority, and therefore it is
subject to the determination and decision of a General Council, which,
without all controversy among Catholics, is an infallible means, to know
certainly, what authority Christ has given to the Pope or Church.

3 And if you had duly observed this disparitie betwixt temporal and
spiritual titles, you might easily have perceived the weakness of your
objection. For it is too too manifest, that all Princes are bound to search
out, by all possible and convenient means, the truth, or falsehood of the
rights, which they with probability pretend to the Kingdom, which an other
Prince possesses with a probable title before they can justly make war
against him, in regard only of their probable title; and if there be any
assured and peaceable way to find out the truth, they are bound to try the
same, before they can, by war or violence, dispossess any Prince, who has a
probable title to his Crown: because according to the doctrine of all Divines,
no Prince can lawfully make war (wherein the blood of so many innocent men is
by all probable conjectures likely to be shed) to try an uncertain title, if
the certainty of his title, may be clearly known and decided, by any other
assured and vndoubtted peaceable way. Seeing therefore, that Christ has left
in his Church an assured and infallible way, and which all Catholics
acknowledge to be infallible, to find out the truth and certainty concerning
the titles, which are grounded upon the Popes pretended authority to deprive
Princes, to wit, the determination and decision of a lawful and undoubted
general Council, it is evident, that both the Pope and Catholic Princes, are
bound by this infallible and peaceable way to find out the truth of such
pretended titles, before they can justly make war, to dispossess any Prince of
his probable right, by virtue of the Popes uncertain authority to deprive
Princes of their temporal Kingdoms.

4 Wherefore this consequence of yours is not good, although the antecedent
proposition were supposed (as it is not) to be true.

Temporal Princes may make war upon probable titles, which are merely
temporal:

Therefore the Pope and temporal Princes may make war upon probable titles,
which are grounded chiefly upon a probable spiritual authority. Because there
is no authority on earth to decide infallibly the differences betwixt two
absolute Princes in mere temporal affairs, wherein they are subject to God
alone, neither are there now any Prophets, as there were in the Old Law, to
declare undoubtedly the truth, and will of God: And if there were now any such
infallible way, Princes were bound to try the same, before they could lawfully
make war, only upon a probable title, against a Prince, who has both a
probable title and also possession. But Christ has left in his Church an
undoubted infallible way, to wit, the authority of an undoubted Oecumenicall
Council, to determine and decide infallibly, what authority belongs to the
Pope or Church, and consequently to determine infallibly all doubtful and
controuersed rights or titles depending thereon. Neither is it to the purpose,
whether a General Council, not including the Pope, be Superior, and above
the Pope or no; for neither do I speak here of a General Council in this
sense, as it excludes the Pope. but as it includes all the Prelates of the
Church, and does perfectly represent the whole body of that Church, which is
without all controversy the pillar and firmament of truth: and moreover it is
most certain, that the Pope is no less subject, and bound to submit him self
to the definitions of faith ex Cathedra of such a General Council, to which
Christ has promised the infallible assistance of the holy Ghost, then any
inferior Christian whatsoever. And so likewise, if Christ had promised the
like infallibility to Arbitrarie Judges for the deciding of mere temporal
causes, which he has promised to a general Council for the deciding of
spiritual, there is no doubt but that temporal Princes were bound to submit
themselves to the judgment of Arbitratours, before they could lawfully make
war upon any doubtful or controuersed title, be it never so probable,
against any Prince, who has not only a probable title, but also possession.

5 Finally, because you stand so much upon the lawfulness of making war upon
a probable title against a Prince, who has both a probable title and also
possession, consider diligently (which the Author of the New-yeres gift chap.
6 nu. 12.
recommended to English Catholics) whether if the French King (for example) or
any other foreign Prince, should upon a mere temporal probable title to those
Dominions, which our Kings Majesty possesses, make war against him, it be
not manifest, that his Majesty may lawfully, and all his subjects are bound to
defend his Royal Person and Dominions against such invasions, and whether
those his Majesty's subjects, who co^curre with any foreign Prince to invade in
that case his Majesty, and the Dominions which he possesses, may lawfully be
put to death, as Traitors, and consequently, whether it be not evident, that
we may lawfully detest, abhor, and abjure that doctrine, as manifestly false
and indirectly, or by a necessary consequence repugnant to those words of our
Savior, Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, which houldeth, that
they are not Traitors, nor can justly be put to death, but rather do well in
taking part against their Sovereign in the aforesaid case. And nevertheless,
as I have showed above in the former Section, the falsehood and absurdity of
the Doctrine, concerning the inuading of Princes, and seeking to dispossess
them by war, only by virtue of the Popes sentence of deprivation, or upon any
probable title, which is grounded upon a controuersed Spiritual authority, is
far more manifest for the reason there alleged.

Sect. 14. Objection.
LAstly, Object.
(say you) about this Branch your exposition of those words [as hereticall]
seems to me neither agreeing with the ordinary, and common sense of the
words (which though sometimes may be taken in such sense as you expound them,
yet ordinarily are not) nor with the intention of the Lawmakers, who (thinking
it to be against Scriptures, that the Pope should have power to depose Princes,
for that none is above Kings (at the least in temporals) but God alone, and
that by Scriptures) would have all, no doubt, detest such doctrine, as shall
allow the deposition of Princes, not only as heretical, but for heretical.

Answer.
1 But it seems, Answ.
that you have not well considered M. Widdringtons meaning and drift, in
bringing this last answer, for the expounding of these words [as hereticall]
in the fourth Branch of the Oath. For in his former answer he took the word
[hereticall] for that, which is directly or indirectly repugnant to Scriptures,
and in which sense both Catholic Divines commonly, and also Protestants, and
his Majesty do understand it; which sense nevertheless you above, in the
third Section* seemed to disprove in those words [which sense is not in my
conceit so proper neither with us nor Protestants, who most of them hold that
for heretical which subuerteth the foundation of faith* and not that which is
contrary to Scripture] And yet now you will have the Lawmakers, who are
Protestants, to take heretical for that, which is against Scriptures. Now Mr.
Widdrington, taking heretical in this sense, to wit, for that which is against
Scriptures, either directly, formally, and expressly, or at the least
indirectly, vertually, and by a necessary consequence (which sense I have
sufficiently proved above to be proper and usual both among Protestants and
Catholics) affirmed, that the doctrine even of deposing Princes, being
excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may be abiured, not only as heretical
but for heretical.

2. But because some might peradventure contend (as you seem to do) that the
word [hereticall] according to the common understanding of Catholics, is to be
taken only for that, which is expressly declared by the Church to be
heretical, and repugnant to Scriptures, and which makes a formal heretic,
and to be punishable, as an heretic, by the Canons of the Church, and the
Imperial Laws, Mr. Widdrington, in regard only of such contentious spirits,
and admitting, for Disputation sake, that to be true, which he accounts
very false, gave this last answer, to wit, that if we will needs have the word
[hereticall] to be taken for that doctrine, which is made heretical by the
Church, and makes a formal heretic, and which before the declaration of the
Church is not to be accounted heretical, although it be a very false doctrine,
and contrary to the word of God, then the Aduerb [as] does signify, both by
virtue of the Word, and also of the matter, not an identity, or reality, but
only a similitude of that strict, and rigorous heretical. And this answer he
has at large confirmed in his Adioynder against Mr. Fitzherberts Reply, where
you may see, that the Aduerbe [As] being an Aduerbe of similitude, does
commonly, and not only sometimes, or oftentimes, signify only a similitude by
virtue of the Word, and that it never signifies a reality, identity, or
equality, but only by reason of the matter, to which it is applied. And that
if the matter of this Branch will not permit, without manifest absurdity, that
it signify a realitie, we are bound to interpret it in that sense, which is
not absurd, according to the rules prescribed by Divines, for the interpreting
of Laws, unless either the words will not bear a true sense, which as Mr.
Widdrington has proved, is very false, or it be apparent, that the intention
of the Lawmakers was to have it taken in an absurd, and inconvenient sense,
which were rashness and impiety, so to judge of his Majesty.

3. For howsoever his Majesty be persuaded in his opinion, judgment, or
belief, yet his intention is not, but that we must take the words of the
Oath, according to the common sense and understanding of them, as it is evident
by the Seventh Branch. And therefore a great difference is to be made betwixt
his Majesty's belief, or persuasion, and his intention, as he is a Lawmakers,
as Mr. Widdrington, and the Author of the New-yeeres Gift In the third
observation.
have proved at large, by his Majesty's express declaration, who, although he
be persuaded* that he is the supreme Lord of his Dominions, not only in
temporal, but also in Ecclesiastical causes, for as much as concerns the
external government by true coactiue authority, and that the Pope has not, by
the institution of Christ, any authority to excommunicate him, yet his
intention was not to meddle in this Oath with these points, nor to distinguish
Catholics from Protestants in points of Religion, but only to distinguish
Catholics from Catholics, in points of their loyalty and temporal
allegiance; for in points of Religion, Catholics were sufficiently
distinguished from Protestants, by the Oath of Supremacy. Neither also is his
Majesty persuaded, that the doctrine of deposing Princes deprived by the Pope
is heretical, taking heretical in that strict and rigorous sense, for only
that which is expressly and formally declared by the Church, or some undoubted
general Council, to be heretical: but he is persuaded, that the said
doctrine is therefore heretical, because it is either directly and expressly,
or indirectly and vertually, or by a necessary consequence repugnant to the
holy Scriptures, in which sense it may be abiured not only as heretical, but
also for heretical, as has been showed above.

Sect. 15. Objection.
THirdly, Object.
I find another difficulty (say you) about your doctrine of Declaratiue
Breues. For you seem to say, following therein the doctrine of Suarez, That
Declaratiue Breues of Popes set forth, and published to declare some thing,
which the Church is in doubt of, do bind no further, then the Law, or ground,
which they declare, and therefore if such Breues be but grounded on the Popes
opinion (as these seem to you, which are set forth to declare, that the Oath
is vulawfull) they bind no more then his opinion. Which doctrine of yours, and
Suarez I must needs confess, I cannot well conceive, or understand. For to me
it seems, that Breues of the Pope, or Church, whether they be declaratiue, or
definitive, for the certainty of their obligation should not depend on the
ground, or Law, which they declare, or define, but on the assistance of the
Holy Ghost, promised to the Pope and Church, when they shall declare, or define
any thing ex Cathedra, for the whole Church to be lawful, or unlawful (which
declaration is indeed, and in effect a definition) in my conceit that
declaration must bind for the assistance of the holy Ghost, whatsoever the
ground thereof be a formal Law, or but only an opinion: and so if the Pope
have the infallible assistance of the Holy Ghost in his definitions and
declarations ex Cathedra (as in Suarez opinion he has, though in yours not,
and that also probably) and intended in his Breues to declare to the whole
Church ex Cathedra, that the Oath is unlawful, I see not why it should not so
be thought and taken, whether the ground of such declaration was his only
opinion, or no. And so we see, that if the whole Church should in a Council
declare any thing to be lawful, or unlawful, which before was in doubt (as
is now of this Oath) when we all agree, that she has the assistance of the
Holy Ghost in her general decrees, as well as in her definitions, we ought to
to take it for such, whether the ground of her declaration be certain, or
only but probable. The same (I would think) should be thought of the
declaratiue Breues of Popes, at the least in the opinion of those, who
maintain, that the Pope cannot err no more without a Council, then with it:
For if the declaration of any such thing to be lawful, or unlawful should
bind us no more, then the ground of that declaration, whether it were a
formal Law, or but only an opinion, such declaration were but idle, and
should not afford that certainty and satisfaction, which at the Church is
required in time of doubt. I know you answer this difficulty about the Popes
Breues sufficiently, in saying, that the Pope may err in declaring, or
defining without a General Council, and that there was no such Council, when
these Breues were set forth; but this difficulty I find about your doctrine,
and much more about the doctrine of Suarez, of Declaratiue Breues, because you
stand not upon that answer only.

Answer.
1. But first, it is manifest in my judgment, that in all declaratiue
precepts, especially belonging to manners, or of things to be done, or omitted
(for only of these precepts, and not of definitions, declarations, or precepts
of faith, or of things to be believed, Suarez speaks) the obligation of the
precept depends upon the fundamental ground, reason, and end of the precept:
and that therein also is employed the intention and will of the Lawmakers (which
is the soul and life of the Law) who intends only to bind by his
declaratiue precept, for as much only as the thing he commands, or
forbids, is of it own nature necessary, or repugnant to some former Law of
God, Nature, or some other positive Law, which the declaratiue precept does
declare and suppose: And therefore (as Suarez well observes) a pure
declaratiue precept does not make the thing, which it forbids, to be
unlawful, but only supposes and declares it to be unlawful, as forbidden
by some former Law. Whereupon it follows, that if it be but a probable
opinion, that there is such a former Law, the declaratiue precept can bind no
more, then the probability of the opinion (which is the fundamental ground
and reason of the precept) has force to bind.

2. Neither does your objection impugn this manifest doctrine. For, although
in such general precepts, wherein the Church cannot err, to wit, when she
commadeth the whole Church something, which is necessary to salvation, the
certainty and obligation of the precept depends upon the assistance of the
Holy Ghost, yet this does not hinder, but that it must also depend upon the
substantial ground, reason, and end, for which the Law was made. But this
only at the most is proved by your objection, that because the assistance of
the Holy Ghost is annexed to the precept, it must consequently be annexed to
all those things, whereon the precept does necessarily depend: But to affirm
therefore, that the precept does depend on nothing else, then upon the
assistance of the Holy Ghost, were ridiculous.

3. As also due diligence and examining of the cause is, according to the
doctrine of all Divines, necessarily required in a General Council, to define
infallibly any doctrine of faith: And because the assistance of the Holy Ghost
is annexed to her definition, it must consequently be also annexed to all that,
whereon her infallible definition does necessarily depend. And thereupon the
Divines affirm, that if it be certain, that the Church did not err in her
definition, it is also certain, that she used due diligence, and all other
necessary conditions, which by the institution of Christ are required to an
infallible definition: But to affirm, that because the infallibility of her
definition depends upon the assistance of the Holy Ghost, therefore neither
due diligence, nor examination of the cause, nor any other thing is necessarily
required to her infallible definition, were absurd and ridiculous.

4. Wherefore you must distinguish betwixt fundamental, intrinsecall, and
necessary reasons, or grounds, and Extrinsecall, or accidental, as M.
Widdrington has often affirmed from the doctrine of Bellarm: and Canus, to which
also all other Divines do agree: for these last may be false, and yet the
definition true. As in the second Council of Nice it was declared, that Angels
might be painted, because they have bodies, the declaration was true, although
this reason, being extrinsecall, and accidental, was false. But if she had
declared, that it is lawful to paint Angels, because it is not repugnant to
faith, or good manners, which is a fundamental ground, and reason of that
declaration, the declaration can not be true, if that fundamental reason and
ground be supposed to be false. And thus much concerning the doctrine of Suarez
in general.

5 And therefore secondly, to apply it to the Popes Breues, if it were
certain, that the Pope, in making his declaratiue prohibition of the Oath, had
the infallible assistance of the holy Ghost, Mr. Widdrington would not stick
to affirm, that as the prohibition is infallible, so consequenly the
fundamental reason and ground, for which the Oath is by the Popes Breues
forbidden, is also infallible: and that therefore some thing is in the Oath
repugnant to faith or salvation, which is the fundamental ground, reason, and
end of the Popes forbidding the Oath: for if there were nothing in the Oath
against faith or salvation, the Pope could not forbid it with such injury to
his Majesty, and so great damage to English Catholics.

6 But thirdly, this objection of yours* concerning the infallible assistance
of the holy Ghost, promised to the Church for the making of general precepts ex
Cathedra either touching faith or manners, does not sufficiently confirm the
infallibility of the Popes Breues forbidding English Catholics to take the
Oath: for that Mr. Widdrington in his Theological Disputation cap. 10. sect. 2.
has clearly proved, that the Pope both might err in the aforesaid Breues,
not only because they were made without a general Council (which
nevertheless, as you very well grant, were sufficient to prove, that he might
err therein) but also because they are not general precepts, and belonging to
the whole Church, but contain only a particular precept directed to one
particular nation (and therefore they are well called by Endaemon Ioannes in
Praefat. paraleli torti.
the Popes private letters to English Catholics admonishing them not to take
the Oath) wherein not only the Pope but also a general Council may err (as
Mr. Widdrington observes out of the doctrine of Card. Bellarmine, and Canus);
Bell. lib. 4. de Romans Pont. ca. 2. Canus lib. 1 5. de locis c. 5. q. 4.
And also that the Pope did err in those Breues upon false informations and
suppositions, to wit, for that he supposed his Primacie in spirituals, his
power to bind and lose, to excommunicate and inflict Censures to be denied in
the Oath, which is manifestly false, and that his power to depose Princes is
most certain and of faith, and not questioned among Catholics, which is no
less untrue, is sufficiently convinced by him in his Theological Disputation
in the place above c^te^.
and in his answer to Mr. Fitzherbert part. 3.6.17.


Sect. 16. Objection.
A Fourth difficulty I find (say you) about the swearing, that this Oath is
ministered unto me by lawful authority: Whereupon it follows, we may use no
equivocation in taking of the same, for that none can equivocate in an Oath,
that is exacted by lawful authority: For if it were certain, that no thing
is exacted by this Oath, but temporal allegiance, then we might not only
swear, but were also bound to swear, that such Oath were ministered by lawful
authority: But when it is questionable and uncertain, whether the Pope has
power to depose Princes or no, and consequently, whether the Prince exacting
such an Oath of his Subjects, should cause them wrong the Pope and Church, and
make them swear a thing uncertain, and with the hurt of their consciences,
not being able many of them to conform themselves to those conceits you frame
of the Oath, though they were true, for that they can perceive no solid ground
therefore, I see not how we may swear, that this Oath is ministered unto us by
lawful authority.

Answer.
1 But first it is not true, that we must swear, that this Oath is ministered
unto us by lawful authority, but only that we must acknowledge so much, of
which our acknowledgment, which is the immediate object of the Oath, we must be
assured to excuse us from perjury.

2 Secondly, it is very true, that we must not equivocate in this Oath; and
this is not only deduced from the lawful ministering of the same (although this
be sufficient to prove, that we must not equivocate therein) but it is also
deduced from the Seventh branch wherein it is expressly ordained, that me must
use no equivocation.

3 Thirdly, the lawfulnes, or unlawfulness of this Branch depends wholly upon
the former Clauses: for if none of the former Clauses contain a denial of any
spiritual obedience due to the Pope or Church, nor be repugnant to truth, or
justice, it is manifest, that they are ministered by lawful authority. And
therefore you must first prove, that some one of the former clauses is
repugnant to truth or justice, before you can impugn the Oath as not ministered
by lawful authority. Whereupon you return back to that which you above
objected against the second Branch, to wit, the Popes power to depose Princes,
which (say you) is uncertain and questionable etc. But, as I answered there,
it is certain to me (neither can any man of learning that well examineth the
question, otherwise in my judgment conceive) that the Pope has no true,
real, lawful power and authority, and which may be a sufficient ground to
depose Princes, or to practice their deposition, but only an imaginary power,
in the conceit only and approbation of some men, which nevertheless is no
true, real, lawful and sufficient power to punish any Prince by depriving him
of the Dominions which he possesses. And consequently the Kings Majesty in
causing his subjects to acknowledge and swear, that the Pope has no true,
real, lawful authority, and which may be a sufficient ground to depose him
(thereby to be the better secured from all invasions under pretense of
Religion, and to discover his loyal and constant subjects from those who
maintain the principles of the Powder-Traytours) does neither wrong the Pope,
nor Church, nor cause his subjects to wrong them, or their consciences, but
seeks to preserve his own right and Dominions which he really possesses,
from all invasions and Powder-Treasons, under color of any probable, or
imaginary power or title, which is grounded upon an uncertain and controuersed
spiritual authority. But contrariwise the Pope in forbidding this Oath, which
cannot sufficiently be proved to be unlawful, does wrong himself, the Church,
his Majesty, and this whole kingdom: And those English Catholics, that bend
their wits to find out scruples, or rather cauills against the Oath, and to
wrest the words to the worst sense that may be, whereas they may expound them
in a favorable sense, do wrong the Pope, the Church, his Majesty,
themselves, and all their Catholic brethren.

4. But many (say you) are not able to conform themselves to those co^ceipts
Widdrington frames of the Oath, though they were true, for that they cannot
perceive any solid ground therefore.

But First, if they be learned, they may easily conform themselves to
Widdringtons explication of the Oath, if they will diligently, and without
partiality examine the soliditie of his proofs, and cousider, that his
proofs and answers are grounded, not only upon his own conceit, but upon
manifest reason, his Majesty's declaration, the doctrine and authority of most
learned Divines, and which is more, even of those, who be his chiefest
Adversaries in this point: and if withal they will remember (as M. Widdrington
has heretofore In the Epistle Dedicatorie of his Theological Dispotation.
obserserued) that no other solid ground, or proof is sufficient to confute
the Oath, but evident demonstrations, but to prove the Oath to be lawful, and
that it may be lawfully taken, it is a very sufficient and solid ground, to
answer probably to all the arguments, which are brought against the same: which
whether he has performed, or no, and what kind of demonstrations, or rather
most weak arguments, the impugners of the Oath have brought, (seeing that few
of them can scarce agree in any one conceit) I dare remit even to your own
judgment.

5. Secondly, if they be altogether so unlearned, that neither by their own
reading, nor natural judgment, they are able to examine the soliditie of the
grounds of this controversy, they must be guided, instructed, and directed by
the learned, who if through ignorance, negligence, want of due examination,
inconsiderate zeal, or partiality either toward Popes, or Princes, they
direct them amiss, the chiefest fault is in the Direrectors, and Instructors,
for which they are greatly to answer at the day of judgment: and how far
these ignorant men, being guided and instructed amiss, are to be excused in
conscience, and before the sight of God, I will not judge, but leave it to his
judgment, who is the searcher of all men's hearts. This only I wish them to
remember, that temporal Princes do not in their Tribunalls meddle with their
consciences, but only with their external actions, for which they may
sometimes be justly punished by the external Magistrate, although their
conscience be never so clear in the sight of God.

6. Thirdly, if some either can not, or can, but will not conform themselves
to Wiiddringtons conceits and explication of the Oath, to which nevertheless
others both can, and do conform themselves, will you therefore infer from
hence, that the Oath is of it self unlawful, or not ministered to them by
lawful authority? Call to mind, how above in your exceptions against the
second Branch you affirmed without any proof at all, that to deny the practice
of the Popes authority to depose, is not to deny the power and authority it
self; and yet now from the denial of the practice of the lawful authority to
minister the Oath to some, who can not conform themselves to Widdringtons
conceits, and explication of the Oath, you would infer, also without any
proof, a denial of the authority it self to minister lawfully the Oath to
them. But the plain truth is, as I observed there, that a denial of all
effects, and practices of any power or authority is a vertuall denial of the
power and authority it self, but a denial of some particular effects and
practices is not a sufficient, or vertuall denial of the authority it self.
And therefore although we should grant, as we do not, that the State can not
lawfully, or without sin, minister this Oath to those who cannot conform
themselves to Widdringtons conceits and explication of the Oath, to which
nevertheless other Catholics both can, and do conform themselves, yet it
can not be inferred from hence, that the Oath is not ministered to the^ by
lawful authority. As also although we should admit, as we do not, that a
Judge cannot lawfully, or without sin, minister an Oath to him, whom he
morally knows will swear falsely, and against his conscience, yet it cannot be
inferred from hence, that the Judge has not good and full power and authority
to minister the Oath to him. For one may have authority to a thing, which
nevertheless in some cases he cannot lawfully do. As a Priest being in
mortal sin has authority to minister the Sacraments, (for example of
Penance) and yet as a Priest he cannot lawfully minister them being in mortal
sin: and therefore although he commit sin by using and exercising his
Office irreligiously, yet the Sacrament is valid because his being in sin
does not deprive him of his authority, neither does he sin in that manner, as
he should do, who ministers the said Sacrament without priestly authority.
See Widdrington in his Answer to Master Fitzherb. part. 2. chap. 10. nu. 33.
page 286. et seq. where he handles this matter more at large.

7. Fourthly, according to your manner of arguing, you might also prove, that
the King has not authority to minister an Oath to his subjects, that they
shall acknowledge his Majesty to be their Sovereign Lord in temporals; and
yet Fa. Parsons himself affirms, In the judgment etc. page 13 16.
that there is no Catholic who sticks, or makes difficulty to acknowledge
and swear the same. And Becanus also in the first Edition of his Controuersia
Anglicana page 101. affirms, that it is certain to him, that King James is
the Sovereign Lord in temporalls over his Dominions. For to use the like
argument you framed above; If it were certain, that nothing is exacted by the
aforesaid Oath but temporal Allegiance, then we might not only swear, but
also were bound to swear, that such an Oath were ministered by lawful
authority. But when it is questionable and uncertain, whether the Kings
Majesty, or the Popes Holiness be the Sovereign Lord in temporalls, not
only of this Kingdom, but (according to the Canonists doctrine, which most
learned Victoria affirms to be altogether improbable, as in very deed it is)
of all the Christian Kingdoms in the world, and consequently whether the King
exacting such an Oath of his Subjects should cause them wrong the Pope or
Church, or make them swear a thing uncertain, or with the hurt of their
consciences, not being able many of them to conform themselves to those
conceits, which the Divines, who are opposite therein to the Canonists, do
make of such an Oath, though they were true, for that they can perceive no
solid ground therefore, I see not, how we may lawfully swear, that such an
Oath is ministered unto us by lawful authority. But how insufficient this
manner of arguing is, I have showed partly in this Section, and partly above in
the Second.

8. Fifthly, if we follow M. Widdringtons first answer, which you can not
convince to be improbable, to wit, that the immediate Object of this Oath, is
only our sincere acknowledgement and persuasion, that the Pope has not any
lawful power or authority to depose the King, and not the absolute
proposition, then the argument you make here is of no force at all, for of this
our acknowledgment we must be and are most certain and assured. And
nevertheless you know right well, that to prove any Branch of the Oath
unlawful, you must impugn all the explications M. Widdrington has made of
that Branch, and that not only with probable exceptions, but with evident and
convincing demonstrations.

Sect. 17. Objection.
LAst, Ob.
I do not see (say you) how and one, that is not altogether of your opinions
in all these points belonging to the Oath, can swear, that he does it
willingly, for that none does willingly swear against his own opinions,
although he might perhaps do it, if the opinion be probable, unless we take
[willingly] for voluntarium secundum quid, which willingness is neither
proper, nor sufficient, as your self will grant.

Your old acquaintance, if he be not deceived, M. B.


Answer.
1. But first, Ans.
this exception of yours does not prove the Oath to be of it self unlawful,
but at the most, that some, who are not of Widdringtens opinion in ad these
points, can not take it against their opinion, or rather against their
conscience: And the same exception you might make, albeit the Oath should ouely
contain, that King James is our Sovereign Lord in temporalls. But this
exception does not prove, that those, who be of Widdringtons opinion in all
these points, belonging to the Oath, may not swear, that they take it
willingly.

2. Secondly, albeit some be of this opinion, that the Pope has authority to
depose Princes, yet unless they hold it for certain, and a point of faith,
and the contrary doctrine altoth crimprobable, and out of all controversy
among Catholics, which nevertheless all the world sees to be a great
controversy among them, they may, notwithstanding their opinion, take the Oath
lawfully and willingly, for that they may, and ought persuade their consciences
assuredly, that the Pope has not any true, real, sufficient, or lawful power
to depose Princes, or to practice their deposition, which is the true and
plain meaning of the Second and fourth Branch.

3. Thirdly, whereas you seem to insinuate, that those things, which are done
through fear, are only voluntaria secundum quid, willing in some sort, but
not simply, and properly willing, and so he, that should for fear of loosing
his liberty and goods, and incurring his Majesty's displeasure, take this Oath
against his own opinion, or also conscience, should not take it willingly,
simpliciter and proprie, simply and properly, but only secundum quid, in some
sort, you are herein greatly mistaken. For, according to the common doctrine of
all Philosophers and Divines, fear does only cause involuntarium secundum
quid, unwillingness in some sort; and those things, which are done through
fear, are simply willing, which willingness is both proper and sufficient:
Do not many both swear and forswear very willingly, against their opinions,
yea, and consciences also, for love of their sensual pleasures, for hope of
great gain and preferment, for fear of great danger, for procuring the favor
of Princes, and avoiding of their indignation? You know, that a great love and
concupiscence of any thing, which we greatly desire, does not cause
unwillingness, but rather increase it, and that where there is a great love
and desire of obtaining any thing, there is also a great fear of loosing, or
not obtaining it. A Merchant does very willingly, hic et nunc, in this
particular case, when he is in danger of drowning, cast his goods into the Sea
to save his life, which he more loves and respects, then his goods. And
many men, who prefer their corporal pleasures, and the avoiding of corporal
punishment, before their souls health, do very willingly hic et nunc, in this
particular case, speak, and do many things against their opinions, and
consciences also. But it seems, that you abstract from hic et nunc, from this
particular case, and that you consider voluntarium, or willingness, if that
particular case were not, which is the cause of your error, or mistaking, for
quae fiunt ex metu, sunt hic and nunc simpliciter, absolute, efficaciter and
proprie voluntaria, those things that are done for fear, are, hic and nunc, in
this particular case simply, absolutely, actually, effectually, and properly
done willingly.

4. But Fourthly, supposing the Oath to be lawful, and ministered by lawful
authority, an other most perfect willingness is to be found in taking this
Oath, as likewise in the observing of all just laws. For we are bound to
observe all just laws both of God, (although eternal damnation of soul and
body be threatened against the breakers of the same) and also of man, (although
great temporal punishments are imposed upon the transgressors thereof) not
for fear of punishment, but heartily, willingly, and sincerely, for the love
of virtue, and for the duty and obedience we owe to God, and the King: as it
has been insinuated in the New-yeeres-gift, Cap. 8.
and declared more at large by M. Widdrington in his Theological Disputation.
Cap. 9.
And therefore unless you can sufficiently prove some one of the former
branches to be unlawful, you need not insist upon this clause, which
according to your grounds, is therefore unlawful, because some one of the
former clauses is unlawful: albeit, as I have showed, you cannot sufficiently
prove that this Oath may not, hic et nunc, supposing the great temporal harm
is incurred by refusing it, be taken willingly by some, who prefer their
temporal state and goods of body and fortune before their souls health,
although we should falsely suppose the Oath to be unlawful: and consequently
this clause may be true in regard of some that take it willingly, although they
should suppose some one, or all of the former clauses to be repugnant to truth
or justice.

5. And thus you see (good Sir) that I have taken a little pains, and spent
some time, which in very deed I could hardly at this present have spared, to
answer all your difficulties in particular, partly for your own sake and
satisfaction, and partly of others, who, as I suppose, have concurred with you
herein, whom, as also your self both in regard of our ancient acquaintance,
and your singular learning and great zeal, I much love and respect. And truly
I make no doubt, but that if you had been as diligent to find out arguments
and answers in favor of the Oath, as you have been to invent scruples against
the same, you would quickly have perceived, that no one Clause of the Oath can
be sufficiently proved to be unlawful: especially if you had observed, that to
prove the Oath to be unlawful, evident demonstrations are required, but to
prove it lawful, only probable arguments and answers are sufficient; and also
that I have here said nothing, but what Mr. Widdrington has either expressly
said before, or may be clearly deduced from the grounds of his doctrine. And
so wishing you all happiness, I take my leave, hoping, that if,
notwithstanding this my answer, you cannot conform your conscience to Mr.
Widdringtons conceits and explication of the Oath, yet you will not condemn
those Catholics, who both can and do conform themselves thereunto; and that
you will not be any cause, or occasion in word or deed, of making a
separation, disunion, or Schism among your Catholic brethren by excluding
them unjustly from Ecclesiastical Sacraments in regard of this controversy,
for which in France they are not excluded, nor thought unworthy to be admitted
thereunto, and which (as Card. Peron notably observes) ought not to hinder the
reunion of those, Peron in his last great Reply cap. 91. page 633.
who are out of the Church, and should desire to be reconciled thereunto,
especially, seeing that the contrary doctrine has bin in France by many public
Edicts of Roman. Catholics, condemned under pain of high treason, for false,
pernicious, scandalous, and seditious; but that you will seek, as you wished
above, to make an happy atonement, reconcilement, and peace among them, and not
over rashly and uncharitably to censure, for any point which is controversy
among Catholics, their consciences, who, for clear and undoubted points of
Catholic Religion, are as ready and willing to loose by patient suffering,
their goods, liberty, and life it self, as your self, or any other Catholic
whatsoever.

From London this 13. of Nouemb. 1620. Your very loving friend, and ancient
Schoolefellow, R. P.

Faults escaped.
In the Summarie page C 2. lin. 5. read has not. page 14. after the words King
etc. add, but only our sincere acknowledgment thereof. page 93. lin. 24.
commands.


