THE PREACHERS PRESIDENT, OR THE MASTER AND SCHOLAR.

In a Sermon preached at a Synod, holden by the Right Reverend Father in GOD,
JOHN, Lord Bishop of CHESTER, at Wigan in Lancashire, the 21. of April. 1625.

By JAMES HYATT, B. of D. and Preacher of Gods Word at Liuer-Poole.



LONDON Printed by William Stansby. 1625.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, John, Lord Bishop of Chester, my singular
good Lord and Patron.
MY GOOD LORD,
IN obedience to your Lordships pleasure, I do here humbly present you with
that Sermon, which I lately preached, by your Lordships appointment, at Wigan:
my little leisure, and health at that time, and my less skill for such a
business, made me very unwilling to undertake it, vnconscious to my self
that I should not sufficiently discharge it: but your Lordships authoritic
imposing it upon me, brought me to a necessity of performing it, as I could;
and when I had done it, your Lordship was pleased (to my great encouragement)
not only to speak well of it, but to require a re-view of it from mine hand
and pen: And, indeed your favor and goodness to me and mine, has been such,
and taken so deep impression in mine heart, that I shall (...) have power to
deny, whatsoever it shall please your Lordship to command, or expect from me,
though otherwise, I could rather have wished that it might have slept with me in
silence. For, it may be, those defects will be spyed in the reading, which were
not so easily observed in the hearing of it.

I confess that the matter is, much of it, gathered from others, only the
method is mine own, and if it prove therefore less acceptable to some, who by
this means may chance to have a sight of it, yet I am confident, that this
shall bring no loss to it, in your Lordships acceptance: as well knowing that
the Spiders web is no whit the more commendable, because it is all wouen out of
her own bowels; nor the Bee's honey less pleasant and useful, because it is
gathered from several flowers.

Whatsoever it be, I now commit it to your Lordships Patronage, humbly desiring
(seeing it has found grace in your eyes) that it may safely shelter it self
under your protection, and continue with you, if for no other use, yet as a
faithful pledge of mine hearts thankfulness, which has for ever vowed it
self to your Lordships ser^ice.

And now, craving pardon for this boldness, I humbly commend your good
Lordship to the mercy of God in Christ Jesus, beseeching him, upon the bended
knees of mine heart, to bless you with health, long life, and happy days upon
earth, to his glory and his Churches good, and with eternal felicity
hereafter in his heavenly Kingdom.

Your Lordships most humbly devoted Chaplain, JAMES HYATT.

THE PREACHERS PRESIDENT, OR THE MASTER AND SCHOLAR.
MATTHEW. 22.16. And they sent out unto him their Disciples with the Herodians,
saying, Master we know that thou art true, and teach the way of God in
truth, neither carest thou for any man, for thou regardest not the person of
men.
THe latter words of this Text may fitly be called The Preachers president,
for they contain in them the exact description of such a man as is fit to
teach Gods Will to the World, as will more fully appear in the after handling
of them, the occasion of their delivery may be thus conceived; The Pharisees
had before assayed to resist Christ openly, but when they see that that will
do no good, they withdraw themselves from him; and think upon a fraudulent
course against him, which is by some means to entangle him in his talk; and
because they foresee that their own persons are no fit instruments for such a
purpose (having before discovered themselves and their malice against his
Person and Doctrine) therefore they send their Disciples with the Herodians to
him; two Sects, though differing much both in life and Religion, yet agreeing
well enough together to destroy Christ; which, that they may the better do,
they are to feign themselves just men. And to say to him; Luke 20.20.
Master, we know that thou art true, and teach the way of God in Truth,
neither carest thou for any men, for thou regardest not the person of men; Tell
us therefore, what think thou, is it lawful to give tribute to Caesar, or
not? which speech of theirs, divides it self into a salutation and a
question; I have now chosen the first of them only to speak of. In handling
it, I might observe the manner of their saluting Christ, and the matter of
their salutation; for the manner, it is very dissemblingly done of them, for
they come with an intent to destroy Christ, and yet give him good words; call
him Master, and tell him, that they know him to be thus and thus qualified (as
indeed it becomes every Master of Gods people to be) but under this mask of
fair words, they seek to shroud the wicked purpose of their hearts from his
observation; they pretend love to his person, and reverence to his profession,
that they may secretly draw him into the snare which they have privily laid for
him; which indeed is the common practice of false-hearted flatterers; it is
usual with them to hide the deadly hook of their wicked purposes under the
sugered bait of fair words, 2. Sam. 20.3.
and to come like Ioab with art thou in health, my brother? or Iudas-like, with
all hail Master in their mouths, Matthew. 26.49.
when there is nothing but treason and villainie in their hearts. But I cannot
stay upon this point, my purpose is to insist only upon the matter of their
salutation, which is the ascribing of three particular qualities to Christ,
which indeed were most eminently in himself, and ought, in some competencie,
to be in every Minister of the Gospel of Christ Jesus. The first is, that he
was true, the second, a teacher of the truth to others, the third, no respecter
of men's persons, the first seems to have reference to his person, the second
to his ministry, the third to both; as if they should have said; we know
thee to be one that do rightly understand, and constantly maintain and
practice the truth in thine own person, and also diligently and faithfully to
teach it others, not suffering it to receive any detriment, either in thy life
or doctrine, through partiality, or respect of men's persons.

So that in these words they acknowledge Christ to be an upright and
blameless liver in his own person, and a faithful and diligent teacher of the
truth to others. Which two things indeed are necessarily required, if not to
the being, yet to the perfecting of our ministerial function, Exodus 28.30.33.
they were represented by the Vrim and Thummim in Aarons breast plate, and the
golden bells and Pomegranets about the skirts of his Garment; whereby God
signified that he would have light of doctrine joined with integrity of life;
and the sweet sound of saving words, to be accompanied with the sauorie fruits
of good works, in all them that should draw near unto him in the service of
his Altar.

So likewise Christ couples them together in the New Testament, whosoever shall
do and teach the Commandments (says he) the same shall be called great in
the Kingdom of Heaven. And he testifies of John the Baptist, that he was a
burning and a shining lamp; Mat. 5.19.
burning in himself by the holiness of his life, and shining to others by the
purity of his doctrine. And the Apostle exhorts the Elders of Ephesus that
they should take heed to themselves and to the flock over which the holy
Ghost had made them overseers: Act. 20.28.
to the flock by feeding them with the food of wholesome doctrine, and to
themselves by living in their own persons, according to that which they taught
to others. So that these two being necessarily required in every faithful
Minister, and joined together by the Holy Ghost, ought not by any means to be
found severed in any that take upon them to be masters of Gods people; but
though they may not be separated in a Ministers practice, yet, for the better
opening of my Text, and fitting of it to the present occasion, I must speak of
them severally, as they are in order laid down to us in the words of my Text.

The first thing then which they ascribe to Christ, is, that he is true, Master
we know that thou art true. Which seems to me to infer three things, first
that he knew the truth, (that must needs be employed) secondly that he used to
stand stiffly to it, and to maintain it against the opposers of it, for that's,
esse veracem, to be one that not only has the truth in himself, but holds
and vpholds it against others. Thirdly that he was faithful and sincere in all
his proceedings, leading an innocent and blameless life amongst them. And that
Christ was true in himself in all these respects, is most evident to us that
know the truth, so that to spend time in the proof of it, were but to hold a
candle to the Sun; but as they were eminently in Christ, so ought they to be
competently in every Minister of Christ Jesus. First it is necessary that
every master over Gods people should know the truth, for as Christ when he
first came to visit in mercy, vpbraided Nicodemus with the want of this which
he observed to be in him; art thou a master of Israel and know not these
things? John. 3.10.
so much more when he shall come the second time to visit in Judgment, he will
questionless be highly offended with those that have taken upon them to set
themselves down in the Masters Chair, when the scholars form would better
have becom'd their ignorance. No wise man sends a message of importance by the
mouth of a fool; and shall we think that Almighty God sends those to be his
messengers in the Ministry of his Gospel to the World, that run like
Ahimaaz, without their errand? no, 2. Sam 18.23.
God him self has foretold us, that though such run, yet he has not sent
them; for whom he sends, Ier. 14.14.
he first tells them their errand, and teaches them that truth by his word and
Spirit, which he sends them to teach to others.

Secondly, it is necessary too, that as every Minister should have the truth
in himself, so he should hold and maintain it against those that oppose it;
for so Saint Paul charge. Titus, that he should ordain none, Tit. 1.9.
but those that should hold fast the faithful word, being able by sound
doctrine both to exhort and to convince gaine-sayers. And he presently adds
this reason, for there are many unruly and vains talkers, and deceiues whose
mouths must be stopped; meaning by strength of reason, and force of argument:
and therefore straight way after he advises Titus himself to use such sound
speech in his doctrine as cannot be condemned; Tit. 2.7.8.
that he which is on the contrary part may be ashamed (says he) when he shall
have nothing to say against you. So that every Minister is to be furnished
with a double knowledge; Dogmaticall, and Polemicall; that he may not only be
able to reach and exhort, but to convince gaine-sayers; being the shepherd of
Gods sheep, he must have a twofold voice; one to govern and call in, and
keep together his sheep, which must be gentle, and familiar to them; and
another to drive away Wolves, which must be fearful and terrible to them; one
to teach and stablish the truth, and another to prevent, or supplant and root
up Heresies and Errors, like Nehemiahs builders who held a Trowell in one
hand, Neb. 4.17.
and a Sword in the other.

Thirdly, every Master is not only to have and to hold the truth, 1. Tim. 4.16
but to live according to it. Saint Paul tells Timothy, that of all else,
Bishops and Ministers must be blameless, and men of good report, even of
those that are without. 2. Tim. 4.16
And therefore afterward, he bids Timothy himself that he should take heed as
well to himself as to his doctrine. And Titus, that he should show himself
in example of good works to others. A Ministers life is, indeed, the very life
of his Ministry, it is to little purpose, for us to commend the strait way to
others, that leads to heaven, if our selves run before them in the broad way
that leads to Hell for, Greg. Page
Cum Pastor per abrupta graditur, ad praecipitium grex sequitur. When the
Shepherd himself goes before in dangerous and steep down places, the
flock cannot but follow after headlong to their own destruction. The life of
a Minister is an exemplary teaching of his people; for the most do more mark
our lives then our Learning: so that he which lives ill, though he preach
well, by his life, puts a lie upon the truth which he preaches, and pulls down
that with one hand which he seems to build with the other. There is no one
thing which makes our Ministry (which is in it self the most honorable
calling amongst men) to be so contemptible and so basely counted of as it is in
the World, as the vicious and scandalous lives of some amongst us; for as
Apollonius is said to have girded a false Prophet of the Montanists, with his
dic quaeso, Propheta ludit tesseris ac tabulis, Propheta foeneratur? etc. So, I
would it might not be said to some of ours, and further added to it, Propheta
pugnat, inrat, inebriatur, scortatur, fallit, litigat, mundana cogitat, sapit,
amat, agit? etc. Oh that these things were not talked of in Gath, and published
in the streets of Askalon. These are they that make our calling so contemptible
in the World; for, Mal. 2.8, 9.
Ye are departed out of the way (says the Lord to the Priests) ye have
caused many to stumble at his Law; therefore have I made you contemptible and
base before all the people. The more shame therefore is it for such, and the
greater shall be their Judgment, who by their disordered lives, bring this
contempt upon our calling, and make the filth of their own vicious courses to
be cast into the faces of us all. Christ calls us the Salt of the Earth: and
Salt is good; Ministers are useful and necessary amongst men; Mat. 5.13.
but if the Salt have lost his savor, wherewith shall it be seasoned? it is
then neither fit for the land nor yet for the dunghill; Luke 14.34, 35.
but men cast in out. That is (says Saint Hierome) unsavory Ministers are to
be deposed and turned out of the Ministry. And so is his Expedition said to
be urged in the Council of Basil against Pope Eugenius, for his deposition
from the Papacy. And well were it for us, if some unsavory ones amongst us
might be so dealt with; but if they escape the hand of Justice at our Synods
and Visitations, I must yet say to them (as once a Reverend Father is said to
have spoken to the Council of Rhemes, when he saw there was no hope of
reformation amongst them) fratres aliam vobis pronuntio Synodum. My Brethren, I
must put you in mind of another Synod, which the great Archbishop of our
souls shall hold at his second coming to Judgment, and then let these be
sure that (though now they lurk in tenebris) they shall be found out, and
fitted according to their deserts; for if then they shall have nothing to plead
for themselves, but, Master, have we not in thy name prophesied? Christ has
told them before hand what they shall look for at that day, I will say to them
I know you not, Mat. 7.23.
depart from me ye that work iniquity.

And so I come to the second thing which they ascribe to Christ; Secondly, And
teach the way of God in truth. Which, as it was also truly spoken of
Christ, though with a bad mind in them that first spoke it, so ought it in
some sort to be verified in every Minister of Gods Word.

First, he that is called to be a Master, his work must be to teach; and
secondly, the subject of his Doctrine must be the way of God, and thirdly, the
manner of his teaching it must be in truth.

First, Ministers are not only to know the truth, and to live according to it
themselves, but to teach it to others. Acts 1.1.
For so did Christ, he fulfilled his Ministry in doing and teaching; Indeed
the Prophet Esaias says, he was dumb as a sheep before the Shearer. But we
never read of him that he was dumb as a Shepherd amongst his sheep; but it
was his custom at least every Sabbath day to preach the Word in the
Synagogues. Luke 4.16.
And himself says, that one chief end why he came into the World was to
preach to the poor. Verse 17.
And it was the first part of the Apostles Commission which they had from him;
Mat. 28.19
go and teach. We know how fearfully the Lord inueigheth against stumbring
and sleepy Watchmen, Esaias 56.10
whom he calls dumb Dagges that bark not; and we read that the Holy Ghost
came down upon the Apostles in the likeness of fiery tongues, Act 12.
quia quos miseris Deus and ardentes pariter and loquentes facit, whom God
sends, he makes them not only to burn in themselves by the zeal of good
Works, but to shine to others too by light of Doctrine. Exodus 38.25
The Law threatens death to the Priest, if he make not a sound with his Bells
when he goes into the Sanctuary. Which, by the Judgment of all Interpreters,
signifies deadly danger to a dumb Minister. Morte dignus est Sacerdos, a quo
vox praedicationis non auditur (says one) That Priest is not worthy to live,
that does not use to preach the Word of God. And it is a dismal conditional
woe, which Saint Paul does expressly thunder out against himself, and, in
himself, against all others; Vae mihi si non euangelizauere: 1. Cor. 9.16.
Woe be to me, if I preach not the Gospel. And therefore here you see that the
intolerable negligence of some amongst us comes justly to be reproved; who,
it may be, are outwardly blameless in their lines, but yet, silent in their
Ministry: living in the Church like Lamps without light, or Bells without
clappers, or as a Crier in a Court without a voice; for, innocens, absque
sermon, conuersatio (says Saint Hierome) quantum exemplo prodest, Hier. ad
Occanum.
tantum silentio nocet: A dumb Minister, though of an innocent life, does hurt
as much by his silence, as he helps by his example. A Minister, by his place,
is not only a Christian, but a Ruler amongst Gods people; not only a Soldier
of Christ's, but a Watchman of the Lord of Hoasts; not only a sheep of the
fold, but a Shepherd of the flock; not only a stone of the building, but a
Builder of the House of God: not only a plant of the Garden, but a Planter of
the trees thereof: not only a Child of the Family, but a spiritual Father to
beget Children unto God in Christ, and in a word, not only (...), Mat. 28.19
a Disciple of Christ himself, but (...); a Master appointed to teach others.
And thefore let us take heed of being dumb in the Ministry, least when God
shall come to us with, how came thou in hither? we be struck dumb by his
Majesty in the day of his Visitation.

Secondly, as a Masters work is to teach, so the subject of his labor, the
matter that he is to work upon, is, the way of God, that is, as David
expounds it, The way of Gods Testimonies, Psalm. 119.34.27, 32.
the way of Gods Precepts, the way of Gods Commandments: and in plain
terms, that manner of living here, which God has prescribed to us in his
word. Which, in regard of the eminency, and profitablenes of it, above all
other ways that man's wit can find out, or any other creature make known to
him; is in other places called the way of Wisdom, Knowledge, Truth, Peace,
Life, Salvation, etc. it is here called the way of God, specially in three
respects; because it is revealed of God, approved of God, and leads those
that walk in it, to the fruition of God.

Gods Word then, must be the matter of our teaching, we may not deliver any
thing else, of our own heads in the room of it, for Gods way and man's way,
the directions of Gods Word, and the thoughts of man's heart, are as contrary
one to the other as light and darkness. My thoughts are not your thoughts,
neither are your ways my ways, Esaias 55.8, 9
says the Lord; for as the Heavens are higher then the Earth, even so are my
ways higher then your ways, and my thoughts then you thoughts. And the
Apostle says, 1. Cor. 3.19.
that the wisdom of this World is foolishness with God. And therefore we are
to look to it, that we do not only teach, but that the matter of our
teaching be the Word of God, and not the froth of our own brains, nor the
Learning which we gather out of humane Authors, any further then we find it
consonant to the Word of God. For Gods way must needs be an undefiled way, but
man's way cannot choose but be corrupted; seeing that such as the Fountain is,
such must needs be the water that runs from it.

1. Thirdly, as the matter of our Ministry is the way of God, so the manner of
our delivery of it must be in truth. Study to show thy self approved of God,
2. Tim. 2.15
(says Saint Paul to Timothy) A Workman that needs not to be ashamed,
rightly dividing the Word of Truth. So that it is not enough for a Minister to
teach the truth, unless that he teach it in truth too; rightly, and so as it
ought to be be taught: for a good matter may be marde in the handling of it.

Now, that it may so be taught, we must teach it, only, wholly, plainly, and
wisely. Only without addition, wholly without diminution, plainly without
affectation, and wisely without indiscretion.

First, that the way of Truth may be taught in truth; it is only to be taught.
As we must teach nothing else for it, so we may mix nothing else with it. It
is a perfect way of it self, which is able to make us wise unto salvation. And
to make the man of God perfect, 2. Tim. 3 15
thoroughly furnished unto all good works. And therefore to add to it (whether
our own inventions, or other men's traditions, if they be contrary, or though
they be but diverse from it, if they be added to it, as of the same necessity
and authority, I say so to add to it) is to alter and overthrow the perfection
of it, making it to be no longer Gods way but man's way. For Gods way is like
himself, it will brook no mixture, it will either be always simple and of it
self, or else not at all the way of God, as the Arc and Dagon would not stand
together in one house, 1. 5 am. 5 3.
so Gods way and man's wit will not be molded up together into a body of one
Religion, a ladder of such compound stuff will certainly never hold together
for a man to get to heaven by it.

2. And secondly, as it must be taught only without addition, so wholly too,
without diminution; for so runs the Apostolical commission, Mat. 28.10
go and teach all things, whatsoever I have commanded you. And Saint Paul
testifies as much of himself to the Elders of Ephesus; Act. 20.20.
I have kept back nothing from you, says he, and afterward he expounds
himself more fully, when he says, 26.
I take you to record this day, that I am free from the blood of all men, for I
have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God. 27.
So that as there is no deficiencie in Gods Word to be supplied by man's
invention, so there is no superfluity in it neither, to be pared away, or
concealed from the world at man's discretion. There can be no danger in
preaching all that to our people (so it be done in season, and with that
discretion which is requisite in a Minister of the Gospel) which God has not
made dainty to reveal to us in his Word.

3. Thirdly, that it may be taught in truth, it must be taught plainly
without affectation: all things must be done in the Church unto edification:
and, be that speaks in an unknown tongue, edifieth himself (says the
Apostle) but he that prophecieth, 1. Cor. 14.4.
edifieth the Church. And therefore afterward, he professes of himself, that
in the Church he had rather speak five words so with his own understanding,
that by his voice he might teach others also, then ten thousand words in an
unknown tongue. Now what difference is there betwixt speaking to the common
people in an unknown tongue, and using such an affected sublimitie of phrase,
and such a Romish English (as one fitly calls it) that plain Englishmen can no
more understand what is spoken, then if he that preaches, were a Barbarian to
them, and they to him: A fault, which some that Master it amongst us, are but
too guilty of, to the great hurt of their simple Auditories, and the too
palpable discovery of their own insinceritie; for what is this, but to act
the parts of the unfaithful Jesuits, and Priests of Rome and Rhemes? who do
purposely so wrap up the light of Gods Word in a dark clowd of absolete and
barbarous words, that all wise men see, they labor rather to procure
admiration to themselves, then glory to God, and salvation to his Church. It
was a judgment upon the Jews, that Christ preached to them in parables, Mat.
13.11
that so they might hear, and yet not understand; and what difference is there
betwixt a parable and an affected kind of eloquence, which transcends the
capacity of our Hearers? 1. Cor. 1.17.
when Christ sent Paul to preach the Gospel to the Gentiles, he says, he was
commanded to preach it not with wisdom of words: and in obedience to this
commandment, he tells the Corinthians in the next Chapter, 1. Cor. 2.1, 4.
that he came not to them in excellency of speech and of wisdom, nor was his
preaching with entising words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the
Spirit, and of power. In the fear of God then, let not us be ashamed to follow
the example of so great an Apostle, that it may appear to the world that we
seek not our selves, but the glory of God in Christ, and the salvation of our
Hearers; and that in the testimony of a good conscience, we may say with the
same Apostle, we have renounced the hidden things of dishonestie, 2. Cor. 4.2.
not walking in craftiness, nor handling the Word of God deceitfully, but by
manifestation of the truth, commending our selves to every man's conscience in
the sight of God.

4. Fourthly, it must be taught wisely without indiscretion; a faithful and
wise servant fit to be made Ruler over Gods household, Luke 12.42.
does not only give his fellow servants meat, and in due season, but he gives
to every one their portion. The same dish of meat is neither fit for every
ones person, nor agreeable to every ones stomach. There is great difference of
Hearers in every Auditorie: some are ignorant, and they must be instructed,
some are erroneous, and they must be confuted; some are disordered, and they
must be admonished; some are weak, and they must be strengthened; some are
distressed, and they must be comforted; some are tractible, and they must be
allured; and some are obstinate, and they must be terrified; so that there is
great prudence required in fitting the matter of our discourse, to their
several estates and necessities: And to this end, as our Auditories are mixed,
so should our teaching be, we are to sing at once, both of Mercy and of
Judgment; to bring new and old together out of our treasury; to power Wine
and Oil together into the wounds of our Patients, and not to use one salve
only for every sore, nor to harp always to them upon one string.

And as our matter must be good spiritual food in it self, and various;
fitted to their several conditions: so must it be cleanly dressed and disht
up, and skilfully handled in the preparing of it for them and presenting of it
to them. Omne tulit punctum, etc.
He bears away the golden bell indeed, that delivers a profitable speech in
a pleasant style: whereas good matter slubbered up in rude terms, becomes both
loathsome to the hearers, and disgraceful to the teachers of it. Solomon says
in the person of Christ that the lips of his Spouse (and they are the preachers
of his Church) drop as the Honey Comb; Cant. 4.11.
Honey and Milk are under her tongue. Now Honey and Milk we know, are both
sweet and wholesome, pleasant in taste, and good for nourishment: so should a
Preachers speech be; clothed with comely words, which are as well delightful
to the Ear, as profitable to the Hearer.

The Preacher (says Solomon in an other place did not only teach the people
knowledge, Eccles. 12.9.10.
and write words of truth, and that which was upright, but he sought to find
out acceptable, or delightful words to deliver his matter in; and so should
we; for our nature is soon weary, even of good things, unless we take
pleasure in them. And therefore mulcendi sunt auditores, sermonis dulcedine ne
vtilia inutiliter audiant: we are to seek out delightful words for our
hearers, least they hear the profitable matter which we speak of to them,
without any profit to themselves. Divinity is a grave Matron, who, as she
abhors garishnesse, so she loves comeliness. And therefore they do both alike
offer her great indignity, who either pranke her up in the light and
vaine-fashion of wanton words, or carelessly present her in a loose and ragged
speech to the ears of their Auditors. And therefore, that we may rightly
divide the word of truth, it concerns us to be careful that we show our
selves as well skillful as faithful, in the teaching of it; least our
negligent handling of it, make it to be neglected of, and unprofitable to our
hearers.

The last thing which they ascribe to Christ is, that he was no respecter of
man's person; in these words, neither carest thou for any man, for thou
regardest not the person of men. Which also, as it was true in Christ; so ought
it to be in every master. For they which will go about to please men (says
Saint Paul) are not the servants of Christ when truth is to be taught, Gal.
1.10.
falsehood to be confuted, vice to be discovered and condemned, and virtue to be
countenanced, and encouraged, and that in the name, and by the word of God,
what an high sin were it for us then, to deal partially with men, for love
or fear of their outward persons? we may not do it, and that we do it not, let
us call to mind how Eliah behaved himself against Ahab, 1. King. 18.18.
in condemning his Idolatrous courses, and Elishah against Iehoram, King of
Israel, when he was in the company of Iehoshaphat the King of Judah, 2. Kings
3.13.
and Nathan against David in telling him of his Adultery with Vriahs wife, 2.
Sam. 12.7 Luke 3.19.
and John Baptist against Herod in reproving him for Herodias his brother
Philips wife; and for all the evil which Herod had done, though these were
Kings. And to these might be added the examples of the Apostles, and
Apostolic men in the times of the Primitive Church, who neither for love, nor
hope, nor fear, nor any other respect, would ever be drawn to deal
partially in their teaching the way of God to the world. Let us therefore
follow their examples, assuring our selves, that what God spoke to the Prophet
Jeremy, is in him spoken to every one of us. Gird up thy loins, and arise,
Ier. 1.17.
and speak unto them, all that I command thee, be not dismayed at their
faces, least I confound thee before them.

And now, from these things, thus opened and applied to our Masters in Gods
house, I might gather many lessons too, for our scholars to take out. But
because the time has prevented me, I will but point at two or three of them in
a word and so conclude.

First then, seeing our office is as Masters in Gods house to teach his people;
here you learners may see how you are to esteem, and what use you are to make
both of our office and persons.

First, our office is to teach, which infers, that your duty is to learn;
therefore it is not enough for you with patience to give us the hearing, but
you ought carefully to heed, remember, and carry away what you hear; for that
is the end why masters teach their scholars, not that they may tickle their
ears with a tale for a while, and so farewell, but that they may be bettered
in knowledge.

Secondly, for our Persons, this title of Teachers, teaches you how to esteem
and use us; 1. Tim. 5.17.
let the Elders which rule well (says the Apostle) be counted worthy double
honor, especially they which labor in the Word and Doctrine, which double
honor has been ever vncontroleably acknowledged, the honor of reverence and
maintenance, such as befits our calling; both which, those which are taught by
us, are bound by the Laws of God and Nations, freely and fully to afford to
us.

First, for the honor of reverence, it is the Apostles own exhortation to
hearers; 1. These. 5.12.
we beseech you Brethren to know them which labor among you, and are over you
in the Lord, that you esteem very highly of them in love far their work sake.
And indeed not to reverence Ministers for their work sake, is to despise God
himself, whose work they do, and whose Ambassadors they are unto you; for so
says Christ, he that despises you despises me, Luke 10.16
and he that despises me, despises him that sent me.

Secondly, for the honor of maintenance, it is the Apostles own rule too;
Gal. 6.6.
let him that is taught in the Word, make him that has taught him, partaker of
all his goods; or, (as our last translation renders it) communicate unto him in
all good things; meaning in the use of all such outward and wordly blessings as
God has bestowed upon the learner. Nor is this any great matter, (says he in
an other place, 1. Cor. 9.11 13, 14.
though carnal men may think it so;) that we should reap your carnal things,
seeing we have sown unto you spiritual things; nay it is Gods own ordinance
that us they which waited at the Altar, lived of the Altar; so they which
preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel. And therefore, by force or fraud
to detain that from us, which the Laws of God do give, and of men, do
confirm unto us for our maintenance, is to dishonor us, and in us, to
dishonor God, Malac. 3.9.
and to pull down his curse upon your selves and upon all that you possess.

Secondly, seeing that which we are to teach is the way of God, this teaches
you, that you are to walk in it for that's the end why men seek to know ways,
that they may travel in them to the places which they desire to come to; if
you had not need to know this way, what should we do teaching of it to you?
and what use else, can a way be put to by you, but to be traveled in?
therefore when you have learned it from us, walk in it accordingly; or else
our teaching, and your learning of it, will bring you never a whit the nearer
to heaven.

Thirdly, as we are to teach it in truth* so are you to walk in it; that is,
to believe and practice it only without adding your own devises to it, and
wholly, without presuming to pass over any part of it unpracticed, as occasion
to do it is offered unto you; for if any man shall add unto it, God shall
add unto him the plagues that are written in his Book; and if any shall take
away from it, Reu. 22.18.
God shall take away his part out of the Book of life.

Lastly, as we are to teach Gods way without respect of men or persons, so are
you to practice it too: you may not conceal, nor corrupt the truth in your
words, nor do any thing contrary to equity, or Christian Charity in your
deeds, neither for favor of friends, nor fear of great men, nor hope of
profit, nor hatred of enemies, nor contempt of Inferiors, nor any other
respect whatsoever; for this is to set up the Creature above the Creator. God
only is to be loved, and feared simply for himself; and above all things else
that are; and all things else, respectively to him; as he directs us in his
Word. So that if any of you favor an unjust cause, for his sake whose cause it
is, in so doing you commit Idolatry, making him whose unjust cause you so
favor, your God; in as much as you prefer him and his falsehood, before God
and his Truth; and therefore take heed, that through respect of men's persons
you renounce not your Religion, and turn Infidels. Amicus sit Plato, magis
amica veritas: It is good for a man, though to love his friend well, yet still
to prefer the Truth before him.

And by our thus teaching and living, and your thus learning and walking, both
we and you shall be sure at the last, to obtain the end of our faith and
pains which shall be the salvation of our souls. Which God the Father grant
to us, through the merits of his Son Christ Jesus, and prepare us to, by the
power of his ho-Spirit; to which Trinity in Unity, the only true, immortal
and invisible God, be ascribed all Praise, Wisdom, Majesty, Might, and
Dominion, now, and for evermore.

Amen.
FINIS.

