A WORLD of wonders* A MASS of Murders.

A COVIE of Cosonages.

Containing many of the most notablest Wonders, horrible Murders and
detestable Cosonages that have been within this Land.

Not imagined ^also to delight vain heads c^iese, nor practiced trans mare to
breed truth cum ambiguitate, but committed even at home re vera, and may be
proved cum honestate.

A matter most fit to be known, well wayed and considered of all men. Who
list of Wonders tell, and strange events to know,
Or hear of Murders fell: this Book a Mass does (...).
Who would the wily slights, of Cousnage gladly hear,
Heerin for his delights: a Couie does appear.
Muse at the first, fear at the next, the third does cry beware
So may thou shun a world of woes which herein named ere.
NON PLUS

W.B

printer's or publisher's device

Imprinted at London for William Barley, and are to be sold at his shop in
Gracious streat near unto Leadenhallgate. 1595.

To the christian READER. grace, mercy and peace.
FOrasmuch (gentle and beneuolent Reader) as we are now abiding in that same
iron world whereof Ovid speaks in which is small store of good fruits but
such as barren soyles do buy: Nature yields, to witthistles, brambles and such
like, whereof small gain is to be expected, wherewith men's hearts are hardened,
charity chased, love lacking truth thrusted out of doors, liberality laid
along, compaision coupled in chains and all good and virtuous exercises either
seldom used or utterly extinct: as fire smothered up in ashes, and instead of
these carnal and most unnatural murders, detestable periuries, cankerd
coutousnes incestious adultery, hardness of heart, peevish extortion, exactions
usury and diverse such most horrible and abominable practices yearly, monthly,
nay howrely are used and practiced. All which and other like to the learned are
thought to be most evident and manifest signs, that that final end that
conclusion and shutting up of these transitories and vanities of this mortal
world are at hand and that Christ is even ready to call us unto judgment: and
forasmuch as calling of Preachers, execution of laws and justice and other
like woorketh but small amendment in us, yet nevertheless because that signs
threats, tokens of Gods wrath, signs in the air, murders, incest and such
like heard of and seen with our corporal eyes although they be not in
continual remembrance to terrifye by us from committing such abominations,
yet do they for the present time that they are seen, heard or done, stir
and move us up to prayer to God to amendment of our sinful lives, to the horror
of such wicked actions and such like.

And for this cause I have collected these exampses not from strange languages
or from foreign nations which might breed some ambiguitie or doubtas touching
the truth, but I have taken them out of our own native Cuntry (not without
sorrow that such heinous sins and enormities should be so rife amongst us)
whereof can no doubt be made for truth of action or exception for process of
time or antiquity, being done all for the most parr within these few years
within our memory with in our knowledge. All which I say are collected together
in a redines as apretious glass to see the frailitie of man, to vein the
wickedness of this world, the end of mischiefs, the punishment of such
grievous enormities and such like that thereby, other seeing the same may refrain
the like, and seek to shun such paths as lead to destruction which grant us
so to do he that for sinners shed his precious blood upon the tree. Amen. (.)

Thine in Christ. T. I.

AS there is no fructe which has not first his bud then his flovver, thirdly
his fruct and afterward time for his rypenes. Even so there is no villainy o^
wicked fact that has not first his motion and intent, next his opportunity,
thirdly his execution or committing of that fact and lastly his shame and
punishment as may appear by these examples.

A COVIE of Cosonages.
WIthin these three year dwelled in Brodstreet within the City of London a
Chaundler, whose honest life, good conversation, upright dealing and christian
zeal is yet manifestly to beknowen of ye inhabitants where he dwelled. Unto
this youngman in a winters evening repaired a tall young man of a commendable
proportion of body, if inward gifts had accorded therunts:

This man entering this Chaundelers shop (where the goodman was busy in his
vocation) and demanded if he had any Nutmegges to sell, whereupon after he
had seen the Nutmegges, demanded the price, he asked the Chaundler if he
would buy a good bargain of Nutmegges and other wares? saying he was lately
come out of the Carick and had certain commodities to sell which he had kept
till than, but now wanting money and coming into arrorages, with his Ghoast
where he soiurned, was constrained to sell all his merchandise or at least some
of them to discharge his lodging: the Chaundler ready (as all worldlings are)
to get: After certain speeches of bargaining, they grew to a composition and
absolute bargain, and thereupon this halter catcher desired the Chamdler to
take a bag or two with him, to put in the commodities for the easier
carriage, and also to put sixteen shillings in his pursse to pay the host if
he would not let the wares to pass (for so much he said he was run on the
score) The simple and plain meaning Chaundler suspecting nothing less then
cosenage took to his box and took out from other money twenty and five
shillings, and put it into an other pursse by it self, and so taking the
bags marched all along from Breadstreet to Queen-hiue where this tibornesse
growing son, entering into a door (fit as it seems his parpose) desired the
Chaundler to stay at the door, till he took the bags and filled them.

After some short space or time this new gates bird came again to the
Chaundler sitting at the door and there certifying him that his host and he had
been at some speeches and that he would not let him have the Nutmegs vill he
had his sixteen shillings, and therefore desired him to let him have sixteen
shillings to pay him, and there with delivered him a thing wrapped up in brown
paper after the best fashon like to a piece of velvet which he said was ^uft
taffata this he left as gadge for the money till the Nutmegs came, the
Chaundler meaning plain simplicity delivered him his pursse with the five and
twenty shillings saying take ye pursse you know I put in so much money, pay
him out sixteen shillings, and keep the rest till we reckon.

Now the viliaine is gonne, and the Chaundler waits for his Gentleman at the
door some half bower and more, and pereceiuing no likelihood of his coming
began to suspect some vnacqainted bargain and theruppon untied paper to see
what merchandise was therein which being opened he found naught but tailors
shreds artificialy placed and bound after the fashion of yeeces of taffata.
Imagine now that the Chaundler is in his dumps, and there leave him a while
meditating upon the proffit of his bargain.

The caterpiller in the mean space making haste you may be assured out of a
falce back door (whereof there may be to many in London more is the pity)
came home to the Chaundlers house again, and he that before had veiwed each
thing for his purpose, and had seen the bor out of which the chaundler had
taken out the five and twenty shillings before, came to the chaundlers boy,
and said sir you must send your master twelve shillings wanting twopence out
of the bore that has the ragge of white cloth in it: the mark of the cloth he
saw in the box and at the quantity of the money he gessed.

The boy gave small trust to his words, and replied that he knew no such box
till he had him look for the ragge and said his master had sent a porter that
was coming with nutmegs, which nutmegs his master charged should be laid out of
sight in the back room. Notwithstanding for all this the boy would not deliver
him any money, but when he was importunate upon him he desired an other boy of
one of the neighbors to come in and take so much money and to go with the man
to his master.

The matter concluded the neighbors boy had a xi.s. and x.d. and going forth,
this notorious cousener leads the boy into Saint Mary-axe to an other door and
bids the boy to stay he would call the chaundler to him. He went in and
stayed a while and came again to the boy saying that the chaundler was so
busy that he would not come to him but desired that he would send it him in,
willing him to stay and carry a bag of nutmegges home with him: the boy
simply delivered the money and stayed an hour for the bag of autmegges but
as yet can not they be heard of.

In the mean time the chaundler comes home but how disposed (God knows)
where he finds himself two fold deceived, to his greit no doubt, and more in
my judgment for the wiccednes of the man then for the loss of the money.

If this be not as notorious a knauerie as ever you heard off I refer it to
your own considerations.

How a woman consained a minister often groates.
A Minister who yet lives godly disposed repaired upon a day to Christs-Church
in London to hear the Lecture and continued there during the set men. Afterwad
departing thence, and coming into the open streat, upon the sudden came a
woman unto him with open mouth and commanded him to give her her ring. What
ring said the Minister? the ring said she you took of my finger in the Church.
Auaunt queen said the minister I have nothing of thine and with that the woman
made such exclamations in the streat, that the passengers gazed upon them in
such sort that the Minister ashamed of such an hurly burly demanded what her
ring was worth, who answered that it was worth forty pence, and thereupon, he
drew his pursie and gave her ten gretes to be rid of the filth.

An other.
Within these last twelve months even at twy-light, an honest man and of good
behavior, came to enter London at Cripplegate, under which gate as he passed,
soddainly met him a study fellow who iustled him with his shoulder, and at that
instant, upon the other side of him, an other knave confederate with the other
supposing that he would mind she man that instled him, as indeed any man
should do, caught the fellows cloak by the lap, and therewith turned himself
round, in such sort that the honest man's cloak was lapped the inside outward
upon the cony-catchers back, and having his pray, fled with swift heels: the
honest man, notwithstanding their iustling, remembered his cloak and theruppon
cried stop thief, the other knave that just led him never stirred his feet
but hearing the man cry shop thief, drew out his dagger and asked where,
where, and by that time people gathered as the usual order, the honest man
said that he that had the dagger in his hand was he that iustled him but
whether he was his associate that ran away with his cloak he would not say.
What a villain is this queth the cony-catcher to make such an hurly burly,
thou art a dissembling rogue said he and take this for thy labor and therewith
stroke the poor man upon the head with his dagger, and by this meenes, left
he his cloak and was also cruelly heaten.

An other.
ANd seeing I have begun with Clocke-catching, behold an other knack of
knavery, which was committed in Smithfeild at noone days. A certain man
walking or going in Smithfeild with a new cloak upon his back, there came to
him of Plutoes hel-hountes, demanding what he might pay for his cloak: mary
sir said ye other, it cost me five nobles, truly said the other it is worth
that: I pray you where bought you it? at such a place said the other, and there
you may have of the very self same piece: at last the frauder desired the
honest man that he might see it upon his back, if it were long enough, for
him, who meaning nothing but plain dealing, put the cloak upon the others back
and incontinent the thief runs away as fast as he might with the cloak, the
true man cried stop thief stop thief, and he that was the thief and
ran away, he cried also stop thief, stop thief, the men in the streat
hearing both of them cry both one noate supposed that both they had run after
a third body, and could not tell whom to stay, so that in conclusion, the
thief past away stily with the cloak and so far as ever I could learn was
ever heard of to this day.

An other.
ANd will ye yet hear stranger matters the truth whereof is, and may with
small labor be known.

At the Sun without Alders-gate not long since there supped certain Gentlemen
and seruingmen: There Chamber prepared and supper ready, they fat down to
meat, among whom came in also an other man booted and spurred and fat down
with them at the neither end of the Table, a mere Stranger to the rest, yet
unsuspected, for that every one thought he had been some friend or
acquaintance of some of the other, (as well it might be judged) where many are
together one thinking him to be such a man's acquaintance, the other thinking
him to be his friend, etc.

They passed their supper time in mirth and paid the reconing, among the which,
this new found gue and orderly paid his share and having so done they sat
talking till it was near to eleven of the clock at night and that all the
companies were departed the Tavern, except this uncouth guest watching his
time left the company and came to the bar where he found the boy that sat
therein nodding a sleep with money to the value of eight or ten shilings, in
his hand unto whom came this prigger and with theeuish softly means assayes
to take the money out of the boys hand and did faindeed, the boy not fast in
sleep awaked, mist his money, search was made, the fellow not far was gonne
from the bar: and theruppon had in suspicion: he denies the fact both with
words, oaths and gesture: inquiry was made of whose acquaintance he was, of
them that supped together and in conclusion he was found a mere stranger to
them all, and thereupon did search both his sleeue, bosom and other places
where might be any possibility to hide any money but all in vain, it could
not be found he stood upon his terms he was a Gentleman, he was honest as
the best etc. This made the company muze till at the length one subtiller then
the rest commanded his boots to be plucked of and in one of them they found
the eight shilinges, manifested by tokens and his other to the value of five
pounds.

An other.
But if you desire to hear a subtiller kind of knavery and such a one as if
it had not been petie knavery for the small valuation of the thing defrauded,
you might say it carried the vel away and it was thus.

A pore woman there was, (yea she yet lives) that used to to take kildeckins
of beer of a brewer: this wam an being a widow and having but few of meany
could not well drink the kylderkin whilst it was good, and therefore a neighbor
of hers came to her and called her by her name, saying neighbor, you are but
few of household and I like a good husband fetch all my drink at the alehouse
if you think good I will fetch of you if I may have so much for a penny, as I
can have at the alehouse, yes marry shall you said to the widow, why then quoth
the other let my folks hare here when they come for it, and when they have
fetcher so much as comes to twelve pence you shall have money: content says
the widow, and heerupon they departed, and the man sent day by day for beer
till it came to eleuenpence, and then he lift fetching any more, and so it
continued: In the end, the poor woman sent to him for money for her drink:
money said her good neighbor, why I awe you none, no quoth the widoowe I have
deliueret so much as comes to eleuenpence: I confess all that said he, but
when is my day to pay? marry says she, when I demanded it, nay quoth he, my
bargain was to pay when it comes to tweluepence and not before. Thus the poor
witow was beguiled.

An other.
IT may see me needless to write that which as yet is not buried in the bosoms
of obliuien that is how a cripple within these few years within four or five
miles of London desired a passenger to help him upon his horse, who suposing
it a deed of charity to help him, and taking him in his arms the cripple
wounded him to death, and robbed him and according to law was therefore executed.

An other.
AN Usurer sometime there was who lent out much money and never twenty or
thirty years made any desperate debt. This usurer had a man a young whely of
this tigers kind: apt to learn of his old churl his master what might turn
to his proffit: Yet notwithstanding, his master kept all his dealings close
from his servant, in so much, that the servant seeing his master made no such
debts as sometimes he did, demanded of his master how he could keep himself
from banckroutes?

The master kept him self a loose and would not be known of that secret to
his servant, till acenclusion was made that the servant should bestow a supper
of his master at the tavern to learn the secret. The supper was prepared, the
master, servant and other friends supped and were merry: the master told the
servant that if he dealt as he used to do, he could make no evil debts, and
that was that he should not take any man's bill, bond or word but ever be sure
of a good pawn worth double or treble his money in vsancce with a good bill of
sale in open market. The supper ended, the old seignior having well liquored
himself and old vessels must needs leake, would needs be gone to make
water, nay said the servant then you will leave us: not so said the usurer, if
you think so keep my cloak, wheruppon he took his cloak and laid it to pawn
at the bar for the shot and went his way. thus fraud was deceived with
deceit.

An other.
NOt three years passed, it chanced that a certain man traueling toward
North-hawton meet with an other man in a solitary place whereas was none other
but them twain, the one of them commanded the other to stay and to deliver
him his pursse for he wanted money, the other party seemed willing, and said
truly I have but two shillinges, but seeing it is so that thou will needs have
it here it is, and so gave it him and departed. This party who had they pursse
went forward, and he that lost the pursse seemed to go forward an other way,
but seeing opportunity crossed over two or three closes or feildes till he
came and met the other thief again, and then commanding him to stay charged
him to deliver his pursse for he was a goodfellow wanted money, and lately
robbed and now must and would have money: the other answered that he should
have none, and then after some speeches they fell to grapling together so long
till the first thief was contented to redeliuer the man his own pursse and
his two shillings, but the other was not so contented took from him his pursse
wherein was seven shillings and odd pence.

An other.
IT was credibly-reported that not far from the cross in Cheapside in London
used a Costermongers wife to sit with apples, who used for her better intising
of customers to have forty or fistie shillinges in the pocket other white
Apron, which because it was so directly before her a outpurse took great care
how to cousin her of her money (which to an honest man's mind might seem
impossible to be brought to pass.) The cut-pursses man had made made many
assayes but could not prevail and therefore the mastercut-purse being moned,
took the matter upon him, and taking a cloak commonly called a spanish-cape
(such as Italians daily use) it has a hoode hanging down the back, he put it
about him and came to her where acter many speeches he bought a groates worth
of pippins of her but not having canuenient carriage requested that she would
let some body carry them home with him. The woman making answer that she had
no body but her self he then prayed her to put them into the hoore or cape of
his cleake where upon he stooped down with his head and she putting in the
apples he put his hand into her packet and by that means picked out her money
a thing thought impossible.

An other.
IN a winters night (some few years past) a boy about thirteen or fourteen
years of age was sent with three or four shirtebands, caffes and handkerchers
thereto according valued at four pounds or there about, unto a Gentleman lying
about old Fishstreat, who passing through some part of Waeling-streat upon a
sudden met him a woman demanding his name his mothers name his dwelling and
place whereto he was going, the boy fold her truly all these things and so she
departed goin unto another companion not far seated from her and told her mate
all what so ever the boy had before declared: which done, this other cosoninge
queen crossing over the streat came and met the boy calling him by his name,
asking him whether he went and so forth: the boy wondered how she knew him and
said that he knew not her, no said she, I a well heard by thy mother at
Bishopf-gate and I have been heerby of an err and and as I came along this
streat at I spied a good shoulder of mutton in a Cooks shop but I cannot have
it under xiiii.d. because he and I fell out, I pray thee take this xii. pence,
and go and asue for one Harison a Cook here in: Watling streat and se if thou
can buy it, and thou and I will be merry together with it and then go home
together. The boy simply took the money and left his bands and other things
with the huswife and in the mean while, she went away with the clothes.

An other.
SEeing I have spoke of Watling-streat, I mean to put you in mind of an odd
jest (if so I may term it) committed in Fryday-stre^at near the said place,
and thus it was.

Salters there as other traders use to set out there wares upon she stalles
and such like places that men may see what they have to sell. Amongst the rest
one W. C. now living, set out half a firkin of soap under his stale upon a
barrel of pitch as the report goes, and so it long continued. One day above
the rest, there passed by a man (seruingman like) who seeing the said half
firkin (without saying by your leave) took the half firkinne under his at me,
and away he went. The owner knew nothing thereof, till one of the neighbors
servants seeing the fact told him of it and he intentinent sent his servant
after him, who brought him to his master, and being asked why he stole it,
defied them saying, he came not into his house for any ware, but he found that
half firkin in the Queens high way, and therefore he took it up.

An other:
AMong petie cosonage this may also be numbered. A Country man came into Fry
day-streat before named and demanded which was his way into Fryday-streat a
naughty minded fellow bad him turue at the next corner and he should be out of
it by and by. The fillie suspecting no deceit did as he bad him and so was led
amisss. And this petie cosonage is to common now a days more is the pity.

An other.
AS notorious a cosonage as ever was heard does follow.

In Lecester town dwelled sometimes a weauer who being a perfect workman
wanted not customers to set him on work and among others one in the town
brought him some. thirty or, forty pounds of flaxen yarne to weaue, his
work ended, he brought home the cloth as the usage is, and the goodwise
partly knowing how much might be be made of so much yarne and suspecting that
he had stolen same of here yarne, asked if he had brought home all her yarne,
yea dame quoth he that I have, but (...) ^^king as though she did not believe
him, he s^ore as G^^ sh^^^^^ judge him he had brought home every ha^^^ to
(...) and so he did in very deed, he brought home all and yet (...) standing he
beguyled her of two or three pounds in his (...) ^reeches, but going away he
carried it a way with him back again.

A wounder it is to see what sleightes the devil uses to draw men unto him
aswelmay be noted in this, for he thought by this means to save his oath
though he never imagined that it was asault to deceive such as put most
confidence in him.

An other.
IN Melton Mobray dwelled a Caryer named K. who when first he used carrying, as
he travailed in the hiyh way, heard a woman over the hedge crying and making
great moan for help, the man supposing if a good deed to help a woman
distressed would have left his companion and have gone to the reseue of the
woman: but his fellow traualler would not suffer him, showing him what
treachery might he insuch dissembling cries, so he stayed a space, but yet
hearing the importunate moan he said that he would aid her what he might,
and thereupon leapt over ye hedge, where presently one caught him by the throat,
and had not rescue been he had both been robbed and murdered.

An other.
IN Colm instreat in London oueragainst a Persumers stall, met three men or as
may be suspected came thither of a set purpose and stood in the open streat,
within two or three yardes (or there abouts) of the stall and talked secretly
between themselves, the Perfunter, his wife and servant busy in the shop,
even at noone days: yet one of the three having a small long wand in his hand
as it should seem having a crooked pin in the end, filched away three or
four pair of glooues and went there way untaken, yea not suspected of such
filthy actions. This was done within these twelve menethes.

An other.
ABout the same time also, a boy aged sixteen or there about, in structed by
some miscreant, (for such young years could not produce so mischeiuous a
faction of themselves) got a stick fashioned much like unto those sticks which
the boys calls bandyes, and having the samel esmeered with lyme, came by a
Goldsmiths sop in Foster-lane and under a pretense of knocking the stick upon
stalles as be passed along at the last struck his stick upon a Goldsmiths
bourde where a gilt spoone and other money, they knew not how much he got upon
his lymed stick. The spoone being weighty fell into the current, and they had
it again, but what money was lost it is not known.

An other.
NOw for because our Contrymen are slaundered not to be so upright in
conversation nor so true dealers as strangers, and therefore we run thick and
three fold to buy what soever commodities we want (of them leaving our own
native Cuntreymen as an oprobris to the world as well for cunning in acts and
trades as also in upright dealing, which sure is lamentable that we should
deecleane contrary tonature and reason, even all one to beggar our selves and
enrich others. I will by your patience show you a most cunning piece of
knauerie this one to serve insted of many examples. Neither is it invented as
false, but even now by sufficient proof to be verified at this present and
thus it was.

A Gentlewoman of ye country occasioned to buy her a gown of taffata came into
Cheap Side in London and sought the mercers shops up and down and could not
find a piece of taffata so good as she would have had (for women w^^ have ye
best, if it be for their own backs especially( notwithstanding marking where
the best was, came back again and offered money for it, but not so much as the
mercer would have, wheruppon there was going and sending to and frs but the
bargain could not be made.

Thus they parted, Now in the mean while a Stranger a Dutchwoman as I ween,
coming to the mercers, upon some business noted there business, noted there
speeches marked the goodness of ye taffata and considered the humor of the
Gentle woman and theruppon bought the pecce of taffata of the mercer and sent
it home to her own house, and afterward wandering in Cheapside till she espied
the Gentlewoman, went unto her and said Gentlewoman, I understand that you want
a piece of very good rich taffata, if it please you to go with me I will
show you such an one as you never saw a better and all London can not match
it: the Gentlewoman wonderful glad went with her, saw it and liked it
exceeding well, bought it and paid some two or three shillings in a yard
deerer then she might have had it before of an englishman. Well this is our
shuttle nature, the parties are yet both pleased. The Gentlewoman passing
along Cheap Side told the mercer of her good hap and therwithall showed him
the taffata with his own mark and seal at the end thereof, and incontinent he
told the Gentlewoman where she bought it and in what place she dwelt, and how
it was the same piece that she should have bought of him: whereat the
gentlewoman thus deceived was out of measure astonished.

Many other like cosonages might be here set down as how the Trpe-wire was of
late deceiued-which now in memory: yea many others, but these may suffice
only, I will note two or three add sleightes or jests ands sproceed to a
further matter.

An other.
SOmetime a company of prentices had apponted to meet at a Tavern to break
their fast together, an hour was set, who so came not at that hour was fined
at a gallon of wine besides the loss of his breakfast. One above the rest,
wanting excuse to to come abroad to meet his companions, the hour drew on,
his master and mistress both in the shop that he could not start, you would
wounder what excuse he made: standing at the door looking to his appointed
place where his heart was, suddenly he ran out of the doors to his mates,
stayed there some hour or more, and coming home to his master, enquired where
he had been? and what was the cause of his sudden running out of the shop?
sir said he, as I stood at the door I saw H, K. your old debtor that has
ought you money this long time, and I have followed him till now to see him
housed, and he is in such a place, and he has promised to come and agree with
you before he will go out of the Towke.

An other.
A Like to this is reported, that one Master H. in the Pultrie, having sundry
Chapmen, one of them did owe him money a long season, and at last understanding
that his Debtour was in the Town be commanded his man to go and demand the
debt, and if he make delay for the payment (said the Master) tell him from me
that I suppose, he takes no care to pay in my money.

The servant went and accomplished in each respect what his master gave him in
charge. When the Debtour heard him talk of care to pay his money, he replied,
saying, does thy master think that I take care to pay his money? no, no, he
is deceived, tell him I took care and great care how to get the wareof thy
master, now let thy master take care how to get his money, for I will take none
to pay him.

An other.
AN honest man flitting or remoouing from the house where heeearst dwelled,
wanting room was constrained to sell a certain bedstead. Now a young man
ready to take a wife, understanding thereof. desired a Ioyner a friend of his,
to go with him to see the bedstead and to have his counsel in it for so much
as he him self knew not what such things were worth.

The Ioyner went with him, and after the sight, they grew to barganing, but the
Ioyner would not suffer the other man to give the price by five shillings and
so departed.

Afterward the Ioyner resorteth again to the house alone and buyeth the
bed-slead for his own proper use, defrauding his freiud that put him in trust.

O most unnatural, devilish and detestable action, whom shall a man repose
his confidence in these our most dangerous and troublesome days and times?
wherein eniquitie so deceitfully and arrogantly strives to subject and deceive
the simple and well meaning: yea in so much, that the brother seeks to greiue
the brother, and friends deal so unjust that it is hard to repose confidence
in any. A thing to the good odious, but abhorred in the sight of God.

I have thought good, because I have published some actions which are already
imprinted to manifest (according to the offenders confession at the Sessions
house) the report, (in this my collection of false dealings and cosonages (the
notorious cosenage used to M. Mascall, which because it is already extant in
print. I was the bolder to note it in this collection, to admonish others to
beware of the like.

The most notorious cosenage that ever was heard of, how M. Mascall the
Trypewife was deceived.
Written as it was spoken by the Offendour before the Honorable at the
Sessions House.
MAscales wife supposed to be left rich at her husbands discease as it seems
she was, had sundry and many suitors amongst the which there was one Pee^ers a
gentleman at the least (for all be gentlemen now a days) who often and many
times resorted to her house ^oying at the last to obtain her good will but the
widdowe careful enough for her own good could not by any ways be wun.
Whereupon Peter's perceiving that drift as touching marriage to be in vain
determined to get some of her money by other means and therefore frequenting
her house as before he studied to know the fashions of her house the
disposition of her mind the vmber and names of her acquantance friends and so
much and so many of her secrets as possibly he might and therewith one Vaughen
he went to a woman lying with out Bishops gate fitly instructed for such
purposes and there asking for her they met with her husband and between them
three was great talk, and at the last they went to the taueren where after
further speech there was a pint of wine sent unto the woman that should do
this feate: Not long after they either sent for her to the Tavern orels they
came home to her (I know not whether) but truth it is, they told her what
their meaning and determination was, and how that they had heard that she was
the only woman for their purpose: but she made them answer that in so much as
she had been diverse times before my Lord A. for such tricks as this was, she
durst not be seen in London: for if my Lord should see me (said she) he will
hang me Then they encouraged her saying that she should go in a Country
woman's gown whereby she should not be suspected and she should say she came
from a very friend of Mistress Mascalls dwelling in Essex and in that letter
should be commendations of her and so forth.

When this woman had granted her consent: Peeters began to certefie her of all
that he had learned that was, how Mistress Mascall had many suitors and how she
loved a parchment seller in Parer noster row better then any of them, also he
told her that she had aring with five precious stones in it, which ring one
dwelling upon London bridge did wear upon. Christmas day last past.

He told her also that there used to beseene strange light or fire in the
night in her house: as also how that the last time he kissed her, her hat fell
into the souce-tubbe and many other.

Now she having all these ad vnguem (like an old beaten soldier) would not
go till she was also well instructed of the man from who^e the letter should
be supposed to come and therefore made the two Gentlemen to go see what favor,
what hair, what stat^re and condition the man of Essex was of, least she
should be intrapped.

All things like an apt scholars tale learned by heart. Vaughen makes the
letter in effect thus.

Mistress Mascall after commendations etc. I pray you show the bearer heerof
(my special friend) what favor, friendship and courtesy you may for my sake,
and so much the rather because she has done me great pleasure it many things
touching the art she professes, and I doubt not but she will pleasure you the
like if you have any occasion: you may trust her as your self, wherefore I pray
you do for her, as you would do for me if I were with you. I mean to be at
London between this and Eastervppon urgent business that I have, and then I
mean to see you etc.

This letter after the foresaid form being framed and sealed up, the woman in
her counerey like gown takes and goes into S Nicholas-shambles, knocks for
M. Mascall and delivers the letter: M. Mascall calls for a cup of beer for
the messenger and in the mean time opening the letters and having read the
contents takes the woman by the hand and leads her up into her house, and
according to the folly of all simple women shows her one room, after an
other, with all the braueries thereof, and afterward to victualing and gossiping
they go by the fire, and there sit merely some season.

You may be well assured all this pleased the messenger right well, and now
having grown into some familiarity or acquaintance the effects of the letter
were rehearsed: as touching the favor she had done to M. Friend in matters of
her art, and so forth: Whervppon the trusty Roger (this messenger I mean)
began now to work her fact and desired M. Mascall to show her her hand,
which she forthwith did, and when she had looked in every place of her hand,
she told her soon matters touching her husband deceased, and moreover that
she had many suitors, whereof some were good, and other that were naught, from
which she diswaded her and gave her counsel to take heed of them.

You may have many (said she) but yet you love a parchment seller in Pater
noster row above the rest, and there is a Gentleman that is a suitor unto you
take heed of him said she for he will deceive you: what is he said M. Mas.
mary quoth the other it is the Gentleman that the last time he kissed you, he
kissed you in such a place by the same token your hat fell into the souce-tubbe.

When M. Mascall heard that she (as most women light of belief) thought that
she then knew all things, and therevppon falling into further talk this
cunuing woman asked if there was not some vnacoustomed or some strange sights
seen in ye right time her house: Yes marry said mistress Mas. but do you know
the reason thereof said the other, no said misteris Mas. except there be some
money hid in my house. There is money hid in very truth said this cunning woman
and that good store: can you help me to it said mistress Mars. yea said the
other and if you will swear to me that you will not make any christian body
acquainted with it, the^ mistress Mas, as the woman confessed went to a bible
that lay up on the table and swore by the contents of it never to open it unto
any. You must understand that the cunning Cosoner liked the falling out of
these matters wundrous well for her purpose, and having now brought them even
to the very issue, proceeded in or the like order.

Mistress Mascall if so be, you desire to have this money that is hid in your
house it behooves you to have both gold and silver and jewels to present
unto the King of the Feries: I have said the other, and therewith led her up to
her Chesis, and showed her both gold, silver, golde-ringes and a chain of
gold.

Now when she had seen these, among the rest she espied one ring which had
five stones in it, this ring said the Cosoner one upon London Bridge did wear
upon Christmas day last, which was true indeed, and therefore M. Mascall
hearing her say so, gave the more credit unto her words, supposing that she
knew all secrets.

Well these jewels, gold and silver were brought down and M. Mascall must put
these into the Cosoners lap, with her right hand and there they must rest
awhile.

Then she must put them into M. Mascalls lap with the like ceremony, and
then M. Mascall taking the foresaid things must go into every reume and every
corner thereof must kneel down and say certain prayers: which finished, she
must come and put the gold etc. into the cunning woman's lap again with her
left hand and she receiving the same must in like order as the other had done,
go and say prayers in every place as before.

All this brought to ripenes there must be a capon and a turkey bought to feast
the king of Feries, but this must be done some two days after, in the mean
time this cunning woman must have the custody and keeping of the money and
^inges till two days be ended and in the means time she delivered to M. Mas. a
cloth with two things in it, into which cloth m. Mascall might not dare to
look into during two days, and thus the cunning woman departed with the ring,
money and chain leaving naught else but two little stones lapt in a cloth for
the same.

Now if conetousnes had not ouermastered her she had never been taken but
understanding what plate that M. Mascall had she hanged thereafter and
therefore caused the forenamed Capon and turkey to be cut and mangled, the head,
feet and heart etc. to be cut off and every corner of the table one to be laid.
a candle burning, to be set also upon the table, and all the plate set there
upon as a present for the king of Feryes, then should they go to the Tavern
with some of the cunning woman's companions, and m, Mascall with them, and the
cosoner should get some sure token from m. Mascall to come home for some thing
and the Messeger by that taken should bring away the plate, but this effecting
not and suspicion of cosoning arysing, this cunning woman was apprehended and
laid in Newgate and being examined before the bench at Sessions house
confessed these words or the like in effect.

How she cosoned an other woman, confessed by her self at the Sessions house
the fourteen of February. 1595.
AFter she had made an end of her former discourse as she termed it one of the
Judges asked her if she knew a woman that stood thereby, she made answer yes
my Lord and an other woman to, whersoeuer she be, whereupon it was asked how
she knew her, and she made answer that about a twelve months past, she came
to the place where this woman dwelled and enquired of some of her neighbors
what Cunterywoman she was as also what manner of man her husband was, how many
children, how many boys, how many Wenches and many such like fitting her
determined purpose, which known, immediately she went to the honest woman's
house, desiring as it should seem some refreshing for her and her Children.

The woman inquisitiue of her state inquired what country woman she was, (who
knowing ye other to be of the same shire) said she was a Lancashire woman and
how that for coniuring she was cast in prison and had remained long there. The
other woman asked what she consured for, who answered for money hide, and how
for those matters she was very expert, and there telling her how many children
she had had, how many boys and how many wenches, how many of them alive and
how many dead and many such like before learned questions they grew to a
composition that this cunning woman should help her to a pot of money no less
then three hundred pounds, which she promised with speed to persourme, and
thereupon the poor woman not having so much money as she desired, went to one
of her neighbors and borrowed more, so that this coning woman coniured five
and fifty shillings out of the poor woman's (...). So much she her self
confessed at the Sessions house, but the party dece^affirmeth that it was
three pounds or more.

The foresaid party deceived also a rich and greedy Churl in such sort that
she sadled him and road upon him as upon an horse and deceived many others, but
because it is a thing extant in print, I purposely omit them, ending with an
odd jest done of late at Islington.

An other:
A Young man and a maid there was dwelling at Islington near London who in
some continuance of time loved mutually even almost to the perfection of
marriage so that naught remained to stay their intent but the good will of
Parents without whose consent the maid scrupuously would not be obtained.

Many suits and entreaties being made but to small effect, the young man
absented him self from his love some space of time and after the wooing manner
courted an other maid in the town, in such sort that the common brute went
he should marry with the latter. Wheruppon meeting his former love in
Islington church yard after some greeting between them the maid had God give
him joy for she heard say that he should be asked in the Church the next
Sunday. True it is said he, and I fear nothing but that you will forbid the
banes, with that he took an oath forthwith, rashly you may be bold to say, as
commonly in such causes women are, to prove that of her faith and troth she
would not forbid the banes.

They departed each from other, the man straight ways to the Clark of the
Church, to give him notice of his own name, and and this maid his former
love her name also, and caused them two to be asked banes together, the maid
and her father and mother that Sunday being at the Church not knowing of it,
till other neighbors and their servant told that sure it was she that was
asked. The matter examined, he told the father of the maid, what promise his
daughter had made, that if he were asked in the Church, she would not forbid
the banes, therefore he thought good to be asked to her whom so long he had
wooed and looued.

Now the Parents seeing the matter had gone so far, gave their consents and so at
this present live honestly together.

I might here note down many other cosonages and shifts, more then the
aforesaid, but for breuities sake I will will here succease, with this caveat,
that people beware of many youths and others, who having got copper rings, and
other such like when they meet such whom they think they may beguile, they
will go is them and say they have found a gold or silver ring, and offer to
sell it for a small price.

The buyer thinking it to be gold, gives him for it thrice the worth and
thinks that he has a great penny worth till truth try the contrary.
Therefore let every one beware let not fair words make fools feign, had I
wist comes ever to late, shrede surnes to soon, and repentance by leisure.

Ignauiam necssitas acuit, et sepe desperatio spei causa est.

A WORLD OF Wonders.
IT is recorded in ancient monuments that what time Rinaldo ruled this land it
raiyned blood three days, and after that followed a tempest of venomous
beasts which slew many people.

All this was a forewarning of great punishment to light upon the Inhabitants
in this land that lived not penitently as ensued the next year: when so great
a mortality happened that this land was almost in desolation. Whatsoever
therefore (gentle Reader) thou find in this book assure thy self that it is
written as a memorial or day-booke for all and every of us daily and hourly
to look into for the better and speedier amendment of our sinful lives.

Bladud sometime governed this land who cunning in Nigromancie and trusting
thereto decked himself with feathers and presuming to fly over the town of
Bathe broke his neck by falling upon the Temple which he there had built. A fit
reward for all such as as use Nigromancie or any such unlawful acts.

At what time Norindus ruled this land a wonderful monster came out off the
irish seas and devoured much people against which the King him self Neides
fought, and was of the same monster clean devoured. Beware of fools hardness.

Archigallo was twice king of this land and Elidurus his brother twice
disposed, so that he was thrice ruler heerof.

Catillus who ruled this land ten years, caused all Extortioners and
oppressors of the poor to be hanged, to give examples to other. I would to God
they were so used now a days: I suppose there would be a great number of
usurers, brokers and sergiaunts.

About threescore years after the birth of Christ, it is supposed that
Christianity came into this land: but diverse write diversely, for some as
Necephorus and Dowthemus say that Simon Zelotes first preached Christ here.
Some say Phillip the Apostle: Some say Joseph of Armathia that buried our Lord.

King Arthur conquered thirty kingtomes such as were in those days wherein he
lived.

In the reign of Careticus and Ethelfridus was such civil and deadly wars
that the most part of this land was buried and destroyed, and the people that
were left feign to fly into Wales, the faithful of Christ was then almost
extinguished, the Britains indispaire and in subversion to the Saxons.

But what is the cause or this provoking of Gods anger? even covetousness,
whordome and extortion: Look up England, look up and repent: those sins
were then but even in the budde, now behol^e and repent, for now are they in
the fulness of their flower, and stay but for the fruit. Woe are we whose doyes
are so dangerous: But Lord awake in mercy and take pity on us.

Then couerend Beda wrote 78. books and in his time renoumed throughout the
whole world.

When Bytiricus ruled this land it rained blood yea that fell on peoples clothes
appeared like crosses.

When this land was stored with Wooules, the Princes of Wales paid 300.
Wooules every year to the King of England for at that time might scarce two
be found until the year 994. neither fever nor flix nor murren of Cattle were
known in this land.

In the time of king William the Conqueror was scarcity and dearth that men
did eat horses, cats, dogs yea and man's flesh.

Anno 1093, was such a famine that thereof sprang such and so great a mortality
that the quick were scant able the dead.

Also in the year 1099. we read that blood sprang out of ye earth at
Finchamstead in Barkshire.

Much about this time the water of the river of Trent at Nottingham was dried
up from one of the clock till three.

The like defection of water did the Theames at Londen bridge suffer about four
years after.

The 24. of February at Tewxbury being then their Fair, such number of flies
and kyttles dammed Seuern that for the length of a Buts shot were in men's
judgment esteemed abooue a hundred quarters.

A wunder of wunders befell in England throughout 1133. for there was great
darkness throughout all the land and the Sun appeared no otherwise then as the
Moon when she is in her last quarter.

Giraldus Cambrencis in his book of the description of Wales tells that in
the Country Kemanies, yea in his time a young man named Se^^illus borne in
those parts, was so tormented with toades as though all the toades in the Country
had been gathered together to vex him, and when as innumerable numbers of them
were killed by those that kept him, and by others of his friends and kinsmen,
yet came they still increasing in greater numbers then before, insomuch that
when his acquaintance perceived no help, after many assayes they loped all the
boughs and leaves of a very high tree and closed him in a coffin made for the
purpose so hoisted up into the said high tree, but notwithstanding poor
S^isillies was still molested with them. for they creeping up wunderfull heaps
left him not til they had eaten him vy to bare bones and so dyed.

About Orford in Suffolk certain fishers took in their nets a fish in all
points shaped like a man, which fish was half a year kept in Orford Castle
for a wunder. He would eat all manner meat but most greedily raw fish, he was
showed in no kind of worship. Aftermen had wundred at him, he was little
esteemed of and so not being looked unto stole away and was never heard of.
1188.

In the year 1230. a sudden darkness chanced in Poules-Church even at
service time so oue could scantly see an other: Also bout three or four year
afterward, five suns to be seen in the air as also two great dragons
flyingand fighting together during a whole day, the one day chased the other to
the deep sea.

After all these followed great wars and troubles in England Wales. etc.

Behold all Cornehourders a wunderfull example not fained but by sufficient
testimonies to be approved done even at home.

In the year 1234 was a dearth in England as true histories record (even as
now also there is) so that many dyed for want of victuals. The richmen as now
a days were dwelled with covetousness, so that they would not releive them that
were in necessite Amongst whom (a thing worthy noting) was one Walter Gray
Archbishop of York, whose corn being five years old, doubted that the
vermin would destroy it, and therefore commanded to deliver it to husband men,
that dwelt in his manours upon condition as much new corn after the next
harvest, and would distribute none of it to the poor for Gods sake.

Now it fortuned that when the men came to a great stacke of corn that stood
near to the town of Rippon belonging to the said Archbishop and had opened
the corn, there appeared in the sheaues the heds of worms and of toades, and
horrible serpents, yea and a voice was heard out of the mow saying lay no
hands one that corn for the Archbishop and all that he has is the devils.

This being heard, the left it, and the bayliffes of the Town were feign to
build an high wall round about the corn, and then to set it one fire least the
venomous venime should have gonne out to have poysned the corn in other places.

Behold this true example and repent thou covetous richman and do good while
time is offered thee, and God will bless thee the better,

A sea-bull was taken passinge the thames as far as Mortlake to the 25. year
of the reign of King Richard the 3.

It is most aproued that in the said Kings reign there dwelled in the Dioces of
Lincoln a woman of noble birth, both well favored and beautiful who being
married to a rich man in that curtry bear to her husband many children and yet
not with standing (wonderful to tell) the said woman got another gentle with
child and begat of her three sons one after an other or ever the ma^er came
to light the woman were named Hauissia and Lucia.

In King Edward the 2 reign flesh of beasts was so corrupted that men durst
not eat thereof, such murraine of beasts and cattle was then that men and
women stole Cattes and did eat their own children, some fat dogs, horses
and such like. Prisoners, plucked in pieces such as came newly to them as
prisoners and eat them haule a live so grievous a mortality of people
folloged that uneath the quick were able to bury the dead. Lord deliver us
from the like.

About Chippyngnorton in Oxfordshire in the year 1344, was found a monsterous
serpent, having two heads and two faces like women one face attired of the new
fashion of attyres then sprung up, and the other face atired after the old
ci^ll fashion and like a bat or ^^^n^er mouse.

And shall we not say those were tokens of Gods wrath sent to move us to
repentance and leaving of our new devised pride of apparel.

But what then may be said of the strange birds or fowls taken by Richard
Waller, and Richard Preston, within the Parish of Crowell in Lincoln shire,
even even the other day in ^^r memories in the year 1586 which birds w^^ed
enter^^^t ^^llors having feathers upon then heads or fronts growing and standing
out very like the frisled and curled hair of most men and women in these
days, yea having also great feathers / about their necks growing and standing
very high, very even and in the very form of our greatest set of ruffes, being
diversely coullored held up with (...) quilles resembling the wyers commonly
called supporters, which word (in my judgment) right fitteth the matter for
that in very truth they are the supporters of sin and of many iniquities.

If we further consider how these fowls being taken would walk three and
three togeither in most stately form, and afterward turning bill to bill
stood as it were consulting, it might be imagined they did but resemble the
most ^proude, stately, and scornful footesteps of women in these our days as
also their gossops talks and inventions of new^^nd tails and behavior.

But gentlewomen consider what you are and whereto you must turn: A apainted
wall is but a deceit to the buyer, and a painted body is but a deceiving of
the soul.

Consider that a simple soul surpasses thousands of the most gorgious
attired bodies of this world: Leave off the pride of the Pecock and take the
humility of the Doeue, for when age draws upon you you your selves will
repent your former pride, and acknowledge it mere vanity.

Upon Christmas day in the the 25. year of the reign of L. Richard the
second a Dolphin came out of the sea euento London bridge showing himself
playing but after there followed great tempests.

The posterne gate of London near the Tower in King Henry the sixth days sunck
more then seven foot into the earth at the same season.

Wonderful and strange it is to tell how in the 1594, the body of one Alce
Hackney which had been buried in the Church of Saint Mary-hill in London by
the space of one hundred three score and fifteen years was taken out of the
ground by a grave maker, both whole of skin and also her joints pliable, not
deminished.

This body being also so taken up, is reported that after so long time lying in
the earth to lie four days abooue ground to the vein of all comers, not
smelling nor anoying of any, and then buried again,

This (as it seems to me) veryfieth the saying of reueend Bid our
Cuntreyman, who affirms that there be three days in a year wherein
whosoever is borne the bodies shall not consume until the day of Judgment.

In the year 1552 at Middleton eleven miles from Oxford, a woman brought
forth a Child with two bodies from the nauill in such sort that when they
lay at length the one body and head lay as it were eastward, and the other head
and body lay west westward, the legs for ye bodies grew out at the midst
whereas the bodies joined and they had but one issue for both the bodies.

These were women children and lived eighteen days,

About that time when the Gray-f^yers was made an hospital, ten great Dolphins
were taken and brought to London the least whereof, was bigger then a horse.

Strange it is to consider how God sundry times in most miraculous sort
provides for the poor, as may be read in the days of Queen Mary.

The twenty six of November 1575. a Poulters wise in Christ Church parish
within Newgate was delivered and brought to bed of four daugghters all alive.

A place by the seaside all of hardstone and pebles commonly called a shelf,
lying between Oxford and Alborough in Suffolk, whereas never was known to be
either grass or earth, but always bare and barren, suddenly by Gods
appointment sprang out of the fame without labor or till age such great
abundaunce of peason that the poor Inhabitaunts there gathered (as it was then
judged) above one hundred, quarters and yet notwithstanding there still
remained pease some ripe some green and some in the blossom, even in as a
great a quantity as they were before they were gathered.

About the same time also a great fish was taken threescore feet in length very
sweet and pleasant to be eaten.

In the year 1557. before harvest was such a dearth, that wheat was sold for
four marks the quarter, malt for forty four shillings, pease at forty six
shillings the quarter, but it pleased God to send such a harvest, to ensue
presently upon that dearth that wheat was sold for five shillings a quarter,
malt for an noble, Rye for ten grotes, and all this so sold at London, in the
cuntry it was better cheap.

Let us repent us of our wickedness and begine to love one an other as we ought,
and doubt we not but God will even now do the like for us in this our dearth
although in man's judgment it presumptio^s may be made to the contrary.

More monsterous births befell in the year 1562 then in many years before.

A Mare brought forth a foale with one body and two heads and a thing like a
tail growing sut between the heads.

Also a Sow farrowed a pigge with four legs like to thearmes of a man child,
with hands and figers.

Also there was an other Sow which farrowed a pigge with two bodies, eight
feet and but one head.

Diverse children and beasts were brought into the world in monsterous forms
but most to be noted, is how many had resemblances of ruffs growing about their
necks and this without fable.

The xvij, of February 1570. at a place called Kinnaston near Marclech hill in
Herefordshire, a strange thing was seen that was the ground to open. and the
ground with certain rocks to remove, and went forward for the space of four
or three days to wit satterday, sunday and monday, and in five and twentee
hour it removed forty paces every pace five foot carrying both trees and
sheepecoates yea sheep and all in them, some trees falling into the chinkes
others remaning firm as before others that to fore stood east stand now west:
et sic econtra.

Kinaston Chapel was overthrown with it, and two high ways laned with hedges
and trees are removed trees and all an hundred yards from their acc^ustomed
places, where ^^llage ground was, there it was pasture left in place thereof,
and whereas pas^ure ground lay there tillage ground has gone upon it, the
ground as it was moved drove the earth before it, and at the lower part ever
whelmed the ground so that it is now great hill highted abooue twelve fadome:
it brake out at first in depth thirty foot, the breadth of the earth being
eightscore yardes, and the ground in all being twenty six Acres.

The like also happened within these two years, being a wunderfull example and
worthy the marking.

The 9 of July 1274, in the I Will of T^net a monsterous whale was taken, who
wanting water dyed with such roaring that he was heard a mile off. His length
was two and twenty yardes one of his eyes being taken out was more then six
horses could draw in a cart* a man might stand upright in the place, wherout
his eye was taken: between his eyes was twelve foot in length, three men might
stand upright in his mouth: his ribs being sixteen foot long, his liver was
two cart load, and any man might creep into his nos^rels, which was wunderfull.

A wounderfull and a notable Example for such as use swearing and forswearing
them selves.

Anne Auery coming into the house of one Williamson in Woodstreat in London to
buy six pounds of Towe or hardesse, having had the towe and being demanded
money after many vain speeches and filthy oaths desired of God that she
might sinck where she steed if she did not pay for it. God who is just, sent
his just judgment upon her so as forthwith she sunck down unto the ground,
not able to stand, the use of that her blasphemous tongue being taken away, and
she remaining speachlesse cast up at her mouth (that vessel of sin) the
filth and ordure of her body in great quantity and with horrible shucking,
which by natures course should have been voided downward, and in it is sort
continued which was not long till she dyed.

I might here also put you in mind of the like perjured called father Lea,
dwelling about Foster lane, but to the wise this may be a warning: as for such
as are commonly called knights of the I c^n in conscience think no otherwise
but that they are even reprobates hated of God and beloved of the devil. God
for his Christ's sake give them grace to repent and amend.

Even as before is said as concerning perjury, so in a manner may be said of
other enormities, as of whordome, hardness of heart to the poor, unmercifulness
of brethren and such like, in which extremity, God never leaves such as
trust in him, as may well be seen by the peason growing in the rock before
mentioned as also by one William Lumley a poor man dwelling in Elmeton in the
county of Worcester who being cast into prison and there continuing. within
three days after his imprisonment had a mare which foalded unto him a mare
foale, which immediately after had such an vdder of milk that she gave for a
long time together every day three pyntes of milk to the great comfort of his
poor wise and children. A wunderfull providence of God and worthy to be noted
especially of such as having superfluity yet even for the smallest debts care
not to what trouble and hard imprisonment they put their poor brethren that
God suffers to want for their further indgement and condempnation I fear
except they repent and be merciful as Christ him self is and has commanded
us to be so likewise.

Mark here an notable example of such as practice any unlawful arts.

The 17 of January, 1577, Simon Penbrooke dwelling in Saint Georges Parish in
Southwarck suspected for a Coniurer, and therefore summoned to appear before
the Ordinary, at S, Saviors Church, standing by his proctor, when even as the
Judge came in he fell down rattling in the throat, and never spoke word but
dyed presently: in whose clothes were found five devilish books of coniuration
and a picture of a man made of tyn, having three dice in his hand with this
writing: chance dice fortunately. A fit reward for such vile varlets as make
lawful arts ill spoken of, and detested by their ungodly uses and practice of
devilish devises.

But since I am now rehearsing of wounders and woundrous shapes, I will here
declare as strange a matter as ever was heard of.

In the year 1588, was a widow named Margaret Owen, aged threescore years
who had an horn four inches long most miraculously growing out of her
forehed down to her nose, and there crooked toward her right eye, and was
then growing so fast that she was feign to cut it, least it should blemish her
sight.

The woman was to be seen as well in London as in other places of this Realm,
neither can any natural cause be known thereof, but a wounder that God has
sent.

Many are the reports, but whether they be true or no I leave to your
judgments: for some affirm that in her youth she was not so loyal to her
husband as duty ought, and that diverse times there has been speeches tending
to that purpose between her husband and her, whereupon he suspscting flying
fame to be true, that she was light of behavior. and charging her with it in
these terms, that she had given him the horn, it is said, that she not only
denied it, but wished of God that if she had given her husband the horn, that
she might have one horn growing out of her own forehead as a witness
against her to the wounder of the world: (God only knows whether it were so
or not) if it were, I counsel all other as well men as women to look to them
selves and not to commit sin upon sin: first, in committing such an
horrible offense and adultrie: and secondly to cloak the same, to call
vengeance on their heds. Remember the woman that forsware her self for a small
sum of money: the old saying is: It may be spoke in such an hour, as God
may say Amen.

This woman inhabited in Wales in the Tawneand parish of Llhau Gaduaine in the
County of Moungomrye and at the root of this horn began, an other hard
knot even as the other began which she used to cut of least it should prove
also an otherhorne.

The merciful and loving kindness of god unto sinful people has and is so
great that he long time suffers us before he punishes nay he seldom
punishes except he use some marvelous operation before hand to move to
repetance to forwarne us of the anger depending our heads, as fatherly
admonitions, as may well be perceived, by this that follows.

About the year 1579 or there abouts, in Aberwick in the parrish of Agglingham
in the county of Northumberland, dwelled one John Urine a piper, unto whom it
pleased God to send by his wife Elianor a daughter, and by report a goodly
child.

The wife being delivered and each thing (as in such causes requires) ordered
the midwife glad of the woman's saftie. called the said John Urine to his wife,
and told him that it had pleased God to send him a goodly daughter.

A daughter quoth he with a stern and angery countenance, if it be a daughter
the devil take my part for me, for it is none of mine: and so departed
murmuring, withont any thanksgiving to God for her saffe deliverance but
rather tempting God, as most of us do, God be merciful unto us, but mark the
sequel.

A year or two after about the year 1580 which is not long since that it may
be forgoten, or fained as a lie, it pleased God to send his wife to be with
child again, and to be delivered of a monster, a male according to his
desire, having the shape of two Children, from the shoulders upward it had two
heads, having natural proportions, saving that the one ear of each head was
shapened like an horse ear, and the other like a swine. The body greater then
usual, ha^ing two feet, and two arms, proportionable, and was borne dead.

Lo here God his judgment sent upon him that murmured against his creator,
what would he have said if it had pleased God to have sent him this, when he
sent him the daughter? But he seeing this wonderful work, as it is reported,
accknowledged his offense, and cried to god for mercy: which God grant unto us
all, he that shed his blood upon the tree for us. Anen

A memorial of certain most notorious witches, and of their dealings
THere dwelled not so long since, but shat of some it may be remembered. In
Barking in Essex seven miles distraunt from London a Witch named mother
white-coate alias mother Aruold alias mother Glassenbury who committed many
execrable factes, as may appear.

There was dwelling in Barking one Thomas Clark a fisher who having angered this
witch, went forth in mackerel time to catch flounders, and he and two boys
sailing down almost as far as Lee where they cast out his nets, in the same
place was such an neddy that he could by no means woork, neither his nets come
in order, as they should do, but upon a sudden this Clarke cried out and said
that he saw mother Arnolde the witch walking in the water, and withal cried
the spirit entered into him and moved him to kill him self so that he took a
hatchet, a hook and a knife and threw them ouerbourd and after tied he
himself about the middle with a rope and so fell mad, so that the boys cried
unto other fishermen, who seeking to help him, there was a whirlepoole that had
almost cast them away so that none durst come near them, atlength a boat of
Green which perceiving the whirle poole threw a roape unto them and so plucked
him into his boat and so brought him home to Barking where he remained mad,
and lying still bound cried out of mother Arnold, and in the end dyed thus
tormented.

The said mother Arnold going in precession with other her neighbors in
gangweek and William Daulbie seeing her very lively came unawares behind her
and struck up her heels giving her a fall, and after thrust him self into the
prease of the people to the intent she might not know who did it, but she
arysing came immediately to him taking him by the hand thanked him for her fall,
and said she would be even with him.

They went to one Malles house a mile and a half from Barking where she
complained of the young man and after some victuals given her by the good wise
went homeward again.

Malles wise and Daulbie going to Barking together a good pace but could set no
eye of her, till they came by Barking, where she sat a praying under a tree,
and so passed by her, and so went home, where being not a quarter of an hour,
but Daulbie was so miserably vexed, that he sought to kill himself, thrust his
hedde into the swilling tub full of swines meat, where he had smothered him
self if help had not prevented it.

Then would he have run into an hot oven to the burning fire brands with
his teeth that he burned his mouth and lips very sore: when night came his
friends had him to bed, but his vexation growing wursie and wursse and he
feeling his bowels burn within him (as a pot seething on the fire) could not
endure the bed but lay for the most part all the night out of a window which
he so byted with his teeth that it may be perceived still, so long as the
window endures, and in these miserable cases continued. At last helped by an
other witch, was at the Asssses bound to appear at Burnt wood where he gave
evidence against mother Arnold in the hearing ofher own daughter, who after
came to him and said you have given shrode evidence against my mother but you
will be little better for it. And the next night following, rising to make
water was stricken in the neck that he fell sick and was feign to be brought
from Burnt wood to Rainford in a Cart, and so from thence home, being
pitiously vexed till he gave up the ghost.

WHen Master Clement Sisley Esquire had examined this witch and told her she
should go to prsson the wiech desired that she might not go to prison, for
the spirit would be revenged as it happened when he took paper in his hand to
make his warrant suddenly both his feet were taken from him by reason whereof,
he fell on a plain pauement of free stone in his own house at Tastburyhall
and struck out the huckle bone of his thigh out of the joint, so that for three
weeks space he could not go, nor stand along time after her erecution but
used styles for necessities sake.

But before he committed her to the Iaiole, he caused her to be searched by
honest wives who between her kercheif and her hat found wrapped in a linen
cloth swines dung, the herb cherwell dill, red fenell and saint John's woort,
the right hand or forefoote of a Moulewarp, which upon the opening so stanck
that no person could abide it.

After the finding of this she kneeled down upon her knees, desiring them if
she might not have the whole, yet to let her have some part thereof, but the
same by the commandment of the Justice was burned.

IF I should write at full the manifold mischeifes of this most detestable
practicioner, they would fill a great volume, as how she lamed Newman of
Stratforde a tanner, how she stole an handchercher from his wife and after
five days keeping it sent it back again by one of her neighbors* who
delivering it, fair, and white, to Newmans maid, presently there fell three
dropps of blood upon it one after another, and the maid amazed giving it to her
mistress it became all over red as blood most wonderful.

Also how she vexed one Harison being a Dutch man meeting him at Mile-end and
stroke him so lame that he was feign to hire a horse, to carry him home, and
bewitched him dumb, that he could not speak: and made his horse to shake, and
dance, for the space of one whole year.

Also how she threatened George Male at the Grayhound at Barking that for so
much as he thrust her and her daughter out of his doors and would give them
nothing, this witch threatened that she would set a Be in his tail the next
time. Yea and that a stinger said the daughter. So not long after he
determining to ride, put on a new pair of hose with a double rugge in them
prysed forty shillings, the first day of his riding he was so tickled in the
buttocke, that he scratched through all, both hose and lynings and such a hole
in his slesh, that it was not whole a m^neth after.

Many other mischeifs might be here numbered, but I mean not to stand long
upon these detestable actions only this to be noted, that being often
examined, when she was to answer suddenly there rose in her throat a
swelling as big as a man's fist, black as pitch, and then she seemed to have
the hitchcough, as though she would speak but could not, and in this case the
examiners would strike her on the breast but she required them not to do so:
And when she was executed such a stinking vapor issued forth of her mouth
that the behoulders were scantlye able to endure it. All which is most
wounderfull.

I might here noate the cruel devises of mother Bumby the witch of Rochester:
the tirannie of the witches of VVarboys. and many other, but for breuities sake
I omit the^, putting them in memory of one the most strange of all other,
committed in March 1592. near Harrow on the bill.

One Master Edling having a barn at the towns end, his servant Richard Bucte
going thither with a mastiue dog after him, suddenly espied an hair to
fiart before him and set his dog at her, but the mastiue refusing the chase
ran round about the fellow whyning pittiefully, but the fellow left not till he
saw the hare take in at one mother Atkins house, known to be a notorious witch.

The fellow perceiving this, blessed him self and bad auaunt witch, which
turned to his woe for a month after or there about he going to his masters
barn again met this mother Atkins and bad her good morrow, but the witch
would not answer.

The next day he went to the barn again and carried with him his dinner and
going to his victuals about noone he saw a monsterous black cat, among the
straw shaking it, whereat Richard rising up from whence he sat, heard avoice
commanding him to come away.

Come away thought he whether shall I come? the voice said again come away
and leave thy victuals behind thee and thy knife also: the fellow amazed went
with his victuals in his hand to the barn door and there was hoisted up
suddenly into the air and carried over many feilds by the way espying his
masters plough plowing but not able to call to them from thence he was
hoistedouer to Harrow over that side of the hill, whereon there is a great pond
of water through which was drawn most piteously that there he lost his hat
and then was violently rapt up the hill, and over the tops of the trees by
Harrow church but being haled further, he was taken into a place which was al
fire wherein was such lamentable crying and howling as all the damned ^oules had
been there, such stuicks, such darkness, such noise and such heat that it made
him so thristie that he knew not what to do: where upon he having but one penny
in his pursse remembered it, and looked round about for an alehouse where he
might spend it. But perceiving no such matters but hearing variety of voices
supposing some had spoken unto him he replied saying, here is no work for me
to do, it was reanswered again, coast away with him with this pro^iso, that
thou be seceret when then come home: whereupon Richard said my master will
a^ke me where I have been and with that his tongue was doubled in his mouth
that he could not speak, his legs burned, his arms and hands scorched, his
coat pinched of his back and throne into the fire and immediately was again
coasted over hedges and ditches seu^ed in mire and dirt scratched with thorns
and briars and finally to beddawbed, singed and diffigu^ed that it was most
lamentable to behold him.

Thus being brought again to his wouted place or dwelling he went to a ditch
to drink and after to a friend of his being now absent four days and as then
able to speak, his master not knowing him at the first, but afterward with
much a do his tongue being unfolded he told all the story as you have heard
and would not be quieted till he had drawn blood of mother Atkins since which
time he is amended.

Thus have you heard the mostnotorious fact that ever witchcraft hatched,
omitting many other, from all which our good God deliver us. Amen.

A MASS OF Murders.
IT is read that sometime Bithricus ruled in this land of England and was
poisoned by his own wife.

A widow dwelling without Aldgate in London in the days of King Henry the sixth
was murdered for her goods: the murdepassing by the place where he had
committed the fact, was killed with stones, sheep horns, kennell doung and
such like by the women of that parish that threw them at him: and this was the
reward of murder.

In the reign of King Henry the eight a stranger was hanged in chains for
staying his master one Capon in a garden for his harlot. Lo here the proffit
and good of harlots.

Much about that time was Margaret Dauie a maid servant boiled in Smithfeeld
for poisoning of three several houshoulders with whom she had dwelled.

In the 5 year of King Edward the sixth, Master Arden of Feuersham in Kent, was
murdered by the consent of his own wise for which fact she was burned at
Canterbury.

In the year 1554 a spaniard was hanged at Charing-crosse for killing of an
englishman.

In the year 1571. Rebecca Chambers, was burnt (...) of her husband.

A most shameful murder was committed about the twenty four of May the same
year by one Martin Bullock in this sort, Bullock had procured a Merchant named
Arthur Hall to come to the personage house of Saint Martins in Thredneedle
streat, in London, to buy plate of him: whereupon this Hall veiuing the mark of
the plate, said, this plate is none of yours master Bullock for it has Doctor
Gardners mark upon it, and I know it to be his: that is true said Bullock,
but he has appointed me to sell it for him. Now Bullock suspecting this
robberye thus to be detected, ran into a further condemnation both to God and
man: for whilst Arthur Hall was waying the plate, Bullock goes into the kitchen
and fetches a heavy washing betle wherewith he camming behind Hall, struck
him on the head that he feld him with the first stroke, and then stoooke him
again. and after took Halls own dagger and stickt him. with his knife cut
his throat, and after would have trussed him in a ^ans^ chest, but the same was
to short: Wheruppon he turned him down a pair of stares thinking to bury him
in the sellor but he being stiff and the sell^^ stares narrow and winding he
could not draw him down, wherefore took an hatchet and cut off his legs and
trussed him up with straw in a dryfat saying it was his apparel and books
and caused it to be carried to the water side and carried to Rye.

The year 1573 was one hanged in chains in Saint Georges ^eild near London
for murdering the Iaylour of Horsham ^n the said seild.

The 25 of March 1573 George Saunders a merchaunt was murdered most
shameefully by George Brown by the instigation of his own wife and other her
accomplices.

A youngman was hanged in chains at Miles end near London the seventeen of
February for murdering a man in a Garden.

In White Chaple parish near London in the year 1584 dwelled one Cornelius an
enteandishman a shoemaker, who had his wife lying sick some certain time, this
woman had a Daughter married to one Arnold a Cobbler, who retained into his
service a Dutch maid being his near kinswoman, and Arnolds wife had a son
also being a youth of reasonable years, who whilste the maid was in the
house, would often be familier with her, yet nothing suspected for any lewd
dealings betwixt them, till Cornelius his wife dyed, and the maid went to
dwell with Cornelius, whereupon: his youth get the maid with child, and was
partly seen doing the deed by a little boy the Cunstabies son of that
precinct, which told it to his fellow servants: who nothing regarding his
words said not any thing thereof, so that the maid being tall and of a
reasonable proportion went so long with child till the time of her labor
unsuspected, which time of travel happened even the self same day that her
mistress should be buried, at what time the household busied in winding the
dead corpse, this maid departing from the women, went to aback chamber in the
further part of the house and after seem small time, was delivered none being
near the place, but the forenamed boy who wrought in the room underneath.

When she was delivered, she endeavored to strangle it, by laying her hand upon
the mouth of it, but the Child being strong cried so that the boy in the
neither ro^^^e heardit, whereupon she took a knife and laying the child upon
the fiares cut the throat of it so deep, that a man might have laid seure
fingers in ye wou^d, and having thus ended her most unnatural fact, cast it
into the privy, and went about her business, without any sign or suspicion of
any such filthiness.

But the boy partly perceiving that it was the maids child, went privily to
one of the chei^ servant and told him what he had heard, and that party
told it afterward to one of the neighbors, whereupon the cry of the Child
came in question. and she to examination and search, where she confessed the
matter, and thereuppon the child was taken up and bad the law, and she
committed to prison, had judgment according to her defert and was executed at
Tibourne.

But this one thing is to be noted that being demanded of the wives who gave
her that vunaturall mind and mischeiuous help, so to kill the Child,
answered that the devil was with her and helped her to dispatch it in that
manner. Thus much have I thought good to note at large, forasmuch as it is more
usual then any other and is the more odious, inasmuch as it is engendered of
two most horrible actions: First, of whoredom or adultery which is wursse:
secondly, of murder. Let this then be a looking glass to all maids wherein to
vei^ the reward of silthines least they in^^rre the like danger and penalty.

I Flosse of wealth affray thy mind,
If sickness dyre oppress thy heart:
If loss of friends alyed by kind,
If all or more tormet with smart,
Yet help in time only succor these,
Before cold death does clame his fees.
But if that mae den head be wrackt:
Then may dens name and fame are crack.
And cannot be restorde again:
But does her stock with blemish stain.
No he^th, no wealth, no foe, ne friend,
Can breach of may denhed amend.
Beware then may des I you exhort,
Jove, live and dye in honest sort.
A most notorious mnrther committed by an Inkeepers wife in Lincolneshyre upon
a trauailer, a matter worthy to be known of all Trauallers.
AN honest man travailing upon business into Lincolneshyre, not being able to
reach so far as he purposed the day waxing toward an end, he himself
wearyed, and having some charge of money, ryding through Carthrope not far
distant from Newort upon Trent understanding of lodging in the Town, at the
house of one Tompson a man of honest reputation, went ^^ether, requesting the
good wife of the house that he might have lodging, and in secret sort opened to
her what store of money he had, and requested a chamber where his charge might
be safe, the wife very willing g^aunted and seemed so careful that she would
that night lodge none that might be suspected persons: Supper prepared and
ended this trau^ler going to bed laid, his money under his beds head, having
locked the door and the key sticking in the inside.

The hostess and the rest of her Famely gone to bed, for ye goodman of the
house was rydden from home about certain business, and knew nothing of this,
the hostess incensed by the devil could not rest for casting in her mind how
to get the trauallers money wherefore when she thought every one was in their
dead sleep, she went to the Chamber door where the traualler lodged, and
having a slight to open the lock by a little hole in the door she went in
and found the man's knife, (see here the subtletie of satan) to direct her to
his knife as the instrument, which she took out of the sheathe, and laying
her hand upon his mouth that he might not cry out cut his throat with his
^wne knife, and being thus mortally wounded, he began to struggle with her but
all in vai^^ for she soon b^reaued him of his best joy in this world and
took away the money.

Now to cover this her abominable act she fastened the man's hand to the knife,
which she left sticking in his throat, and so de parted. Her smock bloodded in
the action (other clothes she had not upon her when she committed the fact)
she put off and put on a clean one, hyding the other, least by that means
she might come in suspicion by her servants: for none of them were made privy
what money the traualler had.

The morning coming, she with her household arose, and nothing was said till
the day drawing well on, she said to her maids that she marvelled that the
trauailer lay so long, having a journey to go, and thereupon, bad one of her
maids go up to see if he were styring, w^o knocking at the door and hearing
no answer, at last thrust open the door by force and went in, finding this
most lamentable spectacle. The maid amazed ran down, and told her mistress,
who after a most vi^^ fashion counterfaited swooning, but was comforted by
neighbors.

A guest is pannel^, verdict given, that he him self was guilty of his own
death and theruppon to persecute the maimed corpse yei further if it might be he
was buried out of christian man's ^uryal and so was it for three or four
months hushed up.

But what is it that God in his secret judgment will not disclose though it
seem never so impossible? about three or fours months after, this Inkeepers
wife carried out her blouded smock to a poor woman in the town desiring her
towash it saying that she had sticked a pig and her maids had no leisure to
wash it, the woman took it: behold a wounder, murder cannot be hid the
more the woman we shed it thee more fresher began the blood to look and the
cloth the more blacker, which so amazed the poor womman and troubled her in
mind so that she could not be quiet till she had told the Counstable, who
immagining what after proved truth, took other of his neighbors and went to
the Inkeepers wife who after some examinations confessed the matter, and had
the law at Lincoln and was executed for the same.

A wounderfull example it is and worthy to be noted and remembered as well of
Inkeepers to keep sure lecks without counterfeit keys, as also to take heed
what servants they keep to be of honest reputation.

Not far from Lincoln at a town called Bourne were three brethren whereof
one was a country mercer who had married a very honest woman who had of hec
own a pretty piece of land, so dispose as she thought good during her life,
and after to come to her husband if he suruiued.

Her husband this mercer being an unthrift would have had his wire to have
s^^lde this land, which no ways she would consent unto, being surely
persuaded that being gone, to have naught left to help her self withal. This
her husband not preuayling, brake his mind to his other two brethren, whereof
one was a butcher who counseled him t deal extremely, with her who not
prevailing, they met all three at the mercers house and their conconcluded to
murder her, threatening the maid of the house is kill her also if she bewrayed
them wheruppon they forced her to hold the candle while they did the deed,
for the butcher after his butcher like trade qu^kly dispatched her of her life.
But the maid going abroad revealed the matter whereupon they were apprehended,
and had the law accordingly.

Wonder it is to see to what fond affections and most wicked and abominable
practices we are lead to for want of grace: some to murder for wealth as in
this example, and also the example upon Tower hill where the sealer killd the
widow for her goods, Nottingham also can testify it where one kiled his own
mother for her lands, and many other, some upon harbrannes as Glouer who killed
Seirgeant Grace, the Cook in Saint John's streat, that killed his wife and
infinite others.

I might here set before your eyes what mischeifes have followlowed to masters
by over hard vsages of their apprentices and servants a matter to be looked
unto for some are brought up to idle to proudely, to wantouly with to much
excess both of meat and apparel which brings them to lewdnes* to dycing* to
ryoting, to whoredom to imbeasling of their masters goods and suck like,
others on the contrary part want both apparel and sustenance and besides and
most unreasonable set to taskes to woorking upon Sundays and holy days
forbidden, beaten and corrected out of measure and most vnchristan like used,
whereby they are forced for want of further rememdie to run away or to filth
and steal to buy victualles orels to run to a further mischeife amongst
which I might remember the Powderers servant that sometime dwelt in Finchlane.
Also George Collins sometimes Apprentice with Richard Haiton tailor in
Fanchurch who being badly used his master sought to kill him which he
performed being unable to do such a fact, and was for the same executed, but
because the seand many others and yet fresher in memory and writing then that
they may yet be forgotten.

It shall be needless to report unto you the most heinous murder committed
upon the Chaundlar near broken Wharff in London the matter being so fresh in
memory, the male actor still hanging as a notable example to our eyes, a grief
to the godly a terror to the wicked and reprobate: which God grant for our
Lord Jesus sake.

AMEN
FINIS.

