LAWS AND Orders of War, established for the good conduct of the service in
Jreland.
ROBERT Earl of Essex and Ewe, Earl Marshall of England, Vicount Hereforde
and Bourgcher, Lord Ferrers of Chartley, L. Bourgcher and Louayn, and her
Majesty's Lieutenant and Governor general of the kingdom of Ireland, To all
Officers of the Army, and all Coronels, Captains, Officers and Soldiers of
Companies, and all her Majesty's Subjects and others, whom these Laws and
Orders ensuing respectively and severally shall concern.
FOrasmuch as no good service can be performed, or war well managed where
Military discipline is not observed; And Military discipline cannot be kept
where the Rules or chief parts thereof be not certainly set down and
generally known: I have with the advice of the Counsel of War set down
these Laws and Orders following, and do now publish them under my hand, that
all persons in this Army or Kingdom within my charge, may take knowledge of
the said Laws, and the penalties set down for the breakers of them.

First, Since we owe our highest duty and greatest allegiance to him from
whom all power and authority flows as from the first fountain, and must
receive our successes of him that is Lord of Hosts: I do straightly charge
and command all Commanders and officers of the Army to see that Almighty GOD
be duly served, that Sermons, Morning and Evening prayer be diligently
frequented, and that those that do often and wilfully absent themselves, be
duly punished.

2 Let no man speak impiously and maliciously against the holy and blessed
TRINITY, or any of the three persons, that is to say, God the Father, God the
Son, and God the holy Ghost, or against the known Articles of the Christian
faith, upon pain of death.

3 Let no man blaspheme Gods holy Name, or use unlawful oaths or execrations,
or commit any irreligious act to the derogation of Gods honor, upon pain of
loss of his pay, imprisonment, and such further punishment as a Marshall Court
shall think his offense deserves.

4 No man shall use any traitorous words against her Majesty's person or Royal
authority upon pain of death.

5 No man whether he be Soldier or other, English or Irish, shall have
conference or intelligence with any enemy or Rebel, that is in open action
against her Majesty, or harbor or receive any such within the Camp, or any
Town, Fort, Castle, or Garrison, or shall send or procure to be sent any
victual, munition or other relief to any enemy or Rebel in action, upon pain
of death: Except, such as shall be auowed and warranted by me (or those that
shall command the Army in mine absence) to speak, confer, or have
intelligence, or commerce with the enemy or Rebels.

6 No man shall run to the enemy or Rebel that is in action, or depart the
Army without license upon pain of death.

7 No man shall commit any murder, or kill any person or draw blood of any, or
draw any sword in private quarrel, with intent to offer violence within the
Camp or Garrison, upon pain of death.

8 No man shall ravish or force any woman, upon pain of death. And adulteries
or fornications shall be punished by imprisonment, banishment from the Army, or
such other penalty as by the Marshals Court shall be thought meet.

9 No man shall steal or take by force any treasure, victual or munition of
her Majesty's, or take by force, or steal from any person, any money, arms,
apparel, or other goods being above the value of 12. pence, upon pain of
death.

10 No man shall deliver up any Town, Castle, Fort or Skonse without warrant,
or depart from any Straight or passage which he is commanded to make good, or
take Passeport of the Enemy or any Rebel in action, for any Troops, or make
any ignominious composition with the Enemy or Rebel in action, upon pain of
death.

11 No man shall throw away his arms, or abandon his Ensign, Cornet, or
Gwidon, or fly away in any Battle or Skirmish, upon pain of death.

12 No man being set Sentinel shall sleep, or appointed by the Officer of the
Guard, or any superior Officer that has authority to place him, shall depart
and forsake that place without warrant, upon pain of death.

13 No man shall offer any violence, or contemptuously disobey his Commander,
or do any act, or speak any words which are like to breed any mutiny in
the Army, or impeach the obeying of the Generals or principal Officers
directions upon pain of death.

14 No man shall outrage, or do violence to any that comes to bring victual
to the Army upon pain of death.

15 No man that caries Arms or pretends to be a Soldier, shall remain three
days in the Army after it is on foot, except he be enrolled in some Company,
upon pain of death.

16 No Soldier of the Army shall do violence to the person, or steal, or
violently take, or wilfully spoil the goods of any Irish good subject, upon
pain of death.

17 No Soldier shall burn any house, or lodging, or burn or wilfully spoil
any Corn, Ship, or Boat, or Carriage, or other thing that may serve for the
provision of the Army, without he be commanded so to do by the General, or
some principal Officer of the Army, upon pain of death.

18 No man shall depart a mile out of the Army or Camp, except he be
commanded, or lawfully warranted so to do, upon pain of death.

19 No Soldier shall break his order to follow any rowte or chase, or to seek
any pray or spoil, except he be commanded by such as have authority, nor
further then he is commanded, upon pain of death.

20 No man that has passeport for any limited time, shall exceed the time
limited for his absence, except he can prove he was stayed by the hand of God,
upon pain of death.

21 No Prouider, Keeper, or Officer of her Majesty's victuals or munitions,
shall embesell any part thereof, or give any false account to the General,
with a purpose to deceive her Majesty, or to hinder the service upon pain of
death.

22 No man shall wilfully or through gross negligence fail of coming to the
Rendezuous assigned to him by the General, or other principal Officer, that
shall command the Army upon pain of death.

23 No Soldier in musters shall answer for an other, or take two pays, or
muster in a false name, to defraude her Majesty upon pain of death.

24 No Captain shall through corruption, wilfulness or gross negligence,
suffer his Company to grow weak, or practice to defraude her Majesty in his
muster, upon pain of imprisonment, loss of his place, and ignominious
banishment from the Army.

25 No Captain of the Army, or Officer shall give passeport to any, or
dismiss any Soldier once enrolled, without warrant from the General, or
other Officer whom he shall authorize, upon pain of loss of his place and
imprisonment.

26 No Soldier shall depart from his Captain, or servant from his Master,
without his license, though he serve still in the Army, upon pain of a
months imprisonment, and loss of a months wages.

27 No Soldier shall play away, give away, pawn or sell away his Arms,
without he be dismissed and have leave of his Captain so to do, upon pain of
imprisonment.

28 All Captains shall be diligent in training their Companies, and shall be
careful in governing them well, and in providing for them, and also shall see
in all Services that they do the duties of Soldiers, as they will hope for
favor and advancement, or escape ignominious displacing from their charges.

29 All Captains or other Officers, that for the time shall have Command of
Companies, shall see their Companies do orderly Quarter as they are appointed,
and to entrench or fortify as much of the Quarter as they are appointed, and
as they are commanded, upon pain of loss of their places.

30 No man shall spoil or take the goods of any man that dies or is killed in
Service, upon pain of restoring the double value: But the goods of such as die
in the Army, if they make any Will by Writing or Word, shall be disposed
according to the Will, if they make no Will, it shall be distributed to the
hurt, sick, and poor of the Company whereof the Soldier was, or shall go
to the Hospital of the Army.

31 No man shall enter or go out of the Army, but by ordinary ways, upon
pain of imprisonment.

32 No man shall give any disgraceful words, or commit any act to the
disgrace of any person in this Army, or any part thereof, upon pain of
imprisonment, public disarming, and banishment from the Army, as men for ever
disabled to carry Arms. And as I forbid all men under my rule to renew any
old quarrels, or to begin any new, so I do acquit and discharge all men that
shall have quarrel offered to them, or chalenges made to them of any disgrace,
or opinion of any disadvantage, since they do but do the duties of Soldiers
which ought to subject themselves to Martial discipline, and they that provoke
them shall be proceeded withal as breakers of all good Discipline, and enemies to
the good successes of the Service.

33 And because drunkenness is the mother of many other vices and disorders in
Armies, every Soldier or Officer that shall be found drunk, shall be
committed to prison for the first offense: And if he fall into it the second
time, being a private Soldier, he shall besides his imprisonment forfeit two
months pay: if he be an Officer, he shall loose his place: The third time
shall have such far greater punishment as a Martials Court shall set down.

34 Every private man and Soldier upon pain of imprisonment, shall keep
silence when the Army is to take lodging, or when it is marching or
imbatteling, so as the Officers may be heard, and the commandments executed.

35 No Soldier serving on Foot, shall carry any Boy, nor no Woman shall be
suffered to follow the Army.

36 All Captains, Officers and Soldiers shall do their endeavors to detect,
apprehend and bring to punishment all offenders, and shall assist the Officers
of the Army for that purpose, as they will answer their slacknesse, and be
censured at a Marshals Court.

37 All other faults, disorders and offenses that are not mentioned in these
Articles shall be punished according to the general Customs and Laws of
Wars, and therefore I command all men to look to their charge: and him that
has no charge to look to his own carriage, and to keep himself within
bands of duty: for the discipline of War shall be strictly kept, and the
Laws thereof severely executed.


