A SERMON AGAINST SELF Policy, Preached at White Ha^^^n ^^nt. 1621.

BY ISAAC BAPGRAVE: Doctor in Divinity; Chaplayne to the Prince His Highness,
and Pastor of St MARGARETS Church in WESTMINSTER.



LONDON Printed by Nicholas Oaks, for John Bartlett, and John Spencer. 1624.

A SERMON AGAINST Selfe-Policy: Preached at WHITE HALL.
OSE 10. Verse 1. Israel is an empty Vine, he brings fruit to himself.
IT is the misery of man that since his first fall, no estate can free him from
misery, being once touched with the venom of the tempter, he turns all things
into poison which he touches, the very apple of the Tree of Life, is made the
ministration of death: all Gods appoyntments for his felicity prove the means
of his misery. To demonstate this in all mankind, would make too long a
Syllogism, see it here in one for all, Gods chosen inheritance the sons of
Israel; who though they had for many years bin the treasury of Gods
blessings, and that the whole Series of the old Testament be little other then
the sacred Register of his free mercies toward them: yet now especially in the
time of Ose, under the reign of Jeroboam they were in the height of their
prosperity. Now were their garners laden with Corn, their bottles swelling
with wine, their presses flowing with oil, their Coffers burdned with the
abundance of silver and gold; and yet in this fullness of all temporal
blessings, they prove empty of all spiritual grace, they power out their wine
before Astaroth, and their oil before Baall, they abuse all these favors of
their Maker, to the setting up of Idolatry, or the satisfying of their own
Luxury. Israel is an empty Vine, he brings, etc.

The Text in the matter of it is an expression of one main sin in Israel;
and this matter is Discovered in a most remarkable form.

First, in a similitude or Allegory: In which we have the exemplar or
pattern, a Vine: the Exemplatum or Parallel Israel, Israel is a Vine.
Secondly, this Allegory contains a Riddle, and a Resolution. The Riddle set
down by way of Paradoxe, composed of two Contradictory Positions,

Israel is an Empty Vine. Fruitful Vine.

The Resolution is unfolded in the last Word, Sibi, to himself; This Reads
the Ridle, and reconciles the Contradiction, for therefore Israel is an empty
Vine, because he brings, etc.

Such is the monstrous nature of sin, that direct simple notions are not able
to express it. It must be helped out with oblique Similitudes and Allegories,
what shall I liken to thee Oh Daughter of Jerusalem: Thy breach is great like
the Sea, who can heal thee, Lam. 2. 3. Thy mother is like a Vine in the blood,
Ezech. 39. Nay, such is the Prodigious form of sin, that similies and
allegories cannot yet enough describe it, unless they beheightned by Ridles
and Paradoxes. Israel is an empty Vine, Israel is a fruitful Vine. Lo this
only have I found (says the wise man) Quod facit Deus hominem rectum, That
God made man upright; but the praeuaricating quality of sin has perplexed
him with many Ridles and Paradoxes, just such as this in my text. Which in that
regard if it may add any life to your sacred attentions, (as admiration is the
mother of attention, says Aristotle.) I may presume to style it, Textus
admirabilis, an admirable text, Metap^. ^. 1.
for so Tully from the Stoics, and the Schoolmen from Tully, call all
Paradoxes, propositiones admirabiles. And that justly too, for every Paradoxe
consists of two contradictory positions: Now the nature of contradictions being
such, that if one be false another must needs be true, if one true, another
must needs be false, if by discourse we may reconcile these opposites, and
prove them both true, it may well be called an admirable Text. And sin with
all the Paradoxiall qualities, and ridling intricacy thereof is not so subtle,
but he that searches the heart and the reins, can discern and discover it,
for the last word of the Text, resolves the Riddle, and makes that which is
strange and admirable, familiar and easy to us For therefore Israel was an
empty Vine, not because she brought forth fruit, but because she brought
forth, etc.

This sacred Paradoxe, I have chosen to present to your gracious attentions, as
a subject neither unfit for wise, nor great ones. Divine Plato, thought it no
Oil misspent, to discourse of that vulgar paradoxe, V^r, (...) 5 d. rep.
non vir percussit auem, non auem, in arbore, non arbore, An Eunuch struck a
Flinder-mouse in an Elder Tree. Maria the Queen of Castile commended to the
Interpretation of Tostatus 5 Divine Paradoxes; concerning the person of Christ
and his blessed Mother. The first was, There was a Lion who was seen and not
seen, heard and not heard, taken and not taken, known and not known This and
the three following he interpreted of Christ our Savior, who to dissolve the
paradoxe of sin* was made not only Scandalum but Paradoxon, Not only a
stumbling block, but a Paradoxe to all humane reason, he suffered, and
suffered not, he dyed and dyed not, he was buried, and not buried, he rose
again, and rose not again, says (...) Sar. ^.
Saint Ambrose. As he was man God dyed, as he was God, man was (...) c 1^ ^.
raised to life, says S. Austin, All these are admirable yet true
propositions, so many paralels to the Text, which as the sin of Israel, had now
out grown the Common nature of sin. So the Holy Ghost in no Common form of
style blazons the sin of Israel, by the pattern of a monstrous paradoxicall
Vine, an empty, yet a fruitful, a fruitful yet an empty Vine.

Now because such parabolicall transumptions, are to be expounded to the sense
not to the letter, and are then best expounded, when all the parts of the
parallel agree with the pattern. Israel being the Center upon which all the
lines of similitude are proportionably to fall, we will first, as it were in
Puncto, set down what may be here meant by Israel, Israel is, etc.

We know that after the flesh there were Ismaelites as well as Israelits, the
sons of Agar, as well as the sons of Sarah. But the sons of the Bond
woman were cast out, Saint Paul only the free borne I^raelites became Gods
proper Inheritance. That happiness which Jacob foresaw in his dream, when
he beheld the Angels ascending, and descending from Heaven, while GOD stood
upon the Top of the Ladder, was but a shadow of that happiness, which the
Israelits for a long time enjoyed. GOD their indulgent Father by the
Ministration of the Angels, and the Creatures, pouring down the plenty of all
both Temporal and Spiritual Blessings upon them. For to omit their
protections, their victories, their possessions in the land of Canaan, what
higher privilege then that which was the proper right of the I^raelits, that
to them should pertain the Adoption, and the Glory, and the Covenants, the
giving of the Law* the service of God and the promises, of whom are the
Fathers, and of whom after the flesh Christ came, who is GOD over all blessed
for ever Amen, Romans 9. verse. 3. Israel according to the flesh thus protected,
thus privileged, This Israel so filled with Fruit, becomes an Empty Vine. So
sounds the letter of the Text, but is there no spirit in this letter? Are the
sons of Abraham, only the seed of Abraham? No certainly, they are not all
Israel which are of Israel? Rom 9. 6. It is mirabile magnum, says Austi^, yet
as true as wonderful. Many which are not the sons of Israel, are Israel; and
many which are the sons of Israel, are not Israel. In the flesh the Ismalites
pertayne to Agar, the Israelites to Sara, in the spirit the Jews pertain to
Agar, w^ Christians to Sara: had they retained the faith and the works of
Abraham, they had still continued the ions of Abraha, but now they have lost
their progeny, and we have found it. For of Israel came the Jews, of them came
Mary, of Mary Christ, in Christ we all live and move, and have our being, and
therefore all we are the sons of Israel: Not by nature but by faith, not in
the letter but the Spirit, not by the Law but by grace, not carnal, but
spiritual Israel.

Would you see this yet clearer, look in the glass of this similitude, Israel
is a Vine, There we shall find Tropum in Tropo, Israel under the Vine, and
our selves under Israel. There we shall see that almost none of GODS peculiar
mercies to Israel, but are become proper to us. I pray GOD we may not likewise
partake of their sins and punishments.

It is the Law of an Allegory, says Aristotle, that it have a true proportion
of similitude; and if the words be not consonant to the matter, Error fit non
metaphora, it is rather an Imposture then an Allegory, says the School. To
serueigh this Parable by this Rule.

A man says Aristotle, is a Tree turned upward, having his head for the root,
the rest of his Lymmes for the branches. But among all Trees the Holy Spirit
does most often present the selected Israel of GOD His Church in the likeness
of a Vine, as the fittest emblem both of his bounty to them, and their duty to
him. First, says Calvin, the Vine best In lo^
speaks his bounty to his Church, because he gives us not only bread, ad
vitam, but wine ad Hilaritatem, whereby we live cheerfully, for wine glads the
heart of man, Gal. 10. 4. Never was there Vine so planted, so bound, so spread,
so pruned, so fenced by the providence of GOD. Judge ye Oh inhabitants of
Jerusalem, betwixt me and my Vineyard, what could I have done more then I have
done to it. Esaias 5. 4. Israel is a Vine, Ergo fratres forte vinea fuit domus
Israel and nos non sumus vinea? Has Israel only tasted of the bounty of Psalm.
80. 8 10.
God, and are not we also the Vine of the Lord of Hosts, has he not likewise
brought our vine out of Idolatrous Egypt, has h^^ not cast out the He ^hen,
an^ planted i^, has he not caused it to take deep (...), so that it fills
the Land. Nay w^ile Rebellious I^ra^l are rooted ^ut of the Vineyard, having no
King, nor Priest, nor Law, being become Rebels to Heaven, and Vagabonds on
earth, are not we in their room grafted into the stock Christ Jesus? has he
not given us a most indulgent nursing Father to this prosperous Vine? Has he
not planted us in the Gospel, pruned us by the Law, rooted us in faith, bound
us up in love, solaced us with peace, cherisht us with plenty, fenced us with
his providence by rare and unheard of protections* But let your hearts rejoice
in the memory of it* Never any (...)* any Nation, no not Israel it (...) has
been blessed with more arguments of Gods bounty, I pray GOD they may not one day
prove so many accusers of the neglect of our Dut^.

As the Vine cannot flourish without Gods bounty, so secondly, he will not
suffer it to flourish without our duty: He expects f^uite from his Vine. As the
Vine excells not other Trees in show or stature but in Fruit, so it is not the
glorious show of Temporal things, but the saving fruits of the Spirit, with
which God would have his Vine flourish. But of this anon more properly.

In the mean time, while ye behold this Vine of Israel thus dressed and blessed
by the hand of God: me thinks like the Fig Tree which Jesus saw, it should
move your appetite to come and seek for the Fruit. But alas! when Christ came
to it he found nothing but leaves: just so proves this Vine here; Vitis
frondosa, as Jerome, vitis vacua, as Tremelius, and our Translation a leaffy,
unprofitable, empty Vine.

The comparison of Israel to a Vine, had been rather honorable then odious,
for a good Vine of all other Trees brings forth the best, and the most fruit,
but see now this Allegory grows into a Paradoxe, this Vine into a Monster. An
empty, yet a fruitful, a fruitful yet an empty vine.

Now because a Paradoxe is neither true nor false till it be expounded. We
must know that all sin is (...), a direct Paradoxe, crossing the Common
sentence both of the Law of GOD and Reason, and among all the Paradoxes of
sin: Hypocrisy is the most exact; an Hypocrite and a Paradoxe have both the
same definition. Qui aliud verbis, aliud sensu ostendunt: They are both one
thing in show, and another in deed. And of all Hypocrites two of the most
notable are descryed in this paradoxe, The first, Israel is an Empty Vine.
Here a pure Platonicall Hypocrite, Faith without works, God in his mouth, the
Devil in his actions, They say and do not. Matthew. 23. The second, I^rael
brings forth, etc. Here Is a Popish ^hrasonicall Hypocrite, works without
Faith, false charity in their Works, self vayneglory in their thoughts, They
do all their works to be seen of M^n. Matthew 23.

First of the first. When God the Husband man went down to see how the Vine
Flourisht, Canticl. 6. 11. Ecce vitis vacua, Behold, he found Israel an Empty
Vine. Empty, says Jerome; mispending that fat moisture which it should have
converted into Grapes, upon the vain ambition of Flowers, and Leaves:
mis-employing those eminent graces which GOD had given them above other
Nations, upon their own lust, and vayneglory. The Adoption, the Law, the
promises, their peace, their plenty, with all these, they were full and fat
Full of blessing, but empty of thanksgiving. I^s^r^^ waxed fat and kicked, he
forsook GOD which made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock of his salvation,
Deuter. 23. 15. They gloried to sit in Moses Chair, and interpret the Law, but
they said and did not, Matthew. 32. 3. They made long prayers, but it was to
devour widows houses, verse. 14. They paid tyth of mint, anise and cummin,
but omitted Judgment, mercy and faith, the weightier matters of the Law, verse.
23. In a word, this Vine bare leaves and flowers enough, but no fruit, no
grapes; it was an empty Vine.

And I would this Prophecy had ended only in Israel; but this is seconded with
another of Saint Paul, that falls near our times. In the last perilous days,
men shall be lovers of themselves, having a ^^rme of godliness, but denying
the power thereof, 2. Tim. 3. Why here is a true empty Vine, the shadow of a
Christian, the pure Hypocrite of our Church, Moses Chair, long prayers, the
tything of mint and cummin; all form but no power of godliness; all leaves no
fruit, all faith, no works, all profession, no demonstration. Saint Basil in
his time found out the progenitors of these Bastard plants. Vidi ego orantes,
iejunantes, praeteritorum paenitentia suspirantes, omne denique fine sumptu
pietatem ostendentes, egentibus vero ne obolum quidem praebentes. Our times
will well Translate him. We may see many among us, men demure in their looks,
thin in their apparel, long in their prayers, deep in their sighs, most
devout in all cheap duties of a Christian, but in the Works of Charity, to
be devout in them it is mere Popery.

CHRIST himself may hunger, but the Fig Tree will yield no Figs. Those
little ones of Christ the poor may thirst, but this Vine gives no Grapes, it
is an empty Vine.

The Church is a Theater, upon which some act their own parts, being always
the same that they seem, and these are all good men, but bad Actors. Others on
the contrary do merely personate, seeming perpetually what they are not, and
these are all bad m^n, but good Actors: notorious Hypocrites, like Monkies, who
imitate humane actions, but remain Monkies still. Like complementall
Courtiers, all courtesy in promise, no honesty in performance. They have the
voice of Jacob, and the hands of Esau. Like the Apples of Sodom, they are fair
to the sight, but if you touch them, they turn to fume and ashes. They are
such eminent Histrionicall Mimickes, that in Greek all Stage Players are
called by their names (...) Hypocrites. They form a Plato^call kind of
Divinity, an abstracted sanctity, that diuides Faith from Charity. In a word,
they are nothing else, but a mere paradoxe in our Church and Commonwealth.
Vir non vir, arbor no^ arbor: A Vine and no Vine, a Christian and no Christian,
a mere empty Vine. And as their way, so is their end, their whole Course; as
when a Hungry man Dreams, and behold he eats, but when he awakes he is
faint, and his soul is Empty, Esaias 29. 8.

It is the Fruit that denominates the Tree, thy Faith makes thee a true
Christian, thy works make thee known to be a true Christian. As in a
Logician, so in a Christian give me Demonstration, thou must Demonstrate thy
Faith by thy Works. There was no Honey used in GODS Sacrifice, Leuiticu^ the
2. Chap. and the ^1. verse. Says Theodoret, because it was made of Leaves and
Flowers only, and not of Fruit.

Herodotus tells us that the gods went to chose their Trees Jupiter chose the
Oak, because it was strong; Neptune the Cedar, because it was long; but Pallas
the Vine, because it was fruitful.

When our GOD, the GOD of all power and Wisdom, calls Israel a Vine, he
calls for fruit, and if we look upon the letter of the Text, he can but
call and have, for see the next words, this empty vine brings forth fruit.

What an empty, and yet a fruitful Vine? This will be worth the examining,
says the Hebrew paraphrase.

Every Riddle or Paradoxe consists of Contradictions, and it is the rule of
Contraries, that Circa idem praedicantur, they both belong to the same subject,
empty or fruitful, here is the same Israel, the same Hypocrite still. There is
two kinds of hypocrisy, says Nauarrus, in words and in works. Faith without
works, and works without faith, hypocrisy is the ground of all. Our Savior
in the 23. of Matthew, as he found some all-sayers and no doers, so others
that would out-doe all faith. This empty Vine will bring forth fructum
aceruatum, as the Chalde bears it, whole heaps of fruit. This was and is the
Jews Tenet, that they were able to fulfill the whole Law, and so to work out
their own salvation. And to this end they spare no labor, they compass Sea
and Land to make a Proselyte. v. 15. they pinch at no cost, they build the
Tombs of the Prophets, v. 29. with the Israelites in this Verse, they build
many Altars, goodly Images. They do as much to seem, as others to be good.
Yet all this in the end proves nothing but a morning cloud, and as the early
dew it goes away, Ose 6. for all this fruit, the Verse 4.
Vine is but an empty vine.

But do these bastard-plants grow only in Jury? are there no such Jews to be
found among Christians? Yes certainly, there be those that can outdoe the
Jews, do more than Gods law requires, they can supererrogate, as much as will
save other men as well as themselves. As for their cost, it is they that
sumptuously garnish the sepulchers of the righteous. Old Rome it self was
never so glorious with rich shrines and Altars. And for their labor, it is they
that compass Sea and Land to make a Proselyte, that sail with the four
winds, vltra Garamantas and Indos: Southward to call home Heretics, Westward
to convert Pagans, and when they have converted them, they make them twofold
more the children of Hell than they themselves, Matthew 23. 15. compassing the
whole world, they disgrace and scandal the Gospel of Christ, throughout the
whole world, dum exigunt sumptus lucrosae egestatis, aut simulatae pretium
sanctitatis, while under the veyle of religion, they bring forth fruit to
themselves.

The all-searching Spirit of GOD, makes all good Christians see and know, that
all is not gold that glisters, that all this fair show of works, is but to be
seen of men, Matt. 23. all but so many mists to delude the spiritual eyes of
the people, and to catch them as cobwebs catch flies. These painted sepulchers
so fair without, within are full of dead men's bones, a generation of Serpents
and vipers, who make use of the works of Christ, only to betray the cause of
Christ. As the former are so nice in the point of Faith, that they are afraid
S. James comes too near Popery, so these so jealous in the point of works,
that S. Paul himself has run the censure of being too much a Lutheran.
Works without faith are dead works, says Paul. And faith without works is a
dead faith, says James. And the Heathen could teach us that dead wine was
(...) unfit to be offered to the God of life. Medium tenuere beati. Most happy
is the temper of our Church, who as in the rest, so in this, is medium
Contradictionis, partaking no more of either extreme, then conduces to perfect
verity. Words are women, deeds are men, say the Italians, we marry them both
together. Prayers and alms, profession and demonstration, Saint Paul's faith,
and Saint James works, we join them both together; and this conjunction is
like the sacred union of the houses of York and Lancaster: so long as these
were divided, our fruitful vine became empty, and no sooner were they united,
but instantly our empty vine became fruitful. The blessed dew of Heaven fall
plentifully upon that royal Plant, in whom both those stocks continue united,
that under the gracious shadow of him and his, our Vine may flourish to all
eternity. In the mean time, let us endeavor with words and works, with heart
and hand, to take these Foxes that destroy the vine, these contradictory
combining hypocrites, who, though their heads are asunder like Samsons Foxes,
with malicious firebrarnds they are tied by the tails, they take several
paths, but both meet in the end. Here Is one word yet in the Text, sibi, to
himself. This makes the Paradoxe to be Orthodoxe, it reads the Riddle, and
discouers their hypocrisy. Israel empty, or Israel fruitful, they are
neither for God nor his Church, for the King nor the Kingdom. Israel is all
for himself, and Therefore Israel is an empty, etc.

Here Is all contradiction, all admiration taken away. The vine of Israel did not
want fruit in the kind thereof, they enjoyed the blessing of peace, that with
which the Vine is so much delighted. Suidas.
Their Land was filled with plenty, with the multiplication of Wine, Oil,
Silver, Gold, Ose 2. But all this abundance of fruit does but serve to bring
forth the abundance of sin: for as they had the fruit, so now as if they had
had the rain and the dew in their own power, they contemn God that gave it
them, they turn all the love of GOD into self-love, all their devotion and
Religion ends in sibi. Even God and his blessings are made but the instruments
of their base lusts, they presently fall to building of Altars; to making of
Images. They bring forth, etc.

So sweet and so secure is that dependence which we have upon God the first
of being, that when we fall from him, we fall to nothing, or to that which is
worse than nothing, a trust in our selves. Verily all things are vanity alone
without him who is virtue alone, no man's thoughts or actions good, whose end is
himself, and not the chief Good. But give me leave with this Prophet to
strike at the root of all evil self-love and covetousness. For either I am
deceived, or else this one word sibi, reads the riddle, and discouers the
mystery of the whole Worlds iniquity.

Verum illud verbum est vulgo quod dici s^let, Omnes sibi ma^le melius esse
quam alteri. Plautas.


In the corruption of nature, we are all borne with this contractiue quality
of self-love and interest. It Was that which made Plato banish meum and M^r. 2.
tuum out of his Commonwealth. And Aristotle could tell us that only (...),
that the wicked man does all things (...): he makes himself the end of all
his actions, whereas the good man does all things (...) not for his own but
virtues sake, and therefore is rather (...) then (...), a lover of goodness
then of himself. To love virtue it self, not for virtue, but thy self, is
the stain of virtue. If we love goodness for profits sake, we may be crafty
men, but never good men, says Tully: we may be as 1. De L^g.
these men in my Text; perfect Hypocrites, but never good Christians. Such a one
as these may mask under the name of Christ, and plead very passionately for
faith or for* works; but the truth is, he has no faith but in his own
proiects: and esteems no works but such as work his own commodity. Oh this
wicked sibi, this selfedoctrine, the mother of Hypocrisy, and the nurse of
Apostacy! There are some Court-Doctors who teach, that the finis
Architectonicus of a Courtier, is this sibi, neither the glory of God, nor the
honor of his master, but his fortune, his own commodity: it is true, he may
cover his own proiects under either of these, but he should serve neither of
them, no farther then he serves himself. My noble Auditors, I must hope
better things of you, for you have bin instructed in the knowledge of the
Spirit of life. Far be such Amnous and Absaloms from the house 2 Samuel 13. 10,
28.
of our David. Ye have the high calling of Christians, that which must command
and actuate the calling of a Courtier, that which teaches thee to deny thy
self, while thou followest Christ, and not in compliment alone, but indeed to
lay down thy goods, nay thy life for the service of the King. But it were some
comfort, if this selfe-accusation lay upon the Court alone. There, are some, as
Posse^ine and Ribadeyneir^ that make it fall as heavily upon our Church and
State, as if our ministry aimed no farther then our own commodity, and our
Religion had no other ambition, but to bring forth fruit to our selves. But if
any such Foxes as these be crept into our Vineyard, the fearful curse of
Hypocrisy light upon them to their amendment or confusion. But as for the
general aim of our Church, I appeal to this Auditory, if ever we aimed at
other ends than the glory of GOD, the peace of His Church, and the safety of
our Sovereign: if with true exultation of spirit, we do not daily rejoice in
the form of our civil government, that after the pattern of Gods universal
providence, we live in the best of all forms of policy, a Monarchy, and in
that piously and peaceably under a most religious King. In point of Doctrine,
we have the pure word of God for our Judge, in matter of discipline, Gods
immediate Deputy for our Commander, under this vnparalel'd government has
our Vine flourished, to the irreconcilable hatred of those our accusers, and
under the same may it still gain vigor and strength, donec

Rumpatur quis quis rumpitur inuidia. But if we would have past the Alps for
our Divinity, we might have learned, not from hellish Machiauel alone, for
private interest to do things against faith, charity, and Religion, but even
those our very accusers, Posseuine and Ribadeynira in their Antimachiuels,
would have taught us; that it is a point of conscience to equivocate in a point
of State, and that as against the sting of Vipers we may use Triacle; which is
made of Vipers flesh: so it is Religion, against dissemblers to use
dissimulation. And thus Boterus, that common brander of our English and
Scottish Nations, and for that happily so much esteemed among the Romanists, he
has it among his Capi di Prudenza for a resolute Principle, that l. Interesse
e quel lo che vince Ogni partito, that all friendship, leagues, affinity, all
bands of communion whatsoever, are to be measured by this Sibi, by the line of
our own Interest and commodity. And what is this, but an absolute forsaking of
GOD, to sacrifice in the house of Mammon? This was an excellent Rule for Judas,
who rather than suffer with his Master, to provide for himself, he must betray
his Master. These had been choice Tutors for Lodwicke the Eleventh, King of
France, who desired his Son Charles the Eighth might learn no more Latin than
this, Nescit regnare, qui nescit simulare. What a rare Disciple in this cursed
school was Eccbolius, Iulians Governor, who with the Emperor Constantius was
a Christian? and because his Master was so, an Arian, with false Julian who
succeeded, he turned Gentill, and with pious Iouinian who followed, he returned
Christian, and begged pardon at the Church-doore. Here was one of the Devils
precious Agents of those, qui non Deum, sed purpuram colunt, says Socrates,
who are so wise that they know not God, 1 Cor. 1. Oh the powerful effects of
this hellish doctrine, the sinful omnipotency of this wicked sibi! Hence it
is, that a good Christian is now no more esteemed but a great Politician, the
rule of State has banished the rule of Charity, every Mechanicke is become a
Machiauill, Gods Word is forbidden, and Tacitus is become their Bible, more
Commenters upon him than upon Saint Paul. Eight Hierol^mo da Ro^^^e.
thousand Maxims of State in one Volume, and all these squared by the
master-rule of selfe-Interest. This is become the maine Canon of all their holy
Orders: for though the Jesuits be the best Capreoli; the most winding
branches of this incroching Vine* yet as the Heavens, though all carried about
by their first mouer the Pope, yet every Planet, every peculiar Order have
their proper motions for their own Interest and perfection. This is that makes
Infants Cardines Ecclesiae, the pillars of the Church. This is that makes the
Head of the Church, the Pope. I have their published Conclaues to auow it, that
Interest of gain, of affection, of revenge, of faction, are the 4. prime
Electors in the Popedom. Nay the top of Iniquity, this Sibi, is able to make
gods: for so Jeroboam, lest the peoples hearts should turn against him, sets
up one Calfe at Dan, and another at Bethauen, and cries to the people, Behold
thy gods, O Israel, 1 Kin. 12. Here was worldly policy the ground of foul
Idolatry; for verily desire of gain, devised the image, Wisdom Verse 16.
14. This made the Israelites here build so many goodly Altars, and Images. And
thus our friend Boterus advises all Catholic Princes, that no means is so
prompt to enrich and people a Country, as to get the fame of some holy
Relic, some miraculous Shrine or Altar. Such as Loretta in Italy, Saint
Michael in France, Guadalupo, Montserrata, and Compostella, in Spain. Here Is
excellent doctrine for the Devils Court. They must play with the poor peoples
Conscience, to favor their affairs; and GOD the highest Object, with Religion
the chiefest act of man, must serve to no other end, but to usher in wordly
policy and ambition. Notorious Antichristian Mountebankes, who have Christ in
their foreheads; and Mammon in their hearts. The sons of the Sorcerers, and
the seed of falsehood, Esa 57. Such as have Religion for the murder of Kings,
and the Interest of the Church, for the dethroning of Gods Anointed. Oh let not
this extraction of hypocrites, these Dogs and Foxes, come near the Court of
David, nor harbor in the Vine of Judah. These bastard-plants, that make no use
of Religion but for their own ends, they may have the name of a Vine, and
bear leaves like it, but are indeed pura labrusca, in stead of grapes, they
bring forth wild grapes, even those goordes of the savage Vine that poisoned
the broth, 4. King. 4. They Verse 40.
are worse than the Vine of Sodom, and the fields of Gomorrah, their grapes are
grapes of Gall, and their clusters bitter, Deuteronomy. 32. One word in the ear of
Verse 33
these glorious worldlings, and I have done. Let not him that is deceived,
trust in vanity: for vanity shall be his recompense. When the evil hour
approaches, wherein thou must enter into the chambers of death, now when thy
soul body, and polluted soul are ready to be distracted, when thy trembling
pu^^e shall strike the Alarm to death, when thy spirits shall faint, thy
nerves fail, thy bones anguish, thy limbs sink under thee, and thy heart be
forced to resign the power of life to him that gave it; now shall thy
conscience turn thy inside outward, and with horror thou shall plainly see
the fruits of thy former proiects, that they are all miserable vanity. Now
shall thou shake off thy unripe grapes as the Vine, for the Congregation of
Hypocrites shall be dessolate, Job 15. And at the length, when the son of man
with his sharp sickle shall gather together the clusters of the Vine of the
earth, then shall he cast them into the great Wine Press of the wrath of God,
and the Press shall be trodden, and blood shall come out thereof, even to the
Horses bridles, Re^. 14. Even thus shall it be with all those, who abuse the
name of God, to bring forth fruit etc.

Thus shall it be with the empty Vine of Israel. But though Israel play the
Harlot, yet let not Judah offend. The very Vine it self does teach us better
things. Video vites, quantum velis prem^s, stati^ ad superna conari, says
Tertullian. Behold the Vine, press it as much as thou will, yet naturally it
climbes upward, and seems ambitious of Heaven: And will thou, O Christian, the
proper motion of whose soul is an ascension to God that made it, will thou lie
groueling in the Serpents way, feeding upon thine own earthly proiects, the
corrupt dregs of the flesh? Let Pagans pant after the world, and the Jews
still hang in the expectation of their temporal prosperity, shall we
Christians make the world our end, when Christ our Savior has pronounced the
poor so blessed? See, the good Vine brings not forth fruit for himself, but
for us. Sic vos non vobis. Let this likewise be our care to bring forth fruit
to God, and not to our selves. God, who has given the means, has not l^ft
thee destitute of ends, whereon thou art to employ the fruits of his grace. The
first and chief is the maintenance of true Religion: the second subordinate to
this end, is the good of thy Commonwealth: the third, as the band of all
Societies, is charity to our Neighbors, that in the pride and prime of our
Vine, we forget not the afflictions of our brethren abroad; but freely, with
heart and hand assist them: for, alas, if we suffer the deuourer to destroy
them, then in the time of thy need, who shall pray for thee, or who shall have
pity upon thee, O Jerusalem, Ier. 15? In a word, let this Trinity of religious
objects, be the ends of all thy pious endeavors, and then the sin of Israel
shall light only upon the head of Israel, but all the fruits of thy labors
shall reflect upon thy self, and thine own eternal happiness. Say ye to
the Righteous, that it shall be well with them, for they shall eat the fruit of
their labors, Esa 3. The Vine shall give her fruit, the ground* shall give her
increase* the Heavens shall give their dew, and the people shall possess the
Land, Zach. 8. Their happiness, who only aimed at themselves, shall end in
themselves: but as in no Tree nature lasts longer than the Vine; the Vine of
the Lord of Hosts shall flourish to al eternity. In the path of that eternal
happiness, conduct us, O Shepherd of Israel, thou that leadest Joseph as a
Flock, thou that dwell between the Cherubims, shine forth. Look down, O
God of Hosts, from Heaven, behold and visit our Vine, the Vine which thine own
right hand has planted, and the branch which thou have made so strong for thy
self: Let not the Bore of the wood waste it, nor the Beast of the field
devour it. Keep thou still the Keeper thereof: upon the head of him and his,
let his Crown for ever flourish: so shall Sion be glad, and Jerusalem rejoice
in thy Salvation; Ever attributing to thee, O FATHER, with the blessed So^^e,
and holy Spirit, all power, praise, etc.

FINIS.

