An inuectyue against dronkennes.

Prouer. 20. A Wine makes a man scornful, and dronkennes makes a man
unquiet, he that delyteth therein, shall never be wise.

Iohel. 1. A Awake up you dronkards, weep and mourn you wine suppers, because
of your sweet wine: for it shall be taken out of your mouth.

I dread it much lest that such as be sobre should scornefully deryde me for
my discourse and inuaying against them ye be dronken, The proemy.
as light and labor lost and tryfled time in vain for they will say, that
such castigacion / as to sobre me^ it needs not so unto dronkerdes it bootethe
not: which wallowynge invayne can another hear any man's voice, understand
his fryendlye admonytio^, nor feleth ye poygnant sharpenes of any rebuke. For
in like case, as a dead corpse can with no vehemente pryckynge, be made to feel:
no more can ye mind of a dronkard be stirred up with any admonisshements. And
albeit it ware to be wisshed, yt men's labor should not be lost in chastenynge
of the^ that are so wedded to their vice and wilfullnes that all hope of
amendment utterly is excluded, yet that not with standing, for as much as some
there be which otherwhiles and betwixt times, as it were awaking out of ye deep
sleep of that so great an euy^ (...) them selves and declare the^ selves no
less, but to be in case to be helped in yt they do acknowledge some time their
own disease: I will eue^ for their sakes, now as briefly as I can, declare what
outrage and enormitye is in this foul vice contained: for as there is nothing
moore beautyfull, Contra^ (...)
the^ a sobre man ^est and ready (...) hyng in what so ever time and place you
will have him: so is there no monster more huglye then a dronkerde whose hands
and fete, as Terence says, can another of the^ do their duty And first of al,
I can much praise the wisdom of the Greeks, The ety mologie of the word.
who in the propriety of their language do manyfestly express how great a
vertewe and how exellente is sobriety for to thente^t they might declare, yt
the mind of man can not contynewe in his dignytie with out sobriety, they have
called this virtue by a good ly name, SOPHROSYNE, which signyfyeth nothing else
but the preservation of the mind that in how much man does excel all
unreasonable Creatures in worthynesse of mind so much should this virtue be
esteemed above all other excellent and albeit, that certain Philosophers of the
sect of zeno hold opinion, that he that has one vertew, wants not the
resydew: yet nevertheless, it is often seen by experyence, yt he has had
fortitude which has not kept the laws o^ Almytie. But without the
fou^datio^ of sobriety, was never man yet, endued with other virtues. For in
like case, as that eye only can judge best the diuersytie of colors, like.
which is clear without any blemysh of evil humor or other infection: so can
that mind discern in every thing, what is to be esc^^^^d, and what is to be
followed, which ye temperancie of meat and drink, keep the clear from any
burden This unto wise men is mother of all good Counsels. This puts in
execution, all witty devises. This makes common well these to floryshe. And
with out this the chiefeste things decay. So that even hereof is it
manyfeste, how great a mischief in a co^monne wealth, is a dronken citesyn,
Declaration.
which as he is clean without all virtue and honesty: so ca^ he another in
doubtful matters give any counsel him self, nor follow that shall be given
him of others, as oone that another can remember things paste, another
understand yt which is present, another fore ^ee things to come: finally, who
is nothing else, but as the Poet says of idle persons, Telluris mutile
pondus, an unprofitable burden of ye earth. Furthermore, It feyned person.
painte in your mind with the Pensyll of your thought, such a man's life
from euenyng till it be far forth nyghtes, There is cry enge, there is
drynekyng, there is playeng there is singinge, there is talkyng of bawdry, There
is hod lynge, there is Chiding there is fighryng and braw lynge, there is
breaking of pottes there is vieng and vomytyng, ye shame it is to hear. Then
are some taken with sleep so heavy as it ware even death: some ar trubled with
spirits and other things most terrible in their dremes. The^ ensues ye just
punishment of dronke^nes, great hedache and debilitatio^ of all ye members. On
ye morrow, ache and wine notte as yet digested, keeps him in bed till none. But
and if he have any vrgente business to do, he goes there about as it were a
man worn and half dead. And who shall ever do any thing purposly in a
matter of weighti importance, wherevntoo he commethe with so evil a will, so
faint, and weak in his lymmes? What thing can he dispatche being him self
laden? What thing strongly can a weak man do? What labor can he endure
which with drynkyng over night, was not only weakened and weryed: but also
clean over thrown? Must he touch any thing? His hands have the paulsy.
Must he go any whyther, his legs stacker, Comparison.
so he reeleth, and makes inde^tures. Does the matter require eloquence His
tongue stamereth, his voice will not let him speak, and to be short, amongeste
all kind of diseses (where unto the miserable co^dytion of man is subject,
there is none at all to be found, that so whollye take the man from all use of
him self and ouerthrowethe both body and mind as does this vice of
dronkennes. For all other diseses, what tim they do assail the body or any
part thereof yet dare they not attempt, to pearce the mind, ye immortal part
of man.

For some have ye cra^^^ and some the gout, some hot diseses and some cold:
yet have they styh the use of reason in her chief perfection. But ye self same
thing which we have common and all ^one with God, wherbye, both we are, and so
be ryghtlye called, men* wherein (...), we differ from brute bestes, dro^kennes
both can and is also accustomablye wont to confound and bring to naught.
Falling sycknes
The falling sycknes is undoubtedly a cruel and a dreadefull disease, wherein
many ar wont often times to destroy them selves, whyleste they beat their own
members, tear their heir, and wallow the^ selves in ye mire. But no man is
able with words to express, how much more beastly and detestable,
dronkennes is: for whom so ever the falling sickness takes, it leaves him by
and by, and restores unto him the use of his mind again. But the dronkerd
after that he has long and much been tormoyled with dronkenship, and has
both done and suffered many things full shamefully (unless he ware by and by as
often times it chaunseth utterly extinguisshed therein) and has leyne two or
three days like a dead man, scarsly then comes again to himself. The other
man's disease is less evil for this cause, that nothing is committed
through his fault, but through the vehemency of his disease. He repents that
he has said and done: but this manne has a double evil, ye he can lay the
blame upon none other, and that such things do more grieve me^ which chance
unto them with out deserte. Again, amongeste the diseases of the mind, there is
none so hurtful, Things annexed.
nor where upon grows and ensues so much wickedness to be found. For once,
what thing is so abhomynable yt dronkerdes dare not do? Consequentes
Nothing ought amongeste men to be more reuerentli observed, then faith and
counsel keapyng: but thou may commytte nothing in creadite to a dronckarde:
for he blows it abroad and can keep no counsel, be it never so reverent a
thing, never so holy, never so much need to be kept secret, but if he be
provoked unto such folly by any dronken companion of his, The cause.
he bewrays and betrayeth the high dignity of his mind: for what thing is
it that he will not dyscloose which is so ready and so greadye at the foolysshe
request and affection of oothers, to lose that thing that he has in this
world dearest. Effects.
And to whom is it unknown that dronkennes is an ouerflowyng founteyn and
welsprynge of all myschiefes, of contention, strife and debate, woundyng of
men, rauysshynge of women, murdre and aduoutry. It is euydently known, that
the great fight of the Lapithes (as Horace makethe mention) arose only upon
wine, and we now at this dai have to many examples thereof: and did not
Tharquinius king of Romans, after that he had in his cups, goo and rauyshe
that good woman Lucrece, and lost thereby his kingdom? Who knows not, yt great
Alexander king of Macedonia, in all other things a prince most excellent and
a famous conqueror, in his dronkennes would sley his most dear and famyliar
friends, and so lost the love of his Lords thereby, that in fine, he was
poisoned. A brief peroration.
But men may impute to me great folly, which go about with the shortness
of speech to comprise anne endless matter, whose myschief stretches so
far, that in case I had an hundred wits with as many tongues, and a mouth
of brass or iron, yet ware I no thing able to utter the euyls that arise of
dronkennes.

Imprinted at Ippiswiche by me Ihon Oswen.

Cum priuilegio ad Imprimendum solum.


