A pretty and Merry new Interlude: called the Disobedient Child.

Compiled by Thomas Ingelend late Student in Cambridge.

Imprinted at London in Fletestrete, beneath the Conduit by Thomas Colwell.

First Edition.

The Players names.
The Prologue speaker. The Bycheman. The B^chemans son. The ManCooke. The
young woman. The Serving man. The Priest. The Devil. The Perorator.
The Prologue speaker. Now forasmuch as in these latter days,
Throughout the whole world in every land
Vice does increase, and Virtue decays
Iniquity having the upper hand.
We therefore intend, good gentle Audience,
A pretty short Interlude, to play at this present
Desiring your leave and quiet scisence
To show the same, as is mete and expedient.
The sum whereof, matter and argument,
In two or three verses, briefly to declare,
Since that it is for an honest intent,
I will somewhat bestow my care.
In the City of London, there was a rich man
Who loving his son most tenderlye,
Moved him earnestly now and than,
That he would give his mind to study.
Saying that by knowledge, science, and learning
Is at the last gotten a pleasant life:
But throng he the want, and lack of this thing
Is purchased ponertie, sorrow, and strife.
His Son notwithstanding, this gentle monition
As one that was clean deuoyde of grace,
Did turn to a mock, and open derysion
Most wickedly with an bushame fast face.
In so much that contrary to his fathers will
Unto a young woman he did consent,
Whereby of lust he might have his fill,
And married the same in contynents.
Not long after that, the child began
To feel his wyffes great frowardenes,
And called himself unhappy man,
O^^ressed with pains and heauynes.
Who before that time, did live blessedly,
Whilst he was under his fathers wynge
But now being weddyd, mourning and myserye
Did him torment without ending,
But now it is time for me to be going,
And hence to depart for a certain space,
For I do hear the Rich man coming
With the wanton boy into this place.

Here the Prologue speaker goes out, and in comes the Rich man and his
son. The Son. LAther I beseech you father, show me the way
What thing I were best to take in hand,
Whereby this short life so spend I may
That all gryefe and trouble, I might withstand.

The Father. What is the meaning (my child) I the pray
This question to be maunde of me?
For that thing to so, I am glad always
Which should not be grievous to the.

The Son. Marye but therefore, of you counsel I take,
Seeing now my Chyldehood, I am clean past,
That unto me ye plainly do make,
What to a yongman is best for to taste.

The Father. I see nothing truly my Son so mete
And to prove so profitable for the
As unto the Schole to move thy feet,
With studious Laddes, there for to be.

The Son. What the Scholeen aye father, nay,
Go to the Schole is not the best way,

The father. Say what thou list, for I can not invent
A way more co^modyous in my Judgment.

The Son. It is well known how that ye have loved
Me heretofore at all times most tenderlye
But now (me think) ye have plainly showed
Certain tokens of hatred
For if I should go to my Book after your advise
Which have spent my Chyldehood so pleasauntlye,
I may then seem driven out of Paradyse
To take pain and woe, gryefe and myserye.
All things I had rather sustain and abide
The busynes of the Schole ones cast aside,
Therefore though ye cry till ye reave asunder
I will not meddle with such a matter.

The Father. Why can not I thee thus much persuade
For that in my mind is the best trade.

The Son. When all is said and all is done,
Concerning all things both more and less
Yet like to the Schole none under the Son
Brings to children so much heaviness.

The Father. What though it be paynfull, what thought it be greues,
For so be all things at the first learning,
Yet meruaylous pleasure it brings unto us
As a reward for such pains taking.
Wherefore come of and be of good cheer
And go to thy Book without any fear
For a man without knowledge (as I have read)
May well be compared to one that is dead.

The Son. No more of the Schole, no more of the Book
That woeful work is not for my purpose
For upon those Books I may not look,
If so I did, my labor I should lose.

The Father. Why than to me thy fansye express
That the Schole matters to the are counted werynesse

The Son. Even as to a great man, wealthy and rich
Service and bondage is a hard thing
So to a Boy both dayntie and nyce
Learning and study is greatly displeasynge.

The father. What my Child, displeasynge I pray the?
That makes a man live so happyly.

The Son. Yea by my truth, such kind of wisdom
Is to my heart I tell you, very lothesome.

The Father. What trial thereof have thou taken
That the Scole of thee is so ill bespoken?

The Son. What trial thereof would ye feign know?
Nothing more easy then this to show:
At other boys hands, I have it learned,
And that of those truly most of all other
Which for a certain time have remained
In the house and prison of a Scholemayster

The Father. I dare well say that there is no myserye
But rather Joy, pastyme, and pleasure
Always with Scholars hapynge company,
No life to this, I the wall assure.

The Son. It is not true Father which you do say,
The contrary thereof is proved always,
For as the Brute goes by many a one,
Their tender bodies both night and day
Are whypped and scourged, and beat like a stone
That from top to toe, the sayn is away.

The Father. Is there not (say they) for them in this case,
Given other while for pardone some place?

The Son. None truly none, but that alas, alas
Diseases among them do grow apase.
For out of their back and side does floe,
Of very goore blood merueylous abundance,
And yet for all that is not suffered to go,
Till death be almost seen in their countinaunce.
Should I be content then thither to run,
Where the blood from my breeche thus should spuane,
So long as my wits shall be mine own,
The Scholehouse for me shall stand alone.

The Father. But I am sure that this kind of facion
Is not showed to children of honest condition.

The Son. Of troth with these Masters is no dyfference
For alyke toward all, is their wrath and violence.

The Father. Son in this point, thou art quyte deceived
And without doubt falsely persuaded
For it is not to be judged that any Scholemayster,
Is of so great fiersenes and crueltye
And of young Infantes so sore a tormenter
That the breath should be about to leave the body.

The Son. Father this thing I could not have believed
But of late days I did behold
In honest man's son hereby buried
Which through many strypes was dead and cold.

The Father. Perauenture the Child of some disease did labor
Which was the cause of his Sepulture.

The Son. With no disease surely, was he disquieted,
As unto me it was then reported.

The Father. If that with no such thing he were infected
What was the cause that he departed.

The Son. Men say, that of this man, his bloody master
Who like a Lion most commonly frowned,
Being hanged up by the heels together*
Was bealy and buttocke greuouslye whipped.
And last of all (which to speak I trembled)
That his head to the wall he had often crusshed.

The Father. Thus to think Son, thou art beguyled verilye,
And I would wysshe the to suppose the contrary.
And not for such tales my counsel to forsake
Which only do covet thee learned to make.

The Son. If Demesthenes and Tully were present truly
They could not prynt it within my head h^pely.

The Father. Yet by thy fathers will and intercession,
Thou shall be content that thing to pardon.

The Son. Command what ye list, that only excepted,
And I will by ready your mind to fulfill,
But where as I should to the Schole have resorted
My hand to the Palmer submyttynge still.
I will not obey ye theri^ to be plain,
Though with a thousand strokes I be slain.

The Father. Woe is me my Son, woe is me,
This heavy and doleful day to see.

The Son. I grant in deed, I am your Son,
But you my Father shall not be,
If that ye myll cast me into that prison,
Where torn in pieces ye might me see.

The Father. Where I might see the torn and rent?
O Lord I could not such a deed invent.

The Son. Nay by the Mass, I hold ye, a grote
Those cruel tyrauntes cut not my throat:
Better it were my self did fleye,
Then they with the Rod my flesh should fleye.
Well I would we did this talk omyt,
For it is lothesome to me every whyt.

The Father. What trade then (I pray the) shall I deuyse
Whereof thy lyuinge at length may arise?
Will thou follow Warfare, and a Soldier be pointed,
And so among Troyans and Romans be nombred,

The Son. See ye not masters my Fathers advise
Haur ye the like at any time hard?
To will me thereto he is not wise
If my years and strength he did regard,
Ye speak worse and worse, what soever ye say
This manner of life is not a good way.
For no kind of office can me please,
Which is subject to wounds and strokes always.

The Father. Somewhat to do, it is mete and conueniet,
Will thou then give thy dylygent endenoure
To let thy youth unhonestly be spent
And do as poor knaves, which Iares do scour?
For I do not see that any good Art
Or else any honest Science, or occupacion
Thou will be content to have a part
After thy fathers mind and exhortacion.

The Son. Ha, ha, ha, a labor in very deed,
God send him that life which stands in need.
There be many fathers that children have
And yet not make the worst of them a ^aue,
Might not you of your self be well a shamed
Which would have your son thither constrained?

The Father. I would not have the driven to that succoure,
Yet for because the Scriptures declare,
That he should not ear, which will not labor
Some work to do it must be thy ear.

The Son. Father, it is but a folly with you to strive
But yet notwithstanding I hope to thryue

The Father. That this thine intent may take good success
I pray God heartily of his goodness.

The Son. Well, well, shall I in few words rehearse,
What thing does most my Conscience perse?

The Father. Therewith I am Son very well contented.

The Son. Yea but I think that ye will not be pleased.

The Father. In deed peradventure it may so chance.

The Son. Nay but I pray ye without any perchance,
Shall not my request turn to your greuannce.

The Father. If it be just and lawful, which thou do require,

The Son. Both just and lawful have ye no fear.

The Father. Now therefore ask, what is thy peticion?


The Son. Lo this it is without further Dilacion,
For so much as all yongmen for this my Beauty,
As the Moon, the stars, I do far excel,
Therefore out of m^de, with all speed posy^ly,
To have a wife (me think) would do well,
For now I am ^onge, lively, and iustie,
And welcome besides to all men's company.

The Father. Good Lord, good Lord, what do I here?


The Son. Is this your beginning to perform my desire.


The Father. It is my child, what means thy dotynge?
Why do thou covet thy own un doing?

The Son. I know not in the world how to do the thing
That to his stomach, may be delyghtynge.

The Father. Why fooly she I deot, thou go about a wife
Which is a burden and yoke all thy life.

The Son. Admyt she shall as a burden with me remain,
Yet ^oyll I take one, if your good will I attain.

The Father. Son it shall not be thus by my counsel.


The Son. I trust ye will not me otherwise compel.


The Father. If thou were as wise, as I have judged the
Thou would in this case be ruled by me.

The Son. To follow the contrary I can not be turned
My hatte thereon is styflly fixed.

The Father. What I say, about thine own destruction?


The Son. No, no, but about mine own salvation:
For if I be helped, If were by the Mass,
It is only Marriage that brynges it to pass.
It is not the Schole, it is not the Book,
It is not Science or Occupacion,
It is not to be a ^arbour or Cook
Wherein is now set my consolacion.
And since it is thus, be father content
For to marye a wife, I am full bent.

The Father. Well if thou wylt not my Son, be ruled
But needs will follow thine own foolysshenes,
Take heed hereafter if thou be troubled
At me thou never seek redress.
For I am certain thou can not abide
Any pain at all, gryefe, or vexacion.
Thy Chyldhood with me so easily did slide
Full of all pastyme and delectacyon.
And if thou would follow the Book and learning,
And with thy self also, take a wise way:
Then thou may get a gentleman's lynynge
And with many other bear a great swaye.
Besides this I would in time to come
After my power, and small havylytie,
Help the and further the, as my wisdom,
Should me most counsel for thy Commodytie.
And such a wife I would prepare for the
As should be virtuous, wise and honest,
And give the with her after my degree,
Whereby thou might always live in test.

The Son. I cannot, I tell ye again, so much of my life
Consume at my Book without a wife.

The Father. I perceive therefore. I have done to well
And showed over much favor to the,
That now against me thou do rebel
And for thine own furtheraunce wylt not agree.
Wherefore of my goods thou gettest not a penny
Nor any succoure else at my hands
For such a child is most unworthy
To have any part of his fathers lands.

The Son. I do not esteem father your goods or lands
Or any part of all your treasure,
For I judge it enough to be out of bands
And from this day forward to take my pleasure.

The Father. Well, if it shall chance the thy folly to repent
As thou art like within short space,
Think none but thy self worthy to be shent,
Lettynge my council to take no place.

The Son. As touching that matter, I will no man blame
Now farewell father, most heartily for the same.

The Father. Farewell my Son, depart in Gods name.


The Son. Rome I say rome, let me be gone
My father if he list, shall tarry alone.

Here the Son goes out and the Rich man taryeth behind alone. The Father.
Now at the last I do my self consider
How great grief it is and heaviness,
To every man, that is a Father.
To suffer his child to follow wantonness,
If I might live a hundred years longer
And should have sons and daughters many
Yet for this Boys sake, I will not suffer,
One of them all at home with me to tarry,
They should not be kept thus under my wynge
And have all that which they desire,
For why it is but their only undoing
And after the Proverb, we put oil to the fire.
Wherefore we Parents must have a regard,
Our Children in time for to subdue
Or else we shall have them ever untoward,
Yea, spytefull, disdaynfull, naught, and untrue.
And let us them chruste always to the Schole
Whereby at their Books they may be kept under:
And so we shall shortly their courage cool,
And bring them to honesty, virtue and Nurture.
But alas now a days (the more is the pytye)
Science and learning is so little regarded,
That none of us all does muse or study
To see our children well taught and instructed.
We deck them, we trym them with gorgious array
We pampre and feed them, and keep them so gaye
That in the end of all this, they be out foes.
We basse them, kiss them, we look round about
We merualle and wonder to see them so leave
We ever anon do invent and seek out,
To make them go tricksie, gallaunt, and clean.
Which is nothing else, but the very provoking
To all vnthriftynes, vice, and Iniquity,
It pucteth them up, it is an allutynge
Their fathers and mothers at length to defye.
Which thing mine own Son does plainly declare
Whom I always intierly have loved,
He was so my Joy, he was so my care
That now of the same I am despised.
And now he is hence from me departed,
He has no delyght with me to dwell,
He is not merye until he be married,
He has of knauetye took such a smell.
But yet seeing that he is my Son,
He does me constrayne ^ytterly to weep,
I am not (me think) well, till I be gone
For this place I can no le^ger keep.

Here the Rich man goes out and the two Cooks comes in First the one and
then the other. The Mancooke. NAke have Blaunche Blabbe it out, and come a way
For we have ynought to do all this whole day,
Why Blaunche blabbe it out, will thou not come
And know what busynes there is to be done?
If thou may be set with the pot at thy nose
Thou carest not how other matters goes,
Come a way I did the, and tarry no longer
To trust to thy help, I am much the better.

The Maydecooke. What a Murryn I say, what a noise do thou make
I think that thou be not well in the wyrtes
I never hard man on this sort to take
With such angry words, and hasty fyttes.

Mancooke. Why do thou remember, what is to be bought
For the great Brydale against to morrow?
The market must be in every place sought
For all kind of meats, God guye the sorrow.

Maydecooke. What ba^nyng? what cursynge? Longtong is with the
I made as much speed, as I could possyblye,
I wys thou might have tarried for me
Until in all points I had been redye,
I have for thee looked full often heretofore,
And yet for all that said never the more.

Mancooke. Well for this ones, I am with thee content
So that hereafter thou make more have,
Or else I tell thee, thou will it repent,
To loyter so long, till the Market be past.
For there must be bought Byefe, Veale, and Mution,
And that even such as is good and fat
With Pigge, Geese, Conyes and Capon,
How say thou Blaunch blabbe it out unto that?

Maydecooke. I can not tell Lontonge, what I should say
Of such good cheer I am so glad:
That if I would not eat all that day
My bealy to fill, I were very made.

Mancooke. There must be also Fesaunte and Swa^^e
There must be Heronse^er, Partic^e and Quayle,
And therefore I must do, what I can,
That of none of all these the Gente^^an fail.
I da^e say he looks for many things more,
To be prepared against to worn,
Wherefore I say, hence let us go,
My feet do stand upon a thorn.

Maydecooke. Nay good Long tongue, I pray the ones again
To here yet of m^ mind, a word or twain.

Mancooke. Come of them dispa^che, and speak it quicklye
For what thing it is, thou causest me t^^y.

Maydecooke. Of whence is this Gentelman, yt to morrow is matried
Where does his father and his mother dwell?
A boue forty miles be has trauayled
As yester night his Servant did tell.

Mancooke. In very deed, he commes a great way,
With my Master he may not long abide,
It has cost him so much on costly array,
That Money out of his purse apase does slide.
They say that his friends be rich and wealthy
And in the City of London have their dwelling,
But yet of them all he has no penny,
To spends and bestow here at his wedding.
And if it be true that his Servant did say
He has utterly lost his fryndes good will
Because he would not their counsel ^haye,
And in his ^vone Country tarry still.
As for this woman, which he shall marye
At Sainet Albones always, has spent her life
I think she be a shrew, I tell thee plainly,
And full of debate, malice and strife.

Maydecooke. Though I never saw this woman before
Whi^he hither with him this Gentelman bo^ught,
Yet nevertheless I have tokens in store,
To judge of a woman that is froward and naught.
The typ of her nose, is as sharp as mine
Her tongue and her tune is very shryll
I warraunt her, she commes of an vng^acius ^yn,
And loneth to much her pleasure and will,
What though she be now so neat and so nyce,
And speaks as gentle as ever I heard:
Yet yongmen which be both wyttie and wise,
Such looks, and such words, should not regard.

Mancooke. Blaunch blabbe it out, thou say very true
I think thou beginnest at length to preach
This thing to me is strange and new,
To hear such a fool yongmen to teach.

Maydecooke. A fool mine own Longtong, why calst thou me fool
Though now in the kytchyn I waste the day,
Yet in times paste I went to School,
And of my laten Prymer I took assaye,

Mancooke. Masters this woman did take such assaye,
And then in those days so applied her book,
That one word thereof, she carried not away,
But then of a Scholar was made a Cook.
I dare say she knows not, how her Primer began,
Which of her master she learned than.

Maydecooke. I trow it began with Domine labia aperies.

Mancooke. What did it begin with butterde peeas?

Maydecooke. I tell the again, with Domine labia aperies,
If now to hear, it be thine ease.

Mancooke. How, how, with my Madaine lay in the peeas?
I think thou art mad with Domine labia aperies.

Mancooke. Yea mary, I judged it went such ways,
It began with Dor^the lay up the keys.

Maydecooke. Nay then God night, I perceive by this gear,
That none is so deaf, as who will not hear,
I spoke as plainly, as I could devise,
Yet me understand, thou can in no wise.

Mancooke. Why yet ones again, and I will better lysten
And look upon the, how thy lyppes do open.

Maydecooke. Well mark then, and harken ones for all:
Or else he are it again thou never shall,
My Book I say, began with Domine labia aperies.

Mancooke. Fie, fie, how slow am I of understanding*
Was it all this while, Domine labia aperies?
Belyke I have lost my sense of hearing,
With broylynge and burning in the kytchyn adyes.

Maydecooke. I promysse the thou semest to have done little bette^
For that I wot in my life I never saw,
One like to thy self, in so easy a matter.
Unless he were deaf, thus play the Dawe.

Mancooke. Come on, come on, we have almost forgotten
Such plenty of victualles as we should bye
It were alms by my trothe, thou were well beaten
Because so long thou have made me tarry.

Maydecooke. Tusshe tusshe, we shall come in very good season,
If so be thou go as fast as I,
Take up thy basket and quickly have done
We will be both there by and by.

Mancooke. I for my part will never leave runnynge
Untyll that I come to the Sign of the Whitynge.

Here the two Cooks run out and in comes the Yongman and the Yongwoman his
Lover. The Yongwoman. WHere is my sweetynge, whom I do seek
He promised me to have met me here
Till I speak with him, I think it a week
For he is my Joy, he is my chere.
There is no night, there is no day
But that my thoughts be all of him
I have no delyght if he be away,
Such toys in my head do euerswym.
But behold at the last, where he does come
For whom my heart desired long,
Now shall I know all a^ some,
Orels I would say, I had great wrong

The yongman. My darlynge, my Co^ye, my Bird so bright of blee,
Sweet heart I say, all haylee to thee
How do our Loves, be they fast a sleep
Or the old lynelynes, do to they still keep?

The yongewoman. Do ye ask and my Love be fast a sleep?
O if a womon may utter her mind,
My love had almost made me to weep
Because that even now I did not you find
I thought it surely a whole hundred year,
Till in this place I saw you here.

The yongman. Alack, alack, I am sorye for this,
I had such business I might not come
But ye may perceive what my wit is,
How small regard I have and wisdom.

The yongwoman. Whereas ye ask me concerning my love
I well assure you, it does daily augment:
Nothing can make me starte or move
You only to love is mine intent.

The yongman. And as for my love does never relente,
For of you I do dream, of you I do think:
To dy^ner and supper, I never went,
But of Beer and Wine to you I did drink.
Now of such thynhes therefore to make an end
Which pytyfull louees do cruelly ^orment,
To Marriage in Gods name, let us discende
As unto this hour we have been bente.

The yongwoman. Your will to accomplysshe I am as redye,
As any woman, believe me truly.

The yongman. This Ring then I gyne you as a token sure,
Whereby our love shall always endure.

The yongwoman. With a pure pretense your pledge I take gladly
For a Sign of our love, faith and fydelytie.

The yongman. Now I am safe, now I am glad,
Now I do live, now I do ra^g^^^
Me thought till now I was to sad,
Wherefore sadness fly hence again.
I way with those words which my father brought out
A way with his saigenes and exhortacion
He could not make me his fool or his lowte,
And put me vesydes this delectacion.
Did he judge that I would^ go to the School,
And might my time spend after this sort*
I am not his Calse, nor yet his fool,
This Uirgin I kiss, is my comfort.

The yongwoman. Well than I pray you let us be married
For me think from it we have long tarried.

The yongman. Agreed my Sweetynge, it shalve then done,
Since that thy good will I have gotten and wone.

The yongwoman. There would this day be very good theare
That every one his vealy may fill.
And three or four Minstrelles would be here
That none in the house sit idle or still.

The yongman. Take ye no thought for abundaunce of meat
That should be spent at our Brydale,
For there shall be ynought for all men to eat
And Minstrelles besides thereto shall not sail.
The Cooks I dare say, a good while a gone
With such kind of flesh as I did them tell
Are from the market both come home
Or else my own Conye they do not well.
I knew before that I come to this place
We should be married together this day
Which caused me then forth with in this case
To send for victualles or I came away.

The yongwoman. Where fore then (I pray ye) shall we go to our Inn,
And look that every thing be made redye,
Or else all is not worth a Brass pynne,
Such have is required in matry monye.

The yongman. I think six a clock it is, not much passed
But yet to the priest we will make have
That according to custom we may be both coupled
And with a strong knot for ever bound fast.
Yet ere I depart, some song I will sing,
To the intent to derlare my Joy without fear
And in the mean fyme you may my swetynge,
Rest your self in this little chair.
The Song.
SPyte of his spyte, which that in vain.
Does seek to force my fantasye,
I am professed for loss or gain,
To be thine own assucedlye:
Wherefore let my father spyte and spurn,
My fantasye wyil never turn.
Although my father ^f bus^e wy^te,
Does babble still. I care not tho,
I have no fear^, nor yet will flytte,
As does the water to and fro,
Wherefore let my father spyte and spurur,
My fantasye will never turn.
For I am set and will not swerue,
Whom spytefull speech remoueth naught
And since that I thy grace deserve,
I count it is not derely bought,
Wherefore let my father spyte and spurn,
My fantasy will never turn.
Who is afrayde^^let you him fly,
For I shall well abide the brunte:
Mangre to bys lyppes that lysteth to lie
Of busye brains as is the wont.
Wherefore let my father s^yte and spurn,
My fantasye will never turn.
Who ^ysteth thereat to laugh^ or loure
I am not be that ^ught does retche
There is no payue that has the power,
Out of my orest your love to fetch,
Wherefore let my father spyte and spurn,
My fantasye will never turue.
for whereas he moved me to the School,
And only to follow my Book and learnenynge:
He could never make me such a fool,
With all his soft words, and fair speaking.
Wherefore let my father spyte and spurn,
My f^nt^sye will never turn.
This Mynion here, this myneing Trull,
^oth ^le^se me wore a thousand fold:
Then all the earth that is so full.
^f precious stones, Soluer and Gold.
Wherefore let my father spyre and spurn,
My fantasye will never turn.
What soever I did, it was for her sak
It was for her soue, and only pleasure,
I count it no labor, such labor to take,
In getting to me so high a treasure.
Wherefore let my father spyte and spurn,
My fantasy will never turn.
This day I intended for to be merry,
Although my hard Father be far hence.
I know no cause for to be beuye,
For all this cost and great expense.
Wherefore let my father spyte and spurn,
My fantasye will never turn.
How like ye this song, my own sweet Rose,
Is it well made for our purpose?

The young woman. I never hard in all my life a better,
More pleasmante, more meet for the matter,
Now let us go then, the morning is nigh gone
We can not any longer here remain:
Farewell good Masters eueryechone,
Till from the Church we come again.
Here they go out, and in comes the Priest along. Syrs, by my truth it is a
world to see,
The exceeding negligence of every one.
Even from the highest to the lowest degree,
Both goodness and conscience is clean gone.
There is a youge gentelman in this town,
Who this same day now must be married:
Yet though I would bestow a Crown,
That knave the Clarke can not be spyed.
For he is safe if that in the Alehouse,
He may sit typlyng of Nut brown Ale:
That often be commes forth as drunk as Mouse,
With a nose of his own not greatly pale,
And this is not once, but every day,
Almost of my faith, through out the whole year,
That he these tricks does use to play,
Without all shame, dreable and fear.
He knoweh him self that yester night,
The said young gentelman came to me,
And then desired, that he might
This morning beiymes married be.
But now I doubt it will be hye noone,
Ere that this bufynes be quite ended:
Unless the knauys she fool come very soon,
That this same thing may be dispatched,
And therefore since that this noughty pache,
Has at this present me thus served.
He is like hence forward my good will to lack
Orels b^wyss I might be judged.
I am taught hereafter, how such a one to trust,
In day matter concerning the Church,
For if I should, I perceive that I must,
Of my^e own honesty loose very much.
And yet for all this, from week to week,
For his stypende and wages he never cries,
And for the same contynually does seek,
As from time to time plainly appears,
But whyther his wages he has deserved,
Unto you all I do me report,
Since that his duty he has not fulfilled,
Nor to the Church will scant resort.
That many a time and often, I am feign
To play the Priest, Clarke, and all
Though thus to do, it is great pain,
And mire ward but very small,
Wherefore (God willing) I will such order take,
Before thou I be many days elder,
That he shall be glad this town to forsake
And learn evermore to please his better.
And in such wise all they shall be used,
Which in this pacysshe entende to be Clerks,
Great pyt^e it were, the Church should be disordered
Because that such Swylbowles do not their warkes.
And to say truth, in many a place,
And other great towns beside this same,
The Priests and Parishioners be in the like case,
Which to the Church wardens may be a shame.
Haw should the Priest his office fulfill,
Accordyngly as in deed he ought?
When that the Clarke will have a self will
And always in Service time must be sought?
Notwithstanding at this present there is no remedy
But to take time, as it does fall,
Wherefore I will go hence and make me ready
For it helps not to chafe or brall.

Here the Priest goes out, and in commethe the rych man. The Rich man.
LOmmynae this day forth of my Chamber,
Even as for water to wasshe I did call,
By chance I espied a certain stranger,
Standing beneath within my Hall.
Who in very deed came from the Inholder
Whereas for a time my Son did lie,
And said that his master had sent me a letter
And bade him to bring it with all speed possyblye.
Wherein he did write that as this day
That vnthr^fre my Son to a certain Maid,
Should then be wedded, without further delay,
And bath borrowed more than will be paid.
And since that he hard, he was my Son,
By a Gentelman or two, this other day:
He thought that it should be very well done,
To let me have knowledge thereof by the way.
And wylled me if that I would any thing
Of him to be done of me in this matter:
That then he his Servant such word should bring
As at his coming he might do hereafter.
I bade him thank his Master most hattelye
And sent him, by him a piece of Venison:
For that he vouchesaued to write so gentely,
Touching the marying and state of my Son,
But notwithstanding I sent him no Money,
To pay such Dettes as my Son did owe,
Because he had me forsaken utterly,
And me for his good Father would not know,
And said that with him I would not make,
From that day forward, burynge my life
But as he had brewed, that so be should bake,
Since of l^ys own choosynge, he gat him a wife.
Thus wha^ his Servant from the departed
Into my Chamber I went again,
And there a great while I pitterly weeped,
This ^ewes to me was so great pain:
And thus with these words I began to moan,
Lamenting and mourning my self all a lone.
O wadnes, O dotynge of those young folk
O my ^^es without wit, advise, and discretion,
With whom their par^ntes can bear no stroke
In th^se first Matrimonial conjunction
They know not what myserye grief and unquietness
Will hereafter ensue, of their extreme foolysshenes,
Of all such labors, they be clean ignorant,
Which in the nourysshynge and keeping of Children
(...) their great charges, it is convenient
Either of them henceforth to sustain:
Concerning expenses bestowed in a house
They per^eyue as little as does the Mowse.
On the one side, the wife will brall and scolde,
On the other side the Infant will cry in the Cradell:
Anon when the Child wareth somewhat old,
For meat and drink, he begynnes to babbell.
Hereupon comes it, that at markettes and fayres
A Husband is forced to bye many wares.
Yet for all this has my foolysshe Son
As wise a Wodcocke, without any wit,
Despysynge his Fathers mind and opynion,
Married a wife for him most vnfyete,
Supposing that mirth to be eueciastynge,
Which then at the first was greatly pleasynge.
How they two will live, I can not tell,
Whereto they may trust, they have nothing
My mind ^yueth me, that they will come dwell,
At length by their father for want of lyuings,
But my Son doubtless, for any thing that I know*
Shall reap in such wise as he did sow,
True he shall find, that Hippon^rtes did write
Who said with a wife are two days of pleasure
The first is the joy of the Marriage day and night
The second to be at the wyfes Sepulture:
And this by experience he shall prove true,
That of his Brydale great euyiles do ensue.
And (as I suppose,) it will prove in his l^fe,
When he shall wysshe that to him it may chance,
Which unto Eupolis and also his wife,
The night they were wedded, fell for a vengeance
Who with the heavy thine of the Gedde were s^ayne,
As the Poet Ovid in these two Uerses makes plain,
Si tibi coniugii nox prima, nouissima vite,
Eupolis, hoc periit, and noua nupta modo.
Ouidius wrytinge against one Ibis his enemy
That the first night of his Marriage did wysshe
The last of his life might be certainly.
For so (quod he) did Eupolis and his wife perysshe.
Yet to my Soon I pray God to send
Because thereunto me Nature does bind:
Though he has offended, a better end,
Then Eupolis and his wife did find.
And now I shall long ever anon,
Till some of those quarters come riding hither,
Unto the which my Son is gone,
To know how they do live together.
But I am fasting, and it is almost noone
And more than time that I had dyned:
Wherefore from hence I will go soon,
I think by this time, my meat is burned.

Here the Rich man goes out, and in comes the yongman his son with the
young woman, being both married. The Husband. O My sweet wife, my pretye Conye.


The Wife. O my Husband, as pleasant as Honnye.


The Husband. O Lord wath pleasures and great commodytie,
Are heaped together in Matrimonye?

The Wife. How vehement, how strong a thing love is?
How many smyrkes, and dulsome kysses?

The Husband. What smiling: what laughyng?
What sport, pastyme, and playenge?

The Wife. What ticklynge: what toyinge,
What dalyenge, what ioyenge?

The Husband. The man with the wife is wholly delyghted
And with many causes to laughter enforced.

The Wife. When they two drink, they drink together
They never eat, but one with another.

The Husband. Somtymes to their Garden forth they walk
And into the fyeldes somtymes they go,
With merry tricks, and gestures they talk
As they do move their feet to and fro.

The Wife. Somtymes they ride into the Country
Passing the time with mirth and sport,
And when with their fryndes, they have been merye*
Home to their own house they do resort.

The Husband. Somtymes abroad they go, to see plays,
And other trym syghtes, for to be hold:
When often they meet in the hye ways
Much of their aquaintaunce they knew of old.

The Wife. Sometimes to the Church, they do repair
To here the Sermon that shall be made:
Though it to remember, they have small care,
For why? they be now, but few of that trade.

The Husband. Somtymes at home, at cards they play
Somtymes at this game somtymes at that
They need not with sadness to pass the day
Nor yet to sit still, or stand in one plat.

The Wife. And as for us wyfes, occasions do moan,
Somtymes with our Gossyppes to make good cheer
Or else we did not, as did us behoue,
For certain days and weeks in the years.

The Husband. I think that a man might spend a whole day
Declarynge the Joys, and endless blys:
Which married persons receive always,
If they love faythfullye, as meet it is.

The Wife. Wives can not choose, but love earnestlye
If that their Husbands do all things well
Or eyes my sweet heart, we shall espy,
That in quietness they can not dwell.

The Husband. If they do not, it may be a shame
For I love you hartele I you assure:
Or else I were truly greatly to blame
Ye are so loving, so kind, and demure.

The Wife. I trust that with neither hand or foot,
Ye shall see any occasion by me:
But that I love you even from the heart root
And during my life so intend to be,

The Husband. Who then merye Marriage can disco^mende
And will not with Aristotle in his Ethickes agree*
But will say, that myserye is the end
When otherwise I find it to be:
A polyt^que man will marye a wife
As the Philosopher makes declaration,
Not only to have children by his life,
But also for living, help, and sustentacion.

The Wife. Who will not with Herocles playntly confess,
That Mankind to Society is wholly adioynyng^
And in this Society nevertheless:
Of worthy Wedlock took the beginning.
Without the which, no City can stand
Nor Household be perfect in any land.

The Husband. Pythagoras, Socrates, and Crates also
Which truly were men of very small Substance
As I hard my father tell long ago,
Did take them wyfes with a safe conscience:
And dwelled together, supposing that they
Were unto Philosophy, another stop nor stay.

The Wife. yea what can be more according to kind
Then a man to a woman him self to bind?

The Husband. Away with those therefore that Marriage despyst
And of dangers thereof invent many lies.

The Wife. But what is he that comes yonder,
Do ye not think it is our man?
Somewhat there is that he hastes hither,
For he makes as much speed as he can.

Here the Servant of the Kyche man's Son comes in, with an errande to
his Master. Servant. Master there is a Stranger at home
He would very feign with you talk:
For until that to him you do come
Forth of the doors he will not walk.

The Husband. Come on then my wife, if it be so,
Let us depart hence for a season:
For I am not well till I do know
Of that man's coming the very reason.

Here they both go out, and their Servant does tarry behind alone. Servant.
Let them go both, and do what they will
And with communicacion fill their bealy:
For I by Saint George will tarry here still,
In all my life I was never so werye.
I have this day filled so many Pottes
With all manner wine, Ale, and Beer:
That I wysshed their bealyes full of Bottes
Long of whom was made such cheer.
What kinds of meat, both flesh and fyshe
Have I poor knave to the table carried?
From time to time dysshe after dysshe,
My legs from going never ceased.
What runnynge had I for Apples and Nuttes?
What calling for Biskettes, Cumfettes and Caroweies?
A vengeance said I, light on their guts
That makes me to turn so many ways.
What cryinge was there for Cards and Dice?
What coystynge, what rufflynge made they within?
I counted them all not greatly wife.
For my head did almost ache with din.
What bablyng, what jangling was in the house?
What quaffyng, what bybbyng with many a Cup?
That some lay alonge as drunk as a Mouse
Not able so much as their heads to hold up.
What daunsynge, what leapyng, what iumpyng about
From benche to benche, and stool to stool?
That I wondered their brains did not fall out
When they so out ragiously playde the fool.
What iuglyng was there upon the boordes?
What thrustyng of knyues through many a nose
What bearinge of Forms? what holdinge of Swords?
And putting of Botkyns through leg and hose?
Yet for all that they called for drink,
And said that they could not play for dry
That many at me did nodde and wynke
Because I should bring it by and by,
How so ever they sported the pot did still walk
If that were away, then all was lost:
For ever anon the Judge was their talk,
They paste not who bare such charge and cost.
Therefore let him look his Purse be right good,
That it may discharge all that is spente,
Or else it will make his haere grow through his hood
There was such havoc made at this present,
But I am afearde my master be angrye
That I did abide thus long behind:
Yet for his anger I pass not greatly,
His words they be but only wind,
Now that I have rested so long in this place
Home ward again. I will bye me apase.

Here the Servant goes out, and in comes first the Wife, and shortly
after the Husband. The Wife. WHere is my Husband, was he not here?
I marvel much whyther he is gone
Than I perceive I am much the nere,
But lo^, where he comes hither alone.
Wot ye what Husband, from day to day,
With dayntye dysshes, our bodies have been filled:
What meat to morow^ next shall we assaye?
Whereby we may then be both refresihed.

The Husband. Do ye now provide and give a regarve
For Victualles hereafter to be preparde?

The Wife. But that I know Husband, it lies us in hand
Of things to come to have a consyderation
I would not ones will you to understand
About such busynes my careful provision:
It is needful therefore to work we make have
That to get both our lyuynges we may know the cast.

The Husband. To trouble me now, and make me vexed,
This mischievous mean have thou invented.

The Wife. What trouble for thee? what kind of vexation?
Have I to disquiet thee, caused at this present?
My only mind is, thou make expedycion
To seek for our profit as is convenient.
Wherefore to thee I say ones again,
Because to take pains thou art so loathe,
By Christ it were best, with might and main
To fall to some work, I swear a great oath.

The Husband. Yet for a time, if it may thee please
Let me be quit, and take mine ease.

The Wife. Will thou have us then through hungre he starued:


The Husband. I would not we should for hungre be killed.


The Wife. Then I say then, this gear go about,
And look that thou labor diligently:
Or else thou shall shortly prove without doubt,
Thy sluggysshnes will not please me greatly.

The Husband. Begynnest thou even now to be paynefull and grievous
And to thy Husband, a woman so troublous?

The Wife. What words have we here thou misbegotten,
Is there not already enough to the spoken?

The Husband. O mirth, O Joy, O pastyme and pleasure,
How little a space, do you endure?

The Wife. I see my commandment can take no place,
Thou shall abye therefore, I swear by the Mass.

Here the Wife must stryke her Husband handesomlye about the Shoulders with
some thing. The Husband. Alas good wife, good wife, alas, alas,
Stryke not so hard, I pray thee hartelye,
Whatsoever thou will have brought to pass
It shall be done with all speed possyblye.

The Wife. Lay these Faggottes man upon thy shoulder
And carye this wood from street to street:
To sell the same, that we both together,
Our living may get, as is most mete.
Hence Nidiot hence, without more delay
What meanest thou thus, to stagger and stay?

The Husband. O Lord what how miserable men be those
Which to their wyfes as wretches be wedded
And have them conty nually their mort all foes
Serving them thus, as Slaves that he hired.
Now by experience true I do find,
Which oftentimes unto me heretofore
My father did say, declarynge his mind
That in Matrymonie was pain evermore,
What shall I do most pityfull Creature?
Just cause I have alas to lament:
That frantic woman my death will procure
If so he this day without gain be spent
For unless for my wood some Money be taken
Like a dog, with a Cudgel I shall be beaten.
Ho thou good fellow which stand so nigh
Of these heavy bundelles ease my sore back:
And somewhat therefore give me by and by
Or else I dye, for Silver I do lack.
Now that I have some Monye received
For this my burden home I will go:
And lest that my wife be discontented,
What I have take, I will her show.
Wife I am come, I went a long way
And here is the profit, and gaynes of this day.

The Wife. Why thou Lowte, thou fool, thou horson folte,
Is this thy wood money, thou peuisshe Dolte?
Thou shall smart for this gear, I make God a vow
Thou know no more to sell wood, then does the sow

The Husband. By Gods precious I will not unwisely suffes
To do as I have done, any longer.

The Wife. Why do thou rise against me Villayne?
Take heed I scrache not out thy eyes twain.

The Husband. Scratche and thou dare, for I have a knyfe,
Perchance I will ryd the of thy life.

The Wife. Slaye me with thy knyfe, thou shytten Dastarde?
Do thou think to find me such a Dissarde?
By Coxe bones I will make thy skyn to rattell,
And the brains in thy S^ull more depely to sattell.

Here the wife must lay on lode upon her Husband. The Husband. Good wife be
content, forgive my this fault
I will never again do that which is naught.

The Wife. Go to foolysshe Calfe, go to, and vpryse,
And put up thy knyfe, I the advice.

The Husband. I will do your co^maun dementes whatsoever.


The Wife. Hence away then, and fill this with water.


The Husband. O merciful God, in what lamentable state
Is he, of whom the wife is the master?
Would God I had been predestinate,
On my Marriage day, to have dyed with a Fever.
O wretched creature, what may I do?
My grievous wife shall I return unto?
Lo wife behold without further delay
The water ye sent for, here I do bring.

The Wife. What I say^ what means this weepynge?
What ayleth the to make all this cryinge?

The Husband. I weep not forsothe, not cry not as yet.


The Wife. No, nor thou will not, if thou haste any wye,
It is not thy weepynge, that can ought avail,
And therefore this matter no longer be wayle.
Come of I say, and run to the River
And wasshe these clothes in the water.

The Husband. Wife I will thither hye me fast.


The Wife. Yet I advise the, thou Cullyon make have.


The Husband. O how unhappy and eke unfortunate
Is the most part of married men's condytion?
I would to death I had been agate
When my Mother in be arynge me made lamentation.
What shall I do whyther shall I turn,
Most careful man now under the Sky?
In the flamynge fire, I had rather burn,
Then with extreme pain, live so heauylye,
There is no wyfte, to my wife I must go
Whom that I did wed, I am full^^o.
Where are ye wife, your clothes are washte clean
Is white as a lylly without spot or ueyne.

The Wife. Thou thief, thou caytyfe, why is not this place,
Washed as fair as all the rest,
Thou shall for this gear now smoke apase
By gys I swear, thou brutysshe Beast.

Here she must knock her Husband. The Husband. Alas, alas, I am almost
quyte dead,
My wife so pytyfully has broken my head.

Here her Husband must lie alongs on the ground as though he were fore
beaten and wounded. The Wife. Well I perceive, the ryme will away
And into the Country to go I have promised
Look therefore thou go not from hence to days
Till home again I am returned.
Take heed I say, this House thee retain,
And stir not for any thing out of my door:
Until that I come hither again,
As thou will be rewarded therefore.

Here his Wife goes out, and the Husband taryeth behind alone. The Husband.
The slyinge and fiende go with my wife
And in her Journey ill may she speed:
I pray God almighty to shorten her life
The earth at no time does bear such a weed.
Although that I be a Gentelman borne
And come by my Auncetours of a good blood,
Yet am I like to wear a Cote torn
And hither and thither go catye wood.
But rather then I this life will abide
To morrow morning I do intend,
Home to my Father again to ride,
If some man to me his Horse will lend.
She is to her Gossypes gone to make merry,
And there she will be for three or four days:
She cares not though I do now miscarye
And suffer such pain and sorrow always.
She leaves to me neither Bread nor drink
But such as I iugde no body would eat:
I might by the wailes lie dead and stynke
For any great holsomnes in my meat.
She walks a broad, and takes her pleasure
Her self to cherysshe is all her care:
She passes not what griefs I endure,
Or how I can live with noughty fare:
And since it is so, without further delay
To my father to morrow I will away.

Here he goes out, and in comes the Devil. Satan the Devil. HO, ho, ho,
what a fellow am I?
Give row me I say both more and less:
My strength and power hence to the Sky
No eacthly tongue can well express.
Oh what inuencious, crafts and wiles,
Is there contained within this head?
I know that he is within few miles
Which of the same is thoroughly sped.
Oh, it was all my study day and night
Co^nyngly to bring this matter to pass:
In all the earth, there is no wighte
But I can make to cry alas.
This man and wife, that not long ago
Fell in this place together by the ears:
It was only I that this strife did sow
And have been about it certain years.
For after that I had taken a small:
Of their good will and fervent love,
My thought I should not tarry in hell
But unto debate them shortly move,
Oh it was I that made him to despise
All wisdom, goodness, virtue and learning
That be afterward could in no wise
Ones in his heart fancy teaching.
Oh it was I, that made him refuse
The wholesome menytion of his Father dear
And caused him still of a wife to muse
As though she should be his joy and there.
Oh it was I, that made him go hence,
And suppose that his father was very unkind,
It was I, that did oryue him to such expense,
And made him as bare, as an ^pe is behind.
And now that I have this busynes ended
And joined him and his wise together:
I think that I have my part well played,
None of you all would do it better.
Ho, ho, ho, this well favored heads of mine
What thing soever it has in hand:
Is never troubled with Ale or Wine,
Neither by Sea, nor yet by land.
I tell you I am a meruaylous body,
As any is at this day living:
My head does deuyse each thing so trymly,
That all men may wonder of the ending,
Oh I have such fetches, such toys in this head
Such crafty deuyses and subtle train:
That whom so ever of you I do wed,
ye are like at my hands to take small gain.
There is no gentelman, knight, or Lord:
There is no Duke, Earl, or king:
But if I list, I can with one word,
Shortly send unto their lodging.
Some I disquiet with Coueitousnes,
Some with wrath, pride and lecherye,
And some I do thruste into such distress
That he feels only pain and myserye.
Some I allure to have their delyght
Always in Glotonye, Envy and murdre:
And those things to pracise with all their might
Either by land, or else by water.
Ho, ho, ho, there is none to be compared,
To me I tell you, in any point:
With a great sort my self I have tried,
That boldly ventured many a joint.
And when for a long time we had wrestled
And showed our strength on either side,
Yet often times a fall they received,
When through my Polycye their feefe did slide.
Wherefore (my dear children) I warn ye all,
Take heed, take heed of my temptation:
For commonly at the last y^ have the fall
And also brought to Desperacion.
Oh it is a forye for many to strive
And think of me to get the upper hand:
For unless that God make them to thryue
They can not against me stick or stand.
And though that God on hy^ have his domynion
And rules the world every where:
Yet by your leave, I have a portion,
Of this same earth that stands here.
The kingdom of God is above in Heaven
And mine is I tell you beneth in Hell:
But yet a greater place if he had dealt even
He should have given me and mine to dwell,
For to my Palace of every Nation
Of what degree or birth so ever they be.
Come runnynge in with such festination,
That other whiles they amassed me,
Oh all the Jews, and all the Turks,
Yea and a great part of Christen dome
When they have done my will, and my works
In the end they fly hither all and some.
There is no miunte of the day
There is no minute of the night:
But that in my Palace there is always
Crowdynge together a meruaylous sight,
They come on thicker, then swarms of Bees,
And make such a noise and cryinge out:
That many a one lies on his knees,
With thousands kept under, and closed about
Not so much as my parlours, halles, and every chamber
By Porches, my galeryes, and my court:
My entryes, my kytchyn, and my Larder,
But with all manner people be filled throughout.
What shall I say more, I can not tell,
But of this (my children) I am certain,
There comes more in one hour unto Hell,
Then unto Heaven, in a month or twain.
And yet for all this, my Nature is such
That I am not pleased with this company,
But out of my kingdom I must walk much
That one or other I may take tardye,
Ho, ho, ho, I am never ones afraid
With these my Claws you for to touch,
For I will not leave till you be paid,
Such treasure, as is within my Pouche.
The world is my Son, and I am his Father
And also the flesh, is a daughter of mine
It is I alone, that taught them to gather,
Both Gold and Silver that is so fine.
Wherefore I suppose that they love me well
And my Co^maun dementes gladly obaye,
That at the last then unto Hell,
They may come all the ready way.
But now (I know) since I came hither
There is such a multitude at my gate,
That I must agaynt repair down thither
After mine old manner and rate.

Here the Devil goes out, and in comes the Rychmans Son alone. The Son.
How glad am I, that my journey is ended,
Which I was about this whole dare?
My Horse to stand still I never sufferd,
Because I would come to the end of my way,
But yet I am sorye that I can not find,
My loving Father at home at his place:
That unto him I may break my mind,
And let him know my miserable case.
Here he confesses his noughtynes vitring the same with a pitiful voi^^. I
have been wild, I have been wanton,
I have ever followed my fancye and will:
I have been to my Father a froward Son
And from day to day continued still.
I have always proudlye dysdayned those
That in my madness gave me good counsel
I counted them most my mortal foes,
And stowtely against them did rebel.
The thing that was good, I greatly hated
As one which lacked both wit and reason,
The thing that was evil I ever loved
Which now I see is my confusyon.
I could not abide of the Schole to hear
Masters and teachers my heart abborred,
We thought the Book was not fyt gear,
For my tendeer fyngers to have handled,
I counted it a pleasure to be daintely fed
And to be clothed to costly artaye:
I would most commonly slugge in my bed,
Until it were very far forth day.
And to be short, anon after this,
There came such fancies in my brain:
That to have a wife whom I might kiss
I rekened to be the greatest gain.
But yet alas I was quyte deceived
The thing it self does easily appear:
I would alas I had been buryeb,
When to my Father, I gave not ear.
That which I had, I have clean spent,
And kept so much riot with the same:
That now I am feign, a Cote that is rent
At as to wear for very shame.
I have not a cross left in my purse,
To help my self now in my need:
That well I am worthy of Gods curse,
And of my Father to have small mede.
THere the Rich man must be as it were coming in. But except m^^e eyes do
we beguyle,
That man is my Father, whom I do see:
And now that he comes, without craft or wyle,
To him I will hende on either knee.
Ah Father, Father, my Father most dear,

The father. Ah mine own child, with the what there?


The Sone. All such sayings as in my mind,
At the first time ye studied to sattell,
Most true alas, I do them find,
As though they were written in the Gospel.

The Father. Those words my Son, I have almost forgotten,
Stand up therefore, and kneel no longer:
And what it was I spoke so often,
At two or there words, recyte to thy Father.

The Son. If that ye be Father well remembered
As the same I believe ye can not forget:
You said that so soon as I were married,
Much pain and trouble thereby I should get.

The Father. Haste thou by proof soon, this thing tried?


The Son. Yea, alas to much I have experyenced:
My wife, I did wed, all full of frensye,
My selye poor shoulders, has now so broused,
That like to a Creple, I moan me weakly,
Being full often with the staff thwacked:
She spares no more my flesh and bone,
Than if my body were made of Stone,
Her will, her mind, and her Commandment,
From that day hither, I have fulfilled:
Which if I did not, I was bytterly shent,
And with many strokes grenously punysshed:
That would God the hour when I was married,
In the midste of the Church I might have fynked.
I think there is no man under the Son
That here on the earth bears life:
Which would do such drudgerye, as I have done,
At the unkind words of such a wife,
For how I was used, and in what wise
A day to declare will not suffyse.
If this be not true, as I have spoken
To my good neighbors I me report,
Who either whiles when I was smytten
My wife to be gentle, did then exhort:
For glad I was to abide all labor
Whereby the less might be my doloure.
Wherefore good Father I you humblye desire
To have pitye of me and some compassion?
Or else I am like to lie fast in the mire,
Without any succoure or consolation:
For at this hour I have not a penny,
My self to help in this great myserye.

The Father. For so much as by my advise and counsel
In no manner wise thou would be ruled:
Therefore to the I can not do well,
But let the still suffer, as thou haste deserved
For that thou have suffered, is yet nothing
To that trybulation which is behind coming.

The Son. Alas Father, what shall I do?
My wits of them selves can not deuyse,
What thing I were best to go unto,
Whereof an honest living may arise:
Wherefore gentle Father in this distress,
Somewhat aswage mine heaviness.

The Father. What should I do I can not tell,
For now that thou have taken a wife
With me thy father thou may not dwell,
But always with her spend thy life.
Thou may not again thy wife forsake,
Which during life to the thou dydst take.

The Son. Alas I am not able thus to endure
Though thereunto I were never so willing:
For my wife is of such a crooked nature
As no woman else, is this day living,
And if the very truth I shall confess
She is to me an evil that is endless.

The Father. If that thou think thy self alone
Only to lead this yrkesome life.
Thou may learn what grief, sorrow and moan,
Socrates had with Xantippa his wife.
Her Husband full often she tawnted and checked
And as the Book says unhonestly mocked.

The Son. I can not tell, what was Socrates wife
But mine I do know alas to well,
She is one that is evermore full of strife
And of all Scolders bears the Bell.
When she speaks best, then brawleth her tongue
When she is still she fyghteth apace:
She is an old Witch though she be young,
No mirth with her, no joy or solace.

The Father. I can not my Son thy state redress,
Me thy Father thou dydst refuse:
Wherefore now help thy own fooly shenes,
And of thy wife no longer muse.

The Son. My wife went forth n^ to the Country
With certain Gossyppes to make good chere,
And bad me at home still to be,
That at her return, she might find me there:
And if that she do take me from home,
My bones alas she will make to crackell:
And me her Husband as a stark mome,
With knockyng and mocking she will handell.
And therefore if I may not here remain,
Yet loving Father, give me your reward,
That I may with speed ride have again,
That to my wyfes words, have some regard.

The Father. If that at the first thou would have been ordered.
And done as thy Father counsayled the:
So wretched a life had never chanced
Whereof at this present thou complaynest to me.
But yet come on, to my house we will be going
And there thou shall see, what I will give:
A little to help thy nedye living:
Since that in such penurye thou do live,
And that once done, thou must hence again
For I am not he, that will the retain.

Here the Rich man and his Son go out, and in comes the Peroratour. The
Peroratour. THis Interlude here good gentle audience,
Which presently before you we have played:
Was set forth with such care and diligence,
As by us truly might well be showed.
Short it is I deny not, and full of brevity
But if ye mark thereof the matter,
Then choose ye can not, but see plainly
How pain and pleasure be knyt together.
By this little play, the Father is taught,
After what manner his Child to use:
Least that through cockerynge at length he be brought
His Fathers Commandment to refuse,
Here ye may learn a wyttie lesson,
Betymes to correct his Son being tender:
And not let him be lost and undone,
With wantonness of mischief the Mother,
For as long as the twygge is gentell and plyent
(Every man knows this by experience:)
With small force and strength it may be bent
Putting thereto but little dylygence.
But after that it waxes somewhat digger
And to east his branches largely begins,
It is scant the might of all thy power,
That one kowghe thereof* easily bends,
This twygge to a child may well be applied
Which in his childehoode, and age of Infancy:
With small correction may be amended,
Emoracynge the Schole with heart and body.
Who afterward with over much lybertye,
And rangynge abrobe with the Brydell of will.
Despyseth all virtue, searnyuge and honestys,
And also his Fathers mind to fullfyll.
Whereby at the length it so falls out
That this the young Stryplynge after that day:
Runs into confusyon without any doubt
And like for evermore quyte to decay.
Wherefore take heed all ye that be parents
And solowe a part after my counsel,
Instruct your Children and make them students
That unto all goodness they do not rebel
Remember what writes Solomon the wise,
Oui parcit Virgae, odith filium.
Therefore for as much as ye can deuyse
Spare not the Rod, but follow wisdom.
Further ye young men and Children also
Lysten to me and harken a while,
What in few words for you I will show,
Without any slatterye, fraud, or guyle.
This Richemans Son whom we did set forth,
Here evidently before your eyes:
Was (as it chanced) nothing worth,
Given to all noughtynes, vice, and lies.
The cause whereof was this for a truth
His time full idly he did spend,
And would not study in his youth,
Which might have brought him to a good end.
His fathers commandment he would not obaye,
But wantouly followed his fantasye:
For nothing that he could do or say,
Would bring this Child to honesty.
And at the last (as here ye might see:)
Upon a wife he fired his mind,
Thinking the same to be felicity,
When in deed myserye came bebynde.
For by this wife be carefully lived,
Who under his Father did want nothing:
And in such sort was hereby tormented
That ever a none, he went lamenting.
His Father did will him lyghtnes to leave
And only to give him self unto study:
But yet unto virtue he would dot cleave,
Which is commodious for soul and body.
You heard that by Sentences ancient and old
He styrred his Son as he best thought:
But he as an vnthryfe stowte and bold,
His bolsome counsel did set at naught.
And since that he despised his Father
God unto him did suddenly then send:
Such poverty with a wife, and grief together
That shame and sorrow was his end.
Wherefore to conclude, I warn you all
By your loving parents, always be ruled:
Or else be well assured of such a fall?
As unto this yongman worthily channced.
Worship God daily which is the chief thing
And his holy laws do not offend:
Look that ye truly serve the king,
And all your faults be glad to amend.
Moreover, be true of hand and tongue,
And learn to do all things that be honest,
For no time so fytte, as when ye be young,
Because that age only is the aptest.
I have no more, to speak at this season,
F^^ ^^^ye good will these things I did say.
Because I do see that virtue is geason,
With most men and children, at this day.

Here the rest of the Players come in and kneels down all together, each of
them saying one of these Verses. And last of all, to make an end,
O God to the we most humblye pray:
That to Queen Elizabeth thou do send
Thy lively pathe, and perfect way,
Grant her in health to raygne.
With us many years most prosperoustye:
And after this life for to attain,
The eternal bliss, Joy, and felycytie.
Our Bysshoppes, pastoures, and Mynisters also
The true understanding of thy word,
Both night and day, now mercyfully show,
That their life and preaching may godly accord,
The Lords of the Counsel, and the Nobylytie,
Most heavenly Father, we thee desire:
With grace, wisdom, and godly polycie,
Their hearts and minds, always inspyre.
And that we thy people duelye considering
The power of our Queen and great auctorytie,
May please thee and serve her without faynynge,
Living in peace, rest, and tranquilytie.
God save the Queen.
A Song.
WHy does the world study vaynglory to aff^yne
The prosperytye whereof is short and transitory
Whose mighty power, does fall down again,
Like earthen ports, that breaks so daynly.
Believe rather words that be written in Ice
Then the wretched world with his subtylytie:
Disceytfull in Gi^ces, men only to entyce,
Destytute of ^^^sure credence and fydelytie.
Gyne credyt more to men of true Judgments
Then to the worldly renown and joys:
Replenys shed with dreams and vain intentes,
Aboun dynge in wicked and noughtye toys.
Where is now Solomon in wisdom so excellence
Where is now Samyson, in battle so strong?
Where is now A^solo^^ in Beantie resplendent?
Where is now good Iousthas hyd so long?
Where is now Caesar in victory tryumphynge?
Where is now Tines, in disshes so dayntie?
Where is now Tully in Gloquence exceeding?
Where is now Ar^^^le, learned so depely?
What Emperoues, kings, and Dukes in times past?
What Earies and Lords, and Captains of war?
What Popes and Bysshoppes, all at the last,
In the twy^^kynge of an eye are fled so far?
How short a Feast is this worldly ioyenge?
Even as it shadewe (...) passes away,
Depry^^ge a (...) of by^tes everlasting
Leadynge to da^^ed (...) not to day.
O meat of worms, O heap of duste,
O like to dew clyme not to hye:
To live to morrow, thou can not trust,
Therefore now betyme help the nedye
The fles shely Beauty, whereat thou do wondre,
In holy Scripture is lykened to Hay:
And as a Leaf in a stormye weather,
So is man's life blown clean a way,
Call nothing thine that may be lost,
The world does give and take again:
But set thy mind on the holy Ghost,
Despise the world that is so vain.
Finis.
S. John Evangelist.



