The offer and order given forth by Sir Thomas Smyth Knight, and Thomas Smyth
his son, unto such as be willing to accompanye the said Thomas Smyth the
son, in his voyage for the inhabiting some parts of the North of Irelande.
THE Queens Majesty's grant made to sir Thomas Smith Knight, and Thomas Smyth
his son in Ireland, is all that is her majesty's by enheritance, or other
right in the country called the ARDS, and part of other countries adjacent in
ye Erledom of VLSTER, so that they can possess and replenish them with English
men. The which thing that it might the more surely be done, the said sir Thomas
and Thomas his son, have bounden themselves to her highness to distribute all the said land within the said countries, which they shall be able to obtain
and possess, to such as shall take pains to help them to possess the same,
to have and hold to them and to their heirs for ever.

That is to say, to each man who will serve as a soldier on foot, one Plowland
containing a hundredth and twenty acres Irish of arable land, for which the said
sir Thomas and Thomas, must pay to the Queens majesty two pence* Irish for an
Irish acre, after four and twenty foot to the pole. In consideration of
which rent by them to be paid unto her Majesty, the Soldier shall pay for
the said plowlande unto sir Thomas Smyth and Thomas, and their heirs, one
penny sierlyng for every English acre of the said Plowelande, after the
measure of sixteen foot and an half to the pole, and no more. The first
payment to begn four years hence, videlicet. 1576.

To each man who will serve on horseback two plowelandes, videlicet two
hundredth and forty Acres Irishe, which is at the least five hundredth acres
and more English, paying for every acre English as the footman does.

And the earable land being divided, each foot man and horseman shall have
also allotted unto him pasture, medowe, wood, and such like necessary, as the
country will serve, as reasonably as they have arable ground, so that they may
therewith be contented.

The charges that is required of a footeman at his first setting forth, if he
be furnished of sufficient armor, for a Pike, Halberd, or Caliuer, with a
convenient liuerey cloak of red color, or carnation with black facing, is
ten pounds for his vitayling for one whole year after his arrival and his
transportation: after which year, there is hope to find provision enough in
the country, which they shall obtain with good guydance.

The charges of a horseman well horsed and armed for a light horseman with a
staff and a case of Dags, is twenty pounds for vittaile of him and his horse
for one whole year, and for his transportacion. His livery had need be of the
color aforesaid and of the fashion of the riding Dutch cloakes now used.

And to avoid the Flixe and such dangerous diseases as does many times
chance to soldiers by reason of lying upon the ground and uncovered, and
likewise to horses for lack of hales. If any soldier footeman will give
before hand ten shillings, and the horsman twenty shillings, they shall be
lodged under canuas, and upon beds, until houses may be provided.

And if any will bear^ the charges of a Souldyer, that cannot go himself, nor
send an other in his room, he shall have his part of land allotted to him as
well as though he went himself: but then for a footman he must pay in ready
money.xvj. pound.xiij. s.iiij. d. This is one part. And if any will have two
parts or more, then according to this rate to pay the money. The Coronel to
find the said footman or men in all points, for the first year according as the
money is received.

And to the intent that no man willing to adventure in this most honorable and
profitable voyage, may doubt hereof, if it please him to resort to London into
Paul's Churchyard to the sign of the Sun, there he shall see both the
Letters Patentes and the Indentures of couenauntes betwixt the Queens
Majesty and the said sir Thomas Smith and Thomas Smith, and pay such money as
he is disposed to adventure, and receive his assurance from Thomas Smith the
son, who takes the adventure and voyage upon him to go in person, or if the
said Thomas be not there, one of the receivers of this voyage remaining there,
shall do herein as apperteineth, whom he has made his deputy in this behalf.

Note that all such kinds of provision as be necessary in this journey, the
treasourer may receive in lieu of money, according as he shall have need of
such provision, be already furnished therewith, and according to the place
where the said provision shall lie for the commodious transportation thereof.

Because the time of our Embarking is short: And that it is necessary that
some time for the provision and gathering together of all things necessary be
had after the receipt. Therefore have we appointed the said receipt in all
places, to end the last day of February. Requesting all such as be resolved
to adventure in this enterprise, to hasten in their paiments before that last
day of February. Especially immediately upon their resolution to send up their
names in writing, the quantity of their adventure, and the day or days, which
they shall take within the term before limited, for the payment of such
sums. The same under their hands to be delivered with all speed unto the
Treasorer or Receiver, where they shall think good to pay their said
adventures, to the end their names may be entered certainly. And the number once
known, all necessaries by proportion provided accordingly. As for the day and
place certain of meeting and Embarking, because it is not necessary to
publishe the same, the Treasorer or Receiver, shall give it forth by Ticquet
at the time of his receipt of the adventure.

Tho Smith
God save the Queen.

