A fruteful and a very Christen instruction for children with a Dyalogue wherein
the child asks certain questions answeryng to the same with a general
confession, And three manner of loves, The saying of Solomon in the, vi, of the
Proverbs, And also many godly lessons which we ought daily to have in our
remembrance M. D. xl, vii.

God save the king

Wyllyam. Coplande,

A fruitful instruction.
IN the morning at thy up rising / thou shall make ye sign of the cross over
ye sayi^g thus In to this dai do I enter all things for to do. In the name of
the father, of the son, and the holy gooste. Amen.

The^ knele done upon thy knees or else standing say thy. Patet. Aue. and Creed
as follows.

OUR father which art in heaven hallowed be thy name.

Thy kingdom come.

Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven.

Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our trespaces / as we
forgive them that trespace against us And let us not be led into temptation.
But deliver us from evil. Amen.

The Aue maria.
Hale Mary full of grace, the lord is with the, blessed art thou among women,
and blessed be the fruit of thy womb. Amen

The Credo.
I Believe in GOD, the father all mighty, maker of heaven and earth.

And in Jesus Christ his only son our Lord

Which was conceived by the holy ghost, borne of the virgin Mary.

Suffered under Ponce, Pilate, was crucified, dead, buried, and descended into
hell

And the third day he rose again from death

He ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the father
almighty.

From thence he shall come to judge the quick, and the dead.

I believe in the holy ghost,

The holy chatholike faith

The communion of saints. The forgyuenes of sins

The resurrection of the body,

And the life everlasting. Amen

I Thank the (my heavenly father, by thy dear beloved son Jesus Christ that
this night thou have given me sleep and rest, preseruyng me from all hurtes and
pe^illes.

I beseech the to keep me likewise this day from sin and all evils, so that
al my deeds yea, al my life might please the, for I commit my self both body
and soul and al things that I go about in to thy hands. Thy holy angel be
with me lest the devil my aduer^ary have any power over me Ame^

Thus thou armed with gods help, speed the forth to scole. or to thy craft
and to thy calling
The grace or blssynge of the table, to be said of children standinge before it
their hands elevated and joined to gether, saying thus devoutly and sadly.

THe yies of all things look up and wait upon the O Lord and thou gyuest
them maete i^ dew time: when thou gyuest it them then they gather it, when
thou openest thy hand, then are they well satysfyed Thou openest thy hand and
replenisshest all things living with thy blessyng. Our father. etc.

O Lord God our heavenly father bless thou us, and these thy gifts which we
here receive of the blyssing and bountuous goodnese, through thy son Jesus
Christ. Amen.

Grace after dinner.
LET us give thanks unto the Lord, for he is right good his mercy is laid
forth for us at al times It is he that gives meat unto every thing living. He
gives cattle their fode, and fedeth the raue^s birds that call upon him. He
deliteth not in strong stedes nether stands his pleasure in the trompet of
men But he is well pleased with them that fear him and trust in his mercy. Our
father which art. etc

we thank the, O lord god my father by thy son Jesus Christ our Lord, for
all thy benifites, which live and reignest from age to age, world with out
end Amen. Our father. etc.

Grace before supper
Christ which at his last supper gave him self unto us. promysyng his body
to be crucified, and his blood to be shed for our sins bless us and our
supper Amen. Our fa. etc.

Grace after supper.
Honor and praise be unto God the king everlasting immortal invisible, and who
is oneli for ever and ever Amen. Our father which art. etc.

God almighty, father of all mercy and GOD of al consolation give us grace to
consent together into the knowledge or his truth through Jesus Christ that we
may with one mind and one mouth gloryfi God the father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, Amen. Our fa, etc.

Grace for fisshe days
BEnedicite. Dominus That meat that goes into the mouth says Christ Math. xv.
defiles not a man, but that thing which proceeds by the mouth from the
heart, defiles man which are evil thoughts, murder, breakyng of wedloke,
horedome, theft false witness bering, blasphemy, these defile man. Praise ye
the Lo. de. Our father which art in heaven. et. c.

After dy^er.
THese are the very words of the holy ghost in the first epistle to Tymothe,
the fourth chapter. In the latter dyaes some shall depart from the faith,
forbidding to mary and commaundyng to abstain fro meats which, God has
created and ordained to be received with thanks gyuyng of the^ which believe
and know the troth for all the creaturs of GOD are good and nothing to be
refused if it be receiue^ with thanks gyuynge for it is sanctified by gods
word

Praise ye the Lord al Gentiles magnify him all nations, for his mercy is
spread over us, and, the true^h of the Lord stands forever

Glory be to the father, to the sone, and, to the holy ghost

As it was in the beginning, as it is now and ever shall be. Amen

when thou shall go to bed
Lie me down to rest In the name of the father, of the son and of the holy
ghost Amen, Then as thou dyddest in the morning say thy Pater noster, the
Aue. and the Credo. with this prayer. Jesus Christ, that this day of thy
ple^tuous rich mercy, thou have thus preserved me. I pray the forgive me al
my sins which I have this day vnrightuouslye committed in deed, word,
and thought, and that thou would wouchsafe, of thy gracious goodness to keep
m^ this night, for I commit my self both body and soul, and all mine into
thy hands. Thy holy angel be with me lest my adversary have entresse in to
me. Amen

Finis
A dialogue where in the child asks certain questions, aunsweryng to the same
The question

Speak my fair child what art thou

The answer

As concerning my first birth I am a creature of God. endewed with wit and
reason, the son of adam. and as touching my new and second birth I
knoweledge my self to be a chrysti^.

The question.

wherefore say that thou art a Chrystian.

The answer

Because I am christened in the name of the father, of the son, and of y^
holy ghost.

The question

what i^ Baptysme.

The answer

It is called of Paul. the lauer or water of regeneration, by the which every
man that believes is received. and consecrated into the fellowship of Christ's
church, to be part taker of life everlasting

The question.

In whom beleuest thou

The answer

I believe only in God the father almighty, and so torth as it stands ^ the
C^ede

The question

what is faith,

The answer

Faith is a sure confidence and trust of a mind trustyng and beleuyng in the
very living God

The question

How many gods are there

The answer

There is but one GOD alone for all sufficient, which has his being of
himself and al creatures has their being of him

The question

How many persons then are there in the godhed

The answer

There are three persons which are god the father, god the son, and god the
holy ghost. three persons in trinite and one god in essence

The question

what is god

The answer

God is he of whose goodness and by whose power I am persuaded and assured
through my faith to receive all that good is unto whom also I fly in all
adversities and periles, as unto a present, and all alone sufficient help for
me, he pacientely abides our, turnyng from sin, full of mercy, gentle good,
redye always to forgive, and suffers no sin to be unpunished and that into
the third and fourth generation, until none of that synnefull sto^ke be left
alive.

The questione.

In whom beleuest thou.

The answer.

I believe i^ god the father almighty maker of heaven and earth. And in Jesus
Christ his only sone our Lord. etc

The question.

what meanest thou by the first article.

The answer.

I believe tyat he is my GOD, and merciful father unto me, tenderyng me as his
dear beloved child and to be evermore unto me an almighty helper.

The question.

What meanest thou by the third fourth, fyfte and syxte artycles,

The answer.

I believe that Christ was conceived, borne, and suffered for my sins and y^
he ro^e to make me righteous

The question.

what thing woorketh this faith in the

The answer

It works in me love to GOD / and to my neighbors / as to myself, and so
changes me in to a new man so that I beleuyng and knowing god to have showed
so excedi^g love for me study to do his commandments / and am full heavy i^
my heart that I cannot fulfill them.

The question.

why? what are thy conmaundeme^tes

The answer.

These are his commandments.

The first commaundeme^^.

Thou shalt have none other gods but me.

The.ii. commandment

Thou shall not make to thy self an^ graven image nor any likeness of
anithynge that is in heaven above, or in earth beneth, nor in the water under
the earth. thou shalt not bow down to them nor worship them

The.iii, commandment

Thou shall not take the name of the Lord god in vain

The.iiii. commandment

^ Remember that thou keye holy the sabbath day

The.v. commandment

Honor thy father and thy mother

The.vi. commandment

Thou shall do no murder

The.vii. commandment

Thou shalt not commit adultry.

The.viii. commandment

Thou shall not steal.

The.ix. commandment

Thou shall bear no false witness aagynst thy neighbor

Thou shall not desire thy neigbours house, thou shall not desire thy
neighbors wife, nor his servant nor his maid, nor his ox, nor his ass,
nor any thing that is thy neighbors

The question

what meanest thou by the first commandment.

The answer.

I know thereby that I am commanded to believe, to trust and to cleue to the
lord which promises himself to be my god to worship and to love him alone with
all my heart, mind and powers of my soul And that it is he only of who^ all
goodness is given me. and unto who^ I must fly and call upon in all my
trouble, for he only delyuereth me

The question

what meanest thout by the second commandment

The answer

Even as the words show plainly for wha^ the lord spoke unto you says
Moises in the fourth of deuteronomi Than saw ye no image or simlitude of him,
lest ye disceyued should make ye images. The voice of his words ye herd but as
for any shap or similitude of him in nomaner of wise have ye sen

ye shall not make ye silver gods neither golden Gods shall ye make you.
Exo.xx. Also ye shall make my an Alter of earth. but if ye will needs make it of
stones, yet shall ye not hew them, for if you set any instrument of iron to
them than shall they be defiled

Also this I believe was ernestly spoken with so many words, to avoid all
caruyng and curiosite in setting forth of images when Christ declaringe the
same, said. That the very true worshippers a^ they that worship the fader in
spirit and troth, for GOD is the spirit. Johan.iiii.

The question

Forasmoch than as god is the sprit and may not be imagined of our wy^, how
shall we know him

The answer

Faith and trust find him when we a^ in perell and show him unto us. And yet
this faith to find him must be given us for if we get us a faith of our own
facionyng whereby we believe and trust in any other thing than god than make we
us an Idol for it is the faith and trust only in our hertes that makes other
god or, Idol for if ou^ faith and trust be right and, pure than have we the
very true god but if it be false or feigned than must we needs feign us false
and alyeng god, for true faith and god a^ joined together with one knotte, so
that in whatsoever thing thou trustest and beleuest. that same is thy god

Here now may thou well se, that in these.ii. first commandments, god
requi^eth and asks all ou^ hole hertes and in y^ third he asks our mouths
and tongues to be used for his praise and holiness of his name

The questyon

why what meanest thou by y^ third commandment

The answer

Than take I the name of God in vain when I use it to confirm a lie or to
hurt my neighbor. yea. and when neither by it god is glorified nor yet m^
neighbor is profited Also if I fli not to him for help in my troble, nor take
him for my benefytes in my prosperice and wealth than take I his name in vain

Also if I entend and do not all things for his names glory than take I his
name in vain

The questyon

what meanest thou by the fourth commandment

The answer

I sanctify the Saboth day when I give my self hole to here the holy scripture
taught me or to read it, and so ocupy my mind in it. for when I give my self
to any other holy works (or as Esai says) when I cesse to do mine own will or
to follow mine own ways, although they appear to me right gloryouse and good,
For thus me thinks, the Prophet expounds this point of the law in
the.lviii. chap. And for the fulfilling of these.ii. last precepts we pray
saying. Thy name be hallowed, and thy will be fulfilled and not owers.

Thus may thou se these first four precepts to pertein to the glory of god
and to the halowing of his name

The question

wherefore than commands he the other six

The answer.

For our neighbors health and profit to serve them and especially our fader and
mother, whom next god we ought to honor to do reverence. to obey, to comfort
to help and to follow their godli monicion and instruction

The questyon

what meanest thou by the other?

The answer

That in no manner a way I should hurt mi neibour: but to do to him as I would be
done unto not to desire or coueyt any thing of his

The question

what? is Thought, than sin

The answer

yea verily for so expounds our savior the law in the.v. chap o^ Mo saying,
That whosoever casts his eye wantonli upon an other man's wife desyring her
has committed aduoutrye with her already in his heart

The question

Than ar we all sinners, and have broken all gods commandments.

The answer concludes

we are al sinners and have need of the mercy of god, if we were not all
sinners, the merci of god should take none effect in us wherefore the scripture
concludes that all men ar sinners that as many as shall be saved shall be saved by
gods mercy only

A General confession for every sinner broughi into the knowledge of his sins
to confess himself with penytent heart before god, at all times.

OH my most merciful father the father of mercies and god of all consolacio^
mi god mi father I knowledge my self vnfanedly with hirt mind and mouth now
before y^ to have offended grievously thy high may and goodness I knowledge, I
knowledge mi self to be full of syn full of unfaithfulness, and a servant
unprofitable, for all thy holy commandments have I transgressed and broken
First I have not set al my belefe, confidence, trust and hope in the I have not
loved the with all my heart, with all my soul mind and powers of my soul

Secondly I have divided thy honor and worship from the and given it to the
creatures and did things imagined of my onwne fantasy

Thirdly I have abused thy holy name by false and disceytfull sweryng to the
hindrannce of my neybour, and idely and vainly have I used thy holy name I have
not said ne done / nether thought all things to thy glory

Frourthli in the Saboth dai have I not given my self to hering reding and
lerning thy holy sriptures nether visited the sick and pore confortles /
norcessed fro my nowne synful will and lust prayeng at all times thy will and not
mine to be fulfilled, wherefore I cry the mercy and desire the of forgiveness
Furthermor I have not honored mi father and mother I have not so much set by
them as thou commaundest me / ne obeyed them nether conforted them or helped
them etc. I have s^ayne, I have broken wedlock, I have stolen and boorne false
witness. Also I have coueted my neighbors house and his other gods unlawfully. I
have desired his wife, his servant his catell / etc. wherefore I cry the mercy
most merciful father and desire y^ for that love which thou bear to thy
dear son my savior Christ to forgive me in his blood: for wha^ I went about
to seek the, to trust to believe in the, or to do any thing to thy glory, yet
would not this lust and concupiscence, this contagious original poison and
fleshly dregs drawn of our father Adam su^^re me to do that I would have done
through this natural concupiscence, I strive and fight daily against the holy
ghost in me, which unlawful lust and desire I knowledge to be a grievous syn
agynst thy highness, without the which concupiscens I can not be, wherefore I
being a sinner of my self without al rightousnes without all goodness, all
holiness, all deseruyng, am come ^ow by faith before the unto Christ's mercy
stole and rightousnes, unto, his goodness, holiness, deseruyng and satisfactions
desyring the O merciful Father for his deaths sake, that his rightwisenesse /
his wisdom, holiness, goodness, meryts and satisfactions may be mine, and serve
me for my forgiveness and salvation For likewise as thou gave me him to dye for
my sins eue^ so believe I that thu have given me with him all his to be mine
and to serve me for my salvation, wherefore glory, worshipe, impery and rule be
to the o father, with thy soon in the holy ghost for ever. Amen.

The seven works of merycy
Furthermore, I have not given met to ye hou^gry, drink ^o ye thirsty, lodged
the harberles, clothed the naked, visyted the sick, conforted and releued them
in prysone. For I have not extemed of how great weight these words of thy
son my savior Christ ar, neither believed him saying. In as much as ye have
done these things unto one of the lest of these my brethren, ye have done, it
to me Mat.xxv But I have bestoed my gold and silver upon dead stones and
stocks and have suffered the living creatures and der beloved breth^^n of
Christ to go naked and to perish for cold and hongre. Thus gruously have I
sinned, leuing thy commandments (oh father) to do deeds of my nowne
imagination. wherefore I cry the mercy my god my father, desyring forgeuenes of
the blood. and for y^ dethes sake of thy son my savior Jesus christ. to whom
with the be glory, world without end. Amen.

Three manner of loves. First the love of god. the love of thy self, and the
love of thy neighbor.
IN this true belefe I shall first love god ye father almighty that mademe, and
our lord Jesus Christ that redeemed me and ye holy ghost that always inspireth me.
This blessed holy Trinite I shall always love and honor and serve with all my
heart, mi^de. and strength, and fere god alonly, and put my trust in him only.

The love of thy self.
Secondly, I shall love my self to god ward, and shall abstain from all sin
as much as I may, specially from the sins dedly

I shall not be proud nor envious nor wrothfull.

I shall not be glotonous nor lecherous, nor slothful.

I shall not be covetous, desyryng superfluite of worldly things.

And evil company I shall eschew and fly as much as I may.

I shall give me to grace and virtue and cunnyng in god.

I shall pray often, specially on the holy day.

I shall live always temperately and sobre of my mouth.

I shall fast the days commanded in Christ's church.

I shall keep my mind from evil and foul thoughts.

I shall keep my mouth from sweryng lyeng and foul speking

I shall keep my hands from steylyng and piking

Things taken away I shall restore again

Things found I shall restore again

The love of they neibour

Thirdly I shall love my neybour that is every man to god ward as min own self
and shall help him all his n^^^eitie spiritual and bod^ly as, I would beholpe^
my now self, specially my fa^^^ and my mother that brought me into this world

The master that techeth me I shall honor and obey

My f^lows that learn with me I shall love

^ Penance
If I ^al to syne I shall anon rise again by penance and pure confession

Here after follows the saing of Sal

These, vi. things the lord hates and the seventh he utterly abhors
^Proud look a disse^bling tou^g hands that shead, Innoce^tes blood. an heart
yt goes about with wicked ymaginacions, feet that be swift in runnyng to do
mischief, a false witness that brings us lies and such one as sows discord
among brethren Proverbs. vi,

These things following should we ever have in our mind
THe sins that we daily do the short time y^ we shall abide he^e The
vncertainte of y^ dai of our death, The unstableness and frailte of us. The
strayte and fearful judgment of God, The bitter and unspeakable pains
ordained for sins The everlasting loss of eternal glory

Imprinted at London by Rychard Kele dwelling in Lombert streat at the syne of
the Egle


