A SERMON UPON PART OF THE SEcond chapter of the first epistle of S. John:
Preached by THOMAS INGMETHORP.

The sum whereof is briefly comprised in this Hexameter:

Omne tulit punctum qui (...) miscuit arti: He bears the bell away,
that lives, as he does safe.
John. 13.17. If ye know these things, blessed are ye, if ye do them.

At Oxford, printed by JOSEPH BARNES, Printer to the University. 1598.

TO THE WORSHIPFVL, MASTER THOMAS FLIT, one of the head-magistrates of the
City of Worcester T. I. wishes increase of all things appertaining both to
this life and to the life to come.
SIR, being importuned by diverse, for the publishing of this Sermon, which (as
they protested) not without some fruit they had heard me preach: I have
condescended at length unto their desire. The rather, for that by dedicating
the same unto your worship, I might be occasioned (as I thought,) to giue-forth
some testimony of my goodwill and thankefulnes toward you, to whom I am so
deeply beholding, and so many ways indebted. If there were no other thing but
this, that at the Font you vouch-safed to undertake for me, I should
over-shoote my self far, if I did not think very dutifully of you; but seeing
that ever since, you have enameld, as it were, and embroidered that
graund-benefite with infinite other kindnesses, from time to time, as occasion
was ministered: Surely, if I should not lay hold of every opportunity, whereby
I might reflect any toke^ of an affectionate mind I were highly to blame; yea
my own conscience would appeach and vpbraid me of foul ingratitude. Such
therefore as it is: I do here offer and present unto you. Desiring you to
esteem of it, not according to the simple workema^ship which has been mine:
but according to the worth and value of the stuff, which has bin all, I dare
assure you, digged-out of the most precious mine of Gods word. My trust is, the
goodness of the one, will be always able to counter-peise the rudenes of the
other. God bless you, and preserve you: that you may long live, to be a
principal stay and ornament, to that worthy City, my native nest. Where how
sore you will be missed, whenever it shall please the Lord to translate you
from it unto himself, we may take a scantling (no disparagement to any) by
the exceeding great steed you long have and daily do stand it in. And thus
recommending this homely present unto your good acceptance, and you and yours
to the most gracious tuition and patronage of the Almighty, I take my leave.
From Stainton in the street, in the Bishopric of Durrham the 1. of March.
1597.

Your Worships in the Lord, THOMAS INGMETHORP.

TO THE READER.
HEre have thou (gentle Reader) this simple Sermon of mine, made at the first
for the hearing of few, but now by request set-forth to the common view. For
my part, Novi quam sit mihi c^^ta supellex.
truly I never meant it: but when frindes be set-on a thing, they are
importunate, and will not be said nay. Indeed it would better fit my
note-booke, then the press: yet if it shall please thee to give it the
reading, I doubt neither of thy profiting by it, nor of thy well accepting of
it. It is no seditious pamphlet to raise mutiny, nor amarous toye to nourish
wantonness; which the more thou perusest, the more thou abusest thy time, and
the more they affect, the the more they infect thee: but a sound and serious
discourse of holy Scripture; wherein is sounded as with a shrill trumpet a
retraite from sin, and men put in mind, to join virtue and truth, knowledge
and practice, repentance and faith, a Godly life and a good belief together:
upon which two points, as upon two poles, the whole sky of Christianitye is
turned. God give thee grace to follow the whole some counsel therein
delivered, to his glory and thy comfort, through Jesus Christ.

T. I.

It is written in the second chapter of the first epistle of S. John the third,
fourth, sift and sixth verses.
3. Hereby we are sure that we know him, if we keep his commandments. 4. He
that says I know him, and keeps not his commandments, is a liar, and the
truth is not in him. 5. But he that keeps his word, in him is the love of
God perfect indeed: hereby we know that we are in him. 6. He that says he
remains in him, ought even so to walk, as he has walked.
THis portion of Scripture (welbeloved in the Lord) consists of two parts:
of a proposition and a confirmation. The proposition in effect imports thus
much, that the knowledge and faith of Christ, if it be of the right stamp
indeed, is never solitary, but always accompanied with the keeping of Gods
co^ma^dements, whereby, as a tree by the fruit it is discerned: being contained
in these words: Hereby we are sure that we know him, if we keep his
commandments. He that says, I know him, and keeps not his commandments,
is a lier, and the truth is not in him. The confirmation stands upon two
reasons: the one drawn from the effects, where it is said, But he that keeps
his word, in him is the love of God perfect indeed: Hereby we know that we
are in him; The other derived from the example of Christ in the clause
following: He that faith her remains in him, ought even so to walk as he
has walked. The scope and drift of all, is to bear down the vanity of those
men, which professing the name of Christ, lived not with standing
unchristianly, to the manifest flaunder and derogation of the same. Wherein as
in a glass or mirror, by way of reflection, we may behold the spots of our
own deformity: whose co^versation being compared with our profession, is for
the most part no more consona^t thereunto, then the harsh iars of discord, to
the sweet harmony of music, as if they had made a wager, which should vary
most either from other. Touthing the uniting of which divisio^, motion has bin
made, so often, so earnestly, both here and elsewhere, that it may seem, but
a needeles or booteles office, to solicit the same agame. Howbeit, as the
Physician never cease to minister, till his sick pacie^t be wholly recovered:
even so it behooves us the Lords Physicians, daily to apply the most
wholesome medicine of Gods word, till the malady of sin, wherewith men's souls
are sore diseased, be thoroughly healed and recured. But before I come to the
particular points, let us pray etc.

3. Hereby we are sure that we know him, if we keep his commandments. 4. He
that says, I know him, and keeps not his commandments, is a her, and the
truth is not in him. This is the proposition (as I said) and is co^trived (if
ye mark) of an excellent Antithesis. A figure of speech, very familiar with S.
John, both in his Gospel and Epistles, not so much for perspicuitie, as
vehemency sake. Hereby we are sure that we know him, that is, by this
argument, we may certainly persuade our selves, that we have the true
knowledge and faith of Christ, if we keep his commandementes. For the Apostle
speaks not here of a bart historical knowledge, Iam. 2.19.
which the Devils themselves have, and are never the nearer: but of that saving
knowledge, whereby we are justified, as the Prophet Esaias witnesses. Esa. 53.11.
But this be amplyfieth, by setting against it, another proposition of the
contrary: He that says I know him, and keeps not his commandments, is a
lier, and the truth is not in him: as if he had said, the keeping of Gods
commandments is an evident token of the true knowledge and faith of Christ, to
boast therefore of the one, without having apparent testimony of the other, is
but a Thrasonicall brag, a loud lie void of truth. Which accords with the
premises on this manner, whereas I said before, that Christ was given us of
God the father, to be the reconciliation for the sins of the whole world, 1.
Ioh. 2.2.
and that we must use him for our mediator and advocate with the father, let
no man gather thereupon, verse. 1.
that it is sufficient to be called a Christian, to learn the stories of the
Bible by rote, neither yet to be partaker of the holy Sacraments instituted by
Christ. For besides all this there is an other matter of far greater moment and
importance required at our hands, namely, a lively knowledge of Jesus Christ,
which is a work and influence of the holy Ghost. It graffeth us wholly into
Christ: ravisheth us with admiration and love of him, so as we hunger and
thirst after nothing more, then to testify the same to the world, by our
obedience toward him in keeping his commandments. This carfulness to walk
in the way of Gods commandments, who so feels effectualy wrought in him,
may well ascertaine his conscience, to the unspeakable joy and iubily of his
soul, that he is endued with the true knowledge and faith of Christ indeed.
But otherwise, if he find no inclination, no disposition at all, but rather a
backewardenes and repugnancie in himself that way, let him leave glorying in
any such vain paradise: for he does but he, and play the Hypocrite. And this,
as near a I can utter, is the true purport and meaning of the Apostles words.
Wherein are wrapped many very good points of doctrine worth the unfolding, as
well for comfort as instrucion.

And first it is not lightly to be passed over, that S. John says not barely,
we think, or we suppose, but (...), by this we are sure, that we know him. A
clear evidence, and strong proof, that we may have certain knowledge of our
salvation. For salvation being apprehended by faith, as the whole tenor of
scripture every where defines, in that the Apostle here plainly confesses,
we may be sure of our faith, nay sets down an infallible note of the
certainty thereof, it cannot be, the faithful should be uncertain or
doubtful of their salvation. This does flatly repeal that dangerous and
wicked Cannon of the counsel of Trent, Sess. 6. c. 9.
whereby men are taught always to stagger, and stand in doubt of their
salvation, as being impossible for any in this life, to know of a surety that
he in particular shall be saved, without by some special privilege from God,
he be made privy thereunto. A faithles doctrine (...) like a ship in a
storm without helm or compass betwixt the billows and surges of the sea?
but no marvel, though the Papists do thus lesson their scholars always to
doubt of their salvation, the ground, the matter and form as it were, of whose
doctrine, is their own lucre and gain. For once let this truth be admitted
off, that Christians be by the word and spirit of Christ assured of their
salvation by him: then may they straight, poor men, bid adue, and singe a
perpetual requie^ for the soul of their priesthood, their pardons, their
trentals, their dirgies their chauntries, their censing, their singing, their
ringinge, their masses and prayers for the dead, with whatsoever mercenary
trumperie else of like stamp. For bar them of their profit (the only butte,
the only white they aim at) and all these, I warrant you, will quickly lie in
the dust (if that common proverb be not wro^gly fathered on them: no penny no
pater noster.) Again in that they look to be saved by their own works,
which (alas) they cannot but see in their guilty co^scie^ces (howsoever they
hoodwinke and blindfold their eyes against ye light of ye truth) to be spotted
and vnpetfect, and such as are not able to abide ye touch of Gods justice: how
ca^ they stand resolute me^, but needs must remain scrupulous and suspicious
of salvation, as not knowing, whether they have desartes enough to serve their
turn or no? Thus does the spirit of giddines, wherewith the malignant Church
is intoxicate and governed, Like the Rat: prodi^ seipse S^rez
bewraie it self eve^ by his own doctrine.

Secondly comes to be marked the certain mark, whereby to discern the true
Christian, from the counterfeit and Hypocrite. True it is that faith makes a
Christian: howbeit, because it does many times lie hid, and we cannot readily
judge of other men's minds, wherein faith has her seat and mansion: therefore
the Apostle shows, how the faithful may be descried by an outward mark: and
that is the keeping of Gods commandments. Whereby is meant, not that perfect
and continual abiding in all things commended and commanded in the law, to
which condition, Levit. 18.5.
do this and live is annexed, (a burden to heavy for any wordly wight to
bear so long as we are environed on every side with the infirmities of the
flesh:) Gal. 3.12.
but only that careful study and endeavor, wherewith the faithful soul is
inflamed and set one fire toward the commandments of God to fulfill them in
some good measure, as God shall enable him, whereunto nevertheles, by reason of
the corruption of our nature, much imperfection will cleave, will he, nill he,
when he has done the best he ca^. Neither did S. John feign this mark of his
own head, but learned it of his master Christ. Ioh. 14.23.
For he says: he that has my words, and keeps them, is he that loves me:
verse. 24.
And again as it were doubling his blow; he that loves me not, keeps not
my word: and in another where: ye are my friends if ye do whatsoever I command
you. So when God the father had made solemn proclamation from heaven: Mat.
17.5.
this is my beloved son in whom I am well pleased: to admonish us of our
duty withal, he adioyneth: hear him: signifying thereby, not the hearing of
those things, which Christ should give in charge in his word with our outward
ears only, but the expressing and practicing of the same in our lives and
conversation: for they only are pronounced blessed of him, Luc. 11.28
which hear the word of God and keep it. As therefore that son does
degenerate and is not worthy to bear the name of his father, which studieth
not by all means possible to obey and please his father: even so no more is he
to be esteemed a true Christian, and child of God, which endeavors not, as
much as in him lies, to approve himself to God ye father, by keeping of
Christ's commandments, wherein only he delights. But above all, this one thing
I would have escecially noted, as it were with a hand in the marge^t: that S.
John reckons for true and faithful Christians, only such, as observe and
keep the commandments of Christ. This touches to the quick al those that
imagine Christianity to be placed in the observing of humane traditions: nay
stiffly co^te^d with tooth and nail not some piece, but the very perfecio^, and
as it were quintessence thereof to consist therein. As for example; the
Fra^cisca^ Friet must no remedy be reputed holier the^ the rest, because he
follows the rule of S. Francis. The Dominican, he prefers himself before
the Franciscan, and all other Christians: for that he professes the rule of S.
Dominike: and so of the rest of those irregular orders. But it is the rule of
Christ, that makes a Christian: and therefore we must either hold our selves
satisfied with it; or else show that S. S. Francis, Dominicke and other such
like patrons of theirs, have found out somewhat that is more holy and perfect,
the^ that which was delivered and established by Christ: which once to think
or speak were horrible blasphemy. Verily as no man will take him to be a
right English-ma^ borne, who refuses to live after the laws, statutes and
co^stitutio^s of England: so is not he to be deemed a true Christian, who to
choose embraces the hests of men before the co^ma^deme^ts of Christ. Our
savior himself is plain and pere^tory in this behalf: Mat. 15.9
in vain do me^ worship me, teaching doctrins that are but the traditions of
me^: verse. 13.
and eury pla^t which my heve^ly father has not planted, 1. Cor. 1.12.
shall be rooted up. S. Paul sharply rebukes those which said I hold of Paul,
3.3.
I of Apollos, I of Cephas: and condemns the Corinthians as carnal: for that
by those names they were severed and sundred as it were into so many sorts and
sects of professions. But we (alas) at this day are grown to such madness,
that we magnify and extol the^ for holyones: we applaud and admire, yea and
adore the^, as the only perfect men of the world, who disdaining and despising
the name of Christians, made unto us expressly lawful and honorable by the
word of God, do call themselves Fra^ciscans, Dominicans, Bernardines,
Benedictines, Augustines and I cannot tell what, rather then Christians. But
howsoever they vaunt themselves of their perfection, Miles gloviosus.
like the glorious soldier in the comedye of his imaginary valor, and swell
like Esops toade, till they burst again with the proud titles of Angelical,
Seraphicall, and Cherubinical: yet by the verdit of S. John, or rather of the
holy Ghost, in despite of all Monkish Friars and Frierly Monks, they only
are indeed, and are to be accounted true Christians, which apply themselves
wholly to the observing and keeping of Christ's commandments.

But some man may ask what those co^mandeme^ts which import us so greatly to
be kept, are? for if he harken to the prelates of the Romish Church and popish
religion they will tell him, they are none other, but the same which they both
practice themselves, and prescribe unto others to be done. But to be resolved
aright of this doubt, he must in no wise be carried away with ours or theirs,
yea or nay: but hold him self sure to the word of Christ, sounding in the
scriptures. For Christ Jesus, as S. Paul bears record, being yester day, and
to day, Heb. 13.^.
and the same for ever: it is a clear case, that all such things, as Christ
has appointed heretofore to be kept, do and shall remain in full force, even
to the worlds end. And seeing he is the wisdom of God the father: 1. Cor.
1.24.
and the father gave the spirit unto him not by measure, Ioh. 3.34.
but in such abundance, as we all partake grace of his fullness: can the
perfection of Christ's commandments be doubted-off, but the perfection of God
himself, and of the holy ghost, must needs be called into question
therwithall? furthermore in that God, in the old Testament, gave such a law, as
might neither be added-to, Deuteronomy. 4.^.
nor taken-from, without attaint of high treason against the Highest, as the
holy Ghost in sundry places affirms: is it likely, I appeal and report me to
your own consciences, that our estate under the Gospel, in the time of
reformation, should be in worse case then theirs, and so uncertain that it
should need every day, new additions to be supplied, new pieces of traditions
to be patched, to be cobled and clowted thereunto Besides it is apparent, that
Christ gave not so much liberty, no not to his Apostles, to obtrude and thrust
upon the Church, whatsoever seemed good unto them: but he restrained their
commission with this limitation: go gather me disciples out of all nations,
Math. 28.19.
teching them to observe whatsoever I command you. 20.
Where upon S. Paul grew so precise, that he doubted not, to denounce anathema
against him whomsoever, Gal. ^.8.
though in degree of an Angel, that should presume, to a^nounce any other
Gospel, then what himself, and his fellow Apostles had preached and published
before. But it shall be needful. I speak something of these commandments,
which be they. For though they be almost infinite, being severallye considered
in themselves: yet for plainness and shortenesse sake, they may be all
raunged, and as it were marshalled into three general ranks.

The first co^prehendeth all such, as concern our faith. Amongst which, that
leads the ring, whereby we are bound, to believe in God alone, according as
is put down foremost in the Decalogge, Iet. 17.5.
or ten co^mandeme^ts: For cursed be the man that trusts in man, and makes
flesh his arm. Next this marches that which pointeth-out Christ: in affiance
of whose merits and intercession, we may boldly repose our trust and
confidence in GOD. For except a man bring Christ with him, to be his
spoakes-man, in vain is he sent unto GOD, to treat for mercy: whilst the
testimonye of his own conscience will accuse and convict him, to be both a
sinner and the child of wrath. And that we must believe in Christ, he himself
does us to wit, where he says: this is the will of God that sent me, Ioh. 7.4^.
that evere one which sees the son and beleveth in him should have life
everlasting. Also where he inviteth those that be weary and laden to come unto
him to be disburdned and refreshed: Math. 11.28.
and the thirsty, to repair unto him, and drinko. Ioh. 7.37.
But because faith is no vain opinion, conceaved by the persuasion of man, but
a solid and sound apprehension of the things, which are exhibited in Christ:
it shall not be amiss, if we consider a little, what the scripture does
report as concerning Christ. For unless we do acknowledge him, to be such a
one, as he is there purtrayed and depainted to be, we can never fulfill the
commandementes of faith, but shall run headlonge, against the perilous rocks
of mis-beleefe, to the everlastinge hazard and shipwreck of our souls. For to
forge any thing of Christ that he is not, is as horrible, as to say there is
no Christ.

Whatsoever therefore is registered in scripture of Christ, either it touches
his person or his office.

The person of Christ is one: and therefore in no wise to be divided. Wherein
are ioiued two distinct natures: the one of the selfsame eternity, majesty
and substance with God the Father; the other in the time prefixed, taken of the
Virgin Marie. Both these I say, be co^ioyned in one person, but not confounded.
For the Deity remains whole, and is not stained with any spot of humane
infirmity: neither is the humanity swallowed-vp with the glory of the divine
majesty. But as he is perfect God: so is he likewise perfect man, consisting of
a true humane body and reasonable soul. This may be avoued by many manifest
testimonies of holy writ. For the old Prophets in regard of the divine
nature of Christ, Esai. 7.6.
call him wonderful, Zach. 13.9.
the everlasting Father, Ier. 23.6.
coequall with God, eternal, yea and which more is, the Lord and God himself:
Esai. 11.1.53.2.
but having respect to his manhood, they name him a branch, a graffe of the
root of Iesse, David, the son of David, the last and least amongst men. Ioh.
1.1.
In the gospel likewise, there is express mention made of the Godhead of
Christ; in the beginning was the word, Verse. 14.
and the word was with God, and that word was God: but the same Changelist in
the same place intimating his humane nature says further; 10 30.
and that word was made flesh: not by making exchange of his divinity, but
by taking our humanitye into him: For by way of exposition he adds; and
dwelt among us. So CHRIST himself, 8.58.
speaking in the person of the son of GOD, says; I and the father are one:
14.28.
and before Abraham was, I am: but in the person of man he says; the Father
is greater then I. Much might here be alleged for further proof of this
point, if need required. But let it suffice us, that it is a special
commandment of CHRIST, necessary to be believed of every true Christian
man, that Jesus Christ, in one person, is very GOD, and very man: This figure
of speech, is called of some, (...): of Damascene, (...): but commonly,
communicatio idiomatum: a communicating or mutual intercourse of properties:
whe^as that is vouched of one, which is proper to another.
both those natures being in such sort united and knit together, that the
properties of either, do abide sound, though by reason of ye Hypostaticall
conjunction and union betwixt them, it comes often to pass, that that is
attributed unto whole Christ, which properly belongs but to one of the
natures only. Which caution, if we give not good heed unto, in reading holy
scripture, we may soon run contrary, ere we be aware, with Arrius, Evion,
Marcion, Valentinus, Nestorius and others, who, through oversight in that
point, entangled themselves with many gross heresies, to the great annoyance
of the Church, and their own utter destruction. The informatto^ of this
doctrine is very behoofeful, for the corroborating and strengthening of our
weak faith. For so much as otherwise, Christ could not have achieved that
wonderful exploit of our redemption, had he not bin, both God and man. Man; to
make satisfaction for man, that had offended: God; to overcome death, the due
stipend of sin, whom no mere man, of him self* was able to surprise.

The office of Christ, is implied in his names. For if that saying of the Poet
be found daily verified in a number: convenient fatis nomina saepe suis: men's
names often prove suitable and correspondent to their fortune and destiny: the
same ought especially to take place, in the son of God, so long longed and
looked-for. The name (Jesus) is an Hebrew word, (...)
and expresses his office, in a more general signification, for it sou^deth as
much, Mat. 1.21.
as a Savior, according to the true etymology thereof, given by the Angel.
Christ, is a Greek word, and does more specially notify his manner of saving
us. For whom the Grecians term Christ, (...)
the Hebrews call Messiah, and is as much in Latin, as vuctus, in English,
anointed. Now of old, by the ordinance and appointment of God, 1. King 1.3^
Kings and Priests were wont to be anointed, Exodus 30.30.
whom to have bin types and shadows of Christ, then to come, cannot be
gainesayed: and so answerably unto that figure, was our savior called Christ,
that is, anointed. Not that he was anointed with material oil, but as it is
in the Psalm, Psalm. 45.7.
with the oil of gladness: that is, with the gifts and graces of Gods holy
spirit, above all other his brethren, the sons of men: being consecrate
thereby, to take upon him the office, both of the chief and eternal
priesthood, and prince-hood of Gods people. In witness and token whereof, John
Baptist saw the holy Ghost, Math. 3.1.
in a visible form descending and lighting on him. In believing then, and
professing the son of God, to be Christ, we acknowledge and confess him, to be
both king and priest of Gods people, that is to say, of the whole Church. And
therefore except we will make of him an image without life, we must agnise in
him accordingly the duties, as well of the one, as of the other. The priests
office in time past, was to teach the people, and to instruct them in the law
of God, as also to pray, and offer sacrifice for the^. These things, are al
fully performed by Christ in every part, for he did not only teach the people,
when he was conversant upon earth; but still does to this day, whilst he
reveals and makes his will known to the Church by his ministers, and by his
spirit quickens the same in the hearts of men. Nay Christ is to be holden,
for the only and singular doctor and schoolmasters of the Church. 1. Cor. 1.7.
For ministers do but execute the external function only, which though it be
done, never so exquisitely, never so in printe, as they say: yet if Gods
spirit, do not inwardely concur therewithal, it avails no more, then if
a candle be set before a blind man, though never so bright, or a tale told
to a deaf man, though never so loud and shrill. J^epist. Jo^^^. tract. 3.
As Saint Austine says very well: think not that one man learneth any thing
of another: we may warn by the sound of our voice, but if he, who teaches
the heart, be not within, vain is the noise made without. Neither did he
only pray for his, whilst he lived in the flesh, but even now appears
before the face of the Father, to play the advocate and intercessour for us:
having offered a sacrifice, not such a one, as was accustomed in the old law,
but eue^ himself, his own body and blood, which being slaughtered on the
altar of the cross, has not only taken away the guilte of sin, and penalty
due unto the same, but also purchased the favor of his Father toward us.
Howbeit the manner of CHRIST'S priesthood, and theirs in the old Testamente,
is somewhat different. For the Leviticall priests, being but mortal men,
subject to death, they needed new successors, to be substituted in their
rooms, ever as they deceased: but CHRIST, in that he is immortal, and death
has now no more stroke over him, he wants no successor, as no Vicar
neither, as who is both able and willing enough of himself, to discharge that
function, which was assigned and allotted unto him of the Father; For unto him
it was said: Psalm. 110.4
thou art a priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedec. Heb. 7.17.10.4.
Again in that the blood of Oxen and Goats, was not of value sufficient, to
ransom the sins of the whole world: and al those swarms of sacrifices, used
in ancient time, were nothing but figures of that graund-sacrifice, to be
offered on ye cross; they were often to be renewed: 9.25.
But Christ once offered, entered not into yt holy places made with hands, but
into very heaven, there to appear in the sight of God for us: not yt he should
offer himself often, but by ye one oblation once offered, has obtained for
our sins, plenary deliverance, full and complete redemption. Who so then will
keep the commandments of Christ, appertaining unto faith, he must constantly
believe, that Jesus Christ, is ye only true, chief and everlasting priest of
Gods Church: who only has the words of eternal life: who only makes
intercession for us to the father: who by the only sacrifice of his body and
blood, once offered, and never to be reiterated or repeated again, has pur ged
the sins of the whole world. Now a word or two of his kingdom.

The duty of a king stands chiefly, in preserving the people committed to
his charge, in safety and public peace. For better performance whereof, he
must make good Laws, and cause them to be put in execution: he must be
vigilant and watchful for their welfare: cherish the good: chastise
malefactors: minister true justice: see every man have his own: yea and if
need be, shield and defend his subjects by force of Arms against all
unjust violence and tyrannical usurpation. But in Christ not one of all those
qualities, is wanting, if we consider what the Scripture giueth-out of him.
For he sought the good and tranquillity of his people so earnestly, that he
thought not his own precious hearte-bloode too dear, to spend it, for the
furtheraunce and procuremente thereof. He made laws not only availeable for
this life, but for the life to come: the same he vpholdeth maugre all
adversary power, heaping benefits and blessings upon such as obey, but
plagues and punishments upon transgressors diverse and sundry ways. Neither
lacks he weapons, where with to establish his own kingdom, and to subdue
his enemies. Heretofore he discomfited Satan, the captain general of al
impiety and wickedness: puld-out the sting of sin, that it can no more
mortallie wound us: vanquished the grave: daunted the power of death: queld
and crushed in pieces the gates of hell. And still he incounters daily by his
word, against Antichrist and all his imps and adherentes, the tyrauntes and
wicked ones of this world: them he kills with the breath of his mouth; yea
and many times brings most horrible judgments upon them: whilst stripping
them naked out of all their authority, pomp, riches, honors and possessions;
he cl^^theth them with misery, contempt and shame: whilst scattering their
counselles; defeating their purposes; frustrating and disappointing all their
plottes and practices; he tangleth them in the snares they had laid to
entrappe others with all: and like an arrowe shot against a brazen wall,
reboundeth their mischievous imaginations back again upon their own heads.
Examples hereof are rife, and every where to be seen. For what one kingdom
can there instance be giue^-off, what one, in all the world, whose laws,
privileges, swaie, majesty and dominto^ have endured so many ages, as we see
the kingdom and Church of Christ has stood and flourished inviolably? The
famous Monarchy of Assiria, which was founded by the first tyrants of the
world, the Empier of the Grecians and Persians, (at whose beck whilome the
whole world stowped, at whose frown they trembled and quaked) what trow ye
now, is become of them? are they not clean subverted? are not the very
foundations of them utterly razed, turned topsie turvie, vp-side down? and
what an ecclips, has befalled unto Rome for all the insolent crackes, which
have bin made of her, half an eye may see. To say nothing of other puissant
kingdoms, which sometime shone in exceeding glory, but now quite extinct and
scarce remembered. Only the kingdom, and Church of Christ continues safe and
sound, and though it has been maligned and assaulted sore from time to time,
by mighty and malicious adversaries, yet has it ever been so protected and
guarded by Christ at al assaies, that it never miscarried: but the more fierce
and fierye, the more furious and outrageous the enemy was bent against it, the
more it still abounded in strength and glory. In which respect the state
thereof was very significantlye represented unto Abraham in Genesis, Genesis 15.17
by a fire-brande flaming in the midst of a smoking furnace: Exodus 3.2.
and in Exodus by the bush which Moses saw burninge but consumed not away. And
for the same resemblance has been likened, sometimes to Cammomile, which the
more it is pressed-downe and trampled-on, the faster it grows, and spreads
farther, and smells sweeter: sometimes to the palm tree, which the more it
is laden, the more it mounteth under the burden: sometime to a vine, Just.
M^^^ de verit. Christ religi^ onis tom. 2^ page 224. lin^ 14.
which the more it is cut, dressed and pruned, the more fruitful it waxes:
sometimes to roses and lilies which sprout and flourish even among sharp
thorns. So true an oracle is that, not of Apollo of Delphos, but of the holy
Ghost: that the gates of Hell can never prevail against the Kingdom and
Church of Christ. And this accounte must we make of Christ, if we will
believe in him, according to his commandments. Whereunto must be referred
whatsoever the scripture delivers of him, and teaches him to be the whole
and sole savior of the world. So that they do violate and break the chief
commandment of Christ, who believe otherwise either of his person, or of his
office, then he has disclosed and taught in his word. They likewise offend,
that profess they carry such an opinion of Christ in those respects, as the
truth requires: but not contenting themselves with him alone, do ascribe
part of their salvation to their own works, or other creatures, as if he
without them, were insufficient to work the feate. For as there is but one
God, who will be worshipped by him self alone* so is there but one mediator
between God and man, 1. Tim. 2.5.
eve^ Jesus Christ, our true Immanuel, who is so ielous of his glory, Esai.
42.8.
that he cannot brook, that any other person, or thing whatsoever, should be
joined patent with him in the same. And thus much of the first rank, or band
of Christ's commandments.

The second rank is of those, which belong to the service of God, or external
religion. For albeit the true service of God be spiritual and stands
principally in the Canons and rules of faith before specified: yet God like a
merciful father, tendering the infirmity of us his children, aloweth certain
outward rites, for the better exercising of our inward religion and faith. And
therein he has set us bounds and limits, which we may not pass; least
following the current, the tide and stream of our own wisdom, we should
devise any kind of worship in the serving of him, which though it seem
never so devout and holy in our own eyes (as we are give^ overmuch to be
enamoured with our own inventions and good intentions, Est quique sibi
Suffenus^ Catul Cacus amor sui: Horat. Ovid. Met. lib. 3 fab. 6. (...): Naz.
as Narcissus fell in love with his own shadow:) yet can it not stand with the
nature and glory of God. The Jews, they had many many ceremonies prescribed
them, and well: for the more diversely the promised Messiah, was decyfered and
figured out unto them, the better it was for them, both to kindle their
devotion, and to confirm their faith. But now since the body it self, is
come in place, which was the end of the law, all those heaps of ceremonies
are vanished, and of right abrogated and abolished: and all things, whereby,
either our faith is to be helped, or our devotion to be furthered, do consist
in a few chief points. Amongst which we may afforde Church assemblies, the
first room, vy virtue of Christ's promise: Mat. 18.2^.
where two or three be gathered together in my name there am I in the midst of
them. But it skilleth not, how often we flock and flow together, except the
things be done, when we meet, for which we ought to assemble together in the
name of Christ (for otherwise goats use to heard together as well as sheep.)
Here then comes, in the ministry of the word, which Christ would have,
both sincerely preached, and attentively heard with faith: insomuch that he
makes the hearing of the word, aspeciall badge and cognizance, Joh. 8.47.
to know his servants by, Luc. 10.42.
and highly commends Marye for that whiles Martha cumbred her self about
much serving: she sat at Jesus feet and hard him preach. To this study of the
word, we must join fervent and heartye prayer: For the heavenly wisdom is
given to none but such, Jac. 1.5.
as seek and sue for the same at the hands of the father of lights by faithful
prayer. We must make our petitions then unto God, and not unto creatures, and
that in a lively faith, which banisheth all misdoubte of Gods good will toward
us, and assures us of his presence. These prayers, whether they be private or
public, how sweet a savor, how fragrant a smell they yield in the
nose-thrilles of the Lord, we may esteem by his vehemente and often calling
on us, Psalm. 50.14.
to use them: protesting, he sets more by the invocation of his name, then
by all other external service what soever. And for our better direction in
praying, we must learn, as to subject and submit our selves in all things, to
the will and pleasure of God: so to crave to be heard in all that we ask only
in ye name, and by ye mediatio^ of Jesus Christ. For being of our selves by
nature corrupt and sinners, we are not in case, to prescribe unto God, what he
should do for us; no nor without our mediator Christ Jesus, so much as to dare
to present or prostrate our selves before the throne of his divine majesty: as
Christ himself gives to understand, informing us, Ioh. 16.23.
both to pray in his name, Math. 6.10.
and in our prayers to say thy will be don in earth, as it is in heaven, These
things at atte^ded and waited-on, with the right use and administration of the
sacraments, to wit, Baptism and the Lords supper, where we must be wonderful
circusispecte, that they be neither profaned through irreverence or contempt,
nor polluted with superstition: remembringe, how careful Saint Paul was to
reform such abuses, 1. Cor. 11.23
as had crept into them among the Corinthians, according to the precise
pattern of Christ's original institution, not daring for his life to swerve
one hears breadth from it. These, these be the points, wherein the outward
service of God, does in a manner consist: viz. holy and Christian assemblies,
the preaching of the word, prayers and sacraments. All which as they were at
first simply ordained by CHRIST: so were they duetifully received, and
faithfullye observed of the primative Church, without alteration or
depravation. They that diligently addict and give themselves unto these things,
be they, that follow the commandementes of Christ, and by their so dooinge
evidentlye declare, that they have the true knoweledge and faith of Christ in
them. But such as setting them aside, broach new ceremonies of their own
brueing; abandon the Church; 01 contemn the word of God; embrace the
inventions of men; direct their prayers unto creatures, or in them use the
mediation of others to the father besides Christ: pervert the right use of the
Sacraments; and to all these add images, aulters, new consecrations; yea and
coin new Sacraments too: these cannot justly be said, to keep the
commandementes of Christ, in as much as the things which they use, were never
authorized by Christ: being indeed but birds, as the saying is, of their own
hatching, fancies of their own devising, without ground and warrant of the
word, the only authentical rule of our religion, and infallible pole-starre
for our direcion, in the service of God.

The third rank of Christ's commandementes compriseth all those, which serve
for managing of our behavior and manners. These may be extended as far, as
our whole life, and every action thereof does streach: but Saint John in the
third chapter following, reduces them all unto three general heads, where
he attributes to the children of God, purification, righteousness, and
brotherly love or charity. We are purged indeed, by the blood of Christ, yet
so, that we need daiely, to wash our feet, that is, Ioh. 13.10.
to shake-of the unclean affections of the flesh which carry us captive into
the triumph of sin. For as dirt and balm cannot well be tempered together:
so no more can we have fellowshippe and communion with God, Lev. 19.^
who is holiness it self, Esai.33.19.
so long as we lie drowned in the dregs of our own natural corruptions,
never once waving so much as a hand or a foot to get out. Righteousness
includes both tables: when as we yield both to God, and our neighbor,
whatsoever is due unto either of them from us, by the law. Charity does not
only prohibit injuries and wrongs: but also inioyneth the doing of good. But
these points, because they be daiely beaten-on in your hearing: let it suffice
at this time, that I have only pointed-at them. Holding for most certain, as a
case overruled unto us by the holy ghost, that they are but hers, dissemblers,
and Hypocrites, as many as do not imploie themselves, to the observing and
keeping of Gods comma^deme^ts: how glorious a show soever otherwise they make
of ye knowledge of Christ and his profession. But I see, I have stayed overlong
in handling this former part: I will therefore as it were upon the spur posse
over the other so much the more speedily.

5. But he that keeps his word, in him is the love of God perfect indeed:
Hereby we know that we are in him. This is the first reason, whereby our
Evangelist and Apostle goes about to justify the foresaid Proposition, being
taken (as I told you) of the effects, towit, the love of God, which the
knowledge of Christ ingendreth in us, and may be framed in form of argument, on
this fashion:

He that loves God truly, knows God truly:

But he that keeps Christ's commandments, loves God truly:

Ergo, he that keeps Christ's commandments, knows God truly, and is a
true Christian indeed.

Which consequence to be soundly inferred, not only scripture, but even common
sense inforceth. For is it possible a man should love God, whom he knows
not? the Poet could sing, Ovid.
ignoti nulla cupido: vncooth; vnkist: that which is unknown, is commonly
unregarded and out of request, be it of never so great excellency in it self.
(...): love does breed of the sight and knowledge of a thing. If Esops cock
had known the worth of the precious stone, he would not have set so light by
it: but because he knew not the value, therefore he esteemed more of a barely
corn. Now he that is ignorant of Christ, can never know God. Heb. 1.3.
For he is the brightness of his glory, Ioh. 1.18.
and the ingraued form of his person: and no man has seen GOD at anytime,
but the son, which is in the bosom of the father he has declared him. So
that a full knowledge of Jesus Christ must of necessity go before, especially
seeing a cold profession of the love of GOD is not enough, but we stand
bound to love him above all things, to rely wholly upon him, and for his
sake, to relinquish father, Math. 10 3.7.16.24.
mother, wife, children, yea and our selves and all. Marc. 8.34.
But again this so great love of GOD, cannot be without the keeping of
Christ's commandments: it being the nature and property of love, to fashion
and conform it self, as near as possible may be, unto the will and
disposition of the party, whom it affects. So the son is careful to obey
his fathers commandments not driven of any servile or slavish fear: but
moved of a filial and childe-like love he bears toward him. And God, for
none other cause, requires us to love him, with all our hearts, with all our
strength, and with all out souls: but that that love should frame us, to a
dutiful obedience toward him; insomuch that we shall think; nothing too
much we do, to be joined with him, who is our only felicity and sovereign
good, so tenderly and entirely beloved of us. And therefore, since neither the
love of God, can be separated from the knowledge of CHRIST, nor it, from an
holy life ordered according to the prescript of his commandementes: the Apostle,
ye see, has sufficiently auerred his purpose, that they which keep Christ's
commandments, know Christ indeed, and are true Christians. As for the
perfect love he speaketh-of, it is not to be construed in that sense, as
though we could in this life, arrive unto the perfection of love, or of any
other virtue: for (God knows) as we know but in part, so we love but in in
part. But either to recommende unto us the continual endeavor of perfection,
which every true Christian, according to the proportion and strength of grace
received, ought to aspire unto, and strive toward, though it be beyond his
reach to attain unto it, until the world to come, 1. Cor. 15.28.
when God shall be all in all, and perfectly consummate the good work, which
he has here graciously begun: or else, the word perfect must be taken, as
opposite to feined, after an Hebraisme, very usual in divine scripture so that
perfect love betokens true, (...) perfect, for which Targhum has commonly
(...) but Hier. simplex: and Lxx. (...), idest, (...), Gel. non fictus no^
fucatus: which is, not with out fault, but without double nes or dissembling.
See for all Genesis 25.27.
hearty, sincere and unfeigned love, which God of his mercy will accept and
crown, though it come many aces short, of that absolute degree of perfection,
which the rigor of the law precisely exacteth, measuring his gifts in us
(such is the profounde riches of his goodness toward us,) not by the effect,
but affect of our doings. And the better to excite and stir us up heereunto
our Apostle proceeds further, and shows, what singular fruit, profit and
commodity we shall reap thereby, which being duly weighed, is able to set
an edge on the blu^test apperite, if it have any metal of the holy Ghost in
it. For he says: Hereby we know that we are in him. The love of God the^,
which begets in us, the keeping of Christ's commandments, is a sure sign
and undoubted certificate that we are ingraffed into Christ, the greatest
dignity, preeminence and prerogative in the world, and alone is of efficacy
sufficient to underset and stablish our weak faith, against all the doubtings
of frail flesh, if there were no other pillar, as there be infinite, to
supporte and proppe it with beside. For if we be in him, he must needs be
in us, according to that comfortable saying of his: Ioh. 14.23.
if any man love me, he will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and
we will come unto him and will dwell with him. So that he that knows God
truly, loves him truly, and keeps his commandments, has not only Christ,
but also the father restaunt and dwelling in him: which is the assured
salvation of man, and procures that glory, brings that bliss with it,
which al ye glory and bliss of this world, is not able to match or
counter-vaile, how notable soever. Thus the Apostle, after the example of
Christ, considering how dull and lumpish we are unto every thing that good is,
uses most forcible motives, as sharp spurs, to prick us forewarde, and as
strong ropes to draw us on, to the performance of those things, which he
would induce us unto. And because it is the cast of every body, be they never
so destitute of grace, never so bereft of Gods holy spirit, and unto every
good work reprobate, to pretend themselves never the less, to be of the
number of those, which are incorporate into Christ, and have CHRIST abiding in
them: therefore to discover their mask, and pluck the visard of hypocrisy
clean away from their faces, he takes occasion thereby to inculcate, to
urge and grate upon their duty again, saying:

6. He that says, he remains in him ought even so to walk as he has
walked. This is the other reason, and is like that which he made before in the
1. chapter, of the light. He that will be joined and coupled together with God,
must endeavor to resemble him in conditions: but God is light and in him is no
darkness at all: therefore he that will be one with God, must walk in the
light of virtue and truth, and not in the darckenesse of ignorance and sin.
By a like reason he teaches here, that such as will be Christians, must
imitate the example of Christ and tread in his steps. But the argument carries
the more force with it, by reason of the straight conjunction, wherein we are
co^bined with Christ. For it is the work of faith, that we are grassed into
Christ, and receive again from him of his spirit: by mean whereof, it
comes to pass, that in all our behavior, there appears a lively picture
of the life of Christ. Which union Saint Paul having an eye unto, says: thus
I live, Gal. 2.20.
yet not I now, but Christ lives in me. But how can they walk otherwise then
Christ has walked in whom Christ by his spirit lives? For the spirit of
Christ is never idle: but where it is, there it does regenerate, mortify the
lusts of the flesh, and resist sin. Now the manner of CHRIST'S walking, and
what kind of life he lead on earth, is faithfully described by the
Evangelistes in the Gospel, whatsoever therefore we find inrow led there of
him, it behooveth us, if we will not glory of his name in vain, to transporte
the same by imitation into our lives and conversation. Surely since Christians
borrow their name of Christ, it is meet, requisite and our bounden duty, that
we should be, as diligent in learning his doctrine, that we may know what
to profess: so careful in observing his doings, that we may adorn and
bewtyfie our profession with Godly demeanor. It is a shame for any man, to
profess himself, to be a scrivener, if he cannot use his pen; or a
soldier, and cannot handle his weapon: none can well claim the title without
the effects. None can well take the name of a preacher, except he be able by
the word of God to teach, co^vince, correct, instruct; nor of a Carpenter
except he can hew, and square, and plain, and frame and foyne the timber
together: so cannot ye be Christians, except ye bring-forth the works of
Christians. A Christian, is no mathematical fantasy, but an essential
thing. It is a name of equity, of justice, of truth, mercy, integrity,
chastity, wisdom, patience, humblenes, devotion: neither can ye of right
challenge the name, if ye be void of the works. He is a Christian, that
suteth himself in all points unto the fashion of Christ. We read in Matthew of
S. Peter, that as he sat in the Hall, Mat. 27.69
a maid came to him saying, thou also wast with Jesus of Galile. verse. 71.
And when he went out into the porch, another maid saw him and said unto
them that were there, This man was with Jesus of Nazareth. verse. 73.
After a while came unto him, they that stoode-by. and said unto Peter,
surely thou art also one of them: for even thy speech bewraieth thee. Even so,
my brethren, in like sort should be our manners and carriage, our words and
our deeds and all our actions of life, in love in joy, in peace,
long-suffring, gentleness, goodness, meekness, temperance, and all other
good-works and fruits of the holy ghost, that all that see us, may be
enforced straight to say of us, that we be Christians, havinge our whole life
in all parts, and every lineament thereof, so far forth as the frailty of our
humane estate and condition will permit, squa red by the pattern of Christ's
example. Such in old time was the life of all, that marched under Christ's
banner. John Baptist was a burning and a shininge candle: Ioh. 5.35.
S. Paul an example of integrity: Act. 9.36.
Dorcas full of good works and alms deeds. Phil. 3.15.
The Philippians shone as lights in the world, their lives did testify what
they were. Iustine Martyr witnesses of himself, that he was first converted
to the faith of Christ, for the liking that be had of the innocente and godly
life of Christian men. But if all that this day profess the name of CHRIST,
were weyed in this balance, were examined and tried by this touchstone, alas,
alas, how many of us would be found too light? How few would prove current
Christians? What one is there amongst an hundredth, that sets himself, to
follow the president of Christ's example, to walk in his steps, to live his
life? nay whom has not Satan that old Serpent, brought to his bent, trained
to his lure, wryed to his crooked by as? It is recorded of a running Musition
that setting his scholars to a rude minstrill to learn music of him,
Bishop Iuell.
before they went, he gave them this caveat by the way, whatsoever ye see your
master do before you, see that ye avoid it, and do the contrary; he is but
a bungler and his lessons and manner of fingring naught. To use a like
comparison between unlike persons: we come to school to Christ, to learn of
him, how we ought to live; but whereas we should follow him in all things,
he being the only express samplar and rule of all Godliness, it seems by
the whole trade and course of our life, that we deal by him, as the Musition
hade his scholars do by the bad minstrell For look whatsoever we see Christ
has done before us, we go as nere as we can, to do the clean contrary, as
by laying his doings and ours together, will most manifestly appear. He was
holy; we sinful: he heavenly; we earthly he spiritual; we carnal: he
obedient to Gods will in all things; we rebellious: he humble; we puft-vp with
pride: he chaste; we incontinent: he sober; we intemperant: he zealous of Gods
glory; we keye-cold: he patient; we murmurors: he quiet; we quarelous: he
meek; we surly: he a peacemaker; we sowers of debate: he compassionate; we
strait-lated in one bowels: he loyal; we treacherous: he liberal; we
covetous: he merciful; we cruel. Finally, his life was a mirror of all true
holiness and righteousness: but ours, a sincke of all carnality, dissolutenes
and Epicurisme, governing our selves for the most part, more like brute beasts,
by the motion of our passions, the^ like good Christians, by the line and
level of Christ's most blessed example. But be not deceabed: this
lip-profession is no armor of proof against the deadlye shot of GODS wrath
full indignation. If we continue thus to deny CHRIST in our lives; whom in
tongue and other outward appearance, we seem to profess: to draw near
unto GOD with our lips; our hearts being all together alienated and
estraunged from him: to make a face of amity with the Lord; and practice
enemitie: to pretend truce in words; and in deeds proclaim open war and
hastility against him. If we be only hearers of the word; and not doers of
the same: talkers of the Gospel: not walkers after the Gospel: knowers of
Christ, not keepers of his commandments: Let us hope for no better, but to
have our portion with hypocrites, in the lake that burns with fire and
brimstone: for the mouth of the Lord, Mat. 21.19.
has sealed it. Certes we may read our doom in the fig tree, which for all it
was garnished with goodly green leaves: yet because it was unfruitful, it was
accursed. The Jews cried-out the temple of the Lord, Ier. 7.4. (...).
the temple of the Lord, we have the temple of the Lord amongst us: yet
because their life was not conformable to their profession, their sacrifices
became abomination unto the Lord, and the^selus, though the peculiar people of
God, were at length utterly discarded for bastards and cast-awaies. Revel 2.5.
verse. 4.
The ca^dlestick was removed out of Ephesus, for leaving their first works. Let
us like wise me^ by other folks harms learn to beware. Foelix quem faciunt
aliena pericula ^^^tum.
Let botemen look one way, and row another: let the crab-fishse forward, and
swim backward; let stage players, put-on other persons, then they are: let that
profane proverb, saying and doing is two men's offices: be verified among the
heathen and infidels; let it have no place among us, that profess Christ. Let
our conversation and our profession, our words and our works, our lips and
our lives, our hands and our hearts, our sayings and our doings, agree in one
tune, draw in one line together, as beseems and becomes good Christians:
else, Forewarned, forearmed they say.
if we be guilty of the same hypocrisy the Jews were, let us be sure to
smart for it, as the Jews did. In a word, let us be the same men indeed we
would so feign seem to be in show. We would be called Christians, let us then
walk worthy of Christ: otherwise it will not advantage us, as Origin says, to
confess that Christ is come in the flesh, which he took of the virgin Mary;
if in this our flesh, we disclaim the end wherefore he came, which was that
we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, might serve the Lord in
holiness and righteousness, all the days of our lives. We would be called
the children of light; if then in place of the works of the light, we delight
and wallow in the works of darkness: what other may we expecte, but to be
cast out into utter darkness, with the Devil and his Angels? We would be taken
for the Lords harvest; if then, for the good corn of virtue and godliness, we
yield nothing but chafe of vanity, and cares of wickedness and sin: what other
may be looked-for, but to be gathered by reapers into bundles, and to be
thrown into everlasting fire? We would be counted for good ground, if the^
drinking-in the rain and dew of Gods blessings, which shower down so often,
and so ple^teously upon us, we bring not forth good herbs, but weeds and
brambles and briers: we are near unto cursing, whose end is to be burned. We
would be esteemed for a choice vinyard, which the Lord has planted in a
fertile soil, which he has fenced, dressed and manured, which he has
watered and cherished with all the streams of his goodness, if now in steed of
sweet grapes of sa^ctity and good works, we bring-forth bitter clusters and
grapes of gall, of lewdnes and ungodly life: then is our judgment most
severely, but most deservedly awarded already: he shall break down the hedge of
our vineyears, and lay it wast, so that they that go-by, shall make havoc of
the grapes, and the wild-bore out of the forest shall root it up. God be
merciful unto us and bless us, and show us the light of his countenance, and
grant us grace, so to profess his only begotten, and well belooved son,
Christ Jesus: that knowing him, we may love him, and loving him, in such sort
keep his commandments, and follow his example, that in the end, we may live
and reign with him everlastingly, in his heavenly kingdom; whereunto he bring
us, who has so dearly purchased the same for us, even Jesus Christ, our only
King and high priest to whom with the father and the holy Ghost, three persons
and one God, be rendered all honor, power, glory and dominion now and
evermore. Amen.


