A SERMON PREACHED Before the Honorable Assembly of Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses, of the lower House of Parliament, February the last, 1623. BY ISAAC
BARGRAVE: Doctor in Divinity; Chaplain to the Prince's Highness; and Pastor of
St MARGARETS Church in WESTMINSTER.

LONDON: Printed by G. P. for John Bartlet, and John Spencer: and are to be
sold at the Gilded Cup in Cheap Side. 1624.

TO THE HONORABLE, MOST RELIGIOUS, And Loyal Assembly, of the Knights,
Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons House of Parliament.
IN the opinion of the most Accurate, a Sermon once delivered, goes afterward
to the Press as to execution. And where-euer there is but an equal part of
Plato's (...) in pronuntiation, Quintilians Rule will no Lib. 11. cap. 3.
question prove true; Ita quisque vt audit, movetur. But my aim is always
more at the heart, than at the ear; and in my present Endeavors, my chief
ambition is, to serve you, while you serve the Common-Good. That, by your
command, is now in a dead Letter, which lately, by your sufferance, lived in
the mouth of the Speaker. Your favor calling me to the Pulpit, made me truly
feel my weakness; And nothing but your Authority commanding me to the Press,
is able to sustain it. The speedy execution of your command, gave me no time
to perfect what in too little time I had conceived; how-euer, with me, to
speak honestly, is to speak Eloquently. My soul professes, I could
willingly have spent the whole labor of my life upon so worthy an Assembly; to
express the desire whereof, (by the encouragement of many of your own Body) I
shall speedily annexe to this, two other Sermons, the one against Bribery, and
the other against Selfe-Policy; both which, I will be bold to call, The
Character of mine own heart toward the public good of our Church and
Commonwealth. For this in particular, be pleased to accept what your selves
have commanded, and favor me with the liberty of this Apology; Vt si quid
peccatum siet, fecisse Plaut.
me dicant de vostra sententia. We all bless our selves in the contemplation
of these times; for having such a God, such a King, such a Parliament: Quid non
speremus amantes? The God of Blessing so dispose of your Councels, that you may
keep the spirit of unity in the bond of Peace.

Your humble and ready servant in the LORD: ISAAC BARGRAVE.

A SERMON PREACHED Before the Honorable Assembly, of the Commons House of
Parliament: on Sunday, being the last of February, 1623.
PSALM. 26. 6. I will wash my hands in innocence, O Lord, and so will I go to
thine Altar.
THe prime end of the Creature, is the glory of the Creator: this end cannot
be attained, without the preservation of the Creature: The common good of the
whole world in general, and of every part and Commonwealth in particular.
Upon this ground (all actions receiving perfection from their end) all
understanding men have been wont to Praeface all great Consultations for the
common good, with some such religious Acts, as did best conduce to the glory of
God. A Jove Principium, was the law of Nature; the Gentiles were wont to begin
from their Altars and their Oracles. It was ever the style of the Civil Law to
begin, A Deo optimo maximo; and our old Saxon Laws, had the ten great
Praecepts of the Decalogue prefixed in their Front. But Gods Children ever used
especially to consult with GOD, to auspicate all their solemn Actions with
Prayers, fastings, sacrifices, Sacraments; making their Creator, who is the
Alpha and Omega of all Creatures, the beginning and the end of all their
actions.

We find in the old Testament, that the Israelites being to war against the
Beniamites, Three several times they went up to ask counsel at the mouth of
God, Judge. 20. 26. And it is remarkable in the New, that though the holy Ghost
himself had separated Barnabas and Saul to that great Work, the Conversion of
the Gentiles; yet the Church would not dismiss them, till they were
consecrated by fasting, prayer, and imposition of hands. Act. 13. 3. For
Sacraments in particular, those two notable actions in the holy Story. The
first, that powerful delivery of the Israelites out of the bondage of Egypt,
was Vsher'd in with the cebelratio^ of the holy Passover: And the second, that
memorable Redemption of mankind from the bondage of sin, by the Passion of
CHRIST our Savior, blessed for ever, He himself aggrauated by the solemn
Sacrament of his last Supper.

Would we have yet a closer Insta^ce, my Text suggests it: if David be to
oppose a common Adversary, he enquires of the Lord for counsel, and again he
enquires of the Lord. 1 Samuel 23. v. 1. et 4. And if he be to provide for the
welfare of his own Kingdom (as now he was, when he composed this Hymn, even
presently after his third Unction) he thinks the Altar the best Preparatiue to
the administration of his Kingdom; and washing his hands in Innocency, the
best Preparatiue to the Altar, I will wash my, etc. Good luck then in the Name
of the Lord, to this honorable Assembly: even in this, Honorable; that with
the custom of all good Christians, and Christian assemblies, Ye auspicate your
worthy designs in the House, and at the Altar of God. God that made all things
for his own glory, is certainly the best assistant to his own end. Has not,
think you, the devil domineered in their hearts, who have set a mark upon
your two last Parlamentary Assemblies, as if your endeavors prospered not,
because you received the Eucharist? as if the Sacrament impeached the Work, or
the Work the Sacrament. Oh the Power of Satan! Shall we accuse Gods Ordinance,
from the effect of man's weakness?

-- Careat successibus opto,
Quisquis ab euentu factanotanda putat.
Had you not intended Gods glory, certainly you would never have begun with
Gods Sacrament? But two cool words with these malicious obiectors. Was their
Gunpowder Plot the worse for their Sacrament? or their Sacrament the worse for
that plot? Indeed there is a communicatiue power in evil as well as in good:
an Idolatrous Sacrifice was a well fitted Preface to a murderous end. But is
there no difference betwixt their washing their hands in blood, and our washing
our hands in innocence? Betwixt the intention of butchering of Kings and
Kingdoms, and preserving of Kings and Kingdoms? But I remember we are going
to the Altar: the GOD of mercy convert the hearts of these malicious furies,
these wily Gibeonites, who while they dwell among us, labor to deceive us,
with the pretense of Antiquity, their old shoes of S. Peter, their old
garments of their own merit, their old moldy Bread of Transubstantiation,
with all which, though put on but yesterday, they endeavor to deceive Joshua
and his people; and we find they did it too, but it was because they asked
not counsel of the Lord, Ios. 9. 14. Let us therefore to prevent the like
wiles, go on in the Name of the Lord, whom we come to serve, and David's
resolution will infallibly produce David's blessing. So holy means cannot but
produce a happy end.

But that Truth may run on with order, the maine general parts of the Text,
are a Praeparation, and a Resolution; The first, a Praeface; the second, the
Work it self. The first, a Condition propounded, I will wash my, etc. The
second, a Duty performed, So will I compass, etc. In the Praeparation be
pleased to observe with me these 4. things. The Subject, David; the Object, his
hands; the Act, washing; the Integrity, or form of the Act, in Innocence. In
the Resolution I shall pitch your attentions upon two things; the first is,
Motus, I will go, or compass: The second is, Terminus, the place he aims at,
The Altar. To which I can add nothing but this, that the Lord stands at the
Center in the middle of the Text, as he who alone gives power and life, both
to the Praeparation, and the Action.

Of these particulars (by His divine assistance, and the continuance of your
indulgent favor, which brought me hither) briefly and plainly; and that in
Circulo Theologico, leaving curiosity to her own Courtiers, assuring my self,
that the plain way of truth, is the best way to the Altar.

And first in David's, and all good men's Method, to begin with Praeparation; a
part of my Text, which in this Auditory, I might happily have spared. I speak
it to Gods glory, the comfort of the Land, and your just encouragement, that
as, many of you equal your Prophets in learning, so al of you even prevent us
in zeal to Gods cause: yet when I consider the Subject here, I find 'twas
David, David, a man so often repeating his innocence in this Psalm, that
Caietan conceiues, he wrote it in the person of Christ (there being none but
Christ capable of so much innocence) yet even David himself had not so much,
but he had need of Washing and Praeparation. Suffer me therefore, if not to
give light to your understanding, at the least to quicken your affections: that
my periods may serve as so many places of memory, to revive your better
meditations.

And if Greatness might have privileged this person from impurity, David was
a King; if the Grace of his soul might have freed him from the soil of sin;
he was a man after Gods own heart. But let not great men put too much trust in
their greatness; the longer the Robe is, the more soil it contracts; Great
power may prove the mother of great damnation. And as for purity, there is a
Generation that say there is no sin in them, but they deceive themselves,
there is no truth in them. What ever Romes (...) pretend for the power of nature,
and of free will, we wretched sinners are taught to conceive more truly of
our own infirmity. Christ's own Apostle, stout Thomas, failed in the faith of
his Resurrection; Peter (whose Chair is now the pretended seat of
Infallibility) denies his Master; David, a man after GODS own heart, has need
of washing; and who can say, I am pure in the sight of the LORD? Certainly, O
Lord, No flesh is righteous in thy sight. No: this is the best ground of
Christian felicity; if with David we fall to a sight of our own sins; if
with the Publican, we strike our own breasts, and not with the Pharisee, cast
our eye so much upon other men's faults: why should we like Tailors, measure
all men but our selves? As if the best of us had not sin enough of his own to
think on See David here calls himself to an account for his own sins; O
Lord, I know mine iniquity, and my sin is ever before me. Oh the powerful
effect of Christian Devotion! when by the reflectiue Act of the Understanding,
Science is turned into Conscience, and our knowledge is but the glass of our
own imperfection, the glass wherein the sight of our sins, send us
presently to God, as it did David here, who makes this account only betwixt
God and his own Soul, I, O Lord. First, He takes his rise from Humility, and
the sight of his own sins, and then he soars up by the wings of Faith, to
the Throne of Gods mercy: I, O Lord. He sees with his own eyes, and not only
with the Church, or the Priests Spectacles, he is his own Poenitentiary and
Confessor; here is no intercession by Saints, no Masses, Merits, Indulgences,
Tre^tals, Dirges: All Is done betwixt God and him, I, O Lord. With the eye of
Humility, he looks to himself and his own misery, then with the eye of
Faith, to God and his mercy, and from both these, results a third virtue of
Repentance in the Act of Praeparation, washing the soil of sin in the Bathe
of Sorrow, I will wash my hands, etc.

This washing in religious Praeparations, is a custom established even by the
Law of Nature. (...), was written upon the door of Diana's Temple, and
therefore they ever went from Washing to Worshipping from the Lauer to the
Altar: Lavabo vt rem diuinam faciam, was the common practice of the Romans,
and even the Turks themselves, Wash before they pray. But not to authorize so
divine a Rite from Infidels; In the Old Law, we find Sanctity ever
accompanied with Decency; the Lauer was placed before the Altar, and Cleansing
was ever the Praeface to Offering. And in the New Law, it is our Saviors
Ordinance, that we begin with Baptizing; and 'twas his own practice, to
Wash his Apostles feet, before the LORDS SVPPER: Not that He would have us
insist in the outward Act; No, the very Legal Washing, was the instruction of
inward Cleansing. And our Absolution here, it sounds Regeneration, Repentance,
Renouation.

There are two eminent Lauers in the Gospel, the first, Christ's Bathe, a hot
Bathe, Lavacrum Sanguinis, the Lauer of CHRIST'S Blood; the second, Our Bathe, a
cold Bathe, Lavacrum Lachrymarum, the Lauer of Repentance. These two mixed
together, will prove a sovereign Composition, wrought first by CHRIST
himself, when He sweat water and blood.

The first is as that Poole of Bathesda, into which whosoever enters with
Faith, is healed; The blood of Christ is the true Lauer of Regeneration; a
Fountain set open for Judah and Jerusalem to wash in. The blood of Christ
purges us from all sins, 1 Ioh. 1. 7. We account it Charity in Mothers, to
feed their Children with their own Milk: How dear is the love of Christ,
that both Washes and Feeds us with his own Blood? No sooner are we borne in
Christ, but just as our Mothers, so Christ's blood is turned into Milk,
nourishing us to everlasting Salvation. What is Calamus Beniamini, or Storax,
or a thousand Rivers of Oil, to make us clean, except the Lord purge and
cleanse us? No, it is His blood that speaks better things than the blood of
Abel: Unto Him therefore that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his
own Blood, and has made us KINGS and PRIESTS to GOD His Father: to Him be
glory and dominion for ever, Revelation 1. 5, 6.

But yet it is the second Bathe, the Lauer of Repentance, that must apply and
make the first Operative. This Bathe of Mary Magdalens repentance, it is a kind
of Rebaptization, giving strength and effect to the first washing. And it
implies a threefold Act: First, To bruise our hearts by Contrition; Secondly,
To lay our wounds open by Confession to God; Thirdly, to wash our hands in
Innocence, by Satisfaction to men.

The Sacrifice of a broken heart, makes a happy way to the Sacrifice of the
Altar. Lachrymae pondera vocis habent, our tears are the best Harbingers we
can send before us, our silent Orators to GOD; Quae veniam non postulant, sed
obtinent, as Saint Ambrose says, they speed without asking, and never return
from GOD without obtaining. It troubled my Soul in these times of Trial, to
perceive the hearts of men filled with distracted thoughts, their mouths with
discontented Obloquyes: Had they turned these Passions into sound Repentance,
they would soon have found more ease to their Souls. Through this Red Sea of
Sorrow, all our FATHERS were wont to pass to the Land of Promise, leaving
their enemies, their sins, all swallowed up in those Waters, and by these
blessed Streams they were cleansed, not only from civil and temporal, but
spiritual and eternal punishments. So Abimelech, Hezekiah, Manasseh, Job, the
Ninevites. So the Israelites; it is true, twice they went up to ask Council of
God, and were overthrown by the Beniamites, but the third time, when they went
up to GODS House, and sat Weeping, and Fasting, from Morn till Even, then
they overthrew Benjamin, and Slew twenty-fiue thousand men of those that drew
the Sword, Judge. 20. 35.

This is the third time, my Worthy Auditors, that you have come up to this
House of God, and if heretofore ye have fayl'd of your good intentions, I
fear it was for want of this virtue of Repentance. Prodigious Swearing,
blasphemous Cursing, uncharitable Gluttony, swinish Drinking, grating Usury,
exacting Bribery, unjust Ambition, merciless Oppression: these are the sins
that have kindled a fire in the Land, and call first for your tears, then for
your hands to quench it. Ye now present the whole body of the Land, and
therefore now before you approach the Altar, Repent for the whole body of the
Land. Certainly we have no Purgatory but true Repentance, no holy water but
this, can quench the fire of Lust and Hell.

I know there is no good soul here, which is not wounded at the Common sins
of our Nation, and yet which of us all, have ever happily shed one tear,
either for our own sins, or the sins of the people? Alas! that we should
not yield one drop for those offenses; which cost our Savior many streams
of blood to wash them away. I would feign dwell upon this sweet virtue, but
your devotions must supply, what the time detracts. And if ye cannot shed a
tear, give a sigh for our sins; if not that, repent that you cannot repent:
our sins begat our sorrow, let our sorrow devour our sins, as the Worm
the Tree that bred it: VVash and wash now, for, ad Aras consulere, it is too
late, to wash at the Altar.

Wash now and wash all, from the Crown of the Head, to the sole of the Foot,
there is nothing in us but Wounds, and Sores: yet above all, there is
something here in it that David washes his hands. Indeed it is not enough to
come with wet eyes, if we come with foul hands, to offer (...), with unwashed
hands, The Gentiles would not do it. Contrition and Confession to God make not
up complete Repentance, without satisfaction to men. Non remittitur peccatum
August. Epist. 54 Ser. Latim. before Edw. 6.
nisi restituatur ablatum, It is an true as old, and in old Father Latimers
English it is, either there must be restitution open or secret, or else Hell.
Whoeuer repayres not the wrong, rejoices in the sin. Proverbs 2. 14. Where
there is no satisfaction, Non agitur sed fingitur paenitentia, says Saint
Augustine: and those who restore not all, wash not their whole hands; they
dippe only the tipps of their finger. Extortion, Rapine, Bribery, these are
the sins of the hands, (sins so proper to the Jews that they may well
conceive as they do, that the Devil lies all night on their hands, and that
is it makes them so Diligent in washing) but as for us Christians, unless
these Vipers be shaken off our hands, though ye cover the Altar of the Lord
with Tears, with Weeping, and with crying out, yet if you continue in your
Pollutions, God regards not your offering any more, nor will he receive it with
good will at your hands. Mal. 2. 13.

But there are some that put more Arist. 3. de anima.
spirit here into this Object, and tell us that David aimed at more then his
hands. It is true, the hand is (...), the actiuest part, and so put here for
the whole Body, and not for the body alone, but usually in Holy Writ for all
the practick faculties and operations of the Soul; the Understanding, the
Will, the Affections, the Mind, the Conscience, Administration, Counsel, All.
This washing here, it is not only Ablutio, but Balneatio, it is not a little
washing, but an entire Bathing; if any of these be unprepared, unwashed, hand
off from the Altar. In the Popish Mass, they think it enough to wash the
tipps of their fingers. At our Altar we must wash all, offer the whole man a
living and an acceptable Sacrifice to God. Otherwise Pilate washed his hands,
and at the same instant condemned Christ. We must wash, and wash thoroughly
(...), in innocence. This is the Integrity of the Act.

The very (...) and Crown of all our preparation, the purest Water we can
wash in, is innocence, and innocence is a virtue of the heart, as well as of
the hand. Cleanse your hands James 4. 8.
ye sinners; and purify your hearts ye double-Minded. I could wish our
washing might be like Crprians Baptizing adtincturam, even till we were dyed
in Repentance, and the Blood of Christ. Let the quantity of thy sins be the
measure of our Repentance. First offer thine innocence, then thy Sacrifice. It
is not enough that you come this day by order, you must come with innocence.
God requires the Duty of the second Table, as well as of the first: he
abhorres the outward Act of Piety, where he finds no conscience and practice of
innocence.

I have here (my Honorable Auditory) a large field to run in, and you to
work in; but I will contract my self within David's Limitation. He in this
Psalm marks us out three enemies of innocence: Dissemblers, at the fourth
verse: Men of blood, at the ninth: and Bribe-takers at the tenth. David (as you
this Day) goes to the Altar, that he might separate himself, and not sit with
such as these are. And too many such Iebusites there are in our Israel, after
whom give me leave to make a short inquisition.

First Dissemblers, such as our Church-Papists in whom Machiauell in the head
has gotten the advantage of the Pope in the belly; half Papists, half
Protestants; Like Oseas Cake, half baked, half dough: Just Saint Austins
Amphibions: Qui dum volunt esse and Iudaej, and Christianj, neque sunt Iudaej,
neque Christianj. While they would be both Papists and Protestants, they are
indeed Newters and Nihils. Let all zealous souls set a brand upon such
Hermophodite Christians, as these latter times have discovered to us.

There is another sort of them yet, to whom we are more beholding though it
be but for their impudency, professed Dissemblers, who will be professed Papists, and
yet professed Partakers of our Altar, and they have a reason in conscience for it
too: our Sacrament is no Sacrament, they receive it only in a civil
obedience, and it is no more with them, then a civil act. Oh the bold cunning
of Satan, whose kingdom consists in lying, without either memory or modesty;
in dissembling without shame or innocence; and if any such Foxes be crept into
the Vineyard of Judah, and think to lurk under our Altar: give me leave to
hunt them out with their own Weapons, even such as shall challenge the best
Buckler the Devil affoords them, their Equivocation.

First then tell me: thou professed Hypocrite. To deny Gods true Worship, is not
this to deny God himself? and do not thou by joining in our Sacraments,
deny thine own Religion? in thy conceit the only true worship: True, but
thou do it in show only, not in heart, no more did Saint Peter, when he
denied Christ, but he that denies me before men, I will also deny him before my
Father. Matthew. 10. 13. Again, if we be such branded Heretics as you style
us, our Table is as you term it, the table of Devils, and therefore to
communicate with us, is to shake hands with Satan, and partake of the Table of
Devils, 1. Cor. 10. verse. 18 If yet ye will not go when the Devil drives you,
at the least let that which you prefer above either GOD or the Devil, the
power of your Church, let that exorcize you Is it not your Trent Prescription,
fetched out of Lombard, and Aquin Firmi in side non debent conuersari cum
Haereticis Sent. 4. Did. 13. q. 10. Aquin. ibid.
in diuinis. Those that are firm in the Roman faith, ought not to converse
with Heretics in Divine Worship. Was it think you well done of Saint Peter,
to scandalize the Gospel by eating with the Gentiles, if he do, Saint Paul will
withstand him to his own face, and so do I you. In a word, if the curse of
Rome or your own conscience can prevail with you, hand off from our Altar. If
God be God, follow him: if Baall be God, away from this Holy place, follow
him. Those that thus equivocate in Gods House, what will they do in your
House, and in your Councels? There should be none but David's sons in David's
assembly, but there is none of David's seed love to sit with Dissemblers. verse.
4. Much less with such Dissemblers as lie in wait for blood: Such as hear
not the complaynts of the wronged, but build up Syon with blood, and Jerusalem
with iniquity Micah. 3. 10. Gather not my soul with sinners, nor my life with
such bloody men, verse 9. But of these more anon.

The third Corrupter of innocence is he, whose right hand is full of Bribes,
verse 10. Bribery, an vbiquitary vice, a sin as fearful as common; as in a
public Auditory at Paul's Cross, I have heretofore discovered, and though I
have known whole families groan under the burden of it: I have neither time,
nor will to repeat any thing I then Delivered. Only spare me so much of your
pious liberty, to commend to your Religious endeauours, one prodigious strain
of corruption, the stayne both of Religion and nature, some of the Professors
whereof have fallen within the lists of mine own knowledge, and those are
English Pensioners to For rain States. Such as sacrifice their King, their
Country, their Parents, nay their Savior to Mammon; such as wind into our
Court, our Parliaments, our hearts; such as eat and take Council together
with us, but like the Traitors in the Troyan horse, fifty of them do more hurt
in one night, then five thousand open enemies in ten year. I might subioyne to
these such World-wormes, as sell their consciences either for Court-fauour, or
popular applause, pretending the Common good, but aiming at their own.

But I make have to the Altar, it is your washing in innocence must prepare you
for that, and the zeal of that cannot but stir you up to wash the Land from
corruption. I will wind up this point with the Prophet Esay's Character of a
good Parliament, as I may call it. Wash you, make you clean, cease to do
evil, learn to do well, seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the
Fatherless, plead for the widow; then come and lets reason together, says
the Lord: though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be white as snow, though
they be red like Crimson, they shall be as white as Wool. Esaias 1. 16.

Not that all this washing and innocence of ours suffices to salvation,
without Gods Altar: If it had, it is likely David would have gone no farther:
Nay even when we are at the Altar; in Altari non inuenit viam, qui in Christo
non inuenit causam: Not by the works of righteousness which we have done, but
according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of Regeneration, and
renewing of the Holy Ghost. Tit. 3. 5. We see after all his washing, yet David
goes to the Altar.

This is Motus, his gesture, he does not only look on it, he goes to it: as
in the old Transl. He does not as most among us, make the Temple a
thorough-fare, and pass by the Altar, but with seemly devotion he compasses
the Altar: as in the new Tran. I might here Litigate which were the fittest
gesture at the holy Table; standing, Sitting, Walking, or Kneeling, which are
all used in several Churches. The reason of this diversity is the generality
of the Gospel Phrase, (...), Matthew. 26. 20. (...) Luke 22. 14. They both
signify leaning, or falling down, not sitting. David's gesture was compassing
with Hymns and Psalms; and the same gesture Theodofious and Charles the Great
used; but I would not here make a quarrel of a Ceremony, I leave that to the
Tithers of mint and cummin, who in the mean time let pass the more essential
comfort of Gods Table. It is enough that the Text runs with our Church,
making humility and penitence the best preparatiue to the Altar, no gesture too
low in the receite of so high a benefit, Humble your selves in the fight of
the Lord, and he shall lift ye up. James 4. 10. And as for this and the whole
body of our Church-orders, I had it from the mouth of that Reverend Father Paul
of Venice, the worthy Author of (that excellent discovery) the History of the
Council of Trent, that he esteemed the Hyerarchy of our Church, the most
excellent piece of Discipline in the whole Christian World. But howeuer they
esteem it abroad, we here at home, if we be not vnworthily-vnthankfull must
needs confess, that for this sixty years and upwards, we have felt such a
blessed effect of it, as no other Church nor Nation in the Christian World can
parallel. And therefore to your care, and love I commend it. Compass you Gods
Altar, with your protection, and you have Gods own Word for it: he will
compass you with his providence, He will open the Chatar acks of Heaven, and
power out a Blessing upon you. Mal. 3. 10. Bless you Gods Altar, and no
question Gods Altar will bless you.

Thus at the length, though I fear with some exercise of your patience, I have
brought you to the desired port of Health, the Altar.

The Altar? why but that is the place where the Romanists would have you; if to
the Altar, then to a Mass, to a sacrifice for the Living and the Dead: God
forbid. I confess that (...) and (...) come both from (...), to sacrifice,
Lib. 1. de miss.
and with Bellarmine that an Altar properly taken, infers a sacrifice properly
taken. But the words that I speak unto you, are spirit and life. John 6. 63.
Our High Priest is Spiritual. Heb. 10. 22. our Priesthood, and our Sacrifice
Spiritual, 1. Peter 2. 5. When we speak properly, in our Canons and
Communion Book, we call it with the Apostles, (and as Bellarmine confesses
with all the Fathers to Tertullians time, 200. years of Christ) The Table of
the Lord, 1 Cor. 10. 21. Not but that in a Metaphorical sense we can allow it
to be called Altar, and Sacrifice too: We are content to hear Saint
Chrysostom call it (...), a Sacrifice, if he add by way of explanatiall
(...), rather the memorial of a sacrifice. In this we will subscribe to their
own Lumbard, Vocatur Sacrificium quia memoria Lib. 4. Did. 12.
est very Sacrificij. It is called a Sacrifice because it is the memorial of a
true Sacrifice. We confess it both an Altar, and a Sacrifice in Signato,
though not in Signo, in the thing signified, though not in the sign. We
contemplate at the Altar, the Son of God himself sweating Blood, wrestling
with the wrath of his Father, torn on the Cross, pierced to the Heart, for
our sins. We confess him there, as the Holy Lamb of God, really offered up a
true Propitiatory sacrifice for our sins, and by the Virtue of this Sacrament
really sealing up remission to our souls.

And if then we have no other hope nor faith, but in that real Sacrifice of
Christ once offered for us, why have those men of blood, for this (...) this
word-quarrell of the Altar, sacrificed the lives of so many Devout Confessors?
while they profess they drink the blood of Christ, why have they made
themselves so drunk with the blood of Christians and Christian Princes? In
these men is too truly fulfilled that vision of John, Reuele. 6. 9. I saw under
the Altar, the souls of them that were killed for the Word of God, and for the
Testimony which they have maintained. Should these men escape your Zeal and
Justice, which I assure my self they shall not, yet God has a cup in store
for them, with which they shall one day be fully drenched. Because they have
shed the Blood of the Saints, therefore have thou given them blood to drink.
Reu. 18. verse. 4. and 24.

Let such as these still offer their sacrifices which cannot take away sins.
Heb. 10. 11. But let us who have an Altar whereof they have no right to eat,
Let us hold fast the Profession of our Faith, without wavering, Hebrews 10.
23. As all Jewish sacrifices looked forward, so all ours look backward to the
sacrifice of Christ. They were as the morning shadows; growing shorter and
shorter till the midday, ours as the afternoon shadows, growing longer even
till the second coming of our Savior, when we shall offer the sacrifice of
praise for ever.

Let us in the mean time with David in the next verse, begin that Eucharist
here; let us at the Altar of GOD, show forth the voice of thanksgiving, and
tell of all Gods wondrous Works. The wondrous works of our Creation,
Vocation, Redemption, the wondrous work of Gods Blessing this Land with peace,
plenty, and the liberty of the Gospel; the wondrous work of our preservation
in 88. the wonder of wonders in our delivery from the Gunpowder Treason; the
wondrous work of our Royal Prince's safe return to his Pious Fathers House:
in all these the wondrous love of God to his Dear Church, and the members
thereof, his constant servants in this Land.

And if God has so loved us, let not us now fail to love one another: Ye
have all taken oaths heretofore, ratify them now again at Gods Altar, vow
one vow more there, even the vow of love and constant union, and the power of
Grace enable you to perform it. The Altar is the proper seat of
reconciliation, Mat. 5. 24. and that Holy Sacrament, as it is the best Pledge
of Gods love to us, so of our Communion, one with another. Believe it
Christians, the maine axiom and anuile of popish Policy, the very Axell
whereon they wind about the whole body of their Machiauilisme in England, is
our division and dissension; themselves have bragged, that there is no way so
ready to convert a Lutheran, as by the passion of a Caluinist: no means so
prompt to make a Protestant a Papist, as by the opposition of a Puritan. Thus
they endeavor to destroy us (as we destroyed their invincible Navy) by
sending fire, even the fire of dissension in the midst of us. Oh let us bear
down this policy of the world, with the wisdom of the Spirit: Away with
these distracting names of Lutheran, Caluinist, Puritan, etc. We are all the
children of the same father, who has begotten us in the love of one Mediator,
and Sanctified us by one and the same Spirit. Christ and his spouse, the King,
and his Kingdom, Christian Brother and Brother, these are they which God has
joined together, and cursed may he be that endeauours to put them asunder.

I will conclude with the Vote of Paul, I beseech you brethren by the name of
our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no
divisions among you, but that you be perfectly joined together, in the same
mind, and the same judgment: That so by the united power of charity, and a
good cause ye may all march on Valiantly, and meet the adversary in the face,
constantly fighting the battle of our Elder Brother Christ Jesus, who fought
to the Death, for our sins.

That Jesus, who for us was made both the Priest, the Altar, and the Sacrifice,
accept this your morning Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving. He wash you in
his blood, cloth you in his innocence, Crown you with his Glory. He this Day
at his Altar conueigh such grace into your hearts, that ye may form all your
ensuings, actions, and counsels, as if you were still at Gods Altar. To that
Jesus with the Eternal Father, and Holy Spirit, we ascribe all Praise, Power,
Glory, Dominion, in Saecula Saeculorum.

Amen.
FINIS.

