A TRVE AND CERTAIN REport of the Beginning, Proceedings, Overthrows, and now
present Estate of Captain WARD and DANSEKER, the two late famous Pirates: from
their first setting forth to this present time.

AS ALSO The firing of 25. Sail of the Tunis, men of war: Together with the
death of diverse of WARDS chief Captains.

Published by Andrew Barker Master of a Ship, who was taken by the Confederates
of Ward, and by them some time detained Prisoner.

LONDON, Printed by William Hall, and are to be sold by John Helm at his shop
in S. Dunstans Churchyard. 1609.

TO HIS WORSHIPFVL, WORthy and singular good friend Master T. I. these
faithful commendations.
SIr, a far greater happiness then I of late have had, either leisure to hope
for, or means to expect; I commend to your good self, and the friends of our
acquaintance. Being certified by my affection, that your gentle nature, does
commiserat the misfortunes has befalne me, and therein as a friend, does share
with me in sorrow: I shall as soon as occasion will suffer me, make have to
London, to be counseled by your advise, touching those things in particular,
that mainly concern my estate: Nor make I any doubt, but before the receipt
hereof, you have heard of my mishap, from the report of some of my men who I
hope, are arrived by passage, by the way of Holland: therefore I omit herein to
trouble you with the manner of my first taking by the Turks, whose governors,
I mean Masters and Pilates, are all Englishmen, not only Pirates, but mearely
reprobates, and whose success at Seas is so great, that it is most lamentable
to report, how many Ships of London, and other parts of England have been
taken and made prey unto them: without the help of which English, the Turks by
no means could have governed and conducted them through their unskillfulness and
insufficiency in the art of Navigations: yet of late to my woeful experience, I
can witness, they have been so readied by the instruction of our apostate
countrymen, [I mean of Ward and others, who have been their commanders] to
tackle their Ships, to man and manage a fight, that if it do not please God
to move the heart of his Majesty, and other Christian Princes, and states, to
join together for their speedy suppression, and the disiointing of their late
strengthened forces, which continually increases by the Ships of England, and
Holland, which they daily surprise, It will be discomodious to the state, and
so dangerous to the common wealth, in succeeding times, that Christendom must
expect no Traffic at Sea: for they are already grown to the number of
fifteen sail of great ships belonging to Tunis, some bearing 40. some 30. and
some 20. pecces of ordinance, with men accordingly, as 300. 250. and 200. men
at the least, in every Ship, so that I doubt, and the cause it self may breed
a general fear, that if expedition be not hastened against them, the state
may heareafter share a part in that sorrow, which we poor Seafaring men have
already suffered. I have sent you a note by Leanard Crowder, of diverse ships,
both English and Dutch, that have been taken since January last, which although
it be a business not much pertinent to gentlemen of your profession; yet I do
assure my self, that you are so faithful a wel-willer to the good estate and
prosperity of the commonwealth, of which the Merchant and Mariners are not
the least members, that in pity of our losses sustained, with us you could
wish, and expect a reformation, since the infinite wealth that our nation has
suffered ruin of, by the Turks this last year it were without doubt,
incredible to report, since happily you have heard, and I doubt not to prove
that Londons losses has amounted to above 200000. pound. Thus having presented
you at this time, but with a relish and taste of that which hereafter shall
be stored to your expectation in a more ample and fuller feast, I beseech you
receive this with my love, in good part.

Always desirous to be commanded yours ANDREW BARKER.

The true report of Captain WARDS Piracies, done by Andrew Barker, Mr. of a
Ship, and who was lately prisoner in Tunis.
SIr, I have received your Letter, and herein am glad to consent to your
request, which was, (that since so many flying fables, and rumoring tales have
been spread, of the fame, or rather indeed infamy, over the whole face of
Christendom, of this notorious and arch pirate Ward) my self, who had even
known him to be a knave, and of late (yet too soon) had proved him a thief,
whose fortunes had been so much decayed by his prosperity, and who so long
had been held his prisoner (...)* who had there seen, abroad heard, and at
Sea felt, the ability of his strength, the ordering of his actions, and the
vniustnes of his proceedings. I might best gratify my friends, and most truly
satisfy the world, and their greedy and auidous expectation, what injury he
has done, daily does, and still indeauoureth to do, to rich estats, and
provident Sea-farers, to the venturing Merchant, and the careful Saylor, to
poor wives and distressed children; how like a villain, and an apostata he
lives, and how like a reprobate in persisting, he resolves to die.

Which pleasure of yours, that I may the better and more fully accomplish, and
no way to seem ungrateful for your benefits received, in neglecting my
pains, I beseech you, let it not be held unnecessary by you, nor superfluous
of the world, that I first endeavor, to deliver truly, and of mine own
knowledge, the manner of his first going forth to Sea, and the form that he
used in undertaking these courses: so shall I the more directly, and in order,
delymate his proceedings, describe his outrages, dilate his customs, paint out
his oppressions, picture his lusts, image his riotts, manifest his ruins, and
in the end, give you to expect that which is already begun of him, his endless
infamy, and deserved confusion.

Which desire of mine, being I know by your courtesy condiscended unto, and I
perceive by your letter, is expected of others, I pray you receive this that
follows for truth.

This Ward, who now has achieved to himself, the title of Captain, whose
desperate actions has caused terror to trauellors by Sea, and whose name has
bred fear in the Merchants at home. In the last year of her late Majesty's
reign, was resident, and had his dwelling, (as by my own knowledge I can
certify) in the West country at the haven Town of Plymouth, a fellow, poor,
base, and of no esteem, one as tattered in (...), as he was ragged in
conditions, the good past, that he could boast of himself, might be, that he
was borne in a Town called Feuersham in Kent, and there lived as a poor
fisherman, and the virtue present, that he durst talk of was, he had abiding
in Plymouth, wherefore a while keeping house, although I have never heard that
he paid his rent, all the day you should hardly fail but find him in an
alehouse: but be sure to have him drunk at home at night. Oaths were almost
as ordinary with him as words, so that he seldom spoke a sentence, but one
was a silable, he would sit melancholy, speak doggedly, curse the time,
repine at other men's good fortunes, and complain of the hard crosses attended
his own. All the virtue that any man could perceive might grow out of his
whole course, or reckon out of his whole life was, that hitherto he loved not
to be noted a quarellor: for rather then he would fight, he would be beaten by
any one, he was commonly called by the name of Jack Ward, one that was welcome
into any tap-house, more for love of his coin, then love of his company, and
all the reputation that his own crew held of him, was but this, that he was a
mad rascal, would swear well, drink stiff, stick toot, and like a good
cock, he would never out of their damnable pit, If there were either money in
his purse, or credible chalk in his hosts hand, being once in.

So that continuing thus for a reasonable season, in the same town drinking
and swearing, the two twins, that such damnable wombes are ever in labor with,
and not without wonder of a number, by what possible means he could get
chinkes, so lewdly to consume his time withal. It at last so happened, that in
the beginning of the Kings reign, he found means to be employed for
service, in a small ship of his majesty's, commonly called by the name of the
Lions Whelpe, in which employment, persisting as before, in his melancholy
disposition, not contented, with that good and honest means was allowed him,
and satisfied far better men, to defend themselves and the necessity of
their charge: But having new reaches working in his brain, he one day selected
out a choice crew, but of such, whose dispositions he perceived were as
untoward as his own, when the poison of his heart disgorged it self thus.

My mates, quoth he, what is to be done? here is a scuruy world, and as scuruily we
live in it, we feed here upon the water, on the Kings salt beef, without ere a
penis to buy us bissell when we come a shore, here is brine, but to revel,
suppe, and be merry, every one at the proper charge of his own purse. So that
this following night. when the Captain and Officers shall conjecture nothing.
but that we are drawing dry the pot, we will be diuing arm deep in the
Fugitives bags.

With which hopeful project, their resolutions being confirmed, and with the
former purpose, getting a shore to their hosts house, (which they chose to be
without the walls of Portsmouth) after some half a dozen of damnable healths
taken down, they agreed amongst them, that with full cans, for the devising and
foreseeing into this beneficial business, they freely, and of their own
accord would elect Ward for their Captain, and which dignity accordingly
(being down on their knees) with drink they performed, which instalment done,
and considering with themselves how they might best provide themselves of a
boat, which the next full Sea should set them abord the Bark, they resolved at
a sortable hour to begin their ransacke.

But see how it happened: A kinsman of this gentleman's, who had intended his
departure, and furnished himself to this voyage for France, seeing the day
before they attempted this Piracie, this Ward consorted with a crew of
Scattergoods and swaggering Rascals, and knowing fully of the charge that his
friend had aboard, and withal nothing such a crew of desperates, mustering
about Town, more then in one knot had been accustomed, and with such uncivil
behavior, he began to be jealous they had some project in hand: whereupon he
advised his friend to disbarke his money again, till the very instant that the
wind served, and to lodge it in some place of more safety, to prevent the
danger he stood in doubt of: for, quoth he, your self may witness what a
knot of these knaves are linked together, who having not some intelligence, or
but at least suspecting what substance you bear along with you, they will not
stick to venture their bodies, I and it were to hazard their souls for money
wherewithal to maintain their riot.

So that I pray you Sir, be advised by my counsel: Redeem your money out of
the Bark, and prevent their purpose, lest your repentance come too late. Which
counsel of his friends, setting some suspicion in the gentleman's head, and
being the rather confirmed and grounded, through the disorders he beheld them
continue in, and more then they were accustomed to exercise, he resolved
himself to his friends advice, and privately (either without knowledge or
suspicion) landed his money and most estimable riches, and stored them in the
red Lion, (contenting themselves, then suspectlesse, to see what would be the
issue of these fellows) and until the wind and tide should help fair for
their departure.

Which defense of this gentleman's this new Captain Ward nothing at all
suspecting, with his Command (as he before had determined) in the dead of
night, and having so much experience to know when the tide and time was best
for his advantage, he presently came and laid the Bark aboard, and entered his
men in the hold of the Uessell, where he found none to resist him, but only two
poor s^ekes, who belonged to the Bark, whom he straight shut under deck,
and commanded them, not to squeake like Rats (in danger of their lives)
whereby, upon their disturbance, the wach upon the first Blockhouse might have
warning, and so with their Pot-guns disquiet their peace. So presently waying
Anchor, and setting his sails, to Sea goes he. Only before his deparparture
(yet not till he found himself out of their reach) he takes his farewell
aloud, and very kindly bids me the watch good night. So that being now clear,
and out of danger of their summons, and likewise come forth, without the I Will of
Wight, like a Captain indeed, who now had command, he demands for the two men
were lodged in his ^arke, and who, according to his call, were brought to his
sight, when most Commander like, he began to question them, as they loved
their safeties, to deliver truly unto him, in what place of the Bark was the
Papists treasure hid, for that was the chief matter they came for, and that
must be the means to make them merry withal, when these poor wretches
shaking for fear before this terrible thief, they replied, that his
expectation was herein frustrate, store of riches they must confess there was
indeed, but upon what reason they knew not, it was the day before landed again.

At which unsatisfied news, and finding by search their words to be true, the
whole crew having this cake of Ice for Sunshine gold to chaw down, and
comfort their stomachs withal. The Rogues all, began now to be rank mad,
there was then, such Cursing, such Swearing, such Banning: there was a pox of
thee, a pox of thee, and a plague of us all, what shall now become of us? The
Goldfinches we came for, were flowen out of their nest, little succor is to
be found here, and to go a shore we shall be sure to be hanged there, hear
we are fallen desperately into the pitfall, and there we have brought our
necks just to the noose. Yet at last, when their fury like an Hostler, had
walked them awhile, and the heat of their bloods was grown a little calmer,
they agreed amongst themselves, that since their pretense was to come for
somewhat, they would at last see what was there to be found. In which search,
there was presently laid open to their Ravening eyes, a couple of
Venson-Pasties, diverse Turkey-pies, Capons, Hens, and such other choice viands,
as the forerecited Gentlemen, had stored in the bark for his own provision, to
conduct him into France and of every sort whereof, them was great store. At
the sight of which, Ward raps out oaths like p^llets out of a piece, that fly
as swiftly as they can pass one after another, and calls, come, lets be merry
my hearts, although the birds be flowen, we came far, and we have found nothing
but the empty nest, come, lets be merry, and freely fat our selves with their
fodder, here is good cheer, it was provided for us, and we will eat, an ounce of
sorrow will not pay a penny debt. It is bootelesse in these days, to lie in a
dich and cry for help, since every man is bound to thrust out his hand to help
himself, and therefore my hearts let us be frolike with this, and live in hope
that our fortuns will be better. At which (as if they had forgot already what
they had done, and not fering what might follow) with this encourageme^t they
fell roundly aboard, when anon Ward called to them again, what, say you my
bloods, who would be a board of the Lions whelpe, with bare and hungry
allowance of cold fish and naked cheese, and may as we do thrust up their arms
to the elbow in a Venison pastie? and with that, breaking up a case of bottles,
which were presented full of wine to his theueships hand, here my mates (quoth
he) hear is a health to our good fortunes, and a pox of the Hangman, we know
the worst, and lets therefore hope for the best, we will be merry to night with
wine and Uenison, and to morrow take counsel what is best to be done.

So that, no man taking care for any thing now, but that every one pleaged his
partner a full carouse, they sailed one from the wight to the West part of
England, where near unto Silly they met with a French ship, laden with
merchandise, and who was bound for Ireland, the ship being a vessel near about
threescore and ten Tuns, and who bare for her ^^^ence six pieces of Ordinance.
This pray, had my Kight like Ward no soonner espied, but calling his companions
about him, in this form he began to resolve them: my Comrads quoth he, you
know we have proceeded so far, into the Thieves path, that to return back we
shall be stopped with a haltar. To trust to the mercy of the law, is as good
as for a man to chops hand upon a Rasor and see if it will cut. Therefore since
to retire can allow us no safety, it will be wisdom hear to provide for our
safeguard. Your selves see, we have a Frenchman here a ba^t of us and as I
have done, so I still do, entreat the most of you, but to keep down under
hatches, and that not passing some four or five, may be seen above, so by the
scantnes of our number seen, and the smalnes of our Ba^k which I know he will
take note of (I destring to keep co^apnie with him) he shall have no cause at
al to suspect us: So that, when I shall find fit opportunity to give him the
graple, and send to your ears the watch word (which shall be this, now my
masters for us, we may on a sudden board them, and being taken, in the dismay,
so hastily disharten them, that we shall immediately be owners of their goods,
and with the help of their ship and inunition, lay a fundation one the ground
of which, we may raise our good hap: which subtlety of his, was so well
entertained, that my Captain had a Plaudite for his pains, and every man's
hand preast to be ready at his beck.

So then, with the hope of this plot, passing side by side familiarly, and
unsuspected by the Frenchmen, their burden being but small, and their number in
sight so few, and passing many hours, in courteous discourse, either seeming
glad of the others acquaintance, one the sudden Ward, taking hold of
opportunity, he claps me the Fre^chman aboard, gives the watch word, and
enters his men, so that in a breath, was my poor Frentchman surprised, his
goods ceased one and m(...) ^^prisone, ear that any had time to think how
they could be hurt. All which discourse the two poor men who were first taken
when Ward took the Bark, did after their setting a shore, and return to
Portesmouth, relate and constantly affirm to one John Rogers, owner of the
Barcke, in my hearing. So that it is without question, this was the original
and first beginning of Wards piracy, even so base, and so low* although it is
manifest, he has advanced it to that height, which has since been the
undoing of some, and the impouerishing of many.

To proceed then, after as you have heard, the French man was taken by him, he
repaired into Causon Bay, near Plymouth, where with a long boat going a
shore, and flattring some others whom he met of his acquaintance, with the
news of his success, and expectation to come, he their with men much
strengthened his company, and so put on to the coast of Spain. Where about the
Southern cape, he took also a Fly boat laden with excellent Merchandise, and
the ship being about a hundred Tuns, with whom entering into the Straights, he
turned away his small Barcke with the Flemings, and presently threupon he
took a Satta, and withal which three ships, namely, your Frenchman, your
Flieboate, and S^^ta, he put on, and arrived at Argier, where what was his
entertainment, receive this forcertaine.

Not long before, one Captain Iefferd had in the service often he Duke of
Florence, attempted to set the Galleys belonging to the King of Argier afire,
and in which desperate resolution, he had so far prevailed, that they
departed not thence without performing much harm. In displeasure of which, the
king had grounded such an inward hate against al Englishmen for Iefferds
treachery, that he solemnly vowed, that this injury should be a perfecution
to any of the whole nation, that happened in his power, and to manifest, that his
oath was not triuial but as violent in performance, as it was forwa^d in
promise, in revenge of the former attempt, he put twelve Englishmen, who were
there in Argier to a most cruel and lingering death, so that upon Wards
arrival, forbidding him to have any succor on his shore, and Ward on the
other side having heard of his vow, and not willing to play with the Lions
paw, lest he should but feign himself asleep, without longer stay, or further
suit, he with his prises made up for Tunis.

Where with small suit to the King, in respect he brought Merchandise with
him, beneficial to the state, he had leave, their to find safe harboring for
himself, his ships and followers, where having made sale of his Commodities,
and presented diverse acceptable prese^ts to the King of Tunis, as also for his
gifts, received some outward graces of the Crossymon, which is as much to say,
the Lord Admiral of the Sea, and the man that has ever since, held share with
Ward in all his Voyages, Prises, and Shippings* and been his only supporter in
all his disseignes, and upon whose promised favor and furtherance Ward growing
bold, he was at length a suter to the King, that he might be received as his
subject, or if not so, yet at all times, either in adversity or prosperity,
himself and what the Sea could yield him, might be ever sanctuaried under his
Princely protection, and in recompense thereof, he vowed, he would for ever
after, become a foe to all Christians, be a persecuter to their Traffic, and
an inpouerisher of their wealth, only (belike the devil not yet having his
full gripe one him) he desired, his own Country might be excepted out of his
task, whom both by natural love and obedience, he was bound to respect:
withal that his Majesty would be pleased, for the better furnishing of those
ships, he had their taken, their might be leauied under his command, a
convenient number of Turks with whom he doubted not to return, of Christians
goods, with so worthy a spo^le, that hereafter his name should be held of his
greatness in more regard, and his service more acceptable, which suit of his,
being granted at full, and Croseman, being an ader and furtherance in all his
expeditons, since as I said before in all his profits he was a full sharer. He
puts forth from Tunis, and proceeded down to the bottom of the Straights,
where he houered not long before he took a small Argosie, of the burden of
six hundred Tons. In the same action also, he took a Ship of two hundred
Tons, which he afterward named The little John, and armed her with four and
twenty pieces of Ordinance. He then surprised also the Mattalena, a French
Ship, who came from Alexandria with rich Commodities. In this voyage likewise
was gathered to him one Abraham Croften, and many other worthy spirits, whose
resolutions, if they had been aimed to honorable actions, either a sea or
shore, they might have been preferred and commended for service to the
greatest Prince living.

Now concerning my knowledge in these Proceedings, they were all of them, and
each particular delivered me by Graves, who took me Prisoner, and every
circumstance thereof resolved me at full, by diverse others, whom I had
several conference withal. As also that they were above two hundred
Englishmen, good Soldiers, and expert Mariners, when they proceeded forward to
the Gulf of Venice. To the which voyage encouraged (says Graves) we were
four well mand, and well appointed Ships, over whom Captain Ward was our
worthy General, who being severed from us by a forcible Tempest, himself in
his small Argosie, having none but his Fly-boat with him, he met with a great
Argosie of fourteen or fifteen hundred Tons, very richly laden with
Venetian goods, and who, by Computation, was esteemed to be worth two millions
at the least, betwixt whom and him was such a merciless and incredible fight,
as a man may compare is between those two Tyrants, the remorselesse winds,
and the resisting waters. It was long, and it was cruel, it was forcible, and
therefore fearful: but in the end our Captain had the Sunshine, he boorded
her, subdued her, chained her men like slaves, and ceasd on her goods, as his
lawful prise, whom the whistling calm made music unto, vshering her and our
General into Tunis, and whose bounty with his men, did there triumph with her
treasure.

Which report from Graves, I receiving not without much wonder: and though I
seemed to consent thereunto, in my judgment I discredited it, reputing his
tale rather a vain glorious boast from him, to raise his Captains fame, and
the more to amaze us, that were his Prisoners, then any discourse of truth that
was worthy the credit: till afterward, falling into conference with Wards man,
and who at that time was both in discontent and dislike with his Master: of him
I enquired of the former relation, whose approbation was so much and so much
more highly advanced, that me thought now, that Graves had but minced him in
his discourse: and where I ghest the spite and difference betwixt him and
Captain Ward, should have rather whetted his tongue to disparage his worth,
then have steeled it on to describe his worthiness, I utterly found my
expectation frustrate: for demanding in particular of his Masters valor, he
did so far commend his providence in going on, and so farther extol his
manhood in atchieuing, that for these last three years, quoth he, he is grown
the most absolute, the most resolute, and the most vndauntedst man in fight,
that ever any heart did accompany at sea. And if his actions were as honest as
his valor is honorable, his deeds might be dignified in the Chronicles with
the worthiest. As also that in the aforesaid fight, and taking the Argosie,
whose odds was reputed to be three to one, he did in the deadly conflict so
undauntedly bear himself, as if he had, had courage to out-braue death, and
spirit to outface danger* bastinadoing the Turks out of his Ship into theirs,
and pricking others on even with the point of his poiniard, that, quoth he, I
could impartially say, his only resolution was cause of the victory, and that
his forwardness made Cowards venturous; whereby at last having seized her for
his owns, and brought her into the Bay of Tunis: and when he had discharged and
unladen her goods, he divided the spoil as in share with the Turks, to the
great enriching of the whole Country, and to the advancing of his own pride.

But as it is certain, he that does once accustom himself to sin, is
always sitting upon Cockatrice eggs, that bring forth nothing but poisonous
effects: so fares it with this Ward, and his whole company; and to approve,
that goods ill gotten are most commonly worse spent, with this Treasure, which
thus unjustly they had enriched themselves withal, they accustom their lives
to all disorder, making their habit and carriage a shore, far more
detestable, and uncomely to be talked of, or by Christianity to be condemned
and abhorred, then their theeuing at Sea, swearing, drinking, dicing, and the
utmost enormities that are attended on by consuming riot, are the least of
their vices, that can be recited. Unlawfully are their goods got, and more
ungodly are they consumed, in that they mix themselves like brute beasts with
the enemies of their Savior: so that he that was a Christian in the morning,
is bedfellow to a Jew at night. Nay sin is grown to that rankness amongst
them, through the fatness of Concupiscence and Covetousness, that the Jews
hire out their offspring to them as we do horses, either by the day or by the
week: and as we do at an outcry, cry, Who will give more: so do these Jews
set out their children to them, asking, Who gives above a Sultane shall have
this. So then since that al men do know, it is a bad fare where nothing is
bought, and a great many of these Buiers, I will leave their Sodomie, and the
rest of their crying sins (which I fear their Atheism has led them into)
to the Judgment of the Just Revenger, and not give them to be talked of
further by my pen. Only for Ward, he lives there in Tunis, in a most princely
and magnificent state. His apparel both curious and costly, his diet
sumptuous, and his followers seriously observing and obeying his will. He has
two Cooks that dress and prepare his diet for him, and his taster before he
eats. I do not know any Peer in England that bears up his port in more
dignity, nor has his Attendants more obsequious unto him. There is no
admittance of any Suter on any business, but their business is first made
known to one of his followers that is near him, which if he list not to
regard, they have their answer from his man, that his greatness is not at
leisure, neither will he be spoke withal. Nor could I he^re of any affairs
that were dispatched by him, in the time of my imprisonment there, at their
first coming, but with long attendance, much suit, yea and (by your leave)
some bribes: so that his success has made him desperate and resolute, his
riches have made him proud. And so being now at the highest, in hope pride
shall have a fall, I proceed in this discourse.

Ward having thus taken this great Argosie, and (with her and others) so
inestimable riches, his mind was so inflated with pride, and puffed up with
vain glory, that he now thought, nay did not spare to speak, he was sole and
only Commander of the Seas. And indeed, like the Sea, always unsatisfied
(although, as I have heard, and by reason did conjecture, his Treasure was
infinite) providing himself for a fresh encounter, he placed in this great
Ship threescore pieces of Ordinance, and put into her a hundred and fifty
Englishmen, and two hundred and fifty Turks over whom he made Abraham Croften
Captain, and himself General, in his small Argosie the Mattalena and the
little John, with whom lying in the mouth of the Gulf of Venice, there grew
(upon some discontents) a muteny betwixt the English and the Turks: which Ward
having intelligence of, he went aboard the Argosie with his boat, and althoug
the heat thereof, were already broke forth, to a very forceable blaste, he by
his Temperance and persuasion, did very worthily allay it, wherein (being people
of so different a nature, I mean Englishmen and Turks) me thought although a
Villain, it was praise worthy in him to effect, which discontent and
heartburning appeased, he came a board his own Ship again, and lying in
wait for more booty, it pleased God, now to prevent them a little by a storm
that arose, in which storm, the great Argosie being much disabled with cutting
so many holes out of her sides for the planting of Ordinance and laboring in
the Sea, the violent split her self, and suncke suddenly, all the men in her
being drowned save only four, who the next day were taken up floting upon a
Raft of the ship. So that, he who but even now thought himself Commander and
resistles at the Seas, found here a power had Command our him, whereupon, he
now began to fear the retchlesnes of his estate, and greatly to complain of
the violence of his loss. Especially, for Croston, who was equal with him in
manhood, and nothing inferior to him in Command and warlike directions, as
also of the ruin of so many of his English, in whom, his chief hope, stay,
strength, and trust, was built and consisted.

Beside at his return to Tunis, it was no small dismay unto him to hear so
loudly the outcries and cursings blown in his ears, of wives, Fathers, and
Kindred for the loss, of so many of their friends at on blow, So that for
certain, as Graves reported unto me (in Wards own opinion) he went not up and
down but in fear of his life, which distaste past, and doubt present, made
him the sooner haste to Sea again, where to make it evident that one sorrow
never comes without an heir to succeed him, my Captain found that a second
mischief did follow this: for the Venetians, having sustained exceeding great
loss by his ungodly proceedings, the Segniorie of Venice in redress thereof,
had caused to be built a great Ship called S. Mark, of fifteen hundred
Tons, in manner of a Gallias, with fourscore pieces of brass Ordinance, and
with her set forth twenty or thirty sail of Galleys: whose voyage and
enterprise was directed a purpose to beat him out of the Gulf, and from
houering about their Coast. These thus at Sea happened upon Wards fly-boat, and
forced her ashore, whose men for safety running on Land, the Venetians pursued,
slew many of them, and two and thirty that they took, they hung up for carrion
in the Island of Corfowe: another of his men of war they have taken since, so
that by these two damages my desperate Pirate being so much dismayed, he never
since durst approach to the Gulf, notwithstanding I have heard of diverse rich
prises of the French (which traded for Alexandria, and Cypres, and other Ports
in the bottom) which have by him and his Accomplices been since taken, who, for
that I have not heard their names, I will forbear to report. Only I pray you
receive these in good part, which from William Graves his mouth were delivered
me, with the report of incredible wealth that he and his men of war have
taken since his first refuge in Tunis.

Ward having thus had his Argosie shipwrackt, and after that, two of his best
men of wars taken by the Venecians. It follows now that I in order deliver,
what happened to him at Tunis. This last year was left him only, the half of
two ships, the Mattelena, bearing two and thirty pieces of Ordinance, and of
three hundred Tuns, and the little John spoken of before, which about Christmas
last past, he was minded to come to Sea with all, and had furnished with
victuals, munition, and all things fitting for the furthering of his voyage.
But having the last two years past, dealt but grosely and unkindly with such
Englishmen, who were now left with him, in not yielding them their due shares,
which they expected their service dad deserved, they began now (taking
advantage of his lowness) to repine and to gather head against him, and
concluded awongst themselves, that rather then Ward should contain them in
that servitude, which in the time of his height and pride they supposed they
were held, they would now take a course to proud for redress, and which was,
they would immediately run away with the ship, (or at least, the ship should
run away with them) and with her whole provision, sell her to the Maltesaies
who were yet Christians, and so become at their service. To which opinion with
a general consent, they all agreed. And appointed one of their company
Captain and the same night before the Turks should come a board, they did
farewell to Tunis, without taking their leave, and went for Malta, being in
number forty five English, and leaving their old Captain, but thirty in
company,

Which sudden alteration and unexpected news, the next day coming to
Crosiman, he sent for Ward, and there in very stern manner, demanded from him
whether he were consenting to his Countremens Treason namely, to the conueying
away of the ship and goods, in y^ which the Kings majesty his master was a
party and he himself had a half. To who^ Ward made answer that he was no way
guilty of it, neither had he reason to be, since his own loss was as great
as his. Well replies Crosiman, be advised that thou art not, neither let the
honor and wealth, that thou have got by our support, be an encouragement,
shall entise thee to leave us, and serve Christians, but bear thy self even,
and to prevent thy escape, I will have half of thy part of the mattelena, for
my share of the John, which thy Countrymen have deprived me of, then either
resolve me of thy will, or resist me as thou think good, but Ward finding
it no fit time to reply to the contrary, for fear of his head: made answer,
that both himself, service, and all his, was at his pleasure. So that Ward,
now left shiplesse, almost frindlesse, and his state declining, since the
Crosiman has left him, he began to leauie his wits together, what he were
best to resolve upon, to adventure to Sea himself he thought it not yet
fitting, but determined, rather to send others a fishing for him. In which
determination, he forthwith buies him a ship of 80. or 90. Tuns, and appointed
one Captain Sampson to be the Commander, man's her with a hundred men, of
which although the ship were his own, not many of them were English, but the
most of them Turks, who so ouersway them at Sea, that the Captain may bid
what he will, and they will do what they list. For this Sampson going forth
of Tunis the eighth of February last, The first ship that he took was
Captain Fursman of London, a Gentleman who in former time had been as Samsons
sworn brother, of whom when Sampson came to take, note of, (In this I commend
his generous spirit) he would by no meenes have ri^led him, but earnestly
labored in all that he might, to have freely given him his ship and goods
again. To which request of his the Turks by no means would be brought to
consent, but the more he entreated, the more they denied, till at last one
among the rest, and who it should seem, was Life teant to Samspon, struck
violent at him, whom all the rest as readily seconded, so that he was compeld
to look heavily upon his friend, and enforced to be silent while they ceased
on the good Merchant, Master William Fursman with the ship and goods.

The very same day, the said Sampson in Wards ship, gave Chase unto a ship of
Dartmoth whereof John Fursman (who was sole brother, to William Furseman, who
they had taken not fix hours before) was master, from him they took likewise
both ship and goods, and then most cruelly, without pity, and not regarding
prayers, turned the two brothers into their ships Boat, and three leagues from
land in a very grown Sea, where it was impossible to recover the land, but
must unfortunately have perished, had not a ship of Venice happened by chance to
have taken them up. Oh, what inhumane cruelty was this, in them toward two
natural brothers, and who can express: the sorrow and grief (their cases
being a like) that one had for another one striving to help the second when
they saw nothing but to perish both, he lending one hand to help him, when
both would not serve to help himself, but leaving them to their Comfort, and
the rest to be damned who took two prises more though but small Ships, and
returned to Tunis who to their Captain Ward was welcome, according to the
proverb, Somewhat has some savor, although he seemed wondrous discontent,
that Sampson had not brought him a tall Ship, wherein his worships Person might
to theeuing himself, but contenting himself in the mean time, and neither
lamenting nor reproouing him for dealing so unkindly now with his Countrymen,
got away straight, he sends Sampson to Sea again, who in this action thriued
so succesfully, that he takes for Ward a small Argosie, or rather a Spaniard,
of three hundred Tons, with three prises more Flemings and French, which was
in June last, whereby with the strength that they have brought him, he is now
preparing himself very forcibly to Sea, training men, and casting Ordinance,
and the Tunis men making ready fourteen sail of great Ships for men of
war, and as many small for the same purpose, to scour the Coast. Where I am
glad I have left them, to hope for their confusion. Only I pray you receive
that which from William Graves his mouth was delivered me, of their incredible
wealth, as also of the spoil that our own Nation of England has sustained
within these two years. Neither I hope shall it be impertinet to note
heerewithall, the names of all Ships as I have gathered by being partaker of
the like hard fortunes.

A small Bark Fulmoth laden with Pilcherds.

Two ships of London, taken by the Galleys Besart about the Island of Corsowe.
The Merchant that was taken in the first, was also taken in the second. His
name (I suppose) is Master Wallowbee.

The next I heard of, was a ship, whereof Master Thomas Carrull of Plimoth was
owner. She was taken by Captain Elliet in the Bay of Cullery.

The Trojan of London, she was taken, and all her men made slaves but for
shooting one shot in their own defense.

A ship of Portsmouth, laden with oiles from Talloun* the master Richard
Learner.

The same day another small ship taken by the same men of war.

A ship of Hull, Master Andrew Barkers.

The Tobias of Amsterdam.

These five Ships were taken by Crosimans Ship, a Turk, being called
Mamatrice, and an Englishman William Graves the Master, the Gunners name John
Lumbey, the Botsons name Thomas Hussy. Neither was there any more Englishmen
in this man of war, but Captain Wards man, whose name was John White. Other
news I learnt not.

The pearl of London laden with currants from Zant, was taken by the Tunis men
of war in May.

John Bullard of London master of the little Amity, lost goods valued to eight
thousand pound.

Four great ships of Holland, of three hundred and four hundred Tons
apeece, and were taken all in one day.

A French man of war, who had in her 95. men, and fourteen pieces of
Ordinance; yet yielded without any one shot shooting: there were three
Caualeroes of Malta in her.

A ship of London, which came from Anconia.

Rebert French of Sandwich, in a new ship laden with allicant wines.

A small Bark of Milbrooke in his company.

The Bull of Amsterdam of 500. Tons.

Two more in her company.

At the same time, a small ship of Wards (or a man of war of Iunis, choose you
whether) of 65. Tons, took a Holland ship of 500. worth four and twenty
thousand pounds. My men did see her brought into Tunis, ere they came away.

And thus having deliueced as much as I can truly certify of Wards
proceeding, let me be bold to speak somewhat of Danser; (for so is his name)
and of him, as of the former, no more then I can justify. And since they be
thieves in one age together, live almost in one fame together, I Will be bold to
prick them down in one rank together.

Of the Pirate Danser.
THis Simon Danser, another Arch-pirate, was sometimes belonging to Flushing,
where having served the States, upon a discontent he went to Marseles in
France, where leaving his wife and son, he came to petuall slavery, and
there remain in the Galli^^. This Boniton was one of the Ireland Pirates,
whose purpose was to go unto the Straits to learn news. But you have heard
how it proved to his cost.

Not long after, the Moon of Amsterdam, a Ship that the Frenchmen bought, and
set forth from Newhauen, a vessel of 5. 02600. Tuns, which they furnished
most nobly forth, and sent her to the Straits, who by good hap, met with the
ship of Tunis which took me prisoner. Whereof Graves was Master, who in fight
ouercomming him, they carried to Marselis, for so was the news at Tunis, when
my men were there, and were seconded for truth upon their coming away. So that
I make no doubt but they have put him to death, and his Turks with him, which
were about an hundred Infidels, are all made slaves. But the last and best
news is, that the Spanish navy has been in the road of Tunis, and there found
riding fourteen Sail of great Ships for men of war to go toward the bottom
of the Gulf, and twelve or thirteen Sail of smaller, with men of war to
lie to the westward, and about the Islands of Sardmia maiork and miniake, all
which Ships my men which were secondly taken in a French ship in their passage
homwards and carried back again to Tunis, did see thus preparing.

So that I hope since the report holds, that the Spaniards have been in that
road, and burnt twenty five sail of Ships, it is infallibly true, that both
Ward and his assistants are at length deprived of most of their strength, or at
least so infeebled, that they shall never be able to carry such sway again.
Further, it is for certain, that the said fleet is busy in the search of
Danser, and dispersed only in several places to cut him and his forces off.
Of all which proceedings of Ward, Danser, or their Confederates, which I have
either seen, or by other men's knowledge heard, I have truly given you to
understand.

Which pains of mine, if it be either welcome to you, or acceptable to the
world, your friend is satisfied, and accounts it well bestowed.

Whereas it was reported in a former book, that the York Bonauenture (of
which I was master) carried fifteen cast pieces at the time of her taking, she
had scarce five which she could use, or were fit for service.

Andrew Barker.




