papal blazon or coat of arms tableau tableau royal English blazon or coat of
arms Indulgences granted to all and every christian man and whoman in what
someuer party of the world they be entering in to the fraternyite of saint
Katheryn in the mount of Synay.
S. K.

P. F.

depiction of Saint Catherine of Alexandria with sword and scourge IN the name
of our lord Ihesu Christ his blessed mother vyrgyne Mary and saint katheryne
the which vowed her vyrgynyte unto our lord Ihesu christ. etc^. Be it know
unto al and every christian man and woman that in the deserte of Araby the
myddell part of the infydelles is a certain mou^t^yne called the mount of
Synay having in every side infydelles borderynge.viii. C. miles fro the
company of christian men in the which mountain almighty god appeared and as
Dauyd the profit testefyeth spoke with Moses face to face and gave to him
the.x. commandments where and Moses saw a bu^she brennynge all in fire and
by that fire nothing consumed / sygnyfyenge the Incarnacyon of the sone of god
to the top of the which Mountain god by his aungelles cauled the body of
that blessed vyrgyne saint katheryne to be brought whereby process of time for
a remembrance of so great meruaylles in the honor of the said saint
Katheryne was builded a devout monastery. For the favor of whom also our
holy fathers Innocentius the.viii. Iulyus the second and Leo the.x. popes of
Rome has granted the Indulgences following for.iii. special causes. First
for the mayunyenaunce of the monks of the said place ye multitude of whom is
great there serving god under the rule of saint Basyle and with great
reverence keeping the glorious body of the said saint katheryne which monks
in the mids of the said Infydell^s like sheep among wolves led their life
in extreme pouerte and tere both by cause they dwell.viii. C. miles from any
christian men as we said before / and also because the countrees lyenge.C. C.
Miles round about The said Monastery is vnfruytefull bringing torthe another
corn nor wine. Secondely the said Indulgences were granted that the said
monastery might be the better repaired in buyldynges and maynteyned with books
chalyses and other ornaments longing to ye church for because it has no
small ruin and decay by ye inuasyons and oppressyons now lately done both by
ye great tyranny of the Turk and the Sowdan. Thyrdely the said indulgences
were granted to the said monastery and hospytall for the charytable receyuynge
of pilgrims resorting to the same which pilgrims wtin the space of. CC.
miles can find another house nor habytacyon to put their heedes in but only ye
said monastery which pilgrims if they should not mekely and charytable be
received of the said monks doubtelesse many of them should take sykenesse and
other bodily inconuenyentes thrughe tedyousnes and labor of their Iourneys.

(...) of causes papal.
(...) auctoryte of our say^ ^^ly (...) popes (...) that they may chose them a
suffycyent confessoure seculer or reguler which dylyge^^ely h^^rynge their
confession may assoyle them of all and every one of their sins crimes
excesses or causes reserved to the ^ee of Rome ones in their life except only
such causes that be contained in the bulle that is read on Sherethursdaye.

Absolucyon tociens quociens.
Also the said auctoryte is granted to the foresaid Brethren and Systerne and
benefactours yt they may chose a suffycyent confessoure as is specyfyed above /
the which dylygently herynge their confession may assoyle them as often times
as it shall be needful from al their sins or causes except them that be
reserved to the sea of Rome.

Full remyssyon in the article of death.
Also by the said auctoryte is granted to the brethren and systerne that they
may chose them in ye article of death a suffycyent confessoure which may
assoyle them from all their sins and causes how grievous and enorme someuer
they be and to grant them full pardon and remyssyon of all their sins and
to remytte pains dew for their sins in purgatory.

The reverent Abbot with the covent of the said monastery has wylled and by
their letters has declared that the foresaid Brethren and systerne may be
partakers for evermore in time to come of all masses prayers and other
spyrytuall suffrages which shall be done by the^ in ye said monastery

Punysshment for lettynge of this commyssyon.
Also our foresaid holy father. Leo the x. now being Pope is infourmed by the
record of credyble parsones that Dane Clement is a true monk and a true
proctoure of ye said monastery wherefore he exorteth all manner of lords /
patryarkes / Archebysshops / bishops / Abbottes / and their deputyes and all
other having dygnyte of Crystes church that they will withstand and punysshe
by the Censures of the church and other remedies of the law all appelynge set
aside such men that contraryeth and lets the foresaid Clement or any
commyssyoners by him for ye time deputyed in publysshynge of the said pardons
taking unto them if necessyte shall require help and assystence of the laytye.

Also it is commanded by the auctoryte of the pope under the pain of
excommunycacyon in doing the contrary that all manner of abbottes Pryours and
parsones of parysshe chyrches show and publysshe to the people the said
Indulgences when they shall be required for the behalf of ye said Dane Clement
or of any other by him deputyed which Indulgence our foresaid holy father Leo
now being pope has determined not for to be comprehended under any manner of
reuokynge lymyttynge or modefyeng of other Indulgences as for the favor of
building of saint Peter's church in Rome but always to be except.

Also out holy father Leo the.x. now being pope requires al and every one
being parsones and mynysters of parysshe chyrches yt immedyately after the
receyuynge of this present artycles they show and publysshe the said
Indulgences and pryuyleges to the people assygned unto them with out
contradyccyon under the pain of exco^munycacyon. Also the foresaid Dane
Clement besecheth and prays the parsones and mynysters of parysshe chyrches
for the love of god and saint Katheryne that they will whytsawfe to do
these.iii. things following. First after such declaracyon of Indulgences made
by them that the alms gadered that they will wytsaffe for to write every man
and woman's name in there letter or confesso^nall wan that be requyryd.
Secondely that they deliver confessyonalles or letters testemonyalles for the
said fraternity to all good christian people gyuynge of their goods as their
devotion or conscye^s gives them. Thyrdely that they show to the people that
they may enjoy these fore said Indulgences not only by gyuyng^ their alms in
ready money but also by gyuynge such other goods as god sends them.

Commandment under the seal of our sovereign lord the king.
Also our sovereign lord king Henry the.viii. by the grace of god king of
England and of France and lord of Irelonde considering ye great trybulacyon
and sorrow of the said monastery as the wryttynge of our holy father the pope
testefyeth under lead and form of a breffe moved by the way of pity has
gracyously granted the said Indulgences to be publysshed thrughout all his
royalme under his letter pattent and commends all officers and mynysters of
chyrches to rise up and gather such alms as shall be given unto them. And
favorably give it to ye said Dane Clement or his deputyes.

God save the king.

