A NEW INVENTION OF Shooting FIRE-SHAFTS in Long-Bowes:

Wherein, besides the manner of making them, there is contained a brief
Discourse of the usefulness of them in our modern Wars, by Sea and Land.

Published by a true Patriot for the common good of his native Country of
England.

printer's or publisher's device DEVS PROVIDEBIT
IVSTVS VIVET FIDE

R Y



LONDON, Printed by H. L. for John Bartlet, the gilt Cup in Cheape-side.

Anno Dom. M.D.C. XXVIII.

The Use of FIRE-SHAFTS: together with the manner how to make, and shoot them
out of Long-Bowes.
THe cost, encumbrance, and small avail of Corslets for Field or Fortress in
our modern Wars, may be sufficiently known to all experienced men in the
profession of Arms; yet dare I not auow, that Bows and fiery Arrows would be
more serviceable in all occasions, because the preualent custom of received
traditions, is much more plausible than reason. Only I will lay down some
probable (though but imaginary) effects of the one, and some seeming (if not
experimented) defects of the other; till time add form and farther credit to
the Essay.

My Ouerture is no mysterious subtle Artifice, all that can recommend it, is
the employment: but if any man be pleased to prove the demonstration, I doubt
not of his patience in reading this discourse. Where first I would advise by
way of Preface (because by some experience I have learned, how hardly men are
drawn to fence themselves against they see not what) that no trained Soldier
arm himself by any Argument of mine against the public institution of
prouisionary Corslets. For those who have ill neighbors (which no so blessed
estate as ours can ever be without) must suite themselves (if better may not
be) with Arms of like defense; lest enemies invited by their nakedness,
attempt the deprivation of their liberties, together with the effusion of their
blood.

I know not the just price of a serviceable Corslet at this time; but sure I
think it far exceedes the charge of all that furniture an Archer stands in
need off. Besides the daily perquisites when ere they are employed, of oyling,
buckles, thongs; small things, but very necessary, and which sometimes can
scarce be had for money. Their weight (I confess) is little to an able man,
and the fashion not much uneasy for him that has them shaped to his own
proportion: but when slender fare, and hard lodging abate men's strength, and
that the shape of body must be constrained within the Corslet (as commonly men
see in service;) and amongst trained Soldiers (where the Master to his
servant, or the Father to his son deliver Arms as they have made them for
themselves, or for some other of more unequal stature) then not to speak of
the ridiculous show they sometimes make, the encumbrance is so great that
hardly any patience can endure it long. They foul and fret men's clothes, and
add extremities to the excess of cold and heat: so that in Winter men are
loath to put them on, and in Summer they throw them off in spite of all
command. The help is, on a march to put them into Carts, where either much
time must be spent (too precious) to pack them up in order; or they must (as
commonly they are) be thrown together on heaps, that when they are taken off
again upon occasion, they are so bruised, broken, and confusedly disioynted,
that men which put them on seem rather restrained in irons, than harnessed
with an armor of defense. And though this inconvenience be less sensible in
Holland (where sea and intersection of many waters yields convenient
transportation by boat, almost to every town) yet the proof they have had
even there, may serve to justify the truth of what men find in other parts.

If Armours were all musket-proofe, and men well able to endure them, their use
were excellent for many purposes: but such men scarsly find we amongst many to
guard a pettardier, or make discovery on a Counterscarp; works of quick
dispatch co^par'd with marches, breaches, or field-skirmishes. But light
armours (as we now have them) though complete with head-peece, tassets,
gauntlets, will be of no defense against an enemy that mingles bullets with his
Arrows: for I seek not to persuade the use of Bows in steed of Guns, but that
by due accouplement of both, more hands might in less room be brought to
fight at once; a part of chiefest excellence in marshalling of men.

Some men I know have Armours in so great esteem, that they think for a
Soldier to quit his sword, is (in extremities) a fault more pardonable, than
to cast away his Corslet: their reason is, that though it be bad to lose his
weapon of assault, yet much more desperately ill to abandon all the means of
selfe-defence. And examples they allege that in former times, one Soldier was
punished for casting away his Target though he kept his Sword: and another was
rewarded, for that in like extremity he left his Sword and kept his Target.
But if Corslets hold no proportion with the weapons of our modern wars; if
Muskets, Carrabines, Pistols, all predomine, then are they now no instruments
of selfe-defence, but mere impediments. And if any will object the advantage of
Pike-men armd against a stand of unarmed Pikes, I refer me to the testimony of
old Soldiers, how often in their life time they have seen a firm (I say a
firm) encounter in the field, twixt Piles and Pikes. And yet if so it happen,
I know not whether the bodies free agilitie on the one side, or the temper of
an armor on the other, would yield a better means of preservation. But sure I
think it is our chiefest disadvantage, that they so seldom entershock; for the
thigh bone, shin-bone, and the arms of English, longer than of French, and
much less foggy than of Duch, to take large strides, and retch and wind
themselves into all postures, makes much for us at push of Pike; as does like
feature of our Limbs (more apt than of our neighbors) to practice shooting in
the Long-bow. Therefore what I speak in general of Corslets extends not
wholly unto Pikes: for some of them may be of use in open field to supply the
intermission of Arrows, as bows might serve to counterguard the slow dispatch
of Musketeers, in traversing to shoot and charge again.

There was a time when Lances were esteemed serviceable, as Corslets at this
day: but by discourse and farther trial, men have found that they are
bootlesse in our Wars; and time with better discourse may work the same effect
in that I treat off. Mean while the practice of the bow may be received,
though we retain the use of the Corslet; for if the one be small encumbrance
on the body, the other will be little burden at the back, and if to rest the
left hand on the pike, enable men to draw a stronger bow, that ingenious
device of scruing both together will be best; otherwise to lay the pikes (in
time of service) not longst the fyles (as usually men do) but thwart the
ranks, will be no let at all to the Archier, but help to keep him in an even
front, and so they will lie ready to take up again when time shall be.

Now if the fire-shafrs which are proposed, be of that efficacy which I
pretend, no fairer engine was there ever used in war; the cost not great, the
encumbrance none at all: they are neat, portable, and so mannageable, that
even children may make their sport with them, and youths of any growth may do
good service, making their practice only with the common arrows; than which,
there can be no more noble recreation. But if at festival times, a Bull (in
stead of bayting him with dogs) were tied at stake, or sheweld in with
Archiers, conveniently placed upon a Common, or other spacious place; men might
then make trial with their fire-shafts (a brave and manlike sport) where
happily the madding of the enraged beast (besides inuring men to conflict)
would teach some profitable stratagem for war.

Whateuer martial feats by land are left recorded of our nation in old times,
have been most commonly achieved by virtue of the Bow; which virtue may be
artificially renewed, if a grounded apprehension that bullets are more mortal,
take not from us all consideration, that arrows may not only be delivered
more speedily, more safely, and in greater numbers at once; but also will flee
farther (shot at randon) than bullets reach point-blanke. Advantages, which
well observed, will frustrate all the efficacy, by depriving men of the use of
whatsomeuer other weapon: for Bow-men placed behind a Paraper, a stand of
Pikes, or mannuple of Musquettiers, may shower down such incessant drops of
fire, like Sodoms rain, upon an enemy, as will not only annoy the Pikes, and
rout the Horse, but altogether disable the Musquettier; as may be gathered by
the suppositions which comparatively I shall lay down in that which follows:
insisting only upon the regular imbattelling of men, and leaving to discretion
the difference of accidental forms, according to the variety of occurrents.

The form of a regular Squadron, whose body consists of Corslets, leaves a
great space of ground before it void; and as much more supplied with idle
hands, and those idle hands exposed to inevitable hazard. The whole space
before the Corslets, is, and must necessarily be left void; lest the
Musquettiers wearied, wanting munition, or otherwise ouercharged by any sudden
incursion of Horse, should hastily make retrait upon the front of their own
Corslets, and so deprive themselves of their own defense: for in that case the
Corslets are no refuge.

This space before the Corslets being then so left void, and the mannuples of
Musquettiers being drawn forth to skirmish on the flanques, in any imaginable
manner; the Corslets are but so many idle hands, yet stand exposed to great
mortality during the skirmish of the Musquettiers: for Corslets are no
musquet-proofe, nor dare the Musquettiers draw forth so far before, as to leave
them out of reach of the enemies musket, lest by some sudden fury of Horse,
themselves should be ouer-run ere they could make an orderly retrait. But
suppose they make an orderly retrait (for continual motion and agitation, with
often bruising of the Musket against their bodies (if nothing else) will force
them at the length to make retrait) the succor they shall find on the
flanques, or in the rear of the Corslets, will assuredly be very small; for
the enemies Horse advancing forward, and discharging upon a Carico, will in
short time so dishearten the Corslets, wounding and maiming in the face, and
arms, and other bared parts (if not through the very Corslet) the foremost and
brauest of them, that the rest men may believe will easily give ground, and open
ranks to an utter overthrow. Or admit at the best, that our Musquetties so
discomfit the enemies that we put them to retrait, I say not, that our Corslets
will then serve us for no use; but a prudent Commander, I think, will either
hold his advantage with Musquettiers, or pursue it to an execution with his
Horse; and then no weapon to the single sword, though pistols, pikes, and even
musket stocks, are sometimes instruments of execution.

For a fortress, the chiefest use of Corslets that I know, is at an assault
after battery, where (as well within as without) they have been usually
employed amongst other weapons. Whether they or other weapons be in that case
more serviceable, I need not to contend; it is sufficient that assault and
battery is almost every where laid aside. They without make their approches
underground to the ditch, and throw the ditch if it be dry; and if it have
water, they pass a gallery to the wall of the fortress, and there mine and
blow up, gaining their ground by handbreadths, and employ their Ordnance only
against the flanquers, and to clear the Curtens; for experience has taught
that this way (though more slow) makes an assured passage with less cost and
loss of men; chiefly of those most able bodies and valiant spirits, which at
an assault were commonly employed on both sides. And this which has been said
of Corslets without, may show their small avail within a fortress; where the
ordinary defense is countermine, retrenchment, fire-workes and guns. As for
Corslets in a sally, if the Musquettiers pass not the Rampar and Reualins, the
use is very little; and if they pass beyond, it is no more than has been
said before in field-seruice.

These are the deficiences that some years since took up my imagination, and
made me consider, whether by the subuention of some other more proportionable
engine, the subalterne and slow discharging of the Musket, might not be
secured against the sudden fury and swift incursion of the Horse; as also
whether the void ground and vacant time might not be more seruiceably supplied
with fighting hands: and my opinion was, that if the arrow could be so enforced
with fire-workes, as might give no impediment to the flight and quick delivery,
the thing were found. But having my self no skill in fireworks (had not mine
own ouer-aboundant leisure invited me since that, to tamper somewhat in such
kind of engenry) I had laid aside my conceit of long-bowes, which I now
communicate; beginning as before, with the examination of their benefit for the
body of a squadron in field-seruice: where it is evident that the Musquetters
may be placed before the front with a mutual defense; for as the Musquettiers
are defended by the arrows from over their heads against the enemies horse, so
the Archiers are defended by the bodies of the Musquettiers (who are in no more
danger, but yield more shelter than before) against the enemies bullets; and,
which is the chiefest advantage in fight, all hands shall be employed at once:
for at the same time with the Musquettiers, the Archers may shoot over such
vollies of fiery arrows, as shall (though less mortal) give an enemy no
less occasion to look about him than the bullers. Or because a total
innovation of arms and order may seem too hazzardous, where the lives of men
and honor of the field are laid at stake; if the fire-shafts, I speak of, flee
but tweluescore yards (and I know by some good proof, that they will flee more
than fourteen, from any practiced arm of common strength) the Archiers may be
placed behind four ranks of Corslets (as many as at once can charge their
Pikes to purpose) and from thence without impediment to any of their own
(either Pikes or Musquettiers) perform as much as has been said before. And
if the store an Archier bears about him, will not suffice to maintain the
fight throughout, one horse for every hundred bowmen, will bear munition as
much as will serve the turn; and when all fails, they have their Pike and
Headpiece to defend themselves; for these a man may march withal, besides his
bow and arrows very easily.

Now because I am fallen into discourse of arranging men in squadron, I may
without detracting from any authorized discipline, or from the more approved
customs of our graduated martialists (for I will propound it but in case that
long bows be received in stead of Corslets) show how in my opinion the
Musquettiers may most commodiously shift station in a skirmish; and open place
for ranks that follow, and consequently for the whole body (Bows as well as
Musquettiers) to give or gain ground on an enemy, insensibly. And that I may
be the better understood, I will express my self by a supposed mannuple of
thirty Musquettiers, five in file and fix in front; the foremost rank whereof
having discharged, shall sever it self by three in file on either flanque, so
leaving space void for the next succeeding rank to advance in even front with
the former of those files; where they likewise having discharged their
muskets, shall file themselves on either flanque as did the first, leaving
like open way for them that follow to draw forward. By which order of
succession, the first rank will have leisure to charge again and resume his
former place, without retiring to the rear of all, as usually they do, and as
indeed is requisite when they will give ground: for then the first rank having
discharged, may turn away (three on each flanque) unto the rear, and there
rally themselves: the rest, each after other doing the like, and taking place
behind, till the whole ground whereon they first began to skirmish be left
void, and the way left free again for the foremost rank, without advancing to
discharge anew. This I think sufficient to explain my meaning; I will
therefore now proceed to show the benefit of fire-shafts for a fortress. where
they seem to me incomparably useful as well within as without: for they may
be shot from behind a breast of defense, without discovering any part of our
body to the enemy. No enemy can so shelter himself in his approches, but that
these fire-shafts may fall upon him. They will put to great trouble and hazard
the Cannoniers that plye the Artillery on batteries, where bullets cannot hit
them. They will serve to set on fire the enemies tents and cabening. And the
blaze of them in the night will in all likelihood make such discovery, that
Musquettiers standing ready to level where they fall, may aim at the enemy as
by day, and keep perdues, engeniers, workmen, and those that watch by night in
such continual awe, as will greatly hinder, if not wholly drive them from
their watch and labor. Yea with reason it may be thought they will facilitate
all attempts by night; for the eye of enemy will be so dazelled, and his body
so clearly discerned by the multitudes of them, that men may boldly assail an
enemy by night, and safely make retrait in all occasions.

Many other, and indeed indeterminable are the uses that by conjecture may be
drawn from such like arrows shot out of the long-bowe, both by sea and land;
in particular to deprive an enemy of the use of his sails at a great distance;
for the canuas will take fire like tinder, and vanish by enforcement of the
wind in sudden flame, if any arrow fasten in it, as among many some assuredly
will do. I may therefore say, that as other parts of that munition which has
been patternd out from heaven in former times, have in this latter age been
nearly resembled by ordinary means on earth with great effect; as thundering
hailestones by shooting bullets, and making whole towns brimstone, salt, and
burning like the overthrow of the four cities, by mines of powder, consisting
of brimstone, salt-peeter, and burnt coal; so this newer imitation of sharp
arrows with coals of Juniper, and of mingling hailestones with coals of fire
(both which we read of) may be found in the practice (for ease and variety of
use) to be of great importance: and in that opinion I recommend it to the
welfare of my Country, whose peculiar weapon of advantage it will be; at least
for to supply our want of Horse, which we neither can transport to foreign
employment in convenient numbers, nor are by nature so inclined to tend with
art and industry, as other of our neighbors do.

Sapienter idem.
How to make and shoot Fire-shafts out of the Long-bowe.
LEt the Fire-shafts have one end feathered and shaped, after the manner of an
ordinary arrow, and the other end fitted with a pipe of latten, ten inched long
or more, at discretion, a bearded head of iron fast glued into it, with a
socket of wood, and a touchhole made close by it, with some little reuerse to
stop the arrow from piercing so deep into a man's clothes, the flanques of a
horse, or other mark of easy passage, as to choke the fire. The shaft may be
made fast within the pipe (if men so please) with hard wax; which melting as
the pipe grows hot, will make it very difficult to draw the arrow from where
it lights.

Arrows to make a blaze by night, as also those that are to shoot into the
sails of a ship or an enemies tent, must have the touchhole within an inch of
the shaft, and the reuerse a little above the touchhole, to stay the arrow
while the mark takes fire.

The pipe must be filled with this mixture bruised very small and hard ram'd in;
Gunpowder and salt-peeter a like proportion, and brimstone half so much, with
some small quantity of camphir (if men please) to make it operate more strongly
where the mark is wet. If the mixture burn too quick, add brimstone; if too
slow, add powder.

To stop the touchhole that the mixture run not forth, and to take fire when
you mean to shoot, sees cotten-candlewicke in vinegar and gunpowder bruised
very small; and when it is thoroughly soaked and well dried, take a small
quantity (rolled a little in the former mixture) and stop the touchhole
therewith.

The Fire-shaft being made, and filled in this manner, take the Bow with a
match well lighted into your left hand, after the manner of Musquettiers; then
hold the Arrow ready nocked in the Bow, after the manner of Archers. Lastly,
give fire, return your match, and deliver the Arrow.


