A SERMON UPON THE WORDS OF SAINT PAVL:

Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers.

Wherein the Popes sovereignty over Princes, amongst other errors, is briefly
but sufficiently refuted; and the Supremacy of the King, by clear evidence
and strong proof auerred; to the silencing of the adversary, and satisfaction
of the indifferent Christian, not blinded with partiality and preiudicate
opinion:

By THOMAS INGMETHORPE.

1. Pet. 2.13. Submit your selves unto the King, as unto the superior.

LONDON, Printed by R. Field for Robert Mylbourne. 1619.

TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, TO BIE, BY THE PROVIDENCE OF GOD,
Archbishop of York, Primate of England, and Metropolitan.
I Present unto your Grace this short Sermon, not for any Synopticall skill to
be seen in it, (for how should a Minstrell pipe artificially, wanting his
ouerlip?) but only for the good I am persuaded may redound by it to the people
of this Land, my brethren and kinsmen according to the flesh. For, whereas they
are borne in hand, and some, for want of better grace, are made verily believe,
that the Regiment of the Church peculiarly belongs to the Bishop of Rome, by
the prerogative of his office; and thereupon admit no coin for current money,
but that which comes from his Mint, and has his Image and superscription on
it: here they may see the ground of that lewd opinion shaken at least, if not
razed; and, as it were, a Trophee of the Kings supreme power over his
subjects, as well in matters Spiritual as Temporal, by force of Gods word, as
by dint of sword, established. So as there is likelihood, that such, who have
any spark of the good Spirit, which leads into truth, residing in them, upon
so evident a manifestation of their error, will be won at length to retract it,
and leave banding themselves in the Popes quarrel against the Lord and his
Anointed: the only Helena, in a manner, that this day troubles the state of
our Greece. For (to appeal to all that be acquainted, either with the present
constitution of our body politic, or with the true complexion of our Church)
what other malign humor, to speak of, does attaint the health of the one; or
blemish, disfigure the beauty of the other? If this cloud were scattered,
Lord, how bright would our Hemisphere shine? If this mud (...)

To the Reader.
IN this Sermon, if thou be not too partial, thou shall find, to the comfort
and encouragement of all true subjects, the Kings title fairly pleaded against
the Pope; and proved to be agreeable to the written word of God, and to the
example of the Church, when it was yet in the prime and flower of her age. If
our Romish Rabbines could show the like evidence for the Popes sovereignty
over the King, their followers (I must confess) were to be borne with in the
course of their proceedings that way: but it being a thing, which the Scripture
does not only not warrant, but utterly disauow, and which is so far from
corresponding to the pattern of the primitiae Church, that it is antipode and
quite opposite to the same, no pretense, though never so colorable will
absolve their doing from guilt of notorious disloyalty, who contrary to their
allegiance do abandon the King in a right of his inheritance allowed by God;
and as if that abuse were too little, most unnaturally do abette against him an
outlandish Prelate in a most unlawful claim, by meare forgerie at first
usurped, and ever since by force and fraud supported and maintained. Were it
that the State made for it, and with fire and faggot did seek to establish it,
as a signet meet for Sions right hand, as heretofore it has done; their fault
would appear the less, and they the more excusable, by how much death is of
that terrible aspect, and has so grim and ghastly a look with it, that it is
enough to quail the courage of a right stout champion, even in a right good
cause, as we have experience of the same in Peter. Matthew. 26.
But since that by the positive law of the land it is now clean put down, and
as a bastard brat of Babylon banished the Country, we may justly proclaim
them for ministers of Antichrist, that in heart undutifully wish, and by wicked
practices audaciously attempt, or under hand covertly, but craftily, broake the
restoring of it among us again. Wisdom would, they did look about them, and
be sure, before they take so maine a leap, lest lighting against the rock of
perdition, they be crushed to pieces with the fall. For how light account
soever they make of the matter, Saint Paul does not slightly sentence it as
petty trespass, or venial offense, but censureth it deeply, as a damnable
sin, for subjects to spurn against the superior powers, as through their
sides thrusting at God himself, whose ordinance they be, and whose room, next
and immediately under him, they do by special assignement from him occupy. And
if so grievous a penalty as the Apostle threatens be to be inflicted upon such
as resist the common Magistrate, abusing his power to protect idolatry, and to
root out the name of Christ and his Gospel, as the Emperors, then being
heathen, did; how do not they deserve the uttermost rigor of hell torments,
that withstand their godly and christian King employing the authority given
him of God to Gods glory, and to the benefit of the people committed to his
charge? They would think much to be conycacht in any worldly business they
take in hand, though never so triuiall: How happens then, that they let
themselves be thus sensibly gulled in a case of greatest moment, importing no
less then their bodies and souls be worth? They are surely bewitched, else
they would never either by persuasion be inueigled, or by allurement entised, or
by violence enforced to such an impiety, as to leave their duty to the King,
which God by express charge has imposed upon them, and to clean unto the
Pope as a superior commander, whom God has inscoffed with no such privilege.
The Scripture has foretold of Antichrist, that he indeed would aspire unto
such an estate, and in process of time should atchieue it, and for a certain
space hold it, till God put in the heart of Kings, to call for their own
again, Revel. 17.
and with one accord and joint consent to pull the beast down as fast as ever
they set him up; as already in part we see come to pass. But for any person,
to whom Kings by Gods appointment should submit their swords and scepters, and
may lawfully neither draw the one nor weild the other but at his beck and
liking only, they may as soon find a man in the Moon as such a one assigned
there. Let them then take heed, I advise them, how to pick a thank and curry
favor with the Pope, they incur the displeasure of the King: lest fearing to
be beat with a paper rod, they procure themselves a whipping with quick
Scorpions; lest flying a painted smoke, they run headlong into a hot burning
fire; and shunning an imagined Scylla, fall over helmet and crest into an
essential Charybdis. For assuredly as the Popes blessing when it is at the
best, and poured out in his fuliest horn, is scarce worth a good shoebuckle; so
his curse, though with bell book and candle, is but as a fillip or fleabiting
in effect: whereas disobedience to the King does bring the offenders to
undoubted ruin, as here for the present, so eternally in the world to come.
Spem pretio non emam.
Sannio in Terence, as simple as he was, yet would not buy a pig in a poke,
according to the proverb: for so he knew he might happily be cheated, and
disburse his money to his own disadvantage. But these be so sottish, nay
stupid, that they stick not wilfully to adventure all their wealth temporal
and eternal, in a ship that has a maine breach in the bottom, and so is no
sooner lanched out from the shore into the deep, but it sinkes straight, and
is sure to miscarie without hope of remedy. They might do far better, and show
more discretion a great deal, to answer the Popes solliciters in that wicked
motion, as Demosthenes did the harlot Lais in another unreasonable demand:
Tanti poenitere non emo: (...)
We list not buy a rue-bargaine so dear. He has good luck if he run not into
forfeiture, that seals an obligation, and never takes notice of the condition;
he may well come to beshrew himself and sit down with loss, that strikes
hands before he be throughtly made acquainted with the match; he is not like to
win the game that plays his cards at randon as they be dealt, without so much
as looking whether he follows suit or no: And are not they worthy to perish
with Antichrist, that embrace his tyrannical usurpation as a chief article of
their Creed, and therefore not only inwardly to be assented unto, In their
Cases of conscience, the 55. Article
but openly to be professed, though death ensue, before they have well searched
whether it be proportionable to the analogy of faith expressed in the
Scriptures, the only authentical and self-complete rule of all true
Catholicisme? It will not serve their turn before God to say, such and such
learned men so informed us; no more then it did the Jews, which gave their
voices to Christ's crucifying, that the Scribes and Pharisees, and high Priest
had induced them so to do. They would be loath to cut their coat after another
measure, or to bespeake their shoes by another last; for so they might be
made either too strait, and wring them; or over wide, and not fit them. What
marvel then, if they stray from the right faith, who frame their judgment to
the opinion of other, of knowledge perhaps profound enough, and never examine
whether it be answerable to the platform of sound doctrine? Truth is not
pinned to the school doors, nor tied to the girdle of great Clearkes, but is
confined only within the limits of the holy Scripture. And as no gold was
accounted holy without the Temple, so there is no doctrine to be reckoned
Catholic, but what has his warrant and ground there. If all that take upon
them the name of Teachers in the Church, were ipso facto inspired of God, and
Orthodoxall, the danger were not so great, nor the caution so needful: but
since all is not gold that glistereth, nor every one that pretends well,
intends well, but there be swarms of false Prophets abroad in the world, such
as can say one thing, and think another: carry bread in the one hand, and a
stone in the other: such as in painted boxes for whosesome Triacle sell rank
poison: under a pleasant bait, hide a deadly hook: and upon counterfeit
metal, set a right stamp: Scorpions that have amiable faces, but stinging
tails: Crocodiles, that under tears can shroud treason: Virgilian Sinons,
Dicebant been, sed mente alta praua struebant. (...): a metaphor taken from
foundations of houses, which are laid deep. Epicharmus, (...) Cicero.
that under a smooth tale, can bring in a Trojan horse: Homericall hypocrites,
that can speak well, but dissemble deeply: doubtless in matters of Religion,
especially in this controuersed point of highest consequence, they cannot be
ouer-cautelous and circumspect. And truly hence it is, that we daily see so
many ouerseene and seduced, because they practice not the precept of the witty
Poet, in being mistrustfull; nor follow the counsel of the sententious Orator,
in not being ouer-credulous; nor take warning of the Divine both Evangelist and
Apostle, in not believing every spirit. 1. Job. 4.
Wherefore I read them, as they tender their own welfare and souls health,
not to suffer themselves longer, like hooded hawks, to be carried blindfolded
they wot not whither, as Solomon's fool was led to the stocks: Proverb. 7.
but to try before they trust, and not to follow the opinion of any man, how
Encyclopaedian soever, Nullius addicti iurare in verba magiftri.
till they have thoroughly sisted and bolted it, and by due proof and
disquisition found it to be flower, not bran; good ware, not raffe. In which
behalf, forasmuch as the small Tract following promises to minister no small
furtherance unto them, it shall not be amiss without longer prologue or
further prefacing, to refer them unto it. Only I request them to peruse it
with indifferency, all factious affection set aside; and then in Gods name let
them judge, and do as they see cause. I can but persuade: it lies in them
whether they will yield or no. In the mean while, good Reader, I bid thee
heartily farewell.

At Stainton in the street, in the Bishopric of Durrham. Nouemb. 5. Ann.
1618.

Thine in Christ Jesus, Tho. Ingmethorpe.

The sum of this Sermon, for memory sake, may be abstracted into this
Tetrastich.
ACtum est de Papa, perijt suprema potestas,
Quam supra Reges vendicat ensiferos:
Diuina siquidem Scriptura test, bicornem
Constituit Mitram post Diadema Deus.
In English.
ALas for you, Sir Pope,
Your supreme power proves void:
To Kings it is due by right,
Whom long it has annoide.
A SERMON UPON THE WORDS OF SAINT PAVL:
Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers. Romans 13.1.
OF all doctrinall positions set abroach in the school of Antichrist, (men,
brethren, and fathers, well beloved in the Lord) there is not a more erroneous
paradoxe, estranged nay abhorrent from all both divine and humane literature,
then that which gives the Bishop of Rome pre-eminence over Kings and Emperors.
Innocent. 3. in decretal. aduanceth the Pope in state above the Emperor as
much as the Sun in brightness surmounts the Moon, and as gold in value
exceeds lead. Gelas. did. 95.
Howbeit as among the Philosophers there was not an opinion so absurd, but
there were ever some auditors as absurd, to entertain it: so, as harsh an
assertion as this is, and unsavory, yet there want not even amongst us
Christians, who intoxicated with the cup of Babylonish enchantment, not only
not distaste the same as vncatholicke, but as truly Orthodoxall, approve of it
and embrace it; and that with such resolution of mind and heat of affection,
that many stick not in defense thereof to venture goods, lands, living, and
liberty; and some more desperate then the rest, Like the Donatists, who for
their errors and credits sake, wilfully made the^sclues away: Aug. cpist. 50.
ad Bonif.
to lose their lives. For the better informing therefore of men's judgments and
consciences in that behalf, I have thought it opereprecious for the present,
and worth the while, to travel somewhat in that argument, and to let them see,
unless they hoodwink and blindfold themselves for the nonce, that Kings and
Princes by Gods ordinance are constituted supreme Governors of their dominions,
without subordination or dependence to any earthly superior; and the
sovereign power which the bishop of Rome claims over them, to be merely
transcendent, Antichristian, unjust, and usurped. A string more then needful to
be harped on in these Iesuited cayes: wherein traitors go for martyrs, and
rebellion against Princes, does mask under the vizar, and is enameled with the
specious name of Catholic devotion.
And for this purpose, I have purposely singled out and chosen for my Text, the
parcel of Scripture even now proposed, as promising much that way. For indeed
it contains an absolute rule, briefly setting down both the subject from
whom, and the object to whom subjection is due. Which two points duly debated
and discussed, it will evidently appear, among other wholesome documents,
whether of right is above or underling to other, the civil Magistrate or the
Pope; and consequently who do better, or be more to blame in the title of
Supremacy, we, who stand for the King against the Pope, or our unnatural
countrymen, who take part with the Pope against the King. The King of Kings
grant, that in the audience of Christian subjects, I may not without fruit
entreat of so important, prositable, and necessary a Subject.

And first, touching the parties liable to subjection, our Apostle declares
who they be, in the words (every soul.) Where by soul is meant, According to
the Hebrew word (...) in the old Testament, for which Targhum expressly has
(...) Leuit. 2. (...) a kind of speech wherein the whole is noted by the part.
not the spirits of men separated from their bodies, for they be either in
heaven if good, or if bad in hell, as Scripture affirms and informs us, and
so without the reach of any earthly Potentate to be able to touch them: but
according to the figure synecdoche, the soul being the nobler part of man, is
put for the whole man composed of soul and body. A figure of speech very
familiar in holy Writ, and much frequented. To this is annexed the particle
(every) (...) every soul, which being a note of universality, and neither
here nor elsewhere throughout the whole volume of Gods book, by any restraint
of exception in this case abridged, it cannot but make the proposition general
and extend universally and singularly to all. For the persons to whom
subjection is to be yielded, the Apostle likewise expresses them by the name
of higher powers: whereby is signified the civil Magistrate in every common
wealth, of what form of government soever it be, as the King, Tres regiminis
formae: Monarchia, Aristocratia, Democratia. Plato in polit. and Aristot. l. 3.
polit. cap. 5. and lib. 6. Ethic. cap. 16.
where the state is Monarchical; the Optimates, where it is Aristocraticall;
the people, where Democraticall. For it is not to be thought, that Christ came
to abrogate, to abolish or repeal any lawful civil policy formerly
established, but by planting therein his spiritual kindome, standing
especially in the motions of the heart, of the Synagogue of satan to make it
the Church of God. The outward administration whereof, may well be fitted, and
made agree to any fashion of political regiment, without impeachment or
prejudice to the same. In so much, that where they meet aright, a Christian
commonwealth and the Church are no longer to be held for two distinct bodies,
as iron and clay, which will not stick together: but so grow into one, like
the sience and the stock wherein it is graffed, that they become in a manner
termini conuertibiles, as Logitians speak, terms equivalent, or as
Grammarians say, synonymaes, words that import all one matter. And of them may
be verified, that which Joseph said of Pharaohs two dreams of the Kine and of
the ears of corn, Genesis 41.
They are both one. By which their combination and mutual dependence, the
wel-being of either is not only no whit empaired, but greatly bettered and
amended. As may be exemplified, not to instance foreign countries, in this
native and flourishing Realm of ours, the Lords name be praised for it. And
pray we incessantly and from the ground of our hearts, that as he vouchsased of
his goodness to stitch them together again, when by force of Romish tyranny
they were rent asunder; so now they may be wedded in a perfect and perpetual
marriage, never to part nor be divorced any more. The several parcels of the
account thus cast, the sum of the whole in gross by just Arithmeticke
amounts to this much: that all men, of what condition or state soever they
be, do stand obliged and bound by duty to subject themselves in all things to
the temporal Magistrate, where they inhabit and converse, without resistance.
A doctrine of singular consequence, and to many very good uses serviceable. To
give you a taste of some of the principal and most material points, for time
will not suffer me to touch them all in particular.

First, it ditteth up the mouths of Anabaptists, who dreaming of an equality
purchased by Christ, disclaim all Magistracy, See the Antitheses between the
true Christ and the salse, put forth by certain of that crew in Transiluania,
especially the seventh
as a calling altogether unlawful for Christians to exercise. As though true
Christianity and Magistracy were things incompatible, and as fire and water did
expel one the other. Whereas in very truth there is no more repugnancy between
them, then between heat and light, which though they be disparata distinct
things, and in themselves seiunct and separate, yet are found to concur well
enough in eodem tertio, as in the globe or body of the Sun. If Saint Paul had
been of their mind, he would no doubt, in this his treaty of a Magistrate,
have branded it with some mark of dislike or other, and not blaze it with
colors of applause and approbation, as he does. Neither would he so vehemently
have called for obedience unto rulers, but rather have incensed and set the
people at defiance against them. To say, this of Saint Paul shows, that
Christians may be subject to an heathen Magistrate, but proves not that a
Christian may play the Magistrate himself, is no sound collection of a
judicious mind, but a frivolous suggestion of a light brain: for if Christians
with safe conscience may be subject to an heathen Magistrate, why not rather (I
report me to you) to one that is a Christian, and better qualified? And if it
be lawful for a Christian to be a subject, why not a King, since subjection
seems more to preiudicate the liberty of the Gospel, then to reign and
bear rule? Much might be said in consutation of these phantasticks, but
because I see they rather need to be purged for frenzy then informed by
divinity, I leave disputing the case longer with them, and at this time only
for their healths sake put the^ in mind of Anticyra, Naniget Anticyras.
where, for sailing thither, they may be sure of Helleborus enough to scour
their humorous brains withal. And if they think much to be seen arrive and
land there, let them, by my advice, hold on their course, till they come to
Vtopia, or some such Vdemien coast. For there, if any where, it is likely they
may find entertainment, and obtain license to erect their new fangled
architecture, the confused chaos and (...) platform of their turbulent and
tumultuous Anarchy. Sure, sober and discreet Christians, who besides the light
of nature have the Canon of Gods word to direct them, will none of it.

Again, this marres the market of the Roman Clergy, who challenge an
exemption from all earthly powers, as a legacy bequeathed them of God, by
virtue of their spiritual function. For whereas Saint Paul exacteth obedience
of all men, none of any vocation excepted, as by the tenor of his speech is
more then evident, it argues plainly, that by the authority of Saint Paul,
which is agreed of all sides to be canonical and authentic, Clerks if they be
men, do owe subjection to the Magistrate no less then lay men. The inference
is not mine, that ye should suspect it as new fangled and partial. It is the
ancient Fathers own, of whom I have borrowed it, and from whom the Church of
Rome would seem to swerve in none of her Theoremes, Chrysostom. hom 23. in
epist. ad Romans.
and proceedings. Chrysostom in his 23. Homily upon the Epistle of Saint Paul
to the Romans, out of the same words now in hand, makes the same deduction,
that by that general precept of the Apostle all are concluded under subjection
to the Magistrate, Priests (to use his own terms) as well as secular men.
Theophyl. in cap. 13. epist. ad Romanos.
Theophylact as he traceth the footsteps of Chrysostom in most of his
expositions, so in this he iumpeth just with him and follows him to a hair.
To whom subscribeth Theodoret, In cap. 13. ep. ad Romans In Epist. ad Roman.
Epist. lib. 3. cap. 100.
neither does Oecumenius vary from them. Pope Gregory the first makes up a
part in the same harmony, howsoever the later Popes sing the clean contrary
note. But it is no news to hear Popes contradict one another, the Music of
the Papacy is compact almost if not altogether of such discords, which make a
melody fit for hell and Devils to dance by the measures thereof. Saint Bernard
though he saw not all things, Ad Senoneos. Arcbiepiscop. epist. 42. about the
year 1140.
by reason of the blindness of his time wherewith he was overwhelmed, as he is
taxed in the Proverb, Bernardus non vidit omnia: yet as thick as the mist was,
he could descry this interpretation for true through it, and not only
condescended to it himself, but labored by strong persuasion to possess
others also, and that Eugenius a Bishop of Rome himself amongst the rest, with
apprehension of the same. And if these gray hairs, these old Fathers had all
held their peace, the case is so clearly resolved in holy Scripture, and by
practice of the Church so abundantly ratified and confirmed, that none but such
as have lost their eyes, or wilfully close them against the light of apparent
proof, can choose but see it. To begin with the Priests of the old Testament,
that they were ever subject to the Prince, and under his Coram nobis, it is
frankly and freely confessed by Doctors of their own, that I shall not need to
spend any time, nor to bestow any pains about the further proving of that
point. And for the Gospel, that by it the state of Princes was neither abated
nor altered, but remained still the same it was before, and so the Princes hand
no more restrained from his Clergy then from his other subjects, it may also by
many manifest testimonies of the new Testament unavoidably be euinced. You
cannot be ignorant, how that Christ charged the Scribes and high Priests as
well as others, will all duty to Caesar, the right and interest of God, which
in all things, and at all times, and of all persons ought to be foreprised and
kept inuiolate, safe reserved. And for his own part, when he was conuented,
arraigned and condemned by the Roman Magistrate, Ioh. 19.
though but a deputy: he was so far off from excepting against him, as one
that transgressed the bounds and went beyond the limits of his authority in
meddling with him both a Priest and a Prophet, that he dutifully submitted
himself unto his will, and ingenuously agnized his power over him to be from
heaven, notwithstanding his judgment against him was most injurious and
wrongful. And if Christ had freed his Apostles from the jurisdiction of the
Magistrate, would Saint Paul, think you, wittingly have forfeited and betrayed
his right, Act. 25.
when of his own accord he appealed to Caesar, and made his personal
appearance and apology before his tribunal seat, unrequired? No, no; it is
well known Saint Paul was of that puissant spirit and undaunted courage, that
rather then he would have so done, he would have incurred and undergone any
even the sharpest penalty, yea though he had been thereunto by authority
urged and provoked. And whom, I pray, does Saint Peter warn, 1. Pet. 2.
to submit themselves unto the King, as unto the supereminent, were they not
his fellow Elders as well as the rest of the faithful, whom a little after he
importuneth to feed the flock of God? 1. Pet. 5.
As for the title of kingly Priesthood attributed by Saint Peter to the Church
of Christ, 1. Pet. 2.
it makes nothing against this, if it be construed aright. For it must not be
understood of ye kingdoms of this world, as though the Apostles meaning had bin
that Priests, which in former times were subject to the King, were now by
means of the Gospel, become kings within themselves, and may do as they list,
without controulment and fear of law, Dorm. fol. 40.
as Dorman that drowsy Endymion and his Louanian consort dream in their
sleep: but the Church was styled with that appellation only in regard of the
kingdom of heaven, as Johannes de Parisiis a bird of their own feather, Ioh.
de Paris. cap. 18.
well notes, and all the ancient Fathers, vno ore, with one voice so expound
the place. With Scripture does accord the use of the Church for many ages
succeeding. Peruse the Ecclesiastical stories from top to toe, or if your
leisure or skill will not serve you, consult the best learned Divine amongst
our adversaries you can come by; and if he can produce unto you one
vncounterfeit president to the contrary, but that the Priest, for the space of
a thousand years after Christ, was still under the check and correction of
the Prince, then let me bear the blame and shame of a false teacher. Truth it
is, religious Princes have showed Clergimen extraordinary favor in their
Courts, both for their Masters and for their message sake; but never Prince,
look who enlarged their liberties most, did so absolutely release them from the
bond of allegiance, but that himself might at his pleasure call them to a
reckoning of their doings, and proceed to punishment against them, if the case
so required: until such time as the Antichrist of Rome, as it was
prognosticated of him long before under the person of the whore of Babylon,
Revel. 17.
got the mastery of the Kings of the earth, and bound them in such awe, that
they durst not so much as question; much less cross any of his desires or
designs, though never so lewd, never so extrauagant. As a glozer of their own
upon the Decretals not obscurely insinuates; his words be these: Quaeritur
quis exemit Clericum de jurisdiction Imperatoris, etc. Question is moved, who
exempted the Priest from the jurisdiction of the Emperor, whereas before he
was his subject: Extra. de maiorit. and obed cap. 2. in marg
Laurentius says, the Pope exempted him by consent of the Emperor. But what
though the Emperor at the Popes motion, had endowed them with an immunitie and
an impunitie full out as large as is pretended? You must know, it is one thing
to plead a privilege by special grant from the King, and another, to
entitle themselves unto it in the right of Gods word, and to claim it as their
own heritage properly belonging and inseparably united to their sacred
function. So that ye see, howsoever it be disguised under the mask and vizar
of Religion, it goes clean against the stream of Gods word, and is in truth
no better then flat rebellion against his Vicegerents and Lieutenants here on
earth, for Priests, under the color and pretext of Gods law, to sequester
themselves from the governance and chastisement of the Prince. And this
conclusion shall undoubtedly go for current, and stand for Catholic, though
all the kennell of Jesuits, Seminarians, and other Antichristian hounds do
bark and baule never so with open mouth against it as heretical.

Moreover, Princes may hence take a scantling, how far their authority and
charge stretches, as well in respect of the persons over whom, as of the
causes wherein they have to govern and bear the sword. For since the holy
Ghost requires subjection of all in general, and that simply without
limitation of any kind of matter, it is a sequel past the refelling of both
Seminaries, A Gordius knot past loosing, except the Pope, like Alexander, come
with his sword and chop it all to pieces.
and lay all their heads together, that Princes within their own Realms and
territories are supreme governors, as of all persons, be they Priests,
Prelates, Popes, or whatsoever, so likewise in all things, whether they
concern the first or second table of the Law of God. For where the Spirit of
God compriseth all, they do but delude themselves, who upon any pretense
exclude themselves. And where the Spirit of God speaks indefinitely and at
large, not distinguishing of the things wherein subjects are, or are not to
obey; it is vain for subjects of any sort, to capitulate and indent with their
Prince, in what cases forsooth they will be at command, and in what they will
not. Whereby appears, that popish Princes who suffer themselves to be
persuaded, that all Ecclesiastical both persons and matters are clean without
the compass of their commission, and pertain not to their princely charge,
and thereupon refuse to have to do with Priests their doctrine and doing, or to
deal in any other occurrent of spiritual nature, leaving them to the entire
conduct of Churchmen, and never regarding whether they be managed aright or no,
are deeply guilty before almighty God, and have much to answer for breach of
duty in the execution of their office. As also those reformed Princes, who
having the word of God for their warrant, and the examples of the godly Kings
of Israel and the religious Emperors of Christendom for their president, do
by due course of law provide that all men do their duty, Priests as well as
other; and that Gods true Religion be maintained within their dominions, as
well as civil justice ministered, do no more then what of right they may do,
and of bounden duty should do. And therefore it was an egregious, saucy,
disloyal and irreligious part of Thomas Becket Archbishop of Canterbury, Math.
Paris. in Henrico 2. anno 1164. Guil Newbrigen^retu^ Ang lib. 2. cap. 16.
when the King then regnant, inflamed with desire of justice, sought to punish
certain Clergy men for diverse robberies and murders committed, whereof they
stood detected and convicted before the Judges in their circuits; openly to
resist and oppose himself against him, as he did. And truly the Bishop of Rome
had done far better for the credit and reputation of his Church, if, when he
canonized him for a Saint, he had condemned him for a traitor. For who, not
already addicted to the Roman superstition, will be induced to think well of
that religion which obtrudeth upon the people to be worshipped a rebel and
traitor against his Prince? of whom the masters of Paris made it a disputable
point, whether he were saved or damned. And one in favor of the Church of Rome
extolling him to the clouds for a Martyr; Rogerus Normannus.
another answered, he was worthy to die as a malefactor, for that he durst
presume to thwart and cou^termand the pere^ptory command of his Prince, whom
God would have in all things with all reverence and submission obeyed, his own
divine dominion and due no way violated. And in case the Kings pleasure be
repugnant to the will of God, though the rule be general, Act. 5. The King as
mount Sinai may not be touched without mortal offense, much less violently
assaulted The true punctual import of the word (...), and the very abstract
quintessence of a subjects duty. The superiority which the Pope usurps over
Princes, is here stripped and whipped, being the most venomous Cockatrice that ever
poisoned the Church of Christ.
that God is rather to be obeyed then man; yet the law of God allows no man
by opposition to rebecke him, but absolutely binds all men with patience to
submit themselves unto his sword, and to endure the penalty which he shall
inflict upon them for refusing to do as he commands. The one way leads to
rebellion, the innate fruit of Romish Catholicisme, abominable to God and
good men; the other to persecution for righteousness sake, the badge of true
Christianity, whereby man is tried, and by his trial God glorified.

Further yet, the vlcerate Aposteme of the Popes usurpation, in taking upon him
to depose Princes, and dispose their kingdoms at his pleasure, if they chance
to stand in his light, or any way to eclipse the bright beams of his unlimited
Majesty, by the interposition of their earthly domination, is here crushed and
lanced to the quick. If his Holiness had any such coerciue power over Princes
allotted him by God, as he challenges, and his flattering parasites soothe him
up in, doubtless S. Paul, having so fit an opportunity as here is offered
him, would have given the faithful some inkling of it. But in that he deuideth
the Church into two parts only, subjects and higher powers, not mentioning any
third state superior to Princes; he gives that Papal fancy so deadly a
stripe, as all the balm in Gilead will not serve to heal the wound. For
except we shall traduce the Apostles division as defective and insufficient, it
must needs be granted, A plain demonstration to the eye whereby the mount of
the Romish synagogue is subverted.
that the Bishop of Rome is included in one of the two sorts; either he must go
in the tale of subjects, or be ranked with the higher powers. But among the
higher powers he can have no place, as by the context is plain, they being
there decyphered to be such as bear the sword, and to whom tribute is payable,
the specificall and, as I may say, characteristicall notes of the secular
Magistrate, and so not originally inherent and incorporate in the office of a
Bishop, as the Pope is, whom Christ by special prohibition has interdicted
all civil dominion, whereof the sword is the ensign, Math. 20. Mark. 10. This
lets not but Bishops may lawfully deal in civil causes, being thereunto
called and authorized by the higher powers.
and tribute the earnest. Wherefore seeing that the Bishop of Rome cannot be
reckoned amongst the higher powers, it follows, not as an arbitrary or
coniecturall supposition, but as a necessary concomitant, and certainty more
then geometrical, that he is to be accounted but in the number of subjects.
And they by Gods own institution and ordinance are bound to obey, not licensed
to domineere and tyrannize over Princes, as the Bishop of Rome in the pride of
his heart arrogantly presumes to do. An ulcer that cannot be pierced with too
sharp a nail.
This Analysis of the place, howsoever the Popishly affected cannot well brook
nor digest with patience, as derogatory to the prerogative of the Pope, whom
they take to be their summum bonam; yet is it agreeable to the uniform
confession of the Primitive Church, which evermore acknowledged Princes to be
superior to all, and subject to none but God; as by the verdict of Tertullian,
Optatus, Chrysostom and other of the ancient Fathers, if need were, and time
and place would permit, might more particularly and at large be made good.
Ridiculous it is, and worthy the smeare of a black coal, which the Bishop of
Rome, to bleare the eyes of his silly profelytes withal, Extra. de maiorit.
and obed. c. Solitae. 1. Pet. 2. The Popes Gloss corrupts the text.
does comment upon those words of Saint Peter, Submit your selves unto the
King, (...) as unto the most excellent. For by (as unto the most excellent) he
would bear them in hand, that the Apostle intended a rese^blance only, not
that the King was very so indeed: whereas the particle (as) does there betoken
the realty and truth of the matter, like as in that of John, We saw the glory
thereof, Ioh 1.
(...) as the glory of the only begotten Son. And yet is this no point so
insulsly paraphrased by reason of the term of doubting (perhaps) wherewith he
qualifieth his speech; as where he a dioyneth without any manner of scruple or
staggering at all, that Saint Peter said not simply, Submit your selves, but
with this addition, for Gods sake; following therein the tracke of the vulgar
version, or rather as other read more sutably to the Greek original, for the
Lords sake, (...): as if by those words (as they ever have had a singular grace
and dexterity in transsubstantiating by words) the precept were transformed
into a counsel: See the Gloss upon the Chapter.
whereas taken in their right sense, they serve rather to give a sharper edge
unto it, and to make it more emphaticall. As Saint Paul when he had given out
of the magistrate, He is the minister of God, inferres thereupon, Romans 13.
Wherefore ye must be subject, not because of wrath only, but also for
conscience sake.

The Priest indeed, as cannot be denied, has a kind of regiment, as well over
Princes as private men, annexed to his office. In consideration whereof, Saint
Paul exhorts, Heb. 13.
Obey your Overseers. But this is internal, not external; perswasiue, not
compulsiue; spiritual, not temporal; over their souls, not over their
bodies, goods and inheritances: and so neither hinders the subjection of the
one, nor is prejudicial to the principality of the other. For as the King in
sickness may be ruled by Physicians, in building by Masons and Carpenters, in
traveling by guides, in wars by soldiers, and by his Council in affairs
of State; yet this diminishes nothing of the supremacy he has over them: but
if these or any of them make default against any of his laws, the King for all
that by his princely power may punish them accordingly: so the King may be
ruled by his Clergy in matters of doctrine and discipline, so far forth as
they persuade no other then what is consonant to the Prophetical and
Apostolical Scripture. But if once they exorbitate from that rule, and become
either negligent in their office, or false in their teaching, or vicious in
their living, or in plotting and practicing treacherous and perfidious; the
King may notwithstanding by his royal authority, according to the quantity and
quality of the offense, lawfully correct them, whether it be by a pecuniary
mulct, or by restraint of liberty, or by confiscation of goods, or by the loss
of life, or otherwise, as he shall see good. But if the King on the other side
answer not his duty to God in every point, the Priest must not now do the like
by him, forasmuch as God has not thereunto authorized him.

The Priests office is confined to the word and Sacraments, it extends not to
the sword. So that the Priest may teach and reprove even Princes, as Elias did
Achab, Nathan David, John Baptist Herod: but by any corporal chastisement to
discipline the meanest subject, much less by strong hand and force of arms to
reclaim Princes, and will they nill they, to reduce them to order if they go
astray, whom God has reserved to his own judgment, a punishment no doubt
severe enough; the Priest by the resolution of Gods word, is not only not
permitted, but flatly inhibited so to do.

What words then can serve to utter the hugeness, the length, breadth, depth
and thickness of the indignity and wrong which the Bishop of Rome, of long
time has, and still does offer unto Christian Princes? who if they humor him
not in every thing he would have, tend it never so directly to the dishonor of
God, the destruction of the Christian faith, the annoying of their State and
peoples, over whom God has set them, makes no more ado but depriues them
straight of their regal dignity, assoiles their subjects from their allegiance;
and if they be not strong enough to make their party good and effectuate his
proiects, The Pope can fish best in troubled water
irritates foreign Princes to invade their dominions, upon compact to wear
them if they can win them: knowing like a crafty fox, that ambitious Princes,
as fish with bait, are easy to be caught by such compositions. Certainly if
Tully himself were now living, who for eloquence bare the bell in all the
world, he could not with all his Rhetorical colors paint it out sufficiently,
nor with figures of passion condignely vociferate, exclaim and inueigh against
it.

Were there not of the Kings of Israel and Judah, as the Spirit of God
vpbraideth diverse of them, that were sold unto wickedness and devoted to
idolatry? yet in the books of Kings and Chronicles, you shall not find one
Priest recorded that ever attempted the like against any one of them so long as
that kind of government was afoote. After the coming of Christ and irradiation
of the Gospel; of the Emperors that reigned, some were infidels, some
tyrants, some heretics, some apostataes; and yet neither the Apostles for
their time, nor their successors for many ages after, did either offer to
rebel themselves, or incited others to take arms against them. If they will
not trust me so far, yet I dare say they will give credit to Oath Frisingensis,
who was neither Lutheran nor Caluinist, but Historian of their own. Thus he
writes: I have read over and over the gests of the Roman Kings and Emperors,
and I find none of them before Henry the fourth, Emperor, excommunicated by
the Bishop of Rome, or deprived of his kingdom. This deed was done by
Hildebrand, alias Gregory the seventh, a thousand years good after Christ.
And was there none of all his predecessors, think you, no not one all that
while, that either knew his duty, or would perform it, saving Hildebrand
only, that furious and sacrilegious monster? But in him and this exploit of
his, if all be true which men of his own time and religion historifie of him,
is verified the old proverb, Similes labris lactucae, (...), dignu^ patella
operculum.
Like lips like lettuce, sorry crow sorry egg, such a cover such a cup: I mean,
like act like author, such a stratageme such a contriuer; the one wicked, the
other impious; the one sathanicall, the other diabolical.

Fie of that Papal and more then Pharisaicall presumption, that of a Bishop
under a Prince, should not only aspire and take upon him to be a Prince among
Princes, but counts himself disparaged and iniuried, if he be not suffered to
rule the roast by himself alone, as Lord paramount over all Princes. He
boasts himself for Christ's Vicar and Peter's successor: but this beastly and
Lucifer-like pride ministers strong suspicion, if not assurance, that he is
neither, but rather that man of sin and son of perdition, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
forespoken of by Saint Paul, that should exalt himself above all that is
called God; for so are Princes, I said, Psalm. 82.
ye are Gods.

Oh that it would please God at length to illuminate the eyes of our modern
Princes, that they may see their own right, and give them courage, that they
be no longer afraid of that Roman chough, to take from him these feathers of
theirs, which he guilefully but wrongfully has embezeled and purloyned away
from them, The power which the Kings of the earth give to Antichrist shall at
length recuile again to the right owners, Antichrist confounded.
and implumed himself withal! Well, some such thing there is intimated in the
Apocalypse, which though it has not so speedy an accomplishment as we could
wish, yet we may ascertain our selves that in due time as God in his infallible
cousaile has determined, it shall come to pass. And as Dalila served Sampson,
so shall they shave off his furtiue locks, bereave him of his triple Crown,
strip him out of his imperial prerogatives, revenues and eschetes, and make
like another Bishop. Heaven and earth shall pass, but no title, no iota of
Gods word shall by any engines never so politic, never so potent, be
frustrated or defeated. Which being so, as ye see cannot be gainesaid, The
devil and his spirit of rebellion do possess the hearts of these men, and
itch to come into their fingers and will not leave them I think, till by some
disciplinary exorcisme more then ordinary they be coniured out.
O Lord, how fearful is the case of those countrymen of ours, who upon the
Popes warrant, a strange proud Italian Priest, make no bones nor conscince not
only to disobey their gracious and liege Sovereign, but by plots and
practices to take away his life, and to disinherite him of that portion of the
earth which God has entailed to him and his for ever, for the preservation of
his Church and continuation of his Gospel amongst us: as for his own part,
both by sword and pen he has hitherto done, to the admiration of all
Christendom; and we do verily trust in God, will persevere in that resolution,
he and his hopeful progeny after him to the worlds end.

What? do they think the Popes dispensation will excuse their doing from
undutifulness? Alas, Alas; that is no armor of proof: but being made of no
better stuff then thin brown paper, is not able to bear out the last shot
that Gods word does discharge against so gross and heathenilsh an impiety.
But at this time, Lord that men not banished from their wits should so
foolishly and wilfully build the bulwark of conscience upon so fickle a ground
and sandy a foundation, and hang the state of their souls upon so rotten a pin.
only to kill them with their own weapon, their own sword: they crake much
of their Thomas Aquinas, the very Atlas indeed that bears on his shoulders the
heaven or hell rather of their Schoole-diuinitie; but as seems, they study
him but lightly and to halfes: else they would never so confidently affie and
repose themselves upon the Popes dispensation in that case. For he plainly
avouches one where, of the law of nature, that it is unchangeable; and in
another place, of the commandments of the moral law of God, that they are
indispensable. Now who knows not, that the duty of a subject toward his
Prince, is both derived from the law of nature, and also prescribed by the fifth
precept of the Decalogue? So that by their own Angelical Doctors judgment,
which I am sure they will not for any good go about to impeach, the subjects
duty toward his Prince is inuiolate and past dissoluing.

Do they bear themselves upon the Popes excommunicating of the King? That
plaster is too narrow for the sore too. For by that Ecclesiastical censure a
man is made but as an heathen, Sicut Ethnicus, Mat. 18.
not worse then an heathen. Now it is manifest, that heathen Princes ought to
have obedience exhibited unto them, as the Apostles Peter and Paul do precisely
enjoin: therefore such as be excommunicated ought not to be debarred of the
same neither. Besides, it is a case ouerruled by the joint consent of their
own Doctors for the most part, Excommunication is not available to unloose
the natural bond of duty which servants, children and wives do owe unto their
masters, fathers, and husbands: much less the^ to break that great knot, and
as it were adamantine chain, wherein subjects as the children of the great
family which we call the commonwealth, are linked indissolubly to their great
father.
that by excommunication, neither the servant, nor the son, nor the wife be
discharged from the bond of duty, wherein they are severally tied to their
master, father and husband; but the subject does owe the same if not more
duty to his Prince, as who has his life in his hands; which neither the
master has over his servant, nor father over his son, nor the husband over
his wife: therefore the Popes excommunication of the King, were it current, as
it is counterfeit, blanke, and annullest, is no sufficient discharge to acquit
his subjects from their homage and fealty toward him. O that my voice were as
loud and shrill as a bell, that I might righ these things in the deaf ears of
that Adders brood, that viperous generation, our refractarie Papists, who to
restore the worthily ab^ndoned usurpation of the Bishop of Rome, care not how
they vilify the Majesty and deface the authority of their sovereign Lord
the King: counting it no breach of loyalty, but a most just and honorable
exploit, nay a meritorious act before God, for any brother of their
confraternity, by any means of open assault or privy conspiracy, to ruin him
and his Estate: whereas if every hair of their head were a life, they ought of
right to afford them at his command and in his defense. In this devilish and
damned resolution, equalling if not surpassing, the very heathen which knew not
God.

The Conclusion.

All this notwithstanding, if there be any here so bankrupt of grace, so
destitute of the Spirit of God, so bereft of reason and sense, The ulcer of
Babylon is incurable.
as to dwell still in the contrary opinion, and persist to be the Popes devoted
vassals, factious accomplices, and traitorous heretics: I call heaven and earth
to record this day, that I have blown the trumpet and given them fair
warning: I have done what lies in me to retire them from their wicked course;
their blood be upon their own heads.

The authority wherewith God has invested Princes, and the Popes usurped power
cannot stand together, but as in a counter balance the one scale mounting up,
the other falls down: so the more suppliant men are to the Pope, the more
inobedient they grow to their Prince.
For our selves, my brethren, that already have shaken off the yoke of Popish
servitude, let us not, like those Ifraelites, who being in the way toward
Canaan longed to be in Egypt again, make our selves thrall any more; but let
us hold out without wavering, and constantly proclaim all hatefulness and
hostility against that Roman Pharaoh, whose government (as our fathers to
their cost and smart experimented) is but tyranny, his doctrine
Antichristianitie, his devotion superstition, his religion the seed of
rebellion, his discipline disorder and enormitie, and his life iniquity. Let
us, I say, abomine and abandon him as the sworn enemy of our State. And let us
live in all true subjection and Christian obsequiousness to the Kings most
excellent Majesty, the Lords in dubitate Anointed over us. He, he is the
father of our Country, we the children; let us honor and obey him: he the Lord,
we the servants; let us fear and reverence him: he the shepherd, we the
flock; let us be guided by him: he the foundation, we the building; let us
rely and depend on him: he the root, we the branches; let us maintain him:
he the head, we the members; let us defend him. Let us serve him in peace, let
us second him in war; let us with uniformity of heart and tongue pray for
him in both, that God would deliver him from the hands of all his enemies,
bodily and ghostly, secret and open, foreign and domestical, as frequently and
in miraculous manner he preserved our late Sovereign his most gracious
handmaiden, queen Elizabeth of famous memory; that he may long reign a
happy, a godly and an ancient Father in Israel. Let us give most humble and
most hearty thanks unto God for him, by whose means we enjoy so many, so
great and so inestimable benefits, that the Countries round about us have
cause to repine at us, and to wax pale for envy: and for felicity and all
humane happiness, this Island of ours may worthily be reputed to be the
peerlesse parago^ of the whole world. Finally continue good Lord, continue the
light of thy fatherly countenance toward him for ever, and toward us his
subjects the children of thy covenant, that we both here and in the world to
come, may magnify thy goodness, and sing unto thy Name with thy blessed
servants and elect Angels, that melodious hymn and eucharisticall
encomiasticke music, Praise and glory, and wisdom and thanks, and honor,
and power and might be unto our God for evermore. Amen, Amen.

To end as I began:
Let every soul be subject to the higher powers.

