THE INTERPRETER Wherein three principal terms of State much mistaken by the
vulgar are clearly unfolded.

Qui vult decipi, decipiatur. Anno 1622.

To such as understand not the English tongue perfectly.
THat the unwise may learn to understand,
how certain words are used in our land,
And that they may write sense whilst they remain
in foreign parts, or shall return again
(for idioms, fashions, Manners, after here,
as friendship and religion every where)
I have some elegancies for our tongue
observed, as they are used now, among
our ablest linguists, who mint for the Court
words, fit to be proclaimd; and do resort
where Lords and Ladies couple and converse
and trade lip learning both in prose, and verse.
and by these few the docible may see,
how rich our language is, religious we.
Time was a Puritan was counted such
as held some ceremonies were too much
retayn'd and urged: and would no Bishops grant
others to rule, who government did want.
Time was a PROTESTANT was only taken
for such as had the Church of Rome forsaken
for her known falsehoods in the highest point
But would not for each toy, true peace disioynt.
Time was, a PAPIST was a man who thought
Rome could not err, but all her canons ought
to be Canonical, and blindly led
he from the truth, for fear of error fled.
But now these words, with diverse others more
have other senses then they had before.
which plainly I do labor to relate,
As they are now accepted in our state.
A Puritan: (So nicknamed: but indeed the sound Protestant.)
A Puritan is such an other thing
As says with all his heart, God save the King
And all his issue: and to make this good,
will freely spend his money and his blood.
And in his factious and fond mood, dare say
it is madness for the Palsgraue thus to stay
And wait the loving leisure of kind Spain
who gets at first, only to give again
in courtesy; that faithless Heretics
may taste the faith and love of Catholics
And Hope too. for a Puritan is he
That does not hope these Holy Days to see
And would a wasted Country on condition
Scorn to receive, although the High Commission
of England, Spain, and Rome would have it so:
false favors h^e'd not take from a true foe.
A Puritan is he that rather had
Spend all to help the States, he is so mad
Then spend one hundred thousand pound a year
to guard the Spanish coasts from Pirates fear,
The whilst the Catholic King might force combine
Both Holland, Beam, and Pal^z to undermine,
And by his crosse-curse-christian counterworke
To make Rome both for Antichrist and Turk
right Catholic. So The Empire firrst divided
By holy mothers pious plotts, (who syded
the East, and West, that she might get between,
and si^ aloft and govern like a Queen)
The Turk did great Constantinople gain
and may win Rome too, by the help of Spain.
A Puritan is he that would not live
upon the sins of other men: nor give
money for office in the Church or State,
Though 'twere a Bishopric, he so does hate
all Ceremonies of the Court and Church,
which do the coffer and the conscience lurch
of both the treasures. So that (covetous) he
would not have such as want both, better be.
A Puritan is he that thinks, and says
he must account give of his works and ways,
And that whatsoever calling he assumes
it is for others good. So he presumes
rashly to censure such as wisely can
by taking timely bribes of every man
in rich themselves, knowing to that sole end,
God and the King did them their honors send.
And that Simplicity has only mounted
by virtue; but such fools they will not be counted.
A Puritan is he that twice a day
does at the least to God devoutly pray:
And twice a Sabbath goes to Church to hear,
to pray, confess his sins, and praise God there
in open sight of all men; not content,
God knows his heart, except his knee be bent
That men and Angels likewise may discern,
he came to practice there, as well as learn,
And honor God with every outward part,
with knee, hand, tongue, as well as with the heart.
A Puritan is he which grieves to think
Religion should in France, shipwreck and sincke,
whilst we give aim: And that those men should sway
the kingdom there, who made the King away
The whilst all such as helped to croune the father
should by the Son be now proscribed the rather.
A Puritan in unadvised zeal
Could wish that Huntsmen ruled the Common weal,
And that the Kings hounds were the only spies
for they would tell truth, as the other lies,
He wishes beasts were men, as men resemble
beasts: for surely they would not dissemble,
But would tell where the fault lies, and hunt home
the subtle fox either to Spain or Rome.
A Puritan is he that speaks his mind
in Parliament: not looking once behind
to others danger, nor yet sidevvaies leaning
to promisde honor, his direct true meaning.
But for the laws and truth does fi^mely stand
By which he knovves Kings only do command,
And Tyrants otherwise. He crosses not
this man beeause a Courtyer, or a Scot,
Or that because a favorite, or so:
But if the States friend, none can be his foe.
But if the States foe, be he what he will
Illustrious, wisegrear, learned, he counts him ill.
he neither sides with that man nor with this
but gives his voice just as the reason is
And yet if Policy would work a fraction
to cross religion by a forr^igne faction
pretending public good, he will join with those
who dare speak truth, not only under the Rose
But though the white Rose and the Red do hear
and though the pricking Thistle too be theare.
yea though the stars, the moon and son look on
and cast through clouds oblique aspect^ upon
his clear and free intentions, he is as bold
and confident as the bright Marigould
That flatterer, that favorite of the sun
who does the self same course observe and run
not caring though all flowers else wax sear,
so he the golden livorie may wear.
But our free generous and noble spirit
Does from his ancient English stock inherit
such native worth and liberty of mind,
as will omit no slavery of his kind,
yet he is ready to obey wheresoere
he may not prejudice the truth by fear,
nor faintly seem to shrink, withdraw, give way
whilst other mushrumpes do the state betray.
Hee'^e not a Traitor be unto the King
not to the Laws (for that is an other thing
men dream not off: who think they no way can
be Traitors unto many for one man)
But his chief error is to think that none
^^n be a Traitor till law calls him one.
And that the Law is what the state decrees
in Parliament: by which whilst that he sees
his Actions and intentions justified
He counts himself a Martyr glorified
If in this cause he suffers; and contemnes
All dangers in his way. Nay he condemns
All such as Traitors be to Church and state,
who for the love of one all others hate,
And for particular ends, and private aims
forsake their Country and their conscience maymes.
His Character abridg'd if you would have.
He Is one that would a subject, be, no slave.
A Protestant: (so will the Formalist be called.)
A Protestant is such an other thing
As makes within his heart God of the King
And as if he did with his crown inherit
A never-erring, and infallible spirit,
Labors to blow him up by praise of wit
And by false flatteries coosen him of it.
A Protestant is one that shakes the head
And pitties much the Palsgraue was mislead
to meddle with Bohemia, and incense
The Spanish wrath, against which there is no fense
That his Revenewes in the Paltz again
were well restor'de he wishes, so that Spain
would take the honors of that house, and give
Mentz his demands, letting the Paltzgraue live*
for such a favor as his lands and life,
not one except the father of ^is wife,
That King of peace and love dares bouldly crave.
But what is it he may d^spaire to have
By means of The English and the Scottish Saint
who at their pupills suit does still acquaint
The Spanish Patron, how the first of May
Philip and Jacob make one holy day
what therefore's given to one, the other must
Be sharer in: for James is surnamed Just.
And ^o^ this year by holy churches count
The Calendar reformed has singled out
These two most sacred saints to wayt upon
Our Saviors feast of Resurrection,
which by the English Heathen computation
meets with May day amongst the ^atholick nation,
And may be such a day as that for goodness,
which some called (...) May day from peoples woodnes.
A day of feasting, and a day of pleasure,
A day of m^riage and withal of Treasure
A day of Catholic unity and love,
which may a kind of Resurrection move
in our State union, almost now forgot
being buried both by The English and the Scot.
Soain^ strikes betwixt, and like a Lord commands,
They join their Laws together as their Lands.
And join they will, but in despite of Spain
making his holy day of hope but vain.
A Protestant is he that fa^ne would take
occasion from the East or West to shake
our League with the United Provinces
to which end he has many fair pretenses.
Our honor first for in the Greenland they
And the East Indies beat our ships away.
Our profit likewise, for in both those places
we do great loss* sustain, beside disgraces:
And in the nar^ow Seas where we are mast^rs,
They w^ll presume to be our herring tasters.
But we should ha^^ w^ite he^^ings wondrous plenty,
If they would give us two or every twenty:
O^ stay our idle l^ysure, till that none
remayn'd, for them or us but all were gone.
And if ^h^y will no^ thus our humors serve,
That we (says he) should l^aue them they deserve.
A herring co^ we see will make him quarrel,
what wou^d the man do think you for a barrel?
Well could I wish these things were all amended
But greater business now is to be tended.
Our lives, religions, liberties and lands,
upon this nice and tickle quarrel stands,
And we must for a fi^ter tim^ attend,
else Spain will soon this controversy end.
A Protestant is he that by degrees
clymes every office, knows the proper fees,
they give and take, at entrance of the place,
and at what rate again they vent that grace,
knows in how many years a man may gather
enough to make himself a reverend father:
Or from the lowest civil step arise
To sit with honor in the starry skies:
for he has gone that progress, step by step,
as snayles creep up, where safely none can leap,
for snales do leave behind their silver slyme
and guild the way for falling as they clyme
A Protestant is he that with the stream
Still swims and wisely shunnes every extreme
Loves not in point of faith to be precise
but to believe as Kings do, counts it wise
If Constantine the great will Christened be,
this will the white Roabe wear as well as he,
And in the hallowed founteyne plunge a main
his naked body, as if every stayne
were now washed off, and his inflamed zeal
Thirsted these waters which souls sin does heal.
Again if Julian will renounce his faith
this man will say just, as his Sovereign says,
If he intend Religion to betray,
and yet will walk a close and covert way
Corrupting men by office, honor, bounty,
you shall find this man will deserve a County,
By double dealing and by broaking so
That none shall think him ere they find him to
Apostated; for no way so does work
to make a man an Atheist, Jew, or Turk
as do Corrupted manners which lets in
a deluge of impiety and sin.
These backed by favor and preferment may
have power to make all error open way
and every man will censure opposition
when guilden flattry kills without suspicion
This poisoned vial then was powered in,
when first the Church got means to mainteyn sin,
and now the means withdrawn or misimploy'd
makes all Religion and a^l conscience void,
for man that hunts for honor, wealth, or fame,
will be as those be who dispose the same.
So that no readier way there can be found
to conquer us, then to corrupt the sound
by Bribes; the worst assault that can befall
to bodies politic confounding all.
Guiftes blind the wise. And though the Chequer be
open and empty, as erst full and free,
yet other brybes can work the same effect
that Mammon would: the favor and respect
of favorites, a nod or wink from Kings,
employment, office, grace, are able things.
Besides the honored style of Vicount, Lord.
Earl, Marquess, Duke, can work at every word
strange alterations more then Circes Cup
In such as can no otherwise get up.
Will he speak truth directly? make him then
a Deane, or Bishop, they are no such men,
The wolf has seen them first, their throat is surd
you shall not hear from them a factious word.
Stands he for Law, and custom of the Land?
make him an officer, give him Command.
Command where he may gain, this will bewitch
Demosthenes, who labors to be rich.
What is he bold and forward? send him out
on some embassage; or employ the stout
At sea or land some desperate voyage, where
they may be lost: then leave them helpless there,
undo them thus. Before they had too mutch
But being poor, the'ile nothing dare to tutch.
This ostracisme will sure abate their pride,
And they shall give great thanks for it beside.
If he be poor, oppress him, shut him out
in forlorn banishment, where round about
the faithless world, he may his living seek,
Then no man after him will do the like
If he be faint, check him, or do but c^^de,
he will hold his tongue* and his tail closely hide.
Is he free-tongu'd? though serious and discreet,
Proclaim him silent: whip him through the street:
Thus whatsoever is done, no bird shall dare
To warn the rest, till all be in the snare.
Is he a Rich man? then the Fleet and fine
will make him seem (although he be not) thine.
Briefly, whatse're he be, except alone
directly honest, (of which few or none
remain alive) A Statist ways can find
By policy to work him to his mind.
And thus the common wealth may conquered be,
The Church deflowered, besl^u'd our liberty
without all bloodshed, under the pretense
of peace, religion, love, and innocence.
A Protestant is an indifferent man,
that with all faiths, or none, hold quarter can:
So modetate and temperate his passion,
as he to all times can his conscience fashion.
He at the Chapel can a Bishop hear,
And then in Holborne a Religious Frear:
A Mass nere troubles him, more then a play,
All Is one, he comes all one from both away.
A Protestant no other fault can spy
In all Romes bead-roll of iniquity.
But that of late they do profess King killing
which Catholic point to creadit he is unwilling:
only because he gaynes by Kings far more,
then he can hope for by the Romish whore.
He says this only does the Pope proclaim
for Antichrist, because that Greekish name
does signify Against the Lords anointed,
As if it only against this doctrine pointed.
And therefore leaving this out of their Creed,
He in the rest with them is soon agreed.
And so the Kings part may be safe from fear,
Let God himself for his own part take care.
A Protestant is he that guards the ear
of sovereign Justice, so that truth to hear
he is not permitted; nor to know the danger
he stands in, twixt the subject and the stranger:
The plots which strangers have, grief of his own,
which may too late be prevented, known.
For thou^h his foes be wily wolves and foxes,
his subjects shackled asses, yoaked oxes,
yet time will show them not to be such dawes,
As will look on whilst others change the Laws,
and Rob the State, Religion do deflowre
having their Prince imprisoned in their power.
As Princes have been prisoners to their own
And so may ours too if the truth were known.
The liberty of will by strong affection
may be restrayn'd, which is the worst subjection.
For then the understanding will not see
But rusheth on whatsoere the danger be.
A Protestant is he whose good intention
Deserves an English and a Spanish pension
both for one service, and obteynes it too
By winning Spain more then their arms could do
with long delays, and loosing us and ours
what lost to get again we want both powers
And perhaps will.
Others by treaties and disputes may gain
But we by blows, else old said sawes be vain.
A Protestant is he that has no eye
Beyond his private profit, but does lie
In wait to be the first that may propound
what he foresees power plotts. The solid ground
He nere examines, be it right or wrong
All Is one, since it does to his part belong.
For to his part belongs to sooth and flatter
The greatest Man though in the foulest matter
And him he holds a Rebel that dare say
No man against the Laws, we must obey.
His Character abridg'de if you will have
He Is one that is no true subject, but a Slave.
A Papist.
A Romanist is such an other thing
As would with all his heart murder the King,
That says the house of Austria is appointed
To rule all Christians and for this anointed
by Christ's own vicar. And they Rebels are
who dare against this house make any war
Invasiue or defensive Jesuits wit
And Indian gould, do both attend on it,
And all Romes Hyrarchy do plot, pray, curse,
And spend the strength of body, soul, and purse
to this sole end, that every state beside
may be the vassalls to the Austrian pride,
And so Rome may of both the Emperies
keep still the Civil and Religious keys.
A Romanist is he that sowes debate
Twixt Prince and People, and twixt every state
where he remains: that he by the division
may work himself some profit in decision.
Or bring in Rome and Spain to make all friends
Who having footing once have half their ends.
For as the Devil since first he got within
man's heart, keeps still thereby original sin
So those wheresoever once they interest gain
keep all; or such a party let remain
behind, assured to them as may procure
A relapse, when men think themselves secure.
Thus each disease, though cured, remains in part
And thus the frail flesh often betrays the heart.
Now for the rest, no Romish false opinion
Can make a Papist in the Kings dominion.
Nor absence from the Church, for at this season
He is no Papist that commits not Treason
Let him to Church resort, or be recusant
Alls one, he is counted a good Protestant.
Nay it is a question if Guy Faulkes were one
But it is resolved that Papist he was none.
His Charact^r abridg'd if you will have
He is Spaynes subject and a Romish Slave.

