Laws, and Orders of War, established for the good Conduct of the service
of Ireland.
HENRY FALKLAND:

HENRY, Lord Vice-Count of Falkland, one of the Lords of his Majesty's Most
Honorable Privy Council of England, and Lord Deputy General of the Realm
of Ireland. To all Officers of the Army, and all Colonels, Captains,
Officers, and Soldiers of Companies, and all his Majesty's Subjects, and
others, whom these Laws, and Orders ensuing, respectively, and severally shall
concern. Forasmuch as no good Service can be performed, or War well managed,
where Millitarie discipline is not observed, and Military discipline cannot be
kept, where the Rules or chief parts thereof, be not certainly set down, and
generally known; I have set down these Laws, and Orders following, and do
now publish them under my hand, that all persons in this Army, or kingdom,
within my charge, may take knowledge of the said Laws, and penalties set
down, for the breakers of them.

1 First, we owe our Highest duty, and greatest Allegiance, to him from whom
all Power, and authority flows, as from the first Fountain, and must receive
our successes of him that is the Lord of Hosts, I do straightly charge, and
command, all Commanders, and Officers of the Army, to see that Almighty God
be served, That Sermons, Morning and Evening Prayer be diligently frequented,
and that those that often, and wilfully absent themselves, be duly punished.

2 Let no Man speak impiously and maliciously against the Holy and blessed
Trinity, or any of the Three Persons, that is to say, God the Father, God the
Son, and God the holy Ghost, or against the known Articles of the Christian
Faith upon pain of death.

3 Let no Man blaspheme Gods holy Name, or use unlawful Oaths or erecrations,
or committ any irreligious Art, to the derogation of Gods honor, upon pain of
loss of his Pay, Imprisonment, and such further punishment, as a Marshall
Court, shall think his Offense deserves.

4 No Man shall use any traiterous words, against his Majesty's Person, or
Royal Authority upon pain of death.

5 No Man whether he be Soldier, or other, English or Irish, shall have
conference, or intelligence, with any Enemy or Rebel, that is in open action
against his Majesty, or harbors, or receives any such within the Camp, or in
any Town, Forte, Castle or Garrison, or shall send, or procure to be sent, any
Victual, Munition, or other relief, to any Enemy or Rebel in action, upon
pain of death, except svch as shall be avowed, and warranted by me, or those
that shall command the Army in my absence, to speak, confer, or have
intelligence, or converse with the Enemy or Rebel.

6 No Man shall run to the Enemy, or Rebel, that is in action, or depart
the Army without license, or from the Garrison or Colors, upon pain of
death.

7 No Man shall committ any Murder, or kill, any person, or draw blood of any,
or draw any Sword in private quarrel, with intent to offer violence within the
Camp or Garrison, upon pain of death.

8 No Man shall ravish, or force any woman, upon pain of death, and
Adulterers, and Fornicators shall be punished, by imprisonment, banishment
from the Army, or such other penalty, as up the Marshall Court shall be
thought meet.

9 No man shall steal, or take by force, any Treasure, Victual, or Munition
of his Majesty's: Or take by force, or steal from any person, any Money,
Arms, Apparel, or other goods, being above the value of twelve pence, in
Marching, Camp, or Garrison, upon pain of death.

10 No man shall deliver any Town, Castle, Forte, or Sconce, without warrant,
or depart from any straight or passage, which he is commanded to make good, or
take Pass port of the enemy, or any Rebel in action from any Troops, or
make any ignominious composition with the Enemy, or Rebel in action, upon
pain of death.

11 No man shall throw away his Arms, or abandon his Ensign, Cornet, or
Guidon, or fly away, in any Battle, or Skirmish, upon pain of death.

12 No man being set Sentinel shall sleep, or appointed by the Officer of the
Guard, or any Superior officer, that has authority to place him, shall
depart, and forsake that place, without warrant, upon pain of death.

13 No man shall offer any violence, or contemptuously disobey his Commander,
or do any art, or speak any words which are like to breed any Muteny in the
Army or Garrison, or impeach the obaring of the General, or principal
Officers directions, upon pain of death.

14 No man shall outrage, or do violence, to any that come and to bring
Victuals to the Army, or Garrison, upon pain of death.

15 No man that carries Arms, or pretends to be a Soldier, shall remain
three days in the Army, after it is on foot, except he be enrolled in some
Company upon pain of death.

16 No Soldier shall burn any House or lodging, or burn, or wilfully spoil,
any Corn, Shipe or Boat, or carriage, or any other thing that may serve for
the provision of the Army, or his Garrison, without he be commanded so to
do, by the General, or some principal Officer of the Army upon pain of
death.

17 No man shall depart a mile out of the Army, or Camp or Garrison, except
he be commanded, and lawfully warranted so to do. upon pain of death.

18 No Soldier shall break his Order to follow any Route or chase, or to
seek, any prey, or spoil, except he be commanded by such as have authority
no further then he is commanded, upon pain of death.

19 No man that has Passe-port for any limited Time, shall exceed the time
limited for his absence, except he can prove he was stayed by the hand of God,
upon pain of death.

20 No Prouidor, Keeper, or Officer of his Majesty's Victuals, or Munitions,
shall embrazill any part thereof, or give any false account to the General,
with a purpose to deceive his Majesty, or to hinder the Service, upon pain of
death.

21 No man shall wilfully, or through gross ignorance, f;a^le in coming to
the Randez-vous, or Garrisons assigned to him by the General, or other
principal Officer that shall command the Army, upon pain of death.

22 No Soldiers in Masters, shall answer for another, or take two pares, or
Muster in a false name, to defraude his Majesty, upon pain of death

23 No Captain shall thorough corruption, wilful, or gross negligence,
suffer his Company to grow weak, or practice to defraude his Majesty in his
Muster, upon pain of imprisonment, loss of his Place, and ignominious
banishment from the Army:

24 No Captain of the Army, or Officer shall give passe-port to any, or
dismiss any Soldier once enrolled, without warrant from the the General, or
other Officer, whom he shall authorize, upon pain of loss of his Place, and
imprisonment.

25 No Soldier shall depart from his Captain, or servant from his Master
without license, though he serve still in the Army, upon pain of death.

26 Item that no Soldier do sell, or lay to pawn his Horse, or Hackney, or
any part of his furniture, Arms, or apparel for any respect, or pretense of
want whatsoever, upon pain of death.

27 Nor that any Inhabitant in Town or Country, shall presume to buy, or to
take to pawn any part of the same, upon pain both of imprisonment, at the
discretion of the Lord Deputy and chief Commander, and forfeit of double the
value of any such thing so bought or laid to pawn.

28 Item, that all Bands of foote-men, shall in passing through the Pale, or
other Countries in obedience to go to any Garrison, or Place of Service, March
ten miles a day or thereabouts, holding the direct way to the same Garrison
or place of service, And that no Captain, Officer, or Soldier, do upon any
pretense of want, commit any wast, spoil, or violence, or do extort any
Victuals, or Money, or Pawn in lieu of Victuals, from any good Subject, but
shall content themselves with Meat, and drink competent, not taking any
allowance for dead pays, but for the most number of men they have in their
Company for a supper, and a breake-fast in one place only, upon pain of such
sharp punishment as the Lord Deputy, or other Magistrates thereunto
authorized, agreeable to the nature, and quality of the same offense, shall
think good to inflict, be it by death, imprisonment, or other corporal
punishment: But if upon any occasion of March thorough the Country the
Soldier shall be in want, that then the Officer, with the advice consent, and
assistance of the Shiriffe, Subshiriffe, Collectors, or others his Majesty's
Officers in that Barony, or the next adjoining: if there be any, or may be
found, shall seek and provide such diet and lodging for them, as shall be
thought fit at reasonable rates heretofore accustomed, for the which the
Captain or Officer give ready money, or for want thereof, deliver his Ticket
to be satisfied upon the Captain or Soldiers entertaynment, So as all
occasions of offense and grief shall be far removed from all good Subject.

29 Item, If any Horseman shall loose his Horse or Hackney, or Foote-man any
part of his Armor, by negligence or other lewdness, whereby he shall be
unabled to discharge the duty of his place, that until he shall recover the
same, or otherwise furnish himself with as good, he shall reserve in the
state, and condition of a Proner, or sustain further punishment, at the
direction of the Lord Deputy, or other Officer thereunto authorized.

30 Item, whenever any prey, or spoil, shall be taken from the Revels,
either when the Army is in the field, or by any residing in Garrison upon the
borders, that no Officer or Soldier do attempt to imbeazill or purloine any
part thereof, upon pain of death: But shall endeavor themselves to the
uttermost of their powers, to keep the same together, to be disposed at the
direction of me the Lord Deputy, or any other by me thereunto authorized.

31 Item, That no Captain, Officer, or Soldier, or any other that shall take
any Prisoner, shall presume to deliver upon ransom, or conceal him, but that
within four and twenty hours, he shall make the same known to the Lord
Deputy or chief Commander, and deliver the same Prisoner under the charge of
the Provost Marshall upon pain of death.

32 No inhabitant in City, Town or Country, shall presume to receive any
Soldier into their service, not having a sufficient authority, and Passeport,
neither shall any conceal or hide any such run away, or use means, to
convey them out of the kingdom, or to any other secret place: But shall
apprehend all such, and deliver them over to the Prouost-Marshall, upon pain
of imprisonment, and such other punishment as shall be thought fit by the Lord
Deputy, or other chief Officer hereunto authorized to be inflicted.

33 No Magistrate or Officer of any City, or Corporate Town, shall presume to
imprison or detain the body of any Soldier above four and twenty hours,
or to inflict any punishment upon him for any offense, but shall deliver all
such to the Prouost-Marshall to be tried by the speedy course of Marshall law.

34 All Captains shall be diligent in trayning their Companies, and shall be
careful in governing them well, and in providing for them, and also shall see
in all services, that they do the duties of Soldiers, as they will hope for
favor and advancement, or escape ignominious displacing from their charges.

35 All Captains and other Officers, that for the time shall have Command of
Companies, shall see their Companies, do orderly quarter, as they are
appointed, and to entrench and fortify, as much of the Quarter as they are
appointed, and as they are commanded, upon pain of loss of their places.

36 No man shall spoil, or take the goods of any that dies, or is killed in
service, upon pain of restoring double the value: But the goods of such as die
in the Army or Garrison, if they make any will by writing or word, shall be
disposed according to the Will, if they make no Will, it shall be distributed
to the hurt, sick, and poor of of the Company whereof the Soldier was, or
shall go to the Hospital of the Army.

37 No man shall enter or go out of the Army, but by ordinary ways, upon
pain of imprisonment.

38 No man shall give any disgraceful words, or commit any act to the
disgrace of any person in his Army or Garrison, or any part thereof, upon
pain of imprisonment, public disarming and banishment from the Army, as men
for ever disabled to carry Arms, And as I forbid all men under my rule, to
renew any old quarrels, or to begin any new, So I do acquitte and discharge
all men that shall have quarrels offered to them, or challenge made to them of
any disgrace or opinion of any disadvantage, since they do but the duties of
Soldiers, which ought to subject themselves to marshall discipline, and they
that provoke them shall be proceeded withal as breakers of all good
discipline, and enemies to the good success of the service.

39 And because drunkenesse is the mother of many other vices and disorders in
Armies, every Soldier or Officer that shall be found drunk shall be committed
to prison for the first offense, and if he fall into it the second time, being
a private Soldier, he shall besides his imprisonment forfeyte Two Months pay,
If he be an Officer, he shall loose his place, The third time shall have such
far greater punishment, as the Marshall Court shall set down.

40 Every private man and Soldier, upon pain of imprisonment shall keep
silence when the Army is to take lodging, or when it is marching or embatling,
So as the Officers may be heard, and their Commadements executed.

41 No Soldier serving on foot, shall carry any Boy, nor any Woman shall be
suffered to follow the Army, upon pain of such punishment, as shall be
inflicted by the Lord Deputy, or other Officer.

42 All Captains, Officers and Soldiers, shall do their endeavors, to
detect, apprehend, and bring to punishment all offenders, and shall assist the
Officers of the Army for that purpose, as they will answer their slackenesse,
and be censured at the Marshall-Court.

43 All other faults, disorders, and offenses that are not mentioned in these
Articles, shall be punished according to the general Customs, and Laws of
Wars: And therefore I command all Men, to look to their charge, and him that
has no charge, to look to his own carriage, and to keep himself within
bounds of duty, for the discipline of War shall be strictly kept, and the
laws thereof, severely executed.

44 No Victualler shall presume to issue or sell unto the Soldiers, or to the
Companies, unsound, unsavory, or unwholesome victuals, upon pain of
imprisonment, and such other punishment, as by a Marshall-Court shall be
thought fit to be imposed, upon him or them that shall so offend.

45 No Captain, Lieutenant, or other Officer of the Army, shall in the tender
and presentment of their Musters, use any fraud, practice, or deceit whereby
the Muster-Master his Commissaries, or Deputies may be misled, mistaken, or
prevented, of the due understanding of the true estate of of that Company,
upon pain of the loss of his place, and such other ignominious punishments,
as by a Marshall-Court, shall be thought meet.

46 No Muster-Master, shall either for favor, friendship, love, or hatred, or
any other by respect whatsoever, impose a less or greater check upon any
Captain or Officer, then his default shall justly merit, nor get any check at
all, where no defect or fault shall appear, upon a due view taken of the
Company. And that no check shall be imposed by discretion without view, upon
pain that every o^fendor that shall be found to transgress in all, or any
part of this Article, shall forfeite the place which he holds, and be further
subject to such corporal, or pecuniary punishment, as by the discretion of a
Marshall-Court shall be thought convenient.

We require the Marshall of the Army, the Iudge-marshall, the Captains of
Horse and foot in his Majesty's pay, and all other his Majesty's Officers in
this Kingdom whom it may concern, to observe these Laws, and to see them put
in due execution from time to time. Published the 11. day of June. 1625.

HENRY FALKLAND.
God save the King.
Imprinted at Dublin by the Society of STATIONERS, Printers to the Kings
Majesty. Anno 1625.


