A LIGHT UNTO THE UNLEARNED: OR, THE PRINCIPLES OF THE DOCTRINE OF CHRIST.

Set down most briefly, for the use of young and ignorant Persons. To be
learned and remembered, at all times: but specially, when they would come to the
holy Communion.

Divided into eight Sections.

LONDON, Printed by John Legatt for George Lathum, and are to be sold at his
Shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the Sign of the Brazen Serpent. 1622.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
I Propound (Christian Reader) in this most brief Treatise, the principal
Grounds of our Religion, in the most compendious manner. The cause of my
brevitie is this: There be many poor servants and laborers; many that are of
trades and manual Sciences; many aged Persons of weak and decayed memories:
Of these, some never learned so much as to read, some very little, and the
most of them have, or will have, small leisure to learn long discourses: the
world, or other vanities, taking up their thoughts and cares. Yet all these
have immortal souls, to remain after a few days, in eternal joys, or in
endless pains. Of these care must be had: and the rather, because many of
them have little care of themselves. To these, the longest tractates being
displeasing, I direct the shortest. For, better a little well learned, then a
great deal not learned at all. In which, I comprehend much matter in few
words: and draw together, into the narrowest space, those things, which I
judged most needful for them to know unto salvation. I have confirmed the same
in the margent with proofs of Scripture, selected out of many which might be
produced: and for their greater ease and benefit, I have expressed the words
themselves; and where need is, as the straightness of room would permit,
explaned them: that they may see herein, not man teaching them, but God. Jf
they would take a little pains, to learn these few points without book, they
might have matter of good meditation, when they are about their works, and
travailing in worldly affairs: and so their earthly dealings should be more
blessed. Also, they may receive greater profit by the Scriptures they read,
and Sermons they hear, when they know to what head or ground of Doctrine, to
refer that which is delivered. And may by this means come better prepared to
the Lords Table. Wherefore, I earnestly exhort them, as from my heart desiring
their salvation, to retain the grounds of heavenly Doctrine, in perfect
memory: to labor to have their hearts affected therewith: and to manifest
there knowledge by an holy conversation. That living virtuously, they may die
comfortably: and after this short and uncertain life is ended, come to blessed
immortality.

Fran: Inman.

THE PRINCIPLES of the DOCTRINE of CHRIST, set down most briefly.
Sect. 1.
GOD is a Ioh. 4.24. God is a Spirit.
Spiritual This word, essence, signifies a being. God is the first and
chiefest being. He says. Exodus 3.14. I am: implying his selfe-being. And he
gives being to all other things.
Essence, Psalm. 90. verse 2. From everlasting to everlasting thou art God. Ier.
23.24. I fill heaven and earth.
infinite and Genesis 17.1. I am the Almighty God.
Almighty, Psalm. 147.5. His understanding is infinite.
most Wise and Isa. 6.3. Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts.
most Holy, 2. Cor. 1.3. The Father of mercies.
most Merciful and Psalm. 11.7. The just Lord loves justice.
most Just.

The Godhead is distinguished into 1. Ioh. 5.7. There are three that bear
record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost: and these three are
one.
three divine Persons: the Father, who is of himself; the Son, who is of the
Father; the holy Ghost, who is of them both.

All these three are one, and the same God.

Sect. 2.
This God; the Father, the Son, the holy Ghost; Nehem. 9.6. Thou have made
heaven, the heaven of heavens with all their host, the earth and all things
that are therein, the seas and all that is therein; and thou preservest them
all.
created all things: things invisible, as Angels; and visible, as Men, and
other creatures. And he governs them all.

Sect. 3.
God created our first parents in Genesis 1.27. God created man in his own image.
Man resembled his Creator in excellent gifts: in soul, in body, in both.
blessed estate. He adorned their souls with wise-dome, and righteousness:
their bodies with beauty, and glory: and both with immortality, and dominion
over other creatures.

But by the Genesis 3.4, 5. The serpent said unto the woman ye shall not surely
die: -- Ye shall be as Gods --
inticement of the Devil, they Genesis 3.^. When the woman saw, that the tree was
-- to be desired to make one wise, (to wit, in her seduced judgment) she
took of the fruit thereof, and did eat: and gave also unto her husband --
fell willingly from God, and Romans 5.19. By the disobedience of one man, many
were made sinners. This man was Adam, our first parent: his fosleritie, who are
many, which issue by generation from him, are made sinners by imputation of his
sin.
we, their posterity, fell with them. Hereby, our whole nature is corrupted,
and inclined to all evil. Whereupon we are Deuteronomy. 27.26. and Gal. 3.10. Cursed
is every one that continues not in all things which are written in the book of
the law, to do them. The curse of God contains all troubles of this life;
and torment of the text.


subject to eternal misery: beginning in this life, in manifold calamities:
and continuing after this life, in unquenchable fire.

Sect. 4.
Gal 4.4, 5. God sent forth his Son -- made under the law: to redeem them
that were under the law.
To redeem us out of this misery, and to bring us again to felicity, God
has given to us a Savior: His Son, Jesus Christ.

Christ consists of Ioh. 1.14. The word was made flesh. That is, the Son of
God was made man: and so is, both the Son of God; and the Son of man.
two natures: a divine nature, whereby he is perfect God: and an humane nature,
whereby he is perfect man.

That being God, he might be able to bear the punishment due to us: and might
make the obedience of his manhood of infinite value. And being man, sin might
be punished in that nature which sinned: and in the same, the righteousness of
the law might be fulfilled.

He has three offices: He is a Heb. 5.5. God glorified Christ, to be made an
high Priest.
Priest. a Luke 7.16. A great Prophet is risen up among us.
Prophet, and a Luke 1.33. He shall reign for ever, over the house of Jacob.
That is, over the whole Church of God: which was first confined within Jacobs
family: and now into it all believers are adopted.
King.

He is a Priest, to make satisfaction and intercession for us.

He makes satisfaction, by 1. Pet. 2.24. His own self bare our sins, in
his own body, on the tree.
suffering the punishment of our sins: and by Romans 5.19. By the obedience of
one, shall many be made righteous. This one is Christ: the whole multitude of
believers in him, are made righteous, by imputation of his righteousness.
fulfilling, on our behalf, all the righteousness of the law.

He makes intercession, by Heb. 9.24. Christ is entered into heaven, to appear
in the presence of God for us, His appearing has the force of an entreating.
entreating God the Father to accept his satisfaction for us.

He is a Prophet, Ioh. 15.15. All things that I have heard of my Father, I have
made known unto you.
to teach us the will of God; and the means of salvation.

He is a King, to govern us: and to Ioh. 10.28. My sheep shall never perish:
none shall pluck the^ out of my hand.
keep us in the way of salvation.

Sect. 5.
Of this Savior, and of his salvation, we are Ioh. 3.36. He that believes on
the Son, has everlasting life.
partakers by faith in him.

Faith is a special grace of God, whereby we Ioh. 1.12. To as many as
received him, he gave power to become the sons of God: even to the^ that
believe on his name. Here, the receiving of Christ, is the same with believing
on Christ. Therefore when he is believed on, he is received.
apply Christ to our selves: and are 1. Ioh. 5.13. These things have I written
unto you, that believe on the name of the Son of God, that ye may know, that
ye have eternal life.
assured, through his merits, of our eternal salvation.

Sect. 6.
They which believe in Christ, are Act. 13.39. By him all that believe, are
justified.
justified, and Act. 15.9. By faith our hearts are purified.
sanctified: and therefore endeavor to be Ioh. 15.5. He that abides in me --
brings forth much fruit.
plentiful in all good works.

Sect. 7.
We must be careful to use all good means, that faith may be wrought, and
increased in us.

The principal means are three: the hearing of the word of God, the receiving
of the Sacraments, and Prayer.

We must hear the word of God with Act. 15.14. The Lord opened the heart of
Lydia, that she attended unto the things which were spoken.
diligent attention: and keep it in our hearts by Psa. 1.1, 2. Blessed is the
man that -- does meditate in the law of the Lord, day and night.
continual meditation.

The Sacraments are holy Romans 4.11. Abraham received the sign of circumcision,
a seal of the righteousness of faith. As circumcision was a sign of the
Covenant of Grace, and a seal to assure the believers the remission of sins:
so are the other Sacraments.
signs and seals, by which God declares and seals, for the satisfaction of
Christ, remission of sins, and life everlasting, to every believer.

There be two Sacraments Baptism, and the Lords Supper.

Baptism is a Sacrament, whereby is sealed to us, our Circumcision sealed to
the people of Israel, that God for the merit of the promised seed would be
their God: and Baptism, succeeding that Sacrament, seals the same to us.
receiving into the Covenant of Grace, our Gal. 3.27. As many as have been
baptized into Christ, have put on Christ.
ingrafting into Christ, and our Tit. 3.5. God saved us, by the washing of
regeneration, and renewing of the holy Ghost.
regeneration by the holy Ghost.

The Lords Supper is a Sacrament, whereby is sealed to us, the continuance and
increasing of the benefits confirmed by Baptism. Namely our remaining in the
Covenant of Grace: our further ingrafting into Christ, and regeneration by his
Spirit: and so our nearer union and communion with him.

Four things are required to the receiving of the Lords Supper. Knowledge of
the Grounds of Religion: Exodus 12. The posts of every man's house were sprinkled
with the blood of the Paschall Lamb: So every man must have the satisfaction
of Christ, by faith imputed to himself. This faith must show it self in the
fruits thereof.
Faith in Christ: Repentance for our sins: Charity to our neighbors.

Prayer is an Psalm. 143.6. My soul thirsts after thee, as a thirsty land.
earnest desire of a Prove. 28.9. He that turns away his ear from hearing the
law, even his prayer is abomination.
converted heart to God, according to his 1. Ioh. 5.14. If we ask any thing
according to his will, he hears us.
will, in the Ioh. 16.26. Ye shall ask in my name.
name of Christ, with Mark. 11.24. What things soever ye desire when ye pray,
believe that ye receive them.
confidence to be heard.

Sect. 8.
Having declared the estate of man in this life; what it was in his innocence,
and what it has been since his fall, both by nature, and by grace: I will
also show his estate after this life.

THE estate of the dead is this. The souls of the godly are in heaven, in Rev.
14 13. Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord -- that they may rest from
there labors.
blessed rest: Rev. 7.9, 10. A great multitude -- stood before the throne --
and cryed-Salvation to our God -- and unto the Lamb.
praising God; and Rev. 6.9, 10. The souls of them that were shine for the
Word of God -- cried -- How long, Lord -- do thou not judge and avenge our
blood. --
desiring their perfect felicity.

The souls of the wicked are 1. Pet. 3.19, 20. The spirits, which were
disobedient in the days of Noah, are in prison: So are the souls of all that
have died in their sins.
imprisoned in hell: feeling the Luke 16.23, 24. The rich man in hell, being in
torments, cried, I am tormented in this flame.
horror thereof; in dreadful expectation of the full measure of their torments.

Thus both remain till the last judgment. Then, the dead shall Ioh. 5.28, 29.
All that are in the graves -- shall come forth.
rise, with their Job 19.26, 27. In my flesh shall I see God: -- Mine eyes
shall behold him. --
own bodies. The living shall be 1. Cor. 15.51. We shall not all sleep: but
we shall all be changed.
changed. And all shall 2. Cor. 5.10. We must all appear before the judgment
seat of Christ: that every one may receive -- according to that he has done.
--
appear before Christ: and be judged according to their works.

After which, the godly shall Math. 25.34. Come ye blessed -- inherit the
kingdom prepared for you -- Then, they shall be Kings.
inherit the kingdom of heaven. They shall have Rev. 21.3. God will dwell
with men.
full communion with Christ: and with the Father, and the holy Ghost. There
souls shall be endued with the 1. Cor. 13.12. We shall see face to face.
Evidently and clearly. The moral law, now impossible to our fallen nature,
shall then be perfectly fulfilled.
perfect knowledge, and love of God. Their bodies shall be Phil. 3.21. Christ
will change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious
body.
like the glorious body of Christ. And all shall have Psalm 16.11. In thy
presence is fullness of joy.
fullness of joy, for ever.

But the wicked shall be cast Luke 13.27: Depart from me all ye workers of
iniquity.
from God: into Jude verse. 13. The blackness of darkness. The greatest and
thickest darkness.
extreme darkness, and Dan. 12.2. Shame and everlasting contempt.
utter confusion; tormented in soul and body, in a Rev. 21.8. The fearful,
and unbeleeving, and adhominable -- shall have there part in the lake which
burns with fire and brimstone.
lake burning with fire and brimstone, for Math. 25.46. They shall go into
everlasting punishment.
ever.

FINIS.

