A BVNDLE OF MYRRH: OR Three Meditations of Tears.

The First in the effect. page 1. The Last in the cause of David's tears. Psalm.
42.3 page 270. The middle, and most intended, of religious tears in general.
p. 96.


The particulars whereof, are prefixed to each page, and principal Section.

LONDON, Printed for R. Mylbourne, and are to be sold at his shop at the great
South door of Paul's. 1620.

POTENTISSIMO, DOCTISSIMO, PIENTISSIMOque PRINCIPI IACOBO Dei gratia Magnae
Brittanniae, Franciae, and Hyberniae REGI SYNCERISSIMO: Fidei propugnatori
acerrimo: (...), cuiusque suis causarum generis, Moderatori summo, Si quid
potest peccatoris Oration.
VEstro Optime Principum, ad scribendum de Deuotione incitatus exemplo, vestra,
qua supremo Numini propinquatis maxim, prudenti facilitate fretus: quod pridem
volebam, necdum audebam, publicis distentam negotijs, interturbare Maiestatem,
tandem coactus, nec tamen inuitus, came compello supplex, pro qua (quo tenemur
omnes) supplico noctes diesque, propitiando test Deo. Myrrhae fasciculum,
humando iam corpori Dominico, ex Veterum potissime sententijs co^cinnabam:
huic, enarrato racri ad caput ieiunij, inuulgando vrbi hac hebdomada poenali,
A. V. placuit praescribere nome^, quippe cautum lege, Deuteronomy. 16. v. 16
immunem coram Deo, comparere neminem, Judge 3.17.
nec solitum quenquam accedere reges vacuu^. 2. Sam. 5.11.
Istuc fateor haud Rege dignum, 2 Samuel 8.10.
sed nec cuiquam perinde debitum. 2. Paral. 9.1.
Cuin. primus conatus, nisi patriae primogenito? Dodrantes exigunt annuos,
feudorum Domini seruity perpetis indices.

Ab Jove principium Mus. Porro Regis hae lachry. mae. Quae Caesaris Caesari.
Regis ad exemplum, sed and hic compositus orbis: vel imitando, nec assequendo
deferat archetypo laudem. Architectonices sacrae praeuius his est: adeat (...),
operumque redemptorum Principem. AEque mandatur, aeque mactatur ipsi Deo,
turtur pauperis, and pecus diuitis. (...) menstruum desudat opus:
vestraetamense dedere fidci, vestrum peterc praesidium, medios inter
facturumiter, maleuoloru^ cuncos, quorum plus hodie est, quam muscaru^, cum
caletur maxim: a quibus Heterodogmatistes audio, oppugnator rituu^ Ecclesiae,
nescio quid supra. Atqui se^per egrediebar per vestigia gregis: Cant. 1.8.
Huic Ecclesiae nomen dedi, hic haurio Spiritum. Turpis pars fuero non
congruens vniuerso. S. August. Confess. l. 3. c. 8. S. Bern. De praecepto and
dispensatione
Ipsumque quem pro Deo habemus, tanquam Deum, in his quae non sunt aperte
contra, audire debere didici. Pactum societatis humanae, imo praeceptum
authoritatis diuinae, S. Aug. Vbi supra.
obedire Regibus, Romans 13.1.
and omni ordinationi humanae, 1 Pet 2.13.
propter Dominum. 2. Pet. 2.10. etc.
Cauti igitur, Iudae v. 8. etc
contemnentium Dominatus, portenta pariter and tormenta vitamus. Mandantibus
vobis quicquid licet, pareo: vobis interest an expediat; fecerim ego meum quo
mihi discutere vestrum? an liceat defer videro, vos an exigere. Ipsos
recognosco ritus, veneranda ab antiquitate petitos: adeoque (sicut Samuel
sanctus, 1. Sam. 12.3.
si annuitis) pronoco, cognoscentibus vobis aemulos, dicere, si quid vspiam
contradocuerim, vel gesserim, poenas daturus sieuincant: si nequeant, ipsi
luant, sileant, desinantque dolos pacifice degentibus struere. Psalm. 35.20.
S. Cypr. l. 4. ep. 10.
Nihil haec ad conscientiam fidei suae viribus nixam. Vobis secundum Deum, Pro.
16.14.15
Serenissime Rex (cuius ira nuncij mortis, favor serotinus imber in gramine)
placere votum, spes non displicere. Meritorum de Ecclesia, ad reditum a solo
patrio Principis, explicanda^ susceperam epitomen: applicare vetuerunt,
ignorantia gestorum, pondus rerum, haesitantia linguae, rubor frontis, angustia
temporis: quae rursus, quo fato nescio, retardante praelo, reuocante grege,
Paschalia secum celebrare solennia, prohibent Parua Tyrrhenum per aequor vela
dare: volentem dicere, lucida scripta, spendida facta, haereses retusas,
sublata schismata: coercitum (...) stupendum genus, daturum nouae nomen
fabellae: incitatos exemplo proceres, praesentia caeteros, cu^ctos praeconio,
labentem anhelos surrigere Paulum. O dignam, Principe dicam, an martyr vocem,
aedis sacrae nitorem redemptum suis cupere ieiunijs! Allisit summos Aquilo
saelices: flexit myriadas mentis interpres (nimbus vocum, rerum sylua, sed
luminibus accensa Regijs) auribus illi, intentas oculis vobis, Hyperboreos quo
pacto ferunt, profunda longum pressos caligine noctis, ouantes reducis
suspicere munera Phoebi: S. Aug. Confess. l. 8. c. 2.
vel quo Victorinus Romae, Rhetor clarissimus, Christum professus palam, quem
potuit secreto, frendentibus demonicolis, suspicientibus and stupentibus,
submissam mansueto grege, fiducia^, pressoque viritim sonitu, per ora
strepe^tibus, Victorinus, Victorinus,) heic Dominus Rex, Dominus Rex:) cito
sonuerunt exultatione quia videba^t, cito siluerunt inte^tione vt audirent,
intro in cor quisque suum, amando rapientes, and gaudendo. O fortunatum natum
te Principe regnum! Boskierus in Dedicatori^^ Vegetij (bristiani.
non fatebimur experti, praedicantibus exterae regionis, religionis hominibus?
Neh. 3.1.
Probatices vnde caeptum ciuitatis sanctae consurgere muros, Ioh. 5.4.
gemino piscina coelitus est ornata miraculo, motus angelici, and salutis
hominu^. Relatus in sepulcra regum vnus est Ioiadas Pontificum, 2. Par. 24.16.
qui beneficus in Deum vixerat, eiusque Domu^. Et vestri misertus recordabitur
secundum haec, Neh. 13. v. 14
nec sinet deleri benignitates vestras, quas exercuistis erga domum eius, and
cius officia, Heb. 6.10.
qui fidelis est non obliuisci operum charitatis. Erit, (vt vester ille
Basilius, Anglici parens maximus eloquij) erit Apelles, qui probe depictae,
transmittat posteris, facta tua, exempla sua; cum fueris ipse canitie bona,
Genesis 25.7.
senio satur, diuitiaru^ and gloriae, 1. Par. 29.28.
ceu maturarum metafrugum, Job 5.26.
coelesti conditus horreo: susceperitque nostru^, 1. Reg. 11.36
vestro de lumine lumen, charum Charolus caput, tradentibus vobis, praebendum
lampada posteris, praestantior nomine si queat, 1. Reg. 1.47.
and throno amplior vestro. Ipse Interim

Serus in coelum redeas, diuque
Loetus intersis populo Britanno,
Neue te nostris vitijs iniquum:
Ocyor aura
Tollat. AEternum viuite maxim
Principum, quibusuis annumerantes, dummodo vestris.
Vestrum nascendi lege, and arbitrio viuendi, Gul. Innesium.

DAVID'S TEARS: Psalm. 42.3.
Hezekias not being able quite to divert the judgment against Judah once
decreed, yet in this was comforted, that in his days there should be truth and
peace. Esaias 39.8.
So David loving the people of the Lord, as himself was beloved of the Lord:
whereas he could not withhold from Israel, the scourge which on them himself
had drawn; yet chooses that it may be inflicted rather by the hand of God then
man. 2 Samuel 24.14.
So Moses, truly Moses, Exodus 32. v. 32.
halled up by the hand of God, from amidst the waters of selfeloue and worldly
lusts, into the pure and fervent air of the Creators love, supposing his
Creators glory in the peoples preservation. together with his own names
remaining in yt book of Gods writing, could not stand, though both desired;
yet according to divine precept, beyond humane obedience, seeks of his Maker
the greater which concerned him, though with condition of losing the less,
which did concern himself. 2 Chronicles. 11.1. etc.
So Rehoboam having nobly attempted, but of Gods counsel not allowed, to bring
again all Israel in subjection to the house of David, strengthens himself,
and his kingdom, with Cities of defense, and Captains, and convenient
provision, having Judah and Benjamin on his side. Thus Paul the chosen vessel,
Philip. 1.21.
desiring to depart and to be with Christ, which is far better, nevertheless
is content to know, that he shall abide in the flesh, which is more needful
for the Churches for their furtherance and joy of faith. Thus finally, (once
again to name that Captain of the holy people, the singer of Israel, the
anointed of the God of Jacob) David being prohibited that which in his heart
he had conceived, 1 Chronicles. 28.2. and 1 Chro. 29.2.
to build an house unto the name of the Lord his God, yet that he does which
was allowed, preparing for it in abundance, and gives encouragement with advice
for that which war on every side permitted him not in person to accomplish.
This even this,

Right Honorable, Right Worshipful, and all Right Religious, in and about
London:

By whose favor or boun tie my ministry there has been countenanced or any
way furthered.

Yet in another cause is David's case, and at this time mine: for he, while as
without permission, and yet without intermission too, he longs to satiate his
soul with the waters of the fountain of life, Psalm 36.
which is with God, incomparably more the^ with ye of the well at Bethlehe^s
gate; 2 Samuel 23.15
yet being deferred, not denied more greedily but no whit viciously, feeds on
the bread of tears which his spiritual poverty, then his royal demaines,
ministered unto him more abundantly: and I, having had in mine heart some while
a purpose, and in part also labored, not without some of your earnest, and
instant requests, to build unto the Lord a spiritual temple, a Domesticke
Church, of such materials as you either saw, or heard, I had of my poor
ability congested for this end, being hitherto let (as are the
inconveniences of this life) from accomplishing the work, do tender unto your
most pious and worthy respects, an entire excuse in this Bundle of Myrrh, the
drops of the Churches dew, or tears of Gods bottell, mean while our intended
building arises to his height: but as at this time David is mine example, so
that his cause, may add some grace to mine, rather that both you and I, and so
many as shall vouchsafe to read these lines, may be the divine gift, partake
of this his grace of godly tears, with leave we will assume his words to move
and order our affections.

Induction of the Division. Who having told how from the heat either of inward
poison by devoured serpents, or outward chasing and chasing of the dogs,
hind-like he pants and brayes the fresh, refreshing welsprings to obtain;
adding, declares his pains and practice, while as he seeks and runs,
saying, My tears have been my meat day and night, Text. Psalm. 42 3.
while they say unto me all the day, Where is thy God? For the Heart (they say
who are wont to hunt.) sheds tears some thing like, being pursued and not able
to escape.

This grief of his he amplifies by declaration of the cause, and manifestation
of the effect. The effect in nature last, but first in sense; first in order of
these words is considerable, Tears, and property Mine, and use Bread, and
reference To me, and time, Day and night. Order and matter intended.
Of these shortly each in particular, according to their present standing
briefly, and after of tears more largely, (which chiefly are intended;) and
last, of the common and weightiest cause in the latter part of the verse.

Tears we are admonished; The Saints in those that are called delights, have
no delight when God is dishonored, or themselves (though unjustly) are
afflicted, but to prayers and tears they give themselves. For as touching
pleasures David might have said that which his Son, What can the man that
comes after the King, Eccles. 2.12.
having so fair occasions and alluring prouocations? Yet in this case he
chooses to say with the Church, My confusion is continually before me, and the
shame of my face has covered me, for the voice of him that reproacheth and
blasphemeth, Psalm. 44.15.16.
by reason of the enemy and auenger: and with Paul, Phil. 3.18.
To tell even with weeping of the enemies of the cross of Christ: 2 Kings
19.1. etc.
as Hezekiah also his son no less in faith then in the flesh, to rent his
clothes, and cover himself with sackcloth, and to go unto the house of the
Lord, relating the speeches and reading the blasphemies of Senacherib and
Rabshakeh, rather then after ye guise of godless men to kill oxen and slay
sheep, Esaias 22.12.
enjoying the pleasures of sin for a season, Heb. 11.
when the Lord by trouble calls to weeping and mourning.

The reproaches of them that reproched thee are fallen upon me. Psalm. 69.9.
On the other side, (...).
and his scourges the arguments of their transgressions. Hence Ephraim, Ier.
32.19.
After that I was instructed I smote upon my thigh, I was ashamed, yea even
confounded because I did bear the reproach of my youth.

he threatening them that are not extremely wicked, with exposing of his own
honor to ignominy, 1. Sam. 2.32.
for their extreme punishment, Psalm. 78.61.
it shows they are out of hope, Ier. 12.7.
that are not at all therewith affected: Amos 7.17.
whereby well may be guessed of what stamp they are, who in Theaters and such
like meetings, not only with patience, but with content, yea with delight,
hear blasphemy, and behold uncleanness; to whom the Lord says, Amos 6 13.
Ye which rejoice at a thing of naught: Of whom the Apostle says, Who knowing
the judgment of God, Romans 1.32.
that they which commit such things are worthy of death, not only do the same,
but have pleasure in them that do them. Or if we speak of impenitencie under
the rod of God, such hardness, himself in the Prophets condemns as a note
of desperate impenitencie: Ier. 2.13.
In vain (says he) have I smitten your children, they received no correction.
And in another after enumeration of diverse chastisements, yet proving
fruitless, this conclusion he infers: Amos 4.6.81 with Amos 5.2.
The virgin of Israel is fallen, she shall no more rise. This in the same
Prophet is likened to horses running upon a rock, Amos 6.12.
where first they break their hoofes, then their necks. Whose crime Esaias thus
declares, Esaias 9.13.
denouncing withal a judgment proportional to their offense: For the people
turns not unto him that smites them, Esaias 9.13.
neither do they seek the Lord of hoasts, therefore the Lord will cut off from
Israel, head and tail branch and root in one day. This is the disposition of
them, whom when God fatherly calls by correction to repentance, contemning
the smiter in his rod, drown the voice both of his judgments, and their own
sin, with wine, and wantonness, merry companions, and such like auocations;
against whom it shall suffice to add Ieremiahs complaint and request to God
against them: Ier. 5.3.
O Lord, are not thine eyes upon the truth? Thou have stricken them, but they
have not grieved, thou have consumed them, they have refused to receive
correction: they have made their faces harder then a rock, they have refused
to return. Wherefore by mine award Haraclitus shall be a better Christian, then
them both, who wept upon every meeting of man, remembering the common calamity
of their kind.

Wherefore herein let us not be fashioned like unto this world, Romans 12 1.
but imitate rather either wrathful revenging Moses, Exodus 32.
or humbly mourning Hezekias. Esaias 38.
We, 2 Chronicles. 20.7.
if either the friends of God like faithful Abraham, Isay 41.8.
Iam. 2.28.
or sons of God, Iam. 3.17.
as Christ the Lord; Math. 17.5.
let us not hear with patience either his reproach by others, or anger against
our selves. 2. Sam. 12.11
Vrias while the Arc, and Israel, and Judah, abide in tents, whilst his Lord
Ioah, and servants of his Lord encampe in the open field, is neither entreated,
nor persuaded, nor by what ever importunity moved, to go into his house to eat
or drink, or to lie with his wife. And behold, a greater then the Arc, and
Israel, and Judah, and Ioab, and the servants here; and exposed to greater
injury, not of elementary air, but of blasphemous breath, and black choler
issuing our of hearts that boil on the infernal fire. Judge. 5.
Meroz bitterly by Angels voice is cursed, for not helping the Lord against the
mighty: and shall we look to be blessed, laughing with those that sight
against him?

David full of spirit instructs us, The weapons of the faithful, how
valorous soever, are their tears to God. Abner he laments the loss of such a
Prince in Israel, 2. Sam. 3.32.
he can no otherwise deprecate the crime of murder, committed by his servant,
then by the protestation of his tears. So he, or what other holy penman of the
psalm, expresses the people of God revenging their enemies reproaches by
weeping. Psalm 137.1.
This was also Jobs refuge, Job 16.20.
My friends scorn me, but mine eye powers out tears to God. Thus at length
to mention no more, the Tribes of Israel once, and again before a younger and
scandalous brother Benjamin, Jude 20.36.
put to the worst, in weeping, with fasting, and confession of sin, at length
obtained that victory, which multitude, and might, and counsel, and weapons of
war could not effect. Joel 2 12.
Therefore also now says the Lord, Turn ye even to me with all your heart,
and with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning.

Holophernes practice, its most like that Satan has captiuated these
Bethulians. O men why do you not perceive! This has ever been the custom of
Philistines, Isreal's adversaries, to stop the springs: but hear whosoever thou
art, what valor of thine is this, which while it fetters thee with the chain
of pride, makes thee the slave of vile affections? Is there more strength in
thy body, or courage in thy breast, then with him who being but a stripling
slew the Lion and the Bear? who yet scarce a man destroyed the Giant, that
defied the armies of the living God? who finally, in riper years being High
Marshall of the Lord his host, most valiantly, most happily fought his
battles? 1. Sam. 24.16.
Me thinks not untruly Saul may be accounted better then these, who in
acknowledgement of his offense, wept with lifting up his voice: But these their
eyes are no moyster then a flint, because they have made their faces harder
then a rock, Ier. 5.3.
refusing to return: to whom the infusion of many hogsheads of wine is more
easy, Plaut. Pumiceos oculos habeo, non queo lachrymam exorare, vt exspuant
vnam modo; nam genus nostrum semper fuit siccoculum. Aug. Ciuit. l. 1. c. 6.
Relinquamus Tarentinis Deo^ iratos. Aug. lachrymae Domini, gaudiae mundi, quia,
ille fleuit vt nos gaudia mere remur, De te^pore sermon. 104.
, then the distilling of one tear: who may well say as in the Poet, Our kindred
by kind is dry eyed.

Wherefore leaving unto these their valor, as Fabius sometime unto Tarentum
her armed Gods; imitate we our David, and Esaias, and Jeremiah, and Paul, and
Peter, with Timothy also, and Jesus especially the Lord of heaven and earth,
whose tears are the joy of the world: and let the ancient Proverb stand,
(...) Psalm. 62.8.
Mournful men are good men. Pour we out our heart before him, saying, God is
arefuge for us: and how much soever among us, any is more then other inclined
to religious weeping, let him be esteemed so much the better: as in comparison
of two religious, 1. Sam. 20.41
David and Jonathan, the holy Scripture has employed. These are the childrens
weapons, to whom by our Father we are likened; who has also bid us on this to
lean, Romans 12.
Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord; only let these tears be
sanctified, unfeigned tears. Therefore David thus adds to tears, My tears.

David's dainties, the drink offerings of transgressors he will not offer,
Psalm. 16.4.
neither I suppose, will he set on the Lords board, the bread of deceitful
men. Amplificatio^
For (that you may understand) tears are not of one kind, Diverse sorts of
tears.
as weepers are not of one mind. There are (says Saint Augustine) tears
commendable, Aug. de Sanctis sermon. 4.
and tears culpable, to which I add neutrall, that are middle between both
the other.

Or yet that you may have a more commodious division, De his Arist. problem.
Sect. 5.^^.34.
tears are some of a cause material, to wit, of a swifter motion of the body,
specially against a sharper wind, or in the colder air: or else of some humide
affection of the body, chiefly of the eye, which therefore are neither justly
commended nor condemned.

Others are from a cause intellectual, that is, of an affection or motion of
the mind, and these diverse: some from a weakness of spirit or too tender
affection often indiscreet, Thom. 22. qu. 82.4.3.
and therefore not allowed; rather as much laughter to be blamed.

Others of a natural piety; such were they of Lazarus his sisters, Ioh. 11.
and of the Jews that mourned with them. These proceeding from pure nature,
none I suppose except Zeno his disciples, can discommend, which are approved,
not only by the example of those devout that buried Stephen, and of many of
the Saints, Act. 8.
but of our Lord Jesus also, the author of uncorrupted nature, and sanctifying
grace.

Moreover, too many tears are occasioned by temporal losses, 2. Cor. 7.
plainly to be reproved, as also the sorrow from which they flow. For the just
man bewaileth truly those that weep most part vainly. S. Aug ser. 45. de
Sanctis plorat enim iustus veraciter, plorantes steriliter. Hos. 7.14.
Such are they that howl upon their beds, when they assemble themselves for
corn and wine; and yet they rebel against me, says the Lord. Of these is the
greater number, who while they weep for such, they cannot seek the Lord. Like
they are to those that in Ezekiel mourn for Tammuz their Idol, Ezekiel. 8.13.14.
at the North (that is, the cold) gate of the Lords house, being frozen in
fleshly lusts and worldly cares, they sit deuoide of the Southern, that is,
the celestial warmth of Gods love.

There are yet other forced and fained tears, Ier. 15.18.
lying waters, which are said chiefly to be women's weapons; of the which (being
demanded which waters were deepest and most deceitful) one answered on this
wise: Fallax vnda quidem per se, fallacior vna, Saepe facit stultos, sed tamen
vnda sophos.


Some limpide stream, disclosing ground,
But depth concealing, deceitful proves;
Much more, more often woman's tears,
Of wise, fool makes him that loves. Such as in the Dipnosophist was the
strumpet Phryne. Athen. l. 13.
For this cause named (...), as if you would say, weep-laugh: because commonly
she did both together, having in the midst of laughter tears at command. As he
also spoke of them, which of them had too much experience, Their tears at
will, Ovid. de remed. Amoris, l. 2. Vt slerent oculos, erudiere suot.
for to distill, they teach their eyne. As the Comedian also speaks of the
young man which goes after her As a fool to the correction of the stocks.
Prou. 7.
Howeuer upon contempt he has sworn no more to come at her, which has
despised himself, preferred his corriual, choosing death before such disdain:
Ter. Eunuchi Act. 1. scen. 1.
yet some one tear which painfully rubbing of her eyes, she hardly has
brought forth, will make void those words, so that he shall accuse himself.
And this, (no longer to insist in foreign speech) Sampsons example does too
truly teach; Judge. 15.
and indeed no less the Prophets admonition does imply, chargeing, Keep the
doors of thy mouth from her that lies in thy bosom. Mica 7.5.
Mean while, neither will I charge that whole sex herewith (that I may not
seem to condemn the rest for the fault of most) nor it alone; for such were
Xerxes tears reported to have been, Amens peritura geme bat secula, and ad
cadem dux trahit ipsa breuem.
which wept for the fall of those whom shortly by the sword of others he meant
to slay: and (which is most worthy to be wailed) in most places many may be
seen who in holy assemblies have weeping for a complement of hearing. As of
the Brasilians also is reported, Magirus in Geographia.
whose facility is such, that tears are for a present salutation, and as
soon gone, as if they had said, How do you? Such our hearers, Saint Bernard
lively thus describes: Tract. de ordine vitae.
I behold some weeping, but if those tears proceeded from the heart, then
should they not so lightly be turned into laughter: but now whereas wanton and
scurrilous speeches are vitered more abundantly the^ tears before, I think
not those tears are such as divine comfort is promised unto, whereas after
them so vile and earthly consolation, so easily is admitted. Ad Heliodorum in
episaphio Nepotia^.
Saint Jerome reports of Nepotian, he sacrificed his tears to God and not to
man; but they in this behalf have postposed God to man.

Now with no more cruel mind I show you the sixth, Photius in Eclogis. (...).
Pier. in Hieroglyph.
but most cruel kind, by name the Crocodile his tears, who, they write,
having devoured a man, weeps over the scull when nothing is left, not
repenting of his deed, but because on that bone there remains no flesh to
eat. Which Hieroglyphicke, it is said, Sigismund Gonzaga a Cardinal used of
Leo the tenth, repenting that by his means he was advanced to the Popedom,
adding this Emblem, Crocodili lachrymae. Such were the fained tears of
Bassian the Emperor, who wept upon every hearing the name, or seeing the
picture of Geta his brother, whom he had caused secretly to be slain. Such
were the tears of Demoneta the stepmother, for Cnemon her son, whom
nevertheless by subornations she labored to destroy. To these of this age you
may annumber many doubtful friends, yea such, as when they purpose to ensnare,
cover all with the mantle of religio; whom Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, in
the slaughter of the Shechemites, and Shilumtines, and Samaritan votaries, Ier.
41.5, 6, 7
in Jeremiah egregiously resembled: for he hearing of their coming, with shaven
beards, and clothes rent, having cut themselves, with incense in their hand, to
bring to the house of the Lord; went out from Mizpeh where he had slain him
that began to govern in the fear of God, weeping all along as he went, and as
if he would have joined his supplications with theirs, or rather in religion
have prevented them, entreated them to come with him to Gedaliah the governor;
but when he had brought them whither he would, into the midst of the city,
then slew them, and cast them into a pit, (like in resemblance to that which
Job says, Job 6.27.
his friends dug for him;) sparing only those that had in the fields
treasures to disclose unto him.

To perfection of number was wanting but the seventh kind of tears, in vain
altogether or most part employed: here behold the backsliding daughter of Rome
shows her foolish forwardness, presenting as vain, if not so wicked a sort,
as any of the rest, of her own invention, namely of those which are shed, not
willingly but by compulsio^, wherewith they are tasked, who for plenary
satisfaction for their sins to God, are adjudged to an outward and forced
lamentation for some part, or the whole residue of their life, within
monasteries or abroad: of which tears well speaks father Isac in John of
Cassia, Collat. 9. ca. 30.
saying, By their straining they more abase and drown the soul of him that
prays, pulling it down from that heavenly height, wherein the suppliants
mind should vnremoueably be fixed, and so compel him, losing the prime
intention of devotion, to be sick in seeking fruitless and constrained drops
of tears. Where we read the valley of mulberrie trees, 1. Chro. 14.14.
Saint Jerome renders ex aduerso flentium, Tradit. Hebr. in Paral.
over against them that weep, whereon he thus commenteth, saying, The
Philistines had an Idol, whereto they sacrificed with men's tears. Between
which Idol and our God, I would know what difference they put, that for divine
and spiritual worship, urge tears, and like exercise of constraint, as though
in them, for themselves, he were pleased.

The eight and only at all times laudable kind of tears, are those of sincere
religion, contrition, compassion, and heavenly desire, whereof we have next to
speak. For only these, we observed before, David calls his own tears, My
tears, Proposition confirmed.
For not indifferently the tears of any, but of our selves must make request
to God for us. So of the Church it is said, Lam. 1.2.
Her tears are on her cheeks. And our Lord to the daughters of Jerusalem,
Luke 23.28.
Weep for your selves, and for your children. So the Lord to Hezekiah the King
gives testimony, I have heard thy prayer, Esa. 38.5.
I have seen thy tears.

Simon Magus attempting to buy the holy Ghost with money, Act. 8.
has at all offended. Such other offense is that, when in the morning unblessed,
going to mingle strong drink, Isa. 5.
(to use the Prophets words) or else about ungodly mercha^dise, they hire with
a little money some shaueling to say their prayers in certain Aues, and Paters,
and Credoes, by a rate. It was easy for Israel to say to Samuel, 1. Sam. 12.19
Pray for thy servants unto the Lord thy God, that we die not, while as
themselves ate the calves out of the stall, Amos 6.
and chanted to the sound of the viole. It was easy for Simon, of whom we
spoke, to entreat the Apostles, Pray ye to the Lord for me, Act. 8.24.
that none of these things which ye have spoken, come upon me; but no heart he
had to join his own voice with them. It is like, David who wept and chastened
his soul with fasting, Psalm. 69.10.
was not ignorant of the Gentiles proverb, Weeping becomes not a King:
Euripides.
yet being a King, he counts it no shame to sorrow a little for the burden of
the King of Princes. Hos. 8.10.
Hester putting her life in her hand for her peoples cause, Hest. 4.6.
bids Mordecai gather together all the Jews that were present in Shushan, and
fast ye (says she) for me. And Amos preaches, Amos 5.16.
They shall call the husbandman to mourning, and such as are skillful of
lamentation to wailing. And in Jeremy, Thus says the Lord of Hosts, Ier. 9.17.
Consider ye and call for the mourning women that they may come, and send for
cunning women that they may come, and let them make haste, and take up a
wailing for us. But most agreeing is his precept by the Prophet Joel, Joel 2.17.
Let the Priests the Ministers of the Lord weep between the porch and the
altar, and let them say, Spare thy people, O Lord, and give not thy heritage to
reproach, that the heathen should not rule over them. And Hezekiah (to conclude)
by messengers says to Esaias, 2. King. 19.4.
Lift up thy prayer for the remnant that are left. In all which places, we may
perceive the holy people allowed and accustomed to use the prayers of others
with their own, yet so as always appears the concurrence of their own with
others.

Greg mor. l. 5 c. 7. Luctu suo anima pasci tur, add, sicut vrsae boreales
sugentes pedes suos, i. vltima sua meditantes.
the which their future expectation, even in their tears, procures a present
consolation. This is that use of tears which David implies, whereas he says,
they have bin my bread; for tears often times both feed and ease the mind.
Proposition. Ambr. de obitu Valentin Est enim pij^s affectibus quaedam etia^
flendi voluptas, and pleru^que grauis euaporat dolor.
Weeping (says one) cooles the stomach, and solaceth the troubled spirit. In
weeping holy affections have their proper pleasure, and so most part,
surcharging melancholy is expelled. Therefore the Prophet requests, Turn away
from me, Esa 22 4.
that I may weep bitterly. Now we know, delight is presupposed to follow when
the desire is obtained. So the people in Babylon remembering Jerusalem in
bitterness, find no sweeter leniment then this; Psalm. 137.1.
Upon the rivers of Babylon there sat we down, yea we wept when we remembered
Sion. Wherefore else does Jeremy wish so earnestly? Ier. 9.1.
O that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears! It was leisure
for such emploiment, that Job of his friends so earnestly required, Hold your
peace, let me alone, Job 13.13.
that I may speak, and let come on me what will. Therefore it is, the Prophet
elsewhere eats ashes like bread, Psalm. 102.9.
and mingles his drink with weeping.

laecobs suffering cold and labor, and sweat, Genesis 29.20.
for the love he bare unto his desired Rahel. Moreover, if this the lover know,
that his deeds or sufferings are pleasing to his beloved, so much the more are
his ioys increased. Luke 7.44.
Hence Marie Magdalen her presenting our Lord with tears amidst a feast,
because she knew they should have better acceptance, then the Pharisees costly
cheer.

Genesis 45.14.
as Joseph wept over his youngest brother for gladness of their bodily meeting;
and again, Genesis 50.17.
over all the elder for recovery of their souls in conversion. Raven ser. 64
Habet enim boc natura humani corporis, vt producat lachrymas, vis gaudij^, vis
moeroris.
For it is natural to man to weep as really, though not so frequently in
mirth as mourning. And as often as the bowels are bound with excessive motion
of heaviness or of gladness, straight waters gush out of the eyes. Or if they
proceed from sorrow it self, then convenient gesture adds delight to every
action; Aquinas.
and no gesture is more suitable to sorrow, then sighs and tears, which nature
has annexed thereunto.

Expletur lachrymis, ageriturque dolor.
For in regard of time present, Job 39.3.
as Hindes by caluing, so men by weeping, Senec. lib. 10. contro. 1. Ple rumque
omnis dolor per Lachrymas ef^ fluit.
cast out their sorrows. As waters by pouring, so sorrow in lamenting issues
out. For (as Saint Basil says) when they are emptied, De gratiarum action.
the brain is lightened, like as the element is cleared after rain. Therefore
the Philosopher advises, Aristotle.
not lightly to still children from crying. And in respect of time to come, the
hope of great reward changes no less the bitterness of these waters then the
tree showed by God, Exodus 15.25.
those of Marah, while believing, we remember him that said, Luke 6.21.
Blessed are ye that weep now, Psalm. 30.5.
for ye shall laugh. And gain, Psalm. 126.5.
They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy.

are in lamentation, whose proverb they become, Psalm 69.11.
when sackcloth is their garment. Selfewild are these, and ignorant, That out
of the eater comes forth meat, Judge. 14.14.
and out of the strong sweetness comes. When contrariwise even experience has
taught, Basil. vbi supra. Accedit quod ait Sidonius Apollinari^. Animu^ natura
desidiosissimum dolor fleti^ granidus accendit. l. 4. epist. 11.
by Apoplexies, and Palsies, and sudden deaths, how vnhelpful, yea hurtful, it
has been for many, violently to refrain from tears, being beset of
remediless evils. For even the flame enclosed, is choked of his smoke, which
having no vent it self, reflects and smothers the fire that bred it; no
otherwise in the living creature, that faculty which does dispense the vital
actions, decays and dies by the cagernesse of immoderate grief, having no
outward expiratio^. And on the other side, the issuing of matter from an ulcer,
eases the smart which tumor bred. Wherefore as it is wicked, so it is vain,
to account mourning miserable, which God has pronounced happy. It is more
reasonable to esteem those tears even in the present joyful, which procure
Gods presence, delight the Angels, are a terror to devils, support the feeble,
and solace all stronger Christians. Whereof for this time only this I list to
add: This worthy is of most abundant tears, that tears amongst Christians
are so rare. If carnal men lament, that Esaias 24.11 Ier. 48.33. Joel 1.5.
the new wine is cut off from their mouth; if the Priests are justly charged
Joel 1.9.
to mourn between the Porch and the Altar, that the drink offering is
withholden from the house of God, which notwithstanding is but the bud of an
earthly grape; how much more cause have I to bewail the dryness of my soul?
Who (will I say with the Prophet) Ier. 9.1.
shall give water to my head, and tears unto mine eyes? yet not altogether or
only for the self same reason: he for the breaking of his people, I for the
emptiness and barrenness of my soul. For so husbandmen Richard. Victor. in
Psalm. 119.
are wont, specially in the hotter regions, in time of drought, by deriuing
riuerets from wels or ponds to water their thirsty lands; lest else, having by
too much drought lost all strength, they fail to multiply the seeds of
increase. Ah my God, for the wickedness Psalm. 107.34.
of the inhabitants, the field of my heart have thou turned to barrenness. For
therein dwell thine enemies indeed, yet not my friends; ambition, anger,
avarice, wantonness, headiness, slothful sleep, and dullness, and many
more, of whom more easily any one does lead me captive, then I am able to
recount them all. O my soul, thy strength, My strength is dried like a
potsheard Psalm. 22.7.
. Wherefore consider with me my brethren what all Israel did in such distress,
and understand by that they did, what they wailed, what they would: for being
sometime themselves forced at Mizpeh 1. Sam. 7.6.
to force from their eyes some tears, and yet that neither this they could
(for it was not easy to do this good, how e're they declined their former
evil) in testimony of their inward emptiness, they drew up other waters, and
powered before the Lord. Here we need not Rabhi Vziel his authority to teach
that the soul without tears is as the thirsty land, Psalm 143.6.
whereas the holy Scripture so speaks.

David had of them, in this also that David says, They have been my bread:
where with in another Psalm he says, Psalm. 80.5.
That great householder does furnish his childrens table, thou feedest them with
the bread of tears, and give them tears to drink in great measure. Like
may this be to that, that Job Job 3.24.
affirms, My sighing comes before I eat: and again, Job 23.12.
I have laid up the words of his mouth before my necessary food: so Hanna 1.
Sam. 1.7.
the mother of that son of vows, she wept and did not eat, that is, weeping
to her was in stead of eating. For that other meat the Saints especially in
times of trouble they loath. I ate (says one) Dan. 10.3.
no pleasant bread, neither came flesh nor wine in my mouth, neither did I
anoint my self at all till three whole weeks were fulfilled. And of another
2. Sam. 12.17.
upon less occasion it is said, that he did eat no bread.

Bread strengthens the heart of man Psalm. 104.15.
So do (says one) S. Ambr. Mat. 5.5.
the promises that are made to tears. For those that are patient in
tribulation (according to Saint Paul) Romans 12.12
Rejoice in hope. so much the more as they are more clearly called thereunto,
by example of his preceding tears, and succeeding joys, of whom it is
written, Heb. 5.7.
Who in the days of his flesh, when he had offered up prayers and
supplications with strong crying and tears unto him that was able to save him
from death, and was heard in that he feared.

Bernard has observed seven sorts of bread whereon they of the Kings house do
feed. Domi^ica 6. Pentecostes 1. sermon. in fine.
One is of hearing the words of God; another is of obedience or doing the
works of God; athird is, Meditation on them both; a fourth is, Repentance in
case of negligence, in either of those or both. The fifth is of sociable
unanimity. A sixth, the holy Eucharist the formers pledge, and seal of the
covenant betwixt our Lord and his elect. The last is this we are yet a
kneading, of praying tears, or weeping prayers. The condition of which is
such, not that he who feeds on one, or more, should therefore loath the rest,
but contrariwise the eating of any one or some, whets the stomach for the
rest; whereby we gather, how few are satisfied with this, how many perish in
spiritual famine unawares. Who is he that will give to me this bread to eat?
whom, if I have it, in these days shall I call to such repast? which of them
that daily feast will vouchsafe to be my guest? But to use our bread in a
larger, that is, the Scriptures sense, for all manner of victuals, the most,
filling themselves with sundry sorts of leauened cakes, poor wretches
wretchedly refuse these bitter herbs, Exo. 12.8.
which nevertheless as cates were to be joined with the unleavened bread of a
sincere and Christian conversation, if so be we desired without hypocrisy, to
be partakers of our Lords feast. But this diet what use it has for health or
strength, the world knows not; therefore neither does desire it. Who bewailes
the want of an unknown good? Gregor. Niss. de Beatitudinibus. Eccles. 1.
Cast a blind-borne and one accustomed to the light together into the darkness
of a dungeon; the ones experience makes him to lament, the other without loss,
laughs in ignorance; so, right so here it is: The country swain will disdain
to stoop to ground for that which is precious in his Lords esteem: bruit
beasts deuoyd of reason, and therefore incapable of misery, bred by nature to
exhale their breath in pleasure of their senses: soon as they see the air,
the original of their life, express each of them some kind of wantonness;
the horse pranceth, the ox casts dust into the air, the sow delights in
digging turfes out of the earth, the whelps do play, the calves leap, and
briefly, all the rest, each one by a certain sign, shows that his mindlesse
nature propends to pleasure: but man that's borne to knowledge, begins to
weep, before he has leave to eat, that he may so learn that which was the
first, should be the frequentsts action of his life: so mirth is theirs, and
mourning ours. Now of those beasts very few, and seldom times, in seeming
sorrow are seen a straying from their kind; and if any, yet those for men, as
we have heard of horses and dogs that with their tears have celebrated their
masters funerals; but of men how many to brutish lusts have quite given ever
themselves, ignorant or unmindful of their own condition or their end? for
where is the end of their pleasant springs, but in saltness of the seas? for
the rivers have sweet waters, and the sea bitter, as pleasure also ends in
loathsomenesse: and to say with Solomon, Pro. 14.13.
The end of mirth is heaviness. Howeuer Richard de sancto Victo. de statu
interic^is homini cap. 10.
incessantly the appetite comes and goes, increases, and decreaseth, and
riuerlike follows the trace of her inclination, until her desire be
satisfied, and in her crooked courses following each first declining path of
pleasure, passes as by a certain race, from place to place, after steep
down fall into the vallyes, scarce ever reasce^ds unto the lofty mountains,
which neither the water can, nor appetite is wont; yet still it runs and
ouerrunnes, and again returns unto the first, whence the Preacher says,
Eccl. 2.7.
Unto the place from whence the rivers come, thither they return again. For
from fleshly appetite so many floods proceed, so many and so endless lusts
arise. The place from whence these streams gush out, is the well of natural
necessity, in which they end the ditch of unnatural satietie: the way by
which they pass is the quagmire of voluptuousness; by which it returns, and
runs amain the parching path of concupiscence. And as all decursion of
waters is by visible channels on this furface of the earth, but returns by
underground and invisible: so lust by visible action, and satisfying the desire
eft soon is expelled, but by secret operation of the vegetable faculty,
reflects, and so repaires her restless motion.

How miserable I pray, and how lamentable, ever to whirle about, never to get
out, this eddie, now sinking, then fleeting, but never intermitting? how to be
desired, rather to be detested, are those oblectations of our desires, which
both are gendred of defect, and turned into loathing? Wherefore as we can let
us gainestand and rid us as we are able: be we not so carried of the sweet
streams, as to end our voyage in the saltest waves. Here rather let us admixe,
yea prefer some bitterness: admixe, because, when God bestowed all good
without any composition of evil to be used, and forbad to taste of the bitter
fruit, yet we ingorged our selves with evil: strict justice required, that
evil alone our portion after should have been, yet has the Creators exceeding
clemency even hitherto vouchsafed us some portion of that despised sweet, but
so, that for memories sake and thankfulness, he requires some of our Myrrbe
and Aloes to be mingled. This is surely that sweet sour, most toothsome and
wholesome for the present time. Let us prefer it, that is, foretaste it,
eating our tears before our daily bread; unless this also we take to be the
subject of our prayer, when we request, Give us this day our daily bread: I
deserve not to dine not having wept before, nor to sit at supper, before I have
wet my cheeks; which as unmeet, so how unsafe Lazarus and the gluttons. Luk
16.15
story does declare, and reason proves. For being there is a twofold world,
and in them either, twofold, both joy and sorrow is considered, and that
without all doubt both contraries must be tasted (For God has set the one over
against the other,) Eccl. 7.14.
blessed sure is he, who in things truly good, treasures up his portion of
pleasure for the future life, but swallows before death his portion of the
bitter cup: so the wise man Eccl. 3.4.
orders them, saying, First a time to weep, then after a time to laugh.
Therefore weep in time, that both more surely, and more abundantly we may
triumph in all eternity.

Augustine gathers, In Comment. heic.
it is, that thirsting for the well of life, he terms his tears not drink,
Confirmation
which more greedily is desired, and easily devoured, but bread that is harder
and more difficult, that is harsher and not so pleasant. I remember indeed, he
said sometimes, Psalm. 80.5.
God gave him tears to drink, and elsewhere Psalm 102.9.
that he himself mingled his drink with weeping; but never, that ever he used
them for his drink, lest for themselves he should seem to desire them, as
that well: for what pleasure he has in them, is for necessity of the end, nor
for themselves.

where is thy God? for else as Saint Basil De gratiarum acti^^e.
notes, there remained no time for that joy unspeakable and glorious of the
elect and justified, allowed him of God: no place for the Apostles precept,
Phil. 4.4.
Rejoice in the Lord always. For if sorrow be simply good, then ever to be
desired, and so never shall be obtained that wherewith he does exalt us to the
fellowship of Angels perpetual gladness, who are accounted worthy to stand by
the tribunal of the Almighty. And Simon magister, Orat. 12.
besides, too much sadness becomes a cause of sin, in so much as sorrow
ouerwhelmes the mind, and by want of advice, occasions giddiness, by
forgetfulness begets unthankfulness. This fitteth that which the Hebrews
say, The holy Spirit in them that are ever sad makes no residence, and
experience too plainly proves it in excessive grief.

Augustine In Common. istic.
and Saint Basil De gratiar. action.
and his brother of De beatitudine 3.
Nyssa would not commend but reprehend, not only the Anabaptisticall sect,
which Romanists themselves condemn, as supposing the Godhead is appeased by
rude screeches, or ugly howlings; but also those selfsame Romanists in some of
their esteemed religious orders, and such other like perhaps amongst our
selves, not unlike (as writes that learned Father) Basil. apud Simonem
magistrum.
unto the tender and worthless trees in which the worms most easily are bred;
whom God also himself by Esaias Esaias 58.
sharply reproues, and plainly conuinceth as ignorant of the Godhead.

1. Tim 4.6 7.
and exercise of good works; which piety is much to be preferred (if
separation of these were allowed) before the bodily exercise of votiue tears,
which we in the persons of the women that embalmed our Savior, and of the
Apostles which bare his marks, Gal. 6.
and laboring in his vineyard Mat. 21.41.
Rendered him the fruits in their seasons. The golden Rauennas Sermon. 79.
elegantly compares in this wise, Woman the cause of evil, the author of
sin, the way of death, the graves gate, the inscription of hell, the whole
necessity of lamenting, for which they are borne in tears, are subject to
sorrow, addicted to sighing, and are so strong in tears as they are void of
strength, and so much as they are more unfit for labor, so much the readier to
lament: therefore with their tears they vanquish weapons, sway whole kingdoms
with their weeping, and by bewailing break, all the courage of the nobler
sex. Its no wonder therefore, if women be more earnest then Apostles at
tears, at funerals, at sepulchers, at bodily obsequies about our Lord his
corpse, Where woman first runs to tears, that first ran to ruin; she is
first at the grave, which was first in death, becomes the messenger of
resurrection, that was deaths Herald; and she that brought to man, news of so
great destruction, even she to men presents the tidings of so great salvation,
that by the hearing of faith she may repay, what by counsel of misbeliefe she
had taken away. This order is not preposterous but mystical; Apostles are not
postposed to women, but reserved for works of more honor, and greater moment.
Women undertake the handling of Christ his body, the Apostles his sufferings;
they carry spices, but these stripes: they enter the tomb, these the prison:
they take hold of grave clothes, these of chains: they power in oil, these out
their blood: they are amazed at death, these undergo deaths: and (not to
mention many things) they sit at home, these in fronts of battles stand, that
devout like soldiers they may in dangers prove their faithfulness, strength
in labors, in wrongs patience, in perils death, suffering in wounds, in pains
devotion, constancy in renting of their bowels. To Christ therefore,
Mulieresergo ferunt pro Christo lachrymas: Apostoli diabolo superat^ and victis
hostibus and victoriam referunt and triumphu^. Luke 18.30.
the women are portitors of tears, the Apostles subduing Satan, and all other
enemies, report with victory both triumphs and trophies unto Christ. Like
judgment therefore must be held of them, that by profession and emploiment
succeed the women and Apostles. For as the work, so is the reward; and whose
is the one, to him by right redounds the other, both in this present time, and
in the world to come.

Which even here from David may be gathered, who says, My tears have been my
bread, or, Bread for me. How ever the Saints lament in holiness, the fruit is
theirs. As in another place, I humbled my soul with fasting, Psalm. 35.13.
and my prayer returned into mine own bosom. And yt wc the Lord said to Rahel,
that is, to Israel, in Jeremy does confirm it, saying, Refrain thy voice from
weeping, Ier. 31.16.
and thine eyes from tears, for thy work shall be rewarded. For, The Lord
vpholdeth all that fall, Psalm. 145.14.
and raises up all those that are bowed down: that is, refreshes every one,
and rewards, that is afflicted for his name: that as the sufferings of Christ
abound in them, 2. Cor. 1.5.
so their consolations may abound by Christ. Zachary declares. Their question
is, Should I weep in the fifth month, Zach. 7.3.
separating my self, as I have done these so many years? His answer is: When
ye fasted and mourned in the fifth (which was their institution) and seventh
month (which was immediately commanded) even those seventy years, V. 5.
did ye at all fast to me, even to me? And as if they had said, Then wherein
have we missed? it is added, V. 7.
Should ye not hear the words which the Lord has cried by the former
Prophets? And as if yet further it were demanded, Which are those words? for
the one, fasting and weeping is enjoined; and the other not forbidden: it is
replied a little after, V. 9.10.
Thus speaks the Lord of hosts, saying, Execute true judgment, and show
mercy and compassions every man to his brother, and oppress not the widow,
nor fatherless, the stranger, nor the poor, and let none of you imagine
against his brother in your heart. As if he had shortly said, The purpose of
mourning, as well as sacrificing, is mercy, and the knowledge of God: Esa. 58.
v. 3.6.
for Esaias proves the one, Hos 6.6.
as Hosea does the other. These are the tears that God vouchsafes to see; 2.
King. 20 5
these are they that are contained in his bottle, Psalm. 56.8.
and written in his book.

O that my portion then may be with them, to who^ it is said, Verily, verily,
Ioh. 16.20.
I say unto you, that ye shall weep and lament, but the world shall rejoice,
and ye shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy; so shall
I not fear to stand with them, Reu 7.17.
from whose eyes God shall wipe all tears. Peter at first (in semblance of a
carnal man) said, Thou shall never wash my feet: but after, seeing the danger
(representing the inordinately zealous and il advised professor) says, Ioh. 13
8.9.
Lord, not my feet only, but also my hands and my head. He offended in the
last, but the greater danger was in the first. I will wish therefore as
touching tears, I may keep the mean, neither wanting, nor yet superfluously
shedding them; yet rather then for want I should hear, Thou have no part in
me, I pray they may so wash my soles, that by so glorious a father, and a
tender mother, they may be wiped from mine eyes. But we poor sinners, how
should we be conceived to exceed, whereas the righteous David surceasseth
neither day nor night?

day and night, of many things we are taught. For first, if night and day be
taken for all time, which by them is measured, it shows, The Saints power out
their spirits, not lightly, or for an hour, and so have done, but constantly
and seriously, so long as cause remains. So Baruch in Jeremy, faints in his
sighing, Ier. 45.3.
and finds no rest. So that same Prophet in his book of Wailings, counsels
the daughter of his people, saying, O wall of the daughter of Sion, let tears
run down like a river day and night: Lam. 2.18.
give thy self no rest: let not the apple of thine eye cease. The same is
Jobs assertion, Are there not mockers with me? Ioh. 17.2.
and does not mine eye continue in their provocation?

Ier. 14.17.
Thou shall say this word unto them, Let mine eyes run down with tears
night and day, and let them not cease. They cannot, because of the smart of
his rod, Psalm. 32.^.
who say, Day and night thy hand was heavy upon me: (A wonderful dryness of
the grape, ensued the pressing of that heavy hand,) My moisture is turned into
the drought of Summer. Like to this is that of another, Why is my pain
perpetual, and my wound incurable, Ier. 15 18.
which refuses to be healed? will thou (speaking to God) be altogether unto me
as a lier, and as waters that fail?

Esa. 26 9.
With my soul have I desired thee in the night, yea with my spirit within me
will I seek thee early: but these, like are their tears to Northern showers
in Summers drought, which moisten the boughs and blade, but never nourish the
root of trees or herbs; so it never fructifies.

But to the purpose, let us remember, the sable and silent night affoording
convenient solitude, of all is tears best fitting nurse. The certain
conuenience of solitariness, Jeremy a man next to David, delighted in this
exercise, declares by his example, Ier. 13.17.
My soul (says he) shall weep in secret places for your pride. And briefly
for the night, most devout David witnesses himself, Psalm 6 6.
All the night long I make my bed to swim, I water my couch with my tears:
of whom (says Comment. in Psalm. 42.
Augustine) This meat which is called bread, men eat by day, and sleep by
night; but this so sauourie is, and he so pious, that no time he ceasseth.

Moreover the same Father well observes: 10. Collect. August.
That if you take the day for the prosperity of this life, and night for the
worlds adversity, the conclusion will be the same; for says David, Whether in
prosperity of the world, Ego desiderij^ ^^ei lachrymas fundo.
I shed the tears of my desires, the longing of my desires I leave not off.
And how ever the world be well, Et cum in mundo been est, mihi male est.
I am still ill, until I appear before my God. the prosperity of this world,
is to be lamented then adversity; for that more corrupts us, that this more
easily may break us; fallen they have often in prosperity, that have not
started in adversity.

emulating either nothing but the others vices. O prosperity flowing, (...).
Semper plus deceptionis quam delectationis habem.
and failing, temporal and mortal, fleeing and falling, having ever more
deceit then delight. So much to be feared, and worthy to be lamented, as thou
art able to entice, and ready to kill the entangled! as cunning to do the one,
as the spirit 1. King. 22.
that seduced Ahab, and willing to execute the other as the Ghost that met
Brutus in the battle at Philippi.

A third collection seems hence for to arise, 11. Collect.
that namely the Saints lamenting for sin, surpasses the vngodlies
wantonness therein; for he weeps both day and night; but their blasphemy
which did occasion it, is after said in action but to endure by day. Genesis 27.41.
Esau had shortly resolved to slay his brother Jacob, but Rebekah his mother
supposes his fury after a few days will turn away: Verse 44.
and though perhaps the evil intention was not changed long after, nor ever
repented of, yet the Scripture says, Genesis 28.26.
When Esaw saw that Isaac had blessed Jacob, and sent him away to Padan Aram,
to take him a wife from thence, he also diuerted the stream of his thoughts
from murder to another marriage: but after a little we hear of Jacob though
not watching yet troubled by Verse. 12.17
dreams in the night, and fearful awaking out of sleep. Yea many years
after returning Genesis 32. V. 7.13. etc.
to his country, the fear of his brothers rage distressed him, and not only
by presents and persuasions in the day time labors to mitigate himself, but
V. 9. etc.
all the night until the break of day wrestles with God that he may prevail
with man. V. 24. etc.
So Genesis 14.15
Abraham deuides himself, he and his servants by night, pursuing them that by
day had taken away his brothers son. Deuteronomy. 9.1.9. Deuteronomy. 10. v. 10
So Moses often whole days and nights, and weeks, yea almost months fasts
and prays to God for remission of those sins which Israel committed at once.
So (in resemblance) David in much distress is following to recover what
unjustly is taken away, while Amalecke triumphing in their evil, are eating
and drinking, 1. Sam. 30.
and dancing, V. 6.16.
because of the spoil that they have taken: so he expresses that while Psalm.
102.7.8
his enemies reproach him all the day, he watches, (which is more convenient
for night then day) and is as a sparrow alone upon the house top: and in the
person Psalm. 22.1.
of our Lord he thus expresses, O my God I cry in the day time, but thou
hear not, and in the night season, and am not silent. Which we know how by
our Lord himself it was fulfilled often times in the garden, Math. 26.36. John
18.1.2.
in the mount, Mat. 14.23. Math. 6.46.
and in the desert. So that howsoever the Pharisees sometime by night conspire
against him, yet could they not be so watchful to the evil, as he for good.
Mark. 1.35 Luke 5.16.
So Paul and Sylas Act. 16.25.
at midnight in prison pray and sing praises unto God, while they that
imprisoned them are asleep. So do those many devout in the house of Act. 12.12.
Marie the mother of John, during the Churches persecution and Peter's
imprisonment, for whom V. 5.
prayer was made without-ceassing of the Church unto God. So the religious
ruler Nehemie, with fasting prays both day and night for the evil that had
happened unto Jerusalem and Judah being already done and ended. Neh. 1.6.
So Darius howeuer a heathen king, yet partaking with afflictions of Dan
6.18.19.
Daniel servant of the most high God, when as the treacherous Presidents, having
accomplished their diligent search, Psalm. 64.6.
and having performed as they supposed, The Psalm. 21.11.
mischeuous devices which they had imagined, now sleep their sleep Psalm 76.5.
; went to his palace and passed the night fasting, neither were instruments of
music (according to his usual manner) brought before him, and his sleep
went from him. Yea and the king arose very early in the morning, and went in
haste unto the den of lions, and when he came to the den cried with a
lamentable voice unto Daniel. So powerful is the affection that has but
affinity with religion, much more true religion where it is, by all endeavor
strives to outstrippe naughtiness. For them, after their malignant counsels
and cruel accomplishments, pleasures drown, and sleep enterres: but these
silly lambs, and mourning doves, fear and care still solicites, especially
because they much disdain to see good overcome of evil. Let bloody
persecutors this also understand, that if to feed on others flesh be their
delight, they may have their pleasure also in the night, for herein its not
amiss to imitate the noble spirit of that most religious Lawrence, Prudentius
in (...).
who on his grid-iron bid the persecutor, turn his carcass and eat that
which was already roasted.

But as for us remember we by day to conflict with the works of iniquity, and
by night imploring the heavens help, get new provision for each days fight,
according to the examples of our Lord now related, and of Paul, serving the
Lord with all humility of mind, and with many tears and temptations, Acts
20.19.31.
Which befell him by the lying in wait of the Jews; ceased not from those
tears night nor day for three years while he was in Asia: that according to
ours and their figure in Israel and Egyptians, the more by them we are
afflicted, the more our seed may multiply Exodus 1.12.
and grow, not only by number of the faithful as has ever fared in the
hottest persecutions, Act. 2.41.49.
but also that each of us our selves, Acts 5.14.
being so by them excited, become more fervent in every good word and work: as
of the holy Apostles it is written, that after many threatenings, and beatings,
and imprisonments, Acts 5.42.
Daily in the Temple, and in every house they ceased not to teach and preach
Jesus Christ: for teaching and preaching of whom they were so persecuted. So
shall Satan's persecutions, unto the grace of Christ, prove but as water cast on
burning oil. So shall our religion, by the fruits approve it self, being
both fervent and frequent; which things, by terms of night and day in
meditation of Gods law, Josh. 1.8.
in fasts and prayers to God, Psalm. 1.2.
his most immediate services are usually commended. Luke 2.37.


So doing, we may with joy expect that day without all night, which shall once
clothe us with the garment of perpetual gladness; when they also that now
abuse the useful change of night and day, shall be oppressed with an
everlasting night. For this is the difference of this present, and the change
that is looked for; now during the time of Patience, the visible course of
night and day is common to the elect and reprobate, but then all night shall be
the ones, and constant day the others lot. Even that day, whereof the Prophet
speaks, Zech. 14.17.
And it shall be one day, which shall be known to the Lord. That day, whereof
in one the whole Church may say: When shall I arise, Job 7.4.
and the night be gone? and I am full of tossings to and fro, until the dawning
of the day. That, whose dawning the Psalmist looks for, saying, The upright
shall have dominion over them in the morning. Psalm. 49.14.
That, in difference whereof, David may seem now to say, His tears are his
meat day and night. For when he shall come unto the place, of which it is
said, Reu. 21.15.
There shall be no night there, he shall no more eat the bread of tears, but
drink without let, without loathing, without ending, of that pure
lifespringing well, so earnestly, so incessantly here desired.

Transition to the absolute treatise of tears.
From the particular manner, and determined measure, of whose desires and diet of
tears, as they are bounded in these words; at length we come to more ample and
absolute consideration of that grace, for the good, as we are able, of as many
as having or seeking this gift of religious tears indeed, account them
gracious. For which intendment, these heads seem profitable to be handled:
first the Nature; Division of the matter intended.
then the Necessity; after, the Use; next the Efficacy, fifth, the Lets;
sixth, the Helps; seventh, the Matter, Occasions, or Division of godly tears:
and last, of their Dignity, by way of conclusion to the rest.

As for the Nature, 1. Of the nature of tears. Definition.
thus briefly may they be defined: Tears are in man a humor of thick
vapors, by force of some strong affection, gathered first about the heart;
then from it, being straightened, sent up into the brain, there by the coldness
thereof resolved into water, thence distilling into spongious glanduls of the
eyes, out of which at length they are wrung, by the straining of those arteries
which are derived from the heart and head. Now a little of each of these parts
in particular.

For whereas there are in man two passions principal, to wit, Joy and
Heaviness, arising both from knowledge of the cause, (to either of which all
other may be referred,) the mighty God has assigned to either, in man a sign
expressiue of it self, namely Tears and Laughter. So that those tears
mentioned of Crocodiles, and Pallas his horse, and certain dogs and birds,
happening to some of them ordinarily, are to be accounted tears not properly,
but Analogicall, that is, like unto tears; or if out of order, then to so be
taken as Balaams Ass her speaking. Numb. 22.


That they are a humor, sense seeing them distill, witnesses her self; the
which most rightly is thereunto by God applied: for the flowing of that liquid
thing, betokens the inward melting of the soul; whereto I suppose, well may be
referred that which David says, My sore ran in the night; Psalm. 77.2.
which cannot be a bodily sore, because the original expresses it in the
Hands name.

The matter of this humor, seems most to be those vapors, in that it is
neither blood nor phlegm, choler nor melancholy; nor yet appears to be any of
those which Physicians call Secundary humors: though one has said, Plutarch.
They are the souls sweat. Truth it is, sweat like unto tears, is salt, but
not so clear, nor in such sort passing through the inward parts. Neither is it
easy to perceive, how excrements of the third concoction (which is wrought in
the outward parts of the body) should be the nearest messengers of inward
affections. As for that of Nyssen to this purpose, saying, Greg. Nyss.
that Tears are drops of blood* gushing out of the hearts wounds, I take to be
more Rhetorically, then materially spoken.

For fourthly, that they are a corporeal effect of a mental affection, no man
doubts, (of fained tears I speak not, which are but equiuocally so called)
therefore according to change of affection they are stird and stilled, raised
and laid.

Now if you ask, what affection they betoke^? The answer of some will be, that
properly they witness sorrow, but joy by accident, namely, as joy is
accompanied with remembrance of sorrow: but in mine opinion (howeuer I esteem
all the affections so to remain commixed in the mind of mortal man, as all
the elements in that compound body, wherein one only is predominant,) yet
should not that slight memory of evil be in joy so forcible, as to produce
mourning tears. For sure it is, that as either of two contraries preuailes,
the other in power is abated. Wherefore, the weaker remembrance of sorrow in
the midst of joy, should not so effectually move tears, as that remembrance
which in a middle estate is stronger, because then less resisted: neither does
experience at all times, when most reioycingly we weep, witness any thing
less, then that we remember sadness; yea so much the more abundantly, as we
rejoice in singing the praises of our Redeemer, so much more without restraint,
without observance, these waters spring out of their fountains; wherefore we
must acknowledge with the Orator, Quintilian. Qua er^punt dolor, aut l^titid
mana^t
Nature has given tears messengers of the mind, which burst out in grief, and
in mirth more pleasantly proceed. While as the one pressing, strains them out,
the other dilating opens the passages that they may flow more freely; both
stir the inwards with a stronger motion, as also do desire of revenge, and
affection of pitifulnes. Whereby also may be perceived, why in the definition
we required a strong affection. For neither a slow affection suffices to move
those vapors, and the ouerviolent ouerwhelms, or else, ratifying dries them
up; that infants and womanly creatures of either sex, (...).
are lightly moved to weep, is caused either by the mind, in that through
defect of judgment, things often times of little moment, they repute the
greatest; or else proceeds from a quality of their bodies, to wit, the
abundance of vapors in those whose constitution is of cold and moist.

Mean while those vapors gathering from each part, upon some great and
unaccustomed agitation of the mind, about the seat of life for defense
thereof, compassing on all sides about, do straiten it, binding more hardly in
sorrow, and are therefore more strongly repelled, in joy more gently compassing,
and therefore are more easily dispatched unto the brain.

For between the heart and head, there is a mutual and rare compassion; even
as between understanding and affection. So that as the brain, upon knowledge
of the matter, gives notice, and stirs up the heart: so the heart moved by
the affections, sends for her self her messengers circumfluous vapors to
seek the redress of evil, or increase of good.

The brain then, either by his coldness condenses those vapors into fluide
humors, as the middle and coldest region of the air those that breath out of
the earth and water; or other-waies those hot halations being dar^ed in
abundance upward against the solid cauities of the brain, by their
repercussion and concourse, are thickened, as the drops hanging upon the lower
side of the cover of a boiling pot, may by example teach.

Wherefore it is no wonder, if what way they can readiest they fall into those
spunges observed by the eyes: for in those that are mo^e humide, at the same
time they weep, you shall observe that humor falling into their nostrils,
having found no receptacle in the soliditie of the head, like as it happens in
those stils which they call Retorts.

Heidfeldius Surgunt ex vno f^mes duo monte perennes: vnde duplex falsae
labitur am nis aquae. Vide sis. Rich. de S. Victore in Psalm. 118. Exitus
aquartam.
Finally, it were not well provided for the eyes; if the waters received into
those spunges, were not thence wrong out, which easily the head, and heart by
ministry of their arteryes effect: but in the eyes principally and lastly
they appear, because the eyes first and chiefly harbor sin, and of the eyes
of mankind especially of the woman's, that before man was in the transgression.

Thus of the nature of tears; Necessity of weeping. Division of causes.
follows their necessity, which is either from the present consistence of
our nature, or from the institution of Gods commandment, or finally from
condition of the end.

From the consistence (said I) of our nature, not of nature universally, though
Plutarch being reproved, Plutarches.
for weeping for his child's death, not unaptly answered, Thus nature flows.
Again of our present consistence, not of our primary constitution; for made we
were without them, and without sorrow the frequentsts cause thereof, but now
are borne of sin, in sorrow, unto labor.

Of sin, that is, of seed infected, both with the guilt of the first sin, and
with corruption of original error. For who can bring a clean thing out of an
unclean? Job 14.14.
and David acknowledges, Psalm. 51.5.
Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me. No
less the Lawgiver himself has taught, inioyning the chastest and holiest
mothers purification, and sacrifice upon their conceiving and bearing children.
Leuit. 12.


In sorrow we are borne in respect of causes both procuring and effecting; the
procuring causes are either the loss of good things, or the hold that evil
has taken on us. The first good we have lost is our own integrity, both of
essence and ability: of essence, whereby, at first by connaturall and
vncounterfaited righteousness we were confusion to the apostate Angels; but
now by doleful alteration we are a shame unto our selves, not with rebellious
spirits only, but with the vilest insensitiue creatures being compared. Ah,
how do those malicious supplanters insult and triumph over Adams fall!
Wherefore if Thamar unwillingly and therefore innocently, 2. Sam. 13.19
Virgins apud S. Aug. Ciuit. l. 1. c. 16
having lost virginity, yet wept so bitterly, and others, rather then they
would lose it, have deprived themselves of life; most just reason have we, that
of original glory our selves have stripped so wilfully.

The loss of that other integrity, which we call existence or ability, is that
total corruption of our most pure and perfect nature; so that of those things
wherewith before it was both beautified, and strengthened, and delighted,
almost nothing does remain, but all contraryes in their places are come. Let
thine imagination propose unto thee, some body now fair, and clear, and
strong, and nimble, and by exactest symmetry of parts and colors, and
lineaments proportioned: anon exanguished, some part blew with stripes, other
with wasting agues waxen pale; a third through corrupted humors ouerspread with
vermin, alcouered with ulcers, with issues of matter, loathsome to the eye,
and intolerable to smell through stinch, not able to lift up it self, not to
be approached for help of any other creature; cast out, forsaken, and
abhorred, which sometime was in high esteem amongst the best and honored.
This, even this in respect of that which was, is our present case.

And yet a greater good we all by ods have lost, The King of heaven his favor;
for how should the holy admit unclean society? For thou art not a God that
has pleasure in wickedness, neither shall evil dwell with thee the foolish
shall not stand in thy sight, thou hate all workers of iniquity Psalm. 5.4.5.
. None we justly count more wretched then those who sometime have been kings
delights, but after even to scullions are in derision: whom ere while all men
saluted, all men coveting their presence bowed before them, blessed them; but
now, as known enemies of the common good, they hate, abhor, despise, and
execrate. Hester 1.
Vasthi thrust out of the kings bed, having no place no not in the kitchen, for
making and adorning whose couch before, all the precious things of the
Provinces scarce sufficed; yet those, of late her waiting mades, allow her not
admittance into their presence. Consider also Haman Hester 3.^. etc.
even now the man without compare, honored of the king, and with the king alone
admitted to the banquet of the queen, yet by a sudden turning of the wheel
hoist on his gallows of fifty cubits, prepared for his proposed enemy.
These indeed scarce ever could enough be lamented by the subjects of these
changes, or their friends; yet were not there condigue repentance to be
remembered at the mention of those tears, our fall deserved: there a Queen and
here a courtier, are cast out the favor of a king, but whose breath was in his
nostrels Psalm. 118.
, but who himself within a moment might as another more powerful after him,
be cast, not only out the kingdom, but even from all society of men Dan.
4.33.
, into the place, and form, and company of beasts: but we by our demerit are
expelled from the place and presence, fellowship and Sonship of the everlasting
Father, the almighty God, the incorruptible and unchangeable, King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords.

Hereto add, of what privileges and benefits, both bodily and ghostly, our
whole kindred is disfranchised: For so when any is found in leas-maiestie,
obnoxious to Princes, is deprived not only of favor before enjoyed, but also
of every right and benefit even to fire and water, as the Proverb is. And as
touching our bodies whose food before, all but one, the trees of Eden were;
the fowls of heaven, and beasts of earth, and fish in the sea for service: and
whatsoever else the elements have, for holy sport and sinlesse recreation; not
one the least of these, now they use but for price, or else by stealth. The
Lords his ransomed by price, and that no less then the blood of God; the rest
without right, abuse them by injurious robbery, and shall when the Judge sits,
receive the recompense of their fellonie. As for the soul, while the body used
the creature, the Creator himself was her possession, whose habitation from
the beginning by the coeternall Wisdom, Pro. 8.31.
was with the sons of men. But now Esaias 63.10.
He is turned to be their enemy, and does fight against them. O loss beyond
all loss! o mischief likened by no damage! How many shall you hear relating
upon every meeting their loss of some ship or goods, a part or whole; but of
losing God no more then if they never had had interest in him? Of those losses
so they speak, as they that seem somewhat to themselves, and would to others,
that sometimes they had such things to lose; but this, that as from themselves
without all hope of once recovering for ever God, as loss they do not once
record. Iud. 18.24.
Micaiah could bewail the loss of Idols: how much more meet were it to lament
the denial of the true and only God? Careless Genesis 27 34.
Esau wept aloud with a great and exceeding bitter cry, not quite for losing,
but for missing the chiefest place in his fathers blessing; but we alas have
lost our Father himself, who can refrain from tears? He for failing of a
worldly pre-eminence, but we deprived of heaven, and our Father the maker of
heavens: yea and that other esteems absurd to be demanded, what he ailed: The
gods which (says himself) he made being by violence taken Judge. 18.24
from him; but how much more absurd is the wilful abdication of God the former
of all things, not bewailed?

Finally, with God against our will, we have left our native soil, because
against our selves we have forsaken God; therefore against our minds we depart
our habitation. Ier. 2.31.
Has a nation changed their gods? which are yet no gods (says the Lord:) But
my people have changed their Glory for that which does not profit. For the
elected, because beloved nation, has forsaken the True, cleaving to them that
are not. Therefore their land cast them out, because they had denied their God;
and us all guilty of like offense, had Paradise now for ever spued out,
because we had provoked God, if the clemency of the selfsame God had not
succored. It indeed mercifully relieues, giving hope of some return, yet we
poor exiles justly mourn in misery, during this our absence. Romans 8.23.
Our selves which have the first fruits of the Spirit, even we our selves
groan within our selves, waiting for the adoption, the redemption of our
bodies Romans 8.38.
. AEneas and others long since expelled their country, might carry with them
their supposed gods, whom they had not offended; but we to whom was known, and
to worship granted, the only God omnipotent, do sigh, knowing our selves but
strangers here, and void of God (were it not for Christ) whom we have
provoked. O pleasant soil and fruitful season, and delightful air of native
Paradise, by fault of ours, not thine, from thee we sons of Adam banished are!
Garden of God, plantation of the Highest! with what tears shall I bewail, not
thy desolation, (for thou art blessed, not laid waste by the reiection of the
corrupted sinner, and sin corrupting, as also was the mother earth, by
washing off infecting flesh therefrom) but sorrow for the unhappy case of our
whole race, expelled from thy felicity! Herefore the holy Prophets, Esaias 16.9.
Esaias and Ier. 48.22.
Jeremy, wash Iazer and Sibma, Heshbon and Elealeh with their tears. O men of
God, who shall to me impart some part of your abundant wailing, for the
foreign Moabitish land? you all bewatered a country full of naughtines, that
you might so purge it; but I, first, that land most holy before my coming, by
me defiled, most pure, by me polluted: next, mine own fall deserved but most
distressed casting thence, that it might be cleansed. Some Stella in Luke 7. ex
72. interpretibus.
will have us to understand from a certain and much reverenced translation,
that which is not unlike, that Adam after his fall cast out of Eden, was placed
over against in the sight thereof, that by often beholding, the sorrow of his
sin might be increased. And no less surely I suppose from the original may be
said of Cain Genesis 4.16.
, (...)
the manqueller hated of the Lord, that there he (not without Gods ordination)
being separated from the face, that is, the favor of the Almighty, took up
his residence in the land of Nod. Woe is me that my habitation Psalm. 120.
also is prolonged in the land of Nod: whilst that, for violating the Highest
Majesty, expelled, behold I may, but not enjoy, those pleasures once
possessed. O hardness of heart, and emptiness of head, and dryness of mine
eyes, who for all this hardly shed some tears! I remember that worthless
multitude most like my self, come out of Egypt, a foreign, and to them
unfriendly land, Number 11.4.5.
to have wept most bitterly, within few days after departure, remembering the
melonsz and onions, cucumers and leekes, and fleshpots whereon they had fed
before; though without all love, yea with extreme hatred of the inhabitants,
and wearisome labor brought low: but I absent now hundreds, and thousands of
years, from that most natural, and fruitful, and delightful, and friendly
country, seldom and slightly sigh for it. O call not to my judgment the
inhabitants of 1. Sam. 30.4
Ziklag, who wept for the supposed loss of their wives and children, till they
could no more; they had lost their stuff, but their land remained: their wives
were gone, and their children taken, but without difficulty they might
contract new marriages with women of their own families, by which their
decayed expectation of posterity might be yet repaired; but to us both house
and land, gold and silver, and most precious jewels, and most familiar
fellowship of the holy Angels, never on earth as before to be recovered, was
lost in a moment. Again, I think of this same David, at that time almost
stoned as the cause thereof, at another time constrained to leave Jerusalem for
a season; yet with hope of safe return, covering his head, uncovering his
feet, though guarded with an army of valiant men, 2. Sam. 15.30.
Weeping as he went up by the ascent of the mount of Olives. 2. Sam. 15.30
And grieve that I never enough reprove mine own stupiditie, and sloth, and
dullness. O let us all set before our selves as one of the Ancients S. Ambros.
well advises, that Adam thrust out the garden, Genesis 2.23.24.
kept out by Cherubim, and edge of flaming sword, which turns every way to
keep the tree of life. Observe our wretched father, with Eve the mother of her
husbands misery sent out, looking back, desiring, but not daring to return,
somewhile coming trembling wise, soon by the looks of the awful Angel,
terrified, departing; then accusing his wife, imputing to her alone the loss
of all the plenty, and pleasure, and ease of Paradise: her in silence that had
abused her tongue, with tears and sorrow, alone her self condemning; and him
again, looking home, reflecting rebukes upon himself, at lenght but late,
acknowledging his folly in too much facility to a woman. Finally, both at
length far removed, that now they may not breathe into that air wherein
erewhile, they had all hearts desire; yet in sight confined within some
territory, from whence they may, as from afar, looking, be moved to think
what land, what Lord, what liberty, what honors, what friends, and riches by
their own unrighteousness they had lost: And this esteem in present to be the
case of each of us.

Thus far now of the good things lost, yet not of the evil ensued; of the
gifts whereof we are despoiled, not of our punishments inflicted. Which if I
could as easily, as I may truly and woefully express, a day would not suffice
briefly to relate them. In the soul for knowledge, has ignorance taken place,
for wisdom folly, for righteousness iniquity, impiety for holiness: And
in the body for foundnesse rottenness, for health sickness, for strength,
feebleness, for swiftness, stiffness; a living death, for constant life; a
death beginning at our entry into the world, passing along amidst the manifold
changes of our few and evil days Genesis 47.
: perfected at length when we go off the stage, but never ended, except to them
that are in Christ. So that we are at first loathsome seed, in the middle
brittle clay, at last worms meat. Cherish the flash never so much, flesh it
is: and if you consider diligently what issues by the mouth and nose, and other
passages of the body, you will confess, (as a devout S. Bern. me. ditati.
cap. 3.
man said,) A viler dunghill you never saw. If you could relate in order all
its miseries, how with sins it is laded, wrapped in vices, itching with
concupiscence, possessed of passions, polluted with illusions, ever prone to
evil, inclined to all naughtiness, you should discern it, full of confusion
and all shamefulnesse. What is more worthy of tears, if you consider the best
condition of these present things? and if you will foresee what after? The
grape S Bern. ser. san Cant.
once pressed affords no further liquor, but with perpetual dryness, as salt
vnsaunrie, after is condemned: Like so the flesh by deaths press, for ever is
dried from all delight, neither ever again recouers strength or stomach for
former wantonness. Heretruly me thinks I may assume, the Prophets words: The
precious sons of Sion comparable to fine gold, Lam. 4.2.
how are they esteemed as earthen pitchers the work of the hands of the
potter! And a little after, V. 7.
Her Nazarites were purer then snow, they were whiter then milk, they were
more ruddy in body then rubies, their polishing was of saphir: but o what
change their eir visage is blacker then a cole? V. 8.
they are not known in the streets, their skin cleaves to their bones, it
is withered, it is become like a stick.

As for the Princes favor which once we had, now to the tyranny of hellish
fiends our kind is subject. Can the mind of man with patience behold the seed
of. Adam miserably serve their lusts? Egyptian bondage is a shadow compared
with this: for they in brick and stone, in clay, and chafe, and stubble, but
those material, but earthly, and therefore either measurable and so
tolerable, or as that Stoike Seneca in Epistolus, and in libro, Qua re bonis
viris, mala eueni ant.
said, extreme, and so in short, cutting the thread of life, ending pain, and
doing disgrace away: yet God, so soon as his people came into the promised
land, commanded they should be circumcised, doing the shame away that still
remained, saying, Josh. 5.9.
This day have I rolled away the reproach of AEygpt from off you, wherefore the
name of the place is called Gilgal, (rolling) unto this day. Whereby may be
coniectured, what shame from Satan they have got, who are taken captive by him
at his will 2. Tim. 2.26.
. Does any of you with vnwatered cheeks behold his son, or brother, nephewe,
or near friend, caught out of your company, fettered with chains, bound to
the galleys, wanting bread, cruelly beaten, by Turkish ungodliness, detained,
abused? But if we could look about us and behold, much more basely, slauishly,
cruelly, our brethren at the pleasure of unclean spirits, now as it were with
cudgels beaten, driven up the dangerous hill of pride, anon compelled over
steep rocks to cast themselves, upon sharp pikes of many offenses; sometime
them of high descent filling and emptying swine troughes with the prodigal in
drunkenness and gluttony: Others with Sampson, in stead of horse or asses,
grinding in the mill of the fleshes uncleanness, (which all and thousands
such slavish conditions this present age affords in filling of men's lusts:)
then should we sure acknowledge necessity of tears. What is here, not base,
laborious, bitter, shameful and lamentable? yet these things daily without
tears (I wish without laughter, without puffing up, 1. Cor. 5.
as at the incestuous Corinthian, without rejoicing in such things of naught)
we daily see: Amo. 6.30.
certainly if nothing else, yet this it self to extort some tears from the
eyes of a reasonable mind were all-sufficient.

I will not here record what sorrows are come in place of the joys of
Paradise, a cursed earth for the blessed garden, thorns and brambles for the
tree of life, weariness for strength to labor, poison in steed of food,
rebellion of beasts, against the obedience of all the creatures.

I will omit banishment in place of dwelling, for plenty scarcity, and torments
present and to come, which already partly on other occasions we have touched,
and partly shall in better season speak after, on better occasion. At this
time, this only will I say, nature has excellently instructed us, necessity
of weeping, brings forth into the light all mankind with lamentation: Nudus
bumi sacet infans, indigus omni Vitali auxilio, cum primum ad luminis aura^
Nixibus ex aluo matris na tura profundit. Vagituque Lugubre locum complet vt
aquum est; cui tan tum restat transire malorum. Luer. li. 5
one Zoroastres the Babylonian, natures a duersarie, and witchcrafts author
alone excepted, whose laughing at his birth imported wickedness of life,
surpassing all that man had yet invented Plin.
.

The effecting causes of sorrow in our birth, are the renting of our mothers,
whom before we had burdened, so far nature witnessing our vipereous
generation, Matthew. 3.
because of sin, which poyson-like we bring into the world. And the crushing
of him that is borne, to show how Jesus for our sins must needs be pressed,
as a cart which sheaues Amos 2.13.
. Finally, to conclude the necessity of nature as man is borne of sin in
sorrow, so unto labor as the sparks fly upwards Job. 5.7.
Sore travel has God given to (the best of) the Sons of men, to be
exercised therewith Eccles 1.14.
.

The necessity from corruption of our nature, another follows by virtue of
commandment, to wit, of God, whom as our maker to obey is the first
necessity, whose commandment on every creature has imposed inevitable
necessity of being and abiding according to most absolute decree Psalm. 33.
Psalm. 148. Psalm. 119.
; neither shall man be able to frustrate what he has said Voluntas Dei fiet a
nobis, aut in nobis. August.
, for either here we shall weep willingly obeying his precept; or after, late
indeed, but yet the longer, being compelled by execution of that word on us:
either here we must in the inward light of the living, or after in the utter
darkness of the dead. Now Gods commandment is contained both in the old
Testament and the new: of the old both in the law and the Prophets: in the Law
it is enjoined, by feast appointed the tenth day of the seventh month for
afflicting of their souls. Numb. 29.7.
By a statute for ever (according to the letter of the Law, Leuit 16.31.
during the Laws continuance, and according to equity of the matter, when the
Law is abolished) and this under penalty of the offenders cutting off from
among the people. Again, Leuit. 23.29.
it is employed in the bondwoman, Deuteronomy. 21.13.
her iniunction to bewail her father and her mother a full month, that so she
may be an Israelite his wife: That is, that we who were strangers and sinners
of the Gentiles, Gal. 2.15.
might be presented a chaste virgin unto Christ: 2. Cor. 11.3.
so he has commanded in the Prophets, Ier. 14.17.
Jeremy, Ier. 31.17.
and Joel, Iam. 2.18.
for themselves and others, Joel 1.17.
whose testimonies before mentioned we need not read again. He has commanded
in the Gospel, by himself and his Apostles: by himself, Ioh. 16.20.
first to his own disciples when he had before herein set himself for their
example (for what as necessary he does commend, Ioh. 11.35.
its all one as though it were commanded.) Next his counsel is unto the
daughters of Jerusalem, Luke 23.28.
for themselves to weep and for their children. By the Apostles, Iam. 5.1.
in James, he has charged each one to weep and howl for his own miseries,
Romans 12.15.
and in Saint Paul for others.

Last, is necessity of the end, and that twofold, both escaping evil, and
obtaining good. The evil we shun is double, of sin, and punishment, of
sin in present: for as says Saint Chrysostom, Compunction of the heart
alone consumes and wastes all error of the mind, (for our speech is not of
fruitless tears) and what evils soever it finds therein, wipes out and blots
them all away: finds it there the flame of concupiscence, as an ouerflowing
river, straight it kills and quenches them: if it see a company of cares and
worldly perturbations, as with a whip it drives them out, and forbids them
access to the chambers of the soul, and as the dust stands not before the
wind, so no evil thought dwells in the mind where it abides.

The other evil to be escaped by tears, is sorrow and pain for sin,
signified by tears themselves; because where it is, it causes them by tears
(I say) to be wiped away: but as Bernard says, De Coe^ae D^mini, sermon.
How shall they be wiped from those that have them not?

The good by tears to be obtained, is of grace or glory. The good of grace,
that is to say, good works, can no more without tears (or somewhat answerable
thereunto) be had, then fruits without the waters. For all the just are trees,
who being planted in the midst of the present Church, should bring forth those
fruits that may remain. Ioh. 15.16.
But these grow not in vnwatered mountains. Bern. in sententij^s.
There are (as one says well) three sorts of waters that make or keep us
fruitful, first, inciteme^ts of the Scripture, which by threats and promises
stir up good will in man; then gifts of grace, which of a natural make a
spiritual man, teaching him for himself, commendable care and providence, and
leading into all truth, minister the fruitfulnes of good works: last the
showers of tears, which moistening with their dew the veins of right
intention, renew the root, that the tree may never die.

The other good bestowed on them alone that weep, is that which for
inequality of our vulgar language with the original, the learned interpreters
in our Lords words have rendered comforted; Math. 5.
which as the learned Clemens of Alexandria does observe, Cleme^^ Alex.
contains entirely a twofold benefit, of Consolation here where we are, and
Intercession above, where we would be. That consolation, David plainly in his
own person shows us to be the fruit of tears, saying, Depart from me all ye
workers of iniquity, Psalm. 6.
for the Lord has heard the voice of my weeping; that is, hearing my prayers
joined with tears, he has taken away my sin: therefore depart from me ye
sinners, of whom once I was, but now know that from your number I am exempted;
because for my sins God has given me tears, which of him never are rejected.
Tears give great confidence of our sins remission, and likewise of Christ's
intercession for us. Whereto that of John may happily in another sense be
drawn without offense: If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father,
1. Ioh. 2.1.2.
Jesus Christ the Righteous. If any man sin, and who sins not? but if any
so sin, that is, by tears before the Lord, pouring out his heart (as
sometime the blood of beasts before the altar) because of sin, he sacrifice
himself, then sure it is he has an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
Righteous, the sole oblation of whose body, Ioh. 1.29.
does expiate both his, and sins of all the elect: but who so in this wise
sins not, that is, knowledgeth not himself to be a sinner, or knowledging,
does not as the Apostle bids, Romans 12.1.
By the mercies of God, thus present his body a living sacrifice, holy,
acceptable unto God; the same has no part in Christ's intercession. Now to
conclude necessity, with the nature, most conveniently: Nas^imur in lachrymis,
lachrymis quoque vita madescit, and vitam rursus linquimus in lachrymis.
The Lord of nature, and God the giver, yea and rewarder of religious tears,
has himself ordained, that we in tears should come, and live, and depart
this world.

Necessity indeed does greatly of it self commend the subject, The vsefulnes
of tears.
yet profit and pleasure are the things whereby we are most persuaded. The
pleasure or delight of tears, De hac adhuc si placet vide Aug. Confess. l. 4.
c. 5.
I have in fit place before declared as I could; the healthful and manifold
use thereof shall therefore now succeed. For whether we respect our ghostly
adversaries, Col. 2.
even those that make the handwriting of Gods or dinances to be against us: in
figure of the flood of Egypt, Exodus 14.
they are overwhelmed. Amos 9.5.
For thus the Lord in Esaias speaks: Esa. 44.22.
I have blotted out as a thick cloud thy transgressions, and as a cloud thy
sins.

Or if we regard our friends or brethren in distress: S. Basil. con tra
calumnia^ (...), affert solatiu^ lugentibus suspiriorum societas.
Fellows in tribulation are the afflicteds co^solatio^. This does the purpose
of Jobs friends show; how ever the effect answered not: Job 2 11.
For they had made an appointment together, to come to mourn with him, and to
comfort him: that is, to mourn with him; that by others partaking the burden
of his grief, his shoulders might be a little eased thereof.

Next add we the use thereof in respect of us. For first, they are auailable
for inward consolation; insomuch as Joy fitly comes after sorrow, S. Bernard.
in Came. sermon. 68
like as after labor rest, the haven after uracke by sea; securenesse is
acceptable unto all, but most to him that has lived in fear: to all the light
is pleasant, but more delightful to him that is come out of darkness; to have
passed from death to life, doubles the benefit thereof. Finally, as more
moderately, so more healthfully and joyfully after tears we dilate the spleen
with divinely applauded laughter, whereof it is written, When the Lord turned
again the captivity of Sion, Psalm. 126.1.2.
we were like them that dream: then was our mouth filled with laughter, and
our tongue with singing.

Another profit we have by them, is for testimony, yet to God I mean, not to
men, for whose testimony good men are not much solicitous. For Tears (as
speaks that pathetick Doctor) are witnesses of the spouse her love; S.
Bernardon Caena Them. ser. 9.
to whom her beloueds absence is a flood of tears; while as she seeks, but
finds him not; Cant. 5.6.
she calls, but he gives no answer: nothing she delights to do, but weep. And
for this purpose, Whatsoever is mournful, into her soul she heaps together.
Finally, the allowance of this witness, is testified by that difference, put
by the Lord himself, Luke 7.
betwixt the Pharisees banquet, and the distressed sinners tears.

Moreover, no less the floods of tears lift up the soul from the gulfes of
worldly lusts, Genesis 7.17.
then the deluge of waters, the Churches Arc. For Hanna the religious mother
of holy Samuel, after weeping, triumphantly being exalted, makes her boast in
God, saying, 1. Sam 2.1.
My heart rejoices in the Lord, mine horn is exalted in the Lord.

In whom also as easily (though in figure) may be seen, that plenty of
fruits follow the showers of tears: for she before barren, has borne now
seven. 1. Sam. 2 5.
(And yet this while in letter we hear but one, unless that one, because of
worth, be equalled unto seven; as by the heathen, one Plato to a thousand.)
Hereby that Theoreme of nature, appears also to hold in grace: Aristot. hist.
animal. 7.
That the rain from heaven is more fruitful then those that from the lower
wels are divided unto the lands; that is, The Churches tears are more abundant
in good works, then all inferior ordinances and motives of earthly
commonwealths.

After these, is still our benefit, but in respect of God, a most convenient
way of seeking him. For this by the Prophet, himself does promise, showing the
Israelites of God, Gal. 6.
and Jews in spirit, Romans 2.
their access in the time of grace: In those days, Ier. 50.4.
and at that time, says the Lord, the children of Israel shall come, they and
the children of Judah together, going and weeping, they shall go and seek the
Lord their God.

But what were it to seek, if we should not find? The next is therefore, that
by weeping, in constant seeking, Christ with his Angels is seen himself; which
by another example, that serious penitent Marie Magdalen, after all other, both
men and women, persisting in seeking him, who^ she found not where she saw him
laid, as the holy Evangelist Saint John records, in these words, Then the
Disciples went again unto their own home, Ioh. 10.10.11.
but Marie (namely she that first visited the sepulcher in the morning, Ioh.
20.1.
and after returned with the Apostles) stood without at the sepulcher weeping,
and as she wept she stouped down, and looked into the sepulcher, and sees two
Angels in white, sitting the one at the head, the other at the feet, where
Jesus had layen. And after a little she turned her self back and saw Jesus
standing. When her soul in mourning, was no less then her body, bowed down
unto the dust, Psalm. 44.
then sees she him standing that is the conqueror of death, who^ lately even
dead, she had beheld laid in dust.

The last profit of mourning, (and if it be lawful so to speak) the first is
Gods, namely by delivery of the distressed out of trouble; for boldly, yet not
untruly faith that Father once and often already named: S. Bern. in Cant. sermon.
68.
Think you our God shall have his entire and glorious praise, until they come
who shall in presence of the Angels sing, Psalm. 90.15.
Make us glad according to the days wherein thou have afflicted us, and the
years wherein we have seen evil? from whose praise if they be wanting, who
may say, Psalm. 66.12.
We went thorough fire, and thorough water; but thou broughtest us into a
wealthy place. I will add, if they be wanting, Apoc. 7.
from whose eyes he may wipe all tears, the tokens of their former sorrows,
in sign of changing mourning into perpetual, but most gracious mirth: when
Esays words shall be fulfilled, of them long expected, long since uttered by
him in this wise, Esaias 35.10.
The ransomed of the Lord shall return and come to Sion (first in the Church
on earth, but more magnificently in heaven) with songs and everlasting joy upon
their heads, they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing
shall fly away.

The Proverb is, Transition. Omne tul^t punctum, etc.
He is able to accomplish all that mixes profit with his pleasure; but our
meaning is at this present to join power to profitablenes. To speak therefore
of ye efficacy of tears, which was fourth amongst the heads, propounded to be
treated touching them: If you will call them showers or storms from above,
they hinder the attempts of devils, which besiege the City of God, quenching
all their canon shot; for tears are the effects of faith whose virtue is to
quench the enemies fiery darts. Ephe. 6.16.


Or if you tearine them cataractes, or falls of water from the highest
mountains, they press and crush what e're lifts up it self against God, 2.
Cor. 10.5.
of which perhaps a little after he here complains; Psalm 42.7.
whence is truly said, S Bern. festo omnlum sanctorum, sermon. 1.
A stubborn horse is tamed by the whippe, and a rebellious spirit by shedding
tears.

For rivers and brooks carrying with them what ever lies in the way, at length
ouerwhelming the very walls and bays opposed unto their violence: hence that is
to them asscribed, which is near unlawful to attribute to a creature, that by
the^ a man in wrestling prevailed with God. Hos. 12.4.
He had power over the Angel and prevailed, but how? he wept and made
supplication unto him.

Or if we say, they are pure waters of some silver stream, in which the
letters otherwise vnlegible, are perceived. Bern. de Coena ser. 12. Lachryme
dicant quia voces explicare non queunt, Naso. Lachryma pondera vo. cis habent.
Flor. lib. 1. c. 22.
For if the drooping soul cannot declare her mind, tears shall supply, where
the tongue is tied. Or if that which is intended by weight of arguments must be
enforced, tears are the weightiest words: wherewith Veturia unarmed Coriolanus
her son, now ready to batter the walls of Rome. To Antipater co^plaining
grievously to Alexander of his mother, he returned this answer, Know thou
not o Antipater that one tear of a mother will blot an hundred injurious
letters?

Will you style them bathes? the hardest ice will speedily resolve being cast
therein, such as they say, Stella in Luke 7.
was the heart of the first most sinful, and then most mournful Mary
Magdalen. For in these is a hot resolving quality, issuing from the mines, not
of black sulphur, or the like, but of the precious and celestial gold, of
wisdom inspired by God.

Are they called noble wines and generous, that makes men confident; Spes iubet
esse ratas.
and they give great confidence toward God: which in one of David's words,
evidently appears, where to the Almighty he dares to say, Hold not thy peace
at my tears. Psalm. 39.1^. Ephr^^^ de comp^^^cti^ ne ho^^. 4.
What is, hold not thy peace at my tears? I know (says he) O Lord, thou art a
righteous Judge, none (I know) can deliver out of thine hand; Job 10.
I know thou will judge the quick and dead, Romans 2.
thou will strictly judge the sons of men for every idle word, Mat. 12.
upon every secret, Eccles. 12.
though lightest thought; I know thou will come and call the nations from East
to West, Psalm. 50.
to heavens from above, and to the earth beneath, that thou may judge thy
people. And I to my self am conscious of manifold offenses; Psalm. 38.
yet this I also know, that thou art merciful. I know that tears and troubled
spirit are to thee most acceptable, Psalm. 51.
because these thou have commanded, and these are sacrifices, wherewith thou
art pleased: Therefore I pray, do not remember my sins, and forget my tears,
for so should I not be able to stand, Psalm. 130.
but rather remember these, forgetting those. So shall I not fear to come into
thy presence, when the thrones of Princes are cast down, Dan. 7.
and thou art set the Ancient of days, with garment white as snow, and hair
like unto the purest wool; upon thy throne a fiery flame, with wheels as
burning fire, from which the fiery streams shall issue, and come forth from
before thy face, when thousand thousands shall minister unto thee, and ten
thousand times ten thousand shall stand before thee; when judgment is set, and
the books are opened, out of the which all dead shall be judged according to
the things written therein. Then shall be discovered the iniquities of us all,
and mine amongst the rest: but if for them my tears in thy presence shall
appear, Vide efficacissimam his iusmodi deprecationem in Anacreonticis
Damasceni. (...), etc. (...), etc.
their accusations shall be void, and their guilt undone. Therefore thus
confidently I request, hold not thy peace at my tears.

Finally, if by art you will perfect nature, and rank them amongst those which
stillers skill makes and calls strong waters, Maximus Taurinensis sermon. hiem. de
poenitemia Petri and ostiaria, hom. 3. Qui etiam est inter sermones diui
Ambrosij, nec non S. Augustini, sed falio, illius enim, no^ c^iusuis horu^
stilu^ redole^.
able to break through that which hammers lightly do not burst: for Weeping
has some pre-eminence of praying: which Peter converted by his Lords looks,
taught others by his own experience, breaking forth in tears, without request
of words: For we see his tears, but do not hear his voice: we read his
weeping, but no mention of his speaking. Justly indeed Peter wept in silence,
because that which is bewailed, is not wont to be excused; and what cannot be
defended, yet may be washed away: for tears can cleanse the offense, which
shame forbids us to confess: so tears are careful both of credit and
salvation, not ashamed to seek, and sure to obtain in asking. Tears I say
are silent, and yet effectual prayers; they ask not pardon, and yet obtain
it; they make no plea, but find mercy. This difference there is, the prayers
of tears are more auailable then of words: for speech in prayer perhaps does
lie, which tears cannot; speech often times does not unfold the whole business,
but always tears declare the entire affection. Therefore now Peter uses not
speech, Inuertio quod fleuerit, non inuenio quid dixerit: lachrymas eius lego,
satisfactionem non lego.
wherewith he had sinned, wherewith he had lied, wherewith he had denied the
faith, lest thereby he be not believed in confession, which erewhile denying he
had abused. Therefore had he rather lament, then plead his cause, and confess
with tears, what he had denied in words. And yet see further what Peter has
profited in tears: He fell before he wept, Ibid. paulo infra.
but after he is confirmed an Apostle; and he who before his tears, proved a
transgressor, after, of Gods flock is made a Pastor, and receives others for
instruction, that had not before guided well himself. The same also in that
holy penitent is proved: For we read she wept, but not ought she spoke: We
read not (says one) what in words she uttered, Stella in Luc. Luke 7.
but what she did. For the kingdom of heaven is not obtained by words, but by
good works. A rare miracle is to be seen in her washing with her tears the
feet of Jesus. For often we observe the earth watered by the heavens, but
inuerting natures laws, we never heard the earth bewet the heavens, and yet
that here may be beheld: if we conceive the maker of heaven, above the heaven.

So great a good are tears, Impediments of weeping.
and yet how many evil lets thereof, hardly shall one severally relate; but
their sources, or head fountains, shall here be pointed at; too strong each
one alone, for this same naughtiness, which if in one they do concur, they
resist with more forciblenesse. Them in this order we will digest: first,
Division of lets.
speaking of the natural; then of those which occasion breeds. Amongst those,
natural dullness has his place; which being of those evils that are bred in
man, makes senseless them in whom it rules: which vice, Pierius Hieroglyph. l.
30. c. 2.
by the skillful in nature, they pourtray in that fish, which for this purpose
is called Slothfulness. Torpedo Plato, (...).
This creature casts poison, of temper extremely cold, which when over weeles,
or lines, or angle, or spear, it has run, stupifies the strongest arms
that holds any of these, deluding all their fishing: so whatsoever affection in
man has need for to be stirred, by such heartlesse laziness is overwhelmed.
Whence David so often intreates of God he would quicken him, Psalm. 119.
after his judgments, in his laws, in his righteousness. And as one that had
devoured Opium, or some destroyer of the vital heat: Lighten mine eyes, Psalm.
13.3.
lest that I sleep the sleep of death.

This is accompanied with another vice as hurtful as it self, namely, the
neglect of our own salvation; which has dwelt in man since he cast away
himself. Now where the end is neglected, what care is of the mean expected?
He that cares not for prosperity, what trouble will he undergo for having it?
He that loathes not filthiness it self, will never for cleanness danger his
life, by washing in the river. If any delight in botches, and neither smells nor
feels contagious ulcers, seldom will he endure for health to be lanced, and
seared, and cut.

Like to this, or the cause of this, is ignorance of God and of our selves. For
he that neither knows himself to be unrighteous, not that God does hate and
revenge iniquity; neither Gods mercy, nor his own misery, neither how
shameful is his present life, nor how fearful estate remains him, in vain
shall you look from such for tears and lamentation. Hence all speech for this
effect, to most men is ridiculous and vain. This time (as wrote the most
famous Christian Orator) we neither feel in our selves the piercing sorrows,
S. Chrysest. de compunctione cordis, l. 1. paul ab initio. 1. Tim. 6.
nor admonish others, but are like corpse fairly adorned with vestments
outwardly, but inwardly with long consumption of grievous sickness wasted: Or
as the Frantic, who speaking and doing many shameful things and dangerous,
are neither ashamed, nor frayed awhit, but rather glory, seeming to them selves
scunder and wiser then the best: so we against health doing what ever we do,
not so much as account that health, which we want. If the weakest disease
stir the strongest of our bodies, strait, Physickes help we seek, and
laitish (as the Prophet speaks) gold out of the bag. Psa. 46 6.
But for this purpose, silver is too fine to be weighed in the balance: The
soul is daily torn and wounded, burnt, and utterly endangered, and yet no
care is had. The cause of all is, that all alike of this sickness we are
possessed. As where all without exception have some one bodily grief, very
want of thought consumes them all, while no man ministers the healthful, nor
forbids the hurtful things: so we all languishing, some more, some less, are
one and other destitute of sense.

Oblivion is next, and not unlike. For know a man that himself not only
descrues wrath and hatred, but also is adjudged to shame and pain; yet if by
interuention of other things, he let the remembrance of those to slip, it is
all one as though he had never known. For vnremembrance of evil, is falling
of sense out of the soul; which Lemuels mother intimates, bidding, Plo. 31.6.7.
Give strong drink unto him that is ready to perish, and wine unto those that
be of heavy hearts, that he may drink and forget his poverty, and remember
his misery no more. And familiar instance does illustrate it: when the eues and
robbers arraigned and judged over night to die the morrow, by company of their
mates, with Tobacco and wine become so careless, as if they were repriued from
death for a thousand years. This we see, and wonder at others forgetfulness,
and say, If it were our case, we should not be unmindful of so certain and so
present death: and yet our selves with like or other delights bewitched, scarce
ever think, the like estate is ours. For since once it was in Adam said to us,
Gen 3.30. S. Chrysostem. in Genesin.
Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return, the sentence is past on every
of us, and with our sentence we are sent to prison, shortly after to go to
execution; only with this difference, that they commonly, between their doom
and death, have from the earthly judge the assured respite of a night; but we
from God the Judge of all, have not the certainty of an hour.

From these there springs another evil, as hurtful as the rest; for many
Pharisees not discerning, or not remembering their own wretchedness, remit
tears to publicans and harlots, as not beseeming them, or deserved of
themselves: let David and Peter, and Marye, and like trangressors weep, as for
us, we are not tainted of any criminous offense. Amos 6.
So sing they to their organe, Dan 4.
and boasting of the Babel, which their own conceits have built, glorying in
their riches and increase of goods, and need of nothing, Reu. 3.
not knowing that they are wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and
naked. Such as once fell out of the castle windows, to the bottom of the
deep, though after exalted much higher then before in the house that stands
upon the rock, Mat. 7.
they think had need by reason of their former fall still to weep: Psalm 40.
as for themselves, yet swimming in the waters, sometimes taking hold, yet
never entering into the house, Revel 13.1.
that stands amidst the seas: Revel. 17.15.
they know no cause of forrowing, as long as their head is aloft, though
sudden waves; may drive them once for ever out of sight.

These, of many hindrances we have observed in nature, but if we give good heed
we shall find custom in number or power of evil, will not be behind; or sin
cleaving to us from without, give place to that which is bred within us. Where
first much business offers it self, the bane of all godliness, which not
only possessing, but also distracting the soul never lets it thoroughly intend
the matter of salvation. This in Martha her many things he implies, Luke 10.41.
who was not so much ignorant as unexperienced of bodily employments, Christ I
mean he that sweats much, exhaling the matter (as some think) of tears,
leaves the less for them.

As hurtful as this is the company of others, especially of such as are
destitute of joyful heaviness; which Peter has taught by his example, Luke
22.55.56.
who being scarce gone out of the garden, wherein floods of tears did run,
scarce turned his eyes from off the cheeks, whereon the furrows of their
impression might be seen, and entered amongst the multitude of the high Priests
household: but straight from the eyes of his mind are gone those tears, whose
salt sweeteneth as yet the worlds bitterness.

Hereto be added, two extremes, contrary to themselves, and to that virtue,
which opposes both, namely, overmuch both joy and heaviness. For, as says
Saint Gregory, Mor. l. 9 c. 44. Sicut enim moderata afflictio lachrymas
exprimit, ita immoderata subducit: quiae maror ipse sine maerore sit, gui
afflicti mentem de norans sensu^ doloris tollit.
and experience shows, moderate affliction produces tears, and excess
withdrawes them, because grief it self is void of grief, which swallowing
up the afflicted mind, takes away the sense of pain. This is it the Apostle
says he feared in that Corinthian, 2. Cor. 27.9.
lest perhaps such a one should be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow.

On the other side, I call excessive joy not by intention of the truth of it
self, but by supposition of the occasions falsehood, when men against charity
rejoice in iniquity: 1. Cor 13.
which how little semblance it holds with tears of godliness, needs not so
much, as is easy to be showed. They have no where less residence then in one
heart, together: the one are from God, the other of the world; the one grieved
at worldly things, the other gladded: the one is puffed up with the possession
of things transitory, the other is straightened by defect of things eternal.
Finally, it is unfit the glutton enjoy the daintyes of the holy beggar, neither
can suit in any sort, that Iesabel and Elias, Herod and John, Caiaphas and
Christ, be partners in joys celestial, that are so far fundred in the
temporal.

Lastly, he cannot lament his own misery that strives indeed to resist his
own pernicious way; but yet is weakened by frequent motions of his fleshly
desires: Greg. Moral. 9.44. Qui prauae quide^ consuetudini contraire nititur,
sed tamen succrescentibus adhuc carnis desiderijs grauatur.
Arise he would but cannot, he strives, and promises his fealty to the one
master, and performs it to the other, reaches to the one his hand to be lift
up, mean while the other whispers him in secret, the labor of rising, and the
ease of rest, who seeing as he supposes that rest is good, Genesis 49.5.
consents unto it.

The effect, and end, and sum, and consummation of all these, is induration,
hardness of heart, not only the let of this, but also the bane of all other
divine graces; no otherwise hail consumes the vine, or blasting corn, or the
green herb is eaten of the caterpiller, then this wild beast makes havoc of
all that touches heaven, souls health, or God himself: in whomsoever any of
these bears rule, (because this leaven is in all those lumpes) hardened they
are in manner of a flint, or as ice congealed of cold.

Transition to the helps.
Whose hardness (if possible) with God our purpose is for to resolve, for which
end some helps I proferre, respecting mind and memory, Division.
and action, which together concurring may move the affection, the certain
fountain of all clear waters of this kind.

To the understanding this pertaines, to know this is the time of weeping and
after laughing, this of mourning, that the time of dancing may succeed (as
speaks ye Preacher) present sadness is the mother of expected gladness.
Besides, Eccl. 3.4.
the comparison of things lost unto these present, implies so much, Gregor.
Nyss. in Ecclesiast. hom. 6.
before was neither death, nor sickness, nor these pernicious words, Mine and
Thine: for as the Sun, and tho air, and which is most, the word of God, so
then the earth and things therein were common: but now alas of property and
possession of the basest elements is sprung the most unsavory root of
avarice, besides the envy in men of low estate, with pride and hatred in the
higher, and other plagues of mankind, in stead of honor then equal to Angels;
in stead of supercelestiall contemplation, in stead of confidence to Godward,
and partaking of divine beatitude vnutterably, by the express image glistering
in the soul, is come in place, a swarm of woeful evils and perplexing
calamities, like as waspes. What mischief will you first bewail? the
shortness of life, and pain beginning in tears and ending? or wretched
infancy, the dotage of old age, the inconstancy of youth, the labors of
manhood? or the burden of wedlock, the solitariness of single life, in want
of children, decay of name and memory; in having them, perplexed care of
nursing, teaching, training up, endowing, placing, enriching them, sometimes
the sorrow of losing them, the envy of wealth, the pains of poverty? I pass
by the various kinds of natural diseases, of outward damages from men, from
beasts, from devils, which every man has in possibility, having them in
condition of his nature. Leave we the fury of lustful love, that stinking
puddle, with all that madness wherewith therefrom man's heart is filled; the
pain of coughing, spitting, and other eiections, (that we may not seem to
inueygh by reason against that life that is employed in making dung.) This
plainly is most worthy to be lamented of every prudent man, that when this
living shadow, or shading life is gone, then straitens us the fear of
judgment, and flame of fire, which shall devour the adversaries of God.

It is another help to know the difficult entering that gate of heaven. If the
multitude of Israel so bitterly lamented and wailed so mournefully, hearing but
a misreport of hard entering their country Canaan, that lifting up their voice
and crying they wept all night, Number. 14.1.
much more it behooves us that are taught both by our Lord his sentence, and
our own experience, how strict that gate is, Mat. 7.14.
and the way narrow. This they never feared till they came near it, they
feared not because they knew it not, but upon some knowledge, the conscience of
their sins denying hope of Gods presence, in a moment fills their heart with
fear: so many careless in this wilderness, while being borne of Gods
providence, as on Eagles wings, their garment is not worn, nor the latchet of
their shoe waxen old, Prou. 1416.
Raging like fools are confident, but at deaths approach, hearing with who^
they are to skirmish, fearing the entry, without true hope of help, they begin
to fear and murmr, that ever they came near the border of Gods inheritance,
and then they weep in vain, who if they had wept in time, should have changed
now the voice of weeping, unto that of triumph. O man how will thou be able
without danger to pass through the air, the region of contrary powers and
Principalities, who here, as in thy proper habitation, art not able to
gainst-stand, one of their least assaults by sin.

As for the memory, therein I would persuade thee to have ever three things
especially, Bern. Sermon. de honesta vita.
What thou were, what thou art, what thou shall be: stinking sperme, a vessel
of excrements, and meat of worms; besides that, thou art borne in sins
uncleanness, live in the filthynesse of vices, and die in the bitterness
of ungodly deeds. Who shall give to mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I
may bewail the miserable entering of man's condition, Innocentius de vilitate
conditionis humane.
the culpable course of man's conversation, the damnable departure of his
dissolution? Therefore with tears I will consider whereof man is made, what he
does, and what shall be done with him: formed is he of clay, of dust, of ashes,
of that which in a sort is yet more base, of loathsome seed, conceived in
itching of the flesh, in heat of lust, and stench of luxury, and which is
worse, in uncleanness of iniquity: he is borne to fear, to labor, to pain,
and that which is more miserable, to death; he does wicked things wherewith he
offends God, his neighbor, and himself: shameful things wherewith he
polluteth his fame, his person, and his conscience: vain things whereby he
neglects profitable, necessary, and comely things. At length becomes the
fuel of fire, which ever flames and burns vnquenchably, the food of a worm,
that ever gna^es and eats immortally: a mass of rottenness which ever smells
and stinkes most horribly. These ought we with attentive mind, and present
memory always meditate, so to good purpose should the understanding wretched,
Boe^thius. Plus miser est sapiens, quam rusticus miser scitenim causas
exaggerate dolendi.
in sense be more wretched then the ignorant, knowing and remembering how to
amplify the causes of lamenting, which the other either knows not or forgets.
Amongst all these yet are our sins the cause of all the rest, most worthy to
be thought upon, and with their guilt and shame and filthy baseness ever as a
statue to be set before our eyes. Would God mine were in secret before my sight
as high and broad as Nebuchadnezers Image, set up for worship in the plain of
Dura, Dan. 3.
I know not who now living has less cause then David so to do: whose sin
(as says himself) was ever before him. Psalm. 51.3.4.


The other help of memory in this behalf, is the often remembrance of those
that mourn, in so much as we learn though not most rightly, yet most easily
by example: which when in it self it cannot presently be had, next is that by
remembrance the damage of absence be supplied. So Jeremy by remembrance and
considerance of the people of Gods affliction prouokes himself to weep: What
thing shall I take to witness for thee? Lam. 2.13.
what thing shall I liken unto thee o daughter of Jerusalem? what shall I
equal to thee, that I may comfort thee, o virgin daughter of Sion? For thy
breach is great like the sea, who can heal thee? Woe to them therefore that lie
upon their beds of Iuorie, Amos 6.4.5.6.
and stretch themselves upon their couches, swimming in all the other waters of
voluptuousness. But they are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph. 2. Sam.
11. v. 11.
Vriah the Hittito abhorred to go unto his house, sober or drunk, (though
advised by the king) to eat and to drink, and to lie with his wife, while the
Arc and Israel and Judah abode in tents, while Ioab and the servants of his
earthly Lord encamped in the open fields: and shall not we prove degenerous
Israelites, if hearing how the tabernacles of Edome and the Ishmaelites, Psalm.
83.6. etc
of Moab and the Hagarens, how Gebal and Ammon, and Amalek, the Philistines
also, with the inhabitants of Tire, and Ashur joined with them, have consulted
together with one consent, and are confederate against the Lord: how the Kings
of the earth set themselves, Psalm 2.
and the Rulers take counsel together against the Lord, and against his
Anointed, against the flock of his pasture, not saying now let us break their
bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us: (which long since they have
not feared to do) but now taking crafty counsel against his people, Psalm.
83.3.4.
and consulting against his hidden ones, they have said (in whose person no
less then of those nations, the Prophet may well seem to have spoken,) Come
and let us cut them off from being a nation, that the name of Israel may be no
more in remembrance. If we I say, while God hereby calls us to weeping and to
mourning, Isay 22.12.
be so far therefrom, that we give our selves to fleshly joy and earthly
gladness: if when by supreme authority also under God, in Gods stead we are
called to fasting, a special help of healthful contrition, then we turn to
killing of oxen and slaying sheep, Isay 22.
how dwells the Spirit of God in us, I. John 3.
seeing our brethren stand in need, and yet shutting up the bowels of our
compassion from them. God persuade us better things, not in conceiting of our
s^lues, but by serious practice in us. But thou o God whose is the cause, Psalm.
59.5.
Awake to visit all the heathen, and be not merciful to any malicious
transgressors. Psalm. 74 2.
Remember this congregation which thou have purchased of old, the rod of thine
inheritance which thou have redeemed, this mount Sion (thy Christian Catholic
Church) wherein thou have dwelt, (even during those days wherein Christ in her
was hid from the eyes of man) lift up thy feet unto the perpetual
desolations: Psalm. 157.7.
(at least by their intention, who say, Raze it, raze it, even to the
foundation thereof) even to all that the enemy (the man of sin these
thousand years) has done wickedly in the Sanctuary. Remember O Lord that now
long time right rauenously thine enemies have roared in the midst of thy
congregations, (these western Churches) they have set up their ensigns of
papal keys and supposed ship, and triple crown, of primacy, and
universality, and many such, for the signs of him that is set up for an
ensign to the nations. Esaias 11.11.12.
A man sometime was famous according as he had lifted up axes, Ps. 74.
(of sound speeches) upon thick trees of Gentilisme and Iudaisme, Tit. 2.8.
Tit. 1.9.
and diverse heresies, Act. 14.
as did Paul and Barnabas, Act. 17. etc.
Paul and Silas, Irenaeus and Cyprian, Arnobius and Lactantius, Clemens and
Tertullian, Saint Augustine and Jerome, with hundreds more, transporting the
goodly Cedars, and firres, and palm trees, for the building of the holy
Temple. Psalm. 74.
But now they break down the carved work thereof at once with axes, and
hammers of profane disputings, 1. Tim. 6.5.
of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth: they have cast the fire
(the contentions of words) into they Sanctuary, they have defiled by casting
down long since the dwelling place of thy name to the ground; and now, they
have said in their hearts, let us destroy them together: but now o Lord awake,
arise at last, Psa 79.12.17
and render unto our enemies seuenfold into their bosom, Psalm. 89.51.
the reproaches wherewith they have reproched the footsteeps of thine Anointed;
so we thy people and sheep of thy pasture will give thee thanks for ever.

The furtherers of tears in regard of action it self shall be considered in
the substance and circumstances thereof: of circumstances the manner is first,
that namely it be orderly either ascending from inferior things, or descending
from the higher; either from our own baseness, or from Gods magnificence,
proceeding in order to the other, which both in David's Hymns it is easy to
observe, and we by some resemblance may illustrate in two Mary's mentioned in
the Gospel. For Mary Magdalen began standing to wash Jesus his feet with her
tears, Luke 7.38.
and after is said to wipe them with the hairs of her head and to kiss and
anoint them, which could not be done without bowing of her self: but another
Marie, the sister of Lazarus and Martha, we hear first she sat at the feet
of Jesus, and heard his word, Luke 10.39.
most like after arose because of the reverence she gave unto it, for so was
the ancient manner of hearing the Law, Nehe. 8.5.
and so long after the Fathers Sermons witness, S. Chrysostom.
they used in the Eastern Churches.

The place to be chosen for this purpose, had need to be most retired, lest
either the repinings of ungodliness hinder the fruit of holiness, or favor
of the religious pervert it to hypocrisy. Hence our Lord enioynes, that those
that pray betake them to their chambers, Mat. 6.6.
and shut their doors, praying to their Father which is in secret; and the
effectually religious wishes, O that I had wings like a dove, Psalm. 55.6.
for then would I flee away, and be at rest, lo then would I wander far off,
and remain in the wilderness. Therefore also another Prophet says; Ier.
13.17.
My soul shall weep in secret places for your pride.

For this purpose also serves the silence of the night, when no color by the
eyes, nor any noise by the cares, or object of others sense disperses the
intention of the mind. Therefore the watches wait for the Lord, as witness
the Prophets, both David and Esaias: Psalm 63 6.
If I remember thee upon my bed (faith the one) and meditate on thee in the
night watches. Again, I prevented the dawning of the morning, and cried, I
hoped in thy word* mine eyes prevent the night watches: that I might meditate
in thy word. Psalm. 116.147 148.
And (the other) With my soul have I desired thee in the night, Esaias 26 9.
yea with my spirit within me will I seek thee early: So by another Prophet,
the Lord enioyneth the city which he calls to repentance, Lamen. 2.19.
Arise, cry out in the night: in the beginning of the watches, power out thine
heart like water before the face of the Lord. For darkness by its proper
likeness, striking horror into the mind makes a commotion amongst the
affections, which as in the sea, the moving of the Moon* causes an
ouerflowing of the waters. Therefore not only watching of the soul, but also
of the body is needful: as David says, I watch, Psalm. 102.7.
and our Lord, watch and pray, Mat. 26.41.
and S. Paul, watch thereunto, Ephesians. 6.18.
that is, to prayer, for which we require tears, and S. Chrysostom says,
Tears in stead of gemmes were the ornaments of David's bed.

As for the substance of this action whereof we speak, for it is required the
absence of some, and presence of other things. The absence, or more properly
the omitting of emploiments so far as for this end is needful. For thus the
Lord says himself Be still, Psalm. 46.10.
and know that I am God. To this is that he does command, Deuteronomy. 15.19.
not to plow with the firstling of an ox, nor sheare the firstling of a
sheep, which were holy to the Lord, in figure of our oblation by that kind of
first fruits of his creatures. I am. 1.18.
Yea truly how contrary is too much of employment, how good soever, to
spiritual contrition or rejoicing (the only springs of this we speak of)
experience too plainly proves.

The things whose presence is required, are many; of which these are chief,
the author enioyning, the cause effecting and the object procuring. The author
I speak of, is God, whose looking that is, whose pitying is the first mouer,
as of every other, so of this religious action. So Peter's tears baptize his
sins: For then (says Rauennas) Peter, Sermon. 107.
that is, every repenting sinner, is wont to weep when the Lord looks upon
him. Luke 22.61.62.
And the Scripture says, The Lord turned and looked upon Peter, and Peter
remembered the word of the Lord, how he said unto him, Before the cock crow,
thou shall deny me thrice: and Peter went out and wept bitterly. Bitterly he
wept, that bitterly had cursed: he wept bitterly, resolving the gall of
bitterness by the heat of the two great lights, his Lords eyes: for it is
written, Pro. 20.^.
The King that sits in the throne of indgement, scatters away all evil
with his eyes. Psalm. 34.
Now The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous. Pray we therefore for that
righteousness, that uprightness of heart, which the Lords eyes may not
disdain to look upon: especially when we stumble and fall, For who sins
not? 1. Kin. ^.
So may we indeed be cold, but never so congealed, or our fountain dried, but
some of these waters from our eyes may slide.

The nearest effectual worker, is that Spirit that in the beginning moved upon
the waters, Genesis 1.
and moves to the end what ever was formed of those waters, that is, of the
unformed matter, so void as yet, and yet so capable of any form as water.
Whether not absurdly by certain manner of expounding, that of the Psalm is
drawn, He causes his wind to blow, and the waters flow. Psalm. 147.18. (...),
Spiritu^.
For Spirit and Wind in the noblest languages, have a languages, have a common
name.

As God enioynes and the Spirit moves, so fit object exceedingly prouokes the
mind to mourning, and the eye to weeping. Cape apud exteros lachry marum
bierogly phicu^, vnde Bias inuitanti ad amicitiam, tetrice, (...), dicuntur in
(...), a clandedu oculu.
It may be fitly compared to musterd or onions, or other like, which by
natural austeritie and tartness stir the humors; whence next to the
imploring of Gods furtherance, and entertaining of the Spirits motion, we had
need to frequent those outward helps, that find such hardness in our selves.

That object (for distinctions sake) let us call Presentatiue or Subiectiue:
that subiectiue which may in its own consisence be set before our outward eyes
such as are others sufferings, and what else by sight occasions sorrow; Ioh. 11.
such as was Lazarus his tomb unto his sisters, Ioh. 20.
and Christ's to the other women. So the afflictions specially of the Saints,
scarce is credible how easily they cause to weep, so many as with affection do
behold them. For man's mind by nature is inclined to mercy, upon the sight of
that which is in misery. Whence rightly John Chrysostom advises each man to
be his own almner: Tom. 5. Sermon. Quod dispensatio tuarum rerum, non sit alteri
committenda.
For they who commit unto their servants, or burden their Ministers with the
distribution of their goods unto the poor, not only deprive themselves of the
recompense of that ministry, (for it is one thing to empaire thy substance,
Act. 6.
another to officiate Saint Stephen and the holy Deacons their office in
distributing) but also of the fruit of compassion and grace. For this I may
affirm of all godly Christians, joyfully bearing their masters cross, which
he spoke of the true Monks, that is, the retired solitary ones of that age,
they are as lamps of light in quiet havens; in their cottages, I mean, or
couches, or where ever they lie under the hand of God, holding out, as it were,
torches, and in their own abasement with blazes of heavenly light, directing
all those that daine for to approach them, that they may not split on the
rocks of pride, or sink in the shelfes of fleshly lusts and earthly desires.
Therefore it is the Wise man says, It is better to go to the house of
mourning, Eccl. 7. 24
then to go to the house of feasting. And again: Verse. 4.
The heart of the wise is in the house of mourning, but the heart of fools is
in the house of mirth. For as we laugh with wantons, so shall we weep with
the^ that weep: having put on the bowels of pity. The most certain seats of
tears (says he) are monasteries: but to touch this by the way, not of begging
Friars. For even there he says, They are such as cannot beg. Neither were they
rich and wealthy persons, able to sustain themselves and others, of whom he
speaks, Act. 20.34.35 2 Thessalonians. 3.18. Ephesians. 4.28. Vide Basil. constitus.
monasticaru^. c. 5. item in regulis breuioribus Responsio. ^1. Item Macharium
in honrily^s, August. ad fratres, and passim alios.
It is a great work and laudable, to visit and consider the poor; but of
those that labored with their hands, working that which good is, as the
Apostle requires of all Christians; and all writers of those times, can give
witness to the ancient monasteries, that they sustained themselves, and
relieved others.

This by the way. Next help of this kind, is, that we call for those that
skillful are in mourning, of whom we may learn our selves to weep. For as it
is a work of charity to go our selves to those that mourn; so it is a cause
of spiritual profit to call for them, who by their example can teach others
this affection. Thus God himself gives counsel in the Prophet: for, Thus
says the Lord of hoasts, Ier 9.17.18.
Consider ye, and call for the mourning women that they may come, and seek for
cunning women, that they may come, and let them make haste, and take up a
wailing for us, that our eyes may run down with tears, and our eyelids
gush out with waters. And a little after: Hear the word of the Lord, V. 20.
O ye women, and let your ears receive the word of his mouth, and teach your
daughters wailing, and every one her neighbor lamentation. In which words the
Prophet teaches, both that those women could by example teach to weep, and
that others learned by their company. Lib. 2. co^mu^. in Jerem. Varroni and
Nounie Mar cello dicuntur praefica qui^ praeficisbantur ancillis, quas flere
d^cebant, fueras he cantatrices 2. Paral. 35.25 tibicines, Mat 9.23 (...)
They (says Saint Jerome there) are wont in weeping with doleful voice, and
striking their arms with their hands to provoke the people to wailing. This
custom (says he again) as yet remains in Judea, that the women with hair
about their eyes, and maked breasts, and voice tuned to that purpose, provoke
all to weeping. And this (as I conceive) is the chief, if not the only cause
why the Lord in solemn fasts, assembles not only Elders, and such as
understand, but also bids, Gather the children, Joel 2.16.
and those that suck the breasts: yea and otherwhere enioynes the beasts their
fast; Jonas 3.7.
not that the service of such insensible or unreasonable creatures is pleasing
unto God, who delights only in our reasonable service; but because by sight
of such, Rom 12.1.
those that are endued with actual reason, are the more themselves affected.
Now if you ask, who are these so skilful of lamentation, as to teach others?
Who else, say I, but those that by the hand of God have learned themselves?
Those with whom God according to their measure, deals after the manner of his
only Son, who was a man of sorrows, Esaias 53.3.
and acquainted with grief. Those who at length by constant exercise, have put
on Paul's affection, saying: Who is weak, 2. Cor. 11.29.
and I am not weak? who is offended, and I burn not? Those that can say with
David: Psalm. 73.^4.
All the day long have I been afflicted, and chastened every morning.

The presentatiue object of tears is such, as cannot in the present with
bodily eyes be seen, but presented by the mind unto her self: this besides
the misery of our present case (whereof before under the head of necessity)
is of death, or day of judgment. That hour of death now imminent, let never
depart out of the spirits sight: remember now o man thou have already attained
the eleventh hour of thy life's day, Ephrem de copunctione.
with what diligence thou had need to bestirre thy self, that at last thou
may be found to have wrought one hour in thy masters vineyard: consider now
what necessity does urge, to steer thy bark by Gods direction: for time of
sailing is at an end, (tormes arise, and tempests come, the winter is at hand,
and occasion calls: Hither o sluggard, show what thou have gained thy Lord by
trading all thy life! Alas what fear distracts the unprepared at the time of
death, what dread the slothful, when body and soul must part, to receive
first asunder, some part of that they have earned together: what torment then
takes hold of him, who while time served, neglected the care of life? O my
soul what then will be thy thoughts, when nothing thou shall be able to
speak; and most strict precept, without reuersing delaying, or appeal shall
bid thee to go out? When virtues Worthies, beholding the sweat of their
labors, and fastings, and watchings, shall leap for joy, because the soul
goes to her long desired, and expected rest: and the body to quiet sleep in
hope of resurrection. Then must needs fear affright the careless, seeing no
good, but their many evils meeting them: and when they shall behold the
terrible officers, which in the bodies they have obeyed, ready to receive their
souls out of them, then shall they fall, and rise no more.

After this will much avail often remembrance of the dreadful day of
judgment wherein the thoughts of all hearts shall be disclosed, Romans 2.
and whatsoever is hid shall be revealed, which now most part we do conceal
not only from others, but even from God (if it were possible) and from our
own hearts: For as in the month of April, Macharius hom. 12.
both wholesome roots and poysonable discover themselves which in the winter
were not seen, so then the private prayers, and alms, and fasts of all the
elect, before God and his Angels shall be published to their praise, and the
secret villantes of all impenitent offenders shall (as in the Prophet) be set
on the top of a rock, Ezeck. 24.8. and 26.4.
lest they should blood, or waterlike sink into the ground. For which purpose
I shall not be unwilling to relate, what upon the same occasion sometime a
religious man, uttered in his own person. For coming out a certain morning
at the gates of Edessa in Syria, Ephrem Tom. 1. sermon. 1. de compunctione.
beholding as he looked up that cristalline heaven, like some resplendent
looking glass, with all the stars most glorious shining on the earth,
musing-wise, thus spoke: How shall the Saints shine in the glory of their
Father, whose beauty is but figured by these? but I (said he) destitute of all
commending virtues, and adorning graces, presenting to my mind the horrible
appearance of that awful judge, with thousands of his Saints, the splender of
whom one alone is able to dazell all sinful eyes, in body and mind affrighted,
and utterly amazed, thus admonishd my self? How shall I unjust transgressor
appear in that terrible time, and dreadful day? how shall I stand before the
tribunal of the mighty judge? I puffed up and proud what place shall I find
amongst the righteous? I have lived a goat, how can I on the right hand be
placed with the sheep? how shall a fruitelesse tree abide amongst the Saints,
whose boughs their fruit sway downward? or when in the court of heaven the
Saints shall knowledge and take acquintance each of other, who shall vonchsafe
to speak to me vile wretch, who with them here have entertained no fellowship
of suitable conversation? The martyrs shall present their wounds and torments,
and practitioners of religion the ensigns of their virtues; what can I
present, but spiritual pride, and shame, and sin? Good were it, that each of
us spent many our thoughts, that wander (we know not whither) in this kind of
questioning; for sure the heart that herewith is exercised, while it is so
employed shall never be hardened: Punge oculu^ me^tis, vt prodeat lachryma
compunctionis. S. August. ad fratres ser, 11 Ioh. 11.33. with 35.
if such thorns often prickedour eyes, we should doubtless sometime bring
forth tears.

Hereto add hearty sighs and groans of spirit, which in our Lords example
are tears forerunners: and most agreeable to Job and David's practice, who
weeping most frequently, witness of themselves the one, Job 3.24.
My sighing comes before I eat: and the other, Psalm. 102.5.
By reason of the voice of my groaning my bones clean to my skin. And
experience teaches, that tears by these are stirred, even as the waves of the
sea by winds.

David's Psalms also and such other dittyes with convenient modulation, S.
Chrysostom. de dispensatione reru^, etc.
are able to dig up wells of such pleasant waters: for no outward thing more
powerfully moves the affection then harmonye, because as the learned say, man
in all his parts is formed by exact proportion, both heathen Histories of
Hellene and Alexander, and many other do witness the power of moods affecting
and inclining the mind according to their temper. And the Scripture often
exemplifyes it; for singing men and singing women, provoke the people to
lamentation over King losias, most renowned for religion. 2. Chr. 35.25.
And Elisha will be stirred up to prophecye by a minstrill. 2. Kin. 3.15.
So Saint Athanasius, Conses l. 10. c. 33. and l. 9. c. 67. Basil. Aug.
Chrysostom. and alij in Psalmum 1. and in proamijs psalm. morum.
and especially Saint Augustine witness in their own example, and the learned
Fathers have observed. The whole body of divinity is therefore by the Spirit of
God written in verse.

Here is not to be omitted, the reading of the Scriptures. For if as the Lord
speaks, Ier. 23.17.29
his word he a hammer that breaks the rock in pieces: Then doubtless the
waters shall gush out as by the rod of Moses, Exo. 17.6.
and as a fire; so much more effectually it shall distill them, as the power of
God excels all chymicall art of man, so only reading be with attention.

Finally, meditation of the works of God especially of his mercyes that endure
for ever, 2. Chro. 5.13.
which makes oftentimes the Saints with great admiration to exclame, Job
7.17.18.
Psalm. 8 4.
Psalm. 144.3.
what is man that thou art mindful of him, and the son of man that thou
visitest him! Comparing his glory, and grace, and goodness, with their own
vile estate and unthankfulness: this is it that which David sings, Psalm. 92.4.
Thou Lord have made me glad thorough thy work, I will triumph in the works
of thy hands.

For right use of all these very helpful is John Chrysostomes advice, De
compunctione. l. 1. paulo ab initio.
To draw back, and keep back from outward things, even the outward senses as
far as ever you can, that so you may depart far from the perturbations and
fluctuations of all visible things, breaking through into that inward silence
where nothing interrupts the search of thoughts: we must exclude the images of
outward things, which into the soul as into a pump the senses carry: I mean
not, quite shutting the senses or depriving them of use, but turning their
intentions unto supernall things. Like as some grave matrone and severe
mistress, being about to make some precious ointment, awakes her maids and
calls them her self, and having shut her self and them within, enioynes one
to hold the scales, that with due weight and measure each spice with other may
be mixed, knowing the compound will prove unprofitable, wherein due proportion
is not kept: another she sets to break and bruise the several kinds, lest any
hardness or asperity should hinder the mixture: she appointes a third which
serves to separate the gross and finer from one another. The fourths
employment is to mix all and make one mass: she commands a fifth to stand by
with some box of alabaster or the like; and so restraines the rest each one
unto her task, not suffering their senses, any whither to stray abroad, lest
the intended work should be hindered. Thus plainly it behooves every one to
do, that will prepare this precious ointment and grace of tears. three other
places, now coming to mind, yet observed by experience, to give great
furtherance. First a containing even of the body, so much as may be, in one
place: this Seneca has commended to his Lucilius to be first preparatiue for
his moral wisdom: and others shall find, if serious purpose make use of it,
it is as needful, so very helpeful to devotion. The other is fasting, and the
third silence, so useful that he who has not learned to charge himself
therewith, has scarce from a far saluted the most retired, inward, and
spiritual works of religion. The ancient Christians write of these at large,
specially of the two last; from them if leisure had served, I would have
borrowed what I should have found best fitting our present subject, but must
for this time remit the learneder to the authors them selves, and pray the
unlearned, to accept with patience what God has enabled me to do for the
present.

Bernard they are threefold, Bernard. Epiphaniae sermon. 3. in fine.
of Repentance, of Confortation (or strengthening when the soul burns with
desire of heavenly things) and of compassions. Hugo puts three kinds of them,
Tom. 2. ser. 28
who walk mournfully (and fruitfully) before the Lord of hoastes: Isay 58.
Some for remission of sins, others in the sweetness of grace, the last in
desire of glory. Tom. 3. ad imitationem prouerbioru^ in fine.
Ephrem the Syrian comprehending the evil, says well: Some are for the loss
of present things culpable; others of piety, commendable; a third sort of
impenitencie, vnremediable, to wit as the Scripture speaks, in utter
darkness. Others yet part them otherways, and I thus, (speaking only of the
right religious.) Tears are cither for Gods cause, or man's: for Gods cause, in
respect of others, or our selves. Of others, namely those by whom he is
dishonored; of our selves, in that he is not so honored, as he ought, and we
desire.

For who that loves the Lord, Psalm. 119.158
can behold the transgressors, and not be grieved? because they keep not his
word. Is there any drop of Christ's blood, that hears without offense, the
reproach thereof, and rending of his wounds? Or is he a member of the
spiritual body, that sees with patience, the whipping by reproaches, and
tearing, by oppressions of the rest? The vessel of choice, cannot mention
without tears, Philip 3.18.
the enemies of the cross of Christ. We know what befell good Heli, (though
too indulgent to his sons) and to his daughter in law, the godly wife of a
godless Priest and husband, because the glory was departed from Israel, 1.
Sam. 4. v. 18.19.20.
the Ark of God was taken: and how often it fares with the religious in heart,
upon such occasions.

Yet have we no smaller reason from our own failings, in the performance of
his service: unless we will be rather censurers of others works, then
dischargers of our own duty. This makes the Apostle with bitter lamentation to
bemoane himself, Romans 7.
Wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? The
conscience hereof causes so many confessions and fasts of the peculiar people,
when God vouchsafed them religious governors, exciting and going before them in
such works of piety; grieuing most themselves, that by themselves, their
fathers, their Princes, and their Priests, his name had been dishonored among
the Gentiles: For instance whereof are Hezekiah, Josiah, Ezrah, Daniel, and
Nehemiah. And experience witnesses what sorrow godly men have in heart when
they cannot by the works of mercy so liberally, nor by prayers and thanks so
chearefully magnify as they would, him whom alone they love, saying Whom have
I in heaven but thee alone, Psalm. 73.
and there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee.

The cause of shedding tears on man's behalf, is either common, to wit, the
iniquity and misery of all our kind whereof I have already spoken, or
special: and this again twofold, either it is from our selves, or others. Our
own cause of weeping, yet is double, namely of sorrow, or great joy, which
some of the Ancients by a figure gather of Calebs answer to the suite of his
daughter Achsah, she asked springs of water, and be gave her the upper springs
and the nether springs. For spiritual tears shed in joy, are for the
abundant grace descending from on high, but in sorrow for sins committed here
below.

As for the former it is no wonder, if for joy of finding him that was lost the
father wept, Luke 15.
the son that was dead now revived be thus affected, that wished of late to
be accepted as a servant, but is now more entertained then a son by the
superabounding favor of a most tender father. August. de sanctis ser. 45
Lachryma exigit bonum opus, lachryma commendat bonum opus.
Thus do all the people of God, giving thanks for the grace of living well:
whence one truly says, By tears good works are obtained of God, by tears
again they are commended unto God.

Tears of grief are either from the sense of afflicting evil, or from the
want of good desired: evil again commonly is known to be of sin, or
punishment: sorrow for sin is either for the act, or for the guilt, that is,
either from the trouble of present and doubfull combat which we have
therewith, or from the conscience of former and known offenses. Who knows
what bitter grief to be fighting every hour of life, and yet never have the
crown till death; to conquer and quell, the enemy a thousand times, and yet
to fear as strong assaults as ever before? so that the wrestler though
conqueror, being wearied, Job 7.15.
Chooses death rather then life: as his cries imply, who prays, Deliver me out
of the mire, and let me not sink; let me be delivered from them that hate me,
and out of the deep waters, let not the water flood ouerflow me, etc. And a
little before: Save me o God, V. 1.2.
for the waters are come in unto my soul, I sink in the deep mire where
there is no standing, I am come into deep waters, where the floods ouerflow
me. And in another place, of the enemy, Psalm. 56.1.
He fighting daily oppresses me.

The other kind of godly sorrow which is for sin, is that wherein the sinners
heart is pierced with the stings of former negligence or evil done, whereof he
says, Psalm. 32.5.
When I kept silence, my bones waxed old through my roaring all the day long.
Psalm 6.23.
And again, O Lord heal me, for my bones are vexed, my soul is also sore
vexed. V. 6.
And a little after, I am weary with my groaning, all the night make I my bed
to swimm^, I water my couch with my tears. And in another Psalm, Psalm. 38.3.4.
There is no soundness in my flesh, because of thine anger; neither is there
any rest in my bonet, because of my sin: for mine iniquities are gone over mine
head, as an heavy burden, they are too heavy for me. So the Lady Paula
devout indeed (not as almost the best of this age, scarce in countenance, and
words, and gesture) in continual prayers joining night and day, filled, as the
Father writes, S. Hieron. in epitaph. Paul^ circamed.
that alleged lately of the Psalm, All the night long, etc. For in her you
would have thought there were wels thereof: so she lamented the lightest sins,
as though she had been guilty of the greatest. Who being often admonished by
them of like purpose, that were about her, to spare her eyes, and save them for
reading of the Gospel, was wont to say, That face is worthy to be fouled, which
contrary to divine precept I have often painted: That body shall be afflicted,
which has been given to much voluptuousness; long laughter must be equalled
with continual mourning, the soft lawnes and precious silks be changed into
rougher cloth of hair: I have pleased my husband and the world, and now desire
to be pleasing unto Christ.

As for sins we mourn past and present, so for punishments present and to
come. For feeling the one, and fearing the other, of evil suffered, he
complained, whose is that Prayer entitled, Psalm. 102. title.
of the afflicted when he is overwhelmed, and powers out his complaint before
the Lord, as the context thereof does tell: and otherwhere testifies his
weeping on this behalf, in these words: Mine eye mourns by reason of
affliction. Whence also Jeremy, though sanctified in the womb, Ier. 1.5.
complains: Wherefore came I forth out of the womb, Ier. 20.18.
to see labor and sorrow, that my days should be consumed with shame?

From which words, another inferres the bitterness of that other grief in
fear of hell, in this manner: If he thus spoke of himself whom God sanctified
in the womb, Innocentius de vilit^te conditionis humanae.
What then shall I say of my self, whom my mother conceived in sin? Woe is
me, my mother, (would I say) why have thou borne me, a son of grief and
sorrow? why died I not in the womb? come out of the belly, why did I not
perish presently? Why did the knees prevent me, or the breasts afford me
milk, that am borne for burning, and to feed the fire? Would I had died in the
womb, and it had been my grave for ever; so had I been as not been, carried
from birth to burial. From which fear, we may understand that deprecation to
proceed: Psalm. 143.2.
Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no man
living be justified. This fear how ever it ought to be by love expelled, yet
now and then it solicites even the best; and though of their weakness, yet by
the divine grace for their good. For, as says the Father', Augustine. ad
fratres ser. 11. Timor qui poenitentia^ concu^iscit, contritione^ parit. Esa.
38.3.
The fear that lusts for conversion, breeds contrition. Thus Hezekiah wept,
fearing death, that time, it seems, not assured of a better life.

The good desired for want bewailed, is either the grace of good works, or
glory of free reward. Tears for obtaining or retaining the rule of rightly
living, are those, whereof it is written, Psalm. 120.
They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy. And those, whereof it is said, I
wept, Psalm. 69.10.
and chastened my soul with fast^^g. Of this sort is the weeping of all
repenting sinners: as the Lord speaks of the Churches gathering, Ier. 31.9.
They shall come with weeping, and with supplications will I lead the^. This
promise of being led, implies those tears were joined with supplications, that
they might be led the right way, Psalm. 139.24.
The way everlasting, as the Prophet calls it.

In hope and fervent desire of future glory, doubtless David in this same
place especially lamenteth, as also father Simeon, Luke ^.
howeuer patiently bearing the delay, yet earnestly desiring the well of life:
Phil. 1.
so Paul; but our Lord especially being about to lay down his mortal life.
Ioh. 17.
This is it that Gregory says, Gregor in Ezekiel. bo^n 10. Ex intolerantia
g^udij^ ait Cassia^us, c^l^^^. 9. c. 28.
Some weep for fear, some in love, that is, in grief for deferring of glory
promised; which for this cause most wisely God deferres, that while desiring
long, we long the more, loving and enjoying we may the more esteem.

Weeping for others, is because either of the wicked their destruction, or
affliction of the godly. Of the former kind are David's tears, 2. Sam. 1.17.
for both his adversaries Saul and Absolon dead in sin: 2. Sam. 18.33.
our Lords over Jerusalem, ready to be lastly overthrown: Paul's over the
Corinthians, 2. Cor. 12.21.
that had sinned, but not yet repented, and other the enemies of the cross of
Christ: Phil. 3.18.
Samuels for Saul's abiection. 1. Sam. 16.1.
Finally, after this kind wept our Savior over the Jews, Ioh. 11.35.
Ver. 15.
raising Lazarus to life, that had rejoiced for the Apostles in Lazarus his
death. De Tempore, ser. 104.
What means it, says Augustine, that the Lord is said first to be glad in the
death of Lazarus, and after to have wept in the death of Lazarus? But observe
we the cause of joy, and the cause of tears: he was glad for the Disciples, he
wept for the Jews: he was glad for the Disciples, because by the resurrection
of Lazarus their faith in Christ should be confirmed; he wept for the Jews
incredulity, because neither when Lazarus was raised, they would believe in
Christ the Lord. To which purpose may be referred his charge by Jeremy, Weep
not for the dead, Ier. 22.10.
(for the dead in body alone) neither bemoane him, but weep for him that
goes away, (fio^ the communion of the Church which he seemed to have,) for he
shall return no more, nor see his native country: The heavenly kingdom,
whereof the people of God are all citizens.

Lastly, we may and ought to weep for the affliction of Gods people, as
Jeremy and many others for Josias dead. 2. Chr. 35 25.
2. King. 8.12.
Elisha foreseeing in spirit the desolation of Israel by Hazael; Job. 2.12.
and Jobs friends astonished at his calamity. For so shall we make our selves
partakers of their joy, partaking in their griefs; not being indifferently
affected, much less rejoicing or insulting over them that are in misery, as
is the miserable manner of some. The eye inflamed, Simon Magister, ^at. 12. ^n
fine.
is something pained by the softest medicine; and indifferent words may
oppress the mind, that with other calamities is already troubled. The
daughters of Israel by a custom went yearly to lament the daughter of Iepthah
the Gileadite, Judge. 11.39.40.
four days in a year, (even after she was dead) for her solitary life,
being addicted to perpetual virginity by her fathers vow: much more ought the
Saints, for and with one another in their life, who are by spiritual
coagmentatio^ one another members. These are last in order which are, but
ought not to be least in use. The heathen man has truly said, Tullius ad Heren
l. 2. n. 50 Partitionsbus or aetorij^s, (...). 57.
Nothing dries sooner then a tear, especially in another calamities.

These are the things for which healthfully and fruitfully tears are shed:
Conclusion.
wherefore let us sow them, not in the barren wilderness, but in ground
receiving rain, and rendering much increase. For the world is wont to weep for
the loss of worldly friends, Hugo Victo. t^^. 2. ser. 28.
as father and mother, son and daughter, brother and sister, kindred or
acquaintance after the flesh; but weeping for their dead, they weep not for
themselves: they lament the loss of earthly things, but never a jot bemoane
their spiritual damages. Is any sick in body, or dies out of it? His friends
mourn. He sins damnably, lives incestuously, calls his brother fool, his
eyes behold strange women, and lusts after them, not one bewailes him. O
unhappy health, blinded sight, dead life! for those things they mourn that
ought not to be moaned, and grievously lament that for which a little were
enough; but those things they do not lament at all, which of all most worthy
are. Yea oftentimes laugh because of such, of whom Esaias: Woe unto them that
call evil good, Esaias 5.
and good evil; that put darkness for light, and light for darkness; that
put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter. Let us lament, my brethren,
moderately the loss of friends, but more our want of good works, our want of
virtues. Let the unchaste lament the loss of his or her integrity, the proud
the loss of humility, the wrathful the loss of inward quietness, the
covetous the loss of bountifulness; the drunkards, the loss of soberness;
the dead of heart, the loss of spiritual rejoicing; the envious, the loss of
charity: for happy are those that now in repentance weep, for they shall
laugh obtaining pardon, next being clothed with righteousness and last and
most, received into glory. Which God grant us all, by his Son our Lord Jesus
Christ, Amen.

In the eight and last place of our proposal concerning this subject, The
diguitie of ^^ares.
remains to speak after our little holding measure, something of the dignity
and praise of this grace of tears, which even by the witness of them that are
without, Suidas. (...). S. Chry soft. Pieri^s hievoglyphicor^^ l. 4. cap. 43.
Visus e^am ^i^^eos manibus tract are lapillos, Vnio in his, latis gemma inimica
viris.
are precious unions. For the diuiners have said that those gems seen in
dreams portend the shedding of tears: Whereto some of the Church also do
accord, specially Chrysostom, whose elogie is of them, What is more beauteous
then those eyes, which glister with the frequent showers of these celestial
waters? No purple dye of Iesabels painting, 2. Kin. 9.30.
or renting of the face, as God himself does term it: none of Herod's
precious stones mixing colors with gold and silver set about, how ever
resplendent, reflecting the Sun beams, Ier. 4 30.
are any way save by contrary to be compared with these: Act. 12.
Eusebius. histor. l. 1.
for those how ever together with his oration they drew from the fickle peoples
mouth, a word of admiration, and commendation, as The voice of God, yet could
they not preserve him yet alive from the fretting and eating of worms, and
present stench intolerable. But these most fitly are resembled by the sweet
smelling myrrh dropping from the spouse her fingers, Cant. 5.
whose virtue is to preserve even the dead from putrefaction.

The penmen of the holy Scripture, to show us their esteem, from tears and
weeping have given names to diverse places celebrious in the Scriptures, as men
are wont to call new found lands by the names of their much respected and
loved Princes: of which number are Abel Mitsraijm, Genesis 50 11.
The mourning of the Egyptians, Iud. 2.5.
2. Chr. 35.25.
and Bochim weepers because of Israel: Zach. 12.12.
Esaias 16.9.
Ier. 48.32.
The mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddo, Genesis 35.8.
and elsewhere the weeping of Iazer, and at Deborah Rebekahs nurse her grave,
Allon Bachuth, the oak of weeping.

Here from, the holy Scripture not only commends men, but also sometime argues
their religion, in Paul thus writing to his Timothy: I thank God, 2 Timothy 1.
whom I serve from my forefathers with pure conscience, ver. 3.4.5.
that without ceassing I have remembrance of thee in my prayers, night and day,
greatly desiring to see thee, being mindful of thy tears, that I may be
filled with joy, when I call to remembrance the unfeigned faith that is in thee.
For the honesty of his tears employed the sincerity of his faith.

The excellent esteem that Christ himself has of them, is the cause why he
does compare his spouses eyes unto the fish pools in Heshbon: Cant. 7.4.
unfitly were her eyes compared to pooles, if they were not much bewet with
tears.

So great their glory is, that in regard of the sweetness of those streams
amidst which the Church on earth is planted, for certain respect one prefers
it before the high and pure hill of Angels habitation; for the joy that springs
from tears, or else from which true tears do spring, (for joy is either the
cause or effect of all religious tears) The heavens (says he) knew not but by
the children of the Church. Bern. in Cantica ser. 68.
For the Angels have from their beginning and for ever joy without all
experience of the contrary. The Church this while has them both in practice,
and shall hereafter esteem more highly of the one, having proved the other.

How worthy are those of all to be commended, which by God so choisly in his
bottle are conserved? Psalm. 56.8.
Most noble must needs be that wine which is laid up in the Kings privy
cellar, which under a special key is kept: the stopping and straining, and
drawing whereof, (if we may say it lawfully) the Almighty has vouchsafed, no
not to any celestial Minister.

O that my soul were another Ezekiels book, written within and without; Ezekiel.
2.10.
written (I say) with lamentations, and mourning, and woe. That I might be
found so forward to weep as I have been bold to sin, and such intention as I
have had in offending, so great devotion I might have in repenting.

Tears are that, which in her choicest children, the Church ever most
frequently has used: whither I hold may be referred, which in the mystical
writings is observed, those first Fathers of the faithful congregation; Genesis
26.18.
Abraham I mean, and Isaac, are ever reported to have dug wells, but
Philistines to have stopped them. So speaks the Prophet of the wayfarers that
journey toward heaven, Who passing through the valley of mulberries make it a
well. Psalm. 84.6.
How? but digging by continual contrition the wells, wherout they draw the
living waters of lasting consolation, they dig up fountains still, that as one
well it all appears: but Satan, and his Angels Philistian-like, stop them
with all their might, that Israel and Judah with all that join unto them, 2.
Kin. 3.
might for want of water, perish in the wilderness, wherethrough they go to
fight against incestuous Moab. So again it is recorded by a song, not as a
matter of an external letter, Nu^. 21.17.18
that the Princes of the people dug the well, they dug it with their
staves at the appointment of the Lawgiuer. I will with Israel, most gladly say,
Spring up o well even out of my hearts veins; so will I cheerfully sing unto
it, magnifying him that made it, and put water thereinto.

Even the Lord himself, of whose laughter in all his dispensation in the
flesh, we hear not so much as once mention, yet at least thrice is reported in
the Gospel to have wept, Luke 19.41.
for the Cities destiny, Ioh. 11.35.
for the Jews infidelity, Heb. 5 7.
for the acceptance of his own prayers with the Father; S. Bafil. Greg. Theod.
Johan. Chrysostom.
which observation is often, (I know not whether first,) in the Triumviri of
the Grecian Church, of their time. He wept, Aug. sermon. 104.
as Augustine preaches, That with his tears, he might blot out the sins of
the world, that he might abolish the handwriting of legal ordinances that was
against us, which was contrary unto us: for says he, Col. 2.
if Peter could with the shedding of his tears, wash off his spots
(ministerially) why should we not believe, the sins of the world are wiped
away, by Christ's, (virtually?) Finally after the Lords tears many believed at
Lazarus his resurrection; Vicit ergo ex part incredulitatem iudaeorum
Dominicae pietatis affectus, and discordes eorum mentes molliuit prima fusio
la^^ chrymarum.
so partly his piety overcame the Jews infidelity, and the profusion of
tears, first softened their rebellious hearts.

Blessed are these water floods, whereby every wall of sin is broken through
and ouerborne, Ex Augustino adfratres sermon. 11.
Wholesome waters that quench, and cast out, the poison of vices: a constant
lauare, which so often is able to cleanse, as man's heart, has need of purging.
This is beloved, the hear be of that heavenly fuller, wherewith he daily whites
his servants vestements, when they are fouled: this is the spiritual niter,
which being it self composed of the dew of divine grace, wipes out the blots
of our slippes; this the precious lixiuie, wherewith the inner man his head is
washed. This is the holy tear, sweet solace against our daily falls, which as
it were the vicar of Christ his passion, giving remedy against iniquity, that
thereby Christ may seem so often to die in efficacy, as the elect of God
comes into the deep. This alone is the health of souls, the remission of
sins, a spiritual sacrifice, acceptable to God, a burnt offering full of
marrow. Is the sinners heart humbled, and bewet with daily tears; this (says
the Father,) is a goad whereby God is inclined to man, the cord, whereby he is
strongly bound unto him: without which (says he) neither Baptism auailes
those that in ripe age receive it, and the Lords body, is taken to
condemnation: without which there is no fruit of hearing the word, no reward of
works.

Wherefore let none be void of tears (whom the dignity of the Israelitish
name commends) from the action, or affection, the exercise or desire, the
shedding or remembering them, no good man be destitute at any time, at
whatsoever solemnity, in whatsoever mirth, if so be he will prolong his
gladness to perpetual; whereas the word of truth tells, Pro. 13.14.
the other ends in heaviness, and without doubt unpleasant, vndelightfull:
wherefore the author and giver of all our joy, better providing for it, not
only appointed a fast of afflicting souls on the tenth day of the seventh
month, Leuit. 16 29
but also on every monthly, and yearly feast, appointed a goat to be
sacrifised, For remembrance of sin. Number. c. 28. and c 29.
Which also that pious penitent, seems not to have misknowne, presenting our
redeemer at the Pharisie his feast, with more welcome dishes of tears, then
all that cheer; the event also whereof approved the deed, when our Savior
indeed by open protestation preferred the^. Luke 7.
The like whereof again he exemplified in his own person: for coming in
triumph to the Town, Luke 19.
in a most celebrious manner, accompanied with the multitudes, cutting down
branches, strawing the ways, spreading their garments, crying Haleluiahs, and
Hoshangnahs to the Son of David, David's Lord acknowledged in spirit, wept
over them.

The third meditation of the chief cause of godly tears.

Thus by occasion of David's tears, I have digested as I could, the whole
subject of tears; next is, to consider the matter of David's tears in the
proper cause, which in this wise himself deciphers, While as it was said unto
me daily, where is thy God? For this is the other part of the verse, containing
the cause of that sorrow related in the former. This cause is declared in
terms, first more general, and then more special. This is the general
comprehension, While it was said unto me daily: which shows the injury in the
matter, person and time: the matter is in this, while it was said, whose
quality on the adversaries part, and manner of expressing by the innocent
injured may be considered.

Reproach grievous.
The kind of injury, that it is in word not by deed, saving that reproach and
unjust accusation is the mouths wicked work, and no less to be imputed to the
heart, then that which is acted by the hand; do then words grieve godly men?
Yes, no less the lips then hands, words the^ blows: nothing here we hear of
loss in banishment, of the fear of death no mention; the tongues offense
alone causes all tears, while it was said: For (as speaks one) Adagger
smites the body, Bernard de triplici custodia.
the soul is pierced by the tongue; a deadly dagger is an evil tongue,
striking three through with one blow, when as it smites the conscience of him
that hears, and wounds the charity of him that is offended, at once slayes
with it self both the other. This tongue verily, is a viper poisoning three
with one breath, a two-edged, yea a threeedged sword is this tongue. Their tongue
is a sharp sword, Psalm 57.4.
says the same Innocent in another place. Psalm. 59.7.
S. Bernard bids on his credit not fear to say, that such a tongue is more
cruel, then the spear that opened our Lords side: For (that I may add
something to his reason) it being thrust in at a moment, water and blood issued
out scarce an hour, but this both night and day draws out of the heart drops
dried with cares and fears unto the soliditie of bread: And as he says, This
also pierces Christ his side, and the member of his member, neither pierces it
being dead, but makes it dead by piercing. For if he had not preferred the
life of this body, which now is pricked and pierced, to that which there was
nailed, he would never have given that for this, to the pain of death and
shame of the cross.

Go to now you that say, S. Bern. in Cant.
speech is a light thing, words are but wind, the tongue of man is but a little
and tender, and soft flesh, what wise man will much regard it? True it is,
speech is light, for it runs, rather flies lightly; but it wounds heavily: It
passes lightly, but it burns grienously; lightly it enters in unto the soul,
but goes not easily out again: it is uttered lightly, but it is not so
recalled, it fires swiftly, and therefore suddenly wounds charity. The dead she
is a thing contemptible, Eccl. 10.1.
but it causes the ointment of the Apothecary to send forth a stinking savor.
The tongue is soft, but it is so slipperie that hardly it can be held; tender
and little in substance, but great and forceable in use; a little member, but
if it be not ruled, a great mischief: Thin, and broad, and long, an
instrument most fit to empty both the speaker and the hearers heart, easily a
man slips in his tongue, and as easily therewith he slides into another soul:
so that it has little auailed some to have bridled their own, while as they
have not shunned others.

And yet would God this plague could be so bounded, that it hurt but two; that
the contagion of it did not reach unto the wounding of the third, and
innocents, and upright persons. For hereupo^ not only David in this place, but
also in other, much agrieued, prays with all attentio^, both for taking away
reproach and contempt now present, and also for holding away the like yet
feared; and that by the weightiest arguments on both sides as could be used, of
his own obedience, and Gods clemency. For the one, Remove from me reproach and
contempt, Psalm. 119.12.
for I have kept thy testimonies. As if he had said, This will I esteem a
great reward of all my service, if thou remouest this reproach. And after, Ver.
39.
Turn away my reproach which I fear, for thy judgments are good: requesting
this as a special fruit of the gracious promises, to be delivered from such
reproaches. This Jeremy the Prophet with crying out and clamor, condemns as
violence and spoil, Ier. 20.8.
that the word of the Lord is made unto him reproach and derision daily. The
self same thing Nehemias the restorer of Gods City, and repairer of his
Fathers sepulchers, accounts most worthy of weeping and mourning, Neh. 1.3.4.
and fasting, and prayer before the God of heaven, that a remnant of the
captivity in the province were in affliction and reproach, being derided of the
nations that were about them. Finally, this with one consent, is the whole
Churches supplication to the Lord: Remember O Lord, Lam. 5.1.
what is come upon us; and of those things this is first, Consider and behold
our reproach.

Indeed the account of good esteem, Chrysostom in epistad Hebr.
The esteem of credit has taken so deep root in the nature of men, that
reproach alone is all-sufficient to darken the mind with clouds. Therefore the
Prophet of the God of Israel, afflicting with condign punishment the Priests
of Baal, frets them not with unjust calumnies, but with reproaches most
deserved, pourtraying out in contraries what is that God in whom they trust: 1.
Kin. 18.27.
And (says the Scripture) it came to pass at neone, that Elijah mocked them,
and said, Cry aloud, for he is a god; either he is talking, or he is pursuing,
or he is in a journey, or peradventure he sleeps, and must be awaked.
Therefore the holy women Rahel and Elizabeth, Genesis 30.23.
triumphing and rejoicing for removing the reproach of barrenness, Luke 1.25.
declare, that they before lamented, not so much for not bearing children, as
for bearing infamy. Herefore are seven women (said upon most unequal terms)
to take hold of one man, Esa. 4.7.
saying, We will eat our own bread, and we will wear our own apparel,
only let us be called by thy name, to take away our reproach, namely, that same
reproach, as some suppose, Iunius in notes.
whereat those twain named before, and a third most virtuous woman Hannah, so
much were troubled.

flint have hardened so their faces, that not only refusing to put on
holiness, but daring to put off humanity, fear not to fulfill that of the
Prophet, The unjust knows no shame: Zeph. 3.5.
and that another says, Ier 3.3.
Thou had a whores forchead, thou refusedst to be ashamed. And this last
Prophet in another place. Ier. 6.15.
Were they ashamed when they had committed abbomination? way, they were not at
all ashamed, neither could they blush: Whose judgment follows, Therefore shall
they fall among them that fall. Surely it proceeds from an ingenuous to
wardnes, that Ephraim is ashamed, Ier. 31.19.
yea even confounded, because he does bear the reproach deserved of his youth:
and Judah the soune of Jacob, Genesis 38.23.
fearing the shame he had deserved by his whoredom, if it had come to light.
But it is much more commendable to blush being unjustly blamed. Whence in part
appears what difference there is between the wicked and the just; of whom the
one is not affected with the filthiest and most deserved shame of his own
ungodliness; the other is tormented with the most unjust suspicion, though of
the lightest crime: Ier. 20.10.
I have heard (says he) the defaming of many: the effect whereof is in him,
Fear on every side. Beware therefore to reproach such persons, unless thou will be more cruel then they that rage with fire and sword. Reckon thou
Senacherib and Rabshakeh amongst the first and chiefest kil-Christs, because
ever an honest mind is more afflicted with words the blows; as Solomon in the
Proverbs does confirm, A reproof enters more into a wise man, Pro. 17.10.
then an hundred stripes into a fool. And experience proves no less in them
that are tried with both: whither I may refer that which Saint Hierome does
relate he saw in Egypt, Tom. 1. ad Rusticum monachum. de viuendi forma.
A young man a Greek, that could by no abstinence, no weariness of labor
quench the flame of his own flesh: him (says he) the father of the Monastery
saved by this device, (or did he rather destroy him, by a vicious lie, and
constrained continency, therefore not of Gods gift:) he commands a certain
ancient man to pursue the fellow with chidings and reproach; and when he had so
abused him, to be the first complainer, witnesses being called spoke for him
that had done the wrong: he on the other side persisted with tears,
protesting, all was untruth: none gave credit, only that Father in subtlety
opposed his defense, lest of too much sorrow that brother should be swallowed
up. What more? Thus a year was spent; which being ended, the young man being
asked of his wonted concupiscence, whether as yet he were troubled therewith?
Woe is me (says he) I have not leave to live, and should I lust to commit
uncleanness? So to be unjustly condemned, was to be deprived of life. And
detraction, our Savior witnesses, is confraction, that is, breaking; saying,
Reproach has broken my heart, Psalm. 69.20.
and I am full of heaviness. Which the emulous Ammonites of Isreal's honor
seem well enough to understand, 1. Sam 11.2.
choosing once and again to torment the people of God in their vengefull spite,
2. Sam. 10.4.
rather with reproach then death: once desiring to pull out all their right
eyes, that they may lay it for a reproach on Israel: Another time, cutting
indeed their garments in the middle to their buttocks, and shauing off the one
half of their beards; so sending them away, reproching, as they supposed,
Israel, who had sent their spies: which both David accordingly repayed (no
doubt according to the will of God,) when he brought the people that were in
Rabbah their chief City, 1. Chr. 20.3.
and cut them with sawes and with harrowes, and with axes, yea even so dealt
David with all the cities of the children of Ammon: and God revenged with
punishments of like proportion, the Prophets so often witnessing the same, as
the holy story relates their injury. First to Ezekiel it is said, Ezekiel. 21.18.
Son of man prophecy, and say, Thus says the Lord God concerning the
Ammonites, and concerning their roproach even say thou, The sword, the sword is
drawn for the slaughter, it is furbished to consume because of the glistering:
and in Zephanie he says: Zeph. 2.8.9.10.
I have heard the reproach of Moab, and the reuilings of the children of Ammon,
whereby they have reproached my people, and magnified themselves aagainst their
border: Therefore as I live, says the Lord of hoasts, the God of Israel,
surely Moab shall be as Sodom, and the children of Ammon as Gomorah, even the
breeding of nettles, and saltpits, and a perpetual desolation; the residue of
my people shall spoil them, and the remnant of my people shall possess them:
this shall they have for their pride, because they have reproached and
magnified themselves, against the people of the Lord of hoasts. Which it were
good the Ishmaelites of our age would take into their knowledge and
remembrance: (if they be not past all care of their own salvation) how they
run into such crimes and recompense.

Wherefore let all lovers of God rather to give the strong drink of any
powerful comfort, Pro. 31.
Unto him that is ready to perish, and the wine of cheerful consolation unto
those that be of heavy hearts. Yea even if they have deserved shame, yet not
unmindful of the case of men: but if undeserved, then much more; which
diligently the Apostle performs by writing to the Hebrews which had been made
a gazing stock both by reproaches and afflictions: Heb. 10.33.
and (which deserved such comfort in their calamity) they became companions of
them that were so used. And on the contrary our Lord who has bid us by all
means to bless, curses in the name of God, Psalm. 109.16.
him, and his wife, and seed, that remembered not to show mercy, but persecuted
the poor and needy man, that he might slay the broken in heart.

False accusers persons spared.
Meanewhile here shall not be omitted David's so mild manner of expressing so
cruel a calumny, when it was said, as after, when they said, without any
particularizing of their persons. For the Saints look not so much upon the
persons inflicting as on the afflictions molesting them: their endeavor is to
wipe off unjust aspersions, not so to traduce their accusers, save when the
persons and the causes are so joined that they cannot well clear themselves of
ye one without discovering the others uncleanness. Thus the Church speaks, thus
the harmless Dove she sighs, For thy sake are we killed all the day long,
Psalm. 44.22.
we are counted as sheep for the slaughter: a killing we hear, but the
author we know not: and in a word to speak, so often in the Psalms he lays
before the Lord, injuries, vexations, persecutions, of all sorts; yet scarce
shall you ever see, the Actors branded therewith by name: which is of singular
meekness, and true relish of Christian equanimitye. Sometimes in their
inscriptions shall you find those noted, who gave occasion to the complaints,
plaints, but (under correction) I suppose, it may be thought those titles are
not the same Authors whose is the text (though both doubtless be inspired of
God,) vnleast we grant it of those inscriptio^s wherein sometimes so far as
manifestation of the occasion did require, he puts their names, whose crimes he
wrote against, yet never fully or plainly expressing them: for understanding of
the matter and future ages, being forced, obscurely he touched their names:
Montanus in 2. praefatione Bibliorum Hebraeo-Latinorum.
but void of private gall, for shunning public offense, uses some
tra^sposition in steed of direct intimation, as that which is written, Psalm. 9.
title.
Muth Labben for the death of Nabal, placing the letters backwards which are to
be read forwards; and in another by change, where Cush Ben Iemini, Psalm. 7.
title.
is put for Kish Benjamin, which kind of writing used for fear often times
occurs in heathen writers, by the names of Ruffus, Paercere nominibus, dicere
de viti^s.
Myrmillio, Causidici Cuiusdam, Crispini, Belidae, Eryphilae, Nomentani,
Pentalabus, and the like, with some co^cealment, when men will spare names, and
speak of vices. This lenity in two authors of one name, most worthy is
remarking, Hieronymus Stridonensis, and Hieronymus Zanchius, though far
distant in time, yet thus far in spirit agreeing. For that Father though
angry otherwise and tart enough, so as that he speaks of him self, even young
in Rome he seemed to represent Lucillius his severity, yet when as by sea and
land he fought against his enemies, Velis equisquod.
he conceales their names where he may without his prejudice, or else uses
other feigned, or obscure in their stead: as for example, when under the name
of darkness he contests with Melania, her name in Greek importing darkness;
the one known to the vulgar Latins that read his writings, not the other.
The like is in that argument of suspected cohabitation, and against an unchaste
Deacon, against Susanna corrupted. so inueighed he against Ruffinus and his
adherents in feigned names of Grunnius, Lusc^^s, Lauinius, Calphurnius,
Lanarius, Scorpius Canis Aloinus, and others. Also this late and learned
Hierome in that dissertation, as he calls it, between two Divines, and in
other arguments has done the like; as also Calvin, and sundry others of late
times, where conscience and the matter so allowed. This moderation exceedingly
beseemes them that are led by the Spirit, whose fruit is love, Gal. 5.
joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness,
temperance: all which may be summed in that which the giver of this same spirit
has bid us learn of himself, saying, Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly
in heart. Mat. 11.
This (I say) is Christian moderation to complain before God the Judge, of so
unjust offense, yet without mention of the offender, further then declaration
of the matt^r, and imploration of help requires. You shall find some, Erasmus.
that if death be threatened can despise it, but to be belied they cannot
brook, nor from revenge contain themselves. But the Saints in this as other
temptations, most are moved, that by their sins they have caused God to
inflict such things on them, Thou have showed (says he) thy people hard
things, Psalm 60.3.
thou have made us to drink the wine of astonishme^t; thou have, thou have,
not Saul has, Doeg has. And again, Thou have caused men to ride over our
heads; Psalm 66.12.
men ride over him, he blames them not, Job 9.
but makes supplication to his Judge: who justly doubtless, howsoever
secretly, has caused them so to do; who also is most able and willing upon
request to turn them another way: This lesson also God grant us we learn.

Saints belied to their faces.
Yet God his righteous servant does not so much excel in meekness, that the
sons of Belial do not equal or surpass him in their rage: whose name with
their crime in absence he shuns to make known, they no whit contented with
their secret machinations break forth unto that fury, as that openly and in
presence they dare twit him in the teeth with false religion, counterfeit
adoration, vain confidence in God. For though we hear not their names, yet we
have his person to who^ such things by them were spoken: It was said (says he)
to me, to my self, even to my face, in my hearing. So sometimes the Leuite
Corah, Numb. 16.4.
with the Rubenites his accomplices, and two hundred fifty Princes of the
assembly, making insurrection gathered themselves together against Moses, and
against Aaron, and said unto them (openly, not only of them in their tents) Ye
take too much upon you, seeing all the congregation are holy every one of them,
and the Lord is among them: wherefore then lift you up your selves above the
congregation of the Lord? They fear not to object unto the meekest of men,
with one breath, pride, ambition, and usurpation of authority. So Zedekiah the
son of Chenaanah, dares together smite the Prophet of God, his cheeks with
his fists, and his conscience with the reproach of a lying Prophet, saying, 1.
Kin. 22.
What way went the spirit of the Lord from me to speak unto thee? (The very
spirit that long has rested in the Romish bridg-maker his breast.) Neither was
the Jewish nation confounded to blaspheme to his face, The Lord Christ, Ioh. 8
52.
is having a devil: who often otherways by secret plots conspired his death.
And they who in presence making fair weather to the Prophet Ezekiel, Ezekiel.
33.30 31.
still talked against him by the walls and in the doors of the houses, yet
when occasion served, both spoke and did reproachfully by Jeremy to his face:
for lift up by success and puffed up with riches, Psalm. 10.3.4.
Through the pride of their own countenance, not seeking after God, what will
they fear to cast on the countenance of Gods servants? Will Pashur the son
of Immer being not only Priest but also chief governor of the house of the
Lord, hearing the Prophet preaching things most controling his ambition and
ease, Ier. 20.1.3.
fear to smite him, and if authority serve, to put him in the stocks?

David by dement of our iniquity, let us be thankful unto God the Author,
unto the King the Minister, of this our wealth, that is, Romans 13.
our peace: whereby we are permitted if we have grace to lead a quiet and
peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. 1. Tim. 2.2.
In this peace let us gratulate the happiness of our age, long and much before
us, desired by the whole Church of God, and to this day by many, and most
deserving of her children; which without our knowledge was prepared, and
without our labor is preserved for us, whereby so happy we are, S. Augustine
2. Cor. 11.
that though (as one observes) We can never be free from perils of false
brethren, yet of the openest, and most violent adversaries, to wit, Pagans or
Jews, or Heretics, we are little afraid: Surely a King himself both good
and great, blessed sometime the word of God, which promised him peace and truth
in his days. Isay 39.8.
Wherefore next to that word, it becomes us to magnify and bless the chief
instrument under God of our tranquillity and peace, enriched also with
abundance of knowledge (which Esaias prophesied) as the waters cover the sea.

Meanewhile it is our part, as thankful receivers of present things, so
provident foreseers of things to come, to be forewarned of Shimei the favorer
of his own, 2. Sam. 16.
and Saul's house: howeuer he lurkes, yet if ever (which God forbid) time should
serve, he would by his curses openly declare himself David's enemy, a traitor
to him in heart, under whose shadow he had shrouded himself during all the
time of peace; a hater of those of David's house, with whom in outward
appearance he had lived most peaceably: wherefore it is wisdom, against all
occurrences to be armed. 1. Sam.
If Abner and Amasah both Captains strong and valourous, 2. Sam. 20.
of Israel the one, the other of Iudahs host, had not been too credulous to
Ioabs friendly pretended brotherhood, never had either so valiant in war,
and honorable in peace, fallen so suddenly and shamefully. If those fourscore
from Shechem, from Shile, and from Samaria, having their beards shaven and
their clothes rent, and having cut themselves (though in superstition directly
forbidden in the Law) with offerings and incense in their hands to bring them
to the House of the Lord, had not so simply consented to deceitful Ishmael,
Ier. 41.5.6 7.
they had never so miserably perished by his treachery: for sure they never
cease off intending (if at any time of plotting) against the iusts death, and
what kind of calamities they are able: which also the Princely Prophet by the
circumstance of time implies.

Perseverance in evil.
For says he, It is said unto me all the day or every day, so long as the time
lasts, so often as that space returns, which men call the day, so long, so
often mine enemies reproach me: Psalm. 107.8.
as in another place he expoundes himself, Mine enemies reproach me all the
day; and in another, Psalm. 56.2.
Mine enemies would daily swallow me up: Ver. 5.
for that they cease at all by night, is not from any asswaging of their
cruelty, but from necessity of nature which requires sometime rest; or of their
vicious disposition which buries them in sleep and wine. Wearied they may be
in sin, as Babylon in the greatness of her way, Esaias 47.13.
but not of it; for (says the Apostle) They cannot cease from sin. 2. Pet. 2
14.
Saul surely, so long as ever he could, gave not over of pursuing David: and
Pharao so soon as the scourge ceased, returned to afflict the beloved nation:
And the presidents of Persia, so long persecuted to death the man of delights,
Dan 6.
till they cast themselves into the snare. sitting the Scripture signifies,
Psalm. 50.20.
Thou sit and speak against thy brother: they that sit in the gate
speak against me: Psalm. 69.12.
Princes also did sit, Psalm. 119.13.
and speak against me. Man eaters are they, like unto the Brasilians or
Canibals, as Saint Paul implies, forbidding criminations, under the names of
biting and devouring, Gal. 5.15.
and consuming one another: and Job thus speaking, Job. 31.31.
If the men of my Tabernacle said not, O that we had his flesh, we cannot be
satisfied. And to his friends, Job 19 22.
Why do ye persecute me as God, and are not satisfied with my flesh? Says not
the holy Ghost of these truly? They are gredie dogs, Esaias 56.11.
which can never have enough?

What shall the servant of God do here, but bear with courage in the present,
and as he can, shortly rid himself therefrom? following his Lord, who upon the
like occasion said, For my love they are my adversaries, Psalm. 109.4.
but I give my self unto prayer. And again, Woe is me that I soiourne in
Meshech, Psalm. 120.56.
that I dwell in the tents of Kedar: my soul has long dwelt with him that
hates peace. And where is hope for to escape, Gen 40.14.15.
as Joseph and Jeremy shut up in prison, Ier 37.10.
bound with fetters pricked with reproaches of unreasonable persons, as with
goades, being innocent themselves, what way they could, procured their own
enlargement: so shall he withdraw himself, choosing the desert before the
furious bellowing of the judgment hall and city of Cain, Cypr. forum litibus
mugit insa^^m.
ever unquiet with tumult, and noise of barking dogs, and yelling wolves, and
roaring Lions; and leave in end, them who by their own presage, tell before
their restless torment, vexing now incessantly (so far as they are able) them
that are quiet in the land, Psalm. 35.20.
whose common confession that is, and complaint in the words of one, Psalm.
57.3.4.
He shall send from heaven, and save me from the reproach of him that would
swallow me up. God shall send forth his mercy and his truth. My soul is among
Lions, and I lie even among them that are set on fire, even the sons of men,
whose teeth are spears and arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword. The
spear was sharp that pierced our Saviors side, Transition to the specialtie
of the cause.
but sharper was that iron which entered into Joseph's soul; Psalm. 105.18.
and yet a sharper sword is this tongue by intention, separating the soul from
the life thereof. The life of the body is the soul, the soul lives by God;
the life of the body is more inward then the body, and the soul is without
the life thereof. So deep he smites, that strikes at God. Other wounds, though
in the soul, David might perhaps have borne; but that which takes away the
life of his life, is unsupportable. The word of God is quick and powerful,
Heb. 4.10.
and sharper then any two edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of
the soul and spirit, but of a created spirit. The words of man, as though he
were more mighty then God, would separate from the soul of man the spirit
uncreated: for this is the particular cause of David's tears, that it is said
unto him, Where is thy God? Fierce is this anger, Genesis 49.7.
and this wrath most cruel, not only in the kind, but also by occasion. The
kind, is robbing God, Mal. 2.
not by subtractiou of tithe; but by denying his providence to his own, and to
himself his Godhead. But of the occasion first a little.

Impious to aggrauate evil.
For that evil the ungodly now do aggrauate, wherewith the godly man before
was grieved. He had said before, Psalm. 42.1.
When shall I come and appear before God? They ask him, Where is thy God? Not
as the daughters of Jerusalem in the Canticle, humbly believing that which
clearly they did not understand; in desire to learn, thus enquire, Whither is
thy beloved gone? Can. 6.1.
O thou fairest among women, whither is thy beloved turned aside, that we may
seek him with thee? Nor as God in the beginning, lovingly teaching man that,
whereof himself could not be ignorant, asked, Adam, where art thou? Genesis 3.9.
But maliciously, because reprochfully; and blasphemously, because
unfaithfully, Where is thy God? As though they had said, Thou have no God, God
will not regard thee. I am. 3.5.6.
This is the little fire than has kindled so great a matter, that set on fire
the course of nature, being it self set on fire of hell. This is that dram,
but of deadly poison, I am. 3.8.
that quite defaceth so fair a body of religion: an unruly evil, that so
tramples on him that is already thrown down. In this are Jobs pretended
friends, Job 19.22. and 31.31.
and David's professed foes, more force then the evening wolves, Abac. 1.8.
which when they have devoured the flesh, they gnaw not the bones till the
morrow: Zeph. 3.3.
but these not only (which if there were no worse, would seem extremely
impious) destroy souls to get dishonest gain; Ezekiel. 22.27.
but with, or without the hope of gain slay so far as is in them, the only
hope of the afflicted soul, Psalm. 109.16.
Not remembering to show mercy (to him that is already in misery,) Nam vt oculo
insla^mato etia^ mollissimum medicament^^ molestia^ exhibet^sic etia^ and
animo, qui grawtate calamitatis ardet, quamuis multam consolationent afferat
sermo, molestus tame^ quodammedo esse solet, si tu^ cum in dolor suntus
proferatur. Simon. mag. ex Basil. or. 12. Theecrit. (...). Psalm. 109.12. V. 14.
but persecute the poor and needy man, that they may even slay the broken in
heart. So reaching, or rather outreaching the highest branch of the
arch-traitor his naughtiness, who persecuted even to death, him whose life was
almost spent, in calling him and such others unto life: like the wolf which
did devour the sheep, whose milk had fed him whilst he could not himself
seek his food. The recompense of cruelty is showed to all in that one, that
neither mercy should be extended to him, nor favor to his children; nor the
iniquity of his father, nor his mothers sin be blotted out: V. 17.
that blessing should be far from him, and cursing near: V. 18.
so shall every one have judgment without mercy, I am. 2.13.
that has showed no mercy; how much more they that exercise the greatest
cruelty on them that are in misery. One man bears hatred against another,
Ecclus. 28.3, 4, 5.
and does he seek pardon from the Lord? He shows no mercy to a man which is
like himself, and does he ask forgiveness of his own sins? If he that is but
flesh, nourish hatred, who will entreat for pardon of his sins?

Ier. 20.10.
All my familiars watched for my halting; peradventure he will be enticed, and
we shall prevail against him, and we shall take our revenge on him. And
again, Psa. 119.95.
The wicked have waited for me to destroy me. This hope deferred, Pro. 13.12.
makes their heart sick, but when their desire comes, they desire no other
tree of life. The occasion of exercising their cruelty long desired, once
obtained, they will sure employ to the best improuement of their malice. For
this is the time, think they, wherein, if ever, they shall prevail. When a
reed is bruised, then shall it eafily be broken. Psalm. 41.8.
An evil disease, say they, cleaves fast unto him: and now that he lies, he
shall rise no more. The tender mercies of the wicked are cruel. Pro. 12.10.
They persecute him whom God has smitten, and talk to the grief of those
whom he has wounded: Psalm 69.25.
therefore shall he add iniquity not let them come into his righteousness.
All such shall be blotted out of the book of the living, and not be written
with the righteous.

Thus far their sin and Gods justice: our prudence should be next,
considering their forwardness in adding one sorrow to another; neither to
acquaint them with the weaknesses of Gods elect, nor to disclose the sores of
their punishments; 2. Sam. 1.20.
to tell neither of them in Gath, nor publish them in the streets of Askelon,
lest the daughters of the Philistines rejoice, lest the daughters of the
uncircumcised triumph. This was the care of a right religious King, to conceal
the shameful fall of another vnreligious, or at least wise for Ionathans sake,
faithful in life and death; to his well deserving friend in life, and to his
father, though very unnatural, in death. As much in Micah God commands,
commending to the people private mourning for their sins, Mica 1.10.
Declare ye it not at Gath, weep ye not at all (namely there, for else it
follows) in the house of Aphrah roll thy self in the dust: in the house of
Aphrah, that is, in the house of dust, roll thy self in dust; in the house of
the dust of thy secret humiliation, rememb^ing thine own return to dust;
roll thy self by frequent meditation in the dust of repentance; according to
him that has bid, Math. 9.
When thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou have shut thy door,
pray unto thy Father which is in secret: against whom, Psalm. 51.4.
even whom only (to speak properly) thou have sinned, and done evil in his
sight: Romans 3.4.
that he alone may be justified in his sayings, that every mouth may be
stopped, V. 19.
and all the world may become guilty before God, who alone is the Lawgiver,
and therefore against him alone, David faith, he sinned. This is the
commendation of Joseph, who though deceived as a man, supposing that to be of
sin, which was of the holy Ghost; Mat 1.19.
yet, as aiust man, not willing to make that then unknown vessel of our Lords
flesh, a public example, was minded to put her away privily. It was the
prudence, in his own be half, Genesis 38.23.
of the Patriarch Judah (though his charity toward his daughter Thamar was not
equal) to shun the public shame of the sin which not known, Non dico, vt
confitearis conseruo tuo, vt exprobret; dicito Deo, qui curat ea. Chrysostan
Psalm. 50. Romans 2.
had not given public offense; by letting his pledges go, rather then by
enquity to shame himself, and send forth into the Church the stinking savor
of his foul offense, when he might smother it within the reach of his own and
one others sense, from whom it could not be hid. I speak it, the rather for
reproof of them who not content first by secret sin to grieve the Spirit of
God, do afterward, either in deep hypocrifie (as many are proud of going
meanly) by publication of their sin, under pretense of quieting their
consciences, and (for sooth) of honoring God in shaming themselves, without
warrant or example of God or any of his Saints, dishonor his name, in foaming
out their own shame: Jude v. 13.
or else perhaps now in weakness of judgment to discern between good and
evil, as before for want of strength to resist the evil, minister matter of
obloquy to others, gaining no comfort to themselves, (while others enlarge
their shame, themselves lessen never aiote their sin,) Giving more occasion to
the adversary to speak reproachfully, 1. Tim. 5.14.
then yielding obedience to him that friendly counsels, Debate thy cause
with thy neighbor himself, Pro. 25.9.10.
and discover not a secret to another, lest he that hears it put thee to
shame, and thine infamy turn not away: so incurring the censure of a
talebearer for revealing secrets, Pro. 11.13.
and justly deserving the judgment of hating and deceitful persons, Pro.
26.26.
whose wickedness shall be showed before the whole congregation.

But to make use as we began, of the ungodly their aggravating the evil that
happens to godly men, let us learn, as we may not our selves judge the^ that
are without, 1. Cor. 5.
so neither we expose them that are (for ought we know) within, unto the
censure or reproach of them without: and that so much the rather, because the
wicked watches the righteous, Psalm. 37.32.
and seeks to slay him, that we may not seem to further his wicked device,
or open their mouth who when our foot slippeth magnify themselves against us;
Psalm 38.26.
who blaspheme, not magnify the name of God through the infirmities of his
children. Esaias 52.5.
To which sense Saint Augustine speaks wisely: What have I to do with men
that they should hear my confessions, Confessions l. 10.5.3.
as though they could heal my diseases? who are a curious kind to know the
life of others, but careless to amend their own; why do they enquire of me
who I am, that refuse to hear of thee (O God) what they are themselves? or do
they know when they hear of me by my self, whether I tell the truth, whereas
no man knows what is in man. 1. Cor. 2.
(...).
David and Paul when as the repentance of their known sins is approved of
the whole Church of God, commend both their falls, and risings to future ages,
1. Tim. 1.16.
because for this cause they obtained mercy, that in them first (or chiefly)
Jesus Christ might show forth all long suffering for a pattern to them which
should hereafter believe on him to life everlasting. Knowing that their own
raising was set by God for exhortation and encouragement to all who should
happen after them to fall; not to lie still despairing of strengh to rise and
stand again: which David's words witness as plainly, as those of Paul before
alleged, saying, I will teach transgressors thy ways, Psalm. 51.13.
and sinners shall be converted unto thee. For David by his publication (as
Chrysostom comments) becomes to offenders after, Hom. 1. in Psalm. 50.
as one known to be thoroughly cured of a dangerous disease by the experience
of long and constant health, coming to visit another sick of the same
infirmity without hope of recovery, who has expended all his substance and
used all possible diligence, but in vain; this visiter coming and relating
both how extremely he had been afflicted with the same evil, and withal by
what means he recovered both present ease, and perpetual health: at an
instant cheares the patient with hope, and soon after perfectly restores him
by application of the medicine: so has David that he may do the like, penned
for posterity his own excess, his distress, and redress by the grace of
God: So Saint Austen aged, having by a long and laborious life, not only
blameless but even almost, miraculous, gained both admiration of the Church of
God, and also a good report of them that are without, 1. Tim. 3.7. Confessionum
li^r.
wrote for this same purpose in thirteen books, both the wanderings of his
whole life, as a sheep straying from the flock; Psalm. 119.176
and also the most watchful prouiuidence of the heavenly Shepherd over him,
Psalm. 23.1.
guiding him with his eye even amongst the pits of destruction; Psalm. 32.8.
Psalm. 23.4.
comforting him with the rod and staff of his loving chastisements and prop
of faith, when his soul fainted in the wilderness of unrighteousness: and
finally carrying him on his shoulders to the fold, out of the which the wolf
never devoured any; from which none that ever were of it, shall stray from it,
without return. All this while, I reprove not that confession, which upon
inward remorse, seeks of some skillful souls Physician, or faithful Pastor,
comfort against present grief, and counsel against like sickness in time to
come.

can it be said of the creator, Where is thy God? The latter of these expressed
in the text, includes the former, as the whole sumine part of it self.
Wherefore we first enquire what this means, Where is God? next, the purpose of
the other, Where is thy^ God?

Real Atheism.
Where, the question (as we have observed before) of unbelief is prefixed to
both; for he that asks where is either ignorant, or professes flat denial.
So the ungodly know not or believe not God the Father almighty, maker of heaven
and earth, they deny the first article of the Christian faith, what faith have
they of the rest? For this question touching God, is cither the voice of faith
victoriously, though laboriously, fighting and ouercoming the obstacles, which
for greater glory of conquest are left in the way to wrestle with; as that of
Elisha, asking, 2. Kin. 2.14.
Where is the Lord God of Elijah, having smitten the waters with his mantle:
And of Isaiah strong in faith, when the people as forsaken, almost quite
distrust: Esaias 63.11.
Where is he that brought the^ up out of the Sea, with the shepherd of his
flock? Where is he that put his holy spirit within him? Or else it is the
murmr of unbelief and fury of heathen blasphemy, so often bewraied in the
Prophets to be this in sum, Where is their God? Psalm 79.10.
or where is the Lord thy God? Psalm. 115 2.
meaning, Joel. 2 17.
he is not at all, Mica 7.10.
or else not a God, being not able to save: Wherefore of himself it is
written: Am I a God at hand, Ier. 23. v. 23.
says the Lord, and not a God afar off? Near to the just, far from the
wicked, for God (as is in the Greek Proverb) runs to his Temple, Elias in
Nazianzenum.
in so much as none but pure, can be the habitation of God most pure. And Saul
confesses, 1. Sam 28.15.
God is departed from him, Genesis 4.14.
and Caine knows he shall be hid from the face of God. The oppressors, that
seek after the soul of the righteous, Psalm. 54.3.
they have not set God before them; which is all one as to deny him in works,
Tit. 1.16.
whose voice can be no less effectual then that of words. Psalm. 10.4.
The wicked through the pride of his countenance will not seek after God, God
is not in all his thoughts. And Pharaoh speaks plainly, Exodus 5.2.
Who is the Lord, that I should obey his voice to let Israel go? He that loves
not, 1. Ioh. 4.8.
knows not God. For how can a man know good, and not love it, or not love,
knowing it to be good? Certainly, he that knows honey to be good, (that is,
finds the goodness thereof, in agreement with his own taste) knowing it, loves
it, but as the saying is, Ignoti nulla cupido.
unknown undesired. Now as the Apostle argues his ignorance of God, by want of
love, so the Prophet, his contempt of God, by the excess of his deeds: Psalm.
36.1.
The transgression of the wicked, says within my heart, there is no fear of
God before his eyes: For his words pass through mine ears, and as really his
deeds by mine eyes; his works speak within me, that which his thoughts have
spoken within himself: his thoughts that he may sin without the fear of
God, have said to himself, there is no God: but his words say not so to
others, because he that has forsaken the fear of the Almighty, Job. 6.14.
cannot put away the fear of men: yea sure it is, these two fears dwell not
together; whither soever the one comes, 1. John 4.
it casts out the other: therefore the transgression of the wicked, witnesses
that he believes not God, that he denies him. Before his eyes is the fear of
men, therefore he professes not his iniquity, lest he should be condemned, or
reproved; before his eyes the fear of God is not, therefore within, Aug. in
Psalm. 35.
where he thinks no eye sees, he purposes, he mediates iniquity. Hi^r. in
Titu^.
Christ (says Saint Hierome) is wisdom, righteousness, truth, holiness:
wisdom is denied by folly, righteousness by iniquity, by falsehood truth,
holiness by dishonestie, by cowardice courage; and as often (says he) as we
are vanquished by vices, Quoties vitu^s vincimur, Deum negamus. Use.
we deny God.

There be more Atheists then we are aware of: the word is not in the heart of
all in whose mouth it is, they do not all believe that do confess the Lord
Jesus: Romans 10. v. 8.9.
they seem to speak with judgment, that say, As Antichristianisme decreaseth,
Atheism preuailes, that is Satan's last stratageme, so much more irresistable
then the former, as it is more secret, not auowing it self as the other, but
as the Camelion is changed by every approaching color, so it fitts it self to
every occasion, in every place, not believing steadfastly that God is in any
place. Basil in Esaium.
For which of them that believe God is in every place, beholding all actions,
trying the thoughts of all hearts, will admit into his mind a wicked thought or
act, or ungodly deed? But then men fall to the commission of unrighteousness,
when they suppose that either he sees not or regards not the things that are
done below: Job 22.15.16
The old way which wicked men have trodden, who were cut down out of time,
whose foundation was overflowed with a flood, (as fashions long since used for
want of new invention, are taken up again for new) may be observed now
renewed, as in the day when Noah entered into the Arc. If any could understand
the voice of men's works, (even of those, that do not quite deny a Godhead) he
might with an intellectual ear, hear their hearts discourse in these or like
words, Job 22.13.14
How does God know? can he judge through the dark clouds? Thick clouds are a
covering to him that he sees not, and he walks in the circuit of heaven.
Does any that hear Elias mocking the service and servants of Baal, 1. Kings 18.
believe that Baal is God in his esteem? Why then should they be thought to
account lehouah God, whose sport is in deriding the service and servants of
Jesus? Reason persuades, that Sennacherib, and Rabsakeh esteemed not them Gods,
whose land, against their wills, they have wasted: of whom he says, 2. Kin.
18.34.
Where are the gods of Hamath, and of Arpad? where are the gods of Sepharuaim,
Hena and Iuah? have they delivered Samaria out of mine hand? When he obiecteth
to the God of Israel both untruth of promise, 2. Kin. 19.10.
and inability to deliver Judah out of his hand, does he not deny that he is
God? So they that magnify their own might, and insult over his people, not
fearing his threats, nor believing his promises, do indeed deny him. The
Scripture says, Who is he that ouercometh the world, 1. John 5.7.
but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God? And yet a great part of
the world believes it. James 2.
Do not even the devils believe and tremble? But says Bernard, In Octauae^
Pasche ser. 1.
Do you think he accounts Jesus to be the Son of God, who ever is the man,
who neither is affrighted at his threats, nor allured by his promises, neither
obeys his precepts, nor rests in his counsels? As little reason we have to
believe, he believes in God, that hating to be reformed, Psalm. 50.
casts his words behind him. Yea if we search with a little diligence, we shall
observe them among us, of whom the Scripture plainly speaks, as denying God.
For it witnesses, that they who glutton-like, spend their days in wealth,
James 4.
spending it on their lusts, say to God. Depart from us, Job 21. v. 1^.
for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways: Psalm. 10. v. 9. and 11.
It says, He that does catch the poor, drawing him into his net, has said in
his heart, God has forgotten, he hides his face, he will never see. When the
Priests say of every one that evil is, Mal. 2.17.
he is good in the sight of the Lord, and he delights in them, it is all one
as if he said, Where is the God of judgment? When the people keep from his
messengers his tithes and offerings, Mal. 3.8.
they not only refuse to know him, but also rob him. Finally to whom his
judgments are far above, Psalm. 10 5.
out of their sight, his salvation also is far from them. Psalm. 119.115


Want of God, greatest misery.
For in this wise, God that is near to all men, is far from wicked men. Acts
17.17.
God that is not far from every one of us, Psalm. 145.
is near only to them that call upon him in truth, Eccl. 11.7.
a joy to them that behold his light, Deuteronomy. 4.24.
but a consuming fire to the wicked: Esaias 33.
The same fire, In Nazian. Orat. 6.
as Elias of Candie speaks, has burning heat, and cheerful light; so does
God divide his works, between the good and bad. The absence of God is that
which unawares these mockers testify to be the extremest misery, and the
Saints confess it, so much lamenting even the unjust esteem thereof. When the
Apostle will aggrauate the great disparity of the Ephesians being before
Gentiles, and now Christians, he sums up all their former misery in this
being without God in the world: Ephesians. 2 12.
at their reproach thereof Baals Priests spare not to cut and lance themselves.
1. Kings 18.
Not only the Church prays most earnestly against the appearance of Gods
forsaking, and David grieves that they say, Psalm. ^.^
There is no help for him in God, and Job with all his might arms himself
against that temptation of his friends, saying, I am as one mocked of his
neighbor, Job 12.4.
who calls upon God, and he answers him. But even Cain and Saul, Gen 4.14.
sorrow as admitting no comfort upon experience thereof, 1. Sam. 28.15.
though they had no grace to fear it before it came.

Psalm. 30.5.
in knowledge of whom it does consist: he is not only the author of that
eternal life proper to his own servants, John 17.3.
but also of the natural, Giving to all, Acts 17 25.
life, and breath, and all things. And they who but believe there is a spirit,
know that to be far from God, is to be possessed of Satan. Thus far even
godless men are grieved, much more the godly are moved thereby to mourn, not
receiving comfort. Aug. in medit. quicquid uon est Deus meus egeslas est.
For have they riches, without God it is but poverty; have they friends and
kindred in the world, yet in comparison with God, Mat. 23 9.
they know no father. He it is that when father and mother forsake them takes
them up. Psalm. 27.10.
God alone is he to whom they are betrothed, 2. Cor. 11 2.
to whom they are joined, not in one flesh, 1. Cor. 6.17.
but in one spirit: Therefore upon any desertion though but in appearance, Joel
1.8.
they lament like a virgin girded with sackcloth for the husband of her youth:
Psalm. 73 25.
whom (say they) have we in heaven but thee alone? and there is none upon
earth, that we desire besides thee. And again, Thou art my portion, Psalm.
119.57.
o Lord: and again, Psalm. 62.7.
In God is my salvation and my glory, the rock of my strength, and my refuge
is in God: Which all if in God you take from them, what have you lest wherein
they may be comforted? For when in the day of his trouble he sought the Lord,
Psalm 77.
and found him not, His soul refused to be comforted: and no wonder if he do
so when as he cannot find his heavenly Father, whereas Rahel in the Prophet
likewise so refused, Ier. 31.
because her children whom she sought, were not to be found on earth, though
they had changed it with heaven. In the earth there is no loss besides this
which may not in some sort be repaired; Is the house burned? Money and men's
labor will build another. Has the extortioner pilled, or the robber spoiled
thy substance? By labor and leisure thou shall recover thy self again. Is thy
wife dead? Another may be had: Or thy children? thou may beget, or else adopt
others in their stead. Sickness may be driven from the body by help of
physic, sadness from the spirit by some convenient delight: if God alone be
gone, none can bring him again, nor supply his room.

carried away unto dumb idols even as we were led, 1. Cor. 12.2.
as the Gentiles that know not God: 1. These 4 5.
I mean not only them that have no knowledge of Gods judgments, Psalm. 147.10.
but also and especially them, yt knowing them have turned them into hemlocke
more then the nations that are without the Church: of whom the Apostle says,
2. Ioh. v. 9.
Whosoever transgresses and abides not in the doctrine of Christ, has not
God. To whom God in the Prophet, Ier. 2.19.
Thine own wickedness shall correct thee, and thy back slidings shall reprove
thee; know therefore and see, that it is an evil thing and bitter that thou
have forsaken the Lord thy God, and that my fear is not in thee, says the
Lord God of hoasts. Evil it is in the present: how intolerable, and
vnremediably evil, will the end prove? That which is so bitter in the bud,
increasing to bitterness, how bitter will the ripe fruit prove? Hereby may be
gessed, though not plainly understood, how painful is that punishment of the
damned, which they call the pain of loss? so grievous to the Saints in the
present is the ouershadowing of Gods countenance, that notwithstanding their
steadfast hope of seeing him again, they are disquieted, as though he were
quite departed: Job 29.5.
when the Almighty (says Job) was yet with me: Psalm. 77.7.
and David, Will the Lord cast off for ever, and will he be favorable no more?
S. Chrysostom. in epist.
What sorrow to see the king in royal majesty, accompanied with all his
Princes, and servants, and loyal subjects, riding in chariots of triumph,
because all their adversaries are once so vanquished, as they shall never arise
again, but himself to be debarred of beholding, much more of partaking of
that honor, Psa. 149.
of all his Saints? to see the Lord Jesus with the thou sands of his Saints, as
light clouds, carried up above the starry sky, with Angelicke tru^pets,
royal voice; mean while himself is perpetually confined below, never again
to see that King of glory, Psalm. 24.
nor have access to any of his company: so that it may well be questioned,
whether be more lamentable Depart from me ye cursed, Mat. 25.
or that which follows, into everlasting fire. The Poets make Tantalus his
extreme torment to be in this, that standing in water to the chinne, still
living, he can never drink of it, to quench his thirst: wherefore their worm
of grief gnawes as painfully as their fire burns, who must ever remember,
Luke 22.28.29.30.
how they that followed Christ in his temptations, sit in the kingdom appointed
unto them, eating and drinking (spiritually, celestially, unspeakably, without
filling, without lothing) at his table, in his kingdom, sitting on thrones,
Luke 13.29.
judging the tribes: yea all those that come from the East, and West, and
South, and North, sitting with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of
God; but themselves shut out, Isay 33.17.
not admitted to see the King in his beauty. There must needs be weeping
without comfort, and gnashing of teeth without end. Luke 16.
Dives may know, but not taste of Lazarus his felicity. Would God therefore
they could seek him in time, and find him, as it is said; Isay 55.6.
Seek the Lord, while he may be found, and that after the due order, 1. Chron.
15.17.
that so they might not suffer breaches in stead of a blessing. For if David
failed of finding, for failing in a ceremony when he sought with an honest
heart; what hope that they shall find him, who either seek not at all, or
altogether vnregularly? Moses finds him, Exodus 3. v. 2.
in the desert, in the burning bush, amongst thorns: his reputed father and
mother, Luke 2.48.
in the flesh sought him sorrowing, Luke 7.
Marie Magdalen, and Peter weeping, Math. 27.
the happy thief suffering on the cross. Oh that they did not deceive
themselves, supposing to find him, where, or as the Church could not, in the
bed, amongst roses of pleasures, or in the streets of concourse, and busy
employments of this life, but passing from thence a little, Cant. 3.1.2.4.
that is, leaving these things as but a little viewed in the way, (for the
vanity under the Sun may be soon left behind us) hasten to those hid, and
large, and magnificent, things eternal!

As for the children of God, what grief they have in their Fathers absence,
may be gathered by that they feel upon their parting from one another. The
heathen took notice and advantage thereof, that were wont in times of
persecution to add affliction to their bonds, by relegating and confining them
to Isles and mines, As the Martyrologies, and especially S. Cyprians Epistles
show.
where they could not have access one to another. And their own and the
Churches affairs, causing them to part, though willingly, yet has at times
much troubled them, as Saint Chrysostom shows in his own case, (...)
and Basils of Seleucia; and the penman of the books called Samuels, 1. Sam.
20.41
in the persons and partings of David and Jonathan; and Saint Luke in Paul's
departing from Miletum, Act 20.37.38
where both the inhabitants of that place, and Elders of Ephesus, They all wept
sore, and fell upon Paul's neck, and kissed him, sorrowing most of all for the
words which he spoke, that they should see his face no more. Neither is it to
be wondered, whereas lovers in the flesh are so hardly sundred. With much ado
Rebekahs kindred fend her away, Genesis 24.25.
though to her husband: with more the Leuite is dismissed of his concubines
father; Judge. 19.4.
and Naomi of her daughter in law. Ruth 1.10.
But the spiritual bond, where ever it is, binds no slacker then the withes
of flesh and blood, which often are burnt or cut asunder. The bond is love,
Col. 3.12.
which the more fervent it is, it is the more impatient of absence. Marie
Magdalen, Luke 7.47.
of whom it is written, She loved much, shows her love, by seeking first our
Lord (that seemed to be lost in death) and continued longest of all the
Disciples in seeking: therefore she is vouchsafed the first sight of the
revived Phoenix; whom also, Lactantius poemate de resurr. Quem diligebat
dimittere enim volebat, and timebat amittere.
when she finds him, she holds fastest by his feet, being vouchsafed to kiss
them, that had late trod upon the Lion and Adder, Psalm. 91.13.
and trampled on the Dragon. Peter, Ioh. 21.17.
of whom his master knew that he loved him, would be with him in life and
death; and the rest of that College, upon mount Oliuet, follow him in the
clouds with hearts and eyes, when they cannot in body, until they are
demanded, (I will not say, checked, for satisfying so much the outward sense in
point of religion) Ye men of Galilee, Act. 1.11.
why stand ye gazing up into heaven? By this also may we prove our own love to
God. For Orpah, though she strive a while, Ruth. 1.
yet at length is persuaded to leave Naomi: as the Scribe desired to follow
Jesus; but hearing, The Son of man has not where to lay his head, Mat.
8.19.20.
returns as he came, if not worse: but Ruth showed true love, not harkening to
her that seemed to desire her absence. Those that so hardly leave the servants
company, desire much more the masters: and those whose hearts are filled with
sorrow for subtraction of his bodily presence, Ioh. 16.
more painfully brook appearance of losing his favor. Hence those complaints,
Psalm. 31.22.
I am cut off from before thine eyes; and that, Why hidest thou thy face from
me? Psalm. 88.14.
From this motive is so often seeking of his face: So Psa. 44 24
My heart said unto thee, Thy face, Psalm 77. etc.
Lord, Psalm. 27.8.
will I seek. Make thy face to shine upon thy servant. Psalm. 31.16.
Cast me not away from thy presence. Psalm. 51.11.
Draw nigh unto my soul. Make thy face to shine upon thy servant: Psalm. 69.18.
and many such, Psalm. 119.135
which imply the vehemency of affection, in desire of the conjunction: which
mind, if it be in us, let us shun the things that might cause him to leave
his house our heart, Ier. 12.7.
and by honest life and upright conversation, Seek we the Lord, Psalm. 105.4.
and his strength, seek we his face evermore.

Practice against religion
Let us seek him, and when we have him, hold him fast, as the Church says,
Cant. 4.
I would not let him go. For not only himself willingly leaves those that
forsake him, or hold him loosely; and delights in them who wrestle in holding
him: but also this, all the troops of ungodliness aim at, to cast down the
castle of confidence we have in God. This is the meaning of their saying to our
soul, Psalm. 11.1.
Fly as a bird to your mountain: and of that in the Psalm, Psalm. 62.4.
They only consult to cast him down from his excellency. For who besides the
Lord is the excellency of Jacob? There are but two kinds of temptation that
he can use, either to presumption, that God may forsake us; or else to
despair, whereby we forsake him. By either we are alike deprived of God. This
is the thing he does here, this is the wall he undermines with this engine,
Where is thy God? Not where thine honors, thy health, thy wealth, but thy God,
in whom is all, who therefore being lost, nothing remains. Thus he hunts for
the precious life. Prou. 6.26.
This is the last of his temptations, because the end of all, Mat. 4.8 9.
Worship we, which is, leave God, and lean to me. A skillful fencer is he who
strikes at the legs, and arms, and feet, and sides, that the more we are
exercised in defending any of them, he may the easier and deeper wound our head
Christ and God. He strikes at Jobs flocks, Job 1.11.
and herds, and house, and children; but you hear him tell God, Job 2.5.
from whom he cannot conceal it, all is, that Job may curse God, and so be
forsaken.

2. Cor. 2 11.
being not ignorant of his wiles, 2. Pet. 5.8.
let us be sober and watch against our aduersaric, that goes, about espying
where he may get advantage. We ought to imitate here the serpents wisdom, who
when he cannot get away, first of all secures his head as he can: and we should
fence that best, which he assaultsmost, the hope of God: though the rest, that
is, riches, and esteem, and the like, be wounded or maimed, that life may
remain in the heart, and spirit in the head. Our Saviors answers to his
several temptations, ministers to us a singular instruction concerning all the
sorts of his sleights, (for in those three, are the kinds of all) for in what
ever words, with what ever colors, to what ever pretense the enemy propounds
them, our defender referres them to the injury of God: Math. 4.
Man shall live by every word that comes out of the mouth of God. Thou shall
not tempt the Lord thy God. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God. This
observation is most worthy of our imitation, in all the enemies assaults.

Where God is Now
for answer to the question of these inquisitors, if they will learn, or that
others may that will; we are first to tell them their questions about God,
which they make to us, are shapen by the pattern of the first that the old
serpent made; needless questions, Genesis 3.
that they may turn us to nothing, as they did our mother: but it is good for
us for answer, to take heed unto the word which she neglected. Wherefore, out
of it, as Paul unto the superstitious Thessalonians, The God, A 9.17.23.
not whom ye ignorantly worship, but of whom unfaithfully ye ask, him declare
we unto you, not what he is, (...)
which none can do, but where he is; which you demand (though we could more
easily, if you had asked, where are all other things? have answered, they are
in God) that word which is our wisdom, answers, The Lord is in his holy
Temple; Psalm 11.4.
even in that whereof the Apostle speaks The temple of God is holy, 1. Cor.
3.17.
which ye are. Therefore as this temple is every where, Psa. 6.3.
The earth is filled with his glory; Psalm. 97.6.
so that All the people see his glory. And, The Lords throne is in heaven:
Psalm. 11.4.
for, The heavens of heavens are the Lords. And briefly, if you will believe
himself, Ier. 3.24.
He fills heaven and earth. Or if you believe not the testimony of God
concerning himself, Sybil. oracul. proemio ex Theophilo. (...).
though it be greater then man's, yet receive it from men, and of men like unto
your selves: Pythagoras will answer, Apud Cyrillum Alexandrinum. Jupiter est
summus vertex, atque infima planta, etc.
The one God is whole in the whole circle, Orpheus your ancientest divine will
give his verdict, that Jove is first, and Jove is last (he meant Jehovah, or
Iah) before and after the ages of the world. Jove the highest point, and in the
lowest plant, he is for ever in one, and yet in every place. And Maro Prince of
the Latin Poets, saying, Georgic. 4. Deism ire per omnes, and ter ras,
tractusque maris, coelumque profundum etc.
that God his walk is through sea and land, and highest heavens, from whom the
beasts, and birds, the creeping things and man the Lord of all, take life and
motion, breath and being. Or briefly as the emblame reports which natural men
have given, God is an eye upon a staff, Cyril, contra Julian.l. 9.
a staff upholding all things, an eye beholding, a staff in the clementarie
region, an eye in the celestial; Psalm 33.13 14
for God looks down from heaven, beholding all the sons of men, from the
place of his habitation, he looks upon all the inhabitants of the earth. Esa.
66.1.
The heaven is his throne, and the earth is his footstool. Therefore an eye
upon a staff, because his glory is most seen above, as his help is most
required here in things subject to continual change: for else behold, 1 King.
3.27.
the heaven, and heaven of heavens cannot contain him. He is higher then the
heavens, as the King whom he set over his people, 1. Jam. 9.2.
From his shoulders and upward: So that the upper surface of those spheres is
the lowest base of his palace, and yet he searches deeper then the lowest
earth: wherefore in vain you think you can by searching find out God: Job 11
7.8.9.
can you find out the Almighty to perfection? If he be as high as heaven, what
can you do? if deeper then hell, what can you know? If his measure be longer
then the earth, and broader then the sea, Esaias 40.18.
to whom then will you liken God, or what likeness will you compare unto him?
Esaias 66.1.
Where is the house that you build unto him? what is the place which you
assign him for his bound? Esaias 40.12.
Has he not measured the waters in the hollow of his hand? and meated out the
heaven with a spanne? V. 22.
It is he that sits upon the circle of the earth, and the inhabitants
thereof are as grasshoppers. And yet though he be so high, he humbles himself
to behold the things that are in heaven, Psalm. 113.6.
and in the earth: 2. Cor. 6.16.
he dwells in his Church, and walks amongst the golden candlesticks. Reu.
1.13.
Year not only so, but in every of his Saints it is said, 1. Cor. 14.25.
God is in you of a truth. Yea, what speak we of his Saints? from none of you
he is absent, and yet with none of you he is present: he is absent by his
grace, but is present by his power, Ber. de triplici cohoerenua.
who is every where, and yet no where, being both comprehensible, Nicetus in
Nazianz.
and scarce comprehensible, and altogether incomprehensible. Comprehensible,
Arnob.l. 3. aduersus h^^resis.
because this notion of God is most certain, that nothing can be spoken equal
to him: incomprehensible by the same reason, because (as says Nazianzene:
Orat. 42 in Pascha.
) This only can be comprehended of God, that he is infinite, scarce
comprehensible: in his effects or works, comprehensible in respect of the
creatures apprehension: incomprehensible, in his uncreated nature: scarce
comprehensible, in respect of the things he has created. Isidor. Hispal.de
summo bono.
The infiniteness of Gods greatness, is this, that we conceive him within all
things but not inlosed, without all things, but not excluded, Greg. Mar. 2.
Deus manes intra onnia sursum regens, deorsi^m to^tinens, extra circum-dans,
interius penetrant.
and therefore within, that he may maintain all, therefore without, that he
may contain them all. In that therefore he is without, it is cuident he is the
Creator: by that, that he is within, appears that he gouernes all. For
conclusion let us add the argutest and accuratest (I think it may be said
without offense) of men after the Apostles, in contemplation and disputation
together, his meditation and emblem giving great light unto this subject, S.
Aug. Confess.l. 7.6.5.
I placed before me (says he to God) the whole created frame, and made (in
imagination) one great mass distinguished into certain kinds, yet finit, but
thee o Lord (I conceived) at every part compassing and passing through it, but
every way infinite, as a sea diffused, through all, and infinite space, having
within it a spronge exceeding great, yet finite, full every where, and yet
compassed every where of that sea: So thought I thy sinite creature was full of
thee, her infinite Creator: and I said, Behold God, and see the things which
God has created: mark how he compasses and fills them all. So the knowledge
of God also which may be had of the creature, is rightly resembled in that pit
in the edge of the sea, showed (as they report it) to Thomas of Aquine, which
empty it, and carry away the water, as often as they will, it is filled with
other: search and know of God as much as you can, as many new questions will
offer themselves to inquiry: So that we may say as well of that knowledge of
God whereby we know him, as of that whereby he knows us: Rom 11.33.
O the depth of the riches, both of the wisdom, and knowledge of God: Prou.
25.27.
And it is not good to eat much honey, Pro. 24.13.14.
even of the knowledge of this wisdom, which is so to the soul as bony to
the taste, which though we find it, Pro. 25.16.
we must eat of it, but that which is sufficient for us, lest we be filled
therewith, and vomit it: Vide Bedam in Prouerbiorum cap. 25.
for the knowledge which in measure is delightful, and profitable, being too
much enquired after proves not only unprofitable, but also unsavory, and
unsafe.

David's God, Where is thy God? For there are as S. 1. Cor. 9.5.6.
Paul writes gods many, and Lords many, though to us there is but one God and
one Lord. Of those indeed it may be asked, and showed where they are, 1. Ioh. 5.
in this are the true God, and idols differenced.

For ask the heathen for his god, S. Augustine in Psalm. 41.
and he points to a stock or a stone; if you reprove his confidence therein,
he shows you the Sun or Moon, of some other, or all the host of heaven, or
yet if you urge, God is a spirit, Maximus Ma deurensis, inter Epistolat
Augustini 43 Ira fit, vt dum tius quasi quedam mem bra carptim, vary^s
supplicationi bus prosequimur, toeu^ colere profecio videamur.
and over all, then he says, in those are the parts of the highest and common
God.

Rome also representing God in the likeness of an aged man, and professing
Christ's corporeal presence in her Mass, and assigning or allowing palpable
Patrons to each place, and town, and house, and door, and closet, Esaias 57.8.
and couch, so setting up her remembrance behind (or over) the doors or
posts, as when Jerusalem the faithful City became an harlot, comes nothing
behind them in a visible demonstration of the Godhead. But if she say, she does
not knowledge them for Gods, Symmachus ep. 54. l. 10. Varios cust^des vrbibus
men's diuinae distribuit, vt animae nasce^tibus, ira populis fatales geny^
diuidu^tur. Et paulo post, de Deo. AEquu^ est quicquid omnes coluns vnum
putari. Maximus ad August. ep. 43. Et Longinianus ad eu^de^.
but as Patrones deputed by the great and only God, and her own intercessors
to him again: then does Antichristian Rome, but justify Rome professed
heathen. The daughters voice is so like the mothers, that he who hears the
one, by Symmachus, and the Grammarian Maximus, and Longinianus, and the other
by the common plea of Papists now adays, shall hardly discern the one from
the other. For says the one of them writing to Saint Augustine, Who is so mad,
or besides himself, as to deny, it is most certain, that there is one and
highest God, without beginning, without posterity, as the great and
magnificent Father of nature? His powers diffused through the frame of the
world, we call upon by diverse words, because we are ali ignorant of his proper
name, etc. And for farewell, in the end of his letter, The gods keep you, by
whom a thousand ways, in an agreeing discord, we all that are mortal on earth
worship and adore the common father of them and of all mortal men. I forbear
to weary the reader with more allegations, not purposing here for to dispute.

There is yet a third sort, which being demanded, Where is thy God? can
outwardly and visibly point at him, namely, they who ever worship these brittle
and outward, called goods, whether the covetous idolater, Col. 3.
or the ambitious sacrificer, or the adorer of Thais, and such other faces; or
he that does homage to his belly. Phil. 3.
Now to leave the first of these three, with whom we have nothing to do, (the
heathen I mean) the second and the third show too plainly a paritie of their
causes with the first, shielding themselves under the safeguard of the same
arguments. For what other warrant brings Rome present; for her adoring of God
in visible objects, the^ the patron of paganism for her mother? Shall I relate
his words, that it may be clear I use no fraud? Now (says he) if long time
make religions of authority, Sym. vbi supra. Jam si longa a^as authoritatem
religionibus facirt, seruanda est rot seculis fides, and sequendi s^^^ nobis
pare^^es, qui feliciter sequuti sunt sun.
we should be true to so many ages, and to follow our parents, who did happily
follow thesrs. Neither my present purpose nor task, is to answer the ancient
or modern Romes objection, (for which Iremit the reader to Saint Am, brose and
Prudentius, who purposely and pithily have done it) but to show how the
worshippers of material and visible gods still do symbolize (that they may also
have the argument of such unity as they boast, that is, agreement in untruth.)
For not only the superstrious in doctrine, but also the profane of
conversation, have laid hold on their predecessors arms. That which he said of
victory, they say of wealth and honor, and pleasure, and power, and all such
sensible, but senseless gods. All men honor this power with their vows:
cunctis potentiaista votius est, nemo colendam neget, qua^ profitesur opundam.
she deserves to be worshipped, whom he professes to be worthy the seeking
for. And after, We must join profit, which most procures the gods credit with
men. For whereas all reason is hid, whence shall the knowledge of those that
should be worshipped be better had, then from the momorie and instructions of
prosperous affairs? Finally, after other covetous, and ambitious talk, thus
Rome vaunts, This Sernice of God, made the world subject to my hests, these
rites drove Hannibal from the walls, and the Senons from the Capitol. And on
the other side, Public famine and thin harvest are imputed to the leaving
of that religion which seemed to cause all plenty. Even so they spoke of old,
and still do, Ier. 44.15. etc.
that sacrifice to the queen of heaven, saying, that when they sacrifice unto
her, they have plenty of victuals; but when they leave off to burn incense to
their own yarne, that then they want all things. So to this day they speak of
Popery, and the reparation of true religion, that impiety may appear in all
ages like unto if self. So every of these, if you ask them, Where is thy God?
points with his finger at some thing which he worships, because he worships the
creature in stead of the Creator. Romans 1.
But the Creator cannot be seen, and therefore neither showed to these eyes.
Therefore it is said to Israel, Deuteronomy. 4.15.
Ye saw no manner of similitude on the day that the Lord spoke unto you in
Horeb, out of the midst of the fire. And to us, Ioh. 1.18.
No man has seen God at any time, the only begotten Son, which is in the
bosom of the Father, he has declared him. For, All things whatsoever he has
heard of the Father, Ioh. 15.
he has showed us. All things which were lawful to be uttered unto us, 2.
Cor. 12.
which were expedient for us. Only in the Son for ever the Father may be
seen. Philip having seen the Son, requests, not wifely, John 14.8.
Show us the Father, as though that would suffice him, which was and is
impossible for him. For no man has seen God, nor cansee, 1. Tim. 6.16.
he dwells in light which no man can approach unto. And Solemon says, 2.
Chron. 5.2.
He dwells in the thick darkness. Nezian. in carm.
So that If a man can pass through the darkness, he shall be blinded by the
obstacle and sple^dent veil of the great light, and it is not easy to pierce
(as Nazianzene speaks) through a double battlement: for God that fills all,
and dwells over all, though he lighten the mind, yet shes before the beams
thereof, and still leaving it, as it is able in sight to follow him, draws it
by degrees to higher things: Yet interposeth between it and his
inco^prehensible essence, as many veiles as were over the Tabernacle. Therefore
Moses himself, though known to God by name, much desiring to know the way of
his maker, Exodus 33.13.
receives this answer, Thou can not see my face, for, There shall no man see
me and live. V. 20.
For yt Jacob is said to have seen God at Peniel, face to face, and his life
was preserved, is not spoken properly, Cyril. Glaphyrorum. l. 1. do Jacob.
but because of the Godhead dwelling bodily in Christ. Moses therefore can see
but Gods back-parts, Exo. 33.32.23.
that is, his works, and that too, being put by the grace of the same God,
whose glory passes by him, in a clift of the rock, whereon we are built (that
rock is Christ) in the clifts of which rock alonely, 1. Cor. 10.
the Church herself is lou ly. Cant. 2.14.
Christ alone is that propitiatory or mercy feate, whereby v^e approach to
God, Exodus 15.17.
figurally made by the hand of Moses, and spiritually interpreted by the
Apostles Paul and John: Rom 3.25.
yet it was covered with Chetubins of gold, 1. Ich. 25.2.
and the Seraphins themselves with two wings, Exodus 25.19.20.
cover their eyes from beholding God, Es^^. 6.
and with other two their feet, Cyril. De tabernacule. l. 9.
from being beheld of men. So the things of God themselves are invisible, Romans
1.
how much more God himself, Nyssen. hom. 5. in Cantica.
that is unbounded by any kind of limit of place, of time, of form, of color,
of quantity, of figure, of fashion, of distance, or any other? Without body,
and supersubstantiall is that Nature which commands all things. Cyril. de
sestis Pasch. ho^. 12. (...)
Let never therefore the mind go out of the body to learn ought of God: for
that which is conceived beyond and above all, not only bodily but also
spiritual substance, can neither be circumscribed by place, nor subject to the
shapes of formed things, whose way is in the sea, Psalm. 77.19.
and his paths in the great waters, and his footsteps are not known. The more
presumptuous are they that dare enquire for the sight of his person, Who alone
himselse beholds all things; Sybil. or ac. in prooemio 1. l. 1. (...) etc.
(...) etc.
but is not seen of any mortal flesh: for what flesh can see the heane^ly,
true, and incorruptible, not being able to stand against, and gaze in the
beams of the material Sun, as the heathen Sybil spoke, before Paul was
taught the same from heaven.

This note we for our instruction and comfort, Genesis 30.8.
in the wrastlings of God wherewith we wrestle with those our sisters yt exceed
in multitude, namely Romanists and the congregations of carnal men. Let us
walk, 2. Cor 5. v. 5.
as the true Church of God by faith, and not by sight, Deuteronomy. 4.12.
believing on him, the voice of whose words we have heard, but have seen no
similitude. We have heard the voice of his word, not the immediate voice,
whereof the creature is not capable. For if the sound of the heavens motion be
therefore not perceived of man, because his sense is not sufficient to receive
it (as men of nature write) then much less shall any creature hear the
Creators voice. So the word himself testifies, ye have neither heard his voice
at any time, John 5.37.
nor seen his shape: John 6.46.
neither has any man seen the Father save he which is of God; he has seen
the Father, Psalm. 36.
in whose light the Father in the Son, in that manner which is mere. Mar.
5.8.
Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God: in that they shall see
him, in whom they are pure, being conformed to him, that is the perfecter of
their pureness: 1. Ioh. 3.2.
For now we are the sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall
be, but we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall
see him as he is: as he is immortal, immutable, Romans 8.25.
eternal: partaking of that which now we hope for, not seeing it, but with
patience waiting for it. Waiting for to see it, and enjoy it, but in such manner
as it may be seen, and had: spiritual, celestial, supernatural.

Saints judged forsaken of God.
Mean while it may be said, these doubt not of God, where he is, but deny
David any refuge in God, therefore they say, where is thy God And himself
confesses: Psalm. 3. v 2.
Many there be which say of my soul, there is no help for him in God. Their
conceit seems to be, that God for his wickedness, though he trusted in him,
had forsaken him, as his own speech to Saul implies: If the Lord has stirred
thee up against me, 1. Sam. 26.19
let him accept an offering: and theirs of him, saying, God has forsaken him,
Psalm. 71.11.
persecute and take him, for there is none to deliner him. So it is no new
thing, that the Saints be accounted of the ungodly, as they themselves truly
are, without God: especially if any trouble take them. Such was Shimei his
judgment of him, 2. Sam. 16.8.
flying from Absalom, and the Barbarians of Paul when the viper fastened on his
hand. Acts 28.3.4.


John 8.48.
yea often to our Lord Jesus. Mat. 27.42.
Children of themselves let gold fall, Isay 53*4.
and lie; but if any offer to take it from them, they hold it the faster: so
God suffers wickedness, to snatch at himself in our hands, (that we may
hold him the faster,) but never to catch him away.

Psalm. 119.42.
that we may have wherewith to answer him that reproacheth us, trusting in his
word. The Canaanites beyond Jordan armed themselves, hearing how it fared with
Og and Sihon: the children of this generation their wisdom is thus far
imitable.

Neither receive we the report of such against any, specially them that fear
God. I know not any who^ a harlot will sooner brand with her own name, then
the chastest matron. Beware of that, Prou. 17.4.
A wicked doer gives heed to false lips, and a lier gives ear to a naughty
tongue. Philo de Migrat. Abrahae.
No speech of men how many so ever, say they it is well, say they it is ill,
make the body sicker, or better, much less the soul higher, or lower in Gods
favor.

Ungodliness justifies the godly.
To conclude, most worthy here is for observation, most useful for
consolation: David's foes intending to discourage him, condemue themselves, and
acknowledge his right in God, for in that they say, Thy God, Dan. 6.16.
it is, not ours, but thine, as Darius to Daniel, Thy God whom thou seruest
continually. So the Scripture notes the rulers reviled him that had recovered
his sight of body and mind together: Thou art his disciple. Ioh. 9.28.
Thus wickedness is condemned of her self. Mat. 25.
Out of his own mouth the unprofitable serhant is judged. Scribes and Pharisees
are witnesses to themselves that they are the children of them which killed the
Prophets. Mat. 23.31.
And as for us, Their rock is not as our rock, Deuteronomy. 32.31.
even our enemies themselves being Judges. Indeed they lie not, S. Basil in
Isaium.
the Lord is not the God of all, but theirs properly, who by sincere love are
joined to him, for he will be called the God of Abraham, Exed. 3.16.
of Isaac, of Jacob, and of their seed for ever. Therefore also they fear not
to engrosse this title to themselves: O God thou art my God. Psalm. 63.1.
Jacob said to Joseph, Genesis 49.24.
The arms of his hands were made strong by the hands of the mighty God of
Jacob. And Thomas believing the resurrection which he had mistrusted, said with
all affection, Ioh 20.18.
My Lord, and my God.

Zorobabell with the Fathers of Israel, to those that said they sought and
sacrificed to the God of Israel? Ezra 4.3.
You have nothing to do with us, to build an house unto our God. Or if you
boast of a common and outward calling, showing no fruits of election, then
hear God, to her that was nothing behind you: Ier. 11.15.
What has my beloved to do in mine house, seeing she has wrought lewdness
with many?

Hear ye heavens, and witness thou earth! Come all Christians truly
religious, dearly beloved in God our portion, let us take possession of that
which is freely left us: they have chosen the world, God is ours: ask we him
no more, Josh. 5.13.
Art thou for us, or for our adversaries? They have bequeathed him, answer we
their demand: Where is thy God, with our Savior, Mat. 26.64.
Thou have said. As L^th having bought her husbands company with her sons
mandrakes, went out to meet him, saying, Thou must come in unto me, Genesis
30.15, 16.
for surely I have hired thee: so go we forth, and meet, lay hold, and keep
our God, our husband left to us, as we from the womb are cast on him. Esaias
63.19.
on him. We are thine (O Lord) thou never barest rule over them: they were not
called by thy name. To thee dear Jesus, Heb. 13. v. 12*13*14.
who to sanctify us thy people with thine own blond, sufferedst without the
gate, we come forth without the camp, bearing thy reproach, having here no
continuing city, but seeking one to come, whose builder, and maker is God,
wherein bring us to reign, of thine abundant grace, with thee, thy Father, and
Spirit of consolation, in the fellowship of elect Angels, and glorious Saints
world without end, Amen.

FINIS.

