A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE KING CHARLES, March 27. 1627. Being the Anniuersary
of his MAJESTY'S Inauguration:

BY ISACC BARGRAVE, Doctor in Divinity, Then Chaplain to his MAJESTY in
Attendance: And DEANE of CANTERBVERY:

BY His MAJESTY'S special Command.

LONDON, Printed by John Legatt, for Peter Paxton, and are to be sold at his
shop at the Angel in Paul's Churchyard. 1627.

1. Sam. 15. verse. 23 Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft, and
stubbornness as the wickedness of Idolatry.
OUR all-wise God, who made Order the measure of his creation, placed man among
the creatures here below, as the chief Administrator of order. Man was then
planted as a tree by the rivers of waters, Psalm. 1. 3. and, had he grown on
in the order wherein he was planted, his leaf had not withered, he had
brought forth his fruit in his season, and whatsoever he had done, had
prospered. But alas! disobedience and order could never long dwell together.
The worm of pride had no sooner corrupted the root of mankind, but instantly
this goodly tree lost both leaves and fruit too; nay all the stemmes issuing
from that corrupt stock, have ever since proved naturally fitter for
infernal fuel, then for the service of Gods Temple. Man in his corrupt
nature, ioynes in this with the other creatures; non vult domari. If the wind
be stayed in his course, it will root up the strongest Oaks: if the water in
her motion, she will swell, and ouerswell the banks. And though God himself
be the Commander, yet rather then men will want their will, they will summon a
whole (...) against him, as in the 2. Psalm, The Rulers taking counsel
together, and the people imagining a vain thing against the Lord, and against
his Anointed, saying, Let us break their bonds asunder, and cast away their
cords from us.

Thus does wretched man, by endeavoring to cast off the lighter yoke of Gods
Law, pull upon himself an heavier: The law of his own lust and will, walking
on through the paths of wilful disobedience, to unavoidable destruction. To
cure which swelling sore, as God holding his Scepter in heaven, labors by all
the means both of his mercies and judgments, to retract us from that fatal
way: so he establishes Scepters on earth, as a ready means to help to reduce
us to the perfection of our first rule: making the duty of the second Table, a
step to our duty of the first, subduing our will to the will of man on earth,
that so he may the better subdue us to his own Will in heaven. First, as an
inualuable blessing upon a Land, God gives us a King; and then as the power of
that blessing, he prescribes obedience to our King. So that in reference to the
God of order, as we should esteem no day happier then this whereon God has
blessed us with a true Successor of his Father, a just and pious King; so can
there be no sacrifice fitter for this happy I D^y, then the sacrifice of
obedience both to God and to our King. The breach of which duty to either in
their degree, being no less then as the sin of Witchcraft, and as the
wickedness of Idolatry.

As faith is the cleerest gloss of the Gospel, so obedience the best
exposition of the Law, better then the best of sacrifices, the fat of Lambs,
as in the former verse. Better, because the wickedest man alive may offer
Sacrifice; none can obey but the good. Nay, even from good Abraham, God refused
the Sacrifice, (...)
but accepted the obedience. Whereas on the contrary, disobedience to God and
his Deputies, though it proceed from weakness, is a sin. But if it swell to
stubbornness and rebellion, it is a great sin; great as Idolatry, which is
the worst kind of sin; great as Witchcraft (which in blessed King JAMES his
phrase) is the worst kind of Idolatry.

To the truth of which assertion, that I may lead you through the path of
method, I shall first view it generally and in Thesi, as it may concern all
men, High and low, rich and poor, one with another. Then particularly, and in
Hypothesi, as it strikes at the offenders in this Chapter, Saul and his people.
In the general, we shall find first in positiuo, that rebellion is both a
sin and the cause of all sin: hear therefore and avoid it. Secondly, in
comparatiuo, that it is the foulest of sins, even as Witchcraft and Idolatry.
Be pleased to hearken, that you may hate it.

A subject (I confess) it is of such importance and authority, that none so
fit as Samuel himself, to have delivered it. Fitter had it been for me with
Aaron to have stood below among the people: but since with Moses I was summoned
up to the mount, I would not fall within the censure of mine own text.

Now, to follow these steps as they are laid, and so to make the passage more
easy, first in positiuo we will consider the nature of rebellion in general.

It is a common rule in Divinity, that in all the sons of decayed Adam, that
whatsoever is most natural, is to be suspected as most sinful. Now, by nature
we are all as oxen vnpliable to the yoke. Animam Regis quisque portat: that
which is the hope of the Jews at the coming of their Messiah, Every mechanic
would be a King, no man would be a Subject. Man naturally has such a will as
cannot be subject. We are all borne the enemies of God, and as the unruly Rom 8
7. Judges 19 22.
sons of Belial. Viri absque iugo, like an untamed heyfer we are ever kicking
against our Maker. Multi in Iesum, pauci in Dominum; many will willingly Ier.
31.
hear of God as a Savior, but if you propound him as a Commander, their
answer is ready, our tongues are our own, who is Lord over us? Psalm 12. 4.


Thus it fares with God, and worse with his Deputy: Est multis the saurus in
lingua situs, vt quaestui habeant Plaurus Paenul.
male loqui melioribus. Though the earth swallowed up Core and his accomplices,
yet too many of their generation remain still: men, whose purity consists in
parity, whose conscience in disobedience. Wherefore shall any men lift
themselves up above the Numb. 16. 3.
congregation of the Lord? Well; whence this fruit proceeds the root will
demonstrate. Even when God on the Mount had taken obedience for his text, then
did the Devil divert his people to Idolatry and rebellion. Even when Christ
was giving Judas the blessed bread of salvation, then did Satan persuade him to
plot his Saviors destruction. Thus did both Law and Gospel begin with
opposition a plain argument, that it is the work of the Devil the Author of
rebellion.

A truth, which will yet reflect far more clearly, if you behold it in
Comparatiuo, whether you compare rebellion with the contrary virtue Obedience,
as in the verse before; or with the parallel vices in the text, witchcraft and
Idolatry. First, by the rule of S. Gregory, ex aduerso melius ostenditur, the
light will best appear through the contrary virtue. Now, by the rule of
contraries, as Arist. Eth. 8. says, Primus actus virtutis opponitur maximo
vitio, et minimus minimo. If obedience be the best of virtues, then rebellion
is the worst of sins.

Look then first in the old Law, Sacrifice was the best in that: yet behold,
obedience is better then Sacrifice. And the Adeps, the fat, was the best part
of the Sacrifice (God always reserved that for himself) yet see, obedience is
better then the fat of Lambs. To offer many Sacrifices with the Papists,
without obedience, is little other in their own Tostats phrase then studium
nequitiae, a kind of devotion by which a man takes much pains to offend God.
Sacrifice? Alas, that was commanded as the mere Schoolmaster to obedience.
Obedience is good in it self, Sacrifice only in respect to the Law that
commanded it. Obedience did that which all the legal Sacrifices could not do,
it ransomd us from the power of the Devil. In Sacrifice, beasts were killed;
in obedience, the lusts of our own flesh are mortified: to Sacrifice our
beastly affections, must needs be much better then to offer beasts. As Faith is
the best of the Theological, so obedience the chiefest of the moral virtues:
Nay Legal Justice which is nothing else but the obedience of the whole Law, is
omnis virtus, says Aristotle: nay it excels, says he, all other virtues,
quantum lucifer inter Astra, as the morning Star excels all others in beauty.
In a word; active obedience, says one, is the Father, and passive, the Mother
of all virtue. And therefore if Christ's example will move us, perdidit vitam,
ne perderet obedientiam, he chose rather to lose his life then his obedience.

Why, see then the issue of this first comparison; if obedience to God and his
Law, be not only a virtue, but omnis virtus, all virtue: then rebellion to God
and his Law is not only a sin, but omne vitium, all sin: so that take it
generally, and to compare any sin with it, is to compare a part with the
whole.

Nor is this yet enough. The holy Ghost yet farther aggrauates it in m^ text,
by a second comparison; with the parallel sins, as well as with the contrary
virtues. Rebellion causes all sin in general, and is as great as the
foulest sins in particular, even as witchcraft and Idolatry. Such is the
monstrous nature of man's disobedience, that simple and positive notions cannot
express it, it must be heightened by comparisons; nor can every comparatine
reach it: nothing can arrive at the top of man's sin, but the sin of man;
and no sins will parallel rebellion, but those of witchcraft or Idolatry.

In taking the height of which comparison, Peter Martyr and others conceive,
that Samuel here aymd not at the equality of the sins, but of the punishment:
but to him that well eyes it, it will appear plainly, that as the Prophet had
spoken before of the contrary virtue obedience it self, so here he aimed
directly at the sin it self; that rebellion was as the wickedness of
Idolatry.

Now, Witchcraft being an high kind of Idolatry, I need not compare them
severally; the greater implies the lesser. Nor are we to expect, the comparison
should run even upon all feet: It is not comparatio aequalitatis, sed
similitudinis, it is a comparison of quality, not of equality. But first, as all
comparatiues should do, these sins they meet in vni^oco, they both
communicate in the same form; they are both primarily sins against the first
Table; both have the same beginning from Infidelity; both the same end, the
contempt of Gods Ordinance. The Romish Idolater adores the true God with false
worship: so does he who worships God according to the will of man. The Witch,
he makes the devil his God: little better does he that makes his own will
his God. Idolatry? why, it is the highest of sins, it being against God, not
only as he is a Lawgiver, so the breach of the second table is against God:
but a sin directly against God as he is God: And so does the Rebel oppose
him. The Idolater makes a plurality of gods, and that includes a nullity;
Dicite plures, dicite nullum: and near as good no God, as no obedience to God.
In the breach of the Sabbath, Gods honor is diminished; in Idolatry his
essence is denied; In swearing Gods name is vilified; in Idolatry it is
annihilated. Diminishing, vilifying, denying, annihilating, all are included in
rebelling. In Idolatry they offer to Idols; in Witchcraft they sacrifice to
devils; yet behold, rebellion a sin comparatiue to both; nay, superlatiue
above both, and the cause of both. For were there no rebellion against God and
his Law, there could be neither Witchcraft nor Idolatry.

But if this general gloss seem yet too large, let us now contract it in the
particular, and consider the truth of this comparison in Hypothesi, the sin
here of Saul and of his people. Which being done, it is to be feared lest finding
Israel in rebellion, we shall find our selves likewise in Israel; both guilty
of a prodigious sin, like to that of witchcraft or idolatry.

Now, in Saul's offense clearly characterd in this Chapter, two points are most
remarkable. His foul commission, his false submission. The first is aggrauated
by two clear circumstances: The worth of the Gifts which God gave him; the
unworthiness of his ends, for which he rebelled against him.

First, for his person; there was not a more comely 1* S^m. 9. 2.
place; from the least Family, and the smallest Tribe, Head of the Tribes of
Israel. Thirdly, For his endowments; The Spirit of Lord came extraordinarily
upon him, and he prophesied. Thus much did God give him, and therefore
expected to receive much from him. He did from him, he does from us. Donorum
promptus Bernard.
quidem Author, sed importunus exactor. God requires his own with usury,
Matthew. 25. 27. Where God performs mighty works, he looks for effectual
obedience. Otherwise woe to Israel here, woe to Chorazin, woe to Bethsaida, it
shall be more tolerable for Try and Sidon then for you.

And here, O English Israel, let the stain of Isreal's unthankful rebellion
move thee to ready obedience. The Lord has exalted thee as the King among the
nations. For temporal blessings, he has hitherto made fast the bars of thy
gates. Whereas other more thankful people have been oppressed with bloody
war; Peace and the Princes of peace have flourished within our palaces. Our
wives have been as the fruitful vine, and our children as the olive branches
about our table. The God of our gladness has crowned the year with his
goodness, and there has been no leading into captivity, no complaining in
our streets. Nay, God with an higher hand, has blessed us with all spiritual
and heavenly blessings; he has given us means to be good as well as safe;
his Word most freely, which is his power to Salvation; the Preachers of his
Word most abundantly, in number and knowledge, exceeding all other reformed
Churches. Our Land, she is as a mother in Israel, a refuge to all the
distressed members of Christ abroad: As a Queen in a vesture of Gold wrought
about with diverse colors: here are the seats of Justice; here the Schools of
the Prophets; here the Temples of the living God; the offertories of our daily
prayers and praises; the exercise whereof, (besides our private Soliloquies) we
have in every Parish Church every week thrice, in every Cathedral every day
thrice. Nay, so frequent are they in our great Cities, that every hour of the
day may be spent in public devotion. Lastly, as the crown of all; God, as
upon this day, has given us a careful Guardian of all these blessings, who
studies nothing more, then to make them as secure as they are profitable. Oh
let us take heed, that with these Israelites here, we rebel not against so
gracious a God, so bounteous a Benefactor. It has ever been a Practick Maxim
in Theology, Ingentia beneficia, ingentia vitia, ingentia supplicia: Great
benefits, answered with foul sins, and in fearful judgments. And if we,
through disobedience, shall despise the riches of Gods grace upon us, what can
remain, but a fearful consummation of Judgments already begun, that as God
rent here from Saul a temporal Kingdom, so according to our Saviors own
prophecy, he should take from us a spiritual Kingdom, and confer it upon a
people that will bring Matthew. ^1. 43.
forth the fruits thereof?

The greatness of Gods blessings being abused, they proved to Israel here the
aggrauation both of their sin and punishment. All which light the heavier
upon them, because they did it for such poor and unworthy ends.

Lord! How straight a charge had God given them, concerning the Amalekites,
though it be against the law of Arms, that women and children, who cannot
bear Arms, should be slain? yet God, says Samuel, bade smite Amalek, slay
both man Verse ^, 3.
and woman, infant and suckling, oxen and sheep. With how strong a reason was
this commission backed? Remember how Amalek laid wait for Israel, in the way as
they came up from Egypt. Here is command backed with reason, but all
notwithstanding, Saul and his people destroyed that only which was vile; but
spared Agag the King and all that was good.

The conceived motives of which their disobedience, though many and courtly,
are all, in comparison to the reward of obedience, most poor and contemptible.
Some think they did it for covetousness of the spoil, and of Agags ransom;
and so made Mammon their god, which is express Idolatry Some Phil (...)
conjecture, they spared the fatlings of the cattle, to feast after victory;
and so they made their belly their Ephesians.
god: and that's Idolatry. Some say they spared King Agag* that they might lead
him as their vassal in triumph, after victory; and so they made their glory
their god: and that's flat Idolatry. At the 15. verse it is alle^dged, that they
spared the best of the cattle, to sacrifice them unto the Lord: and so they
made Religion a stalking horse to rebellion; and that's the known badge of
Idolatry. At the 24. verse Saul confesses, that he did it for fear of the
people, and so made popular applause his god. Now, to worship a monster with so
many heads, is gross Idolatry. Josephus writes, he spared King Agag, because
he was a comely and a beautiful Prince; and Abule^sis, that he did it out of
pity; fearing lest the tables being turned, and the dice new cast, it might
one day prove his own case. And such indeed are often the turns in humane
affairs: as England by computation won Normandy, the same day forty years
wherein Normandy overcame England. Well, grant which you will, or all these
conjectures to be true: yet that Saul and his people, for such unworthy ends as
these, should reject the Word of the Lord, and run a whoring after their own
inventions, what was all this, but the worst of Idolatry, (...), Will Worship,
Selfe-seruice, Sacrificing to their nets? They made Col. 2. ^^ Abacuc (...)
their Pity, their glory, their belly, their Mammon, their God, in all setting
up their own ends and their own will, above God and his will. And this is a
lofty pitch of Idolatry.

Thus foul was Saul's rebellion in the commission of his fault; And if you
look with a true Christian eye, either upon his false excuse, or his
hypocritical repentance; twill prove rather worse then better in his
submission: for whereas obedience should be no disputant, no murmurer, no
framer of excuses; yet Saul, who would not be obeying, would be excusing, and
that with a notorious falsity, saying, I have fulfilled the Commandment of the
Lord. Now, falsity is a foul fault in a man, much more in a Magistrate: ^erse
^^
yet an untruth so palpable was here defended, that the very bleating sheep and
lowing oxen confuted him. Yet still the sin rises higher: for as he excused
his fault falsely, so he repented hypocritically. How v^^se 14.
hardly could Samuel bring him to acknowledge his sin! and when he did it,
it was a Politic design, all for vainglory only; the aim of his ambition
was, that the Prophet would honor him before the Elders of his people. ver^e
(...)


Thus did sin thrust on sin, as one wave drives another. And if by these
degrees his rebellion clymd not high enough to reach the sin of Idolatry,
behold yet two steps more, by which it will arrive at the very top of it.
First, it was a sin of knowledge, not of ignorance: For he had a precept
enjoined, Go smite Amalek. He had a reason adjoined; Remember that which
Amaleck did, how he laid wait verse ^* verse 3.
for Israel often. Why behold, Abraham obeyed God even against reason; dispensing
with all his dear and near affections: at Gods command, ready to kill his
own and only son: yet see disobedient Saul^ though he have the Lords
express warrant, backed with unanswerable reason, will to the contrary, spare
Agag, a stranger, an Amalckite, a professed enemy to God and his chosen Israel.

Secondly, which was the pitch of his iniquity; it was not a sin of knowledge
only, but of stubbornnes; a sin of the will; plain rebellion; a wilful
desperate contumacy. Gods dearest children fall every day by sins of
infirmity; but they in their offenses are passive, rather then active; they do
not that which they would, they do that which they would not. Have they Rem
(...) 2. Cor (...)
but a willing mind? Why God accepts according to that a man has. There is as
great a difference betwixt stubborn presumption and a slip of frailty, as
betwixt murder and chance* medly. Saint Paul makes it the property of
Antichrist himself to be (...), one whose will is his law; and his children,
the children of disobedience, are styled by the holy Ghost, The sons of Belial,
the sons of perdition. Deus est sua cuique cupido. Of all Idolaters he is the
most incorrigible, who makes his will his God. Every siune is so voluntary,
that it were no sin, if it were not voluntary. Sins of infirmity are
especially said to be committed against God the Father, whose especial
attribute is power; sins of ignorance against God the Son, whose especial
attribute is wisdom: but sins of malice are sins against God the holy
Ghost, whose especial attribute is love. It Is ill to offend in the former; it is
fearful, with Saul and his people here, to offend in the latter kind. If
therewere no will, says holy Bernard, there would be no hell. Not but that if
our will be subject to Gods will, it is in one respect the best of all the
souls faculties; it being the faculty by which we enjoy all other good things.
Never sacrifice more acceptable to God, then that of Christ to his Father, non
quod ego volo: Not as I Math. 2^. 39.
will, but as thou will. Whereas on the contrary, nor witchcraft nor Idolatry
could be more displeasing to God then Saul's Rebell^on: insomuch as Gods Spirit
forsook him, because he would not forsake his own will. Non obedire, not to
have done the will of the Lord, this might have been only a sin of error or
infirmity: but nolle obedire, (as it is here in this Text) rebelliously to
reject his Word, and resist his Spirit, and not to be so much as willing to do
his will, such stubbornness and contumacy was as the iniquity of witchcraft
and Idolatry.

So that now I am come to the very aim of my text, and could wish I had no
occasion to proceed: I would to God that Saul and his people were only guilty
of this sin: but I fear (too justly) that I have been all this while but
telling our own tale, mutato nomine de nobis fabula. I profess in verbo
Sacerdotis, that my conscience apprehends nothing so likely to provoke yet Gods
heavier Judgments upon this Land, then our wilfulnes and disobedience; our
stubbornness and contumacy, first, against God in heaven: secondly, against
his Deputy on earth. For the first; how often has the Lord called us by his
Word? how often by his Judgments? yet, at what easy rates have we sold our
obedience to our good God?

Though Caesar permitted a man to break his oath, yet he would have it done
for a kingdom. Siluester the second, as Platina reported, gave his soul to
the devil; but it was for a Popedom. Fearful bargains these! Alas, What
profits it a man to win the whole world, and to lose his own soul? Yet see!
our contracts are more wickedly ridiculous: We wretched worms will disobey our
God, for the least interest of gain; the least wantonness of the flesh; the
least punctilio of honor; the least atome of vanity; for very vile and
wretched things, that vanish as smoke: and if we compare them, either with
the eternity of God in Heaven, or with the incertainty of our life on earth (
things that are, as if they were not at all) yet, for their sakes do we become
worse then Judas himself; for he sold Christ but once, and that for thirty
pieces of silver; we daily sell him thirty times; and that scarce for the price
of one piece. We sin, because we will sin; for every trifle, swearing by
his precious wounds; abusing his gracious blessings; being as bad as Pilate
also, crucifying again the Lord Jesus, to give life unto Barabbas a murderer;
that is, unto our sinful will that slayes our souls. That will and heart of
ours, which we should give up to God, our lust has it, or our ambition: either
new Wine has Hosea 4. 1^. Matthew. 6. 2^
taken it away, or else where our Treasure is, there is our heart also. Would
we but look conscienciously into our selves, we should find that there are
two wills in man: the will of the flesh, and the will of the spirit; the one
from our selves, the other from God. If we will follow that only which is our
own, (the will of the flesh) we are mere Monothelites, as bad as beasts
themselves: but if we submit the will of the flesh, to the will of the spirit;
Tunc erit vera pax hominis, quando and caro animo iudice regitur, and animus
Deo praeside gubernatur. Then is there perfection of happiness in the soul of
man, when the flesh is governed by the Spirit, and the Spirit by God. At which
Christian perfection if we will aim; when God commands, we must not spare to
slay our Agag, to mortify our nearest and dearest sins. Nay, Obedire est
obaudire: so to captiuate our wills to God, that we must hear him not only
against our sins, but against our selves too: And that not only in
prosperity, but in adversity also: otherwise we shall be like a bow, which will
bend in the belly only, but not in the back. In a word, Obedience to God is a
Royal Sacrifice; The fear of the Lord, is the glory of the King. Though Kings
Psalm. ^. 10.
have (...), the will of the subjects under them; yet God has the will of
Kings under him. Though Kings be Gods before men, yet, they are but men before
God; though Gods on earth, yet, but Gods of earth; subjects to the God of
Heaven. God raises one King by the death of another, to let us know, that the
living King depends upon the living God: Though ye are the children of the
most high, yet, ye shall die like men, Psalm. 82. No foundation of a King so
sure, as obedience to him that made him King. No Sacrifice so acceptable, as
for the King to lay down his will at Gods Altar. As nothing more hateful in a
subject then rebellion to his King: So nothing more dangerous in a King, then
rebellion to God: but if the King trusts in the Psalm. 21. 7.
mercy of the Lord, he shall not slide. For he gives deliverance to Kings, and
rescues David his servant Psalm. 144. ^^.
from the hurtful sword.

Nor does the benefit of Royal obedience to God redound to the King alone; the
King by his righteousness Prou. 2^. ^.
maintains the Country. Foelix Respub: in qua qui imperat, timet Deum, says
Justin; How long has our own happy experience demonstrated to us, That the
Piety of the King, is the preservation of the Commonwealth? Nor can we justly
forget the happiness of this Day, wherein our own souls know, that God has
enlarged us the continuance of this vnualewable blessing, a most Pious Son,
succeeding a most Religious Father. It Is not with us, where the King obeyes the
Jesuit, the Jesuit his Rector, the Rector his General, his General the
Pope, the Pope his own Traditions, above the Oracles of God. The King resolves
with David, I will hearken what the Lord God will say unto Psalm. 85. 8
me. To which end, how constant is He in his private, how frequent in His
public Devotions? how reverend in His gestures? how exemplary in His life? Ye
cannot count that flattery; which our just comfort, and which the duty of the
Day calls for. If Regis ad exemplum be a good rule, can the Kingdom find out a
better Master to teach the Atheist, Religion? the glutton, temperance? the
drunkard, sobriety? the prophaner, sanctity? the lascivious, chastity? the
Idolater, Purity? Insomuch as would the subjects well learn their Kings
lesson, we could not have such cause to fear the wrath of God in the
prosecution of his judgments upon us: since the Obedience and Piety of this
our holy Guardian stands like the good Angel, like Moses in the gap, to divert
Gods plagues from us. Oh, that therefore His example, and the consideration of
our own good, would move us to express our thankfulness in our obedience to
God first and chiefly!

Secondly, and by a true rule of subordination to Gods Deputy our King. To
which we are not only sweetly invited by his goodness, but vndenyably obliged
by the rule of Conscience; for Kings are Gods Christ's on earth, (as the
Psalmist calls them,) They are neither from Pope nor people, as some would have
it; but hold in Capite immediately from God: By me Kings reign. If with Israel
thou reiectest Samuel, Proverbs 8. 15. 1 Samuel 8. 7.
thou reiectest God himself. I know there is a generation, who think
themselves bound by their holy profession, to quit subjects from their
obedience; to authorize the deposition, nay, the murder of Kings; with Pope
Sixtus Quintus, to justify treasons and parricides, as rare and memorable Acts.
God forbid any such Zimries or Doegs should lurk within the tents of our
Israel. The Gospel cannot suffer us to swell to this height of rebellion. Yet,
that we may not too much ouer-valew our selves, give me leave to wish; I
would there were none among us, who place their conscience too much in their
will; who are all for faith and the first table, nothing for obedience and the
second table. I would there were none to tell us, that to obey our Prince, is
to betray our country; none, who stamp it as a maine brand upon the Clergy,
That they preach obedience. Well, Christians, let it be more practiced, I dare
promise that it will be less preached. Whence we that preach it, have our
warrant, I am sure: but in what Catechism these men learn their religion, I
know not. From Rome they are ashamed to take it; from Conscientious In Esaias cap
^
Calvin they could not, who tells us that the performance of the second table
is the true touch* stone of hypocrites. Much less from Judicious Luther, who
professed in a point of Canonical obedience, Mallem obedire, quam miracula
facere: That he had rather obey, then do miracles. And therefore these men,
who will do nothing without Text, might find Text enough for their obedience,
not only in my Text here, but in 1. Peter 2. Chapter, where they are enjoined
to obey for the Lords sake: and for conscience sake, in the 13. to the Romans
2. where to disobey is damnation. In the whole current of the old Testament,
where we find that for man's disobedience, the pestilence has devoured them;
Fire from heaven has consumed them; The earth has opened her mouth and
swallowed them. Filthy dreamers (as holy Jude calls them) who despise Dominion,
and speak evil Jude ^ 1^, ^
of Dignities, woe unto them: for they have perished in the gaine-saying of
Core: Raging waves of the sea, foming out their own shame, to whom is reserved
the blacknes of darkness for ever.

It was the speech of a man renowned for wisdom in our age, That if he were
commanded to put forth to the sea in a ship that had neither mast nor tackling,
he would do it. And being asked what wisdom that were? replied, The wisdom
must be in Him that has power to command, not in him that conscience binds to
obey.

Hear yet a wiser then he. My Son, fear God and Prou. 24. 3.
the King* and meddle not with them who are given to change: for their calamity
will rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them? To conclude; pretend
these men what they will, Sine obedientia quisque infidelis esse conuincitur.
S. Gregory had no faith in their faith who professed against obedience. Nemo
humanam potestatem contemnit, nisi qui prius Diuinam contempsit. No man has
learned to disobey his King, but he had learned before to disobey his God. Oh,
let us all therefore take heed, That while we fly from Idolatry, we run not
into Rebellion. Far be it from us to be found with Israel a disobedient and
gainsaying people. But as God with one hand, has as upon this Day, derived to
us an Inualewable blessing, a true Defender of the Faith, and Protector of the
Gospel; a King resolved to pursue Amalek, who has so often laid in wait for
Israel: so let us with another hand offer on the same Day, the best of
Sacrifices, Obedience. Obedience to God, who has blessed us with such a King:
Obedience to our King, who is such an example of Obedience to God.

To conclude, Let us pray for our selves, that we may resist all sin,
especially presumptuous sin, especially Rebellion, The sin parallel to
Witchcraft and Idolatry. And let us pray for our King, that we long and
constantly obeying Him, and He long and constantly obeying God; may live and
prosper in the favor of God, and the love of his subjects; to the confusion of
our malicious adversaries, and to the glory of the Gospel. This grant, O Thou
eternal King of Kings, God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost; to whom eternal
Trinity in Unity; be all Praise, Power, Glory, etc.

AMEN.
FINIS.

