A PROCLAMATION SET forth by Sir James Carroll Knight Mayor of the City of
Dublin.
WHere great inconvenience daily happens unto this City, by reason of sundry
disloyal, wicked, and malicious Persons, who rather prefer their own
private unlawful desires, and their private commodity and profit, then by
observing of good Laws and Orders, to procure ye public commodity of the
Inhabitants of the same, and do by their undutiful behavior, endanger
th^mselues in the penalties and punishments of sundry Laws established:
Wherefore the said Mayor intending the reformation of the same, has thought
good, as well by the special commandment and direction of the Right Honorable
the Lord Deputy and Council established for this Kingdom, as also by the advice of the said Mayor and his Assosiats, the Magistrates of this City, to
forewarne and give knoweledge to such as have been ye offenders, that they from
henceforth should not incur the danger of the Laws ordained for offenses,
which (by Gods permision) he intends to put in due execution.

First, the said Mayor by the special comaundment and direction of the Right
Honorable the Lord Deputy and Council, does in his Majesty's name straightly
charge and command all manner of Jesuits and Semenaries Priests, and other
Priests authorized by the Sea of Rome, that are within the City of Dublin and
Franchises thereof, contrary to ye effect of sundry Proclamations published in
that behaulfe, do forthwith remove and depart from the said City and
Franchises, so as they nor any of them, nor any other of that kind, be
hereafter found within any part of the said City or Franchises, at their
perils: And further, the said Mayor by the comaundment and direction aforesaid,
does in his Majesty's name straightly charge and command all and every
Inhabitant, Househoulder, and other Person and Persons whatsoever, dwelling
within this City and Franchises thereof, that they nor any of them, do from
henceforth harbor, keep, or receive into any of their Houses, any Jesuit or
other the Priests aforenamed: Nor shall suffer the said Jesuits or other
Priests, or any of them, to use or exercise their Function contrary to the
Laws of this Realm, neither prrmit or suffer any meetings or assemblies of
People in any of their Houses or Chambers to hear the said Jesuits or other
Priests exercise their said Functions, upon pain of imprisonment of every
such offender, till they and every of them shall be delivered by due course of
Law.

Further the said Mayor does in his Majesty's name straightly charge and
command all and every such Person und Persons within this City and Subburbs,
that do presume to teach and instruct Children or others in any kind of
Learning or Docterine, being not allowed and Lycensed by the Lord Archbyshopp
of this Dioces, that they and every of them do forthwith forbear to teach and
instruct within this City and Franchises, any Children or others, until they
shall be allowed and lycensed by the said Lord Archbyshopp: And withal, that no
Inhabitant or other Person whatsoever within this City and Franchises, do
from henceforth permit or suffer any such Teacher or Instruetor to teach within
any of their Houses and Chambers within this City and Franchises, upon pain
of imprisonment and such furthere punishment as may be inflicted upon them, by
ye Laws and statutes of this Realm.

Also the said Mayor in the Kings Majesty's name does straightly charge and
command, that noe Person or Persons, Inhabitants of this City or otherwise,
shall use any for staulling, regrating or ingrosing, to the hinderance of ye
Market of this City, in buying any Wheat, Malt, or other grain, Fleash,
Fish, Butter, Eggs, Cheese, or any other Victuals, or Accates, before the same
come to the ordinary and accustomed places for selling thereof, there openly
and publicly to be sold, upon pain of xx. s. and imprisonment: And that no
Inhabitant in Fishtreete do permit any Veales, Muttons, or other Fleash to be
brought into their Houses to be kept, for any Country Butcher, or other Person,
to the prejudice and disfurnishing of the Market, upon pain of xx. days
imprisonment, as well to the Owner of the House where such Fleash shall be found,
as also to ye Owner of the Fleash, and also forfeiture of the said Fleash.

And the said Mayor does by the advice aforesaid, straightly charge and
command, that no Person or Persons Inhabitants of this City and Subburbs,
shall from the xx. day of November next, suffer any single-Woman to keep his
or their Tavern in any sort, upon pain of forfeiting and paying ten pounds,
for every such offense, the one haulfe to this City, and the other haulfe to
such as shall inform the same.

And also the said Mayor seeing the great number of Fur and Faggot Reekes,
that are placed both within the City and also in the Subburbs, whereby great
inconvenience may arise (if the same be not speedely prevented:) The said Mayor
by ye advise aforesaid, does straightly charge and command all such Persons as
have now at this instant any such Fur and Faggot, or any other Fuel subject
to Fur within this City, to remove the same by the xx. day of November
next, and that none shall make any manner of Fur, or Faggot-Reeks hereafter,
within the said City, upon pain of xl. s. for every such offense.

And further that noe Fur or Faggot-Reekes as aforesaid, shall continue or be
made within ten Fathom of any House or Tenement in the Subburbs of the City,
after the said xx. day of November next, upon the like pain of xl. s. And
that no Stabler or other Person, from henceforth shall take any more for livery
of any Horse at Hay and Stable room for every xxiiii. hours, but vi. d.
sterling, upon pain of of xiii. s. iiii. d. for every offense.

And further, for the avoiding of diverse other inconuensences that may ensue,
the said Mayor does in like manner charge and command, that all
Country-Butchers coming to the Market of this City hereafter with Flesh to be
soulde, shall bring with them the Hides, Skins, and Tallowe, of al such Beeues,
Muttons, and Veales, as they bring to be sold, upon pain of forfeiture of
all such Beeues, Muttons, or Veales so bought or sold, and that all such
Persons shall bring the same to the Fishambles, there to be sold, and not in
the Streets out of the said Shambles, as heretofore has been accustomed, and
not to be sold there before eight of the clock, upon pain of imprisonment as
well to the Buyer as to the Seller: And withal, that no free Butcher of this
City, nor their Servants, be from henceforth found in the Country Shambles
selling in gross or by retayle, any Fleash upon any market day, upon pain of
xl. s. sterling, And withal, that the Country Butcher from henceforth shall
continue in the Country-Shambles every Market day to sell and retaile their
Fleash from eight of the clock in the forenoone, until one in the afternoon,
and no longer, upon pain of forfeiture of their said fleash.

And likewise that no Person or Persons from henceforth do keep any disorder
or miscule in any part of this City and Subburbs, espetially upon the Saboth
day, at any other day, by day or by night, upon pain of such punishment as
are by the Laws provided: And withal, that no Person or Persons do from
henceforth play at Tennis, Stooleball or Cudgels, or use any kind of bodily
exercise openly in any Street, Lane, or places within this City and Subburbs
on the Sabbath day, upon pain of imprisonment, and that no Prentize or Servant
of any Citizen be from henceforth found playing within any Tennis-court or
Bouling-Allies within this City and Subburbs, upon pain of three days
imprisonment in the Stocks to every offender for every offense.

Also the said Mayor by the advice aforesaid, does straightly charge and
command, that no Ale-wife or Seller of strong Ale or Beer, shall sell any
strong Ale or strong Beer other then after the rate of one Lawful sealed Wine
quart for a penny sterling, upon pain of forfeiture of ten shillings
sterling: and of ordinary Beer or Ale, two Wine quarts for a penny sterling,
upon the penalty aforesaid.

And further, the said Mayor does by the advice aforesaid, does straightly
charge and command, that no Inhabitant of this City or Subburbs, shall utter
or sell any Wine, Beer, or Ale, on any Saboth day until xi. of ye clock in
the forenoone, and that during the same time no Cook or other Person shall
sell any Fleash, Fish, or other dressed meats, either upon Stalls or otherwise
upon pain of imprisonment for the space of twenty days, and forfeiture of
the same so bought or sold to be bestowed upon the poor Prisoners of the
Cas^ell or Newgate, And that withal, no Person or Persons, either Free or
otherwise inhabiting within ye Franchises and Liberties of this City, shall
from the xx. day of November next, utter or sell either Ale or Beer in gross
or by retaile, without the lisence of the Mayor of the said City for the time
being, first had and obtained in writing, upon pain of forfeiture of xl. s.
by every offender in this case, and imprisonment.

Moreover the said Ma^or does by the advice aforesaid, straightly charge and
command, that none of the Citizens, Man or Woman, wear any Irish Apparel,
or such Apparel as is prohibited by the Laws of this Realm, upon pain of
such penalties as are by the same Laws made and provided: Also he further
commands that no Cook of this City or Subburbs, do or shall sell any kind
of Fleash or Fish, raw or undressed without License as aforesaid, upon pain
of forfeiture of x. s. for every offense, and withal does straightly charge and
command, that every Man do use and have true waights and measures, according
the Standart, upon pain of such penalties and punishments as by the Laws are
in that case made and provided.

And the said Mayor does by the advice aforesaid, straightly charge and
command, that all Idell, sturdy and vacabond Beggars and other young
Loiterers, as well men as women, having no Lawful Trade to live by, or Masters
to maintain them, shall within xx. days after the publishing hereof, avoid
this City and Subburbs, upon pain of imprisonment for forty days, and
after to be whipped, and banished out of this City.

And further, that no Person or Persons do or shall come into the Market, on
any Market day either to cheapen or buy any Grain before the Bell be roung in
the common Hall, upon pain of imprisonment of the offenders, at the
discretion of the suid Mayor, and forfeiture of two shillings sterling by the
offender for every offense: and that all Persons which buy or sell any Corn
from henceforth within the Liberties, shall buy and sell by this measure and
not otherwise, viz. the Wheat Pecke sealed to be three Bushels of Winchester
measure strickt, and the Maulte measure to be the Bristol-band-barrel strickt,
s. by every offender in this nature. And for the better effecting hereof, the
said Mayor has caused xxx. Pecks for Wheat to be made and distributed into the
several Wards of this City, for avoiding inconvenience and incertainty of
the heaped Market Pecke heretofore used.

And further, that no Person or Persons of what quality or condition soever,
shall sell any Fleash, Fish, or any other Victuals or Accates within this City
or Subburbs, except Herbs and Fruit, which must not be sold till after
Sermon-time in the afternoon upon ye Saboth day, upon pain of forfeiture
of al such Fleash, Fish, Victuals and Accates: And that no Carmen, Carters,
Bruers, or their Servants, shall from the said xx. day of November come or go
with any Ironbound-Cartes or Carres within the Walls of this City, upon
pain of forfeiture of twelve pence sterling for every offense.

Also the said Mayor by the advice aforesaid, charge and commands, That no
Person or Persons shall from henceforth keep any Swine, Cowes, or Cattle,
within this City, upon forfeiture of xx. s. sterling for every time
offending in this nature: and that no Swine be kept vnringed by any Person or
Persons in the Subburbs of this City, nor suffer to come within the Walls of
this City, upon the like forfeiture.

And further, that no Person or Persons from henceforth shall use within this
City or Liberties thereof, the Trade of Broakage in Selling or Buying of any
Remnants of Broadcloath, Stuffes, or other Commodities or Merchandise, upon
pain of forfeiture of forty shillings sterling by every offender for every
time offending, and imprisonment during Master Majors pleasure.

And likewise where many ungodly, wicked, and ill disposed Persons lately
coming out of England, and there is resident in this Kingdom, do use and
continue that most cursed and cruel trade of extreme interest and Usury, by
grinding the Face of the poor, in lending of Money at rates far exceeding
Judicial cruelty in that kind: The said Mayor b^ the advice aforesaid, does
straightly in his Majesty's name charge and command all manner of Person and
Persons that heretofore have used, or hereafter shall use that griping Trade of
Usury, in this City and Franchises thereof, either by way of interest to be
repaid in Money, or forfeiture of Paunes, to forbear either for the time past,
for which they can challenge any interest for lone of their Moneis, or for the
time to come to take above after the rate of x. li. in the Hundred per Annum,
which is but by way of tolleration only, upon pain and penalty of such
Laws as are established against the same.

And lastely, the said Mayor purposing by the advice aforesaid, to put all the
said Laws and Ordinances in due execution, has caused this Proclamtion to be
printed, that it may be so public as none shall pretend Ignorance of it,
and therefore commands every Alderman, Deputy Alderman, and Counst able, in
the said City and Liberties, to buie on of these for his full and perfect
direction in the execution hereof.

Dated at Dublin the last day of October. 1612. James Carroll Mayor Dublin.
GOD SAVE THE KING.
Printed at Dublin by John Franckton Printer and Stationer to the Kings
Majesty. 1672.


