THE MIRROR of Man's life.

Plainly describing, What weak moulde we are made of: what miseries we are
subject unto: how uncertain this life is: and what shall be our end.

Englished by H. Kirton.

WORMS MEAT: O FROATH: O VANITY: WHY ART THOU SO INSOLENT?


IMPRINTED AT LONdon by Henry Bynneman. 1576.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, and his singular good Lady, the Lady Anne, Countess
of Penbroke, mother unto the Honorable Lord Compton. H.K. wishes all honor
and long life.
TO avoid the fault of Ingratitude, amongst the old Philosophers being
accounted one of the gretest: I thought it good (right Honorable) to dedicate
this Book unto you, as a token or argument of my good will: rather remembering,
tha^ requiting your bou^tifull courtesy. The which Book was written above three
hundred and threscore years past, entitled The misery of man. The contents
whereof, if with deep and due judgment we do consider, we shall easily find
great cause to make a rechlesse account of al worldly pomp and vanity: and
that for great cause: For our life in her first entry into this world, is
encou^tred with three capital enemies, pain, care, and sorrow: Pain bids the
body battle, care continues the skirmish, and sorrow gives the victory. It
is a grievous thing to behold our first entertainment so displeasantly
entreated: we lamente in the first minute, and rewe to the last moment. No
sooner born but straight bound hand and foot, and cast into the cradle as
into a prison, where we lie long time fast fettered in the feebleness of our
own flesh. Then enter we into the wars that holy Job speaks of, where he
says: The life of man is but warfare. For there is no part of man's age that he
passes over, in the which he has not some combat to fight. The first
conflict which we are to endure, is infancy, in the which time we labor with
the lack of reason, and fight with our own folly, not knowing where we are,
ne what we are, ne whence, nor for what we come. The^ after a time, we have to
strive with our hands and feet, using them to learn their duties. And in this
conflicte we do continue until the age of seven years, all the which time we
are feeble, weak, and without judgment or reason, not able to help ourselves.
These years ouerpassed, we war under the fear of the rod, in spending time
to learn some liberal science, or else some other machanical art, whereby we
may either aspire to some high estate, or else procure our necessary sustena^ce
In the third part of our age, we enter into a most perilous skirmishe, fighting
against the desires of the flesh, against fond affections and vain
imaginations, which causes the mind to be unconstant, and to be carried away
with sundry fancies. Fourthly, we have to encounter with manhood. In this
warfare, we bear some countenance in the common wealth, ambitiouslye seeking
after honor and estimation, and couetously affecting wealth and riches. To
this age is incide^t the charge of wife and children, the maintenance of our
family, and care of posterity. After all these follows the main battle
which never takes peace with us, until our dying day. In this field we receive
many wounds which never can be cured: as bleared eyes, tre^bling hands, gowty
feet, deaf ears, wrinkled brows, lean cheeks, lothsom breath, baldness,
corruption of stomach, with many more miseries infinite, which never rest to
va^quish the body with furious assalts, ne to disquiet the mind with
troublesome thoughts, and to wound the conscience with the remembrance of
things past. And furthermore, such is the unhappy lot of life, that all those
things which we most greedily desire, as honor, riches^ and plesures, we
leave them again speedily, and in our greatest dangers they do us no good.
Therefore the wise Philosopher, being demanded what was the gretest thing in the
world? answered, it was the valiaunte heart of a man, that could contemn and
lightly esteem the high and mighty things of the world. For honor and dignity
has no assurance, and in Fortunes favor is no stabilitie. Philip king of
Macedone obtained in one day three notable victories: After the which he is
said to have kneeled down upon the ground, holding up his hands unto the
Heavens, crying out in this wise: O Lady Fortune most uncertain, O my happy
destenies, I humbly beseech you, that after this great honor and glory, which
you now have given me, you would moderate and temper the troubles and
afflictions which in time to come you will lay upon me. For commonly, great
prosperity is a messenger to grievous calamity, and nothing in this life is
certain or sure. As Socrates affirmed when he said, that the certaynest thing
in this world was, that all things were uncertain. It is written, that diverse
Captains came unto Agesilaus, and requested him to walk up unto the hill
called Olympus, where (said they) you shall see great wealthy merchantes
uttering a world of riches and precious Jewels. His answer was this, if I
could buy or sell, yea or excha^ge their sorrow for mirth, sickness for
health, death for life: I would the^ go thither and spend all that I have:
but I see (quoth he) that the biers and sellers, yea and the very things
themselves are condemned to die and to perish. Wherefore neither the sight of
any thing, nor the obtaining of any thing there, can better mine estate, or
help me at the hour of death, when I must creep into my grave. For although
honor, wealth, and riches, bear great rule amongst me^, yet they prevail not
against death. To verefie the same, I could wish (right Honorable) other
testimony, The Lady Compton.
tha^ the lamentable funerals of your loving daughter lately deceassed: of
whom I will forbear to speak much, least the green memory may rufully renew
your forepassed sorrows. In whom, whiles she was, what might be wished that
she wanted? She was endued with all excellent gifts, as beauty, virtue, and
fortune: Her virtues were passing, and made her comparable with any of her
equals: Her beauty was singular, and made her most amiable. What greater
fortune, than to be nobly borne and to live in honor? She feared God, she
loved her Prince, she h^ted vice, and followed virtue: sh^e pitied the misery
of the afflicted, she relieved the necessity of those that wanted: she was the
daughter of true nobility, the mirror ^f al courtesy, the mistress of al
modesty. To be short, she did well and dyed well. Yet neither nobleness of
birth, nor yet the gifts of nature or Fortune, could keep her with us: when
death would have her. Thus you may see, how loathsome our life is, and how
uncertain the transitory things of this world are. I hold him therefore most
wisest, that so lives as though he should always die. There came one unto
Diogenes and said: O what a miserable thing it is to live in this world: unto
whom he answered: my fre^d you are deceived, for it is no misery for a man to
live, but it is a miserable thing for a man to live evil. Whose answer we
shall find most true^ when we shall be called to make an account of our
bayliwikes. For we have here no continual, mansion place: being made or
created of two natures, whereof the one is mortal, and rules here for a time,
where flesh and blood bears the sway: The other is celestial, which gives
feeling, understanding, and judgment unto the erthly or mortal substance: of
the which if it be undefiled in this life, they both shall inhabit the place
of perpetual bliss, they shall receive heavenly gifts and virtues, they shall
acco^^any wi^h Angels, they shall in a moment s^e from one end of the world
unto the other, they shall penetrat the heavens and behold the throne of gods
majesty, where shall be such joy as no heart can think nor to^g express. And so
c^auing pardon for this my bold at^empte, I leave you unto the almighty, who
always in honor preserve your estate.

A Table containing the effect of this presenr Treatise.
In the first Book.
OF the misery of mankind. Chap. 1. The vile and base matter whereof man is
mad^. Chap. 2. The corruption of man's conc^ption. Chap. 3. Of the fee^lenesse
and weakness of the ^ong infant. Chap. 4. Of the pain of the childs birth,
and of his pitiful crying out. Chap. 5. Of the nakedness of man. Chap. 6.
What frui^e man brings forth. Chap. 7. The incommodities of old age, and
shortness of l^^e. Chap. 8. Of the labor of mortal men. Chap. 9. Of the
studies of wise men. Chap. 10. Of the diverse studies of men. Chap. 11. Of
diverse g^iefs and sorows of ma^kind^ Cha. 12 The misery of the poor and ^ich.
Chap. 13. The miseries of servants and masters. Cha. 14^ The misery of the
married and unmarried man. Chap. 15. The misery of good and evil men. Chap. 16.
Of the enimyes of man. Chap. 17. The lamentation of the soul being in prison.
Chap. 18. Of the short joy of man in this life. Chap. 19. Of sudden sorrows
unlooked for, which happen unto men. Chap. 20. Of the neerenesse of death. Chap.
21. Of the terror of dreams. Chap. 2^. Of compassion. Chap. 23. Of sundry
misfortunes that happen unto men. Chap. 24. Of the innumerable kynds of
sickenesses that man is subject unto. Chap. 25. Of diverse kinds of torments
that men sustain. Chap. 26. Of a certain horrible fact committed by a woman
compelled thereunto by extreme misery. Chap. 27. Of the punishing of the
innocent, and dismissing of the guilty. Chap. 28.
In the second Book.
OF the culpable and sinful beginning of man's conversation. Chap. 1. Of the
fervent desire and thirst after riches. Chap. 2. O^ unjust rewards and bribes.
Chap. 3. Of the accepting of persons. Chap. 4. Of selling of justice. Chap. 5.
Of the insatiable desire of the covetous man. Chap. 6. Wherefore the covetous
man can not be satisfied. Chap. 7. Of the false and deceitful name of riches.
Chap. 8. Examples against covetousness. Chap. 9. Of the great car^ that
coue^ous men ^^ue. Chap. 10. Of the inordina^e desire that the covetous man
has to keep riches. Chap. 11. Why the covetous man is called a worshipper of
Idolles^ Chp. 12. The pr^perties of a covetous man. Chap. 13 Of y^ dangerous
possessing of riches. Cha. 14^ Of lawf^ll riches. Chap. 15. Of the uncertainty
of riches. Chap. 16. Of Glutton^. Chap. 17. Exampl^s against Gluttony. Chap.
18. Of Drunkenness. Chap. 19. Examples against Drunkenness. Chap. 20. Of
Lechery. Chap. 21. Of the generality of Lechery. Chap. 22. Of many which
have perished through lechery. Chap. 23. Of the Ambitious man. Chap. 24. Of y^
excessive desire of ambitious me^. Cha. 25 An example of an Ambitious man.
Chap. 26. Of ^he short and miserable life of noble men. Cha^. 27. The
proper^ies of a ^r^ude man. Chap^ 28. Of the fall of Lucifer y^ father of pride.
Ch^ 29. Of the arrogancy of men. Chap. 30. O^ the abomination of pride. Chap.
31. Against the arrogancy of proud me^. Chap. 32. An example against the
deceyt of ambitious men. Chap. 33. Of the properties of arrogant men. Chap. 34.
Of superfluous appa^ell. Chap. 35. Against vain decking and trimming of the
bod^. Chap. 36. That more favor is showed unto man for his apparels sake^ tha^
for his virtue. Cha 37 Of the paynting of the face to deceive the eyes. Chap.
38. Of the vncl^annesse of man's heart. Chap. 39. Of the grie^es and torments
which evil men do suffer at the hour of death, Chap. 40 Of the coming of
Christ at the hour of every man's death. Chap. 41.
In the third Book.
OF the putrefaction of the body when the soul is departed. Chap. 1. Of the
heavy remembrance of the damned souls. Ch^p. 2^ Of the unprofitable repentance
of the damned. Chap. 3. Of the manifold and diverse p^ines of hell. Chap. 4. Of
the unspeakable anguishe and torment of the damned. Chap. 5. Of hell fire.
Chap. 6. Of the darkness of hell. Chap. 7. Of the confusion of pains. Chap.
^. Of the continuance of the pains in hell. Cha. 9. Of the everlasting pains of
the damned souls. Chap. 10. Test^monies of the eternal punishments and
torments of hell. Chap. 11. Of the day of judgment. Chap. 12. Of the
tribulation that shall go before the day of judgment. Chap. 13. Of the signs
going before the later day. Chap. 14. O^ the power, wisdom, and justice of the
judge. Chap. 15. Of Gods judgment. Chap. 16. That nothing shall profit the
damned souls. Chap. 17.
Finis Tabulae.
THE MIRROR of man's life.
The first Book.
Of the Misery of mankind. Chapter first.
IF the Prophet Jeremy whom God blessed or sanctified in his mothers womb,
Hiere. 20.
did cry out and pronounce of him self these words: Why came I out of my
mothers womb to behold with min^ ^y^s the labor and sorrow of the world, and
that my days should be consumed in confusion? if (I say) that holy Prophet
did speak thus of himself, what then shall I say, whom my mother has brought
forth in sin? Truly I may well cry out, woe is me: and with most
lamentable voice may say, O mother why have thou brought me forth the child of
bitterness and sorrow? why did I not end my days in my mothers womb? Job. 3.
wherefore did I not perish as soon as I came into the world? why was I
received in my mothers lap, fed and nourished with her pappes^ being borne
to destruction, and to be the food of fire? would to God the place of my
creation had bin my grave, and the house of my everlasting conception: For the^
I should have bin as though I had not bin at all, transferred from birth to
burial. Who will therefore give a fountain of tears unto mine eyes, that I may
bewail the miserable entry or coming of man into this world? the faulty and
guilty proceeding of man in this his conversation? and the damnable or
dangerous departure of the soul of man from the body? I will therefore with
tears consider and declare whereof man is made, what his doings are, and what
perhaps shall become of him after this life. Truly man is made of earth,
conceived in sin, and borne to pain. He does commit in this life, wicked
and shrewde turns which be not lawful: foul and unclean acts which be
not decent: and vain things which are not expedient. Through his wickedness
he shall become food to ye fire, meat for worms, and a lump of putrefaction
loathsome to behold. I will expound it more plainly. Man is made of dust, of
clay, of ashes: he is conceived in the wanton desire of fleshly lust, in the
heat of carnal appetyte, in the foul delight of leacherye, and which is
worse, in the spotte of sin. He is borne a ser^ant to labor, fear, and
sorrow: and (which is more miserable) a subject to death. His doyngs are ^or
the most part dangerous, The doings of man.
whereby be either offends God, hurts his neighbors, or impayreth him
self. He practices unseemly and dishonest things, whereby he procures
infamye, defiles his conscience, and dishonesteth him self. He occupyeth him
self in vain things, whereby he does neglecte matters of importance: he
does despise things which be for his profitte, and nothing regards things
which be^ necessary. He shall become chafe to the fire which always does
burn vnquenchably: What shall become of man.
He shall be meat for the worm which always does gnawe and devour: and in
fine, he shall be an immortal mass of putrefaction, heaped full of horror and
lothsomenesse.

Of the vile and base matter whereof man is made. Chap. 2.
GOD has made man of the slyme of the earth, which is more base than be the
other Elements, as it does appear by the second Chapter of Genesis. For he
made the Planettes and stars, of the fi^e: the blastes and wyndes he cre^ted
of the ayr^: the fishes and birds of the water: Genesis 2.
but man and beasts he did form of the earth. Therefore if man do consider
those things which be made of water, he shall find his substance vile and
base: if he have respect to those living things which are created of the
air, he shall acknowledge him self to be much inferior: and if he look
upon those creatures which be made of fire, he shall ius^ly take him self
most abiecte of all. He shall not compare him self with heavenly things,
neither shall ^e presume to prefer him self before earthly creatures, for
that he finds his own substance not far differing from the savage or
brute beasts, and shall acknowledge him self like unto them. Eccle. 3.

The book of the preacher.


For we evidently see the death of men and beasts is all one, the condition
of them both is equal, and man can do no more than the beast in this
respect: they be made of earth, and they do both return again into earth.
These be the words of the wise King Solomon. Wherefore to conclude, what other
thing is man, but clay and ashes? Here^ppon does man say unto God, Remember I
beseech thee O Lord, that thou have made me like claye, and wilt reduce me
into dust. Man is claye and ashes.
And heereuppon does God say again unto man, thou art dust, and shall return
again into dust. I am compared (says holy Job) to clay, Job. 10.
and likened to embers and ashes. Clay is made of water and dust, both of them
remaining, but ashes are made of wood and fire, both of them consuming or
decaying. Gene. 3.
Job. 3.
The mystery is manifest, but to be declared more playner in another place.
W^erefore then do thou wexe proud or insolent O thou claye? or why do
thou extol and magnify thy self O thou dust? and whervppon may thou
boast, being nothing but ashes?

The corruption of man's Conception. Chap. 3.
THou may perhaps refute these former reasons after this superficial
sort, saying, that Adam was made of the slime of the earth, and that thy being
is from the seed of man. True it is thou say: but yet was Adam made of a
pure and maydenlye earth, and thou art created of an unclean and corrtupte
seed. Man is made of unclean seed.
And who can make him clean which is conceived of an ad^ltred and defiled
seed? Job. 14.
or what is man that he should seem pure and undefiled, and that being borne
of a woman he should appear just? For behold (says the Prophet David) I am
conceived in wickedness, Psalm. 50.
and my mother has brought me forth in sin: Not in one sin only, nor in
one kind of offense, but in a multitude of iniquities: That is to say, in the
iniquityes and sins of others. For Conception is of two sorts. Cenception of
two sorts.
The one is of ^eedes: and the other of natures. The former conception is to
be understood, in offenses personally committed: the second is, in offenses
contracted or taken by others. The parents do commit offense in the former
conception: and the children do incur offense in the second. For who
knows not y^ carnal knowledge (although it be in marriage) ca^ not he had with
out ye motion of the flesh, without the heat of carnal desire, and without ye
foul delight of wanton lust. Whereby the seeds conceived are adulterate,
defiled, and corrupt: Of the which the soul or life at ye length poured into
the body, does gather the spot of sin, the blemish of offence^ and the
corruption of iniquity, like as an evil seasoned vessel poysoneth good
liquor, or as that which is unclean defiles the contrary. For the soul of
man has three natural operations or virtues. The virtues of the soul.
The first is, the use of reason, to the end it may disceyrne good from evil.
The second is an aptenesse or inclynation to di^lyke, that thereby it may
shun or declyne from that which is evil. The third is a disposition or
pronenesse to affecte, that thereby it may desire and like that which is good.
These three effects or virtues are in man from his birth, greatly altered and
obscured, by three contrary vices. For the use of reason is miscarried by
ignorance, yt it cannot discern the good from the evil. The inclination to
dislike or to be offended with that which is evil, is headlong hurled down by
the fury of anger, which causes the refusal^ oftentimes of that which is good:
And the affection to covet or desire yt which is good, is wholly overthrown
through the desire of evil. The first of these virtues or operations brings
forth offense, which consists in omittyng, and in Latyne is called Delictum.
Delictum.
The last brings forth sin or trespass, which does consist in committing,
and in Latin is called Peccatu^. Peccatum.
The third (mean betwixt them both) brings forth both Delictum and
Peccatum. For this word Delictum signifies nothing else but to omit that which
ought to be done: and this word Peccatum does importe the doing of that which
ought not to be done. These three vices do spring through the corruption of
our flesh. For in the carnal acquaintance betwixt man and woman, the deep
consideration and force of reason is covered and ^upprest, and in steed thereof
ignorance takes place: the flame of fleshly delight is kindled, whereby her
fury more increases: the great desire of pleasure is satiate, by the which
concupiscence is ingendered. This is the Tyran of the flesh, the law of the
members, the nourishment and inflammation of sin, The nourishment of sin.
the languishing and feblenesse of nature, and the food of death. No man is
borne without it: which if at any time we happilye pass over, not yelding
thereunto, yet does her force always remain actually graffed in our flesh:
1. Ioh. 1.
for if we shall say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth
is not in us. O grievous necessity, and unfortunate estate of man, before we
can sin we are fastened and straight linked to sin, And before we can
offend, we are bound with offense. By one man sin entered into the world
(says saint Paul) and through sin death h^th gone over all men. Rom 5.
Did not our fathers eat the bitter grape (say Hi^re. 31.
the Prophets) and are not the teeth of their Ezechi. 18.
children set on edge therewith?

Of the feebleness and weakness of the young infant. Chap. 4.
WHy then is light given to this poor wretch, and life to them which live in
bitterness of the soul? happy are they which dyed before they were borne,
feelyng death before they knew what life is. For some come into this world so
deformed and monstrous, Monstrous children.
that they seem rather to be abominations than men: for whom peradventure it
had bin better provided, if they had never come in sight, because they are set
forth to be beholden as monsters. For many of them are borne dismembered, and
corrupt in their senses, to the heaviness and sorrow of their friends, to the
ignominy of their parents, and to the rebuke of their kinsfolks. To what end
should I speak this particularly of some, seeing that generally we be all
borne impotent, without knowledge, without speech, and without strength? We
come into this world lamenting, feebly, faint, differing very little from
brute beasts, yea in worse case than they be in many respects. The
imbecillitie of all infantes and ^ong ^hildren.
For they as soon as they come forth, do by and by march and go forwards,
and we can not only go upright upon our feet, but being crooked are not able to
creep with our hands.

Of the pain of the childs birth, and of his pitiful crying out. Chap. 5.
We be all borne yelling and crying, to the end we may express our misery.
For the man child newly borne cries, A: the female E: so that all cry, A: or
E: which comes from Eua. And what is Eua, What this word Eua: does signifye.
but as much to say as Heu, Ha: which imports alas, or fie upon me. For
these words be^ both Interiections of him that soroweth or lamenteth,
expressing the greatness of his grief. Hereuppon our first mother before her
sin committed in Paradise, Gen 3.
was called Virago, but after she had sinned, she well deserved to be named
Eua: at the which time she heard God say unto her: Thou shalt bring forth
thy child in pain and sorrow. For there is no pain like to the grief of a
woman laboring with child. Wherefore Rachel through ye exceeding great pain
of trauail with her child departing out of this life, Genesis 35.
on her death bed named her son Benoni, which is as much to say, as ye child of
sorrow and pain. The wife of Phinees through sodayn pangs coming upon her, 1.
Reg. 4.
was delivered of a child and both of the^ died as it were at an instant, yet
in ye very point of her death she called her child Icabod^ which is to say the
child of no glory. John. 16.
But as he which escaped after shipwreck is glad, so the woman when she is in
travel is sad, but after she is delivered, reme^breth no more her pain^ for
joy yt there is brought forth a r^^sonable creature into the world. Then to
conclude, she conceiueth her child in uncleanness, she brings it f^orth
with heaviness and sorrow, she nourishes it with anguishe and pain, she
keeps it with continual care and fear. The mis^ry of the wom^n that
bring^th forth chyld^.


Of the nakedness of man. Chap. 6.
NAked comes he out of his mothers womb into this world, Pre^her. 5.
and naked shall he return again from hence: he comes poor and shall
return again poor: Job. 1.
For I came naked out of my mothers womb (says Job) and out of this world I
shall return naked again: we brought nothing (doubtless) in^o this world,
2. Tim. 6.
because we can take nothing with us out of it. If any man go out of the
world clothed; let him consider what kind of appa^ell he brought into it,
which willingly I will pass over, as a thing indecent to be spoken, and
unseemly to be heard.

What ^rui^e man brings forth. Chap. 7.
O Most vile, unworthy, and miserable condition of man: O unseemly and
wretched estate. Search out diligently and make s^rious inquisition of the
herbs and trees: they do of themselves bring forth ^lowers^ boughs, and
fruits, The fruits of h^rbes and trees.
and th^n miserable wretch bring forth nittes, lyse, and worms: They do
of their own nature yield oil, wine, and balm, but thou vtterest things
displeasant and odious: they do send forth from them sweet and pleasant
odours, thou loathsome and unsavory smells: such as the tree is such is the
fruit, Mat 3.
for an evil tree can not bring forth good fruit. And what is man according to
his form, but a certain tree turned v^side down? Mark. 8.

A man is a tree turned vpside down.


whose roots be the hears, whose trunk is the head with the neck, whose
s^ock is the breast with the belly, Job. 13.
the branches be the arms with the legs, the leaves be the fingers with
the joints. This is the leaf which is ^oste with every wind, this is the
tree that is overthrown with every blast, and this is the stubble which is
dried up with the sun.

Of the incommodities of ^lde age and shortness of life. Chap. 8.
IN the first beginning of man's estate, we read that men lived nine hundredth
years and more: but the life of man declining by little and little, God said
unto Noe, Genesis 6.
my spirit or breath shall not remain always in man, for y^ he is flesh, and
his days shall be an hundredth and twenty years: which may be understood as
well of the term of man's life, as of ye space of his repentance. For since yt
time forwards, we seldom read that man lived longer: but when man's life was
cut shorter, ye Psalmist said. The days and time of our life and years, Psalm.
89.
do consist in the very number of seue^tie years, but if through the powers
and forces of nature, they be continued to the number of four score years, yet
that time is but of more labor and sorrow. Shall not ye small number of my days
(says Job) be ended in a short time: Job. 10.
our days pass over more swift than the web which is cut off by the weauer.
Ibi^em 9. and^ ^ and. Esa. 38.
A man borne of a woman lives but a short time, Ibidem. 14.
and is replenished with many myseries, which florisheth for a time, and
vanishes away again, even as a flower: he also flies away like a shadow,
and does never continue in one estate. Few men now adays do come to the
term of fortye years, The infirmities of the old ^an.
but more fewer do attain unto the age of three score yeeres^ If one proceed
forward and come to old age, his heart is by and by afflicted and tormented,
his head is shaken and to^t, his spirits wax fainte and weak, his breathe
yeldeth a loathsome air, his face becomes wrinkled, his stature begins to
be crooked, his sight fails him, his joints weaken, his nose runs, his
hears fall of, his hands tremble and shake, his teeth wax rotten, his ears
become deaf, his virtue and strength does vanishe and decay. The old man is
soon provoked and styrred to wrath, and hardly and with much a do he is
reconciled again to reason. He is quick of belief, and slowly brought from
it: he is full of suspicion and complaints: he is for ye most part sad, and
seldom merry: he is near and covetous: he is swift to speak, but stow to
hear: he praises his old acquaintance, and despises his new friends. He
does reprehend that which is present, and commends that which is past: he
sigheth and is careful: he is dull and impotent. Hear what the Poet says:
Many incommodities bee^^tte an ^lde man on every side. But let neither old ^en
boaste of them selves against young ^en, nor yet let not young men become
in^olent against old men: for what we be, the old man in times paste was,
and what ^e now is, the very same in time to come if life long last shall we
be.

Of the labor of mortal men. Chap. 9.
THe byrd is created to fly, and man is borne to labor: Job. 5.
all his days be full of pains, care and mys^rie, neither do^th his mynd^
rest in the night. And what is this else, but vanity? there is no man under the
sun without labor or trouble, no man under the moon without some want or
defecte, no none at any time without vanity. Time through delay is ye worker
of all changeable things. Uanitie of vanities, and all is but vanity says
the wise man. Eccle. 1.

The book of the precher.


O how dy^^rs be the studies and affections of men? how disagreeing or unlike
be their exercis^s? And yet one end is dew unto them all, and the self same
effect, labor, and affliction of the spirit is incident unto them all.
Eccle. 4.

The book of Jesus son of Siracke.


There is great labor and exercise (says the wise man) ordained for all men,
and a heavy yoke is laid upon the children of Adam, from the day that they
come forth of their mothers womb, until the day of their burial in the mother
of all men.

Of the studies of wise men. Chap. 10.
LEt the wise men search, and curiously enquire the altitude or height of the
hea^ens, the breadth of the earth, the depth of the Sea, let them se^erally
dispute of every one of these a part, let them diligently consider of them al,
let the^ always learn or teach, and what shall they find or reap of this
their exercise, but labor, sorrow, and disquiet of the mind? Ecclesiast 1.

Book of the Preach^r.


He knew this by experience which said, I gave and applied my mind, that I
might know wisdom and learning, errors and foolishness, and I found it was
nothing else but labor and affliction of the mind: for where much wisdom is,
there is also great tra^ell, and wars of ye wits: and the man that seeks to
attain knowledge, procures to him self greef^ and care. For although he
which seeks out t^ose things, must of necessity give himself to much
watching, great diligence, and continual pains: yet is there scarcely any one
thing so base or vile, or any thing so eas^e to be known, which man may fully
understand, and assuredly conceive: unless pe^happes this one thing he may
perfitly learn and know, that there is nothing absolutely known unto man,
Nothing ^o man is per^^^^y ^now^e
notwithstanding his great and forcible arguments grounded upon probable
reasons. Sapient. 9.
Yea farthermore, the corrupt body afflicts the mind: and this earthlye
habitation or mansion house keeps down the divine sense or understanding,
which pondreth and museth upon many things. Hear Solomon upon this matter.
Eccle. 1.

Book of the Prea^her.


All things (says he) be hard, man can not declare and express them in
words. And in an othere place. There is a man (says he) which takes no rest
day nor night, and yet can he find out no reason of the works of God,
Preacher. 8.
yea how much more he shall labor to seek the knowledge of them, so much
the less shall he find. They therefore do soon faynte^ which endeavor to
aspire to the great s^creci^s, which are only reserved to the secret
scrutinie of the divine mai^stie: Because man thereby should become proud and
lofty, Psalm. 63.
and by the hidden mystery of his works God shall b^e glorified. Prou. 25.
For he which does carefullye seek to at^hie^e to ye mightines of gods
maie^tie, shall be o^erthrown through ye mighty power of his glory, because
the more man understands, the more he doubts: and he which thinks him
self wisest, is most foole^ and most deceived. Therefore it is a part of
wisdom or knowledge, for a man to understand that he is ignorant: Precher. 7^
for God has made man upright, and man has incombred and wrapped him self in
many and infinite questions.

Of the diverse studies of men. Chap. 11.
Mortal men make their ways through hedges and by-pathes: What pai^nes and
dang^rs men sustain to becomme rich.
they clime high mountains, and s^rmounte the great hills: they travail over
rocks: they march over the steep Alps: they enter into Caves: they sound
the deapthe of the Sea: they search the bowels of the earth, and sifte the
very Center thereof: they wander in the wilderness and solitarye places of the
woods: they hazard them selves in deserts and unknown corners: they cast
them selves into the danger of wyndes, ^allings of houses, Castles and Towers,
and of slipping down headlong from upright and steep place, they make them
selves subject to storms and grea^e ^empe^^e, to shoures, thunders, lightning,
flo^ds, and earthquakes: They try o^^ metal^es, and coin them, they grave
stones and polishe them, they cut and hew down wooddes, they weaue and wind
webbes to make cloth, they measure out garments and sow them together, they
buyld houses, make gardens, ti^l and manure the fields, plant vineyards, heat
ouens, set up milles, they fish, they foul, they hunt and hawk, they study
and inuente new devises, they consult and ordain, they complain and strive,
they rob and steal, they make merchandise and deceive one another, they
braule, contend and fight, and an infinite number of such like things they
practice, to the end they may scrape wealth together, and heap up riches,
that they may multiply their gaynes, increase their profits, obtain honors
advance their dignities, enlarge their possessions and authority: And all
these are but troubles, travels, vexations and afflictions of the mind If they
hardly believe me, let them give credit to the wise king: I have (says he)
extolled and magnified my works: P^^cher. 2.
I have builded houses^ and planted vineyardes: I have made gardens and
orchards, I have sown and planted (...) them all kind of trees: I have made
pondes and ditches for water, to comfort my lively young trees when they budde
and spring out: I have possessed bondmen, and handmaydes, and have had a
great fam^lie: I have had great heardes of beasts and great flocks of
^^eepe, yea more than all the other Kings which reigned before me in
Jerusalem: I gathered and heaped v^pe gold and silver, and the riches of Kings
and provinces: I ordained for my pleasure singing men and singing women, and
the delicate recreations that might be had for the children of men^ I made
cups and flagons of silver and gold, to put win^ into^ and I did exceed i^
riches all the kings that were before me in Jerusalem. But when I turned my
self back, and beheld those things which my hands had made, and considred my
pains in the which vaynly I had traveled and sweat, I did see in t^^m all
nothing else but vanity and affliction of the mind, and that there was
nothing permanent under the sun.

Of diverse griefs and sorrows of mankind. Chap. 12
O What sorrow and anguishe of mind does vex mortal men. Thought consumes
them, pensiveness does possess them, hea^inesse harmeth them, fear puts
them out of comfort, tremblyng moves all the parts of them, horror d^pryueth
them of their perfect senses, terror does afflict them, sadness does trouble
them, and trouble do^th make them sad and h^auye. The poor, and the rich:
the seruante, and the master: the married and the single man: to conclude, the
good and bad, be all tormented with worldly vexations, and are all toste with
worldly tempests. Believe in this a master that has tried it: If I shall be
wicked (says Job) then woe unto me: if I shall be just and upright, Job. ^0.
I shall not lift up my head being burdened and ouercharged with affliction
and misery.

The misery of the poor and rich. Chap. 13.
THe poor are pressed with famine, suppressed with sorrow, oppressed with thirst,
cold, and needinesse. They be nothing esteemed, they consume and pine away,
they be despised and discomforted. O how miserable is the condytion of him
that beggeth. For to ask ^or Gods sake, he is abash^d through s^ame: and if
he does not ask, he is pained and pyneth away through need. And therefore is
he constrained by mere necessity to beg. He does accuse and find fault
with God, as that he were unrighteous, and partial: for so much as he did not
deuyde these worldly things equally. He blames his neighbor as wicked and
unmercifully, for that he does not fully and sufficiently succor his need. He
does fret and fume, murmureth, and curses. Mark what the wise man says upon
this. Book of Jesus 4.
It is better (says he) for a man to dye, than to stand in need. The poor man
shall be odio^s even to his neighbor. All the days of the poor be evil and
miserable, yea verilye his own brethren oftentimes do shun him, his
friends loathe him, his ennimyes laughe at him. And therefore upon great
cause the Po^t says: Ouyd.
Whylest fortune does favor thee thou shalt find many friends, but if woe
do bewytche thee, thou shalt be left alone. Out upon this shameful worldly
consideration: that the person of a man should be esteemed according to his
fortune, whereas in deed, the gifts of fortune ought rather to be esteemed
according to the goodness of the person that doethe possess them. But such
is the iniquity of time, that a man is taken to be so good as he is rich,
and so evil as he is poor, whereas indeede^ each, man ought rather to be
thought so rich as he is good, and so poor as he is evil. The rich man is
overthrown through his abundance, The misery of the rich man.
he is carried away by vain glory, and through the confidence that he has in
his welthe, he braggeth and boasts: being pu^t up with pride, he runs at
his pleasure, and falls into that which is unlawful. But those things
truly which were his delights and causes of offenses, shall be eftsoons
made the instruments of his torm^ntes. Preacher. 5.
The labor in getting, the fear in possessing, and the sorrow in losing, does
always trouble and disquiet his mind. For where thy treasure is (says Christ)
there is thy heart. Math. 6.


The miseries of Servants and Mast^rs. Chap. 14.
THe seruante or bond man is vexed and weried about the provision of his
masters necessaries, The misery of servants.
with watching and carrying of things from place to place: he is beaten with
stripes, and spoiled of his wealth. If he have no riches, his labor must make
a painful purchase: if he have ought he is compelled to spend it at his
masters pleasure. The offense of the master, is the pain of the servant: the
offense of the servant, turns to the pray of his master. Horace.
For as the Poet says, Wherein soever the rulers do amiss, the poor
subjects feel the smart. Book of Jesus. 13.
The wild ass in the wilderness is the game or pray for the Lion: even so is
the poor man the pray for the rich. O extreme condition of bondage. Nature
has brought forth all men free, but fortune has made slau^s and bond men.
The bondsman is forced to suffer, and no man is permitted to take compassion
upon ^ym: he is compelled to weep, wayle, and to be sorrowful, and no man is
suffered to be sorry with him: so is ^e not his own man, and in his miseries
soroweth comfortless. Men of war.
The martial minds live in miserable moodes: for besides the great pains
they endure, and the continual dangers they ^tande in, they make their only
felicity of other men's misery: The misery of the master.
and it is an odious thing to live upon the spoil of an other. The cruel
master lives always in fear, least the treason of his servants shorten his
days. If he be gentle, then his familiarity breeds contempt: fear then
does vex him if he be severe: and contempt sets him at naught if he be
courteous: For cruelty gets hatred, and contempt follows familiarity.
Furthermore, familiar care causes weerine^se, and private regard brings
grief. Wherefore it behooves a man to be ready and well fenced on every side,
that he may beware and take heed before hand, of the ambushes and the crafty
fetches or deceytes of the malicious and envious men, whereby he may repel
and put away the injuries of those which assault him, to the overthrow of
his enemies, and to be able to defend his neyghbors, and protect his country
men: For one day is not satisfied in her malice ^owardes man in this life, but
she brings forth labors and sorrows for an other: and one night does
show and declare knowledge to another. We therefore do lead our days in
travel, and pass over many nights without sleep.

The misery of the married and unmarried man. Chap. 15.
SO deeply rooted is lecherous lust in the flesh of man, The conc^piscence of
the flesh that troubles unmarried men.
that if it be possible for fire not to burn, it is possible for man not to
lust. For howsoever the flesh shall be kept under, yet shall not that
unquiet Iebusite be driven out or conquered. For although thou rebuke nature
never so much, yet will she return again. All men do not understand this
saying, Math. 19.
or obtain this grace, but he which can conceive or comprehend it, Exodus 21.
(says our Lord) let him. Whereupon when GOD gave commandment unto Moses
and Aaron for the ordering of the holy garments, and of the apparelling of
their children, ^ee did not only give commandment for the covering of the
thighs, but willed them to use linen s^oppes to cover their priuities, when
they should enter into the Tabernacle of witness. 1. Corin. 7.
The Apostle also says to those which be married, Do not defraud one another,
unless it be perhaps by consent for a time, that you may be more fervent in
prayer, and afterward return again unto the same, least yt Satan tempt you
through incontinency: For it is better for a man to marry, than to burn. For
ye Angel of Satan, with subtle devises continually provoking lewd liking,
does always war and fight with maidenly chastit^ and manly constancy: The
suggestion of the Devil.
He kindles the fire of nature with the blast of frail suggestion: He also
lays matter before us, to work our lewd lusts: He fights a combat with
us, casting before our eyes the glorious shape of some gallant dame, whereby
the feeble mind is secretly sauced with amorous desires^ and the body made
prone to perdition: He changes our affections daily with the sight of ^undry
pleasant shapes. ^. Reg. 11.
Let King David suffice for example, who in the after noone walking in his
Princely palace, beholding Bersabe washing her self on the other side, sent
for her, took her and slepte with her, for she was exceeding fair and
beautiful. But the married man is careful for those things which belong to his
wiff and family, 1. Corin.

The miseri of the married men.


and is divided in him self. For diverse cares draws him sundry ways, and
sundry thoughts disquiete his troubled mind. The fear of e^il fortune does
vex him, the loss of wealth does torment him, and the charge of household does
divide him diversely. For all his st^die is how ^o maintain his wi^e, to
procure things necessary for his children, and to discharge the hire of his
servants. And therefore most truly is it said, that such me^ have the ^roubles
and cares of the flesh. His wife desires to have precious ornaments and rich
iewelles, she craves diverse suits of gorgious and sumptuous apparel, and
sundry parcels of householde s^uffe: yea and oftentimes the wives furniture,
does exceed the re^enewe of her husbands lands. But if she be deny^d what she
demands, the^ does she mourn and sighe day and night, she frowneth and
murmureth, ^he chatteth and checketh, with grievous complaints of her
husbands ingratitude, without ceas^^g. Prove. 2^.
There be three things (says Solomon) which do not pe^mitte a man to tarry
in his house, that is, a smokie chimney, a dropping roufe, and a shrewde wife.
Often times she says unto her husband, such a man's wife goes gorgeously
and finely apparelled, and is esteemed and much made of by every one: but I
poor wretch, all alone, am nothing regarded amongst my neighbors: I am
contemned and despised of every one. She only will be loved and praised: she
thinks the good countenance showed unto an other, to procure hatred unto her:
and she surmiseth the commendation of an other, to be for her disgraces. All
that she loves, must ^e lyked of, and all that she hates must ^ee disliked:
she will be mistress, and cannot be maistred: she may not abide to serve as a
subject, but she must rule as a governor: she will seem ex^erte in all
things, and will show her self ignorant in nothing. If she be fair, she is
soon beloved of others: if she be foul, she is not hastily desired. But it is
a hard matter to keep that which is beloved of many, and it is a gree^e to
possess that which no man esteems. Some men allure her by the comeliness of
their personage: some gain victory by policy: some do move affection by
mercy conceytes, or pleasant de^ises: other some do win good will through
liberality: and needs must there be some breach, where the battery is
laid on every side. The goodness of the Horse, the Ass, the garmente, the
bed, the pot, and also the pitcher, are first tried, and after bought: but
the manners or conditions of a woman are ^ardly known, least misliking grow
before marriage. But after marriage whatsoever befall her, be she foul or
fair, wise or folish, patie^t or proud, loathsome or handsome, she cannot be
separate, but only for adultrie. Mat. 5.
Ye a neither can the man which puts away his wife for this cause marry an
other, neither yet can the wife put so away, take another husband. For
whosoever shall forsake his wife unless it be for adultrie, gives her
occasion to commit adultery: and he which doethe marry her that is
dismissed for adultery, does also commit adultery. If the wife shall go
from her husband for this cause (says the Apostle) ^hee ought ^yther to
remain unmarried, 1. Cori^.
or else ^ee reconciled to her husband again.

Therefore the burden of wedlock is grievous. Prou. 18.
For as (Solomon says) ^e is foolish and unwise which keeps his wife being
an adul^resse: and he is the patron of his wives dishonestie, which does
cloak her crime. If then a man put away his wife being a^ adultresse, he is
punished without his fault, for that he must so long as she lives remain
chaste. And therefore Christ's disciples said, Math. 19.
If a man's condition and case be such wi^h his wife, it is better for man not
to marry. For no man can well brook a mate in love: and who so ever is the
subject of jealousy, is the s^aue of suspicion. Yea and al^hough the Scripture
does affirm, that man and wife shall be two in one flesh, yet besides that,
the very love of the husband it self, doethe cause him to be impatient of
partners.

Of misery of good and evil men. Chap. 16.
THere is no cause (says the Lord) wherefore the ungodly should rejoice:
Esaias. 48. and 57.

^he misery (...) evil men


for look by what parts man does sin, in the same shall he be tormented.
For the worm of conscience shall never die, and the fire of reason shall never
be put out. I did see (says Job) those which wroughte iniquity, and did sow
and reap their own sorrow, I did see them (says he) perish with the blast of
gods mouth, and with the breath of his wrath I saw them consumed. Pride Sicil
never found greater torment than malice her selfe^ Uice (says the Apostle)
corrupts nature. Romans 1.
Therf^re the wicked me^ says he, vanished away in their own imaginations and
their foolish minds and hearts were blinded and darkened: Ibidem.
wherefore God did suffer them to follow the desires of their own hearts in
all vncleanlinesse, to the end they should be injurious unto themselves, and
afflict their own bodies. And as they have forsaken to know God, even so God
has delivered them into a reprobate and wicked meaning, Ibidem
that they may do those things which be not convenient. But they which do
live godly in our savior Christ, 2. Tim. 3.

The misery of good men.


do suffer persecution. For the holy men and such as ^e now saints in heaven,
have sustained mockes and stripes, yea moreover ^aue proved fetters and
imprisonment, Hebr. 11.
of ye which some were stoned ^o death, some cut in pieces, some tempted and
proved what they would do, and at the last were put to death with the sword
for our Lords sake. They went about in the world in sheep skins, in Goats
peltes, needye and poor, troubled in their minds, and much afflicted, whom
the world was not worthy of. They wandered in the deserts and wilderness,
amongst the mountains, and in dens and caves under the earth. They were in
the danger of fluddes and waters, 2 Cor. 11.
in ieopardye of thieves, in great peril through their own stock and
parentage, in fear of the Gentiles, of infidels, and of false brethren. They
traueyled in pain and sorrow, in much watching, Ibidem.
in hunger and thirst, in many vexations and perplexities, in cold and
nakedness. For the just man does deny and forsake him self, Luke. 9.
Gal. 6.
crucifying his members with the vices and imperfections thereof, that the
world may be crucified ^n him, and he in the world. Hier. 13.
He knows that he has no sure nor continual abode in this life, but does
seek to enjoy the everlasting City to come: he sustayneth this world as a
banishment: and his soul is closed up in his body as a prison. Psalm. 118.
Psalm. 119.
I am (says he) a strange pilgrim upon the earth, and as a forener, even as
all my forefathers and elders have been. Ibidem.
Suffer me that I may be refreshed before I go from hence, and before I
shall beecome nothing. Alas that my banishment and dwelling ^eere in this
world is prolonged. I have continued long with those that have their mansions
amongst the hard Cedar trees, and my soul has bin a ^^raunge inhabitant
with them very long. 2. Cor 11.
Who is sick and feeble, and I not sick? Who is weak and I not troubled. For
ye very offenses and sins of brethren and neighbors, be grievous to those
which be just men.

Of the enimyes of man. Chap. 17.
Job. 1.
THe life of man is nothing else but warfare upon the earth. Is it not a
warfare in deed, whereas many kind of enimyes lie in wait on every side,
that they may take, persecute, and kill us? as the diuil, the world, mankind
it self, and the flesh. Four enemies o^ man: the deui^, the world, the (...),
and m^^kinde it (...).
The devil with vices and fleshly desires: man together wit^ beasts, and other
crea^ur^s: the world with the elements: the flesh with sensualities. For the
flesh lus^eth contrary to the spirit, Gal. 5.
and the spirit contrary to the flesh. Yea we have not only a combat against
flesh and blood, Ephesians. 6.
but also against the spiritual authors of wickedness, which be in the air,
and against the Lords and rulers of darkness. For your adversary the devil
(says saint Peter 1. Pet. 5.^
) goes about like a roaring Lion ^eeking whom he may devour. The fiery darts
of our wicked enemies are always kindled against us. Death enters in by the
windows, the eye does rob and spoil the soul, the whole world does fight
against us unwise men, for one nation warreth against an other, and great
earthquakes are in diverse places, pestilence and hungers, terrors and tempests
comes down amongst us from the heavens. The earth brings forth thorns
and thistles: the water brings forth inundations and fluds: the air sends
upon us storms, thunders, lightnings, and terrible fierye sightes. The earth
(says God to Adam) shall be cursed in thy labor, Genesis 5.
it shall yield unto thee thorns and t^istles, and in the sweat of thy brows
thou shall eat thy bread, until thou do return again into the earth. The
wild bore of the woodd^s does lie in wait for to devour us, Psalm. 79.
and every wild beast seeks our destruction. Hier. 5.

Hurtful beasts enemies to mankind.


The Woulf, the Bear, the Lybard, the Lion, the Tygar, and the wild Ass: the
Crocodile, the Grife, the Serpent, the Snake, the Basiliske, the venomous worm
called Aspis, the Dragon, the Cereastes, the Scorpion, and the Uyper: also
Nittes, Lyce, Emattes, Fleas, Gnattes, and Flies, Hornettes, and Wasp^s, Fishes
and Fowls, all these I say, do lie in wait to make a pray of our persons.
For we which in the beginning were created to bear rule over the fishes of
the Sea, and fowls of the air, Genesis 3.
Deuteronomy. 22.
and over all living things which move upon the earth, are now become a
pray for them to feed upon. bidem. 30
For it is written, I will set the teeth of beasts upon them.

The lamentation of the soul being in prison. Chap. 18.
Romans 7.
O Unhappy and wretched creature that I am, who will deliver me from the
torment of this earthly body? Behold the lamentation of the silly soul, which
would feign be discharged out of prison. Psalm. 141.
Whereof the Psalmist says thus. O Lord bring my soul out of captivity.
There is no rest nor quietness in any place here in this world. No where is
there found any peace or security: Fear and trembling is every where,
labor and grief is in all places. The flesh is always in labor, grief,
and sorrow, so long as it lives, and the soul does mourn and lament her
grievous estate and being.

Of the short joy of man in this lyfe^ Chap. 19
WHat man did ever pass over in this life one whole day in perfect mirth and
joy, Man has not one whole day of joy and pleasure in this life.
whom in some part of that day, either the remorse of conscience, the
vehement inna^ion of anger, or the motion of fleshely lust has not disturbed?
whom deuouryng malice, the insatiable desire of avarice, or else the secret
blastes of pride, have not disquieted? whom some loss of wealth, offense
committed, or passion of the mind has not distempered? And to be short, whom
the ^ight of some thing loathsome or grievous to behold, or ye ^earing of some
thing sorrowful or indecent to be spoken, or else some act to be misliked, has
not offended? Truly if any such there bee^ he is as rare as a black swan.
Hearken what the wise man says upon this point. From the morning unto the
evening the time shall be changed, vain thoughts succeed one an other, Book
of Jesus 18^ Chap.
and the mind is severed and divided into diverse motions: men do delight to
hear the pype, the harp, or citherne, and take great joy to hear the
Orgaynes, or other musical instruments, Job. 21.
and by all means they provide to pass their days in pleasure: but alas, in
a moment they fall down into hell.

Of sudden sorrows unlooked for, which happen unto men. Chap. 20.
Sudden heaviness does always accompany worldly mirth: Sorrow i^ the
comp^nio^ of ma^^ mirth
and that which begins with joy, does always and with some sorrow: for
worldly pleasure is mixte with many bitter corsies. This knew he right well
which said: Prou. 14.
Laughter is mixed with grief, and the end of mirth is finished with wayling.
The children of Job Job. 1.
did prove this true by experience, the which whiles that they were making
merry in their eldest brothers house, a sudden myghtie wind ri^ing out of the
deserte, ouerthrewe the house and destroyed them all. And therefore their
father might well say^ Job. 30.
My ^arp is changed into mourning, and my citherne is turned into ye v^yce of
those that weep. It is better (says the wise man) to go into the house of
mo^rning than of banketting. Book of the Preacher. 7.

The preac^e^^ 11^

Book of Jesus. 7.

The mortal man is but a living death


Harken therefore unto his good counsel. In the day of thy mirth and
prosperity, forget not sorrow and adversity, and remember thy last and ending
day, and thou shall not sin damnably.

Of ^he ne^renesse of death. Chap. 21.
THe last day of our life, is unto us always the first day to life, and yet
we do never account the first day to be ye last. Wher^as in deed we should
still so line, as though we should always die. For it is written: Book of
Jesus. 14.

Book of Jesus. 11.


Remember that death does not ^arry long, and is not slow in coming, Time
passes away, and death approaches nighe. A thousand years are before the eyes
of him that dies, Psalm. 89.
as it were but yesterday, which is already past. For the things which God will
have come to pass, are always springing: and things present do daily decay
and perish: and those things which are past, are clean dead and consumed. We
then are dying whiles we live, and then do we cease from dying, when we cease
to live. Therefore it is better to dye^ always to live, than to live to dye
ever. For the mortal life of man is but a living death. Whereupon (says
Solomon) I commend more the estate of those that be dead, Book of the preacher.
4.
than of those that live: and I judge him that is not yet borne happier than
them both. The life of man passes swiftly away and can not be stayed, and
death comes upon him instantlye and can not be hindered. Man therefore is
that wonderful thing which does decrease, and increase, and al in a moment.
For how much the more man's life increases, so much the nearer he approaches
to his end.

Of the terror of dreams. Chap. 22.
THe very time which is granted man in this life for his rest, is not
permitted to be quiet unto him: for in dreams, dreadful things often times
appear, which cause a man to fear, and visions in his sleeps do molest
him. And although in very deed those things which men dream of, be not
sorrowful, terrible, or payneful: yet for certaynetie, those which are
molested with such dreams, are caused to be pensive, sorrowful, and fearful.
In so much, that sometimes in their sleeps, they fervently weep, and when
they are waked out thereof, are often troubled in their minds. Mark well what
Elephas Thematices says of this matter. Job. 4.
In the terror of a vision (says he) in the night time when men are wont to
sleep, a great fear and trembling came upon me, and all my bones did shake
for fear, Job. 7.
and when the spirit passed in my presence, the hear of my head stood up.
Consider the saying of Job also in these words: If I say unto my self, my
bed shall comfort me, and I shall be eased, talking with my self upon my
couch: thou will terrify me with dreams and will make me shake for fear
through visyons. Nabuchodonozer saw in a dream, Daniel. 2.
that thing which made him thoroughly afraid, and the vision being firmly
impressed in his mind, did much vex and trouble him. Preacher. 5.
Many thoughts and cares do follow dreams, and where there is many dreams,
there is exceedyng many vani^ies. Dreams have caused many to err and do
amiss: and the hope that men have had in them, has been made frustrate. In
sleeps also happen often times unclean imaginations, Illusio^s in the night
time^
whereby not only the flesh is polluted by illusions in the night, but the
soul is also defiled: Leuit. 15
whe^^vpon the Lord in the Leuiticall law says thus, if there be any man
amongst you, which by illusion is abused in his sleep by night, let him go
out of the tents, and let him not return, before that in the evening he be
washed clean with water, and after the going down of the Sun, let him come
again into the tents.

Of Compassion. Chap. 23.
O With what grief be we vexed, The grie^e and sorrow man has for his
frion^e^.
with what trembling fear be we shaken, when we understand the losses or
hinderaunce of our friends, and how much do we stand in fear of the
dangers and loss of our parents? yea sometimes he that is whole add sound of
body, is more troubled and vexed in his fear, than the sick and feeble is in
his sickness. For the voluntary sick man is more afflicted with the affection
of his grief, than the sick patient man, languishing in his feeble^esse.
Hereupon breaks out the Poet in these words, The pa^gs of love.

Ouyd.


Love is a loathsome thing God wot, and passing full of grief. Whose breast is
so hardened, whose heart is so stonye, that he can not be sorye and lament,
that he can not weep and wayle, when ^e does behold the sickness or death
of his friend or neighbor, that he can not suffer with him that suffers,
and sorrow with him that mourns. Our savior Christ him self, when he saw
Marye Magdalen, John. 11.
and the Jews which came with her to Lazarus monument, all weeping, he was
afflicted in spirit, and troubled in him self, and wept: Not peradventure
because Lazarus the brother of Mary was dead, but rather for that he should
raise him up, or call him being now dead, The death of the soul is more to be
lamented than the death of the bodi
unto the myseries of this life again. For let him persuade him self to be
guilty of great hardness of heart, and to be accounted as one fault worthy,
who soroweth more at the corporal departure of his friend, than the spiritual
death of his soul.

Of sundry misfortunes that happen unto men. Chap. 24.
SUch is our casual condition, that when we seem to stand in great security,
we dwell in deepeste danger, and when we least fear, we sonest fall.
Calamity falls upon us not looked for, sickness sodaynlye inuadeth us, and
death without ransom requires his duty. Do not therefore boaste upon the
next day, Prou. 27.
being ignorant what the day following will bring forth. Man knows not his
end, but as the fishes be taken with the book, Book of the Pre^cher.
and the birds be suddenly entrapped with the snare, so men be prevented in
their days, and sometimes taken in an evil hour, when death shall speedily
arrest them.

Of the innumerable kinds of sicknesses that man is subject unto. Chap. 25.
THe knowledge that man has had to search out the causes and natures of
things these many hundredth years, could as yet never find out so many kinds
of diseases, or such diverse sorts of passions, as ye frailty or weakness of
man could endure and suffer. Should I call it tolerable impatience to
su^tayne such infirmities or intolerable sufferance? It is better I join
them both together: For it is intolerable for the bitterness of the passion,
and tolerable for the necessity of suffering. Man's nature from day to day is
more and more corrupt: Insomuch that many wholesome experime^ts which in times
past were of great force, are now through the defect or weakness of man's
nature, become hurtful and dangerous. For now both the worlds, that is to say,
y^ great world that contains all, and man which is the little world
contained therein, wax both old, and draw toward an end. And how much
the more the age of them both is prolonged or increased, so much the worse the
nature of them both is vexed and troubled.

Of diverse kinds of torments which men sustain. Chap. 26^
WHat ^houlde I speak of the poor and miserable wretches of this world,
which by innumerable kynds of torments sustain punishmente? Some of them are
beaten to death with cudgels, some cut off by the sword, some burnt with fire,
some are stoned ^o death, some are torn in p^eces with Horses and with the
talents of beasts, some are hanged on gibbets, some are rackte and strangled to
death, some are tormented with engines made of mettalles, and they are
crucified with a million more of miseries. Some are straitely pressed with
fetters and bonds, and yoked with sundry engines. Some are cast into prison, and
there pine away for need. Some are thrown down headlong from high places,
some are drowned, flayed quick, dismembered, cut in pieces and perced through
their body^s. Upon them falls those punishments of the which the Prophet
speaks, saying, some perish under the sword, some by famine, and some in
durance or captiuitye. It is a heavy and pitiful syghte, that some are given
to feed the ^oules of the air, some the fishes of the Sea, and some the
beasts of the earth. Alas, and woe unto you most wretched and miserable
mothers, which bring forth such unfortunate children.

Of a certain horrible fact committed by a woman compelled thereunto by
extreme misery. Chap. 27.
Joseph. de bello. Judah. 10 lib 4. cap. 13.
TO leave out nothing whereby the miseries of this world may be manifest, I will
make rehersall of an horrible and dreadful fact committed in the Jews wars.
A certain woman of noble parentage and great wealth, did endure the common
fortune in the siedge of Jerusalem, amongst the rest of the multitude which
came thit^er from diverse places: The goods which she brought into the city,
were for the most part taken and spoiled by the Tyrants: And that little which
was left to sustain her weary life, the robbers and spoylers of the City
(daily entering into her house) ber^eued her thereof. Whereby great trouble and
grief did so much move her, that often times with opprobrious words she did
attempt to stir up their, choler by their bloody hands to end her wretched
life. But when by no mean^s she could provoke their anger to fulfill her evil
intent, nor yet could mou^ them to take compassion upon ^ir miserable estate,
all hope of food forsaking her, and pain of penury pinching her, using the
worst counsel, did arm her self against the laws of nature. For having a
young babe sucking at her breast, she cried out and said, O unhappy child of
an unfortunate mother, ^eauye is thy chance, but heavier is my choice: for I
am forced to make food of my own flesh: I will make my myserie known to all
posterity, and the cruelty of the Romans the cause of my calamity. Come
now therefore my little babe, whom I have borne full often in mine arms, whom I
have nourished with my tender pappes, whom I have kissed full sweetly with my
^ippes, let ^hy flesh be food unto thy wo^ull mother, and let the womb which
brought thee into light, be thy rufull grave. And when she had thus spoken, she
murdered her child, part of whom through famyne she presentlye devoured, the
rest she did reserve to feed her furious appetite. And behold, the hungry
souldyers passing by, recey^ed the broyling savor of her unnatural diet.
Wherefore with force they came into the house to spoil her of her food: whose
desire to satisfy, sh^^ played her part most kyndly, saying, behold I have
rese^ued the best portion for you: and by and by vncou^r^d the remnant of her
child: which unkind and cruel spectacle did so dismay them and move their
senses, that trembling fear betook them all, and the horror of the sight did
bereave them of their speech. But she with a Tygres countenance, and most
cruel heart, said unto them, ^ate friends, it is part of my child, of my
dea^^ son, whom I have brought into this world, and through penury it is
my deed: what will you be more scrupulous than the mother? shall bloody
Soldiers have more tender hearts than a silly woman? if pity or natural
aff^^ction do overcome you and cause you to abh^r my diet, I my self will
feed ther^on again. And after she had thus said, the souldi^rs departed as men
all astonished at the sight, the which spoiling ^ir of all her wealth and riches,
left her none other ^oode to feed upon.

Of the punishing of the Innocent, and dismissyng of the guilty. Chap. 28.
LEt no man assure him self to be free or ^xempt from p^yne, Cor. 10.
although he know him self to be without offense. He that stands, let hi^
take heed that he do not fall. For the innocent is often times condemned,
and the offendour delivered: the godly is punished, and the wicked is honored:
Jesus is crucified, and Barrabas is dismissed. In these our days a quiet man is
esteemed unprofitable: and he that is addicted unto devotion, or to the service
of god, is reputed for an ^ypocrite: and the simple man that is without
dec^ite, is accounted for a fool. For the simplicity of the rightuous man is
laughed at, and he whose virtue s^ineth before men as a lamp, in the
imaginations of the rich is contemned.

The second Book, of the Mirror of man's life.
Of the culpable and sinful beginning of m^ns ^onuersation. Chapter. 1.
Three things chiefly desired of me^
THere be three things which men are wont chi^flye to affect: Riches, Plesures,
and Honors. Riches are the nourses of sin and iniquity: Pleasure is the
daughter of dishonestie, and the guide that leads to calamity: Honor, is
the mother of worldly pomp and vanity. Whereupon the Apostle saint John
says: 1. Epist. 2.
Do not love the world nor those things which be in ye world, for whatsoever
is in the world, it is either the concupiscence of the flesh, or the delight
of the eyes, or else the pride of mind. For the flesh follows pleasures, the
eye regards riches, and the mind respects honors. From the root of riches
spring wanton desires and avarice: pleasures are the branches of glutonye and
leachery: the ^ruites of honors are pride and insolency.

Of the fervent desire and thirst after riches. Chap. 2.
NOthing then (as the wise man says) ^s more wicked than the covetous man,
Book of Jesus. son of Syracke. 10
and nothing more unjust than is the love of money. Which the Apostle does
confirm in these words: 1. Tim. 6.
Those that will be made rich fall into temptations, and into the snare of the
devil, into many desires, both unprofitable and hurtful, which does drown
men in the pit of hell, and does lead them to their own damnation and to utter
perdition. For covetousness is the root of all evil: covetousness does
commit sacrilege and theftes: covetousness does practice robberies, and
hunteth after prays: covetousness makes war and causes manslaughter:
covetousness byeth and sells spiritual things: covetousness demands
unjust gifts, and receyneth unreasonable rewards: covetousness changes the
unnatural use of money, into the unlawful gaynes of usury: she uses deceites
to the damage and fraud of others: she breaks her promise and do^th
violate her oath: she corrupts witnesses, and per^erteth judgments.

Of unjust r^wards and brib^s^ Chap. 3.
Mark well the Prophet Esaias, Esa. ^.
who says: All men love money, and seek after rewards: they do not judge the
cause of the orphane or fatherless, the cause of the widow is not called
before them. They do not enter into judgment before their bribes and reward^,
because they judge not for the love of justice, but bribes and gif^s do prevent
them in their judgments, for yt they judge for the love of money. They always
have respect to the gift, to the promise, or to the ^ope of reward: And
therefore do they not judge in favor of the orphane, of whom nothing is given,
promised, or hoped for. O you rulers false of promise^ companio^s of thieves,
who so ever you be yt love bribes, and go^ after rewards, you shall never keep
your hands clean from bribes, except you first wash away the covetous desire
from your hearts. Ezech. 2^.
The Prophet therefore speaks this of you. Their rulers be like rau^ning
wol^es, which do rob and take viole^^ly their pray, and most couetously do
follow the^r gain. And likewise (says ye prophet Micheas Mycheas. 5.
) Their rulers and governors did judge for rewards: their priests and
ministers taught for hyre, and their prophets did prophes^e for money. Deuteronomy. 16.
Behold the Lord did co^mauen Moses in ye law: Thou shall ordain judges and
rulers in all thy gates, yt they may judge my people in just judgment, and
decline on neither side. Thou shall accept no person^ nor receive any rewards:
because bribes and gifts do blind the eyes of wise men, and do change the
sayings of the righteous: but thou shalt prosecute yt which is to be done
justly, Esa. 5.
and thou shall li^e. He speaks here of two things, just, and justly, for
some men do prosecute that which is unjust, unjustly: and again there be
which do pursue that unjustly, which is just: and last of all, some do
prosecute that justly, which is unjust.

Of the accepting of persons. Chap. 4.
WOe be unto you which being corrupt by petition or reward, or else moved
through affection, affirm yt which is good to be evil, and that which is evil
to be good: proclaiming ye light to be darkness, and darkness to be light:
condemning the souls to dye, which dye not, and making the souls to live,
which live not. For you do not consider ye equity of ye cause, but ye deserts
of ye persons: not the life of the man, but the gifts that are given: not
justice, but money: not what reason bids, but what will affects: not what
the law ordains, but what the mind desires. You do not whet your wits, and
bend your wills to ye maintenance of justice, and advancement of equity: but
yo^ wreste justice to your own will and wickedness, not ^o the intent that
that which is lawful may please you, but that it which does please you may be
lawful. Mat. 6.
Your eye is never so simple that all the body is made clean and bright, but
always you mingle it with some euel lea^en, whereby you corrupt the whole
piece. You do neglecte the poor man's cause, and with all care and diligence
supporte the cause of the rich. You show all extremity and rigor unto the
poor man, but with cur^eous and gentle dealing you do dispense with the
welthy. You scarcelye cast your countenance upon the poor, but you deal
favorably with those that be of substance. You hear ye poor man's cause
neglige^tly, but to ye rich man you give ear most diligently: the poor man
cries for justice, and none does give ear unto him: the rich man speaks
and every man joyfully gives ear. Whereupon (says Solomon) When the rich man
speaks, every one keeps silence, Book of Jesus. 12.
and what he says, they extol it up to the clouds: but when the poor man
tells his tale, they say, what fellow is this? and if be offend in any word,
they will overthrow him. He suffers violence and cries out, and no man
hears him. He utters his grief with mourning voice, and there is none
that judges his cause. If by chance you take in hand the cause of the poor,
you follow it slowly: but when you take in hand the rich man's cause, you
follow it most earnestlye. You despise the poor, you honor the rich: with
reverence you give place to those that be welthie, but contemptuously you
reiecte those that be needy. If one come into the place where you are
assembled, having a gold ring upon his fingar, in a fair white garment, and a
poor man also homely apparelled, if you behold him which is clothed in
gorgeous apparel, you will say unto him^ Sir sit you down here, making
place for him: but to the poor man you will say, stand thou there, or sit on
my footestole. Do you not in this case judge according to your affection? and
become judges of v^iust imaginations? For of you and against you the Prophet
speaks, when he says, Hiere. 5.
They be magnified, enriched, made fa^te and gross: they have not pleaded the
cause of the fatherless, and have not judged the poor man's cause. But it is
commanded in the law: Deuter. 1.
There shall be no difference of persons, you shall hear the small as well as
the great, you shall accept no man his person, because it is the judgment of
God: Rom ^.
for there is no acception of persons with God.

Of the ^elling of Justice. Chap. 5.
O You corrupt Judges, which never show favor where reason would you
should, ne yet uprightly minister justice. For if no gain or profit fall unto
your lot, upright judgment proceeds not from you: and nothing is given you,
but for the sale of Justice. You use oftentimes such prolonging of Justice,
that you take more from the ^uters, than the value of the thing which is in
suit, for so much as the expenses and charges do far surmount the commodity
or profit reapt by the sentence. But what can you answer to him in that strayt
judgment, Matthew. 10.
who commands you saying, Freely have you received it^ and therefore frankly
give it again? Your cheftes are full of riches, your conscience fra^ght with
sinfulness, your chi^f^st care is for worldly commodities, making your ^oules
cap^iu^s to sin and iniquity. Matthew. 16.
But what does it profit or a^aile man, to gain al ye world, and sustain yt
loss of his soul? or what thing may man change for ye safety of his soul?
The brother shall not redeem ye death of ^is brother. And man shall not pa^ifie
the wrath of God, nor is able to give a sufficient price for the redemption of
his soul. He shall always live in labor until his end. Hearke^ you rich me^
what ye apostle says. Jacob. 5.
Go ye now (^aith he) you rich men, weep and lam^^ the miseries which shall
come upon you: your riches are corrupt, your garments are motheaten, your
gold and silver is cancred, and the rust of the^ shall be a witness against
you, and shall eat your flesh as it were fire: you have gathered for ^oure
treasure wrath in the last days. Behold, the ^ireof the laborers, which have
reapt down your fields, and is kept back from them by fraud, cries out
against you, and the cri^ of the^ is entered into the ears of the Lord of
Sabbath. And therefore truth it self commands you saying. Mat. 6.
Hoord not up for your self treasures upon earth where the moth and rust does
corrupt, and the^^es br^ake in and steal ^t.

Of the insatiable desire of the covetous man. Chap. 6.
O Fire unquenchable: O desire insatiable: What conetous man was ever satisfied
with the performance of that which he first desired to obtain? for such is
his insatiable appetite, that after he has obtained that which he wished for,
he bends his mind to procure greater things, and the end of his desire is
always in getting that which he has not, and is never content with that which
he has already gotten. Jesus the son. 14.
The eye of the covetous man is never satisfied, and will not be filled for a
portion of iniquity. The covetous manne has never his fill of money,
Preacher. 5.
and he that loves Riches takes little fruit thereof. Even as Hell and
perdition are never filled: Proverb. 30.
so likewise the insatiable eyes of covetous men are never satisfied. These are
the two bloudsuckers which always say, bring unto us, for The love of money
does as much increase, as money it self.

Wherefore the covetous man can not be satisfied. Chap. 7.
Will thou know O covetous man, why ^hy mind is never satisfied, and thy desire
is never filled? Mark what I shall say: Thy measure from whence thy covetous
desire does s^ring, is never so full, but it is able to comprehend more: For
the mind of man (which is the measure whereby ^ee measures all worldly
desires) is able also to receive God, because he which cleaves unto God, is
one spirit with God. 1. Corin. 6.
Therefore how much soever the mind does contain, it is never satisfied until
it does comprehend God, of whom it is always capable. If thou will then be
filled and contented, leave off thy covetous appetite, for so long as thou
shall have that greedy desire, thou shalt never be satiate: 2. Corin. 6^
for there is no accord between light and darkness, nor no agreement betwixt
Christ and Belial, Mat. 6.
because no man can serve God and Mammon^

Of the fals^ and deceytfull name of Riches. Chap. 8.
O Thou false and deceytfull felicity that man has in riches, which in very
deed make the rich man an unfortunate and miserable child. For what makes
a man more unhappy or wretched, than wealth or worldly substance, which are
called riches? A man to be needy and to be rich, are two contrarees, Acts. 5.
and yet the riches of the worldly do not take away poverty, but causes
pouertie^ For as the wise man says, A little does better content and satisfy
the poor man, Zachary 9.
than abundance does suffice or please the rich man, For where there is great
Riches, there b^ many to consume it: for we see great nobili^ie ouercharged
with greater necessity. Therefore wealth and abundance does not enrich a man,
but makes him poor and needy.

Ex^mplse against Covetousness. Chap. 19.
HOw many has covetousness seduced and decayed? how many more has (...)
love of money utterly destroyed? ^b. 14.
The Ass rebuked Balaam, for that he being seduced with the desire of those
things whic^e were promised him, determined to curse Israel. The people did
stone Achas to death, because he took away gold and silver which were cursed
and f^rbidden. (...). 6.
Naboth was slain, that Achab might possess his vineyarde. Giezi was stricken
with a Leprosy, because he demanded and received gold, silver, and garments,
under the name of Heliseus. Math. 6.
Judas hanged him self because he had sold and betrayed Christ. Luke. ^^.
Suddayne death made an^ ^nde of Anania and Saphyra his wife, because they
defra^ded and deceived. the Apostles of the pr^ce of their ground. Tyrus built
up a strong for^resse and heaped up silver as ^arthe and gold, Preacher. 5.
as the clay of the stre^tes, but behold, says the Proph^t, the Lord s^all
spoyl^ her of it, and he shall smite down her power in the sea, and she shall
be consumed with fire.

Of the great ^are that covetous men have. Chap. 10.
WHy does man so earn^stly set his mind and so straightly press himself to
gather goods, seeing yt he cannot always continue, and enjoy them for ever?
Number. 22.
for man comes forth like a ^^oure, and does wast and vanish away again like
as the shadow, and never continues in one estate. Why does he the^ desire to
be mast^r of many things, when fewer things would serve him? Iosue. 7.
For having sustenance and clothing, says ye Apostle, le^ us be content
therwith^ 3. Reg. 21.
Why does he seek after things necessary, with much care andA anguish of mind, 4
Reg. 5.
seeing that they offer themselves unto us without great diff^cultie? H^ark^n
what y^ truth itself sayth^ Ma^h. 27.
Be not careful, saying unto your selves, what shall we eat, or what shall we
drink, or wherewith shall we be clothed? for your heavenly father knows
right well that you have need of all these things. Seek first therefore the
kingdom of heaven, and all these things shall be cast into your hands. And
hereupon says David, Psalm. 36.
I did never see the just man forsaken of God, nor yet his seed begging bread.

Of the inordinate desire, that the covetous man has to keep Riches. Chap. 11.
Horatius.
TAntalus as the Poet says, thirsts amiddes the waters: even so the
covetous man stands at need amiddes^ his greatest wealth. Preacher. 5.
To whom, that which he has, does as much good, as that which he has not:
For because he never uses those things which he has already in possession,
but always seeks after things not as yet obtained. He (is says the wise
man) as though he were rich, Proverb. 13
when he has nothing: and is as though he were poor when he ^loweth in
wealth. The covetous man, and the pit of hell, do both of them de^oure, but
they do not digest: they receive both, but they do not render again. The
niggarde does neither pity those that suffer af^^iction, nor yet has
compassion on those that (...) in misery. But he forgets his duty to God,
and the love to his neighbor, seeking his own harm and disquiet. For he
holds back from God the honor due to him, he denies his neighbor things
that ^ee necessary, and withdraws from him self things which are needful.
He is unthankful to God, unkind to his neighbor, and cruel to him self.
To what use has the covetous and miserable man ^ubstance? and to what purpose
has the spiteful or malicious man gold? How can he which is evil unto him
self be good to others? Book of Jesus. 12.
or he that ^aketh no profit of his own gotten goods? He that has the
substance of this world, 1. John. 3.
and sees his brother stand in need, and takes no pity on him, how does
the love of God remain in him? For he loves not his neybour as him self,
whom he suffers to peri^he for hunger, and consume for need: neither does
he love God about all things, who more than God respects Gold and Silver.

Why the covetous man is called a worshipper of Idols. Chap. 12.
THe Apostle does rightly define A^arice or covetousness to be the worshipping
of Idols: Ephesians.
for as the Idolater commits Idolatry by adoring the Idol, even so does
the covetous man in making gold his god. The Idolater most fervently does
reverence the Idol, the covetous man most carefully keeps his treasure. The
Idolat^r puts his hope in his false God, and this man puts his trust in
his fickle wealth: The one is afraid to violate any part of his Idol, and
the other is afraid to decrease any portion of his treasure.

The properties of a Covetous man. Chap. 13.
THe covetous man is always ready to ask, but slow to give, and bold to
deny: All that he spends he thinks it lost, and after expense, he is
full of sorrow, full of complaints, froward, and hard to please: He is pressed
with care, and sigheth, through the remembrance of that which is spent. H^ is
troubled in mind, tormented in body, and if aught go from him, it is much
against his will god wot. He makes his own gifts glorious, and embaceth
that which he receives of others^ He gives in hope to receive, and of his
gifts he makes his gain. He is free of dispense where others bear the
charge, but very sparing in spending of his own. He forbereth his foode^ his
treasure to encrese: he pineth his body for to multiply his gain. Book of
Jesus ^.
He plucketh back his hand when aught he should give, but he stretches him
far forth to receive commodity. Book of Jesus. 40.
Howebeit the wealth or s^bstance of the unrighteous, shall be dried up even as
a river, because goods evil gotten are soon again consumed. For it is a just
judgment, that wea^th of evil beginning should have a worser ending. And that
those things which be unjustly gathered, should be vnt^rif^ely scattered. The
covetous man therefore has his comdemnation both in this life and in ye life
to come.

Of the dangerous possess^ng of Riches. Chap. 14.
IT is most true therefore which ye wise man does testify, Book of Jesus 8.
that gold and silver has undone many. Ibidem. 3^
He that loves gold shall not be justified. Woe be unto them that follow after
it. Behold, ye sinners do abound in t^is world, and for the most part are the
inheritors of we^lth. Herevpo^ our savior Christ gave commandment unto his
Apostles saying, Math. 1^.
possess no gold nor sil^er, ne keep (...) monye in your purses, for as easy
it is for the camel to pass through the eye of a needle, M^^. 10.
as it is for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of Heaven: Math. 7.
for the way that leads to life is straight and narrow. And therefore the
Apostle following the commandment of his master, Acts. 3.
said, I have neither gold nor silver. Woe be unto you says the Prophet,
that join house to ^ouse, Esaias. 5.
and field to field, unto the uttermost bound of the place. Es^y. 2.
The earth is filled with silver and gold, Esaias. 57.
and there is no end of her treasure. I am grieved says God with the
iniquity of the covetous man, and have stricken him.

Of lawful Riches. Chap. 15.
BUt Abraham was rich, and Job of great substance: Genes. 13.
David was wealthy. And yet does ye Scripture say of Abraham that he did
believe God, and it was reputed to him for righteousness. Of Job the scripture
does also witness, Job 1.
that there was not his like upon the earth, being a simple and an upright
man, fearing God, and eschewing evil. 1. Reg. 16.
Of David we have likewise sufficient testimony, that our Lord found him
according to his heart and desire. 1. Corin. 16
But all these holy fathers were as though they had nothing, and yet possessed
all things, according unto ye saying of y^ Prophet David, Psalm. 61.
If thou do flow in wealth, set not thy heart thereon. And on the contrary
side, the covetous men do possess all things, and yet are they as though they
had nothing, as the same Prophet witnesses in another place: Psalm. 33^
The rich men says he, were needy and hungry: For it is more easy to find
one that loves riches and has them not, than to find one that has them, and
does not love them because it is hard to be amiddes the fire and not to
burn, and more harder to possess riches and not to love them. Hier. 6.
H^arken what the Prophet says: From the lowest unto the highst all men set
their minds to heap up treasure: and from the Prophet to the Priest all
commit deceit.

Of the vncertaynetie of Riches. Chap. 16.
THe cou^tous man does always travel much against nature: because nature
does bring him into the world poo^e and needle: and poverty do^^e a^company
him even unto his grave. The earth r^c^ueth him naked, and after he has
played his part thereon, she does devour him naked again, when death shall
gi^e him a deadly wound. The covetous man in this life, desires naught but
Riches, Luke. 12.
and therefore says he^ I will pull down my barnes and granari^s, and will
^nlarge them, to reserve all such fruits as the earth shall bring me forth, and
therein will I lay up al my wealth, and ^reasure. Unto whose determination this
answer was made. O Fool, thy soul shall be required again of th^e ^his
night: th^n whose shall those things be which thou have gotten and scraped
together? Psalm. 38.
Thou do gather treasure (says the Prophet) but thou know not for w^ome:
Psalm. 75.
The Rich men (says ^ee) took their rest, and when they did a^ake, found
none of their Riches in their own hands. The rich man (says Job) when he
shall sleep, Job. 27.
shall b^are nothing away with him, but shall open his eyes and nothing shall
be find. Be not a^rayde says David when any man b^commeth rich, Psalm 48.
and though the glory of h^s ^ouse ^ncreasethe more and more: For when he
dies, of all these things nothing shall he receive, his glory shall not follow
him, his pomp will take her leave, and his riches shall come into the hands of
strangers: for the Sepulchers of such men shall be their house for ever.
Therefore the wise man says, Book of Jesus. 14.
Whatsoever the covetous man wrongfully gathers together, he heapeth it up
for others, and in his goods another shall riot and make hauo^ke. It is
lamentable to see, how it is provided by delieny, yt oftentim^s his greatest
enemy becomes his nearest heir.

Of Glutoni^. Chap. 16.
IN the beginning of man's life, bread and water was his food, and a simple
garment with a poor cottage were thought suffi^i^nt to cover his deformities.
Eccle. 28.
But now ye fruits of the trees, the sundry sorts of graynes, the roots of
herbs, ye fishes of the sea, the beasts of the land, ye fowls of the air,
do not satisfy the greed^e appetite of glutons and r^^en^ng men. For now they
seek pleasant dishes with painted couloures: they procure delicate and hot
spices, choice ^a^^s^ sugared morsels for their dainty mouths. Those things do
they feed upon, which be curiously wrog^t by the art of Cookery, and ^un^ingly
prepa^ed by ye in^e^tio^s of their officers. One by stamping and strayning,
cha^geth some things from their proper nature laboring by art to make that an
accidente which of it self is a substance. Another compoundeth things
together, to make that delicate, which of it self is unpleasant: and all this
is to turn excess to hunger, to bring an apetite unto the stomach oppressed
with saturiti^, and to fulfill the gredy desire of gluttony, rather than to
sustain the weakness of nature. But the place of glutonie, as it has scarce
four fingers in quantity, so has her pleasure hardly four momentes in
continuance. The mean in meats is contemned, superfluity is affect^d, and
variety is desired. Desire of gredinesse knows no end, and variety
excedeth mesure. The mind is ouercharged, the stomach is troubled, and the
sense thorough them both is oppressed. Glutony is an enemy to health, a friend
unto sickness, the mother of wanton lust, and the instrument of death. Be not
greedy says the wise man at any banquet, ne ^eede not on every dishe, Book of
Jesus. 37.
for with diversity of dishes the health is endangered, and through ye surfeit
of wine many have perished. 1. Corin. 6.
Meat is ordained for the belie, and the belie to receive meat, but God shall
destroy the one and the other.

Ex^mples against Glutonie. Chap. 18.
GL^tony requires a costly and chargeable tribute, but it yeld^th a very base
and most vile rent. For how much more delicate the food is, so much more
odious are the fruits thereof. Glutony distempereth the body, cor^upte^h the
stomach, and makes all parts noisome. Genesis 3.
Gluttony did shut up the gates of Paradyse against mankind: Glutonye caused
Esau to sell his inheritance: Genesis 25.
Glutonye was the main pathe that led Pharao his baker to the gallows. Genesis
40.
Glutony was the instrumente that wrought John Baptists death. Mat. 14.
Nabuzardan the chief cook of the King of Babylon, 4. Reg. 2^.
burn^e the Temple and destroyed Jerusalem. Balthazar the King of Babylon in
his great and sumptuous banquet, Dan 5.
saw a hand writing on the wall, Mane, Thetel, Phares, and the same night he
was killed by ye Chaldeans. Number. 11.
Psalm 77.
The people of Israel sat down to make good cheer, and rose up to play, but
whilst the meat was yet in their mouths, the wrath of God sell upon them, and
destroyed them. They which fed voluptuously dyed in the high ways. The rich
man which did feast and banquet, Lame^t^^^^ of Iere. 4.
and abound in worldly pomp and vanity, Lu^. 16.
was bury^d in h^l.

Of Drunkenness. Chap. 11.
WHat is more vile and loathsome than is the dronkarde? whose mouth is the
lodge of poisoned savors: whose body through excess does tremble and shake:
Prou. 3^.
whose promises are large: whose tongue bewrays secrets: whose mind is
soon changed: whose countenance is transformed. For where drunkenness is
the mysteresse, there secrecy bears no maistrie. For commonly when the head
is full of wine, the tongue is set at liberty. Besides this, wine only does
not suffice a dronkard, neither is he content with many sorts of wine, as
Cysar, Bastard, Hypocras, and such like: but he drowneth his senses in all
variety of liquor, making him self the monster of excess. This is the
nurserie of al contention and strife. For as ye wise man says, Book of Iesus^
31.
much drinking of wine kindles ye coals of wrath, and is ye root of all
mischief and ruin: Ose. 4.
and ye sequel thereof is fornication: yea fornication, wine, and drunkenness,
^ereaueth noble minds of all strength and courage And therefore ye Apostle
writes: Prou. 20.
be not dro^k with wine wherein is wa^ton lust. Ephe. 3.
And ye wise king says, yt wine is a lecherous thing, Luc. 1.
and that drunkenness is full of s^rife and disse^tio^: Hie^. 35.
The children of Rachab, and the son of Zachary drank no wine, nor Cisar, ne
other kind of drink yt might make the^ dro^k.

Exemples against Dr^nke^^^sse. Chap. 20.
DRonke^nesse did discover ye privy parts of Noe, Ge. 9. and 19.
and caused Loath to ^o^mit incest. Drunkenness slew Ammon king David's 2. Reg.
13.
son, and murdered Holofernes chief captain of the army. True then it is yt
Solomon says, Iudeth. 13.
They which are given to drink, Pro. 23 and^ 22
and to spend riotously shall be speedily brought to b^ggery. And the prophet
Esaias cries out upon such men, saying: Esa. 5.
woe be unto you which rise up early in the morning to drink your selves
dronk, and to t^pple until night, yt you b^^^me hot and boiling with wine:
having also in your bankets diverse and sundry i^struments^ and ple^of wine: woe
be unto you which be mighty, and able to drink stoutly in ^^as^s: Esa. 28.
and are expert to set up dronke^nesse: be^olde your joy and felicity is to
kill calves and ^at weathers to ^ate of diverse sorts of flesh, and to drink
wine: let us eat and drink say you, ^or we shall dye to morrow. And ye voice of
ye lord (says h^) is reveled in mine ears, yt this iniquity s^all not be
purged from you until death: Esa. 2^.
woe be unto ye crown of pride, e^e^ to ye dro^^e^ p^^ple of Ephraim. The priest
and the prophet know not what they do for dronke^nes: they are a^ swalowed up
with wine, they know not ^im yt looks on them, they stumble and are become
ignorant in their judgments,

Of Leacherye. Chap. 21.
GLutonye the mother of uncleanness, brings forth a more unclean daughter:
Apoc. 21.
For it is very agreeable to reason, that he which is already unclean, should
become as yet more disparged with uncleanness. O^e. 7.
For all those which commit fornication, are like unto the bakers oven made
hot with fire. The Princes and rulers began to rage through wine: for the
belly which is daintily fed, most willingly of it self imbraceth carnal
pleasures. O extreme rage of le^de lust, which do^th not only effeminate the
mind, but also weakeneth the body: which does not only endaunger the person in
this life, but brings both body and soul in peril of damnation in the life
to come. For all the sin which man does commit, 1. Cor. 6.
is without the body, but he that offends in fornication, procures offense
against his own body. Heat and lust are the ^arbengers of fornication, and
^hee is always accompanied with uncleanness and vndecentnesse, but sorrow and
repentance do speedily overtake ^ir: For the lips of an ^arlot (says
Solomon) are like unto a dropping honey comb, Prou. ^
and her throat is more neat and clearer than oil: but the end and later days
of her, are as bitter as wormewoode, and her tongue is a sharp two edged sword.

Of the generality of Leachery. Chap. 22.
THe wicked daughter of Glutonye, Leachery.
is our familiar enemy, not dwelling far from us, but near at hand, not
without, but within us. Job. ^.
Her violence and force is in our loins, and her ^trength is placed in ye
midst. She is never driven away but when she is eschued, and she is never
put to ^light, but when she is kept at hard diet. Two things she requires
to work her force and vyolence, liberty and saturitie: and she puts her
will in practice by company, and opportunity. She provoke all ages, ^he
confounds every sex, ^hee breaks all order: ^hee peruerteth each degree,
she does assault man and woman, young and old, the wise and the simple, the
high and low estates, the base and the best degrees.

Of many which have perished through Leachery. Chap. 23.
WHo is able to set forth and sufficiently to declare ye multitude which have
perished through this wicked sin? Genesis 17.
For leachery overthrew Pentapolis, and the country near adjoining. Genesis 19.
and. 34.
Leacherye destroyed the Sodomits, and Sichem, with all the people therein. Genesis
38.
Through lecherye were those that ravished Dyna murdered. Leachery overthrew
Her and Onam the sons of Judah. Number. 25.
Through leachery ye unclean Israelite and Madianite perished both at once.
Iudicu^. 19. and. 20.
Leacherye caused the fornicators of the tribe of Benjamin clean to be rooted
out. Reg. 2. and. 4
Leachery destroyed ye vnreuerent sons of Hely ye priest, and killed those
which defloured Amon at the banquet. 2. Reg. 11.
Leachery was the death of Vrias, Dan. 13.
and brought y^ two elders which falsely accused Susanna to an ignominious and
most shameful end. To conclude this leude lust did curse Ruben, Genesis 35. and.
49.
seduced strong Sampson, and assotted wise Salomo^. Iud. 16.
It is therefore true which we read: 3. reg. 11.
that many have perished through be^utie. For wine and women do cause wise men
to dote and play ye Apostates, Book of Jesus. 9.
and puts me^ of vnderst^nding to reproof. Ibidem. 1^.
This foul desire has destroyed many lusty Lybertines: and many stout and
valiant captains have perished by her means. The way to ^el is her house which
leads men headlong to the inward parts to death: She weakeneth man's
strength, impayreth his senses, shorteneth his life, was^eth his s^bstance and
wealth.

Of the Ambitious man. Chap. 24.
THe covetous man gathers riches, and the nigarde keeps them together: the
Glutton delights in belly cheart, and the Leacher dwells in his lust. He
that is ambitious affects honors: and he yt is proud does extol and
magnify him self. The ambitious man is always fearful and circumspect,
least by word or deed he should offend in common audience: ^e pretends
humility, and makes assemblance of great honesty: he shows him self
gentle in hearing, courteous in talking, and bou^tiful in doing: he follows his
betters with counterfeit courtesy: he boweth and coucheth unto each one: he
frequenteth the courts of Princes: he visits noble personages, making great
show of duty and obeisance, Ouidi^^.
and always appro^eth what they do affirm, seeking by flatterye to please
their humors. Not ignorant of the Poets saying: although there be no dust
upon the garment of thy better, yet pretend a kind o^ double diligence, and
seem to shake off that that is not. He is ready and diligent where he knows
to please: but slow, and not earnest where he fears displeasure. He seems
to reprove things that be evil, and cunningly detesteth things that be unjust.
He speaks things plauisiblye to those that give ^are: and applies him self
to every company, ^eaping thereby a fruitless praise, and a colorable
commendation. Often times he does sustain a hard conflict ^^th him self,
whilst iniquity moves his mind: and ambition s^ayeth his hand, whilst
ambition does not permit that to be done, which her mother iniquity does put
her in mind of. But yet for all this, the mother and the daughter use couine
togi^her. For the mother openly mayntayneth her purpose, and the daughter in
secret does not resist. The mother before all men claymeth unto her that
which is manifest, and of right dutiful: but the daughter affects that
which is close and couerte. And therefore the ambitious man does always most
willingly i^treat upon soueraintie: which with greedy desire he follows,
saying: O when shall ^ee rule and have the sword in hand, who would be severe
in judgment, meek in mercy: who would frame his will to reason: who^ love nor
favor cannot withdraw from doing justice: whom prayer can not entreat, nor
hire corrupt: who would give credit to those that be faithful, and ^are to
those that be humble: Who in fine would be loving and gentle, liberal and
courteous, steadfast, prudent, patient, and politic.

Of the excessive desire of am^^^^^ous men^ Chap. 25.
THe ambitious man if possibly he do not profit by this means: then has he
recourse unto some skillful mate, that can cunningly play the part of Simon
Magus, or else he uses the help of Giezi the bribe taker. And by Simon whom
he makes a dangerous instrument for a devilish purpose, he p^rchaseth that
which of ^ym self he could not attain: then is he liberal in giving, and
full of rewards: then with fair words he tries his friends and makes large
promises: and then does he leave no pathe untrodden to win grace or favor to
obtain his purpose. But if by this means it comes not to pass, he
vyolently inuadeth estate of honor, and impudentlye usurps the place of
authority, and being supported by the hope of friends, and partly pricked
forward by the help of parentage, he is so inflamed with the desire of
honor, and so deeply drowned with the inordinate affection to bear rule, yt
neither he abhors to fall into scysme, nor fears to commit any scandalous
act. ^ Reg. ^
But Giezi was stricken with a leaprosie: Act. 8
And Simon peryshed together with his money: the fire consumed Chore and his
companions: and the earth devoured Dathan and Abyron. Nu 16.
Let no man therefore take upon him honor, Heb. 5
unless he be called by GOD, as Aaron was.

Au example of an ambitious man. Chap. 26.
We do find an evident and manifest example of ambition in Absolon, ^ Reg. 15
who when he did aspire to the kingdom of his father, made for him self
Chariotes, and provided horsem^n, and ordained men of war to go before ^im:
And rising up early in the morning, he stood (as the story says) near
unto the entrye of the gate, and he called unto him every one yt had business
in the Kings judgments, and asked, Of what City art thou? who making
answer said: I am of one of the Trybes of Israel, and your servant: your
request seems to me good and reasonable said A^s^lon again, howbeit there is
no judge appointed by the King to give you audience: but who will make me a
Judge upon the earth (says he) that all those which have business might
come unto me, as unto an upright Judge? And as there came a certain man to
salute him, he stretched forth his hand, and taking him thereby, embraced
and kyssed him: and the like he did unto all the people of Isra^ll, which came
to iudgem^nt^, and to have audience of the King his father: and hereby he
withdrew^ the hearts of the Israelytes from his father. And when ^ee went to
Ebron, he sent out privy ^coutes amongst the Tribes of Israel, saying thus
unto them: as soon as you shall hear the sound of the trumpet, say unto the
Israelites, Absolon reigns in Ebron. And there was a strong conspiracy, and
their company greatly increased.

Of the short and mi^erable life of noble men. Chap. 27.
BUt admit that the ambitious man be exalted alofte, and promoted to the
highest place: his charges do increase, his cares are multiplied: his times of
abstinence are prolonged, and his quiet nights from rest, are turned to
watching: whereby the body is distempered: nature is weakened, and the vital
spirits made feeble. And through such distemperatures, the sleeps are
broken, the appetyte is lost, the strength decays, and the body consumes:
And languishing in him self perhaps he li^^th not half his days, but
quickly shorteneth his mis^rable life, with a more miserable ^nde. The saying
of the Poet in him is verifyed: Things that are great in them selves do
soon fall: and great men ha^ ^^t permitted to continue long in their estates,
and they b^^ exalted, that they may come down with a greater fall.

This saying of the Prophet also by them proves true, Psalm. 36.
I did see (says he) the wicked man highly advanced and set alofte, yea even
as high as the Cedar trees of Libanus: but I passed by, and behold there was
none that would know him^ I sought him, and in the place of his dwelling he
could not be found. His days shall be abridged and shortened: he shall
be stryken as the vine in the first flower of his Grape, and as the Olyue
when it brings forth flowers, Book of Jesus. 10.
according to the saying of the wise man. The life of every potentate is but
short.

The properties of a proud man Chap. 28.
AS soon as the ambitious man has aspired to honor, ^ee is straight ways
puffed up with pride, and without all measure be breaks into bragges and
boastes sounding to his own praise and credit: He bends not his mind to
do good unto others, but gloriouslye to blas^ out his power and prerogative:
He presumes his person to be made much better, because he has gotten
superiority. But alas, high degree makes not a good manne, nor honor, nor
dignity makes a man better: but the honesty and virtue wherewith he is
endued. Furthermore, the ambitious man exalted on high, contemns the company
of his old friends, and disdayneth the sight of his former famyliars, and
turns his face from his wonted acquayntaunce: his countenance is proud, his
ga^e is glorious, his mouth is filled with haughty terms, his mind is fixte
upon waightye matters. He is impatient of subjection, and desirous to bear
rule: he is a clogge unto the cleargye, a great burden unto his subjects,
and a heavy yoke unto his neighbor. He can not patiently bear any grievous
thing that shall touch him self, nor delay that which he has conceived in
his mind: but he is rash, bold, boasting, arrogant, soon moved, and very
importunate.

Of the fall of Lucyfer, the father of pride. Chap. 29.
O Pride which no man can bear: thou arte^ intolerable and odious unto all
men: and amongst all vices, thou always art the first and last: where thou
^ommest, every other sin does follow, and when thou takeste thy leave the
other are forsaken. For it is written, Book o^ Jesus. 1^.
Pride is the beginning of all sin, and the first begotten and eldest
daughter of death. For this wicked daughter, Pride, in the very beginning of
things did s^irre up the creature against the creator that formed and made
him: the Angel against God: but God threw him down from the heaven, because
he did not continue in the truth: he threw him down from the state of
innocencye into sin: from sin into myseries: from the brightness of
heaven, into the dark and mysti^ air. Esa. 14
Hearken what the prophet says of this fall. How art thou fallen down from
heaven (O Lucifer) which did rise in y^ morning? thou which did wound
all nations, are now fallen unto the earth: thou (I say) which saydeste in
thy heart, I will ascend in^o the heaven and will exalte my self above the
stars: I will sit in the mountain of witness, in the sides of the North,
and I will ascend above the height of the clouds, and will be like unto the
mo^te highest. Thou waste the Image of his likeness, being full of wisdome^
and per^ite in comeliness: thou waste the dearling of Gods Paradise. Every
precious stone was in thy garmente: the Za^donicke, the Topase, the Jasper, the
Crysoly^e, the Onixe, the Beryll, the Carbuncle, the Saphyre, and the Emrode,
yea the very Gold it self: to be short, all these things (O Lucyfer) were
prepared in that day that thou waste created, for the setting forth and
trimming of thee. Thou wast that Ch^rubine, whose wings were stretched forth:
And I placed thee upon the holy Mountain of GOD. Thou did walk in the
midst of the stones set on fire, thou wast p^rf^t in thy procedings from the
day of thy creation until sin and iniquity was found in thee: but when
thou did transgress, I did cast thee out of the holy mountain. Thy heart
was exalted and puffed up through thy beauty and brightness, and now I have
cast thee down upon the ground. The Cedar trees were not higher than he
was in paradise: the fyrre trees did not match his height, and the Palm trees
were not equal with his boughs: there was no tree of Paradise comparable unto
his beauty, because God made him comely and goodly to behold amongst many. And
he is now become king of the children of Pride: He is that great red Dragon
which has seven heads, whose tail drew after it the third part of the
Stars of the firmamente, and set them upon the earth. Job. 41.
And he is that great Dragon and old Serpente which was thrown down,
Apoc. 11.
and is called the Devil or Satan, who seduced the whole world, and is cast
upon the ground, and his Angels also with him: Of whom our Savior says:
Luke. 10.
I did see Satan like unto the lightning falling down from heaven. For every
one that exalts him self, shall be made low: and he^ that humbles him
self, shall be exalted.

Of the Arrogancy of men. Chap 30^
O Proud presump^ion, O presumptuous pride, which did not only attempt to
make the Angel equal with God, but have presumed also to make men as Gods.
Yet such is the fickle favor of pride, that whom she sets up alofte, ^he
quickly pulls down again, and whom she does exalt, she soon embaceth ye
same Where^ppon our Lord said unto the Prophet, Thou son of man, say unto
the Prince of Tyrus, Ez^chie. 28
thus says our Lord, because t^y heart is lift up as though it were the heart
of a God, and for that thou haste said, I am God, when thou art but man. I
will bring therefore upon thy neck the strongest of the Gentiles, and I will
destroy thee, and thou shalt die in the overthrow of them which shall be
slain, and thou shalt perish amiddes the Seas: Nabuchodonozer, because he
did proudely brag upon his power and strength, and said: Is not this
Babylon which I did build for the place of my kingdom: in the strength of my
power, and in the glory of mine honor? And as the word was yet in the Kings
lips, there came a voice from Heaven, saying, King Nabuchodonozer, it is
spoken to thee, Thy Kingdom shall go from thee, Daniel. 4
thou shalt be cast out from amongst men, and shalt have thy place with the
wild and brute beasts: thou shalt eat hay as does the Ox, and shalt
have seven years upon thee, until thou know that the high and myghtie
does rule in the kingdom of men, and gives it to whom so ever he will.
And the very same hour this sayeing was fulfilled upon the King: for ^ee was
cast out and did eat hay with the Ox. It is then true, which is said in the
Psalm, Psalm. 48
Man when he was in honor understood it not, he was compared unto the brute
beasts, and made like unto them. Genes. 11.
Pride ouerthrewe the Tower of Babylon, and confounded the tongues. 1. Reg. 17
Pride slew Golias the Giant, and hanged up Haman. Pride ouerthrewe Nicanor,
Hester. 7
and was the destruction of Antiochus. 2^ Match. 1^
Pride drowned Pharao in the red Sea, 1. Macha. 6^
Exodus 14
and murdered Sennacherib the King of Assyrians in the Temple of his false
God. 4 Reg. 18
Pride cut off Holofernes head, Judith. 13.
when he thought him self furthest from fear: Book ^f Jesus. 10.
and to be short, God has suppressed the seats of proud Princes and
rulers, Ibidem.
and has dried up the roots of insolent nations.

Of the abomination of Pride. Chap. 31.
HOw detestable a thing Pride is, God him self does witness by the mouth of
his Prophet saying, I detest and abhor the pride of Jacob: Amos. 6.
And again, our Lord has sworn against the pride of Jacob, Amos. 8.
I will not until the end forget all their works. And hereupon amongst all the
sins which God does hate, Proverb. 8.
the wise man recites for the first of them, proud and lofty looks. And
the Prophet says, the day of the Lord of ^osts shall come upon every proud
and high minded man, Esaias. 5
and upon every arrogant person, and such shall be cast down and made low: It
shall come upon the Cedar trees of Lybanus, which be both high and strong, and
upon all the Oaks of Basan, and upon the high mountayns and all the lofty
hills, and upon every tower and wall that is fortified, and the statelynesse
of men shall be shaken down, and the stoutnesse of the valiant and courageous
shall be abated. Therefore has Hell increased his power, and has enlarged his
mouth, Esaias. 2.
and she shall devour all the proud and vainglorious persons. The Lord of
hosts has determined this, Esaias. 3
that he might c^t off the pride of the insolent. Holy Job also says, Job. 20.
If pride shall mount up into the firmament and the proud man's head shall
touch the Clouds, yet shall he in the end consume away, and come to corruption
as the dirt.

Against the arrogancy of proud men. Chap. 32.
Every vicious man for the most part loves his like, but the proud man
hates him that is proud and lo^tie. Proverb. 13 Proverb. 11
Herevpo^ says the wise man: There is always strife and deb^te amongst proud
men, and where Pride reigns, there commonly is disdain and reproach. The proud
man desires gladly strange things, whereunto he has bin accustomed, and he
accounts wonted things as loathsome. He thinks the party to whom he uses
speech, thereby to reap profit and great commodity: but if with courtesy
he embrace any man, he presumes his countenance, to gain him great c^edite.
He seldom uses any friendly affection, but always imperiously does show
his authority His Pride, his arrogancy, and his disdaine^ is of more force
with him, than courage, or manhood. But let him remember the words of the
Gospel, Luke. 22
There arose a contention amongst our Lords Disciples, which of them should
be taken for the greater, but Jesus said unto them, the Princes of nations and
people do rule over them, and they which have power amongst the^ be called
beneficial or bountiful: but you be not so, for he yt is greatest amongst
you, shall be as ye younger, and he that has the pre-eminence, shall be as the
servant. And as ye Apostle says, 1. Pet. 5^
you shall not be as having government over the clergy, but an example and
patron to the flock willingly. The ^a^th is the Lords, Psalm. 23.
and the whole world, and all that dwell in it is his increase and abundance.
There is then but one Lord, and one God, and others which bear the names of
Lords be but only servants, unto whom dominion is not proper, but service is
appointed. And therefore says the wiseman, If they have appointed thee a
ruler, show not thy self proud nor stately, Book of Jesus. 10.
but be amongst them as one of them.

An example against the deceyte of ambitious men. Chap 33.
THe mother of the sons of Zebedie made petition unto our savior Christ,
saying, Command that th^se my two sons may sit with thee in thy Kingdom,
Math. 20
the one on thy right hand, and the other on thy left: to whom Christ made
this answer: You know not what you ask, for a Kingdom is not gotten by
honor, but by charge. And therefore does our Lord add in the same place: It
is not mine office to give rule and dignity unto you. As though h^e should
say, It is mine to give, but not to you, that is, to such ambitio^s persons:
For althou^he all power and authority comes from God, yet is not the
gouernemente of the proud allowed of the highest, according to the saying of
the Prophet, They reigned and bore the sword, Osc^. 8
but they had it not of me, They were rulers and I did not know them.

Of the properties of arrogante men. Chap. 34.
THe proud man affects the highest seat in the sinagogues, Math. 23.
and to be first placed in fea^ts: he likes well to be saluted in open
sight, and to have great reverence in public assemblies: the title of
mastership pleases him much, and the proper name of his person or parentage be
cannot abide, but desires to be called by the name of his dignity, which
fortune has lent him: for he loves not to be honored after the common ^^rte.
And when he is placed in high degree ^e uses stately gate, and looks for
reverence on every side, and sometimes most cu^ningly he cr^ueth curte^ie^
There was a certain king vehemently noted for Pride by a grave Philosopher,
whom when the wise man saw in his stately throne of soueraintie, he lay
prostrate before him, and in most humble manner adored the King: that done, he
arose and sat down by him: the King di^liking his disloyal demeanor, because
he knew him to be a Philosopher, demanded what he meant: the Philosopher
answered, thou art either God or man, if thou be a God^ I ought to adore thee,
but if thou be a man^ I may well sit by thee. But the King checking the
Philosopher with his own calling, made this answer: I am in very deed a man,
and therefore thou ought not to worship me, but if I were a god, it besemes
thee not to sit by me.

Of superfluous Apparel. Chap. 35.
IN the beginning of the world after the offense committed in Paradise, Genes.
^.
our for^fathers wore garments made of beasts skins: Math. 1^
Our Savior Christ also to avoid the excess of apparel, says unto us, you
shall not have two coats, but according to the counsel of Saint John, he that
h^th two coats, Luke. ^
let him give one of them to him that needs. But the proud man, to set out
his glory, delights to have sundry sorts of gorgeous apparel, and to be
clothed in silks or velvet, and to be decked with precious stones. Yet what
other thing is a man decked with gorgeous garments, than a painted
sepulcher, whose outward shape is fa^re, but full of corruption and
uncleanness within. The precious stone and the purple, the silk and the
velvet, do all consume in the mudde. Gold, silver, and precious stones be
they never so sumptuous, wax ^oule and unclean in mire: Dignity and
authority are evil placed in the dust: Honor and glory has no good seat in
the ashes: Math. 23
why then do thou set forth thy borders, the instruments o^ Pride, Why do
thou exalt her gay wealts and garments? Luke. 16
The rich man that was clothed in purple and sylke, was buried in Hell. Genes.
34
Dyna the daughter of Jacob the Patriarche before she went forth to buy
ornament^s of forrayne women (as Josephus writes) continued a maid, Joseph.
an^iq. lib. cap. 28
but after she went out from amongst them, Sichem son to the king of the
Ammorites did violently rauishe her. Judith. 13.
Holofernes which sat under the rich and precious Canapye wrought with Gold,
stones and purple, was slain of Judith, who left off her sackclothe, and put
on the apparel of mirthe and joy. Therefore says the wise man, Book of
Jesus. 10.

1. Timo. 2


Boast never of thy apparel. And the Apostle forbids women to be high
minded in their gorgeous garments, and that they should not show forth
their frisled hear, or to set out their cau^es with gold work, ^ Pet. 3
or to use any trimming or bravery in their robes.

Against the vain decking and trimming of the body. Chap. 36.
HEarken what the Lord speaks by the mouth of his Prophet against
superfluous decking. Esaias. 3
For as much as the Daughters of Syon, are become loftye, and have walked with
their necks stretched forth to be seen, twinkeling their eyes as they pass
by, the Lord will make their necks deformed, and will leave them no hear,
and in that day the Lord will take from them the decking and ornam^nts
belonging unto them: as their howpes of Gold, their chains, their owches,
their bracelettes, their scarfes, the instruments wherewith they shed their
hear^, their fine garters, their small cheynes, their nosegayes and sweet
perfumes, their little gimmolles that go through their ears, their rings,
their pearls or precious stones which do hang at their foreheads, their suits
of apparel, their short clokes, their fine lynnen, their crisping pynnes,
their looking glasses, their fine cambricke, their headbands and their vayles
of lawne: and they shall have for their sweet perfumes a loathsome sauoure, for
their fine girdles a cowrse cord, for their curled hear, a balde pa^e.
Behold this punishmente is given them for their sins, that wherein they have
had delight, therein they may be punished. Give ear also unto the Prophet
Ezechiel, who says unto the people of Tyrus: O Tyrus, diverse sorts of silks
are wouen for thee in Egypt, Ezechiel. 27
to make thee vayles and couerings. Blew silk and purple are brought from the
Isles of Elishah, and ordained for thy attire. The marchantes of the Islands
have changed their combs of Iuorie and Ebonye with thee at thy price. For the
multitude of thy works, and for thy use, they have set forth in thy fayres
precious things to sale, as Emeraudes, Purple, Damask, embrodered works, fine
flax, silk, and chorall. The factors of Dedan have brought to thee rich
tapistrie and carpette works, for the garnishing of thy seats. And thou art
replenished with all things, and too much glorified. But now thou art
consumed and eaten with the Sea, and thy goods in the bottom thereof, and
overwhelmed in the waters, and thou art come to nothing, and shall never rise
again.

That more favor is showed unto a man for his apparellsake, than ^or his
virtue. Chap. 37.
WHen a certain Philosopher in very mean apparel came unto a Princes gate,
being long stayed thereat, and not suffered to enter in, he went back and
changed his habit and decked him self in gorgeous attire: afterward
returning again unto the gate, he was at the first permitted to enter in: who
coming in presence of the Prince, began to kiss and reverence his garmente,
wherea^ the Prince not a little maruelling, asked the cause why he did so: to
whom the Philosopher answered, I do honor him (says he) that has done me
honor, for that which virtue could not obtain, my garmente has brought to
pass. O vanity of all vanities, that gorgeous garments should be more
honored than virtue, and beauty more esteemed than hon^stie.

O^ the p^inting of the face to decei^e the ey^s. Chap. 38.
THrough the proud and vain desire to set out our beauty, many times the
natural face or shape is covered, and an artificial co^ntena^nce framed
thereon, as though the counte^fet colors of man's in^ention did much excel ye
cunning or work of God. But manne h^rein is deceived, for faith Christ,
consider and behold the lylies of the field how they grow, they do neither
labor nor spi^ne, Math. 6
and I say unto you, that Solomon in all his glory and tryumphe, was never
clothed as any one of those be: for it is not to be thought, that a framed or
feigned color, is comparable to a natural or true color: For when the face
is ^xternally painted, the inward parts are th^rby corrupt^d and made noisome.
Al men and women are nothing else but vanity. Psalm. 38
For what is more vain, than to trim and frizle y^ hear, than to color and
paint ye checkes, and to stretch out the brows? Prou. 30
seeing that ye glory of this life is deceitful, and that beuty is but vain.
All flesh is but as the grass, and the glory ther^of as the flower of the
field, Psalm. 3^
Esaias 40
which does quickly wither and vade away, and shall soon decay as the
pothearbes. And to omit the speaking any more of this matter, least I should
seem malitious^ what is more vain than to adorn the table with fine and
imbrodered clothes, with Iuorie trenchers, with long carpettes, with flagons of
silver and gold, and a number of precious and gorgeous ornaments? or what
^uayleth i^ a man to paynte his chamber, to gilt ye posts of his ^edde, to
provide a fai^e or sumpt^ous portall to enter therein^ to make the pauement
shine, to fill his bed full of feathers to cover it with silk, or else to
deck it with curtaynes or canapye? for it is written: when he dy^th, Psalm. 48
of al these things nothing shall ^e receyu^, ne yet his glory or pomp ^hal
follow him.

Of the vncleann^sse of man's heart. Chap. 39.
THere is no man that can boaste of the cleanenesse and purity of his heart:
Ia^o. 3
for as much as every one of us, 1. John. ^
has offended God in many things. And if we shall say we have no sin, we
deceive our selves and the truth reste^h not in us. What manne is he that
can say with the 1. Cor. 4
Apostle: I do not know my self guilty in any thing, and yet for all that I
am not justified? who is he that can say thus? if there be any such, Job. 15
we may well praise him. Behold even amongst the Saints of God there have
b^ne ^ounde some chaungeable: and the very heavens are not clean in his
syghte, Job. 4
no not his Angels, for in them he has found wickedness. How much more
then is man ab^ominable and unprofitable in the sight of God, which has
drunk (as it were the water of iniquiti^) sin: Genes. 6
Therefore did it repent GOD that he had made man, because his malice and
frowardness was great upon the earth, and his thoughts were always
inclined unto euill^ for this cause being inwardly moved with sorrow, he
destroyed man whom he had made in the first age.

But yet for all this, the iniquity of man did abound, and the charity of
many wa^ed cold. M^th. 24
Psalm. 13^52
All men went astraye, and were become unprofitable; and there was not one
that did good^ no not one. For the whole life almost of mortal men, is full of
sin and iniquity, in so much that scantely one can be found which does
not declyne on ^he left hand: which does not return to his former
wickedness agayn^, Romans ^
and pyne away in unclean corruption: but rather to increa^e their off^nces,
they do brag and boaste, when they have done amiss, and rejoice i^ their
wicked doings: they are replenished with (...) pride of abomination: as with
malyce^ ^or^ication^ covetousness and pride: ^^ey ^e also fraught with e^^y,
manslaughter^ contention, de^^^^e, ^^ill will, and ^atred^ they may be
whisperers, ^ale bearers, ^ seditious persons: ^atefull to God, contumelious^
pro^de^ ^igh minded, in^entors of mischi^^^, probedi^^^ to t^^ir parents,
wi^^out di^cretion^ without order, without loue^ without keeping of league or
promise, and with (...) With (...) and with wor^^, the (...) abound as with
men of sundry sects with tyrants, disloyal s^biectes^ committers of Symonye,
(...) deceytfull men, with sowers of debate and subtyle persons, with
glu^tons and dronkardes, with adulterers^ and incestuous persons, with
effeminate and leude men, with inc^e as be slow and negligent to do good,
with such as be vain and prodigal, f^r^ous and angrye, impatiente and
inconstant, with sor^erers and southsayers, with periu^ed and cursed men,
with presumptuous and arrogante, with those that ^ee ^arde of beeliefe and
desperate, and to conclude, with all kind of ambiti^us men. But as the smoke
vanysheth awa^e, Psalm. 67
even so shall they decay: and as the wa^e does melt before the fire, even so
shall sinners before the face of God.

Of the gri^^^^ and ^orments which evil ^en do suffer at the hour of death.
Chap. 40.
THe evil li^er^ do suffer (...) pai^^s at their death: The ^^rste is the
anguyshe of the bodye^ which is so great and so ^^treame, that the like n^^^r
was, nor is felt in t^is life at any time^ before the dissolution of the soul
from the body. For it seems in some men through the great pain they do
sustain in their trance, without any motion, yt they do make away them selves:
for the violence which they suffer is so strong and incomparable, because those
natural bonds and knots between ye body and the soul are broken in sunder.
Whereupon the prophet lamenting, says thus in his Psalms: Psalm. 17 and.
114.
The torments of death have beset me ^ounde about: there is not so much as an^
member, no not one ioynte in the whole body, which is not s^retched in yt
intolerable dol^r and pang. The second pain is, when the body bring
altogether wearied and spoiled of ^is strength, y^ soul does see in a moment
more freely and with much more liberty all the good and evil deeds which the
man has done in all his life time, which al are presented before the inward
eyes of the soule^ And this torment is so great, and the calling of things
past to re^e^brance is so gr^^^^^ yt ye soul it self being thereby ^ery much
(...) is forced to declare and rehearse it^ ^herupo^ the Psalmist says: Psalm. 1^
The ^lowing or running s^re^^es of inquitie have troubled ^e for as ye running
strea^es come with great violence and force, and seem to overthrow and cast
down all things they find in the way: even so shall the naughty man at his
death suddenly behold the works which he has don, be they good or evil.
The third pain is, when the soul begins to judge justly and does see all
the torments of hell (which be dew unto him for his sins) approach near,
and as it were ready to ^all upon him: whereupon the Psalmi^t says: The
dolors of hell have compassed me about. Psalm. 17
The fourth torment is, when the soul yet remaining in the body does behold
and see wicked spirits ready to receive it: at which instante the grief and
torment is such, and the fear so great, that the silly soul being in great
anguish, returns and recoyleth back again, so long as it may, into the body,
that thereby ^t may redeem some part of the time, in the which it shall be in
captivity.

Of the coming of Christ at the hour of every man's death. Chap. 41.
BOth good and evil me^, before the soul depart out of the body, do see
Christ upon the cross. The evil and wicked man does see him to his
con^usion, that he may be ashamed and blush, in that he is not saved by the
blood of Christ, his offense so requyring: and therefore in the Gospel it is
^ayde to wicked and evil men: They shall behold and see him whom they have
persed and wounded: Job. 1^
Z^charie. 1^
which is understood at the coming of Christ to judgment: and also at his
coming at the day of every man's death. But the good man does behold Christ
upon the cross to his great joy: 1. Ti. 6
as we gather by the words of his Apostle which says: until the day of
death, when Christ upon the cross shall appear unto the good and evil. And
Christ himself says of saint John the Evangelist: John. 2^.
I will that he remain so until I come, that is to wit, I will that he
remain in his virginity until I come to his death. We read of four
commings of Christ: two of them be visible, and two inuisible^ He came visibly
in ^umilitie, to redeem the world: and he shall come visibly in his majesty
to judge the world. Of his i^uisible commings the first is when ^ee comes
into the mind of man by grace. according to the saying of our Lord in saint
John's Gospel: John. 14
we shall come unto him and dwell with him: The second is at the death of
every man. And therefore ^aith Saint John in his Apocalipse, Apocal. 2.
come unto me Lord Jesus. At whose coming that we may be found watchful
and diligent servants, let us endeavor our selves to serve and fear him in
holiness and pureness of life, to whom with the father and the holy ghost be
all honor, majesty, glory, power, and dominion for ever and ever:

The third Book of the Mirror of man^ life.
Of the putrifycation of the body when the soul is departed. Chap. 1.
THe soul of man (says the Prophet) shall depar^e from him^ Psalm. 145
and he shall return again^ into earth ^^o^ whence ^e ^a^e. In that day al
his thoughts and worldly inventions shall perish. O how many and how wonderful
great are ye Imaginations of mortal men about worldely provision: but when
death shall prevent them, al their devises and inventions shall soon vanish
away, and they shall quite decay, even as the shadow when it declyneth, or as
the Grasshoppers which soon are shaken from the grain. Psalm. 108
Furthermore, when the body and soul are separate asunder^ the^ shall they
forsake with great grief and sorrow such things as they loved in this life most
derely. Job. 14
Psalm. 103
For there is a term appointed the^ which can not be escaped, at what time
earth ^hal return into earth, as it is written: Thou art earth, and shall
re^urn into ^ar^ ^ again. Genesis 3
Because it is agreeable to the course of nature, that every mortal thing
should be resolved again into the self same substance, whereof it was erst
made: Psalm. 103
Therefore (says David) the spirits of men shall be taken away from them, and
they shall return in^o dust. Book of Jesus. 10.
But when man shall dye, his inheritance shall be with brute be^stes and
serpents, Job. 21.
for all men shall sleep in the dust, Esaias. 31
and the worms shall eat their flesh, even as the mo^h the garment, as he
does devour the woolle. I shall be consumed (says Job) as corruption, Job. 13
and as the garment which is eaten of the mo^he: I said unto rottenness, Job.
17
thou art my father, and I called the worms my mother and sister. Man is but a
mass of putrefaction, Job. 25
and the son of man is but corruption. O what a loathsome parentage is that,
where rottenness is the father? and what an unclean stock is that, which is
united with worms? For man is conceived in corruption, and in the burning heat
of foul lust, upon whose dead carcass the worms do wait as mourners. In
his lif^ time he brings forth troublesome and tedious v^rmyn^, and after
death his flesh engenders worms: whilst he lives, his body yeldeth
noisome and odious things: and when he dies he becomes a lump of foul
and unclean corruption. During this life his only care is to nourish and
maintain one, but when he is dead, he shall feed and sustain a number of
worms. For what is more ugly and filthy to behold than is the vile corpse of a
dead man? And what is more horrible unto the sight, than is the body, when the
soul is parted? He whose embracings to us were plesaunte whilst life
endured, the very sight of him after death shall be most noisome. What
profitte then may we reap of our riches? what good shall we find of our
delycate bankettes? or what then shall avail us our dayntie diet? They shall
not deliver us from the danger of death: they sh^l not defend us from the
hungry worms: they shall not preserve us from loa^hsome savors. We have
seen him despised and cast into grave, which of late sat most gloriouslye in
his princely throne. The courteer that walked in sumptuous attire, lies now
in the earth unseemly to behold: and he that was fed with delicate fare,
is now to be devoured of worms in the ground.

Of the heavy remembrance of the damned souls. Chap. 2.
Book o^ Jesus. 7
THe torments of wicked men shall be the worm, and fire. And both of these
have sundry operations: For the one works inwardly, and the other torme^teth
outwardly. The worm which works inwardly does always eat and devour ye
heart: and ye fire which tormenteth outwardly, does always burn^ and consumes
ye body. The worm of the^ (sait^ the Prophet) shall never dye, Esaias vlt.
and their fyr^^ shall not be quenched. Iudeth. 16.
Our Lord will send^ fire and worms for their flesh, that the^ may burn and
feel the smarte for euer^ The worm of conscience shall vex them repentance
shall trouble them, and per^plexitie of mind shall torment them. F^^ they
being fearful and tymorous, sha^^ call to remembrance their sins, a^^
their own wickedness shall bewr^y then and thus they shall say within the^
selves: Book of. Wi^do. 4.
What goodness have we pr^^cured by our pride? Wisdom. 5
or what profit h^^ we obtained by worldly pomp and ^^ni^ie? and what can
our riches now avail us? All these things are gone and paste, even as the
shadow, or as the ship which passes over the raging waves, whose track is
never seen again. So we mortal men which are borne into this world, do
quickly perish and decay, and swiftly approach unto our end. Of ^ertue, we
are scarcely able to show any sign at all, but we are consumed in our own
malice and wickedness. Therefore with great vexation of mind shall the
damned souls often remember those things, which with great mirth and ioylitie,
they did commit in this li^e: that the remembrance at all man augment th^yr
pain, whom the styng of sin provoked to wickedness.

Of the vn^ro^itable repentance of the damned. C^ap. 3
THey shall say unto them selves repe^ting: Wisdom. 5
we have gone astray from the way of truth, and the light of righteousness
has not shyn^d upon us. ^uc 23.
T^en shall they cry unto the mountayns, and say, (...). 6.
O you mountains fall upon us, and you hills cou^r us. They shall repent to
their p^in, but their conversion shall not obtai^ pardon. For it is according
unto justice, yt those which would not repent when they might, shall not (when
they desire) obtain mercy. God gave them opportunity and space to repent, and
they abused his time of long sufferance. And therefore said the rich man which
was tormented in hell: Lu^. 16.
O father Abraham, I beseech thee, that thou would send Lazarus unto my
fathers house, that he may signify unto them what is become of me, least
tha^ they also fall into this place of torments: unto whom after it was
aunsweared, that they had the law and the Prophets, let them hear them: he
did immediately replye saying: No father Abraham, they will not gi^e ^are unto
them, but if any of those that be dead shall go unto them, they will repent.
The rich man then being in hell, did repent him: But because he knew that his
repentance did nothing a auyle ^ym, he desired it might be declared unto his
brethren, that they might do fruitful repentance in this world. For that it
does then profit a man of sin to repent him, whilst as yet he may commit
any sin.

Of the manifold and diu^rs pains of Hell. Chap 4.
THe pains of Hell are many and of diverse sorts, Math. 13
The first pain is the pain of fire. The second is the pain of cold. Of
the^e two our Lord speaks in the gospel, where he ^ayeth: there shall be
weping and wailing with gnashing of teeth, which is by reason of the cold. The
third pain of hell is the foul savor: Psalm. 10
and of these three pains ye Psalmist makes mention when ^ee says, fire,
brimston^, and the spirit of great tempests. The fourth pain shall be worms.
which shall never cease. Whereof the prophet (says thus) Their worm shall not
dye, and their fire shall not go out, Esaias. cap. vlt,
for it shall never be extinguished. The fifth pain shall be the sharp whips
of the torm^nters: whereupon the wise man says thus: Prou. 1^
Judgments ar^ prepared for blasphemers, and beating hammers are made ready
f^r the bodies of the foolish. The sixth pain shall be sensible darkness, both
inward and outward, which ^ob means when he says, Job. ca. 10.
The land of misery and darkness, where is ye shadow of death. Of the damned
soul speaks also ye prophet David in this sort. Psalm. 143
And he shall never see light. And in anoth^r place it is written thus of the
dam^ed: 1. King. ^.
The wicked man shall keep sil^^ce in darken^sse. The seventh pain shall be
the confusion of ^inners: Dan. 7.
for then as it is written in Daniel, The books of man's conscience shall be
opened, Apocal. 5
and all his doyngs shall be made mani^^st. The eight pain shall be the
hor^^ble sight of devils, which shall be seen through the sparks rising out
of ye vnque^cha^le fire. The ninth shall be the fiery chains wherewithal ye
parts of ye ungodly shall be linked. The^e hellishe pains are ordained for the
wic^^d and sinful persons: w^erwith shall be tormented those that follow lewd
desir^s and fl^shly lusts: those that are extortioners and spoylers of their
neyg^bours: those that ar^ puffed up with en^ie and malice: ^^ose that have
provoked Gods vengeance through t^^ multitude of their sins: P^al. 9
those that are despisers and neglecters of the truth: those tha^ are
impenitent and wilful offenders: and those that are commi^ters of mischief and
foul acts, following the wanton (...) affec^ions of the flesh.

Of the unspeakable anguish and tormen^ of the damned. Chap. 5.
THe reprobate whilst they behold the blessed souls, Book of Wisdom. 5.
shall be tormented with horrible fear, weeping and lamenting for v^ry grief
of mind: and thus shall they say unto themselves: These be those whom sometimes
we made our laughing stocks and always had them in derision: we being
without sense, did account their life madness, and their end to become
obscure and with^^t honor: behold now they are numbered amongst the children
of God, and their portion is amongst ye saints. It shall be a great punishment
unto ye wicked, to behold ye glory of ye blessed. And it may be that the
blessed souls after the end of judgment, shall see the reprobate in their
torments, according to the place of scripture which says, Psalm. 57
The just man shall rejoice when he shall see ^he tormente of sinners: But the
reprobate shall not see the blessed in their glory, as the prophet witnesses,
saying: Esa^. ^6.
Wisd. 5.
The wicked shall not see the glory of God. And such shall be the talk of
sinners in Hell: for that the hope of the ungodly is like unto saw duste,
which is quyte carried away with the wind: or like unto the froath of the
earth which is dispersed and ^cattered abroad by the tempest: and as the smoke
which is spread abroad with the wind: and as the remembrance of a guest of one
day.

Of Hell fire. Chap. 6.
THe fire of Hell is neither nourished with wood, nor yet kindled by the help of
any. But it is created of God, and is made unquenchable from the beginning of
the world. Ezech. 20
For it is written: He shall be devoured with fire which is not kyndled.
This hellishe fire is supposed to be under the earth according to the place of
Esaias, where he says: Job. 20
Esaias. 14
the Hell which is under the earth is vexed and disquieted agayns^e thy
coming: but every place is p^nall to the re^robate, which always and in all
places carye their pain and torment against themselves. I will bring forth
from ye midst of thee (says God, Ezec. 28
) by ye mouth of his prophet, fire which shall devour thee. The fire of Hell
shall always burn and shall never give light: it shall always yield thee an
extreme heat, and yet shall it never cons^me that which it burns: it shall
always afflict and never fail. In Hell the darkness is exceeding great, the
bytternesse of pains passes all measure, and the continuance in misery is
without ende^ Math. 22
Cast ^ym bound hand and foot (says our Savior speaking of the sinner^)
into utter darkenenesse, where there shall b^e weeping, wayling, and gnashing
of teeth. Every part of the body shall sustain ^or his sins a propre
torment, that the wicked may be punished in that wherein he has offended.
For it is written: Wisdo. 16.
Man shall be tormented in those things by the which he has transgr^ssed.
Wherefore he that did sin with his tongue, was punished in his tongue. Luke. 16
And therefore did the proud rich man cry, saying: father Abraham have pity
upon me, and s^nd Lazarus unto me, that he may dip the top of his finger
in water, and cool my tongue, wherein I am tormented in this burning flame.

Of the darkness of Hell. Chap. 7.
THe reprobate and damned souls shall not only be covered with outward
darkness, but they shall be also enwrapped in inward darkness, for so much
as they shall be deprived both of the spiritual and corporal light. Esaias. 26
^say. 60.
For it is written: Let the wicked man be taken away, that he do not see ye
glory of God, who only shall then be for an everlasting light. The reprobate
truly shall suffer such grief and sorrow of mind in their pains, that their
thoughts shall be fixed on no other thing but only upon the vehement anguish and
grief of torment, which they shall feel. It is reported, that a certain
Scholar after his death did appear unto his master, and declared unto him
that he was a damned soul: forthwith his master demanded of him, whether
there were any quest^ons or controversies moved amongst the damned souls in
Hell: unto whom he made answer that there was nothing in hell, but pain and
tormente. Solomon also speaking of the worldling, says thus: Book of the
Prea^her. 6.
In Hell whether thou make have to go, is neither work nor reckening:
knowledge, nor yet wisdom: for there shall be so great forgetfulness in ye
reproved of God, with such blindness of heart, and so marvelous a confusion
of reason, that never or seldom they shall have any good thought of God, nor
scarcely shall take their breath, to confess his ^oly name: Book of Jesus. 17
For from the dead man all acknowledging of God does vanish away, even as from
one that is not at all. For it is written, Psalm. 113
the dead shall not praise thee O Lord, neither shall they which go down
into Hell exalte thy name. Hell shall not con^esse thee O Lord, Esaias. 38.
and death shall not set forth thy praise.

Of the confusion of pains. Chap 8
Give me leave (sai^th Job Job. 10
) that I may bewail a w^ile my greef before I go into the land of
darkness, a land covered with the dimnesse of death, a land I say full of
misery and darkness, where is the shadow of death, and where is no order but
eu^^las^ing t^rror, and quaking for ever. There shall be an order in the
quantity of those hellish pains, Luke. 6
because in what so ever mesure you have mesured to others in this life, in the
same measure shall it be measured you again, to the end they which have most
grievously offended, may be ye sorer punished. For they which are mighty,
shall suffer mighty and great torments. Wisdom. ^.
But there shall be no order in the quality of things, Job. 10
because such miserable sinners shall go from the extreme cold water of
snow, unto exceeding great heat of burning fire, Job. 24
that the s^ddaine mutation of those contraries, may make their torment the
more vehemente. For I have seen it tried by experience, that if any cold
thing be presently added to the place which is bu^nte, it shall cause the
party forthwith to sustayn a more ard^nt and grievous pain,

Of the continuance of the pains in Hell. Chap. 9.
Psalm. 48
THe wicked (says ye Prophet) are thruste into Hell like sheep, and death
shall devour them. This is spoken after the similitude of brute beasts,
which do not pull the grass up by the roots, but feed only upon the tops
thereof, that the grass may grow again for their pasture. Even so the
ungodly, being as it were food unto death shall always revive again to
death, that they man be ever dying. Like as ye Poet says of Titius, which
always consumes in Hell, and yet reuiueth again, so that still in such
sort he is languishing, that he may ever perishe^ Then shall death be
immortal, and the dead shall live, which ar^ dead to life: they shall seek
after death and shall never find it, because they had life, and lewdely they
lost it. Hearken unto Saint John who says, Apocal. 9^
in those days men shall seek for death, and shall not find it, they shall
desire to die, and death shall fly from them. O death how sweet and
pleasant should thou be to them, unto whom thou ^ast been bitter? they
shall most desire thee which did most abhor thee.

Of the everlasting pains of the damned souls. Chap. 10.
LEt no man flatter him self and say, Psalm. 102
that God will not always be angry, and that he will not be offended with
sinners for ever, but that his mercies are above all his works: Psalm. 144
because that God when he is offended with sinners, will not forget to have
mercy upon them: Wisd. 11.
neither does he hate any thing that he has made. Let no man I say, reason in
this sort, making that an argument of his error^ which our Lord says by the
mouth of his Prophet: They shall be gathered together even as a bundel, into
the lake, and there shall they be shut in prison, and after many days they
shall be visited: for ma did sin but for a time, and therefore God will not
punish him for ever. O vain hope^ O false presumption of the damned soul. Let
him not be deceived through this vain error, that he can be redeemed for
any price, because that in Hell there is no redemption. Sinners shall be
gathered together in ye lake, and shall be shut up in prison, that is to say,
in Hell, where they shall be to^mented without their bodies, until ye day of
Judgment: and after many days, that is to say, after they have appeared with
their bodies in judgment, they shall be visited, not to their salvation, but
to their greater punishment: for after that day they shall be more grievously
tormented. Psalm. 8^.
And in an other place it is thus said: I will visit their iniquities with
the rod, and their sins with stripes. God therefore is angry with his
predestinate for a time, because he does chastise every child that he loves,
of whom that place is understood, where it is sayd^ He will not be angry with
them for ever. But God is angry with the reprobate for ever, because it is
most agreeable to justice, that the ungodly which does offend God for ever,
should suffer his revenge eternally. For although power to sin does fail ye
sinner, yet does he never shake off the wicked will to sin: for i^ is writte^^
Psa 7^
The pride of them which have thee O Lord, does always increase and asce^^.
The reprobate being become desperate, and without hope of obtaining pardone at
Gods hands, shall not be made humble and mee^e, but the hatred and malice of
the^ shall so increase, that they shall wish he were not, by whose means they have
such an unhappy being: Apocal. 1
They shall curse the most highest, and shall blaspheme the great and mighty
God, complaining against him in that he has created them to sustayn
punishment, and does never incline himself to take mercy on them, or else to
grant them pardon. Hea^e what S. John says: There did a great hayle (says
he) fall down from Heaven upon men, Apocal. 1
and they did blaspheme God for the stroke of this hayle, because it was
marvelous sore. The damned Soul therefore, although he have lost the power
and force of synning, yet always shall he have the affection of wickedness,
and the sling of malice still remaining in him: and that which was sin to him
in this world, shall be his punishmente and tormente in Hell: And perhaps it
may be reputed there also as sin, but not the ^eserte of sin. And
therefore shall the wicked man through the g^ilte of conscience procured by
sin, feel always besides his pain, an inward grief and torment against
him self. For that which in his life time he did not wipe away by
repentance, God does not forgive it afterward by pardon or indulgence.
Esdras. 9.
It then appertains unto the great justice of him that judges, that they
never want the pain of hell, w^o in their life were never without sin.
T^^ely they w^^lde (if they could) have lived for ever, that they mi^^t have
sinned without end or ceasing. For ^e that forsakes not sin in this life,
seems always de^irous for sins sake to live.

Testimonies of the eternal punishements and torm^nts of hell. Chap. 11.
WHich of you (says the Prophet) is able Esaias. 33
^o dwell with perpetual devouring and everlasting fire? or which of you will
^oiou^^e with heates which never shall cease? They shallbe (says he) smoke in
my fury, Esaias. 65
and as a burning fire all the day long, which shall not be put out in the
night, but the smoke thereof shall rise and increase for ever. I will give you
to be a perpetual reproach (says our Lord by Hi^remie his Prophet: Hier. 23
) and an everlasting ignomie which s^all never be blotted out through
oblivion. And they which have slept upon the dust or the earth, shall watch
(says Daniel, Daniel
) some to obtayn life euerlast^ng, othersome to become a reproach, that they
may always see it. And the wise man ^aith, that after the wicked and ungodly
man is departed out of this life, there shall be no more ^ope of him: Prou. 11
Prou. 6
but his perdition shall f^l upon him out of hand, and he shall be suddenly
torn in pieces, and never shall find any medicine or remedy thereof again.
Apocal. 14
If any shall adore ye beast and ^ir Image he shall (says S. John) drink of
the vine of Gods wrath, and shall be tormented with fire and brimstone: and the
smoke of his torments shall rise and increase for ever: neither shall be rest
day nor night, which shall worship the beast and her Image: Math. 2^
The truth it self shall confirm this saying, when he shall come to
judgment, and reprove the reprobate in these words: Go you accursed into
everlasting fire, which is prepared for the Devil and his angels. If therefore
according to Gods judgment all credit does consist in the persons of two or
three, how much more then shall that appear euidente and clear which is
witnessed by the mouth of so many concerning this truth proponed.

Of the day of judgment. Chap. 12.
BEhold therefore (says the Prophet) the day of our Lord shall come cruelly,
full of wrath, Esaias 13.
full of anger and fury, to bring the earth into a desert, and to destroy the
sinners thereof. Because the Stares of Heaven and the brightness of them,
shall not appear or be seen, and the Sun shall be darkened in his rising,
and the Moon shall not give forth her light. And I will visit the
wickedness of all the world, and the iniquity of the ungodly. I will also
cause the Pride of the unfaithful to cease, and will pluck down the arrogance
of the mighty. For all powershall be dissolved, and the heart of every man shall
cons^me and wast away. ^
Torments and greefes shall possess them, Ibidem.
they shall mourn as women do in childebed, every one of them shall be
astonyed at his neighbor, and their countenances shall be defaced with fire.
Sophonia. 1
That day shall be a day of anger, a day of tribulation and anguishe, a day of
calamity and misery, a day of darkness and obscurity: yea it shall be the
day of trumpets and of noise, because our Lord will with have make an end of al
those that do inhabit the earth. Luke. 21.
And that day shall suddenly come upon all such as dwell upon the face of the
earth, even as a snare. Math. 24
For as lightning comes out of ye East, and goes into the West, even so
shall the coming of ye son of man be: 1. The^. 5.
And as ye Thief comes unlooked for, even so shall ye son of man come in ye
night, and when they shall say amongst them selves peace and security, then
shall a sudden death come upon them, as does the pain of a woman with
child, and they shall not escape.

Of the tribulation that shall go before the day of judgment. Chap. 13.
THere shall great tribulation go before ye day of Judgment, Math. 24.
such as never was from beginning of the world unto this time, neither shall
be. And unless those days were shortened, there should be none saved. For
nation shall rise aganst nation, Luke. 2^
and kingdom against kingdom, and there shall be great earth quakes every
where, there shall be pestilence, hunger, terror, and diverse signs shall appear
in the heavens: as in the Sun, the Moon and the Stars, there shall be
oppressings of people upon the earth, and through ye noise of the raging seas
and floods, and thorough ye expectation of such horrible things as shall come
upon the world, men for fear shall w^ther away. There shall arise up false
Prophets, and they shall give great signs and wonders, Math. 24
so that the very elect of God (if it were poss^ble) should be brought into
error. 2. These. 2
Then shall the man of sin ye son of perdition be revealed, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
which ^etteth him self against God, ^bidem.
and extolleth himself above that which is called or worshipped as God,
insom^ch yt he shall sit in the temple of God, showing him self as though he
were God, whom our Lord Jesus shall destroy with ye breath of his mouth. E^ay.
11.
But before the great and horrible day in the which our Lord shall come, Ma^^c.
4.
Ely the Prophet shall be sent, and he shall convert the hearts of the fathers
toward their children, and the hearts of the children toward their parents:
with whom also Enoch shall come, and they shall prophecy a thousand two
hundredth and threes^ore days, clothed with sackcloth: and when they shall
finishe their testimonies, Apocal. 1^
ye beast which shall rise up from ye botomlesse pit, shall war against the^
and shall overcome and destroy them, and their bodies shall lie in the street^s
of the great city, which is spiritually called Sodom, or Egypt, where our Lord
was crucified. And after three days and a half, the spirit of life shall
enter into them again.

Of the signs going before the latter day. Chap. 14.
Immediately after the tribulation of the days which we have mentioned, Math. 14
the Sun shall be darkened, and the moon, shall not give her light: the
Stars shall fall from the heaven, and the powers of the hea^ens shall move,
and then shall the sign^ of the son of man appear in the heaven. Then shall
all the tribes of the earth bewail them selves. Apocal. 6
The Kings and Princes of the earth (says Saint John) the tribunes and rich
men, the mighty and the strong: to be short, every man be ^e bond or free,
shall seek to hide themselves in dens, amongst the mountains, or rocks, and
they shall say unto the mountains fall upon us, and hide us from the face of
him which sits upon the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb, because the
day of his wrath is come. And who shall be able to endure it? Math. 24.
He shall send his Angels with a trumpet or loud voice, and they shall call
together his elect, and gather them from the four winds, 1. These. 4.
and uppermost parts of ye heavens, even unto the ends of the earth. Then
shall our Lord him self (says the Apostle) at the voice of an Archangel, and
at the sound of the trumpet of God, John. 5
come from his heavenly throne, Romans ^.
and al they which be in their graves, shall hear the voice of the son of
God, and the good shall proceed to the resurrection of life, but the evil to
the resurrection of judgment and damnation. Death and Hell shall surrender
their dead which shall be in them, Apocal. 20
and every eye shall see, yea eue^ they which have pricked against him: and all the tribes of the earth shall mourn. Luke. 21.
Then shall they see the son of man coming in a cloud with great power and
majesty. But our Lord shall come to revenge the wickedness of the world, not
with his Apostles only but also with the senators of his people: whereupon the
wise man says thus, Prouer. 31
Her ^usbande a noble man in his gates, when ^e shall sit with the senators of
the earth etc. For they also shall sit upon the twelve seats of the tribes of
Israel. Math. 10.
I did look says the Prophet Daniel, until the thrones were set up, Capit^. 7.
and the ancient of the days satte him down: his garmente was as white as
snow, and the hears of his head were as clear and as white as wool: his
throne were the flames of fire, and the wheels thereof were burning fire: and
from his countenance proceeded a raging stream of fire^ Thousands of
thousands did minister unto him, and ten hundredth thousands did assist him.
Psalm. 49.
Our Lord (says David) will come openly, he is our God and will not keep
silence: fire shall burn in his sight, and there shall be a mighty great
tempest round about him. He has called upon the heaven from above, and the
earth below, to judge or discern his people. Matthew. 2^
Then shall all nations be gathered together before him, and he shall
separate the one from the other^ as the shepherd does separate his sheep from
his kiddes, and he shall set the sheep on the right hand, and the kiddes on
his left.

Of the power, wisdom, and justice of the Judge. Chap. 15.
Luke. 21
O How great shall the trembling and fear be in that day? O what weeping and
wayling shall then be heard? Job. 26.
For if the pillars of heaven do tremble and shake for fear at his coming,
Esaias. 33.
if the Angels of peace shall then weep bitterly, what shall sinners do? if
the just man shall very hardly be saved, how then shall wicked and sinful men
show their faces? Psalm. 142.
Therefore does the Prophet David ex^lame and say, Lord enter not into
judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight no man shall be justified: and
again, Psalm. 129.
If thou O god shalt observe and mark iniquities, O Lord who shall be able to
sustain it? For what is he that does not ^eare a most just, a wise, and most
mighty judge? I call him a most mighty judge, because no man can avoid his
sight: he is a wise judge, because the faults of men cannot be hidden from
him: And he is a most just judge, because no man can corrupt him. If we look
for courage, he is most strong in ^orce, and wise in heart. Job. ^.
If equity in judgment should be required, there is none that dares bear
witness for me. If I should justify my self, my own mouth will condemn
me. Baruch. 3.
If I shall show my self as an innocent, Psa. 32.14^
it shall declare me to be but froward and wicked, although I do appear
simple. He said the word, and all things were made: He gave commandment, and
they were created: Baruch. ^^
He calls upon the stars, and they answer, we be here: He makes his
Angels spirits, and his m^nisters a flame of fire. Psalm. 103^
Romans 9.
Unto whose will nothing does resist, and unto whom no word is impossible:
Ibidem.
And at whose name every knee does bow, as well of those that be in heaven as
upon the earth, Rom 14.
and under the earth. Philip. ^.
His sight no man can fly (as the Prophet says) For if I shall (says he)
ascend up into the heaven, thou art there: Psalm. 13^
Hebr. 4.
if I shall descend into hell, Hier. 1^.
thou art at hand also, He is the searcher of the reins and hearts: unto his
eyes all things are open. He numbreth and tells the drops of rain, and
the sands of the Sea. Eccle. 1^.
God is the Lord of knowledge, for he has the knowledge of all things before
they come to pass. He is privy unto every thing, and a searcher out of
secret and hidden things. No man can be hidden from him, as the Apostle
says: There is no creature invisible in his sight: He is a just and a stout
Judge, Hebr. 4.
and a long sufferer: Psalm. 7.
who neither for prayer nor for hire for love nor hate, does once decline from
the pathe of righteousness, Boethius lib de consol. Philoso.
but always marching in the high way, passes over no evil unpunished, ne
leaves any good deed unrewarded. Therefore can no man corrupt him, according
to the Psalmist. Psalm. 61.
Iere. 18
Thou O Lord rewardest every one according to his deserts.

Of Gods Judgment. Chap. 16.
WHat is he that will not fear that kind of examination, wherein the self
same shall be both the accuser, the advocate, and the judge? for he shall be
the accuser, when ^ee shall say unto the wicked: I was hungry, and you did not
give me to eat: Mat. 25.
I was thirsty, and you gave me not to drink. He shall play the advocate, when
he says: As long as you did it not to any one of these little ones, Ibidem.
so long you did it not to me. He shall sustain the person of a judge, when he
does infer this of that which he said before, Get you hence away from me
you accursed, into everlasting fire. No witness shall be necessary in that
judgment: For that then the secrets of darkness shall be most manifest. For
there is nothing hydden which then shall not be revealed. The books of men's
conscience shall then be opened: 1. Cor. 4
Daniel. 7
then shall the dead be judged of those things which be written in the book:
for their works shall follow them. Apocal. 14
Romans 2
O Lord what great shame or abashment shall then be amongst sinners? What
confusion shall there be, when their most detestable crimes shall be evident and
manifest unto all men. Blessed be they (says the Prophet) whose sins are
forgiven them, Psalm. 31.
and whose offenses are covered. For there can be no appeal made from that
sentence. John. 5.
Because the father has given all judgment unto his son: who shuts and
no man opens: who opens and no man shuts: Apocal. ^
for the mouth of our Lord has spoken it.

That nothing shall ^rofyte the damned souls. Ch^p. 17.
THen shall not riches profit them, their worldely honors shall not defend
them, Ezech. 7.
their friends shall not help them, nor their gold and silver shall not be
able to deliver them in the day of our Lords fury. All the Kings of the earth
shall weep and lament, Apocal. 18
when they shall see the smoke of the fire, for fear of their torments. What
then shall you do in the day of our Lords fury? in the day of visitation and
calamity coming a far off? unto whose help will you have recourse? Gala. 6.
Every man shall bear his own burden: Eze. 18.
The soul that ^inneth shall dye. O straight judgment wherein men must make
an account, not of their deeds only, but of every idle word which they have
spoken. Math. 12
This must they do in the day of judgment, on the which day the debt with the
interest shall be demanded of them, even unto the last farthing. Math. 18
Who can therefore fly away from the wrath of him which shall come? The son
of man shall send his Angels, Luce.
and they shall weed from his kingdom all scandalles and offenses, and those
also which have committed wickedness: and they shall also bind bundels or
faggots to burn, and shall put them into the chimney of the hot burning
fir^, where there shall be weeping and wayling with gnashing of teeth: mourning
and crying with terrible pain: noise and clamor: fear and trembling: grief
and sorrow: darkness and anguish: bitterness and misery: penurye and
torment: with grief of mind, sadness, and forgetfulness, confusion,
wrestings, pinchings, ^harpenesse and terror, hunger, thirst, cold, and heat,
brimstone and burning fire, which shall endure for ever and ever.

FINIS.
Speculum humanum. Made by Stephen Gosson.
O What is man? or whereof might he vaunt?
From earth and air, and ashes first he came:
His tickle state, his courage ought to daunt:
His life sh^l ^lit, when most ^e trustes the same.
Then keep in mind thy mould and fickle frame:
Thy self a naked Adam shall thou find.
A babe by birth both borne and brought forth blind.
A dry and withered reed that wants sap,
Whose rotten root is re^t even at a clap:
A sign, a shewe^ of green and pleasant grass,
Whose gliding glory suddenly does pas^e.
A lame and loathsome lymping legged wight,
That daily does Gods froune and fury feel^^
A crooked cripple, void of all delight,
That haleth after him an haulting heel,
And from Jerusalem on stilts does reele:
A wr^tch of wrath, a sop in sorrow sowst,
A bruised bark with billoes all bedowst.
A filthy cloth, a stinking clod of clay,
A sack of sin, that shall be swallowde aye,
Of thousand hels, except the Lord do lend
His helping hand, and lowering brows vnbende.
The prime of youth, whose green vnmellowde years
With hoysed head, does check the lofty skies,
And settes up sail, and sternelesse ship ysteares,
With wind and wave at pleasure sure it flies:
On every side then glaunce his rolling eyes:
Yet hoarie h^ares do cause him down to drowpe,
And stealing steps of age, shall make him stowpe.
Our health that does the web of woe begin,
And pricketh forth our pampred flesh to sin,
By sickness soakt in many maladies,
Shall turn our mirth, to moan, and howling cries
The wreathed hair of perfect golden wire,
The cristal eyes, the shining Angels face
That kindles coals to set the heart on fire,
When we do think to run a royal race,
Shall suddenly be gauled with disgrace.
Our goods, our beauty, and our brave array,
That seem to set our hearts on ^oygh for a^e:
Much like the tender flower in fragraunt feeldes,
Whose sugared sap sweet smelling savors yeeldes:
Though we therein do daily lay our lust,
By dint of death shall vanish unto dust.
Why seek we then this lingering life to save,
A hugie heap of bale and misery?
Why love we long^r days on earth to crave,
Where cark, and care, and all calamity,
Where naught we find, but bitter ioylitie?
The longer that we live, the more we fall,
The more we fall, the greater is our thrall:
The shorter life does make the less account,
To less account the reckning soon does mount:
And then the reckning brought to quiet end,
A joyful state of better life does lend.
Thou God therefore that rules the rolling sky,
Thou Lord that lendes the props whereon we stay,
And turns the spheres, and tempers all on hie,
Come, come in haste, to take us hence away:
Thy goodness shall we then engraue for aye,
And sing a song of endless thanks to thee,
That deignest so from death to set us free:
Redeeming us from depth of dark decay.
With four and twenty elders shall we say,
To him be glory, power^ and praise alone,
That with the Lamb, does sit in lofty throne.
FINIS.



