THE SECRETS Of NVMBERS; According to Theological, Arithmeticall, Geometrical
and Harmonicall Computation.

Drawn, for the better part, out of those Ancients, as well Neoteriques.

Pleasing to read, profitable to understand, opening themselves to the
capacities of both Learned and Unlearned.

Being no other than a key to lead a man to any doctrinall knowledge whatsoever.

By WILLIAM INGPEN, Gent.

Wisd. 11.17. The Lord has ordered all things in measure, number, and weight.

Cognitio ^o^um altissimarum, est prima sapientia.

LONDON, Printed by HVMFREY LOVVNS for JOHN PARKER, Anno Domini, 1624.

Author pro suo libro, in laudem NVMERORVM.
PRincipium rerum numerus, perfectio, sinis:
Is sapiens, docte qui numerare potest.
Coelum scrutatur: terram metitur: auerni
Inquirit lasebras: ambit and oceanum.
I modo, parue liber: numerorum nubila pande,
Innumeros olim quae latuere viros.
Nec clausa accedunt, quin omnibus obuia prostant,
Quae nunquam scriptis docta fuere prius.
Saepius ergo legas: mysteria magna docentur,
Seu Sacra exoptes, Ethnica sieve magis.
In Zoilum.
Haec qui non calls, ne turpibus excipe sannis:
Est stolidi, ignotos carpere velle libros.
Si ve^ o dubitas, quasi non sum vera loquutus,
Adsis: soluentur scrupea tota tibi.
FRANCISCVS NEALE, EQVES AVRATVS. *
Fama tui illustris praecellens nominis, istud
Rebus in aduersis robur, constantia, virtus,
Appellant steriles nostras, Francisce, camconas,
Nostra patrocinio protegas monumenta, tuique
Conserues nomen millena in saecula vatis.
Inuidus allatret nae quisquam murmr Momus,
Sibilet aut anguis sinuoso corpore serpens.
Carmina sic incults for as audacius ibunt,
Vnum sic mea musa tuum implorabit asylum,
Solis vt aspicimus lucem surgentis Eos.
Naturam, ingenium, candorem, abs indole noui:
Es patri similis tribus his: sunt caetera matris.
Accedunt aliae coniunctae nomine dotes;
Laudant quas multi, sed pauci imitantur, vt omnes
Egregios equites inter ceu stella coruscas.
HONOR, coniux eius.
Hiccine Relligionis amor non dignus honor est?
Ore Deum celebrans confessio viua fidesque,
Nomine cum vestro cu^que omine non quadrat apt?
Opergas seruire Deo, heroina pudica:
Relligio has tibi donet opes, scandas vt olympum.
Nullus vel Phydias melius vel pingat Apelles;
Est speculo nullo facies formosior vlla,
Aurea quam tua tepietas, quam candor adornant.
Lux solis calida est, non est nisi lucida-luna:
Est Venus in speculo mage fulgida, quam Venus ipsa?
TO THE RIGHT WORTHY AND WORSHIPFVLL Knight, Sr FRANCIS NEALE, one of his
Maties Justices of peace in the County of South. *
TO whom may I better dedicate this Book of Numbers, then to your self, who
have bin trained up in the Art of numbering, even from your infancy? I speak
it to your deserved praise and commendation: Many go beyond you in the
theorick, but few or none in the practick. I could wish, that some men could
not Arithmetize and Merchandise so well as they do; Who whiles they number
their wealth, their wit, their learning, their offices, their dignities, their
cattle, their lands, their rents, their moneys, the better part of their life
vanishes away: This is a fruitless and careless kind of numbering. It is
said, that the Athenians (notable speculatiues, but bad practiques) had money
to number only. What do men nou-a-daies, but continually hoord up Gods
blessings, to number them? And yet when they have made their total account,
they can never attain to the Art of true Numbering. To weane therefore the
world, in what I may, from so sordidous and preposterous a kind of
Arithmetic, I have compiled this work, treating of The Secrets of Numbers,
contrary to the practice of our common Arithmeticians, as the two Zones are
distant the one from the other; Wishing them, that among so many Theological,
Arithmeticall, Geometrical, and Harmonicall numbers here set down, they
would think on one more excellent, which is, To number their days. Which to
do, in one word, is no otherwise, then to take something from the pleasures of
the world, which they have greedily pursued, by way of subtraction; and to add
so much to godly endeavors neglected by them, by way of multiplication: For,
the time is short we spend in virtue, but long which we consume in vice.
There is no Arithmetic comparable to this. Wherefore Pythagoras, reducing all
things into Number, making his triplicity of perfection, in the end concluded
thus: Si recta ratione vixeris, male acta dolendo, et been acta gaudendo;
deosque oraueris, vt opus tuum perficiant: tum exuto corpore, profectus in
aetherem, eris immortalis Deus. I do persuade my self, that after you have
read this book at vacant hours, you will be a better Pythagorean than ever
you were; Or at least by turning over Gods Book (as many times you do) you
will not forget this one lesson: Recordare nouissima tua, et in aeternum non
peccabis. Pythagoras in all his lifetime, for all his numbering, learned not
this lesson; but Solomon, wiser then he, did. For that some things here may be
above your capacity, and require more then a Delian swimmer for the searching
of their bottom, I would not have you blame me altogether: For, as in other
tractates I have labored to instruct the unlearned only; so in this I have
done my best endeavor to satisfy both the learned and unlearned, with equal
contentment.

We must consider, we live in a world of learning; and it is in reading of
books, as it is in banqueting: Not only gross and simple viands, but the
most dainty and delicate are called for, though they be something sharp and
distasting to the stomach. I do not doubt, but upon conference had with you, I
shall be able to break the shell, that the kernel of many abstruse and
symbolicall mysteries, never brought to light before, shall be far more
pleasing unto you: which, according to our small skill, I shall always
willingly endeavor to perform. To him, who is that infinite Number, Unity in
Trinity, and Trinity in Unity, according to Athanasius Symbol, I commend you
and yours.

Your loving and most affectionate kinsman, W. I.

TO THE CHRISTIAN and well-disposed Reader.
COurteous Reader, I have not collected and selected these Numbers, to
infatuate or captiuate thy judgment: neither is it my meaning to draw thee
into a Labyrinth by any strange or newfangled opinion; being not ignorant,
how that an itching and pruriginous kind of scribbling, diuing into the
innermost secrets of forbidden Theology, has marred the whole Christian world.
I wonder, that learned men do not blush for shame, to blaze abroad to the
common view such monstrous and impious paradoxes. Some have crept-out of late,
masking themselves under the colorable title of Religion, and that with
public authority. But, to speak truly, such manner of mis-begotten labors,
raking new and old ^^ganicall fopperies together (except public authority
suppress them in time) will be the utter overthrow of all Religion. If a man
should collect into one entire volume the absurd pontions and propositions of
all ancient and new Heretics, long ^g^e ^^othered and buried in silence, under
a p^ pretext for the confutation of them, and by this (...) should blind the
judgment, and dazzle the ^ics of many (simple people; shall not a man think it
were both a damnable, temerarious, and preposterous kind of enterpize? But
these men do worse, as much as Paganism exceeds any heresy whatsoever.
For, what is it to our Christian Religion established already, confirmed by so
many witnesses both from heaven and earth, watered with the blood of so many
blessed Saints, to be made acquainted with the religion of Paynims? Is it not
enough for us to know Jesus Christ crucified, to speak with Saint Paul? For,
admit that it be done by way of public detestation and confutation, yet this
is not enough. For, as Tertullian says of some heresies, Nominasse eas tantum,
est refutasse: so it is here with such Paganicall superstitions: They are so
monstrous, so impious, so absurd, so contrary to our Christian Verity, that
they need no confutation. Nay, more than this; to confute them, or to bestow
much time in the detection of them, according to Tertullian's Rule, is to
allow of them; to give them the name of Religion, is to supplant Christ's true
Religion; to open their fopperies by public writing, is to thrust the old and
new Testament by the shoulders out of the School of Christians, and to place
insteade of them, the Alfache of the Saracens, the Fotoque of the Iaponians,
and Mahomets Alcaron. This is, with the old Academicks, to bring in their
(...); with the Pyrrhomists, their (...), containing so many frivolous
disceptations; than the which nothing could be found more absurd or pernicious.
This is mouere chordas non mouendas. Nay, pray God, beginning with those
Academicks and Scepticks, to doubt of every thing, we prove not in the end
plain Atheists, or mungrell Christians. Alas, that I should write it!
Christian Religion was never in so great hazard, as it is now. For, whereas in
times past we were but half Christians, for want of true knowledge and
understanding; now, by reason of too much knowledge (I mean, knowledge of the
brain) we are swarued clean from the rules of true Christianity.
Christianitatis simulacrum forte gerimus, says one, rem ipsam deserimus. As
touching my self therefore and this present discourse, a kind of necessity
has enforced me to make this protestation. I was never yet a broacher of new
opinions; knowing, that nouelty and singularity were ever the concomitants of
heresy. There are three things that have kept me hitherto in the Catholic
faith; The Word of God, the Catholic Church, the Concent of Fathers. In these
three I have placed my anchor. As for Popery and Puritanisme (two main
opposites and extremes, though the one less than the other) I have always
detested. Neither have I maintained any perfidiousnesse of new error or
heresy, as Heretics are wont to do: neither have I believed (to speak with
Austin) any thing that the Catholic Church vnbeleeueth, but have always with
Saint Hierome, thought that to be the true and orthodox faith, which the
Catholic Church has taught me. As I have said in our books against
Antichrist and his members: so I say again; Ego nihil sanctum, nihil firmum in
meis dict is scriptisue esse volo, nisi quantum probet(...); whereof I hope I am
an unworthy member. And again, I will say with S. Hierome, in his Epistle to
Heldibius; Nobis nihil placet, nisi quod ecclesiasticum est: et public in
ecclesia dicere non timemus ne iuxta Pythagore^, Platonem et discipulos eorum
qui sub nomine Christianoru^ introducunt dogma Gentilium, etc. See whether S.
Hierome was not afraid, that the pleasing doctrine of Pythagoras, Plato, and
others, would pull down the austerulous Religion of Christ and his Apostles.
See again, how dangerously some men go about, in stead of sound and
orthodoxall assertions, contrary to Saint Paul's rule, to bring-in bare
elements and rudiments of the world, to the scandal of our Christian Religion.
Of whom I may truly speak, as Austin did of Dioscorus and others, who
maintained Christ's doctrine, with the testimony of Gentiles; Quid nobis opus
est, propter defensionem Christianae Religionis, quaerere guide senseris
Anaximenes, et ^lim sepi^^s l^^^s in any curiesuate recoquere? Quid, inquam,
Democritus, Epicurus, Parmenides, et Melissus, alijque similes huius farine
Philasephi sonserius, quorum doctrina erroribus natura e^rationi contrarijs
plena suit? I speak not this by way of an Apology for my self, or that I
mean to excuse my pen from error co-incident to other men, (it being an
infallible or inseparable mark of our mortality), neither to free this
numerall discourse presented to thy view, from all manner of exceptions, or
stumbling blocks laid in my way. For, I dare not warrant all these Numbers and
divisions, except they be read with judgment, charitably, and friendly
understood, candidously and ingenuously construed. And so I doubt not, but the
greater part of them will be found not only sound, according to probability,
but Theologically and Orthodoxically sound. I mean it of those who are
borrowed our of Fathers or Schoolmen. Others taken from those Jewish Rabbines,
I dare not vindicate from all exception. In a great house, to use Saint Paul's
similitude, there be vessels of honor and dishonor. And in so large a field as
I have walked, how can it be, but some things must needs distaste, although
perhaps the better part may relish well? If then any thing offend the palate,
or savor erroniously, God forbid it should be laid to my charge, who am but
the collector, not the Author of them. For, as all my grounds are taken ont of
chose Ancients (a few excepted); as namely, Pythagoras, Plato, Aristotle,
Macrobius, Philo, Themistius, and others: So all our Numbers, and their
extendures for the most part, have been borrowed from sacred Scripture, ancient
Doctors of the Church Rabbines, Schoolmen, such especially as savor any thing
of Theology. Others have been selected out of Philosophers, both natural and
moral, Astronomers, Phisicians, Anatomists, Mathematicians, Geometricians
Arithmeticians, Paracelsians, civil Lawyers, to the number of an hundred and
upwards. All that I have done to the full completing of this discourse, has
been, to explane and open such kind of mysteries as have been included or
shut up in these numbers. For, though they are called secrets, for their secret
and hidden virtues infused in them; yet many of them, by the light which I have
showed, are liable even to common capacities. But I have not unfolded all, lest
I might incur the displeasure of the goddess Eleusina, or seem to contradict
the Rules of Pythagoras himself, who enioined to his scholars a fiue-yeers
silence; and under the veil of Numbers (as those Lullianes by their primary
letters alphabeticall) has shadowed and coueted the better part of his
learning, to the intent the common people should not understand them. If then I
should have made all things common to those vulgar capacities, it would fall
out with me, as he says: Arcana definerent esse aroana, and glonia sua,
deposite velo, ab indignis and profanis hominibus contaminarentur ac
praculcarentur. As therefore I said before, I dare not warrant them all without
exception or limitation; being not mine own proper, but the collections of
other men: so now I say again, that I would not have any man to esteem me from
their dignity or indignity, but rather what I am from miue own proper
writings. For, if they shall lay heresy to my charge (which is the greatest
impeachment that can happen to a true Christian), I will say with Ruffinu^, Est
quidem gloriosum Christi exemplo u^iurias tolerare: sed vnem notam haereseos
qui ferat vel dissinnulet non esse Christianum: And again with S. Hierom, Nolo
in susp^cione haereseos quenquamesse patientem.

Let no man therefore contemn my calling or profession, or pr^ferre the persons
of men before their qualities, contrary to the Apostle's and Tertullian's Rule.
The wind blows where it lists: and the Sun shines illibable (to use
Lactantius word) upon the just and unjust, without respect of Regions,
Countries, or Climates. It is well said by One, Deus vbi vult, quando vult,
quibus vult, dona sua impertit. Some perchance will object, that the better
part of these are not properly Numbers, but divisions and distinctions. To whom
I answer thus: If number be said (...), that is, from distribution, as Scaliger
will have it, then let them show me any division or distinction, that can be
framed without number, distribution, or proportion; without which they may not
consist, no more than number can without his equal or unequal parts. And yet
they are not all bare numbers included in this discourse: for, besides them,
there will be found many Theological Principles, many Rules from Astronomy,
Geometry, Physic; moral, natural, and metaphysicall Philosophy, the Art
Spagyrick, Cabala; as no book (I believe) of so small a volume, will contain the
like. I have spaced, besides, among those ancient Hebrew and Jewish Doctors,
for the enquiry of sacred Symboles; wherewith, above all others, they seem to
me most chiefly to abound. Of whom One writes thus: Haebraeorum doctrina velut
circulus omnium figurarum capacissimus, latius patet quam vlla alia sectarum
disciplina. Others will say, that I have been too curious in the unfolding of
them, and that I have given them too much virtue. I answer: If I should have
blurred my paper with the Atoms of Epicurus, with the Cylinders of Anaxagoras,
with the Sphere of Archimedes, with the wooden Dove of Architas, with the
strange Paradoxes of Stoics; I might more justly be condemned of curiosity.
As touching their virtue, this is mine opinion: I do hold, with Aristotle in
his Metaphysics, that Number by it self has no power of working; for, it is a
quantity, and no quality: but the reason of number, which is (as it were) the
form or image of time, concluding all the works of nature, works things
admirable. If therefore thou have any desire to be one of Pythagor as scholars,
that is, according to art and judgment, to number well, read this book with
attention, sobriety, discretion. I dare assure thee, that it will be a key unto
thee, to open the secrets of any science whatsoever: for, in this little room
are enclosed the flowers and blossoms of thirty years study, gotten together
with great pains, labor and industry. For, whereas I intended, many years ago
to treat of such a subject; whatsoever by continual reading liked me, or was
fitting for this present argument, I caused carefully to be set down in my
note-book, according to the example of Pliny the elder, lest the lubricity of
my memory should fail me.

And now having made an whole body of them, partly from addition, partly from
illustration, I present them here unto thy view; hoping, that from their worth,
or from mine intention (which hitherto has bin to further the studies of young
scholars) they will be acceptable unto thee. This one thing I must confess,
that, for the space of one whole years contemplation in the art of numbering, I
got more to the enriching of my poor storehouse, than in seven years theorie I
was able to do by any other study whatsoever. Yea, more than that, I have been
so ravished with the study of numbers, that if any man will ask me, What is the
chiefest Good next to God, that in this life I take delight in? I must answer,
Number; if, What the second? Number; if, What the third? Number. So that, as
Auenzaar the Babylonian says, He that knows to number well, knows directly
all things; iumping with Pythagoras and Plato in this point. Thus, desiring
God, with Lactantius, that I may live no longer than to do good to his Church,
and to that Christian Commonweal wherein I live, I bid thee Farewell.

THE EXCELLENCY OF Numbers; and how far they stretch toward the attaining of
all manner of Sciences.
CHAP. I.
PLATO, inspired as far as any Philosopher that wrote of heavenly things,
among those admirable precepts learned out of the school of Pythagoras, has
left us this Oracle; Prima sapientiae pars est, Under O^ph^call, I comprehend
all that Orpheus has written in his Hymns touching the Trinity, and union of
the godhead; Under Symbolicall, that part of supernatural Theology which is
handled by those Rabbines in their th^dmud, or expositions.
bone numerare: The chiefest part of Philosophy, is, To number well. Under
this word Number, I include not only Arithmeticall and Geometrical Quantity,
the superficial Tones and Sons of Music, those corporal Dimensions frequent
among those Mathematics; but whatsoever is combined within the compasle of
natural and supernatural Theology, called by some, Orphicall and
Symbolicall, taking his beginning from that which Aristotle calls Primum
Mobile; and never leaves speculating, until it has diued into the lowermost
Center of the earth. For, my meaning is, in this ensuing discourse, to show,
how that there is no knowledge, either rational, moral, physical, or
metaphysicall, which has not some cognation or participation with Numbers;
according to that ancient Poet,

Quaque suos retinent numeros: numero omma plera. As touching their excellency,
though the testimonies of Heathens are copious in this point, yet in sacred
Writ we shall find plenty enough. For, whereas it is said, that God had
di^posed ali things according to number, weight and measure, what is signified
unto us, but that when he created the world out of the lump before it had, he
made it an harmonious body, containing number, order, beauty, and proportion,
in all the parts thereof. Now, as the Frame of the world soon shows unto us,
that there is a GOD, the first and indivisible Unity from whence all other
harmony proceeds: so this God, although he be not to be measured with any
quantity, as having all number within himself; yet the next way to know him
perfectly, is, To begin with numbering. For, Except we worship one God in
Trinity, and Trinity in Unity, without confounding the Persons, and dividing
the substance (as holy Father Athanasius says in his Creed), we shall never be
saved. And it is worth observation: there is no number, little or great,
begetting, begotten, or mixed of both, which has not some spark of the Deity in
it, wherein God may not be said familiarly to be known of us, yea, even to
dwell with us; as farther in this discourse shall be made manifest. For
example: Our common Creed read in the Church, being a Sum or an Abbridgement
containing all the mysteries of Christian Belief, cannot be made known unto
us without the ternary Number; seeing it consists of three parts. The first
is, To believe in one GOD, Father omnipotent, Creator of heaven and earth. The
second is, To believe in Jesus Christ, God and Man. The third is, To believe in
the holy Ghost. The first is a Symbol of our creation; the next, of our
redemption; the last, of our sanctification. Again: all the Commandments of
God consist of two, from whence the whole Decalogue is derived: whereof three
Precepts, being of the first Table, concern our knowledge and love of God; the
other seven, the love of our neighbor.

Now, it is manifest, that the mysteries of our Christian Religion cannot be
known without Numbers; no more can many parts of Scripture: for, the Book
called the Apocalypse, styled by the holy Ghost it self, has so many dark and
problematicall Numbers, so many mystical and symbolicall impenetrables, that,
without the Art of numbering, it were foolishnes for a man to say, that he were
able to understand them. As God therefore has not revealed himself unto us,
but by numbering: so man, as touching both parts, his soul and body (called a
little world) cannot be known sufficiently, without the help of Numbers. Some
therefore write, that the soul is no other than an harmony framed out of
Numbers by a marvelous concordance: in which opinion, was Pythagoras and
Plato. To find out, then, her essence, temperature, condition, quality, is to
be skilled in the Art of numbering. As touching our body; it is composed all of
Numbers, musical concent and harmony: for, Anatomists hold, Andra Iaw. reu.
Prasa. ante l^^. de anatomia.
that his symmetry reaches in length, 300 minutes; in breadth, 50; in height,
30: according to whose proportion (having some kind of divinity included in
it) the Ark of Noe (some write) was builded. Yea, others stick not to affirm,
that this Ark was builded of the wood called Cedar; which lasts longer than
any other. Now, Qui se ipsum norit, omnia nouerit, cum in se rerum omnium
habeat sunulachra.
for a man not to know himself (which is the greatest ignorance that can be),
I mean, not to know the stature, temperature, and disposition of his soul and
body, is to be unskilled in the Art of numbering. Now, I suppose, that some of
those Ancients, especially Marcus Varro (though otherwise a learned man), have
a little too much abased man, in affirming, that he came from the earth only:
for, that is common to all creatures indifferently. But, the true Original of
man, is (...): for he is, of all other creatures, the most sociable. And it is
to be believed, that man is to borrow his denomination rather from concord and
co^sellowship, seeing that in Greek, (...) is taken for like, and (...) for a
similitude, which is not to be placed in the earth, nor in the body, Homo ^b^^e
minor mundus appellatur, quia (us seribit Nazianzenus) De^is in ^pso extrim^et,
sub b^^^ quedam comsendio, qu^^q^^d dis^use ant^a secerat.
but in the mind; wherein man excels all other creatures whatsoever. Man
then, consisting of a soul and body, is a lovely and lively harmony, wherein
God himself and the visible heaven is represented.

There are many other speculatiue knowledges; which, without Numbers, can no
more be discerned by us, than the Art of Geometry can be known without
demonstration; the Art of Logic, without syllogizing. For, to measure the
distance of those higher Planets, and how far they are sited from the Center of
the earth, cannot be done without numbering. Some of the Ancients write, that
the earth is from the Moon, 15625 miles; from the Moon to Mercury, 7612 and a
half; from Mercury to Venus, so many; from Venus to Sol, 24433; from the Sun
to Mars, A man cannot divide the age of man without numbering.
15625; from Mars to Jupiter, 6812; from Jupiter to Saturn, so many; from
Saturn to the Firmament, 24427. Out of which may be gathered from Arithmeticall
Computation, that the earth, unto the visible heaven, contains 108959 miles:
under which (as Ptolomey affirms) there be eight Orbs or Spears; For, a
child of ten years old, is counted a Hind;
but, by reason of the tripled motion of the eightth Sphere, they make just ten
in the whole, by a kind of multiplication. Archimedes therefore, That great
Geometrician, who in a certain Table made of brass, made the whole visible
heaven to be looked upon, A Youth at twenty, a Calf;
contrary to the opinion of some who envied his doctrine, could not have done
this, A young man at 30, an Ox;
if he had been but superficially sighted in the Art of numbering. To know the
circuit of the earth, and how far it extends, cannot be done without
Numbers.

A man at forty, a Lion;
Aristotle affirms, that the Mathematicians of his time, did attribute unto
the earth in compass, 40 Myriades of furlongs; which make in the whole, fifty
thousand miles. Our modern Astrologers will have the earth to consist of 20000
and 40 miles. Growing to fifty, a Fox;
Howsoever, whether they speak truly, or roue at random, At threescore, a
Wolf;
it is certain from collection of Numbers, and by consent of Astronomers, that
the earth, in respect of the heaven, is but a point. Which is proved after
this manner: All Astrologers hold confidently, At threescore and ten, a Dog;
that every Star of the eightth Sphere is bigger than the whole earth. But
there be many Stars which are not seen of us; and those which we see, are
like unto puncts. At fourscore, a Cat;
Therefore, if the earth were placed in the starry Firmament, and should shine
as the Stars do, it would not be seen of us. At fourscore and ten, an Ass;
Besides, the continual course of those Planets, without calculation, cannot
be made manifest unto us. The Sun first stayethin every Sign 30 days and
10 hours: he makes his course through the whole year, At an hundred a Goose.
(...) I (...).
from his own proper source; but the day he makes not perfect, without the
motion of the first Mouer. Ventis compleateth her course in 348 days. Mercury,
having some co-fellowship with the Sun, is different from him but 30 degrees:
he finisheth his course in 338 days. The Moon goes through the Zodiac every
Month. Saturn staieth in every Sign 30 Months: whereby it follows, that
he perfecteth his course in thirty years. Jupiter abides in each Sign for a
whole year: and so he compleateth his journey in twelve year. Mars continues in
every Sign forty days. Nice. Cho. thesa. orth. fide. l. 2. c. 9.
These are the numerall conjectures of Archimedes and Ptolomey.

Again, if we would know the Apocastaticall Reuolutions, that is, in how many
years they signify the worlds continuance, used by those Grecians, it is not
possible that it should be done without much skill of numbering: no more can we
conjecture the greatness of the Sun or Moon, without the skill of cyphering.
Some write, that the Sun is ten times greater than the earth: if we believe
Ptolomey, it is eightscore times bigger. So that to know the elevation of the
heavens, the site of the Planets, the course of the Sun and Moon, their
substance, their mouings, fallings and declinings, those which we call Axes,
Poles, Hemi-sphears, Circles, Septentrionals, Solstices, Equinoctials,
Brumales, Australes, Signifers, Meridians, Finitors, Colures, the twelve
Signs, with their thirty and five Gestamines; what is the nature of those
Epicycles, their breadth and length, what is syncentricall, what excentricall,
what schematisms the Sun and Moon have, what is the fashion of the earth,
what inclination of the world, what variety of shadows, what difference of
hours, months and days, how many Clymates and Zones, which are called
Antocci and Periocci, under what Region Antipodes are (being all properties
belonging to sphearicall Astrology), is to have recourse to the quantity,
proportion, and disproportion of Numbers. So that nothing appertains to those
higher Orbs, nothing to those inferior Planets, nothing upon the surface of
the earth, nothing within her hidden bowels and treasures, treated of by our
Alchymists, but proceeds from the Art of numbering.

I will dwell no longer upon these Speculatiues; but with a touch or two, as
touching other knowledges, will take an end. Neither can we ^^^de out the
division and distinction of of each chapter or sentence in the Bible, without
numbering. Some hold, that the Arithmencall partition of those Chapters, is not
very ancient. For 500 years ago, or thereabout, among the Hebrews and Greeks,
there was no place of divine Scripture numerously cited, besides the Psalms;
which had their numbers, even from the Apostles time, as may be gathered out of
the Acts of the Apostles. X^^. Sen^. B^llio (...). 3.
Without the experience of numbering, we cannot learn those Hebrew Sabbath-daies
mentioned in sacred Scripture, those Paynime Festiuall-daies, the use of holy
days, those Egyptian days esteemed among those ancient Magicians, as
planetarian or heavenly dispositures, such as among the Romans were called,
Ante diem quartum Nonas Sextilis, numbered for blank days; as the 17 day of
June among the Hebrews, the ninth of July, and the day wherein Moses brake the
Tables, Manasses crected idols into Sancta Sanctorum, the walls of Jerusalem
were broken, that time wherein both destructions of the Temple were permitted,
the use of the Julian year, the Spanish Era, the Gregorian Calendar, with many
other singular observations, merely belonging to this Art.

From hence if we go to the Art called Magia (which, as Picus writes,
certifieth us more of Christ's Divinity, than any other Art), we cannot proceed
heerin without the curious inquisition of Numbers: for, what is all this Art,
but the Art of numbering, seeing it consists of natural, formal, and
rational computation, both in natural and divine things? And these Numbers
they stick not to call The Numbers of Numbers: wherein Ioachim the Abbat was
found most skilful. Neither can their Characters, upon whom they stand so much,
having a certain community with those celestial Radiations (to use their own
term), consist without numbering. Of which Picus writes, Plus posse
characteres and figuras in opere Magico, quam possit quaecunque materialis
qualitas. Last of all, how shall a man know, that Antiqnum accedat ab aue;
aeuum is next to eternity; eternity is next to God, who reigns and rules
beyond all eternity, being called, The Ancient of days, by Daniel; having all
times and seasons under his power? How can a man be acquainted with the
degrees of those 12 Signs mentioned before, in what points and minutes they
consist, what interuallum there is betwixt the shadow and the Sun, how many
hours and days there be in the whole year, for how ma^^ years continuance
the world shall last; except he know what it is to number? Out of all which
premises we may gather, that the use of numbering is so large, so copious, so
universal, that by the help of it alone, without the supply of other Arts, a
man may find out the nature of propagation from Zaratas, Pythagoras
schoolmaster; Besides all there, and many others, a man cannot know the
proportion and symmetry of Salomon's temple, described by so many old and new
Writers; no, not the increment and decrement of the River Nilus, without the
Art of Numbering: whereof read more in Po. Virg. l. 1. c. 18
what is addition, substraction, multiplication, used among our Arithmeticians;
what is a Monade, a Diade, a Cube, a Square, a Triangle, a Circle, a Figure,
frequent among Geometricians; what is (...), among Musicians; what Phythagoras
meant by One and Two, taking number for the mind of man, and how he
attributes to Numbers, all kind of virtues; how that Themistius, Boethius, and
Auerroys extol them so, that they affirm, No man is able rightly to play the
Philosopher without them; how that to find out the Secrets of Numbers
lineally, superficially, and corporally, is, To know the formal compositure
of the soul, the sympathy of the whole world, and how a way may be made to all
kind of natural and supernatural Prophecy; how a man may diue into the nature
of Oracles, have familiarity with Angels; and lastly, how a man may safely and
compendiously attain to the knowledge, study, and practice of any science
whatsoever. So that, to conclude this Chapter, In things corporeal there is
nothing more divine than the mind of man; in things separate, nothing more
excellent than Numbers.

CHAP. II. The definition of Numbers, Division, Antiquity; what is that which
is not comprehended under them.
NVmber, called in Greek (...) (according to Themistius desinition), is not
only that thing which is composed of Unities, but the thing it self which is
numbered: Para. in 4. lib. physicor.
so that many times the things numbered are taken for the Numbers themselves. It
is divided into two kinds, formal and specificall. Some will have it derived
from distribution. Among Mathematics and Poets it is not taken for the same
thing. Arithmeticall is divided into Par and Impar. By one is ^^^ified the
masculine; by the other, the feminine gender. The on^ ^s imperfect, diuiduous,
and infecundious; the other, perfect, fruitful, and indiuiduous. Geometrical
Number consists of puncts, which is a note impartile: it treats of lines,
straight, curued, circumferent, flexible, Rhombus est quatuor linearu^
aequalium, non orthogonalium, sed tangentium concursus. Cylindru^ Geometricu^
corpus est, quod pro ^ius summitate habet duos circulos parallellos. Conus
geometrica figura est in ipsa basi habens latitudmem, in supersicie acumen, cum
circularicontento. Enharmonium quod Enharmonica. Diatonicum est quod diatonica
d^uisione vtitur. Chromaticum quod chromatia. See of these in Briennius, an
ancient writer, cited by Posse. Selec. Biblio. To. 2. cap. 1. Augustine calls
the first audicial; the second, progressory; the third, occursory; the fourth,
recordable; the last, sounding. Lib. de music. 6. c. 9.10.11.
jacent, perpendicular, altern, distermine, straight angles, square, narrow,
summities, circles, semicircles, and those limits called swaddled; as also
Figures, Trilaters, Quadrilaters, Multilaters. From whence come Equilaters,
Equicrures, Gradates, Rectangles, Acutiangles, Obtusiangles, and such as are
longer; as Rhombi, Rhombides, and Mensulae. In such as are solid, it
comprehends Pyramides, Prismata, Conos, Cylinders, Cubes, Spears, such as
are called Octendras, Dodecaedras, Icosaedras, (consisting all of diverse
quantities) as has learnedly been handled by Politian.

Intellectual Music is compounded of three; Diapazon, Diapente, Diatessaron,
resembling the three parts of the mind, that is, understanding, sense, and
habit. The first comprehends seven things; the mind, imagination, memory,
cogitation, opinion, reason, science. The second aims at four; sight,
hearing, smelling, touching. The third consists of three; increase, height,
decrement. That which is called Enharmonious, is correspondent to natural and
moral Philosophy; Diatonicall, to Theology and Civil Law; Chromaticall, to
the Mathematick and Economick. That which is productiue, resembles the changes
of men's lives, and the conuersions of manners. Of all symphonicall harmony,
justice has ever bin taken for the principal: so that there is a threefold
number or concord; Arithmeticall, Geometrical, Harmonicall. Proclus, an
ancient Philosopher, constituteth five kinds of Numbers; in the voice, in
proportion, in the soul, in reason, and in divine things: so that by putting
Theological Number to the other three mentioned before, is to make a perfect
harmony. Under which I include all those Numbers cited in Scripture, touching
God, or the three Persons in Trinity; all those which are mentioned by those
ancient Doctors of the Church, Schoolmen and others, who have treated of holy
mysteries: whereof this Book shall afford great plenty. As touching the
antiquity of Numbers, some make a question, whether they be more ancient than
that which we call Superficies, and the line. Macrobius resolves it in this
manner: It must needs be, says he, Lib. 1. in Somu. Scip. c. 5.
that Number is more ancient than the other; for that from the line we come to
the other, as to the first, from whence all those Geometrical lines or rules
are borrowed. The first finder-out of Numbers among the Heathens, is Pythagoras
the Samian: some others attribute it to another Pythagoras, who was an
excellent Grauer or Caruer. Linius will have them to be the invention of
Minerua: Polidor. Virg: l. 1. c. 19.
others ascribe it to Mercury. Howsoever, we need not contend much about their
antiquity, seeing there is no Monument, old or new, which can make them so
ancient as the Book of Genesis, or That of Numbers; where both in the creation
of the world, and in the numbering of God's people, commanded by God, by Moses
and Aaron, a remarkable President is given us, to know how greatly the use of
them was respected in those days. So that as God began and finished the Frame
of the world with Numbers: so he will destroy the same, by numbering of his
people unto judgment.

Considering, then, all things are made capable of Numbers; the heavens, earth,
sea, the soul and body of man, yea, the Angels themselves (if we believe
those Cabalists); what is that which is not comprehended under Numbers? It is
God himself, who is that Unity infinite, eternal, simple, absolute: in whom as
there is no change; so nothing can be added or taken away from him. Who again
as he is One from everlasting: so is he unchangeable in his purpose, immovable
in his actions, past finding-out in his ways, making his Throne that he
sits upon, like himself, that the proportion of the one and other might be
equal; according to the opinion of that learned School-man. To say then, that
God is not to be comprehended under any Number (being an Essence
numberless), cannot be offensive, seeing that Maximus, Lib. 2. c. 17
an ancient Father, teaches us, His Godhead is indivisible, because he is
without quantity: he is without quantity, because he is not endued with any
quality: he is void of quaiity, because he is simple: he is simple, because he
is interminate; interminate, because he is infinite; infinite, because he is
immovable; immovable, because he wants beginning; and he could not have a
beginning, because he was from everlasting. Now it rests, that (according to
order) we should speak of their worth and dignity, number, force, virtue,
efficacy, energie, and how large their extendure is, as I find them here and
there related by the testimony of famous Writers. Which, for avoiding of
confusednes and fastidiousnes, I have, according to their several properties,
collected them all in a Sum, not omitting one Number from the least to the
greatest; from the Vnary, to the Number of fifty, and upwards. Neither have we
barely set down their Numbers, properties and effects, but have unlocked many
of their mysteries, now and then by dividing them, now and then by adding light
unto them, and now and then by bringing in authority and reason for the farther
explication, explanation, and illustration of them. All which being performed
according to the module of our skill, learning, and judgment, we thought it
good in the later end of this discourse, to proceed to other speculations;
borrowing their light from hence, or which properly are annexed heerunto by
necessary consequence.

CHAP. III. ONE.
IF Pythagoras were not the Inuenter of Numbers, as some make him; yet he was
a great Amplifier and Illuminer of them, beyond the common practice of all
other Philosophers whatsoever: so that if he were to be blamed in any thing,
it was because he did attribute too much virtue to them. This is he, Lib. de
cura. mor. Graco. 2. c. 6.
who, according to the testimony of Theodoret, Ambrose, and others, took his
pedigree from the Hebrews, Iearned much from Moses, and abstained not from the
Jewish Circumcision. Which a man can hardly believe, if he should be the
Author of that transformation of souls into the bodies of other men, as it
has been untruly and impiously laid unto his charge: For, if a Dog (to make a
comparison) that has long fed upon the body of a dead Horse, may be said to be
changed into a Horse, from his long habit of feeding; then may Pythagoras
justly be condemned for his fond and fancie-full opinion. For, he taught this
transanimation touching the body, and not the soul; or at least, touching the
affection of the soul, not concerning the going of it out of one body into
another. Now, What is this, says, Capuio, than an equal care, a like ^notion
or sympathy, a semblable study of some one man dead, long after to be found the
self same in another man living? For, were it that Pythagoras Books were
remaining among us, as they are all lost, we should soon find this imputation,
laid upon him, to be exploded for a mere fable. And yet his Saying was not
manifest, but a mere riddle; whereby he went about to show to that rude world,
that the first Matter was not only capable of all kind of forms, but that it
was auarous and communicable, and that it was not contented with any form. He
then that was conversant in Moses school, that had learned what the first Unity
was, and had attributed so much to Numbers, how could he be sotted with such a
strange and senseless opinion? For, to think that the souls of men can pass
out of one body into another, according as Pythagoras did into Euphorbus,(...)
est habendum, Ex Orthodoxi cuiusdam not is in M. Choniate^.
to speak with that excellent Theologist: nay, more than that, it is to
prejudice the Majesty of the Creator, and to conspire against the verity of all
kind of sanctified Theology. Yet admit that Pythagoras had imagined such a
Chymene, and was the prime Author of that fancy, I do not see, but his opinion
might be as well defended, as the (...) of those Paracelsians, treated of by
Euercetanus and others. Tetras grauis. affec. c. 10.
But (to come to our matter) Pythagoras Symbol was this; The beginning of all
beginnings was Infinitum, Vnum, and Duo. Under which three, he signified God,
Idea, and that which the Philosopher calls The first Matter. All which three
meeting together, and producing that which we call Tetraclys (which, according
to Pythagoras account, is the Fountain and Spring of all production, the
beginning of all emanation, and the permanent of all immutable substance), it
is impossible, but that much divinity should be enclosed under this Symbol.
Now, although this Number, One, be not numerable, by reason of his
indiuisiblenesse, yet it produces and creates innumerous forms of things of
it self, and within it self. He therefore that knows not what is infinite,
what is One, what is two, according to Pythagoras divine rule of numbering,
knows little or nothing touching the Trinity: for, One signifies the Essence;
two, the different respect of Persons; infinitum, the propriety of beginnings,
that is, the Eternity it self. Whether then we respect this Number barely, as
the beginning of all Numbers, or figuratively, the union betwixt the Father and
the Son, God and Man, Christ and his Church, the soul and body of man, the
wife and the husband, it must needs be a sacred Number. So then, as One cannot
be divided, because it is a single Number (some account it for no Number, but
the beginning of Numbers): no more can the humanity be divided from the God
head, the Church from her Spouse, the soul from the body, the wife from her
husband. For, this is a Maxim both in Philosophy and Divinity; Sola Unit as
omnino simplex, a se perfecta, non egreditur se: sed indiuidua simplicitate and
solitaria sibi cohaeret. Wherefore, setting all other virtues aside that this
Number has, it is easily to be gathered, that there is none that shows unto
us more clearly the Deity, the co-vnion of Christ with his Manhood, the nature
and essence of that indivisible Unity, than this does. Which hypostaticall
union (to speak with Damascen) exceeds all other unions whatsoever. Lib. de
orth. sid. 3 cap. 8. Deus est vnus, qui, tesle Macrobio, vices temporum
nesciens, in vno semper quod adest consistit auo, and rerum omnium principium
nominatur


Let us see now how far this Number extends. There is one God, one Savior,
one Faith, one Baptism, one world, one Phoenix in the world, one Sun, one
Moon, one Ark of Noe, one Church, one Deluge, one Zodiac, one King in his
Kingdom, one Shepherd of his Flock, one Leader among the Cranes, one
Soueraign among Bees, one chief Ruler in the City, one soul in the body, one
head. He that takes away Unity, spoileth the Godhead, razeth the humanity of
Christ, robs the Church of her paramour, takes away the harmony of the
soul and body, depriueth man of his Comforter, confounds the four Elements,
renteth asunder the Frame of the whole world, disioineth his sympathy, and
(that I may conclude all in a word) marreth all order, concent and concord
whatsoever. Therefore Boethius, who has written divinely of Numbers, has left
us this for an Oracle: Every thing remains so long as it is one; but, divided
into two, Lib. de conso Philoso.
it remains one no longer. And it was not without some secret mystery, that
Zenophanes, Parmenides, and Melissus said, All was one, and without one was
nothing. He then that knows not one, knows nothing. We will conclude with
the Poet, Vna fides, pondus, mensura, moneta sit vnus,
Et stat us illaesus totius orbis erit.


CHAP. IIII. TWO.
AFter Monas, this is the first Number, called Par in compositus, having some
resemblance to the first matter which is incomposite. It is the weakest Number
of all, because of it self, without the help of others, it works nothing.
The reason is, every thing existent is coupled with the terne Number, and is
made perfect with the quaterne. As for example: bodies are measured by their
longitude, latitude, and profunditie; spirits, by the memory, understanding,
will. So they are perfited by the fourth Number. As memory, alluding to
understanding and will, is capable of the duall Number; understanding and the
will, of the ternarie: the will unto both makes the quaterne Number
consummate. So that the duall Number, as a noune adjective, stands naked
without help of others. Therefore it is joined with the fifth Number, to
underprop it self the better: from which conjunction the septinarie is framed.
Macrobius refers the one to the stars, called Erratica, the other to the
Zones: the one, by reason of his scission; the other, from virtue of his
Number. He sticks not to call this the first Number, taking Monade for a
point, for no Number at all. For, says he, as a point is no body, but from
it self makes bodies: so is Monas no Number, but the beginning of Numbers.
The first Number therefore, according to Macrobius Arithmetic, consists of
two, which is like a line of a punct, produced under the doubleterme of a
punct. Being therefore of small force and efficacy, his extendure cannot be
so large as others be.

First, we will begin with the two Tables of Moses, of whom Austen writes
in this manner: What disputations, what letters drawn from Philosophers,
Fpistol 3. ad volusia.
what Laws of Cities are to be compared to those two precepts of charity,
wherein Christ said, that all the Law and Prophets did consist? Here are
moral, logical, and political counsels to be learned. Pythagoras rule,
taught his scholars, consists of two; to learn how to speak, and to know
how to hold ones peace. The soul is composed of a twofold essence: The one,
according to Pythagoras, called indiuiduous, which Plato calls intelligible,
the other diuiduous, which he calls sensitive. There be two parts in man;
animal and rational; the one sited in the heart, the other in the head,
according to Plato's division. There be two senses in man's body, interne and
externe. The one appertains to the soul, and has reason for his guide: the
other goes through all the parts of the body, ruling the things without the
body, whereof the sight and hearing is principal.

There be two principal affections (called (...)) pleasure and grief;
contrary to the doting of the Stoickes, who will have them proceed from
opinion, not from nature. There be two understandings in us; the one agent, the
other patient. By that part which is counted immortal, is signified the agent;
by the other, the passible intellect. There are two principal notices of
things given us from God, whence all philosophy (as from a fountain) has his
beginning. The one called Ana in the Hebrew Tongue; whereby, from the instinct
of nature, we discern good from evil; which the Doctors of the Church call
(...). The other, whereby we know truth from falsitie, called Conscientia. The
Art of Physic is divided into two parts; Theorique and practick. Astrology
consists of two; natural, and coniecturall. Arithmetic is composed of two
Numbers, Par and Impar, spoken of before. Music is either natural or
artificial. Artificial is composed of two Arithmick and metrick. There is a
twofold life, active and contemplative. By the one is figured Lea; by the
other, Rachel. There be two astrologicall motions touching those wandering
Stars; the one from the West to the East, the other from the East to the West
of the first Glo be, Libel. contra astrologor. iudicia.
which is the first and swiftest of all, according to Trapezontius. History
contains two kinds of narrations; Those that be fabulous, others that are
serious. Others divide it into that which is manifest, that which is hidden.
Fabularie consists of two sorts; either to show a man pleasure, as encomicall
arguments; or by way of exhortation to deter men from vice to virtue. The one
feigneth an argument, as in Esopes Fables; or expresses truth under obscenous
speeches, or by certain poetical figments, or perchance covers it under
some veil or moralization, as ancient philosophers did. That which is serious,
either it is geographicall, temporal, chronicall, natural, annual,
political, and so forth. There be two Sabbaths, contrary to the opinion of
some Rabbis; who expounding these words in Ezechiel, Sabbata meadedi eis,
under the plural Number, Cap. 20. ^. 12.
will have every kind of rest mentioned in the law, taken for a Sabbath. The
one is a Sabbath of rest; the other, a Sabbath of Sabbaths; when cuery soul,
dislodged from his Tabernacle of sin, shall possess his true and proper
country given him as an inheritance, which is the last and most glorious
Jubilee. By the first may be signified the grave, or the time that the soul
of man is separated from the body. There are two principal Commandments given
us from God, wherein the whole Decalogue consists, mentioned in our other
Chapter; To love God, and our neighbor as our self. There are two Sacraments;
Baptism, and the Supper of our Lord. Popish Arithmetic has found out others,
contrary to Christ's institution. There are two Secrets among those Cabalists:
One that is a simple Secret; the other, a Secret, Cui non est simile, called
the Secret of Secrets. The one is compounded of Art, knowledge, wisdom,
affection, power, habit of the mind, and so forth; The other from ecstasy,
voice, inspiration, vision, and whatsoever is given us from above. All the
elements in the eight bodies of heaven (according to Iamblicus) after an
heavenly manner, are found two times retrograde from their procession,
according to the opinion of Picus, they are twice enumerated. Theology is
contemplative and practiue. Saint Bartholomew, alleged by a Thalmudist,
diuides it into little and great. As the Hebrews hold, there be two worlds: so
Phylo will have two Temples belonging to God. One is this world, wherein his
holy Word is our chiefest Bishop, the first begotten. The other is our
rational soul, whose Priest is the true man of God. What can be more plain,
divine, miraculous, says one, then for the highest Bishop of the Temple which
is the world, to become the divine Word, the first begotten; The world to be
the Temple of God; The first-begotten, which is his Word begotten from all
eternity, to be the hie-Priest of this Temple, which is our soul? There is a
twofold halite of the earth; one moist, resembling the water; the other dry,
compared to the fire. That which we call Fatuus ignis, is divided into two,
precedent or subsequent. The one is called Castor; the other, Pollux. Man
resembles God in two respects: In that he is made according to Gods own
Image, in that he has a rational soul. So that it is truly said by one, Non
reperitur aliquid in homine, in quo non fulgegeat aliquid diuinitatis: nec
quicquam est in Deo, quod ipsum etiam non representetur in homine. There are
two natures in Christ, contrary to the heresy of those Monothelites. There be
two letters mentioned in the Apocalypse, wherein Christ has showed unto us all
his divinity, a and o. And he has done it for these reasons following. For,
as a is the beginning of Greek elements, o the end and term: so is he the
beginning, because no man went before him; and the end without end, because no
end shall follow him. He is the beginning also of all things, from whom all
things proceed, and for whom all things were made: he is the end unto which all
things tend, and in whom all things shall have their abiding. There are two
Adams; the one earthly, cap. 3. v. 12.
the other celestial, according to that saying in Genesis, Ecce Adam sicut
vnus ex nobis. He said not, one like unto you (speaking unto the Angels,
according to some Rabbines exposition), but like unto us, making the second
Person in Trinity. For in the Angels there is a Number or alteritie, which you
will. In us (which is meant by Christ, the second Adam) there is infinite
unity, eternal, simple, absolute. And yet grant there were unity in the
Angels (which some call imperfect), yet it cannot be compared to that unity
which is in God. Therefore God never spoke of the Angels there, when he spoke
of the Unity, Dici non potest quanto interstitio creator a creatura sit
dissitus. N. Cho.
because it is repugnant, that the self same thing should be one in nature
with God and his Angels; there is so great disproportion betwixt the Creator
and the creature.

Primasius, an ancient Father, makes a twofold distinction of penitence: The
one, before Baptism, Lib. de gratia at libero arburio.
which may be termed a deprivation of Baptism; the other, after Baptism, by
which our sins are washed away. There is a twofold Church; the militant, and
triumphant: in the one, the faithful dwell together with the wicked; in the
other, the faithful alone. Man, when he dies, has a twofold receptacle: his
body passes into the earth, from whence it came; his soul, to heaven, from
whence originally it descended. There is a twofould Book of life, of vocation,
and election: we may have our names blotted out of the first, but not out of
the last. Every dissolution of an argument consists in two; by
distinguishing, by improouing. By distinguishing, when fallacies of words are
detected through some ambiguity and construction; the one, by cooperation or
conjunction; the other, by equivocation, many times through confusion of
Synonimies, diversity of distinctions; or lastly, when the Principles be quite
differing from their Principiata, as we call them. Again, by improouing, two
ways: Either from the Principles themselves, by showing the absurdity of false
Principles; or from reason, taken from authority; or by conuincing the lesser
authority with the greater, which is frequent among Logicians. Every Figure is
either angular or circular. Those two appellations used by those Pythagoreans,
Vnum and Bonum, may fitly be called the two Names of God. He is called One,
because he is the beginning of all things, as also the unity of each Number;
Good, because he is the end, rest, and absolute felicity of all things. The
water produces two kinds of living things; birds and fishes. Every point in
the Line is twofold; straight or circular, according to Ptolomey. There be two
manifest operations in the Whole, as touching celestial bodies; Motion and
Illumination. There be two motions; one that is a man's own proper; the other,
borrowed. There are two Stars beneficious unto us; Jupiter and Venus. The Art
military consists of two things; Men and munition. Logic consists of two;
Invention and judgment. Two things are required in a soldier; Strength and
discipline. Angels have a twofold vision; Matutine and Vespertine. Christ's
incarnation was necessary for two respects: For the union betwixt the creature
and the Creator, for that it was needful, that God should become man for the
full satisfaction of man's offense; which by man alone could not be satisfied.
As there be two Stars or Planets beneficious to us: so there are two
maleficious; Sol and Mercury. There be two kinds of exhalations; aride and
humectall: according to Plato's division of humors, crasse and viscosius.
Wherein our Alchymists do somewhat agree, though some think the contrary: for,
their Sulphur serves in stead of that which is aride and dry: their
quicksilver stands for humid and viscosius; even as by red wine they
signify blood. Gold is of a twofold nature; spiritual, being astrall,
formal, volatle; corporal, being material or fix. To the making of that
which we call, Aurum potabile, two things are required: The first is, that the
gold be volatle, not able to be reduced to his first substance; the second,
that the spirit of wine be added to this, that both may be made volatle.

He that will be skillful in this Art, let him read Paracelsus Book, called
Thesaurus Alchymistarum, page 398. Of this drink he writes thus in another
place: Tanta vis inest auro potabili, vt non satis possit praedicari. Mayor
enim vis confortandi non reperitur. Ita vt per hoc remedium omnes morbi
curentur, inprimis y qui sunt in summo gradu: cuiusmodi est contractura.
Besides, Libauius in his Alchymistry has written well touching this Subject.
Ficinus calls the one, Paradise celestial; the other, supercelestiall.
Epist. lib. 6.
There is a twofold Paradise appointed for the twofold condition of man,
spiritual and temporal, maintained by those Rabbines: The one, where that
illuminant vision is, that is viuificous, which the Schoolmen call the
intuitiue knowledge of God, which happens to the soul separated from the body;
the other, wherein contemplation, being not made, is called illuminant, which
is made by connaturall Species; and this is not beatificous. The one commonly
is called celestial; the other, terrestiall. There are also two tortures
appointed for the punishment of the soul, from their opinion; the one placed
in the highermost; the other, in the lowermost world. Hell is taken two manner
of ways; for the punishment, and so the devils carry hell continually about
them; for the place of punishment, where the souls of the wicked are
tormented. According to Phylo, there be two words, two reasons, two minds; one
above us, as the exemplar of our reason; the other, our own reason it self.
Natural science is occupied about two: either it handles those things which
commonly are in the things themselves; or those things which seem to be, but
are not. Some will have the heavens composed of two elements, that is, from
light and the water; others, from light and water permixed together. The art
called canonick, consisting of harmonic, uses two kinds of instruments;
Monachorde and Tetrachorde, consisting of twenty strings, called Nerui, treated
of by Ptolomie. But this is found in Organes only percussorie, tensile,
inflatile. That part of Astrology called Meteoroscope, handles two things;
difference of sublimities, distance of Stars. There are two kinds of veins,
which are as conduits by which our meat is conveyed into the body. The one sort
make way to the heart: the other are derived from thence. They which go to the
heart, are as ministers, that they may convey from the liver to the heart,
imperfect blood; which the heart receives, and turns into that which is
absolute and perfect. The other which come from the heart, provide, that the
juice concocted by them, may be distributed through all the parts of the body.

CHAP. V. THREE.
THe Number of three is the first composite Number, called a multitude, of
some; by our Arithmeticians, the ternarie: his virtue and power is diffusiue
among all creatures. And it is a plentious Number, because it is the fountain
and wellspring of all things productiue, the beginning of all procession, the
continuance of all immutable substance, as in our third Chapter before was
touched. By his multiplication with the unity and dualtie, he brings forth
Tetraclys, one of Pythagoras Principles, being no other then the Idea of all
things created; containing one, two, and that which is infinite. Whereto add
four; and they will make, by a collectiue kind of procession, just seven:
from seven, by doubling of the ternarie Number, they will make ten: And
because there is nothing without the compass of ten, Pythagoras most wisely
has said, that Number is the beginning of all things whatsoever. This is a
Theological Number, because under this the Persons of the Trinity are lively
represented. Ex citatio. Nice. Cho. thesaur. ortho. fidei. lib. 2. cap. 30.
For, as Gregory Nazianzen teaches us, The unity bears principality from
it self: the dualtie arises greater from the vbertie of matter and form,
whereby bodies are existent. The Trinity is definite from his own perfection.
By one, is signified the co-vnion of the Godhead; by the other, the two
natures in Christ; by the last, the triplicity of Persons. The first ternarie
Number, according to Gregory, exceederh the binarie, lest the Divinity should
be included in too narrow a room, or should diffuse it self, Vsque ad
infinitum. Now, there is another reason why the Divinity should extend it
self unto the third Number; because, among all other Numbers, the ternarie
expresses the type of a balance most chiefly. But every man knows, that a
balance is the very symbol of equality. So that it comes to pass, that the
triple Number, beyond all others, occupies the middle place betwixt both
extremes, that it is both even and unchangeable: so that a man cannot perceive
any composition to arise out of this Number. But some will ask, Could not God
represent himself unto us without Numbers, being without compass of all
Number, infinite incircumscriptible, incomprehensible? I answer, Though God be
one, yea, the unity it self, yet he has diverse names; not which show unto
us his diverse essences, or deities, but his proprieties only, issuing from
him. Therefore it is holden a Maxim in Divinity: Nil obstet quo minus nomina
numeralia in diuinis admittantur, Paul. Sea. Encycloped.
etiamsi (vt aiunt) Lypersona dicat substantiam proprietate personali, quae
varia appellatione nominatur, notione non personali. But herein we must take
heed, that we do not Pythagorize too much, by tying the incircumscriptible
Divinity to Numbers and Ciphers, more than his own word will warrant us. For,
his unity is beyond all unity: his Deigenous fecunditie (to speak with
Dionisius Areopagite) is not to be measured with any name or title. So that
there is no Unity or Trinity, no Number or fecunditie, nor any thing else
liable to our capacity, which can unfold this mystery of mysteries. And the
reason is, as the said Dionisius writes, Lib. de diui. nomi. cap. 2.
Because it lies hid in that hie and mystical Divinity, which in his own
substance surmounteth the substance of all others by many furlongs. So that it
is true which is left us by that ancient writer: Vnum non cognoscit Deum, nisi
Deus. And again: Nos non apprehendimus de ipso, et de proprietatibus eius,
nisi vniuorsalia; et haec paucissima. As this Number, by this fecundious
multiplication, goes beyond any other: so does his extendure stretch far and
wide. There are three Persons in the Trinity. Christ says, He is the way,
truth, and life. There are three that bear testimony in heaven; The Father,
the Word, and the Spirit. This triplicitie is expressed in Deuteronomie, in
these words: Magnus, potens, terribilis: some expositors have Reuerendus. By
which is showed, how great he was before the creation, in the creation, after
the creation. There are three kinds of Principiata, or Entia, which you will.
Some are works or magnitudes, Lib. de soelo.
according to Aristotle's meaning. Others dwell, and observe bodies and
magnitudes. Tho last are dominions and beginnings of habitants and keepers;
which, for their noble actions, are styled Olympian dwellings. For, as he
says, Nobilioribus nobiliora et altiora attribuuntur. Orpheus makes three
beginnings; Jupiter, Juno, and the Law. By Jupiter, he understands the
beginning of all things because he is the chiefest God; By Juno, Jupiters
bedfellowe, the mother of all things: For in one of his hymns he writes,
Absque te nihil diuino vitae natura agnouit, and so forth; By the Law, natures
confirmatiue, or distribution. These Symboles have some identitie with that of
Plato, who puts these three beginnings; Proclus will have Plato mean by God,
the most Excellent of all efficient causes; by Matter, the subordinate subject
of all things; by Idea, the fairest exemplar. In. 47, propos. l. 1. in Euclid^m.
God, Idea, Matter: which, Pythagoras has symbolized under these three
mentioned before; Infinitum, vnum ac duo. So that Tecraclys (called of some,
Pythagoras fourth Number) issuing out of these, is the cause of all perfection.
Detestable therefore is the doctrine of Manicheus, making two beginnings;
contrary to the doctrine of Moses, Pythagoras, and Plato.

Paracelsus, Prince among those Chymicks, makes three beginnings of
oylevitriolous, by the separation of those beginnings, that is, Mercury, or
the spirit, from his oil, sulphur, and salt (which in their tryade, make an
unity): it is admirable to think, what effects, in the curing of all manner
of calculous diseases, it produces. There be three kinds of worlds; There are
three things belonging to God; Honor, to the creator; Love, to the Redeemer;
Fear, to the Judge. There are three things due to our neighbor; Obedience, to
our superior; Concord, to our equal; well-doing, to our inferior.
Sensible, intelligible, architypall. The one is the receptacle of all
quantity; the other, of virtue; the last, of principality, drawn from the
former division. These three have diverse respects: The one is circumscriptiue;
the other, definitive; the last, repletiue, because there is the first,
sempeterne, and sufficient good, whereby things corruptible, are made
incorruptible; temporal, eternal; dissoluble, permanent and everlasting. By
one, is signified God; by the second, this that is visible; by the third, the
lesser world. There is a threefold necessity; Absolute, which is from God;
physical, which governs destiny; euentuall or consequentall. But I like the
opinion of those Academicks and Peripateticks better, because it is not so
doubtful, and it comes nearer to our Christian Religion. They make destiny
to be the sole efficient cause of working in nature. Every creature which is
in the world, consists of three; Simple, as the Elements and heaven;
incorporeall, as the spirits; composed, There are three things belonging to our
selves; Cleanness of heart, silence of our tongue, chastisement or government
of our body.
as man. All kind of Planetarean traiections are of three kinds; swift,
sudden, momentane. There be three great heavens; Chrystalline, Empireous, and
the Firmamentall. Fire has three properties; To consume, to incinerate, and to
draw to his own likeness such things as are near unto it. Again, it is
penetratiue, communicatiue, diuisiue. Air has threefold qualities. It is
subtle, mobile, perspicuous. Quicksilver is of a tripled disposition. Some
will have it cold; others, hot; some others, temperate, that is, hot and cold.
The Stars have three proper names. Some are called retrograde; some,
progressiue; others, stationarie. The sect of physicians is threefold;
Empirick, found out by Philinus Coos, Prince of that sect; methodicall, brought
into a Compendium by Themison Laodiceus the Syrian; rational, made persect by
Hippocrates.

There be three affections besides nature; The cause, preceding the disease;
the disease, by which the action is first corrupted; Symptomies, which follow
the disease. Diseases happen commonly in three parts of the body; In the
Similarie parts, in the isntrumental, in both of them. The first is called a
morbous dispositure, where the first qualities or elements deflect something
from their natural symmetrie. The second is an evil constitution, which some
term an official disease. The third is a dissolution of unity and
continuity. Every purging medicament, according to Hippocrates Rule, must
conteyne these three qualities: It must work quickly, safely, pleasingly.
There are three theological virtues; three Charites; three kinds of
Counsels; general, provincial, Episcopal, according to Canus division.
There be three regions of the air; That which is lowest and nearest to the
earth, being hot and cold; that which is composed of rain, snow, hail,
which is cold and moist; the last participating of those higher bodies, called
The highest region, which is hot. There are three exhalations, or impressions
of the air, mentioned by Myzaldus. That part of astrology we call Dioptick,
comprehends three things; The intercapedines of Sun, Moon and Stars. The
Astrolabe invented by Ptolomie (if we believe Synesius, for some will have it
not so ancient) appertains to this science. Civil government consists of
three; Regnum, Optimates, Respub: Her excess conteyneth three likewise;
Tyranny, Oligarchie, Democracie. Plato diuides it into three, as the soul of
man. By reason, he intimates philosophers; by anger, soldiers; by
covetousness, artificers. The art Optic is divided into three: One searches
out the cause of visible things, which through a certain kind of distance are
thought untrue; as, when lines alternall do concur among themselves, and
those quadrate angles are intercepted. The second, called Catoptick, is
occupied about inflexions altogether. The third, called Scenographie,
discerns by what means abnumerous and deformious things may be feined in
Images; which are seen, for their distance and altitudes sake. Some part of it
uses lines and angles concerning the sight, proiections of beams, shadows,
figurations of light, glasses, planes, globous, collumnarie, turbinall, hollow,
conuex, and so forth; treated of by Vitruvius and others. Our style we write
with (especially in an history) ought to be fuse, contimuous, peryodicall.
There is a threefold habitacle of the soul; heavenly, spiritual, earthly,
prefigured unto us (if we believe those ancient Magi) by their threefold
vestiment, made of linen, woollen, leather; which Adam made him, after he was
thrust out of Paradise. Zoroastres dreamed of a threefold Fast, in these words:
Adhuc tres diessacrificabitis, et non vltra. By which, some go about to
interpret the coming of our Savior to the last Judgment.

Eudoxus, an ancient Astronomer, attributes to the Sun, three spears; to
the Moon, as many. The first carries the South-pole, from the East into the
West, by a diurnall motion. The second drives the South from the West into the
East under the Zodiac, according to his longitude, from one sign into
another; and it is called the motion of longitude. The third carries the South
from the West into the East, under the Zodiac, according to his latitude, as
the South declineth from the Ecclyptick: and this is called the motion of
latitude. Philo uses three words, by which are declared many symboles; Image,
Abscision, Eradiation. But these, being well understood, are no other then a
symbol with that Chaldean; propriety, with Solomon; image, with Moses;
delibation, with Cicero: where he faith, Animos nostros haustos et delibatos
ex diuinitate. And in his Tusculane questions he speaks more clearly:
Humanos animos decerpi ex mente diuind; Making indeed (which is admirable in an
heathen Philosopher) the divine mind (which is God) the Original of our
soul. These heavenly bodies are three in Number; Shining, as the Sun; not
shining, as other Stars and Planets, having but a borrowed light; Diaphanous
or transparant, as all the celestial Spears. There be three things which make
the intention of heat; The greatness of light, densitie, and propinquitie. The
moving of the Stars differs three manner of ways: From their motion swifter
or flower, for that some have more need of weight then others have; from the
site of that region wherein they are moved. The circles of the Sun have three
different appellations; straight, local, oblique: the Greeks call them
Zodiackes; the Latins, Signifers.

Bernard holds, that grace consists in three things: Hatred of things past,
contempt of things present, desire of things to come. God made the world by
willing, understanding, by his immutable counsel: in which there wants
nothing toward the workmanship thereof, beauty, and perfection. Though there
be three Persons in the Trinity, equal in eternity, majesty and power; yet
the Son is rather the Image of his Father, than the holy Ghost, according to
the opinion of some Divines. There are three distinctions of intelligences. The
first conteyneth the Cherubin, in the goodness of the Almighty; the Seraphin, in
his verity and essence; Thrones, in his Wisdom and equity. The second has
Dominations, commanding that which others are to do; principalities, caring
for public matters, as heads of the people, and such as resist the power of
others, who oppose themselves against the Law of God. The inferior sort
contain virtues, governing of the heavens, now and then conspiring together to
work miracles, as Archangels, obseruers of divine worship, or Angels that are
keepers of others. Which order being six in the whole, some call doctrinall,
tutelar, procuratorie, ministerial, auxiliarie, receptiue, or assistiue. There
be three Hierarchies of Angels appointed unto the service of God, and safety
of men. Zanchius, a learned Divine, allows different offices, but no
diversity of Hierarchies in those Angels. The perfect work of Angels
consists in three things; To contemplate, to administer, to be as
Ambassadors, Messengers, Prophets. There is a threefold mobility in Angels; Of
nature, intelligence, will: Of nature, because every thing creaeed, turns
into nothing, if it be not guided by the hand of Gods omnipotency; Of
understanding, reaching unto the knowledge of things, and such as they shall
utter; Of will, because they will not do this and that at one instant. There
is a threefold Hierarchy; Supercelestiall, in the order of nature; celestial,
in the order Angelical; terrestrial, in men. Angels have a threefold
knowledge of things; in the Word, in themselves, in the vision of the Almighty.
Their state is threefold; Of innocence, of grace, of glory. Every motion is
threefold; circular, straight, crooked. The knowledge of Astrology in a
Physician, There are three things never asunder: Heresy, tyranny and policy.
There are three singular points in a wise man. 1 He never tells a lie in lest
or in earnest. 2 He never speaks ill. 3 He never speaks but upon good cause,

is necessary for three respects; To know the (...), to prohibit unapt times
of purging, phlebotomizing, and giving of physic. There are three things
needful to be known in foretelling; The initiall hour, the state of the
heavens, or their position unto a certain hour, the certain effects of the
heavens and Stars.

The earth has three appellations; animal, vegetall, mineral. It has three
virtues or properties. It is the matter whereby we were first created; the
mother of all things; the truest physic, as touching our restoration and
conservation. He that knows himself, knows all things in himself; God,
unto whose likeness he was made; the world, whose image he bears; all the
creatures, with whom he symbolizeth. Man's dignity consists in three things;
In that God made him a reasonable creature, innocent in his life, potent in his
dominion. Man has a threefold eye; Of the flesh, whereby he sees the world;
of reason, whereby he sees his mind; of contemplation, whereby he sees
God. In one that shall worthily occupy the Pulpit, are required these three
things: Meet to teach; wherein are required, Gravity, Learning, Eloquence:
As in the Divinity there is one essence, and three persons: So in Christ there
is one Person, and three essences; his Deity, his soul, and flesh. Christ's
nativity is threefold; divine, humane, of his own accord: the first, from his
Father; the second, by his Mother; the last, by his will. There appeared his
benignity and humanity at his nativity, from a threefold receptacle: From the
bosom of his Father, wherein he lay hid; from the shadow of the Law, wherein
he was figured; from the belly of his mother, wherein he was formed. His union
is threefold; his deity with the soul, his deity with the flesh, his soul
with the flesh. Meet to reprove; wherein are required, Courage, Judgment.
His first union remained still the third was separated upon the Cross. Christ
lay in his grave 3 days: Some will have his soul to remain three days in
hell. Philosophy is divided into 3 parts; physical, logical, moral. The
action of the soul is threefold: By vegetating, to be existing; by
understanding, to be good; by reasoning, Meet to convince; wherein are
required, Arts, Memory, Knowledge.
to be excellent good. Her vegetable parts are 3; generatiue, for the
conservation of their Species; augmentatiue, for the conservation of her
indiuiduous; nutritive, for the perfection of her subject. There is a threefold
liberty of free will: One is of naure; the other, of grace; the third, of
glory. He that will be a teller of true dreams, must be endued with these
three qualities: We are bound to fly heretics for three causes: Because they
are excommunicated, and cut off from the body of the Church; Because,
communicating with them, we are made partakers of their idolatry; Because we
tempt God, to make us like unto them.
He must have a pure fantastical spirit, apt to prophecy: he must use
frequent meditation, and moderate diet. There be 3 kinds of learners; one,
that understands things of himself the other, that harkens to things
propounded; the last, that neither understands himself, nor will listen to
others instructing. And this is the worst of all, says Hesiodus. Man uses to
dream three manner of ways, by impulsion from above. First, he can foretell,
that he has some cognation with some celestial body; secondly, that the
air is full of immortal creatures; in which, certain sparkles of noted truth
are apparent; thirdly, that Angels or some supernall powers speak familiarly
with him. And it is even a note of true foretelling, when the soul is near
departed out of the body. There are three conditions of virtue; the removing of
temptation, multiplication of good works, delight in doing well. There be
three kinds of triumphs; Humility has these three excellent properties. 1
She thinks no book so bad, but has some good lesson in it. 2 She
despises none of whom she may learn. 3 She scorneth none of whom she has
learned.

True, when as for a man's merits a crown or garland is given him by mutual
consent of the citizens; most ample, when he is advanced to dignity for his
virtue; most shameful, when he rises higher through the loss or disgrace of
other men. All kind of Cometographie consists in three, treated of by
Mizaldus with much learning and elegancie.

All kind of Architecture is tried three manner of ways; by the touchstone,
by the hammer, by the fire. Every modulation is threefold; Assumption,
conjunction, use. The art perspectiue puts us in mind of a tripled nature;
intellectual, animal, corporeal. Memory consists chiefly in three;
partition, common places, images. Every peroration consists of three;
Enumeration, indignation, miseration. That which we call the leprosy, is
threefold; pale, white, red, from Saint Hieromes distinction. Devils are endued
with a triple sagacitie; Subtlety of nature, by their vespertine knowledge,
True genealogy consists in these three things; 1 In the authority of a
faithful and autentique Writer; 2 In the near and aptest pronunciation of
each regio^; 3 In the site and opportunity of the place.

understanding natural things present; Experience of time, understanding
natural things future; Revelation of superior spirits, knowing things that be
voluntary. Among the damned, three things bear rule: Proteruious fantasy,
mad concupiscence, iracundious fury. There be three forces in creatures;
animal, natural, vital. The soul of man consists in three; The mind,
reason, idol, which some call fantasy, or imagination. There are three
faculties of the soul, by which we resemble the Image of the Deity; The
intellect of mind (called (...)), taken for the reasonable faculty; The
means whereby it discerns all things, which is compounded of common sense,
imagination, and memory; The rational part, which enquireth the causes and
effects of things, which can neither deceive not be deceived, as long it
attends her office. That part of Philosophy we call Metaphysicall,
consists in three things. First, it comprehends God; next, those minds
se-ioyned from the body; last, the multiplications, beginnings of all kind of
doctrine, by the steps of nature, called Axiomata.

There are three things which are every where, and no where, according to
Porphirie; God, understanding, the soul. There is a threefold ladder of
nature, wherein three regions of triplicity, and in every of them one state of
abstraction is considered. The first is the object transparant, and the
exterior fantasy. The second is the interior sense, fantasy, and brutish
judgment; The third, humane judgment, reason, and understanding: of all
which, the mind is Lady and Mistress. There be three principal means or
ways, whereby wisdom, or the knowledge of all things has been derived unto
us. The first, anon after the creation of the world, by tradition, dispersed
through a great many of nations; which, if it had not been violated, would
have been found more profitable unto mankind. The second, by those
Philosophers, who searched curiously after the nature and causes of things. The
third has lightened all kind of nations and countries with his claritie,
dispersing the mist of natural reason and Philosophy, by his sunne-shining
beams; which is worthy the name of wisdom, because it comes from the
fountain of wisdom, contained in the old and new Testament. Those divine
personalities are three in Number, and have diverse operations: The power of
the Father producing all things, giving to every man his unity; The wisdom of
the Son disposing all things, uniting and copulating them together; The love
of the holy Ghost converting all things to GOD, tying the whole work to his
Maker, by the band of charity.

There are three faculties of the body. One is Animal, which, from the brain,
passes unto the nerves, as through certain pipes, transmitting sense and
motion unto all the parts of the body, and nourishing the understanding. The
other is vital; which, from the heart unto the arteries, as by certain
chanells, gives life unto the whole body. The last is natural; which, from
the liver to the veins, administreth sustenance to all the parts of the body.
The preparation of solarie tincture, spoken of much by those Paracelsians,
consists in three things; In expurging, renouating, restoring the member
affected. Their philosophical Mercury is composed three manner of ways; By
sublimation, precipitation, distillation. There were three kinds of music
much esteemed among the Ancients: Lydian, Dorian, Phrygian. There are three
things impossible to be done; To take from Jupiter his thunderbolt, from
Hercules his club, from Homer his verse. There is good cheer commonly at these
three meals; A hunters breakfast; A lawyers dinner; A friars drinking. Cheese
has three good properties: He that eats enough of it, shall never look old;
for, he shall die whilst he is young: He shall not be robbed in the night;
for he shall never lin barking and coughing all night long: He shall not be
bitten with a dog; for, he shall always go with a staff in his hand. Among
the civil Lawyers there is a threefold brotherhood: Vterinus, by one Mother;
Germanus, both by Father and Mother; Patruelis, by the Fathers side.

CHAP. VI. FOUR.
SOme Numbers bear that sovereignty, that they neither beget, nor are
begotten: others beget, and are begotten, being the fourth Number; which
Pythagoras calls The fountain of nature; Macrobius, The jugall or conjunctatiue
Number: whose reasons are as follow. For, four is made of two; doubled, it
makes eight: and so, by duplications, it will arise in the end to that which is
infinite. It is properly belonging to the terne Number, to have a middle place
betwixt two summities, or extremes, whereby he is yoked; mentioned in the
former Chapter. But the quaterne Number possesses two medieties, which is no
other then a type of the worlds indissoluble creation, consisting of four
elements. For whereas there is in every element two distinct qualities, God
has so distributed to every one of two, one of these, that he has made a
federall knot or conjugation betwixt them. First, the earth in dry and cold;
the water is cold and moist: yet these two first elements, although they have
contrary qualities in them, joined to the other two, they make: a convenient
and temperant harmony, according to their several humors, set down in these
verses mentioned by Themistius.

Terrapars terras; pars vndea conspicit vndas.
Aethera dein ether; vis ignea perspicit ignes.
Pax pacem monstrat: litem lis aspera sentit.
Which has caused Heraclitus to hold, that All things are made by a certain
kind of disagreement. Indeed of themselves they disagree; but co-united to
others by a secret commixtion or conglutination in nature, they make no small
concordance. And this is according to Plate's rule, whom Macrobius doubts not
to call, Arcanum veritatis; auerring, that those things are firmly united
together, when as an interjected kind of mediocritie makes the co^plement the
stronger: but when as the medietie is doubled (as in this Number you may find)
those extimous things are not only tenaciously, but indissolubely tied and
linked together. These are the chiefest of Macrobius reasons, to prove the
efficacy of this Number. But our Pythagoreans, they prove the excellency of
it, by a kind of paritie and imparitie this way: One and three, say they,
makes four: four and five makes nine: seven and nine makes sixteen: sixteen
and nine makes twenty five; So that all such kind of Numbers that are so
collected, are found to be quadrangular. The Geometricians call these
Gnomones; Arithmeticians, unequal Numbers; for that, joined to others in
order, they will always retain the form of the quadrant Number. This Number
seems therefore to be a Number of perfection; because, when a man is worthy
of some excellent title, they say, He is quadratus homo, that is, a man every
way perfect and complete. And it has great affinity with the ternarie: So that
out of the four elements, and their 3 Interstitia (to use Macrobius word)
there is a final and absolute commixtion of all kind of bodies: That, as by
the ternary Number, there is a copulation made of every thing; so by the
quaterne they are made perfect. This is that Pythagoras calls (...)(specified
before); coming so near to the perfection of the soul, that the Ancients
were wont by it to make them a religious kind of oath in this wise: Iuro tibi
per eum, qui dat animae nostrae quaternarium numerum.

The first therefore of his extendure, shall be the four elements, the four
qualities of the soul, the four humors of the body, the four seasons of the
year; which this Number does lively represent. We will proceed with others.
There be four Cardinal virtues, four Evangelists, four Patriarks, four
Oecumenicall Synodes, four chief Doctors of the Church, four Winds. Every
site of a country is distinguished four manner of ways. By parallels,
angles, positure of the Eccliptick, and of the Sun. All these have different
qualities of humors and inclinations, He that will know these configurations,
must acknowledge, there be eight Winds as well as four, according to P.
Virgils distinction. Lib. 1. cap. 27.
according to their signs, answerable to four, which do show the singularity
of this Number. In the Signifer there are four triquetrall configurations. The
first is from the North, containing Africa, subject to Borrolybicus, and is
governed of Jupiter and Mars. The second is Austrisolane in the rising called
Brumall, subject to Notapeliotes, governed of Venus and Saturn. The third is
mixed of Aquilo and subsolane in the rising solstitiall, subject to
Borrapeliotis; he is chiefly governed by Saturn, and has Jupiter for an
helping companion. The last mixed of Auster and Africa in the going down
brumall: he is governed by Jupiter, and has Venus for an helper. So that the
earth is divided into four quadrants, according to the triangled Number.
Trigonum est spirituum astrorum transmutatio quadruplex, iuxta numerum
elementorum quatuor: vnumqu^dque regit ac durat ducentos annos, vt cumtrigonum
igneum incipit, supernae planetae suam coniunctionem semper habent in ignto
signo, donec trigonum hoc durabit. S^c de reliqais, Paracelsus.
The breadth is divided by the line of the Germane sea, from the sea Herculean,
led unto the gulf called Isicus, and afterward to the East of the Promontorie
back wards; which line separateth the North part from the South. But the line
from the gulf of Arabia led through the Aegean sea, the puddle of Pontus and
Meotides, parts the East and the West. So that there are four quadrants
according to the trigonous Number: the first called Celtick; the second, the
South part of Asia; the third, the North part of Asia; the fourth, the West
part of Aethiopia, according to the opinion of Ptolomie, a most diligent
Interpreter of the heavens and their motions. Now although among the Ancients
there was but a threefold division of the earth, containing four quadrants,
yet in desciphring her different qualities, site, temperature, signs, we see
how needful the use of Numbering is. By later invention another part of the
world is found out, which will make this Number more complete then ever it was.
There are 4 properties of speaking belonging to 4 several kingdoms, expressed
thus in Latin. Galls cantant. Itali caprizant. Germani vlulant. Angli iubilant.
There be four animal faculties in man's body, according to Plato's
dimension: Attractiue, retentiue, alteratiue, expulsive. Virtues of those
heavenly motions, and force of the Stars are known four manner of ways. By
the coldness or moisture of the earth, by the temperature of the heavens, by the
conjunction of the elements, by the secret power of herbs, plants, stones and
metals, wherein the faculty of those Paracelsians chiefly consists. There is
a quadripartite partition of creatures in Plato. For God looking back to the
Idea of his mind, has produced four kind of living things; Those which he
calls lesser Gods, or heavenly minds, ayerie creatures aquatill and
terrestrial: Death is terrible to 4 sorts of men; 1 To infidels that look for
no resurrection; 2 To the welthy and rich man; 3 To them that never tasted of
the Cross; 4 To them that are strong and youthful.

Aristotle in his book Degeneratione animalium (if he be soundly understood)
does not altogether disagree in this point. There be four principal parts in
man's body; Animal, vegetall, sensitive, rational. There be four instruments
of motion; spirits first, sinnewes next, muscles or the isntrumental parts of
the back, the whole body last. There be four Crises, which Physicians ought
not to be ignorant of; Simple, deficient, evil, imperfect and evil both. A
Physician ought to be skilled in four things, whereby he may know those
Crises the better; The four seasons of each disease, the beginning, increment,
declination, and vigor. Whereto if he add the inspection of the urine, I dare
assure him an excellent Physician. For of those diseases which happen in the
liver and betwixt the veins, there is no certain sign to be had, but from
the urine. Which is no other then an excrement of blood in the hollow vein,
brought through the reins and vrinarie passages into the bladder. Four things
must be considered in the urine; There be 4 seasons or discrimined times
touching the frame of the infant in the mothers belly, handled by Leuinus
Lemnius. Lib. de miranatu. 4. cap. 23.
consistencie, heat, quantity, contents. The good urine will be known by
these four properties: If it be mediocrous of substance, answerable to the
portion which it receives, of a subrufe and subflauous color, having his
sediment white, light, equal. In a captain there are four things required;
knowledge, experience, authority, fortune. In war four things must be had;
money, weapons, store of provision, and artillery. There be four parts of
divine Philosophy. The first entreats of God, according to the work of his
vocation or predestination; the second of God, There be 4 things which drive
away a friend without recovery, Eccles. 22. To blaspheme him, to disdain him,
to open his secrets, to wound him traitorously.
as far as his power shines in the effect of his creation; the third of God,
as far as his wisdom surmounteth in the work of our Redemption; the fourth of
God, as far as his goodness or clemency shines in the work of our
glorification. There were four Rivers compassing Paradise, showing the
fertility of that place; Ganges, Tygris, Euphrates, Nilus. There be four laws
bearing the names of four Gods: Saturnian, Iouian, Fatal, Adrastian. Eudoxus,
mentioned before, gives to every planet, besides the Sun and Moon, four
spheres. The first causes diurnall motion; the second, the motion of
longitude under the Zodiac; the third, Ecclyptica linea est qua media Z^diac^
latitudinem diuidit, ita vt gradus sint virinque sex. Zodiacus gradus 12. latus
con^inet. Sub Ecclyptica linea ebliqua move. ur Luna. Ep^^ycius quid sit, vide
Pe^rum Ali^ce. sem de sphara.
the motion of latitude, as it declines from the Ecclyptick, or toward the
South and North; the fourth, which lets, that the planet goes not but
according to her means of latitude in the Zodiac, and that she may not reach
to the poles of the Zodiac. For, as the Zodiac goes by the poles of the
third sphere: so the third sphere, deferring the planet according to the motion
of latitude, passes through the poles of the Zodiac. Lest therefore,
according to the probable opinion of Astrologers, the third sphere may bring
the planet beyond the Zodiac, there is given a fourth, which drives her
toward the Ecclyptick, whose poles Aristotle (if we believe Eudoxus) assigns
not.

There are four kinds of rights; natural, civil, national, military.
Every element has four properties: The fire is hot, lucid, penetrating,
subtle in the greatest degree. The air humid, Time may be ill spent in
learning, 4 manner of ways. 1 If a man prefer Appendices before the
substance of things; 2 If a man confound arts without order; 3 If a man read
all things, and will be every where; 4 If a man read or practice that, which
is not agreeable to his profession.

transparant, subtle, light in the lesser. The water is cold, white, thick,
ponderous in the same. The earth is dry, black, thick, and weighty in the
greatest. God has four excellent attributes: he is infinite,
incomprehensible, incircumscriptible, eternal. Gods name is expressed unto us
in four Hebrew letters; Mem, Zade, Pe, Sade: which some Rabbines appropriate
to David's Kingdom. And it is written so, because this Number is even and
perfect, and God is said to have no imperfection in him. Besides, the Persians
do write the name of God with four letters, signifying the perfection of his
divinity. The Wisards of Persia (called Magi) (...); the Arabes, Alla; the
Assyrians, Adad; the Egyptians, (...); the Greeks, (...), that is, from
running; meaning, that every where (while need requires) he runs, or is
present to give us assistance: Or, as others expound it, from burning; that he
will burn the dwelling of the wicked, when he is said to be a consuming fire
unto them, according to Gregory the Great. We give to Angels four
attributes; Subtilty of essence, perspicacitie of understanding, faculty of
free will, personal discretion. In Angels there be four dignities; Dignity of
creation, grace of confirmation, love of creation, vision of the Divinity.
There be four kind of metals which participate with the four elements; There
were 4 things in use among the old Romans, which made them famous. 1 They did
usually fight with the enemy in their own territories; as, in Africa, not at
home. 2 They endeavored to keep their soldiers in subjection. 3 Their money
and troops of horse men were always ready; 4 Their forces by sea were greatly
respected.

Earthly lead and silver, waterie quicksilver, ayerie copper and brass,
fiery gold and iron. In the soul, understanding resembles fire; reason, the
air; imagination, the water; sense, the earth. Our sight also is fiery;
hearing, aierie; smell and taste, is referred unto the water; our touching is
earthie, always dealing with those crassious bodies. Now, our actions and
operations depend of those four elements: A slow motion and solid prefigureth
the earth; the water signifies fear, sluggishnes, and one that is negligent;
the air, alacrity, friendly manners; the fire, an acute, vehement, or angry
passion. Whatsoever man can think upon four manner of ways, God is. He
creates every thing: he considerateth of them, created: he loves them,
because he created them: he maintains and sustayneth them.

The soul of man is a four fold Number; substantial, uniform, conuersiue to
her self, rational. Every noble soul has a fourefold operation; One,
divine; the other, intellectual, rational, and animal. It has a divine
operatition, by the image of divine propriety; intellectual, by formality of
her participation with intelligences; rational, by the perfection of her
proper essentialitie; Animal or natural, by her communion with the body. The
nutritive part of the soul has four coadjutors; Attractiue, which takes in
necessaries unto nutriment; Digestive, which separateth the good from the bad;
Retentiue, There are 4 kingly virtues required in (...); Wit, Experience,
Prudence, Love of their common wealth.
which keeps the meat so long in one place until it be altered or concocted;
Expulsive, which expels that which is superfluous in the nutriment. The
soul, by understanding, knows all things four manner of ways; God, which
is above her; her self, within her self; the Angels, near her self; and
whatsoever is contained in the whole Universe beneath her self. Powers
cognitiue are considered by four differences of virtue intellectiue. There are
four kinds of divine fury; love, poefie, prophecy, mystery. All which you
may find in Ficuius. Episilib. 11.
The first is of nature, divided into agent and patient. The second is of the
object, dividing the understanding into speculatiue and practiue; The third, of
dignity, dividing reason in that part which is superior and inferior. The
fourth is of comparison to the act, dividing the understanding into habit and
action.

That which the Philosopher calls force moving, is quadruple; imperative,
conciliatiue, affectiue, or conciliatiue and affectiue. The first is
Synderesis; some will have it to be Liberum Arbitrium. The second is reason.
The third is will, natural, There be 4 notable qualities required in a
Captain; That he be vali^nt, wise, nimble, eloquent.
and deliberatiue. The fourth is understanding practick. There be four sorts
of true dreams. The first is between sleeping and waking; The second, that
which one sees of another; The third, whose interpretation in the night time
is unfolded unto the dreamer; The fourth, that is rehearsed to him that
dreameth. He that means to gain any certainty forth of Oracles, must observe
these four precepts: He must use abstinence, There are 4 properties of a good
wife; To be well borne, to be well formed, to be well moralized, to be well
dowred.
which defends him against the encountrings of devils, and conioyneth him to
God. He must observe temperancie, which strengthens health. He must abandon
superfluous things. He must be respective of the meat he eats. For, as One
says, vsus siccorum ciborum, et corpus crassum iciunijs extenuatum, et facile
permeabilem spiritum humanum, purum et potentem reddit. They therefore that
drench their bodies with much drink, their souls with a plethorie of noxious
cogitations, There are 4 things desired of all men, but never or seldom
obtained; A sober maid, assured of look and mind;
can never dream true dreams, nor see heavenly visions, nor have any thing to
do with the interpretation of experienced Oracles. For it will ever be a
Maxim, Sicca anima sapientissima.

All kind of variation in music consists of four kinds; systeme, love,
concent, and modulation. There be four things which have an admirable power in
nature; The stone called Heraclius, those plants called Cychoreus, Scorpiarius,
Heliotropium. I here be four other things as admirable; A sad young man not
given to lust and wast; A husband true, not ^elous and unkind; A constant wife,
not wilful wise, but chaste.
The loadstone, the blood of a goat, the bunch that is upon the forehead of a
fold, the stones of a Castor. Comets presage the death of Princes and great
Personages for four causes, which are all particularly handled by Myzaldus. In
every coe^licall signification or prediction as touching comets, four things
must be observed, according to Ptolomie; Place, time, manner, quality.
Bacchilides says, that four things are required in a banquet; Moderate
preparation of Bread and Wine; pleasing conference; true benevolence of the
guests; good Wine, wherein old men take great delight. Comet. L^b. 2. cap. 4.
There were four properties in Caesar, which made him renowned through all the
world; Labor, in the dispatch of his business; fortitude, The strength of
France consists in these four things; First, that the States observe well
their King; That they abound in riches; That they grow cunning and exercised in
the war; That the Cities, Towns, and Castles, standing near the Frontiers,
beo well peopled, and made strong; Claud us Sisellius De monar. Galliae. L. 2.
in the hazarding of himself; industry, in doing; celeritie, in executing. To
keep an house, four things are needful; To feed well, to feed enough, to
cloth, to till the ground; according to M. Cato. Those Alchymists or
Paracelsians in refining of gold, use four organes or instruments; Solution,
or putrefaction, whereby gold is brought to his first matter; Sublimation, by
whose help the spirit, soul, tincture, strength, and virtue, lying hid in the
gold, are drawn forth and segregated; Caloination, or physical digestion, by
which the spirit and soul with the body, is made an union: so that out of the
three parts, there is an unity made of the whole; Fixation, by which those
three parts distinguished, are so firmly united together, that there can be
no diuulsion of any of those parts the one from the other. In all those
refinings or quintessences, they prefer the use of fire so highly, that one
sticks not to write in this wise, as touching the dissolution of the world:
Sic mundus et elementa eiut, ignis interventu transitura funt, at que etiam
renouanda, et a pristina forma in chrystallinam long perfectiorem, ^uriorem,
et nobiliorem, ac in aeternum durabilem commutanda sunt. Gold, among all other
Elixiries (to use Paracel us word) has four especial qualities. It
preserves the body: it freeth it from all manner of diseases: Quer. Tetras:
grauis. affec. cap. 32.
it keeps it from corruption: it corrects whatsoever is found morbidous or
putrefactious. But this is meant, not of foliated, but of philosophical gold,
spoiled of his crassious matter, The absence of some men from their native
country, may prove dangerous for these four causes following; 1 If they stay
longer then was appointed them; 2 If they return sooner then needs; 3 If
they stay to avoid suites and contention; 4 If of purpose, without hope of
gain, they are long absent.

and reduced, by a various kind of workmanship, unto a certain kind of
spirituality; as those Paracelsians are wont to speak. Dioptometrie, which is
no other then the Art of measuring, whatsoever comes within the compass of
measure, handles four things; celestial, terrestrial, propinquous, distant
thorough a quadrant Astronomicall.

There be four principal means whereby a man may surely know whether he
has attained to any knowledge whatsoever. The first is, if he seek out the
difficulties consisting in the art he goes about to learn: For, as Aristotle
Lib. 3. Metaphy.
teaches us, Contrariorum demonstrationes dubitationes sunt de contrarijs. The
second is, that he doubt whether he has attained to the truth or no. For, as
he writes, Posse. Biblio. selec. To. 2. cap. 10.
Qui quarunt; nisi primo dubitent, sunt little similes, qui ignorant quonam ire
opertet, et adhuc neque vtrum innenerine, quod quaritur, an non, cognoscere
possunt. The third is, if he know what is to be followed, what to be avoided,
as touching the opinions of other men. The last is, if he be able to refute
the opinions of others, by collation of other men's judgments, more sounder
then others were. For, as Aristotle says, Lib. 7. Ethecor.
Opposita inxta se posita, magis elucescunt. Hipparchus, an ancient Astronomer,
is said to be the first who did find out, that the lunarie course was made
betwixt four Callipicous periods. This man is called by Plynie, as one that
was partaker of the counsels of nature; of Ptolomey,(...), that is, a lover of
truth. And he is cited often by Possenine, Clanius, and others, for the
maintenance of their Romish Gregorian Calendar: wherefore he must be read with
judgment. Death uses four instruments to the punishing of the earth; wars,
and battles, penury, pestilence, These periods are called Callipaous, from one
callippus, that was an Astronomer.
troops of wilde-beasts, figured in the c. 6. v. 8.
Apocalypse, by that pale horse. There were four kinds of punishment,
anciently inflicted upon parasites: They were thrown headlong into a deep
river, tied about the neck with a Cowle, a Cock, a Snake, and an Ape.

CHAP. VII. FIVE.
THis Number is called Signifer, making a moity of ten, There are five
joyful mysteries mentioned in the Gospel; The incarnation of our Savior, The
visitation of Elizabeth, The birth of Christ in Bethleem, The presentation of
our Redeemer, The finding him in the Temple.
and is placed in the middle, as in the midst of an host entrenched on every
side. And it is no other than the vnarie Number twice coupled with four, or
twice four hemmed about with two Vnaries. It must needs contain some more
than vulgar excellency, because it comprehends all things seen, felt, or
understood, whether they be things intelligible, things corporeal, or such as
have no body. For, as Macrobius says, either God is the chief, or the mind is
begotten of him, in whom is comprised the Species of all things; or he is the
soul of the world, which is the receptacle of all souls; or heavenly things
appertain unto us; or nature sauoureth of the earth: and so the fifth Number,
including all things, is fully complete. Let us see what extendure it has.

There were five wise Virgins, and five foolish, mentioned in the Gospel.
Pythagoras commanded his scholars to be silent five years. Nero, for
fiue-yeers-space, There are five doleful mysteries; The prayer Christ made in
the garden, The scourging of our blessed Savior, The crowning him with thorns,
The carrying his own cross, The crucifying his blessed body.
was the best of other Emperors: after five years expiration, he becam the
worst of all others. There be five Senses. There be five capital Workmen as
touching knowledge, cited by Ammonius a Christian Philosopher; The mind,
discourse, opinion, imagination, sense: which are called the first and most
potent Principles of Orphicall Philosophy. There are five parts of physic.
One entreats as touching the nature of man, and his constitution, called
(...). The second conserueth health, and foreseeth lest the body should fall
into any malady, called (...). The third in quireth causes, and their diverse
symptoms, called (...). The fourth contains knowledge of things past, the
consideration of things present, the fore telling of things to come, called
(...). The last, wherein the order of curing is showed, called (...). There are
five glorious mysteries;
There were five famous in the Art of physic, before Hippocrates time; Apollo,
AEsculapius, Chiron, Podalirius and Machaon, sons of AEsculapius. The
resurrection of our Lord, The ascension of our Savior, The descending of the
holy Ghost, The assumption of our lady, The crowning of our Lady.
A Physician ought to behave himself wisely in five things; In his charge,
toward his Patient, toward himself, toward the standers-by, toward his
fellow-physicians, according to the counsel of Cardan. There be five things
belonging to the Art military; Choice of young men, exercise, fortifying of
castles and trenches, munition, instruction of the Camp: whereto if you put
five more, it cannot choose but be complete; Oppugnation, propugnation,
stratagems, fortification, ambushes. Every corporeal nature has his seat five
manner of ways; In the understanding, in the mind, There are five kinds of
waters mentioned in holy Scriptures; The waters of Ralim, most swift; the
waters of Jordan, troubled; the waters of Bethleem, standing; the waters of
Marah, bitter; the waters of Siloe, sour. Romans 5.
in the creature, in heaven, below the Moon. He that will understand the
meaning of Mercury's soporiferous Rod, must be capable of five things taught
among those Platonicks; How that the soul lives a contemplative life,
according to Saturn; politic and practick, according to Jupiter; angry and
ambitious, according to Mars; concupiscible and voluptuous, according to Venus;
vegetable and stupidous, according to Mercury. He must also be acquainted with
these five, frequent in Plato's Works; Eus, idean, alterum, status, motus,
interpreted at large by Ficinus.

Our election stands firm unto us for five special reasons following: The
first is the everlasting and immutable decree of God before the world was
created, made as touching the liberation and reconciliation of all mankind.
The second is the opening of this decree, by his promise made unto Adam,
Abraham, Romans 11
and the rest of the Patriarchs, as touching the benediction to come. The third
is the consideration of the will of God, teuealed unto us by his promise. The
fourth is the commandment of God from heaven, that we should believe in his
Son, John 6 Romans 8 1 Cor. 5 1 These. 2 Ficinus holds, there be five kind of
lights; In God, in Angels, in reason, in the spirit, in the body.
out of these words: This is my well-beloued Son; and so forth. The last is
the holy Ghost, confirming and making us sure, that we are the chosen sons of
God. The holy Trinity includes in his essence five things; Unity, simplicity,
immensity, eternity, in commutability; but, holding that God is Immensus, I
mean not, that there is in him any quantity of dimension, but of virtue: for,
it is a Theological Rule, which will overthrow their Popish real presence;
Non est vbique Deus mole. corporis, sed prasentia Maiestatis. And according to
this immensity, God is infinite, incomprehensible, There are five things which
we ought not ^o put confidence in; 1 Beauty, which is frail; 2 Health, which
is uncertain; 3 Life, which is short; 4 Honor, which is transitory; 5 Pleasure,
which is mixed with sorrow.

incircumscriptible, eternal, unchangeable, to make up the fifth Number. There
be five notions of God; Paternity, Filiation, procession, innascibility, common
spiration. Whatsoever man can think-vpon five manner of ways, God is. He is
the most perfect, most worthy, most noble, most excellent, most mighty. He
that will dispose the conception of his mind to others by way of teaching,
must do it five manner of ways. First, he must prosecute that matter or
subject he takes in hand. Secondly, he must clearly and perspicuously
propound it to his hearers. Thirdly, he must garnish it with some ornaments of
discourse, fitting time and place. Fourthly, he must confute that which is
objected in his way. Fifthly, he must reduce all things into order by an apt
kind of partition, repetition, epitomizing, doing all thing to that end, that
he may find his hearers attentive, obtaining their benevolence, now and then
from the persons, now and then from the things themselves. A Theologist, There
are five things which often deceive (...) 1 Wisdom which is small; 2 Virtue
which is weak; 3 Will which is distorted; 4 Affection which is turbulent; 5
Reason which is unbridled. Romans 12. ver. 1. Mathematicas disciplotas multi
Sancti nesciunt quidem: and qui sciunt cas, sancti non sunt. Aug.

dealing with an adversary, must be able to distinguish five manner of ways;
By Allegoties, Anagogies, Translations, Tropologies, History.

There be five things inseparable: Heaven and earth; earth, and that which we
call Inane; hell and darkness; the Spirit of God, and waters; light, and our
bodies. The earth, void of it self, concludes domestical darkness: then it is
joined next unto light; by light, unto the heaven; by heaven, to the spiritual
substance: now, put thereto God, which is the end and beginning of all things,
one, omnipotent, without beginning, without quantity, form and number; and who
will not admire this fifth Number? All arts, all kind of knowledge whatsoever,
according to the opinion of the Ancients, is included in those five Books of
Moses. All antiquity holds, that, from the virtues of five things, admirable
emploiments have been effected; By prayer, fasting, alms-deeds, repentance, a
chaste mind. And this is meant by Saint Paul; where he says, Exhibiting our
bodies as a sweet-swelling sacrifice to GOD, holy, pleasing, rational,
obsequious, and so forth. Perfection of virtue consists in five; Sufficiency,
order, religion, prelation, security. The Mathematics is a dangerous study for
five respects. It is no true science: it leads not to felicity: it destroies
the fundaments of natural Philosophy: it is full of obscurity: There are five
thing ne^e^sary ^o a ^^^^ne. (...) he must not (...) igno^am of (...)
Pi^^^ples. ^^^^ondly, he (...) must divide (...) the (...) interpret (...) ^on,
^^y, he (...) the ^^^^monies of Scripture, without perverting them, Lastly the
must reconcile those places that seem contradictory. Hypertus de studio,
Theologico.
it is full of scurity: it hinders Theology. Wherefore one writes, Nihil
magis nocivum Theologo, quam frequens and assidua in Mathematicis Euclidis
exercitatio. All kind of sounds in music have five differences; Sharpnes,
gravity, space, Systeme, region of the voice: whereto add Indole or sense,
called in Greek (...) and there will be nothing wanting. Pronunciation
consists of five; voice, countenance, gesture, comeliness, and habit of the
mouth. The devil an noieth mankind five manner of ways; Outwardly, by
hurting the body, as in Job; inwardly, as those that are possessed, or lie in a
trance, by impression of idols or imaginations, suggesting evil; by tempting
the body to sin through exterior senses; lastly, by deceiving, through
objection of false forms. For, he persuades good, through obetext of evil:
he suggesteth evil, under show of good. he disswadeth good, prayer, deeds of
charity, for to avoid the crime of vain glory. He disswadeth the less evil,
to bring a man by despair unto the greater. Lucifor fell from his first
dignity, for these five causes following. First, being placed in the
highermost hierarchy, he was not content with his own proper state. Secondly,
the consideration of his first happiness blinded him. Thirdly, because he
overcame the first man by tempting, it was needful he should be overcome by
the second. Fourthly, he loved himself, and his own private good, more than
Him that created him. Last of all, he thought scorn, that any should be equal
with him.

There be five kinds of garments, according to Vives; Profitable, There be
five excellent qualities in an horse, which he borrows from five sundry
beasts. 1 Quicknes or nimblenes from the Hare* 2 Ready sight and a fair
hanging tail, from the Fox. 3 That he eat his meat well, from the Wolf. 4
That he hold his hair, and have strong hoofes and posterns, from the Ass. 5
That he love to be bridled by his master, from a woman under the comn and of
her husband. Epid l. 6. Actius l. 1. de notis affec. c. 4.

precious, light, neat, vain. There are five hard works to be done; To play
the Commander in the Field, to pray, to preach in the Pulpit, to teach in a
school to bring forth a child. A staff has five properties: It is comely in
the hand of a man: it keeps old men from falling: it directs a man's steps:
it is a terror to dogs: being blind, it leads the blind. There, be five
kinds of slaves; The staff of bread, mentioned in Scripture; the staff of
old age; Alexes staff; Crosiers staff; a staff of reed, wherewith Christ was
mocked by the Jews, To the curing of an Ague, five things are required; first,
to move the belly; secondly, to cut a vein; thirdly, to prepare the matter;
fourthly, to purge; last of all, to comfort the members, especially the heart.
There are five giants mentioned in Scripture; Nephan, Rephaijm, Anakim, Og,
Goliath. Five others are mentioned in Homer and Virgil; Mars, Tityus, Antaus,
Turnus, Atlas. The disease we call the Epilepsie, has five proper Epithetons.
It is called by Plynie, Sontick; by Celius, Rodignie Lunatic; by Apuleius,
divine; by Hippocrates, holy; by Aristotle, Herculean or invincible. Some will
have it so called, because Hercules was melancholic: but Galen and others hold
this opinion, that it borrowed his name from Hercules, because it is immovable
and irresistible; as hard to be ouermastered, as to pluck Hercules club out of
his fist. There are five things rise among those Paracelsians, which they call
as Elements; Elementa, matrices, agri, ventriculi, minerae, treated of by
Quercetanus, an excellent Hermetick and Spagyrick. There are five kind of
Amulets, or preservatives, good against the Epilepsie; The seed of Piony, or
the root hanged about the neck, Coral, the green lasper-stone, the hoof of
a certain beast like to a fallow Dear, the Heraclean stone. Among the
Ancients there were five kinds of wine that did work marvelous effects; The
Heraclean, which caused men to be mad; Thasian, which caused sleep; Arcadian,
which made women fruitful; Regio deligenda est vbi arbores ^ascuntur multa,
ricta, non autem ex latere vno cad nies. copiesae, magnae vberes fructibus, vbi
nascuntur homines pulchrs bonae indol^^i humani. Al. lib. 1. cap. 5.
Trazenian, which caused them to be barren; Lycian, which stopped the belly.
There be five things needful to be considered of him who means to build an
house; Site, Element, air, water, wood; From the site, if the air be
wholesome; from the element, if the region be not too hot nor cold; from the
air, if it be not seated among Fennes, or marshes; from the water, if it
stand far from the sea, looking toward the North; from the wood, if it has
store of Oak or other timber apt for building.

CHAP. VIII. SIX.
THe Number of six is every way full, perfect, divine, and that from the
opinion of the Egyptians; who, from the nerves of the fingers proceeding from
the heart complicated together, (especially the finger next the least;
whereupon rings have been usually fixed) do hold, that this Number is
represented. Macro. Satur. lib. 7. cap. 13.
Howsoever, it cannot choose but be a Number of multiplications, power, and
veneration; seeing, of all the Numbers which are less then ten, it
consists of his own parts: For, it includes a medietie, a third and sixth
part; and he is the third medietie, the third part of two, the sixth part of
one: all which, jointly or severally, make but six in the whole. He has
other tokens of venerable estimation, because it is a Theological Number,
bearing the type of the worlds creation. Now, the sixth dayes-worke, according
to some Theologists, is no otherwise then a representation of the Trisagium,
called the Trinity: which some interpret out of these words in the Psalm;
Dies dici eructat verbum, et nox nocti indicat scientiam. And again, according
to the Septuagint translation; In capite libri scriptum est de me. Whosoever
has expounded that concerning the sixth dayes-worke, has not taught amiss, if
we dare believe Nicetas Choniates. For, the head and beginning of that Book,
that is, of the whole Scripture divinely inspired unto us (to speak with Saint
Paul) is the sixth daies-work figured to us by this Number; by which the whole
Fabric of the world was created. From whose greatness and superexcellencie, the
Creator is worthily to be praised and adored. But some Divines will auerre,
that God made not the world in six distinct days (as some imagine) but in one
day, distinctly representing six several things. I answer, that this Text of
Scripture, whereon these men seem so much to build, must not be understood so,
as that we must take the days according as they note the distinction of
times: for, God (as I have often proved in this discourse) had no need of time,
days, nor years, to finish his begun work; but according to the works of
perfection, which is signified and completed by the Number of six, orderly
distributed into so many several and limited parts. For, whether he made it in
six days, according to hourly or daily computation, or framed it all in one
day, dividing his work into six parts, it is all one for the venerable esteem
and antiquity of the sixth Number: It is enough for us to know, that in the
creation of the world, completed in six parts, or six whole days, He^ ordered
all things in measure, weight, and number, Wisd. c. 11. v. 17
according to that divine Oracle of Solomon. He that is desirous to know^ one
as touching this divine. Number, and for what cause God made the world in 6
days, and rested the seventh, let him read Pious his Heptaplus; where he
may feed his understanding with unspeakable mysteries never understood before.
Or if he mean to reason soundly or theologically as touching such hie and
excellent points; let him peruse Zanchins de optr^us Dei, or Caluins exposition
upon Genesis. We mean to go to the extendure of this Number.

The ages of the world are divided into 6. Antichrist prevailed not much
against the Church of God in those first six hundred years after the passion
of Christ. So that a reverend Pastor of Gods Church has written, The
Protestants have six hundred years of light on their side; the Rapists, B. It
wells Reply against H.
a thousand years of darkness. Some hold, that as the world was created in 6
days: so it shall continue 6 thousand years. The art we call mechanic, is
divided into two, but her parts consist in 6. The one is rational, including
Numbers, measures, the positure of stars, reasons of nature, dimensions of
longitude and altitude, figures. The other is chirurgick, consisting of 6;
Manganarie, Mechane poatick, Organopoetick. Thaamaturgick, centrobarick,
Scheropeick, and that of Archimedes, praised by Claudium in his verses. God
shows unto man the knowledge of future things, 6 manner of ways; By dreams,
birds, wonders, intestines of beasts, spirits, Sibilles.

That part of Astronomy called. Calculatorie, con^eyneth 6 kinds; Exposition
of elements composition, ablation, multiplication, partition, the invention of
the quadrate Later. Every narration consists of 6 elements; The person,
cause, place, time, matter, the thing it self. All kind of works done in this
life, are 6 in number. The first are those whose beginnings are called
voluntary habituous, consisting in natural things done from the commandment
of God; as, To plant, sow, eat, drink, to take physic, and so forth. The
second are called absolute voluntary; as, All kind of operations, virtuous,
vicious, scientificous, done with deliberation. The third are voluntary,
standing in need of extrinsecall instruments; as, To build, dwell, clothe, and
such like. The fourth, which to their own will require the will of some other;
as, To contract matrimony, to join friendship, to request a thing, to speak to
Princes, to sit in judgment. The fifth are such as their ends are fortuitous or
casual; as, Playing, hunting, following of a prisoner, buying, selling,
putting out money to usury. The last are impulsive; as, a servant to do his
masters business; a scholar to be constrained to school; a hangman, to
execute his office. There be 6 draughts in beer or wine; some, allowed; others,
disallowed. The first is drunk for health; the second, for pleasure; the third,
to get sleep; the fourth is drunkenness; the fifth is clamor and noise: the
last is madness or fury, according to the Poet;

Quod si in vas parvum vis vinum fundere maguum,
Saepe potator is mor gitur ingenium.
Every disease kills a man for 6 respects; By altering the course of nature,
by augmenting it self, by corrupting the principal parts, by extinguishing the
heat, by destroying the bodies food or nutriment. Therefore it is said by
Physicians, that a man never dies, Cardan. lib. de art curandi parua.
but when the moisture of the heart is consumed. For, as one of those
Spagyricks writes, Death is no other than the separation, divulsion and
consumption of the spirit, and radical balsam of the life of man; Querce.
tetras. grauis. affec. c. 10
by which only the soul is linked to the body.

There be six humidous things in our body, especially within the veins and
arteries; Blood, phlegm, choler yellow and black, whey, air. Original of
diseases, according to the opinion of the Paracelsians, comes six manner of
ways; From excrementitious exhalations in the body, from that we call
Cacochymie, from a vicious temperament, from old age, from the time or coldness
of the region, from an obstructions kind of feeding. The herb called Seen,
helps maruellously to the curing of 6 pestilent diseases; The pthisick, the
pain in the head, scabs, pustles, itch, the falling Evil. There are 6 famous
Writers, who have employed their wits in the knowledge of Herbals; M. Cate,
Dioscorides, Columella, Pliny, Mosna, Palladius: to whom if you add a later
Writer, that is, Arnold^s de nona Villa, you need not to seek after any other
Herbalist. All kind of purging fruit trees ought to have 6 kind of properties
belonging to them, according to the counsel of Mizaldus an excellent
Hortensian. They must bear sweet and generous fruits: they must not grow too
tall, but somewhat near to the ground: they must not exceed three years of
growth: they must be planted in a sweet and wholesome air, in a fat and
luxurious ground; last of all, in a place defensive, that is, free from the
injury of men and cattle. Some call this Vinum Alkei^ gicum.
That wine which Mizaldus calls Haliacab^us, has 6 notable virtues: It
helps the pain of the reins: it is good against the pissing of blood, the
retention of urine, the stone-collick, the extraction of the stone out of the
bladder, the strangurie. Yea, the same Author does so extol the virtues
thereof, that it is almost incredible which he writes. Lib. de vini^ medicatis.
The method for the curing of the falling Evil, consists of 6 rules, handled
at large by Quercetanus in a peculiar discourse as touching this malady. A
traveler must eschew these 6 things following; Poison, pride, papistry, women,
wine, and wilfulness, beginning with a letter.

CHAP. IX. SEVEN.
THis Number is the most excellent of all others: and there are many reasons,
many notable opinions among learned men to prove his excellency. First, it
neither begettes, nor is begotten, Lib. de mundi ^pifici^.
according to the saying of Philo. Some Numbers indeed, within the compass of
ten, beget, but are not begotten, and that is the vnarie. Others are
begotten, but begot not (...) as, the octonarie. Some beget, and are begotten;
as, the quaternarie. Only the septenarie, having a prerogative above them all,
neither begets, nor is begotten. This is his first diulnity or perfection.
Secondly, this is an harmonicall Number, and (as I may term it) the well and
fountain of that fair and lovely Digramma, because it includes within it
self all manner of harmony, Diatessaron, Diaponte, Diapason; all kind of
proportions, Arithmeticall, Geometrical, Musical. Thirdly, it is a
Theological Number, consisting of perfection, There are seven remedics or
preparatiues against the sin of sensuality. 1 To fly th^occasions of si^. 2. To
banish them. 3 To pray most feru^ntly to God-for help. 4 To give affliction to
thy body, as fasting, watching, discipline. 5 To think of death. 6 To make
confession. 7 To think, God does see thee.

called by some, (...), because in the seventh day, God ceasing from his work,
all things were made perfect. It is the Number of rest therefore called by
some. It is the number of s^nctification, because Moses commanded the same most
venerably to be observed of the Israelites. It is the number of revenge, the
number of repentance, the number of beatitude expressed by the Poet, O terque
quaterque beati! Lastly, it is the number of the Psalms of penitence. Fourthly,
because of his compositure. For, it is compounded of one, and 6; two and five,
or three and four. Now every one of these being excellent of themselves (as
has been remonstrated) how can this Number be but far more excellent,
consisting of them all, and participating as it were of all their excellent
virtues? I let pass many mo reasons cited by Macrobius, Phylo, and others, to
prove his excellency, contenting my self with a few of the better sort.
Bythag^^as calls this Number, Vinculum humana vitae; Cicero, rerum omnium
modum, as that it should link and tie all things together by an indissoluble
knot or confederacy. If I would run over all that has been written
touching his excelleneie, by ancient writers, I should scarce comprehend them
in one volume. Being therefore the most great, most excellent, most divine,
most perfect of all others, his extendure must needs be answerable to the
rest. There be seven Wonders of the world, seven Wife men of Greece, seven
cities contended for the bones of Homer. There be seven S^p^^^on^, the greater
and lesser made in the heavens: the heaven is engyrted with seven circles:
there be seven erraticall Stars. That which we call Ersa mayor, is compassed
with seven Stars: the assembly of Pleiades are composed of seven Stars:
seven of them are seen: there be seven changes of voices, seven physical
and natural mouings: seven vocals among the Grecians. Some will have the
golden age to consist of seven: there be seven doors of Nilus, seven kind of
metals: all the life of man, from his child hood to his decrepite age, is
divided into seven. The first is under Mercuri^, the second under Venus, the
third under Mars, the fourth under Jupiter, the fist under Saturn; over the
other two, Sol and Luxa; have equal predomination, as they have over all the
rest.

This Number is often mentioned in Scripture. God denounces seven punishments
in Leuiticus against his people. c. 26. v. 18.
David likeneth the Word of God to silver tried in a furnace, which is fined
seven fold. Psalm. 12.8. c. 9. v. 1.
Solomon says in his Proverbs that wisdom has built her house, and set seven
pillars under to support it. The Prophet Esaias in diverse places makes mention
of seven gifts or gracious workings of the holy Ghost. Mary Magdalen was
possessed with seven diuela. And in the Apocalypse we find this Number more
frequent, then in any other place of Scripture. Seven Churches of Asia, seven
Candlesticks, seven Stars, seven Angels, seven Seals, seven Trumpets, seven
Plagues, seven Vialles; of which more shall be said in the latter part of this
discourse: But we will proceed to others. It is said, that the herb called
Heptaphyllum, borrowing his name from the seventh Number, by a secret in stinct
in nature, resists any kind of poison whatsoever. There be seven Planets,
having diversities and contrarieties of operations. To every one of these
Planets there be proper and peculiar countries assigned. To Saturn, is
appointed B^nare, Saxony, Stiria, Romandiola, Rauenna, Constance, Ingolstade,
Spain, part of Italy, Jews and the Mores. To Jupiter, Babylon, Persia,
Collen, called Agrippine, Vngarie, and part of France. To Mars, the North part
of Italy, Germany, England, Saurematia, Getulia, Longobardia, Gothland, Padua,
Ferrara, Cracouia. To Venus, Arabia, Austria, the higher, Campania, Vienna,
Augusta, Vindelicorum, delicorum, Polonia the greater, Sena, the Helu^tians and
Thuregians. To Mercury, Greece, Egypt, I^landers, Paris, Vratislaue, Vi^una
in Pannonia. The other two luminaries, because they are those general
significators and dominators of the whole Universe (as erst was said) bear
rule in each Planetatian province; and therefore, from the opinion of those
Ancients, there is no certain place assigned them. Besides these seven
Planets, there be seven clymates assigned to them and their signs, treated of
by our Astrologians. But some will say, that from the Equatarie circle, unto
that place where the day is longest, there be 24 hours, 48 parallells;
therefore there must be 24 clymates correspondent. I answer with the solution
of Mizaldus, that the position and distribution of those Ancients (yea, of
Ptolomy the chiefest among them) is very imperfect; and therefore we ought to
believe our modern Writers before the other, especially in the site of the
earth, motion of Stars, descriptions of countries, according to Ptolomy
himself, alleged by that excellent scholar Ioachim Vadian, in his
commentaries upon Pomponius Mola. And not only in Astrology, but in the Art
of Physic this rule must take place. Ex cita. Joseph. Querceta.
So that I find the saying of Hippocrates most true; Medicinam videlicet
noneam esse ass^ontam perfectionem, eui nihil addipossit: s^d in qua semper
velaliquid modo reprehendi, mode corrigi, modo addisci qu^at. As to every one
of those Planets me^tiond before, peculiar countries are assigned, according to
their several qualities: so by every one of these Planets, several virtues
are signified; By Saturn, high contemplation, judgment, a firm and resolute
purpose; By Jupiter, prudence, temperance, piety, justice; By Mars, truth,
fortitude, heat, and force of doing; By Sol, counsel, charity, which is the
Queen of all virtues; By Venus, hope, order, and motion of desire; By
Mercury, faith, and dilucidous ratiocination; By Luna, pacificous consonancie,
and moderate temperancie. So likewise diverse and several vices are signified
by them. Saturn signifies melancholy, sadness, tediousnes; Jupiter,
covetousness and tyranny; Mars, anger, arrogancy, revenge; Sol, pride,
ambition; Venus, concupiscence, lust, lasciuiousnes; Mercury, fraud, cozenage,
lies. Luna inclines us to things directly opposite unto us. There be seven
natural things; elements, commixtion, humors, parts, faculties, actions,
spirits; handled at large by Hippocrates and Galen.

There be seven parts of the soul, wherein reason, anger, desire, take up
their lodging; Acuminie, wit, diligence, counsel, reason, wisdom, experience.
All the whole body of the civil Law is contained in these seven Articles
following. The first handles those things the Greeks call (...); the second,
judgments; the third, things themselves; the fourth, Hypothekes; the fifth,
what are the nature of Testaments, and such things as are testamentarie: in the
sixth are diverse titles as touching the possession of goods: the last
comprehends interdictions, exceptions, actions, procrastinations of time,
stipulations, municipall titles, significations of words, rules of the Law,
with many other things, which for breuities sake I must let pass. The Canon
Law, derived from the other, and maintained by the Pope at this day, may be
divided into as many. There be seven similitudes of Angels. They are immortal,
invisible, indissoluble, simple, discreted in persons, incommutable,
incommunicable to any other nature. They are also impassible, rational, happy,
foretellers of things to come, gouerners of the world: they take upon them
ayerious bodies, when they are commanded: they abide in those heavenly
mansions. The air has seven properties. It is a vital spirit: it penetrateth
every living thing: it gives life and consistencie to all creatures: it
binds, moves, fills, and refreshes all things whatsoever. There may be
seven natural reasons given as touching earthquakes; The air, fire, water,
wind, some subterraneous vapor, some concauitie in the earth, some downfall.
There be seven parts of harmonicall music; Sounds, spaces, Systemes, kinds,
mutations, modulations, concent. That which we call intellectual music,
conteyneth seven also; Mind, imagination, memory, cogitation, opinion, reason,
knowledge, answerable to the other. The art called Geodesia, Geodesia prunu^
Geometricae exercitationis et actionis est campus.
from whence comes the Geodeticall staff, is comprised in these seven;
Straight, plain, solid, pedature, porrect, constrate, the foot called
quadrate. Pythagoras, going about to make proportions of music, as touching
those celestial orbs, found out an instrument called Heptachorde. This
Heptachorde consisted of seven strings. The first is Hypates, greater then any
of the rest, assigned to Saturn for the slownesse of his motion, and gravity
of his sound. The second is Parhypates, assigned to Jupiter. The third is
Lychanus, taking his name from the finger by which it is strocken, assigned to
Mars. The fourth is Mese, because it is middlemost; attributed to Sol, who
obtains the middle place among those Planets. The fifth is Paramese, as next
to the middle, given to Mercury. The sixth is Paranete, near to the last,
assigned to Venus. The seventh is called Nete, the last in order, attributed to
Luna. Some men perchance will make a doubt, whether such an instrument may be
made by art or no, or whether those higher orbs, so far placed from common view
and understanding, might from such an instrument be lively represented unto us.
But they need not make a scruple as touching this thing, seeing Archimedes,
mentioned in our-first Chapter, did perform a far more illustrious piece of
work-manship. And there was in the time of Angelus Politian, a Florentine,
named Laurentius. who made a mechanical Sphere of that admirable and
stupendous work-manship, Ipis. lib. 4. Epis. 8.
quadrate, after the fashion of a Pyramede, consisting of three cubits in
length, his circle being made of gold, brasle; distinguished by so many
colors, that Politian (who with his eyes did behold the curious work-manship
thereof) has nothing doubted to prefer it before the brazen globe of
Archimedes, See more of illustrious works done by Claudius Gallus in Poss^ vme,
Biblio. Selec. To. 2. cap. 1.
as in the description you may read. Now, if these men, that seem to cast
doubts of every thing they know not, should be acquainted but with the half
of those singularities which the Geometricians and Mathematicians of our time,
beyond the practice of those Ancients, have contrived; I suppose, they would
wonder more. For, to show by art what a clock it is in every several region or
country, according to each several hour of the day; what hour of our day is
made at all times of the year; to measure at an inch the height of the
mountain Caucasus; to make an artificial sail, by whose help the wind
blowing, a governor or a Pilot may direct his ship either on the right side,
or on the left; to make a gallie cut the seas without wind or oars, by a
quadrant astronomicall; to measure the heaven, earth, sea, yea, hell it self:
I think it cannot be done without much wondering. And yet there are several
books written at this day, though not all as yet published, for the
performance of these hie, remote, and impenetrable mysteries, cited by
Possevine and others. ^^blio selec. to. 1. lib. 9. cap. 13.
It is true therefore which one says, Scientia nullum inimicum habet nisi
ignorantem. But to our Numbers again. There were seven sects of the Jews cited
by Niceta; Sadduces, Scribes, Pharisees, Hemerobaptists, Nazarites, Essens,
Herodians, There be seven orbs of the Planets: wherein Plato has erred, by
making the Moon to be sited above the Sun, contrary to the opinion of Ptolomy,
and Regiomontanus; who place the Sun in the midst of those Planets. Now, if
Venus and Mercury were beneath the Sun, as Plato imagines, it would follow,
that the Sun would lose his light, from the density of those bodies. The like
would be found in the interposition of the Moon betwixt the Sun and our sight,
which sauoureth of much absurdity. Though therefore Plato were a great
Philosopher, yet he was but a mean Astrologer. As nature, to the findingout of
those secret treasures hid in the earth, has 7 proper operations, as,
distillatio^s, euaporations, sublimations, exhaltations, circulations,
rectifications, cohobations (portentuous names, me thinks): so our Spagyricks
or Chymicks have as many mo for the right ordering and preparing of their
bituminous, fuliginous, oleaginous, sulphurous, sufflaminous, ebullious,
carbonarious furnaces, to make our Epithetons answerable. Wherefore it is said
by one of them, Io. Querceta. tet^as. grauis a^fect cap. 24.
Non minus baecars suis reuerberatorys surnis indiget, acmonte AEthna, et
perpetuas stammas expirantibus natura. Joseph Castiliensis, one of the best
Rabbines, in his book, called The Garden of Nuttes, gives these seven titles
to hell: Gehenna, the gates of hell, the shadow of death, the well of
destruction, the scumme of darkness, perdition, pit. Wherefore he concludes
thus, Haec captiuitas est, vt peccata noxiorum maneant, vt iustos aqua
comitentur praemia, et iniquos debita sequantur vitiorum tormenta. That
incomparable Secretary of nature, Plynie, writes of a tree that did bear at
one time seven kind of different fruits. One bough carried apples; an other,
nuttes; others, barbaries, grapes, figs, pears, pomegranates: but he was too
good to live long. Baptista Porta, a Neopolitan, in his book touching natural
Magie, describes a tree far beyond the other, He that means to draw the
picture of a Lubber, must observe these 7 properties belonging to him: In
height he must be the proportion of two Pigmies; In breadth, the thicknes of 2
bacon-hogs; Of presumption, a giant; Of power, a gnat. He must be Apishly
witted, Knauishly manered, Crabbedly favored.
and he sticks not to call him the delicacies of the garden. But I dare not
credit him, they are so prodigious things that he writes. In ancient times
they did use an harp consisting of seven tones, called Heptatonon, of which
Terpander a Greek Poet writes in these verses: At nos quadrisonis instantes
saepe camoenis,
Inde nouoseythara heptanon^ celebrabimus hymn^s.


There is a seuenfold Chariot of charity, handled elegantly and succinctly* by
that learned Platonic, Marcilius Ficinus. Epis. lib. 2. There are seven famous
hills about the City of Rome: Capitolinus or Tarpeius, so named from the
Capitole of Jupiter. Palatinus, from Pallantes, Euanders son killed by
Turnus, and buried there. Quirinalis, from Quirinus Romulus, whose Temple
stands there. Auentinus, from Auentine King of Albania. Caelius, from a
Tuscan Captain bearing that name. Viminalis, from a wood of vines growing
there. Exquilinus, from the vessels or fragments of Tributes dispersed in that
place.

CHAP. X. EIGHT.
ALL Numbers, being doubled, must needs be of great efficacy; it being so
almost in every other thing. Therefore this is called a solid Number, being
created from duplication of four; even as four is made of two. Macrobius
likeneth it to Stereon, made after the form of a Die; which is called a square
figure. Four being doubled, and made eight, it makes two quadra-simile^;
which, with their altitude imposed upon them, make a form of a Cube, which is
no other than a solid body. So that the Geometricians do hold, that twice two
make four; and twice four, making eight, make a double solid body; as well as
three times three, which is nine, or three times nine, making 27 in the whole,
do make the other cube a solid body. Wherefore this Number and the seventh
(because they are resembled to perfect and completed men full of years, worthy
to govern a Commonwealth) have been thought worthy, by those Ancients, to make
the soul of the world perfect and correspondent. His extendure is not the
greatest, nor the least.

There be eight Spears allowed by Plato and Aristotle. Macrobius subscribeth
unto them; and he seems to me to gather the excellency of this Number from
those eight. Our later Wits have found out two others, mentioned before. The
last of these, according to the probable opinion of Astrologers, is moved from
the East into the West by a diurnall motion. The ninth, added to those eight,
is volued with the tenth; and by his own motion contrariwise endeavors
toward the ecclyptick line and poles of the Zodiac, which spaceth for an
hundred years together in one degree: and for this cause he is called stern
and hard to be perceived. The eightth is volued from the South to the North by
his own motion; first, for his unequal; next, for his slow; lastly, for his
swift pase. Other reasons amongst Astronomers I omit. Then be eight punishments
appointed offenders, mentioned by Cicero; Loss, bands, stripes, talion,
ignominy, banishment, death, bondage. Which have some resemblance to that
distinction of hell, used by our Schoolmen: for they hold, that it is taken
two manner of ways. For the punishment: and so devils carry hell about them
still: or for the place of punishment; and so it is taken either for the
punishment of sense or loss, where is darkness without and within, that is,
absence of grace (for, this has always mourning, as the Text says); or for
punishment of sense and loss both together, including darkness without and
within; or for punishment of loss, and not sense, concluding darkness without,
but not the same darkness which priueth us of grace. All these distinctions of
punishment, mentioned before, are proved out of Scripture. The first, out of
Esaias; where he compares the iniquity of men to a potters pot, which is broken
without pity. Cap. 30. ver. 14
The second, out of that place in the Gospel; where it is said, Bind him hand
and foot, Cap. 19. ver. 29 Cap. 18.7.
and let him be cast into utter darkness, etc. The third, out of the Proverbs.
The fourth, out of the Apocalypse. The fifth, out of Esaias 13. The sixth, out of
Matthew 22. The seventh, out of Gregory; where, speaking of hell, he says, Ibi
mors semper vivit, meaning the second death, as it is in the Apocalypse. C. 1.
v. 1.
The eightth, out of the Lamentations of Jeremy. Although that God, in the
Trinity of persons, be of an vnious essence; yet, according to some Divines,
there be many lesser gods (if it be lawful to use this word) as beams issuing
from him. For, those whom the Philosophers call gods of nations, the Hebrew
Rabbines numerations, we Christians call Attributes; which amount to eight in
the whole. That which Orpheus means by Pallas, the same we attribute to GOD for
his wisdom. That which the Philosophers by Mercury, the same we signify by
his understanding. By Saturn, we mean propagation: and S. Paul does not
altogether abhor this word, seeing he alleges Poets for his confirmation.
By Neptune, productiue force. By luno, a secret nature in things. By Venus,
love which comes from God. By Sol and Apollo, we understand in God a life that
continually shines. By Pan, we comprehend in God a reason as touching the
fabric of the whole world, and how that his universal power stretches and
diffuseth it self every where. So that it is thought, that many of those
Heathen Theologists, though they ascribed many names to their gods, yet they
worshipped but one true God: or, at leastwise, we may think them to be but
Apes, following the steps of divinity as near as nature would permit them;
symbolizing with the Christians in many things, if they be well understood
For, calling them gods of nations, or lesser gods, with the Philosophers, we
mean not that they have equal power with God, or that they were to be
worshipped, as our Papists (bending at this day too much to Paganism) will have
their he-gods and she-gods. No; we mean virtues, or certain kind of
operations, as so many celestial radiations or Sunbeams proceeding from that
infinite and universal splendour of wisdom. And this did many of those wiser
and sounder Philosophers think, howsoever they covered their doctrine with a
veil of much darkness and obscurity, lest they should be understood of the
vulgar people. We therefore hold (lest any man should mistake us) that all
divinity comes from God: therefore none but He only ought to be worshipped
with any divine kind of worship. And this, I hope, will stand good both
against Pagan and Papist.

Man has eight properties different from other creatures. He has a long,
broad, and upright body. He follows that which is honest: whereas brute
beasts affect that which nature likes. He temperateth his passions to the rule
of reason. He is elevated about the things of the world, by understanding
alone. He has friendship with all men, according to every degree of
friendship. He is a civil and conjugall creature. By his nature, gentle and
full of humanity. Last of all, he has a perfect instinct both of mirth and
sorrow inspired him. So that it is true which the Abderite says, Magnam
miraculum homo; and again by that admirable modern Philosopher, Vnicuique,
homini impressus, est character ciuinus: cuius vigore possit attingere res
sublim^s and profundas, idcoque, capax est omnis disciplina. According to the
opinion of some Anatomists, there be eight bones in the scull of a man's head.
There be 8 Diapazons or voices in music, according to Ptolomey; Hypodorian,
Hypophrygian, Hypolidian, Dorian, Phrygian, Lydian, Mixolydian,
Hypermixolydian. There be eight nominations belonging to God; Art, reason,
substance, nature, life, sense, intelligence, certitude, discussed by Ficinus
and others, who have interpreted Plato's Works. There are eight things good
cheap in Court; Terrible lies, false news, dishonest women, fained friendship,
continual enmity, doubled malice, vain words, and false hopes. There be eight
small blemishes, for which some men have hardly been taxed. The Athenians
reprehended Simonides, for speaking loud; The Thebans, Paniculus for spetting
much; The Lacedemon, Li^urgus, for stooping; The Romans, their Scipto, for
sleeping, snorting; The Vticens, their Cato, for eating with both jaws; The
enemies of Pompey, for scratching his head with one finger; The Carthaginians,
Hannibal, for going loose with his garments; Sillans, Casar, for going male
cinctus.

CHAP. XI. NINE.
IF by duplication or copulation of Numbers, their powers and virtues must
needs be the stronger, as in the last Chapter was proved; then of necessity it
must fall out so when they are trebeled, containing a certain solidity and
stability in them. So that if a threefold cord can hardly be broken, because
of his united and auxiliarie vigor; then much more these three cords, joined
with six more, are irresistable, according to that of the Philosopher, Vis
vnita fortior. That this Number, from the opinion of Geometricians, carries no
small divinity, has been showed already out of Macrobius, for that his
marvelous triplicity makes a cube or a solid body. Now, every solid body
consists of a threesold dimension, that is, longitude, latitude, and
profundity, which is the perfection or Idea of solidity. So that a solid Number
is as well composed of the unequal, as of the equal quality, especially if
they be doubled or trebbled. As for example: The Geometricians do hold, that
foure-times two, which is eight in the whole, being an equal Number, make a
solid body. Even so three-times three (whose beginning is Monas) and
three-times nine, consisting of an unequal Number, produce a threefold
dimension, which is a solid body. His extendure is as large as some of the
other.

There are nine Muses signified under this word Mucmosune, containing nine
elements in the whole. Whereupon Scaliger calls this a most perfect Number;
Poet. lib. 1. cap. 1.
from the concent of Musicians. But how can this Number, says he, be applied
to musical tones, seeing there are eight kinds of Diupazons, Though Scaliger
followed heerin the opinion! of Ptolomir, by numbering but eight Diapazons, yet
Aristexemus counts 13, which is a greater Number.
not nine? Again, the Ancients erred in this, in that they called this, The
Number of the heavens. For, there were but eight in those days when they
lived: how then could the ninth agree with them? This of Scaliger, by way of
objection, might casily be answered. For, by Scaligers confession, there were
but three Muses at the first: afterward the fourth was added. Then they grew
from four to seven, from seven to nine. And why might it not be so with the
Number of the heavens, seeing Calius Rodignie auerreth, that they were nine at
the first; and afterward, by later invention, they grew to the Number of
ten: even as that instrument called (...), was added to (...) and
Monatessaron, to make the harmony more full and complete? And it may be, that
Coelum Empireum was not numbered for one of them among the Ancients. There be
nine kinds of constitutions out of Galen; One temperate, or mediocrous, in
which all the qualities serve, according to equilibrious proportion; eight are
intemperate: in which, one or two excel the rest; from whence four simples,
that is, hot and cold; four compounds, that is, hot and dry, hot and moist,
cold and dry, cold and moist, are derived. In prescribing of sick persons a
diet, nine things must be considered; Goodness, measure, quality, custom,
Metattron is taken two wares: for Moses Angel, for the secret of the mind.
According to these nine orders of Angels, Ficinus has framed nine orders or
degrees of the Trinity. Epis. lib. 2.
delight, order, time, the hour, and day. There are nine Spheres in the
sensible world, moved from the heaven we call Empireum, which is immovable;
unto which Metattron serves. So there be nine companies of Angels moved by
God, who is Primum mobile, serving him day and night. Some Angels are called
Difformes; and they are personally distinct in their essence: of which, Lucifer
was the greatest, falling the first day in which he was created, according to
the opinion of some Divines. Some are made perfect and blessed after their
conversion, endued with a co-operatin ggrace, wanting their own proper body;
to speak with that notable Schoolman.

There are 9 principal archhereticks, from whence all other proceed;
Basilides, who dreamed, that God was a mind created, called (...), who hold,
that the nature of God came from the substance of souls; Anthromorphites, that
God was the image of a corruptible man; Collobarsus, that there were two gods;
one true; the other called Deus, creator of the world; Simon Magus, that God was
not the Maker of the world; Apelles, that there was one good God; the other
bad, begotten from the other Archoutick, that the God of the Law and Prophets
was not Father unto Christ; Sabellians, that God the Father was borne of the
Virgin Marie, that he was crucified and buried; Mentagisinontes, that the Son
was in the Father, no otherwise then one vessel in another. There be nine
subjects of all living things; God, Angel, Heaven, Man, Imaginatiue,
Sensitive, Vegetative, Elementatiue, and Instrumentatiue. All these have a
threefold scale of understanding, whereby secrets of secrets are discerned; Of
degrees, whereby their aptitude; Of nature, by which secrets with their secrets
of secrets, from an eslentiall kind of collation, are examined and
accommodated. Man has nine co-adjutorie helps from those nine orders of Angels
mentioned before. From the Angels, he is corroborated to be a messenger of the
divine will. From Archangels, to bear rule over beasts, the fishes of the sea,
and birds of the air. From Principalities, he obteineth all manner of
strength. From Virtues, the force or efficacy of strength. These things may be
said to be true, according to a kind of resemblance or imitation, or (as he
says) Atonisiue, but not really or potentially P. Scah, conclusio.
From Powers, he gets help against his enemies. From Dominions, help to
the attainment of his wished end. From Thrones, remembrance of heavenly bliss.
From Cherubins, light of the mind. From Seraphins, perfect order of love and
fervent charity. As touching all these auxiliarie helps, our Schoolman, from
whom I borrowed this Number, concludes thus: In vanum laborant, qui naturali
cursu, et proprus viribus, ad tam alt a contendunt. If we might glue credence
to this learned man's distinction, I do not see but we might better give divine
worship to Gods Angels, than unto any Saint in heaven: For, it is without
question, that great power is given them from God, Math. c. 4. v. 6.
for the preservation of mankind; otherwise the devil could never have cited
Scripture 0198 0 to have tempted Christ in the wilderness, C. 19. v. 10.
how that the Angels had care over him, that he should not dash his foot
against astone. C. 19.7.^.
But in the Apocalypse, from the Angel of God we have an express
commandment, that neither Angels, nor Archangels, nor Thrones, nor
Principalities, ought to be worshipped, but God only; seeing all those Tribes,
all those Hierarchies of Angels, all those Elders, praising God, and singing
Halleluiah, fell down before the Throne of the Lamb, and worshipped him. If
therefore Angels, co helpers and coadiutors to man, are not to be prayed unto;
much less any saint of Heaven: who though they enjoy a place not much inferior
to those Angels, and are made fellow heirs with Christ in one and the
selfsame Kingdom, yet this must be imputed to Christ, not to their own
righteousness; being sometimes men on earth as we are, subject to the like
infirmities, as we be; and so shall remain, until Christ, with his glorious
mantle of righteousness, shall cover our unrighteousness. Therefore such manner
of Numbers, giving so much to Angels, whereby the least jot of Gods glory,
dominion, orpower, may seem to be empeached, ought warily and discreetly to
be read. I know, our School-man had these and such like from Denuis Areopagite;
who writes so of these Angelical Orders, as though he were dwelling among
them: but, by his leave, he writes many things at random; some others he
dreameth; yea, the best he writes touching those hierarchies, are but bare
conjectures; and those so childish, frivolous, paradoxicall, as lever thought
it mere tediousnes and cutiosity to read them. This I thought good to annex
by way of a Caveat, lest any man, through over much curiosity or simplicity,
might be beguiled.

There be ninethings which in the soul cannot disagree; A Number moving it
self, that which we call (...), harmony, spirit, light, Atoms, fire, air,
earth. As of Angels: so there be nine orders of devils. The first are called
false gods: for, they will be worshipped as Gods; looking for sacrifices and
adorations: whose Prince is Be^zebub. The second are those spirits of lies,
spoken of by Saint Paul, who are addicted to Oracles, and by their
enchantments, delusions, predictions, and diuinations, deceive the people;
whose Prince is Artertera. In our books against Antichrist and his members, I
have counted the Pope for one of this number, and I have cited Bernard for mine
authority^ who calls Antichrist, The Meridian Devil. The third are those
vessels of iniquity or wrath, the inuentors of all manner of wickedness and
evil arts: Belial is their Prince. The fourth are the reuengers of
wickedness; whose Prince is Asmodeus. The fist are those Prestigiators, who
fain miracles, and seduce men under color of false superstition: Satan is
their Prince. If I were not to be thought uncharitable, I should place our
Jesuits in this rank. The sixth are those aerie Spirits, who send forth
thunder, lightning, and tempests, corrupting the elements, causing pestilences,
and other direful maladies: their Prince is Meririm. The seventh are Furies,
sowers of discord, wars, vprores, depopulations: their Prince is Abadon or
Apollion, mentioned in the Apocalypse. The eightth are slanderers and
detracters, messengers and explorators of strange news; whose Prince is
Astaroth. The last are tempters, whereof one is appointed to every man; whose
Prince is Mammon. To conclude of all these, there is neuer-a-one good; and, as
One notes, Nullum est malum quod penetrare non audeant, nullum bonum quod
faciant.

There are nine holes or cauernacles in man's body, whereby the natural parts
perform their duty, according to their temperature; handled at large by our
Anatomists. Johannes Franciseus Picus, nephew to John Picus Earl of Mirandula,
has written nine worthy Books against false Astrology, Chiromancie,
Geomancie, Sooth-saying, Magic, Divination; whose contents you may read in
Posseuine, Bib^soselec. To. 2. Cap. 3.

CHAP. XII. TEN.
WE are comne at length to the Number of all perfection; within whose compass
or center all other numbers consist, and without whom nothing seems to carry
the type of perfection. Pythagoras calls it the receptacle and production of
all things, for that, by a collectiue kind of progression, either it makes
other Numbers the more perfect, included within it; or, joined with others, it
makes his own perfection the greater. It is a Number (without question) of
admirable power and virtue, especially in that we call formal Arithmetic,
being chiefest among those sphearicall numbers. From the unity, dualty,
ternary, and that which is called Tetrac'ys, arises his compontion. For that,
being originally divided from his omnipotent power, proceeding to the Art
energicall, concludes ten. Now, the quinarre being his moitie, standing in the
place of Signifer, conteyneth on his right side the next highermost Number,
which is six; and on the left, the next lowermost Number, which is four:
either, ascending or descending, conjoined together, just ten is made in the
whole. And being backwards reduced into one (wherein lies his excellency) ten
is made again: which, numbered unto twenty, make an unity; and so passing to an
hundred, a thousand, and upwards. Therefore the Greeks note ten with the letter
Iota; the Hebrews, by a punct: which signs, notwithstanding, both to Barbarous
and Latins, represent a simple kind of unity; whereof Pythagoras Symbol was
framed, often mentioned in this discourse. His extendure stretches large.

Plato concheth all his moral Philosophy in ten Books, touching the framing of
a Commonwealth.
There be ten Commandments given us from God; three as touching the first
Table, seven concerning the second: 0314 0 wherein is redargued the insolency
of Papists; who, by putting out of one, for their better confirmation of
images, and wrong-displacing of another, have gone about to mar this golden
chain of unity, which God himself has linked together with a knot of
inviolable and indissoluble confederacy. Whom therefore GOD has put together,
let no man put asunder. There be ten Orbs or Sphcars; three greater, seven
lesser. All these move saving Empireum, which is the Seat of GOD himself.
Under Chrystalline, we understand that part of the first matter, which
(according to Aristotle) is divided into 2 Orbs, the highest being called
Primum Mobile. This is swift with his motion, being of an influxiue virtue as
touching things inferior. The firmament has many of the others properties. It
is called the diuisiue or partition of waters, gloriously arraied and
picturated with stars. There be ten beginnings or elements belonging to
symbolicall Philosophy, called of some, The steps of a ladder; by which a man
may comprehend the knowledge of all things, whether they consist in true
understanding, sense, science, faith, from the greatest unto the least. These
contain diverse kinds of workmanship, according to the division of those
learned Rabbines. The first is the mind of man; than the which, nothing can be
found more divine: By those ten Sephiroths, are meant those 10 scales of
perfection.
for, as God in the greater world; so the mind of man among those ten
Sephiroths bears the principality. Those ancient Jewish Rabbines speak much
of these scales, calling them by the name of generations or numerations. The
second is man himself, begotten from the miracles of nature, to^ speak with
Hermes: others call him The universal restoration of mankind after his first
Fall, a little God, the image of the Deity, an intelliger of divine mysteries,
an Angel on earth, a Citizen of heaven, with many other excellent
appellations. The third is a reception of our first father Adam and his
posterity to the College of Prophets, continued by a kind of succession or
tradition, successively one after the other. For, Eve, being taught by Adam of
a Savior to-come, after she had conceived her first son, cried out, I have
found out that man (...), so called in the Hebrew Language: which letters she
had learned before of the Angel, called Metratton. This was Cain (as some
Rabbines interpret) who killed his brother Abel with a trunk of a tree (some
write, a wooden key): for, at that time there was no use of iron. Now some,
either from this wood wherewith Abel was killed, or from the Ark of Noe rather,
do typically understand the suffering of Christ upon the Cross made of wood,
for the salvation of mankind: for, Job says, that Noe did put his trust in
the wood. And that as Adam, by eating of the fruit of the Tree of life, did
take life from himself and his posterity: so by the wood whereon the second
Adam was crucified, it should be restored again. The fourth consists
altogether about the parts of symbolical Philosophy, which the Rabbines call
Anagogicall: of which you may read enough in Cap^i^, Picus, and Galatinus. The
first is as touching those two places; Paradise and Hell: for, they all hold,
that there is a twofold place appointed unto man for his twofold condition and
reward; corporal and spiritual. The one is called An illuminating
speculation, that is, vivificating: the Schoolmen call it An intuitiue
knowledge of God; which accompanies the soul separated from the body by the
light of glory; which, to them that earnestly seek after heavenly things, is
only beatificous. The other contains an illuminating kind of vision, but no
contemplation; which is made by Species connaturall, and is not accounted
blessed. The one is heavenly; the other, terrestrial. The Rabbines hold,
especially Raban Gernudensis on Exodus, that a man shall never be made capable
of the first intuition, before the soul is separated from the body. If at any
time, say they, GOD be said to be seen of man, that is, with any corporeal
sense, it is done by an Angel, and not otherwise. It seems, that these
Rabbines, maintaining this doctrine of a twofold place, knew nothing of a
third, which is their Popish Purgatory. They must therefore go to Plato and his
Followers for their supposed Purgatory, or else it will not be found in rerum
natura. The sixth is concerning the communication of the world: for, man being
called (...), and that great sensible world, communicate both together in
Metratton; which is no other than the agent intellect of the first Mouer; one
with the heavenly nature, as being inferior; and with the Angelical nature,
as being superior. Now, the supreme world, with that third incomparable and
super-supreme, communicate together in the soul of Messihas, as being an
essence between them both, consociable with the Angelical and divine world.
Neither does the soul of (...) and (...) differ, but that the one is the Well
of living waters; the other, the river of life. Hence comes it, that there is a
corporeal world; which, first, is composed of the heavens, and heavenly
bodies; secondly, of the elements, and things elementary; thirdly, of the
nature of man, and of singular men, which is man, the lesser world; which
being animated, is illustrated with his own proper mind, which is called
Metratton. Now, the supreme world consists of separated intelligences, full
of Species and forms, including soluted minds and Angels: of those Symbolists
it is called, Idea ideata omnium vitarum; unto which is referred all kind of
individual vitality, specificous or generificous. The third is of the Deity,
which is made of that which they call Seraphin. In Deuteronomy he is called
Thrice holy. Of this world, Rab Hamai, in his Book of speculation, writes
thus: Hic itaque tertius mundus in aternum and vltra extenditur, nec concavus,
nec convexus, nec carinatus, nec superficiem habens. The seventh is as touching
the Sabbath, which is the mystery of the living God, and symbol of the higher
world, where all kind of labor cease: whose breach is forbidden us by a
twofold prohibition in the Law; First, in Deuteronomie, Obserua diem Sabbati;
C. 5. v. 12. C. 20. v. 8.
the next, in Exodus; Remember, that thou keep holy the Sabbath Day; the one,
as touching the inferior world; the other, belonging to the superior: the one
affirmatively; the other negatiuely, according to that distinction mentioned in
our fourth Chapter going before. The eightth is to be understood of those
fifty gates of intelligences, committed all to Moses, save one; and of those
admirable paths of wisdom, wherein all the divine Law is comprehended, and all
kind of science, whether it be literal, anagogicall, verbal, arithmeticall,
geometrical, harmonicall. Of these, more shall be said when we come to the
fiftith Number. The ninth is wholly occupied about Symboles of Angels. For, as
one of their Rabbines writes, Look what tongues our mind^s have in spirit and
verity, the same tongues have Angels. And as those divine Spirits speak with
the tongues of Angels: so do the spirits of men hearken to the ears of the
mind. This Rabbinicall doctrine must be wisely read, and with cautelous
circumspection. For, by this we must not allow of familiar Spirits (called
Geny or Lares, by those Platonicks) See more as touching this point, out of S.
Ierom, unfolding these words in the Gospel: Dico vobis, quod Angeli eorum in
coelis semper vident faciem patris mei.
ministering us such things as we are to speak: for we know, that God speaks
within us, and he is the mouer and searcher of the heart; and if we have any
divine spirit within our bodies or moving our minds to any good action (far
otherwise than the god of Socrates moved him, mentioned by Apuleius), we must
think it to be God himself dwelling within us, opening the closet of our
minds; or else that it is his divine Spirit, evermore speaking unto us in our
prayers and supplications, being ready always in all our temptations and
necessities to assist us. What force the tongues of Angels have; what power
belongs to those blessed and heavenly Spirits; what virtue is in our own
minds or spirits, segregated (as it were) from our bodies by any kind of
Enthusiasme, transe, or vision, to us is unknown, more than God's Word has
revealed unto us. And therefore it is good for us, Not to give too much credit
to such manner of Rabbinicall and hyperbolicall speculations, seeing by the
Word a man cannot warrant them.

There be ten reuengers belonging to the mind of every man, which are indeed
as so many Furies; Ignorance, sadness, inconstancy, desire, injustice, luxury,
envy, fraud, anger, malice; which is somewhat near to that wicked denarie
co-ordination, mentioned by those Hebrews. The intellectual world contains
ten properties or qualities. It is diffusiue, immutable, incomprehensible, most
free, noble, perfect, indivisible, constant, universal, without contrariety.
Those ten Spears figurated by Zachary the Prophet, C. 4. v. 2, 3.
by a golden Candlestick distinguished by seven Lamps, with a Boawl upon the
top of it, with two Olive trees over it, are no other than those that we do
hold. For the heaven called Empyr^um, whatsoever light arises or is infused
into bodies, it is derived (as it were) from that first Fountain. We deny, that
it has any true body. This bears rule over the other nine, as a Captain over
his soldiers, as form does the matter: wherefore, expressing the type of a
Monade, it makes the tenth Number perfect. This I have borrowed from that
admirable Theologist and School man, Paulus Scalichius, Conclu. de mundo
coelesti.
often cited in this discourse. Now, as touching the residue of those heavens
or Spears, to speak after the manner of those Pythagoreans, we may call the
Moon (if we will) A celestial kind of earth, an earthly kind of heaven;
Mercury, a versipellous Star, transformable. Lucan calls him The Arbiter of the
water; Venus, the air, vivificous by her temperate heat; the Sun, the fire
confirmed by reason. But, after an inuerse or preposterous order, we may call
Mars The sire, because he is a kindler of discord; Jupiter, the air, cousin to
Venus by his nature; Saturn, the water, that is, an old Planet of a damnable
frigidity. The rest, as, the eightth Sphere not wandering, we may call The
earth, the order of computation requiring it so; but that Copernicus will not
allow it, seeing he maintains, that the earth moves: which error was first
broached among some of those ancient Philosophers. Verse 14.
The Prophet Zachary, mentioned before (if we dare credit the exposition of
some Interpreters) did rightly call that the earth, which is included with two
earths; above which there is nothing to be seen with our eyes. Now, some will
have the waters under the heaven, to be those seven. Stars which are under
the Firmament. These are congregated, all, into one place, because, as he
says, Omnis Planetavum. virtus in vno Solc collecta est; meaning by this, that
they borrow all their power and light from the Sun. This congregation of
waters is not absurdly called, The Sea or Ocean. We hold the waters above the
Firmament, to be that Chrystalline Orb; and in him, those Animals, which
otherwise are those Signs of the Zodiac. To that celestial Frame, God has
given a living substance, rational, capable of understanding: so that it is
true which Aristotle says; Nihil reluctari coeleste corpus suo motori: True,
if we hold, that Coelum Empyreum is not moved, but from GOD it self, who
moves all things by his omnipotent power, but is moved no ways him self. And
this is (as I think) more agreeable to our Christian Religion, than the opinion
of many Philosophers; who are compared to those clocks or dials in Rome, for
their mutual and continual contradictions.

The true vie of Astrology consists in theseten following: First, it shows
us the causes of the admirable dislimilitude, not only as concerning Regions,
but touching the wits of men, and their manners, under diverse Climates.
Secondly, it remonstrateth what is the cause, that so great diversity arises.
Thirdly, what destinies or events at certain times are like to fall upon
Countries; being called, Indiciall Astrology. Fourthly, it foretells the
varisble state of the air and other elements at every moment. Fistly, it
tells us the happy or unhappy increase of fruits, be it corn, wine, oil, or
whatsoever else the earth brings forth: which was experimented by Thales;
who, fore-knowing a dearth to come, kept-in his fruits, and sold them at an
high rate. Sixthly, wars, famine, unusual drought, inundations, death of
cattle, changes of Kingdoms, destruction of Princes; and so forth. Seventhly,
what times are fit to sow, plant, or to do any other thing appertaining to
the Art of Husbandry. Eightthly, it gives much light to those who profess
Physic, take upon them to be Pilots, discouerers of Countries and Kingdoms,
or will gain them any knowledge in the Art Apodemicall. Ninthly, from this
science are made Prognostications and Ephemerides, needful for all sorts of
men. Last of all, it shows us the temperature of all kind of indiuiduous,
all kind of hourly, daily, weekly, monthly, yearly dispositures,
alterations, and inclinations.

Auicenna teaches us, how that there are ten things which will show unto us
fitting time or occasion to take physic; Trembling of the heart, oppression in
a man's sleep (some call it Incubus) giddiness of the head, a turbidous
countenance, weakness of motion, vehement ruddinesse in the face, tears of the
eyes, sadness and fear, solitariness, a kind of lassitude, and loathing of
meats. And he concludes thus: Omnis res quae de suo mutatur vsu, maxim autem
agritudo pr^aesens, medelae indigens iudicat. Our Treatise, wherein I have
proved the Bishop of Rome Antichrist, consists of ten invincible reasons
or demonstrations. Politic fellows, or Philosophers, are commonly bewitched
with these ten pestilent evils: They are not content with the present state.
Their god is the Commonwealth: their Scripture is Parliament: their life is
sensuality: their end is damnation: they are fit for all times; not unmeet for
all places: they are content with all religions: they go up and down to hear
news: they think their wisdom only wisdom, as the Grecians and Romans did.

CHAP. XIII. Of confused and promiscuous Numbers.
WE have gone along in order, from the Vnarie, to the Denarie Number, being
the form or perfection of all the rest. We mean to speak now of others
following. I call those confused or promiscuous, which are cited by authors
without any order or partition, many times not giving them a right
signification, according to their worth and dignity, perchance huddling them
together all in a heap, without note and distinction, slightly or
perfunctorily passing them over. In this Chapter therefore, according to our
module, we will entreat of all their kinds, significations, virtues,
extendures, not omitting any one noted by others, to have the least
representation of virtue, mystery, divinity included in him. First we, will
begin with the twelfth Number.

There is nothing so remarkable in this, as the twelve signs. For according to
this Number, the Ancients have divided the Zodiac, following here in the Moon
for their guide and mistress. Every sign they have divided into 30 parts. For
the Sun (as they affirm) in thirty days space runs his course through
the twelve parts of the Zodiac. Marry, whether he runs his course alike,
there grows the question. Some Astrologers affirm, that he runs over the
South signs, There be twelve excellent and precious stones, treated of by
Lemuius, which have many and rare virtues in them Lib. de mira. natu ac Exhor.
ad vita^. op. institu, cap. 58.
swifter then those of the North. In our books therefore as touching Antichrist
and his members, we have symbolized something touching these twelve signs, by
making the Number of Antichrist and his Ministers, according to Theological,
Astronomicall, Anatomicall proportion, to agree with them. Wherein nothing is
omitted as touching the lineaments and fabric of that vast and monstrous body,
from grounds of Anatomy, nothing belonging to their signs, from rules of
Astronomy. So that if I have fitted them with curious points out of Theology,
Astrology, Anatomy, Physic, and Metaphysicall Philosophy, beyond their
expectation; I hope they will ascribe it to the few hours and days I have
spent in the Art of Numbering. The Kings of France (if we believe Claudius
Sisellius) have usually twelve chosen Counselors of State about them.
This Number is not without his extendure, answerable to his dignity.

There be twelve Apostles, twelve Patriarchs. About the time of those ancient
Hebrewe Prophets, there were twelve learned Philosophers, that were famous for
the Art of Chronography, cited by that excellent Scholar Pererius; Thales
Pythagoras, Heraclitus, Anaxagoras, Democritus, Parmenides, Empedocles,
Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Epicurus, Zenum. Cardan, a man of subtle
judgment, much reading and understanding, combineth the duty of a Physician in
these twelve qualities; Lib. de art curan. parua.
Touch, sight, smell, memory, wit, learning, experience, wisdom, judgment,
contempt of wordly things, singular love of the truth, diligence. That which
the Paracelsians call Antimonie, has twelve excellent preservatives. The first
is called Panchreston, helping many evil affections; Pantagogon, fit to purge
all kind of humors; Theodoretum, There be thirteen mathematical instruments
cited by Posse. Biblio. Selec. To. 2. cap. 9.
for his divine help; (...), for his efficacy in preserving of health;
Soterion, an wholesome medicament; Lysippyreton, extinguishing all kind of hot
agues; Theodoton, a remedy given us from God; Theopempton, sent from God;
Panareton, endued with all kind of virtue; Polychreston, good for many things;
Isochryson, which is to be equalled with gold; Lysiponon, mitigating all kind
of pain and grief. There be 18 kinds of pthongs in music, treated of by
Prolomy, ^uchde, and others.


There be fourteen externe channels or passages in man's head, according to
some Anatomists. Under the seventeen, those seventeen humors mentioned by
Cardan, may be represented. Zoroastres dwelt in the wilderness twenty years.
Moses, in his book of Genesis, instructed from God himself, entreats of
twenty two high and profound points, such as were never handled by any
Philosopher, Jew, or Gentile; Polidor. Virgil makes mention of twenty several
nations which worshipped twenty strange gods.
The beginning of the world, God, principles of humane things, that we call
Chaos, Deep, darkness, waters, Arid, herbs, plants, Sun, Moon, Stars,
beasts, man, the soul intelligent, Angels, Deluge, Giants, Tower of Babel.
division of Tongues, and so forth. All these things, and much more, he has
written in such a style and character, that those ancient Hebrews, Greeks,
and Latins, L b. 1. cap. 1.
have wond ed at his writing. So that some have not sticked to call him Gods
Secretary, taking pen in hand, to write by his appointment. There are twenty
two Hebrew Letters, according to the Number of those Latin Elements.
There be twenty four prophetical books, called Canonical, according to the
Greek Alphabet. Twenty four Elders are mentioned in the Apocalypse. There
were twenty four famous Physicians of Arabia, whose names are these,
alphabetically set down in this wise: Aboal, Achme, son to Abraham, Agazo,
Asal, Albumazar, Albuer, Ammuram, Anicenna, Auerrois, Auenzoar, Ebezenzar,
Elabin, Hunim, Hamech, Elengezar, Haly Abbas, Saint Hierom affirms, that the
Hebrews made them a Cytharen consisting of 24 strings to the form of D.
Epist. ad Darda. de. instru. music.
Haly son of Abbas, Isaac Abenamaram, Mesne, Rabi, Razis, Sabor, son of
Zuzer King of Medoram, Serapio, Xirase King of Med. It seems by this, that
Physic was in great request in those times, seeing Kings were not only
Patrones, but chief professors of that AEsculapian Science; which now by
unskillful Empiricks and methodians is taken in hand, to the great reproach of
that worthy and learned study. Out of the Text of Scripture, and Denuis
Areopagite, as also from some Schoolmen, it will easily be proved, that hell
has twenty four several and distinct punishments; Heat of fire, a gnashing
of teeth, darkness, smoke, weeping, sadness, aspect of devils, crying,
ariditie, thirst, sulphurous smell, the worm of conscience, bands, prison,
fear, grief, shame, envy, rancor, want of divine vision, the taking away all
hope of redemption, Andra. Lau. Anato, lib. 5. cap. 8.
proteruous fantasy, mad concupiscence, irascible fury. The twenty fifth
Number is famous for this, in that there be so many interne holes or creuises
in the head of a man, according to the probable computation of some Anatomists.
The twenty seventh is a solid Number, consisting of three times nine, spoken of
before; under which progression, Huga de S. Victore concludes the quaterne
faculties of the soul. The thirtith Number is not without some secret virtue,
being a triplication of the denarie; neither does it want his signification,
There are 30 Ornaments required in a fair Virgin, expressed elegantly in verse
by Cornigerus, which were found in Helena of Troy. Silua.nuptial.pagina. 182.
because, in the space of thirty days, the Sun runs his course through
the twelve parts of the Zodiac, touched before in this Chapter.

His extendure is famous for those thirty ancient Civil Lawyers, whose books
are mentioned in the Pandects of Justinian the Emperor. Their several names
are also recorded by that excellent Scholar and Latinist, Angelus Politian.
There be thirty two teeth in a man's head, by consent of all Anatomists, on
both cheeks equally divided. But it is strange, that most men should have so
many, and others so few. Some write, that Enripheus, Cyrenens, and Phirrus that
was King of Epirontes, Epis.lib. 5. Epis. 11.
had but one tooth in their uppermost jawe; and that Direphna daughter to
Mithridate, wanted both rows of teeth. An Lau. Anato. lib. 5. cap. 12.
In Hercules, and others a threefold chest was found. But this was beyond the
ordinary course of nature. The Zodiac has thirty five burdens, called in
Latin Gestamina. But there is no Number more famous in the Scripture then the
fortith Number. God made the rain to fall forty days together on the earth.
Christ made the reign of our salvation to abide forty hours together upon the
earth after his Passion, M. Vigerius de cha christia.
according to the Symbol of that learned Cardinal. Moses took the Law upon
mount Sina, for forty days. Christ, in forty hours, went away Conqueror over
heaven, earth, and hell. Helias, fed with one morsel of bread, came in forty
days to the Mount of Oreb. Christ, fed with the Martyrdom of his Cross,
after forty hours expired, came from darkness to life again. Christ again did
fast forty days in the desert, and overcame Satan. Now, for the further
explaining of this; some hold, that the soul of Christ remained separated from
his body forty hours, taking them from three days: For, he suffered about the
vernall Equinoct, that is, at that time when the days and nights are of one
length; and about the middle of the day he let go his spirit. So that he died
six hours before the Sun went down: because, in the time of the
Equinoctial, if the day have twelve hours, the middle of the day has six
before Sunne-set. He was buried about the completorie hour, that is, about the
going down of the Sun. He stayed in his Sepulcher an whole night going
before the Sabbath day, and the whole day of the Sabbath, which contain in
them twenty four hours. In the morning going before the Dominicall day, which
was the third day of his death, he rose again. The morning goes for two
hours before the Sun rises. So that we must believe, his body remained in
the grave on that third day, for the space of ten hours. Now, six hours of
the day of his death, and twenty four of the whole Sabbath day, make full
thirty. Add ten hours more of the night following the third day, and they
make up just fotty. Therefore the soul of Christ was separated from his body
for the space of forty hours, that is, six before his burial, and after that,
thirty four. But in this computation (which cannot be done without exact
Numbering) we must observe one singular Note; How that the Evangelists,
attributing the space of Christ's death to the Ablative sense, will not have
whole days meant hereby, but part of whole days. By this we may learn, how
needful the use of Numbers is, to the right understanding of diverse passages
in Scripture, whether they be doctrinall, or historical.

Now, in Chronology, or just supputation of years, that is, to know how long
those ancient Kings mentioned in Scripture, did reign, there is nothing so
needful as the Art of Numbering. And if you mark it well, in all their
several Reigns or Regiments, no Number occurreth so often as the fortith
Number; as though God had appointed under this Number, the whole race or period
of their kingly succession to have been concluded and determinated. As for
example: Moses governed forty years; Othoniel, 40; Barac and Debora, 40;
Gedeon, 40; the Philistines interregnum consisted of 40. Saul, David, reigned as
many; which I have collected from the computation of Canus, I.o. Theo. lib. 11
cap. 5.
who has joined Theology and Chronology together the best of any Popish
Writer that I know. The Rabbines in their Thalmud speak much touching those
forty two divine letters, and such as had them in venerable estimation: Lemnius
holds, that men children are perfectly formed in their mothers belly in the
space of 30 days, but women in 42 or 45 Lib. de Mira. natura. 4 cap. 23.
but what they signify, and to what use they serve, I could never yet learn
from them. It is holden by those learned searchers of natural Philosophy,
confirmed by many famous Physicians, that the whole Fabric of man's body in the
space of forty five days, is perfectly and absolutely framed in Embrio, or the
mothers belly. Epimenides slept for the space of fifty years. This Number must
needs be virtuous and famous, for that it represents those fifty gates of
intelligences mentioned before. For, according to those Rabbines, (notable for
their Symbolicall doctrine) there was nothing before the creation, but God and
his name (...) and his only wisdom gotten from all eternity. So that the gate
of the first creation, being shut from Moses, notwithstanding he sought out the
Law by the other nine and forty, I^sue did inquire it by one less; Solomon by
two, who (as Rabbi Akib expounds) labored above measure to reduce the same,
but could not. Hence, says Rabbi Jacob Cohu, our ancient Fathers walked
through many ways, that in the and they might put their feet in these
admirable steps of wisdom delivered them by Zadkiel to Abraham our Father. I
dare not wade too far among those Jewish Doctors, lest I should wander out of
my way. For they are mysteries: and I believe, if Sphinges interpreter were
here, he would scarce unfold them. Now, besides the inquiry of these fifty
gates and thirty two paths, The year of man's age 63 has ever been accounted
perilous, because that where every 7 and 9 year meet together they make seven
nines, or nine seuens, being 63 in the whole, and therefore it is called of the
Philosophers, Climactericus: In which year and in 70 there have died the most
famous men of the world. Christ, when he was here on earth had his 72 Disciples.
they were very curious in searching out the Number of Gods name, called
Tetragrammaton: which if it be well expounded, say they, will arise to fifty
two, according to the Number of Angels. And this Number they slick not to call
The college of letters.

The five and fiftith Number has his excellency in this, in that according to
Callippus and other ancient Astronomers their calculation, all the Planets with
their Spheres, either retrograde or Stationarie, contain just the quantity of
this Number. The last Number that I mean to speak of, is the seventy two,
famous for so many years together, from the translation of the Bible out of
the Hebrew into the Greek Language, by those seventy two interpreters, by
commandment of Ptolomy the Egyptian Emperor; being a work that could not
have been done with the help of man, if the holy Ghost (whose interpreters no
doubt they were) had not seconded them, beyond their own expectation. Of these
and their diverse celles appointed them, with certain questions propounded
before the Emperor, you may read in Aristoas a Greek Author, though I am not
ignorant how that Vines (upon what warrant I know not) has labored to empeach
his credit, by counting him for a counterfeit, as elsewhere I have noted.

CHAP. XIIII. Happy, unhappy Numbers.
ITearm them happy or fortunate, which either in their syllables or elements
exclusive, or their sense inclusiue, bring some notable or joyful tidings,
either present or future; or otherwise being as uttered by God's own mouth;
or by his Prophets, have been esteemed holy, venerable, of hie account until
this day. In Genesis we find it written, Ipse conteret caput Serpentis;
referred to the seed of the woman, and not to the woman herself, as some Popish
Interpreters will have it. This was, sure, an happy promise made, representing
the quaternary Number, being uttered in so many words. For, Christ, which was
the seed of the woman, has played the Conqueror, four manner of ways: By
freeing us from original sin, wherein Adam and Eve both were first polluted;
by breaking the snares of Satan, who had tempted them; by triumphing over the
power of hell; by trampling death and his sting under his feet. This quadruple
blessing, being a pledge of his promise made to our first parents, could not
choose but be acceptable to them and their posterity. The Angel Gabriel, for
the confirmation of this promise, in his salutation unto the Virgin Marie,
spoke two words, more powerful, more ponderous, more remarkable in their few
elements, than of every man can be well understood. What are those? Aue Maria;
containing the binarie Number, every letter almost including within it some
secret mystery. Which no man does better expound, than that ancient Father
Irenaeus, in this similitude: As Eve was seduced by an Angelical Speech (he
means, Lib. 5. cap. vlt.
the temptation of that Serpent), whereby she might flee from GOD, having
preuaricated his Word: so this Eve, by the Angels salutation, was euangelized,
whereby she might bear Christ, being obedient to the Word. And as the one was
tempted to forsake GOD: so the other was persuaded to obey GOD; that one Virgin
might be the others Advocate. And as mankind was subject to death by the means
of a Virgin: so it was restored again by a Virgin; the virginal inobedience of
the one being equally poized with the virginal obedience of the other. Now,
Irenaeus has not only alluded to the Angels salutation, by calling her
Blessed, but unto the bare elements, as well typically to be understood; wherein
this message was delivered: for, Aue, by inuersion of the letters, is Eua. As
then the first Eu^, by preuaricating God's Commandment, did flee from the face
of God: so the second, by bearing Christ in her womb, and being made obedient
unto the Word (for, Irenaeus must not otherwise be understood), has been a
principal means or instrument to reconcile us again to God, which was Christ
the second Adam. For, whereas he says, that the second Eve was made an
Advocate for the first, it is meant, that her obedience to the Word, was
acceptable before God, bearing him in her womb, that should be the Redeemer of
his people; that as by the disobedience of the one, sin entered into the world:
so, by the obedience of the other, an universal restoration should be looked
for again. So that if any thing were admirable and praiseworthy in that
virgin, to make her an Advocate for the other (to use Irenaeus word), it was
surely her obedience to the Word spoken by the angel, conjoined with a lively
faith, that she should bear a Savior; and no otherwise. I could insist upon
many others of this kind; as, The blessing bestowed upon Abraham, In semine
tuo benedicentur omnes nationes; the song of the three children praising the
Lord in the fiery furnace; the Song of Simeon; the Farewell of Stephen, couched
in these seven words, Some will have the 7 words that Stephen spoke at his
departure, to signify those 7 heavenly graces that shined in him.
In manus tuas, Domine, commendo spiritum meum; and those spoken by the
Prophet, Ecce. ex tribu Iesse; meant by that victorious Lion of Judah: all which
contain no vulgar representation or signification of Numbers included in them.
But, leaving them, we will come to those words of Christ upon the Cross;
expressing the most happy, most courageous and triumphant conflict that ever
was endured since the world began. Neither do I think, that those words were
uttered by any kind of lamentation, as some imagine; but rather from
invincible courage and magnanimity, if a famous and learned Cardinal of Rome,
in his exposition, deceive me not. That which I am to insist upon, as
especially serving my purpose, are those two Hebrew words, Eli Eli; containing
the duall Number in form as they lie, but in their proper signification
representing the two Persons in Trinity; making this parcel of Scripture (to
the unfolding of which, many learned men have employed their wits) to be far
otherwise understood, than the bare elements seem to import. Now, because this
Cardinals exposition (as seems to me) wresteth not the sense of Scripture,
but fitteth my purpose; and, of all others that ever I read, sets out most
lively the victory of Christ upon the Cross, I thought it good, word for word,
to set down as follows.

After he had repeated the words of Christ expressed by the Evangelist, thus he
commenteth: If our Lord Jesus Christ was not forsaken; if he fell not from the
strength of his mind; if not from hope; if he knew assuredly, that his soul
should not be left of his Divinity, but should be joined with his body again;
if he left his momentary life willingly, it is not fit that Christ should utter
those words in any lamentable sort, My God, my God, and so forth. And therefore
I think beer lies a mystery; Marcus Vigerius.
which I had rather bear and learn, than express or teach: yet I will say
something, not far from our Saviors meaning, as I think. Our Lord Jesus Christ
was the Son of God, and trui God, the second Person in Trinity, God with the
Father, God with the holy Ghost; all three as one God, and by that union
altogether impartible, indivisible, and wholly inseparable the one from the
other: and yet the Son suffered on the Cross; not the Father, nor the holy
Ghost. When the work of our redemption was taken wholly in the Person of the
Son, all three together, the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, worked. All three
appeared in his natinity. The Son was born alone. His peregrination, his
doctrine, his miracles, his Passion, his death following, all three worked and
effected: the Son alone suffered. This mystery, this ineffable Sacrament, this
inaccessible Secret hid in darkness, the Lord Jesus would have open by these
words; that if we may not ascend to the same wholly, yet in part we may learn
with sobriety and trembling. My God, my Father, my God, my holy Spirit, who
hitherto have labored in all things with me, but I only have suffered all
things; wherefore have you forsaken me, and are now separted from ^^ee in
bearing this Cross? So that these words of Christ showed forth the magnitude
of his mind, and no fear at all.

Hitherto that Cardinal, out of his book called Decachordum Christianum, The
Scapegoat, mentioned in the old Testament, has cuer been accounted a figure of
the Passion of Christ.
written upon the life and Passion of Christ. To whose words may be added, for
the further explaining of this secret Symbol; As a man, that, in the midst of
his enemies, being forsaken of his friends, fights the more valiantly, under
hope of victory: so Christ, in this agony hiding his Divinity, or laying it
aside for a time, forsaken of his two friends that so long had worked with him
(God the Father, and God the holy Ghost), all alone, and in his own proper
person, did manfully and victoriously undergo the terrors of death. So that
whether we consider the word Eli, from his tripled element representing the
whole Trinity, or the word doubled, expressing but two persons, the Father and
holy Ghost, it cannot choose but stir us to an exceeding admiration and
contemplation, as often as we read them; but far more, if from our dull senses
and feeble understanding, we were able to comprehend them. I must confess,
that the Cardinals doctrine seems directly opposite to the common torrent of
some English Divines: but my protestation is not to over sway the opinions of
others better learned then my self, to build my faith (which is the anchor of
a Christian man) upon the fancie-full opinion of any private man. Only this I
must say by way of just defense, that he was learned, religious, exceeding
devout, from whom I borrowed it. Who although he savor Popishly affected, by
reason of the corruption of those times he lived in, yet he is nothing so
superstitiously given as many of his fellows were.

Their doctrine then, who maintain that Christ upon the Cross did suffer
pains of the damned and reprobate, seems very harsh to me. And I would have
them take heed, All the Fathers do speak but of Christ's bodily sufferings, If
therefore one drop of his blood was enough for the redemption of mankind, much
more so many streams of blood issuing from all the parts of his body, as if
it had been a precious ointment.
that whereas Christ at his nativity, his circumcision, in all his works and
miracles he did in his life time, was both God and Man; upon the Cross, and in
his Passion, by a strange kind of divinity, never dreamed of in the Primitive
Church, he should show himself less then a God, less then a man. From
Scriptures, if we go to stories of the Church, plenty of happy Numbers will
be found. The most ancient and of greatest moment, is that which was spoken
from heaven to Constantine the Emperor, when he fought against the Tyrant
Maxentius in these words, In hoc Signo vinces. Which four elements have no
small virtue and admiration included in them, portending more intrinsically,
then extrinsically they seem. For as there was visibly seen a form of the
Cross in the element: so the figure of this Cross is agreeable to the four
words uttered, which does make the excellency and wonder of it far greater
then outwardly it appears.

This figure therefore of the Cross (that I may unfold so great a mystery) of
all others is the straightest, containing four straight Angles, according to
those four elements resounding from heaven. And it is the first description of
that we call Superficies, having both longitude and latitude, which some auerre
to be corroborated with those heavenly powers, because their strength resulteth
by the rectitude of Angles and beams. Whereby it comes to pass, that the
Stars are then most potent, when, in a celestial form, they obtain four
corners, They that show themselves enemies to this ancient and venerable sign,
being no other then a badge or cognizance of our Christian profession, will
become enemies to Christ who suffered upon this Cross.
and by proiection of their beams one from another, do make a Cross. Which
also has great correspondencie with the quinarie, septenarie, and nouenarie
Number. Therefore among the Arabes (men that were curious in the search of high
mysteries) the sign of the Cross was had in no small admiration, as being a
most firm receptacle of all manner of heavenly intelligences. Other Numbers I
count unhappy, which by their exposition do signify or portend some fatal
calamity to men. As, in Scripture we have Man's, Tekel, Phares, spoken to
Balthazar: which, expressed in three Hebrew elements containing the ternary
Number, did (no doubt) signify unto him a threefold calamity or downfall; The
ruin of his Kingdom, the sacking of Babylon, the letting-in the river
Euphrates for the passage of Cyrus and his host, as a just punishment
denounced against him for his threefold sin and wickedness; Pride, Idolatry,
drunkenness. Of this kind there will be found many in Scripture; as, Christ's
word denounced against Hicrusalem, those which he spoke to the rich man; Paul
to Demas; Peter to Simon Magus; the holy Ghost in the Apocalypse, to the Church
of Laodicea: which all contain some inward secrecy of Numbers, parted from
their elements, or which, without exact calculation both of words and letters,
may not be well understood. So that such kind of Numbers, as these be, may be
called tacit or implicit, because they be not properly taken for Numbers,
except the words or elements are divided from each other, wherein they are
secretly or inclusiuely touched. The last Number I mean to insist upon, is out
of the Apocalypse, included in the word Lateinos; A word of such hidden and
impenetrable mystery, that since Saint John's time that did utter it, it is a
thousand and six hundred years, and yet among some it is hardly understood.
Yes, this word of all others has frighted the B. of Rome more and his
ministers, then the D. of Bourbon did, when he and his soldiers seazedvpon the
city of Rome, made his Holiness to entrench himself in his castle of S. Angelo,
and could not be redeemed nor his Cardinals without a great sum of money. To
unfold this secret Number I need not, seeing I have performed this task already
in our Books against Antichrist. Sure I am, it consists of 8 elements, cuery
letter containing a Number, more or less; and it is the Number of the Beast;
and his Number is the Number of a man, as well in Hebrew, as in Greek: and I
do not doubt, but this Number, rightly numbered according to Theological
Computation, will confound him and all his numbers, although they be almost
numberless. For breuities sake, I let pass those Climactericall or
Enneaticall years, consisting of 63 and 70, making either seuen-times nine, or
mine-times seven, which have been fatal to sundry learned and honorable
Personages; as also the octonarie month, being found noxious and prodigious to
the birth of children, by reason of the malignant disposition of Saturn;
judicially handled by that learned Anatomist, Lib. 2. quast. 38.
Andraear Laurentius. Neither have I leisure, curiously to insist upon the
opinion of that learned Clerk, Hugo de S. Victore, L. 2. didas. c. 3
as touching the term of man's life, consisting of 80 years, handled with much
subtilty and dexterity.

CHAP. XV. Mystical and Symbolicall Numbers.
I Call them so, that either from or under their riaked elements, their proper
names and significations, represent some unknown power or energie, or, for some
other respects, contain some Secret in them. There be many of this kind; and
therefore I will runne-ouer but some of the chiefest and choicest among them.
By the sixt-daies-work, our Rabbines understand six extremities of building,
proceeding from Bresit, as Cedars do from Libanus. They hold, that Messiah
Eno^ makes his conjunction with the denarie spirit and Leuite; that to the
firmament, and waters under the firmament, and the visible heaven, are
attributed 17, 18 and 19 gates to every one according to their degree; which,
put together, do amount to four more than those which were mentioned in our
thirteenth Chapter. They hold again, that out of the spirit, is produced the
word and voice; yet these three are but one. Those which they call
Imperfections of influences, in their collection communicant arise from 10 to
5110. That which they call Absolute in the subject, proceeds from the unity
to the nouenarie, Order processiue surmounteth from ten to ninety. Substance in
things proper remains entire; but their imperfections, from an universal
collection, go from 20 to 7670. Imperfections of parts in distributing of
virtues, proceed rightly from 25 to 2838. Whether these be mystical,
symbolical, or Cabalisticall Numbers, it skilleth not greatly: sure I am, they
pass mine intelligence. Capiat, qui capere potest. I have borrowed them of
purpose from those Synagogicall Doctors, to exercise the wits of those who are
better Arithmeticians than my self. I mean to go to others more familiar.

When God made the world, he said It was good. This word Bonum in cludeth five
elements, having a secret signification: for, this creation was good five manner
of ways; As touching the Creator, that was God; creature, that was man; form,
that was the beginning of all things, one of Orpheus Principles; matter, that
was prima Idea, as Plato holds; workmanship, which is no other than his
eternal Wisdom: Or this way; Good, to contemplate, praise, glorify, extol,
worship his Power and Majesty shining therein. It was said to Abraham as
touching the promise, In semine ^^o, and so forth, mentioned in the Chapter
going before. Now, Isaas was born of this seed; which some write with six
elements, agreeable to the promise couched in six words. Otherwise it may
signify those six places he dwelt in; Canaan, Egypt, Gerar, Beersheba,
Sodom, and the Cave wherein he was buried: for, the grave, in many places of
the Bible, is called An house or dwelling, by a metaphor much used among the
Hebrews,

Besides these, there are proper Names belonging to God: which, either divided
into Numbers, by parting of their clements, or without Numbers, have secret and
mystical significations. Which being seven in number, Septenarius nusmerus
est omnium aliorum perfectisimus. As touching the signification of these words,
see more in Lemnius exhor ad vitam optim. insh. cap. 59.
according to the septenarie perfection, it is admirable to tell what they
signify in the Hebrew Tongue. The first is Eloth, signifying GOD. The second,
Eloi; as much as to say, My God. The third, El: which if it be pronounced with
a thin aspiration, it signifies God; if with a sharp, one that is strong or
valiant. The fourth is Adonai, signifying Lord. The fifth, Sabbath, that is,
Lord of the Sabbath: some others interpret it, Lord of virtues. The sixth,
Saddai, that is, apt or potent. The seventh, Am, which is a name ineffable;
according to that spoken to Moses, I am that I am: or, My Name is from one
generation to another. The Greeks call this (...), that is, wanting vowels or
syllables. The Samaritanes called him Iube; The earth fiddib, 2. cap. 29.
not knowing the force and etymology of that word, as you may read in
Nicetas, from whom I have borrowed this interpretation. Now, the word (...), in
Greek is not without his numerall application. For, whether you will have him
called (...), that is, He that is, signifying his essence; or Bonus, because
it is the proper appellation of God, says Denuis; or (...), because by his
course or ambite he contains all things both in heaven and earth; or (...),
that is, God is called A consuming fire in Scripture, because he consumes the
tents of the wicked.
from burning (making all a quadruple Etymon), it cannot be, but that
unspeakable mysteries are contained under these appellations. Now, the words,
Good, just, holy, being but his attributes, represent his nature well, but not
his essence, which (to speak truly) is ineffable. To call him Lord, King, and
so forth, signifies his habit to things opposite, because his power
stretches from four denominations. He is Lord unto those who are subject to
his dominion; King to others who are under his government; Creator of all
things created; Pastor over those whom he feeds. We will come now to the
Apocalypse, to see what secret Numbers we can find there. There is no place
of the old and new Testament, that affords such plenty.

The first Number is a and o, representing the duall number, Chap. 1. ver. 3.
which I have unfolded in our fourth chapter. Seven Churches of Afia are not
without a mystery: Verse 11.
which some will have to be an Antitype of our Protestant Churches; Helvetia,
Swizerland, Geneva, France, Flandirs, Scotland; England: how truly according
to historical narration, let others indifferently consider. For my part, I dare
not contradict them, seeing the spirits of former Prophets (according as has
been fore-prophecied) must be subject to those later. And in prophesying we
find it true, as well as in other learning, which One says, Semper
deprehendit posterior atas, quod non vidit prior. Seven Candlesticks signify
seven Churches. 13
By those seven Stars, 16
are understood 7 famous Doctors of the Primitive Church. C. 3. v. 1.
Seven Spirits represent those seven distinctions of gifts, abounding in those
seven Churches mentioned before. By ten days, C. 2. v. 10.
are mystically understood ten years: and those ten years make a type of the
ten-yeers persecution under Traian the Emperor. C. 3. v. 12
By the word Jerusalem, is meant a twofold Hierufalem; One in this life, when
the Church of God shall come to his perfection and purity, anon after the fall
of Antichrist; the other an heavenly Jerusalem, where the souls shall rest,
symbolizing two Sabbaths, mentioned in our fourth Chapter. C. 4. v. 3
By the Jasper stone, Sardine, and Rain-bowe, are represented the three Persons
of the Trinity. The Jasper signifies the Father; Sardine, the Son;
Rain-bowe, the holy Ghost. Four beasts signify four ages of men wherein the
Gospel shall be preached: 8
others apply them to four principal teachers in God's Church. C. 7. v. 1.
By four Augels, are meant these 4; Contention, ambition, heresy, war (...)
which are four messengers sent from God to punish the earth. And all these
proceed from four corners of the earth, that is; Contention, from the East;
ambition, from the West; heresy, from the South; war, from the North. What
could be more contentious than the Eastern or Greek Church? What more
ambitious than the Roman, who has enricht herself with the spoils of other
Churches? As touching the South parts, it could not be, but much heresy
preutiled there, seeing Pelagius the Monk came from thence. Concerning the
North, it has ever been a Pronetb; Ab Aquilome awnemalum.

By those Numbers of Tribes, C. 7. v. 4.
is meant not only the calling of the Jews, but of the Gentiles. C. 8. v. 10.
By the great Star which fell from heaven, is meant Arr^us; who, with his
bitter heresy of (...), has corrupted the Fountains, that is, the pure and
incorrupted water of God's Word. By the second Star, is understood the Pope or
Mahomer; which you will. Those two Witnesse^ signify the two Testaments. In
that it is said, C. 11 v. 3 V. 18
The Gentiles were angry, we may find the Papal malice truly represented,
furiously enraging against two worthy instruments of God's Church, John Husse,
and Ieroms of Prague, for maintaining the doctrine of Christ. C. 12. v. 7
By Michael and his Angels, is meant Constantane the Emperor, and his Christian
Army; by the Dragon, Maxentius, Maxemi^ius, Litinius, and others, sighting
against him. The beast that rises out of the sea, is the Bishop of Rome: his
seven heads and ten horns signify those 7 hil^ about Rome; his power and
principality being defended with ten mighty Kings of the earth. As touching the
word Lateinos, read our third demonstration; proving, that the Bishop of Rome
is Antichrist. C. 14. v. 19
By those 1600 furlongs, some understand the whole Region of England burning
with persecution in Queen Mary's time: for, 1600 furlongs make 200 English
miles. C. 17. v. 9
Seven Kings signify so many kinds of Romish Gouerners, successively
succeeding one another. Under those ten horns, ten Kings are figured, which
shall fight against the Beast; answerable to the other te^ne, which took his
part. By Babylon, is signified a twofold Babylon, Constantinople and Rome: as
heertofore there was one in Chaldea, another in Egypt. As there is a twofold
Church, a twofold Babylon: C. 20. v. 5. and 6
so there is a twofold resurrection understood in the Apocalypse; The one, to
the embracing of the Gospel; the other, to be partaker of those joys prepared
for the Elect.

See how in a little room I have analyzed or epitomized all or the most part of
those mystical Numbers cited in the Apocalypse. Who then, without the Art of
Numbering, or the Spirit of God assisting him, is able to unfold the one half of
such hidden, impenetrable, symbolicall, and unspeakable mysteries? They
therefore that boast themselves to be Secretaries of the holy Ghost, and think
they are able by common intelligence to comprehend all the secrets of this
book, err greatly, and cause others to err as well. For, as it has pleased
God to open them to many, by illustrating this age far beyond all others in all
kind of knowledge whatsoever: so he has (no doubt) reserved some of them to
himself. So that no man in all his life time, no, not in a thousand years, if
he could live so long; no not the most learned and judicious Divine that ever
took pen in hand, by any long study, practice, or contemplation, is able to
comprehend them all. This to be true, I dare maintain from the testimony of
Irenaus; who, taxing certain. Heretics for the curious searching of forbidden
mysteries, Lib. 2. cap. 4.
concludes in these words: Si ergo et in rebus creaturae quaedam ac carum
cognitio adjacent Deo, quaedam autem et in nostram venerant scientiam: quid
mali est, si et little quae in Scripturis requiruntur, quaedam quidom absoluamus
secundum gratiam Dei, quaedam autem commendemus Deo; vt semper quidem Deus
doceat, homo autem semper discat?

CHAP. XVI. Theological discourse touching divine Numbers.
BEcause I have spoken before something of Theological Numbers, I thought it
good in this Chapter to discourse as touching the Art of divine Numbering; that
unto young Students, or novel Divines, desirous to be skilled in such an hie
mystery, I may prescribe a certain Idea or platform for them to imitate.
Which I cannot better do, than out of the words of Saint John, to frame them a
kind of ladder or scale, whereon to set their feet, or by whose direction
they may safely walk without error. John, desirous to unfold unto us as much
of the Divinity of Christ and his humanity, as might be fitting for us,
begins thus by Numbering: In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was
with God. For one of the second order, is God himself: and whereas within his
divine essence, production of two remains (for, Number consists of
himself, according to Beetius an excellent Peripatetick; and according to One,
the binarie Number alone naturally is procreated), it must needs follow, that
those two Saint John speaks of, the beginning and the Word (the one of order,
the other of Number) must of necessity be God, because within God there can
nothing be but God. These three therefore, the beginning, the Word, and God,
being the original or fountain of all thing, whether they be celestial,
supercelestiall, terrestrial, corporeal, incorporeall, Angels, men, brute
beasts, plants, and so forth: these, I say, comprehend but one essence, seeing
that God is one, and his unity is indivisible, as the Vnarie Number is. For,
this essence of God is nothing at all divided, although two productions or
emanations are numbered out of one: as in corporeal things many times it
happens, that unity, moved into duality (if it be lawful for me to make such
a comparison) proceeds to the ternary, the substance of things remaining
(for, in the terne Number no composition can be perceived), as of a branch, or
bough; but more fitly, the body of a man, his arm, or finger. Out of one
therefore, produced unto two in divine things, arises the Trinity: unto which
if essence be given, formally distinguished from them, it will become a
formal quaternity, which is infinite; one and the Number of two, being the
substance, perfection, and end of all Number; which, by a collectiue kind of
progression, make ten in the whole, according to Arithmeticall and
Geometrical computation, mainteyned often in this discourse.

Besides the Number of ten, there is nothing; for, it fetches his beginning
from one, and goes backward to one, ending where it began, and beginning
where it on death. So that worthily and most divinely, according to John's
sacred Arithmetic, In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God,
and God was the Word; and all three were one Word, only divine, infinite,
incomprehensible, extrinsecally associating it self to man: from whose light
infused, all inferior virtues are directed, derived, and governed; that is
(according to the exposition of the Hebrews) so long as the understanding,
intelligent, and intellect (expressing the ternary Number) be one and the
selfsame. For, as the Prophet says, inspired (no doubt) with a divine Vision
of the Trinity, In lumius tua videbimus lumeu; that is, Deus ipse est lumen
immensum, in scipso consistens, ac per se in omnibus, et extraomnia per
immensum. Lib. 5.
from the influence of the mind which flows from thee, we understand and are
rectified, according to Phyle's explication. Now, if a man should go further
by nu^bring or should at least find out the ternary Number, whereby the Trinity
is expressed in these words; Qui est supra omnias, peromnia, et in omnib^^, it
cannot be but that Ine^aur (a notable expounder of the Apocalypse) will give us
much light to the understanding of this mystery. The Father, says he, is over
all things, and he is the ^^^ad of Christ: through all things the Word is, and
he is the Head (...) the Church: the Spirit is in all things, and he is the
Water of life, ^^ich the Lord bestows upon them that believe in him, and
know^ ^^at he is the Father of all things; over all in all. From hence ^wee
should go, as by a ladder, to those three Theological ^ertues, or to those
words in the Gospel, There are three that care witness in heaven, and so forth,
to find out their virtues ^y numbering, or to any other Theological Number
mentioned in Scripture, especially the ten Commandments, in cluding both the
ternary and septenary Number, by distinguishing the first and second Table; how
much think you might be added to the study of Divinity, by such a kind of
Arithmetic, practiced but of a few, and that jejunely, God wot, without a^t,
without wit, without learning? But, leaving this for a taste, until I may be
better able to furnish a greater banquet, I will proceed to the next; referring
the Reader to Hugo de S. Victore, who has labored much in this kind; and in
his book called The Schoolmaster, has showed more light to the opening of
sacred Numbers, then any Father of the Church that I know.

CHAP. XVII. Arithmeticall Discourse.
I Mind not in this Chapter to play the Arithmetician, by putting Numbers for
ciphers, ciphers for Numbers, as though I were an Accountant, or bredde up in a
merchants or Scriueners shop. No: I mean to frame a scale or ladder
according to Theological Arithmeticke, such an one as never was devised by any
man before. This is no otherwise then a secret manner of discoursing, as
touching the subjects of every thing, according to the harmony of Numbers,
figures, concents. We know, that Numbers work much on the soul; figures,
upon bodies; concent, upon creatures. I will frame our scale first; afterward
we will proceed in order to speak of all their subjects. Our scale
conteyneth six degrees, beginning from the higher most to the lowest. The first
is the Architypall world, in which is (...), that is, the divine essence,
being God himself. Second is the intellectual world, in which are
intelligences. Third is the celestial, in which are those simple bodies,
wanting all kind of permixtion. Fourth is the lesser world, where are placed
those rational bodies. Fifth is elementarie: in this are placed those pure,
natural, and artificial creatures. Sixth is the infernal world, wherein those
evil and malignant spirits bear rule.

In the architypall world, from whence comes the Law of providence, discourse
is made as touhing God, by simple Numbers, which properly signify divine
things; as, denaries, celestial; centenaries, terrestrial; millenaries of the
world to come, exemplified in this wise: First, the divine essence is one, the
fountain of all virtue and power. Secondly, it conteynes in it self eternal
productions, according to the will and understanding. Thirdly, existing in
persons, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. Fourthly, the existing Law
of providence, and of eternal happiness in his holy and most blessed name
(...); Fifthly, the existing Redeemer by the price of his five wounds of his
bitter passion, and in the name and virtue of CHRIST, called Pentagrammaton.
Sixthly, by creating and perfecting the world on the sixth day, redeeming it
again the sixth day. Seventhly, resting from his work, called the Sabbath.
Eighthly, full of justice and that justice, the fulness of justice Ninthly, for
that in the ninth hour he let go his Spirit. Tenthly, in that the tenth day
after his ascension, he sent his Paraclete, that is, the holy Ghost.
Eleuenthly, by sending his heavenly grace, that is, his comfortable Spirit in
his most holy and blessed name. In the intellectual world, from whence comes
the Law of destiny, discourse is made from intelligences in this wise: First,
the foul of the world is one supreme intelligence, the first creature, the
fountain of life. Secondly, it is fellow unto Angels, which has constituted
that there should be two intelligible substances. Thirdly, there are three
hierarchies of Angels, three degrees of the blessed, four triplicities or
hierarchies intelligible, four presidents over the corners of heaven, four
governors of the elements 4 beasts of sanctity, 4 triplicities of Tribes,
four triplicities Apostles, 5 intelligible substances, six orders of Angels,
which are not sent to govern beneath, 7 Angels which stand before the Throne of
God, eight rewards of beatitudes, nine companies of Angels, 9 Angels governing
by triplicities, 10 orders of the blessed, bearing rule from the seprenary
Number.

In the celestial world, from whence the Law of nature is considered, there is
one Prince of Stars and fountain of light, two great lights, 3 quaternions of
signs, 3 quaternions of houses, 3. Lords of triplicities, 4 triplicities of
signs, so many qualities of celestial elements, five erraticall Stars,
called Domini terminorum, six Planets passing from the Eccliptick, through the
latitude of the Zodiac, 7 elements are adjoined to these with the Sun, eight
visible heavens, 9 moving Spears, ten Spheres of the world, twelve signs of
the Zodiac, in four triplicities of signs. In the lesser world, from whence
the Law of wisdom consists, there is to be considered first one living
thing, and last dying, two principal seats of the soul, three parts
corresponding the threefold world, four elements of man, so many powers of the
soul and judicial faculties, four moral virtues, four elements of man's
body, four spirits, humors, complexions, five senses, six degrees of man,
seven members integrall, distributed unto Planers, seven holes or cauernacles
of the head, eight degrees of beatitude, nine senses outward and inward, ten
arteries or pores of the inward man.

In the elementarie World, where the Law of generation and corruption abides,
there is to be found one subject and instrument of all virtues natural and
supernatural, two elements producing a living soul, three degrees of
elements, four elements, as many qualities, seasons, corners of the earth,
perfect kinds of mixed things, so many kinds of creatures answerable to those
elements, five kinds of corruptibles, or Species Mixtorum in Plants, metals,
stones, six subsanticous qualities of elements, seven birds of Planets, so many
fishes of Planets, metals of Planets, beasts and stones, eight particular
qualities, nine stones, representing nine companies of Angels, ten beasts of
sanctity lifted up to heaven, twelve plants, so many stones, twelve months, so
many birds, twelve sacred beasts and trees, mentioned by those who have treated
any thing touching Orphicall Theology.

In the infernal world, where the Law of wrath and punishment endures from
everlasting, there is to be seen one Prince of rebellious angels, two
captains of devils, two things which Christ denounced against the damned,
three infernal Furies, three infernal Judges, so many degrees of the damned;
four Princes of devils bearing rule in the elements, called by Saint Paul,
Ayerie spirits; four rivers infernal, answerable to those in Paradise, so
many Princes of devils appointed over the four corners of the world, five
corporal torments; six devils, Authors of all calamities; seven infernal
mansions, if we believe Rabbi Joseph, in his book called Hortus Nucis; eight
rewards of the damned, nine orders of evil spirits, ten orders of damned: to
whom if you put the souls of the damned, and three degrees of the damned, they
make just twelve degrees of devils and damned. He that can attain to the
Secrets of this scale, (...) facile cognoseet, to use the words of that notable
Peripatetick, that is, in one word, he shall be able to comprehend both the
sympathy and antipathy of all this whole Universe set before his eyes to
contemplate: he shall consider order, which precedeth substance, which brings
propriety, which tells us what is absolute, simple, subject, what is the
imperfection of substances, of influences, of parts; with many other
singularities, beyond all formal, natural, and artificial Arithmetic. Which
scale, in one entire sum, has showed as much as in this whole discourse in
gross has been remonstrated: so that it is no other than a compendious
subtraction of the others confused and copious multiplication.

CHAP. XVIII. Geometrical discourse.
WE may discourse as well by those Geometrical Figures, seeing such manner of
Figures consist of Numbers. Whereof their first Number is correspondent to the
vnarie and denarie; called Circulus because that unity (the center and
circumference, of all things) and the tenth Number coaceruated in unity, return
backwards; from whom the end and co^plement of al Numbers have their beginning.
The Paracelsians do so wonderfuly admire and praise the vnarie Number, that
they stick not to define a Spagyrick after this manner: Spagyricus is est,
quicunque nouit optime discernore verum a falso, a bono malum, et impurum a
puro segregare, et abycere binarium, vnitate sernata. It is much in request
among our Geometricians, though they use not the name so much, but the thing it
self. A circle therefore (being to them in stead of the vnarie) is called a
line infinite; in which there is no Terminus a quo, nor ad quem, (to speak
Logicaly), whose beginning and end consist of every point. Wherefore the
circular motion is counted infinite; not as touching time, but the place. So
that this figure, of all others, is the most absolute, and perfect. Likewise
the Pentagogon, by the virtue of his equinarie and lineature which he has
both within and without; within having five Angles obtuse, without, five sharp,
circundated with five Hexagonous Triangles, conteyneth a wonderful mystery.
Exagonius est triangulus, qui omnes habet acutos angulos.
Which may be said touching other figures; as the Triangle, Quadrangle,
Hexagonon, Heptagonon, Octagonon: of which many, by reason of their
multiplicious intersections, have diverse and different reasons of discoursing,
according to the variable s^^uation and proportion of their lines and Numbers.
Hexahedron est, quod ex sex superfieiebus quadratis aque lateribus et aque
triangulis integratur. Octohedron est, quod ex octo Isopleuris integratur, et
habet angules planos 24. et 6. solidos. Duodecahedron est, quod ex
superficiebus pe^tagogis duodecim integratur, habens angules planos 60. solidos
20. Icohedron est, quod ex 20. Isopleuris componitur, et contmet angulos planos
60. atque 12. solidos.
Put heereto that which we call Algebraicall demonstration, whereof discourse
may be made; which is no other than restoration of Number, if we believe
Euclide. I have spoken as touching the figure of the Cross in our fourteenth
Chapter. But this must not be understood of such kind of figures only which
have secret significations in them, but of all others used in Geometry; as, the
Spheres, Tetrahedron, Hexahedron, Octohedron, Hedron, Dodecahedron, and the
like; whose interpretations I have caused to be set down in our margent.

So Pythagoras, and after him Timeus Locrus, and Plato, gave us to understand,
that the first Cube of earth consisted of eight solid angles, twenty four
planes, six bases quadrated in the form of a balance. But they attributed to
the fire a Pyramide, containing four bases Triangle, and so many angles solid,
and twelve planes. To the air they appointed an Octohedron consisting of eight
bases Triangle, six angles solid, twenty four planes. To the water they
assigned an Icohedron of twenty bases, twenty angles solid. To the heaven they
gave Dodecahedron, composed of twelve bases Pentagonous, twenty angles solid,
planes sixty. He that is not superficially insighted in these Geometrical
Figures, can never attain to the Art of true Numbering. To the gayning of whose
knowledge, Euclides Demonstrations, or Pappus Mathematical collections
(especially if they were perfect) will be of much worth. But if they may not be
gotten, Posseuines 15. book of his selected bibliotheke, entreating of
Mathematical discipline, will serve in stead of the other, because there he
has abbridged the whole work of Euclide, or else has drawn it from others,
who took it in hand before him, into a Compendium, by deducing all those
Mathematical Numbers into certain Theorems, which are illustrated with a
short scholie.

CHAP. XIX. Harmanicall Discourse.
MVsicall harmony brings not a little faculty of discoursing, seeing her
power and virtues are so great, that she is called The Imitatrix of the
stars, of the soul and body of man. Harmony consists of 7; Sons, interuals,
kinds, constitutions, tones, mutation, melody; handled at large by Euclide.
And when she follows celestial bodies so exquisitely, it is incredible to
think, how she provoke those heavenly influxes, how she tempereth the
affections of her hearers, their intentions, gestures, motions; changes their
actions and manners, allureth them to her proprieties, either to mirth or
sadness, boldness or tranquillity; and so forth. We find by experience, that she
draws Beasts, Serpents, Birds, Dolphins, unto the hearing of her modulation.
It recreateth the mind of man with Pipe, Fiddle, Timbrell, Harp, Lute,
Citharene, Organ, and with diverse other instruments. It erecteth the mind of
man. It cures diseases, especially that our Physicians call Tarantula; which
makes a man to run mad, never leaving off kipping and dancing, till it be
cured by some melodious harmony. It moves Captains to war. It eases and
moderateth high enterprises and great labors taken in hand. It recalleth
furious and frantic persons from sudden and desperate attempts. It comfort
travelers. It moves pastime. It mitigateth anger, letificateth those that be
sad, pacificateth such as are at discord. It temperateth choler, and (to
conclude all in a word) it expels all vagrant, wandering, and imaginary
cogitations whatsoever. By this means discourse is made; as, Tensiones dicuntur
ab instrument is ad eas comparatis, a tendendo. Pthongi vero, eo guod voce
etiam eduntur.
by sounds and concents ( Euclide calls them Pthongos) by harmonicall
compositions, tones, mouings, sons, as well isntrumental as natural,
proceeding from the imperious conception of the mind, affection of the heart
and fantasy; as also, consonous and propin quous fundaments of kinds,
symboles, similitudes by analogy, concord of natural and artificial voices,
do take sweetly their beginning from hence. The use and necessity of all which
is so great, that one discourses of them in this manner: Si nihil moveretur,
sed omnia quiese^rent, summum esset silentium: si autem fieret silentium, nihil
moveretur, nihil audiretur. Quare, ut aliquid audiatur, necesse est prius motum
pulsumque fieri: As if he should infer, that without motion and musical
harmony (whereby all things consist) neither the higher heavens, nor the
lowermost Planets, no, Non est hannonice compositus, ait Augustinus, qui
harmonia non delectatur.
not the soul and body of man (framed from harmonicall symmetry) could
perform their duty. Therefore the necessity of music is so great, so potent,
so admirable in each thing, that it is impossible the world should consist
without it. What? consist without it? No, not for a day, not for an hour, not
for a minute; no, which is less, not for a moment.

Musica, apud Ciceronem, in tribus consistit; Numeris, voribus, modis. L. 1. de
Oratore.
Now it is to be noted, that all concent is either of sounds or voices. Sound
is a spirit. Voice is a sound and spirit animated. Speech is a spirit vttred
with a voice or sound signifying something; whose spirit, by a certain sound or
voice, goes out of the mouth. Calcidius, a great Platonic, holds, that it
is sent from the innermost part or penetrall of the heart or mind. Others make
another 3 fold di^^ision, thus: Vnum genus musica est quod instrument is
agitur: alterum, quod fingit carmina: ^erlium, quod instrume^torum opus
carmenque di^udi^at.
And whereas all kind of music consis^eth of these three, Sound, voice,
mouth; discourse is made fitly through the subjects of them all. So that by
this means, that is, by the proportion of concent and the voice, we may
proceed thus: Among the Planets, Jupiter, Sol, Venus, Mercury, are owners of
concent; others, more of voice than concent, as Saturn, especially of such as
are sad, rawking, grave, slow, and of those sounds verging toward the center.
Mars preoccupieth such as are sharp, acute, threarning, swift, angry; The Moon,
those that be mediocrous; Jupiter, grave, constant, studious, pure, graciously
sweet and energious; Venus, lascivious, luxurious, effeminate, voluptuous, and
such as be in their circumference dissolute, dilatous, queint and delicious.
Mercury has remissious concents, multiplicious, and with a certain
strenuity, 10 vial and iucund. From those particular harmonies, Jupiter
obtains a Diapazon, and he carries grace with a Diapente. Sol has a
Diapazon; and, by reason of his 15 tones, a Disdiapazon. Venus holds grace
with Diapente; Mercury, with Diatessaron. These kinds of concents, from the
distance of Planets one from the other, will be quickly found our. For, the
space betwixt the earth and the Moon, contains a hundred, Interuallum est quod
continetur duobus sonis, acumine and grauitate differentibus. Tonus est quida^
vocis locus, Systematis capax, latitudin care^s. Sonus est concinnus vocis
casus ad vnam extensionem. Interuallum diapazonest du plum. Interuallum
diapazon est multiplex. Diapazon est minus sex tonis. Diatessaron est minus
duobus tonis and hemito^io. Diapente minus est tribus tonis and bemitonio.
Euclid. l. 6. propos. 25. It a Deus disposuit spharas, ea^umque mo^us
temperaut, vt (que madmodu^ Pythagoricis Platonicisque placet) in aflimabilem
harmoniam melodiam que conficia^t. Ficinus epist. l. 6.
twenty and six thousand Italian stades, making an interuall of sound. From the
Moon to Mercury, half that space makes a semitone. As much from Mercury, to
Venus, makes another. From thence to Sol, a tripled tone and half makes
Diapente. From the Moon to Sol, a duple with a Dimidium makes Diatessaron.
From Sol to Mars there is as great distance, as from the earth to the Moon,
making a tone. From thence to Jupiter, half of that makes a semitone. As much
from him to Saturn, makes another: from whom to the starry clement, there is a
space of a semitone interjacent. So that from Sol to the starry element, is
found a Diasteme, a Diatessaron of two tones and a half; from the earth, a
perfect Diapazon of six tones integrall. From hence, by proportion of those
planeticall moouings one to another, and with the eightth heaven, the sweetest
Music of all others resulteth.

Out of which may be gathered, that what from the Fabric of this whole
Universe; what from the symmetry, proportion, harmony of all his parts linked
together; what from the mutual concent of heavens, Planets, elements, there is
nothing that beautifieth the workmanship of the Creator more, nothing that so
lively sets out the creature, as music. It is said by Plutarch, who
borrowed it from Plato, that GOD, in framing of the world, had played the part
of an excellent Geometrician, and that he caused this Geometrical Paradox to
be most truly verefied; that is, Two figures granted, a third remains,
equal to one, like to the other. Now, it is without all question, that God, by
making so many contrary elements agree together, by adding so many tones and
sons to those visible and invisible heavens, has played the part of a notable
Musician, as well as a Geometrician. But let us go forward. The proportion of
those moouings of Saturn to Jupiter, is duple sesquialter; of Jupiter to Mars,
sescuple; of Mars to Sol, Venus and Mercury (which make their journey alike)
duple proportion; of them to the Moon, duodecuple; of Saturn to the
stelliferous element, millecuple and ducentuple. So again, between the fire and
air there is a twofold harmony begotten, Diapazon and Diapente; betwixt the air
and water, the like; betwixt the water and earth, Diapazon, with a double
Diapente and Diatessaron. Betwixt the fire and water, air and earth, harmony
cease. For there is a contrariety of qualities among those, yet they agree
through the intermiddle element. I have drawn this harmonicall multiplication
out of others, to show what power music has in all kind of bodies, whether
they be celes^iall or terrestrial; again, to remonstrate, that the Art of
Numbering, which way soever a man will go, extends it self to the certain
knowledge, practice, and contemplation of all Sciences whatsoever, confirming
that which was spoken in our first Chapter. Wherefore by reading of this
discourse, I do wish, as Augustine sometimes did, Lib. de music a. 6. cap. 16.
that the Reader may gather that harmony and sweet delight, that from
contemplation, he may gather prudence; from sanctification, temperance; from
impassibility, fortitude; from ordination, justice; which are four cardinal
virtues. This moved that godly Father to the compiling of that worthy discourse
as touching Music: Where, toward the later part, he concludes thus touching
the soul of man: Tunc autem firma erit at que perfecta, vt numeris
corporalibus, non anertatur a contemplatione sapienti^, etc.

CHAP. XX. A method touching Numerall* Figurall, and Harmonicall discourse.
SEeing we have proceeded thus far for the enabling of those who have not bin
initiated nor matriculated in the School of Numbering, I will add one Chapter
more, for the perfect co^pleting and terminating of this whole discourse: Which
unknown, or (at least) slightly passed over, I do not see how all the former,
though substantially cemented and tied together, can remain uncontrollable,
unanswerable, unviolable. In every discourse therefore (especially of this
nature) Geometrical and Arithmeticall, proportion is chiefly to be respected.
But the discourse of proportion is found most easy in the subjects of Numbers.
For, the Numbers of all subjects are so disposed, that they may not exceed the
Duodenarie. Seeing therefore, the Number is certain, and as it were limited, a
man shall soon find out the proportions of discourse, if he know once the
highest Hoxagonon from the communication of correlatiues. For, from thence he
shall be able to derive simple contractions, and such as be proportional;
doubting in nothing, if he follow this method prescribed him. He shall see
then, what fellowship and commer^e hell has with heaven, sense with
understanding. As touching discourse of proportion, it receives communication
of the Hexagonon in the subjects of figures, as far as those figures arise
out of Numbers, and contain within them a numerall kind of discourse. For,
every figure has his proper fundaments from consideration of it self; as a
circle, considered by himself, has a plain virtue, contented with one
Supersicies, and has lines alike brought from his center to his circumference.
Likewise a Sphere takes his consideration from Geometricians and Astronomers.
Such a frame as this is being made, every part admits his process of Art;
and, as many differences have been assigned to any of these subjects, so many
discrepances of terms as touching this workmanship may be limited. And
therefore a man may reason of the goodness and virtue of a circle, according
to the circular differences handled at large by our modern Geometricians and
Mathematicians. By this means it is easy for every man to make him a sca^e
both of ascending and descending, according to the variety of his w^t; as also
after the manner of Georgins Leontinus, or such ^s we call Lullistes: he may
be able to reason soundly and substantially of any thing brought into
question, handling or prosecuting any Theme, Problem, or Paradox, according to
Art or judgment: As, one way ^ouching the virtue of angles; another way, of
the virtue of bases, by making his process unto a cube, or to the declaration
of a figure, by method of discourse set before his eyes. As then these things
have been spoken of sensible figures: so proportionably they ought to be
understood of such as be intelligible; as in Tropickes, Colures, Artick,
Antartick, and the like. By this method he shall come to some more then
superficial knowledge in those mathematical disciplines. Whereto I should
have given ^arre greater light in this discourse, if I had not lost the works
of Carolus B^^illus, a great Symbolist and Theologist, and one that was the
best and most absolute Mathematician of his time; Especially his Conclusions,
his books of the Trinity, and that admirable and portentuous work of his, De
Nihilo, envying, or rather emulating Leontinus mentioned before. In like manner
an harmonical discourse may be instituted by consideration of those we call
(...), belonging to those subjects; especially if the difference be considered
betwixt sensual and sensual, as diasteme of tones; betwixt intellectual and
sensual, as concent of Planets, with the virtue of inclining from their,
concourse, as well universal as particular; as, constancy, purity, gladness,
iucundity, by Diapazon, Disaiapazon, Diapente, Diatessaron; as also between
the intellectual and intellectual; as unity, equality, verity, and so forth.
All these grounds I have borrowed from those Ancients, being little or nothing
beholding to our Neotoriques, though I know, in all kind of Geometrical,
Arithmeticall, and Mathematical Sciences, they are more to be valued then the
other. But touching mine own knowledge (which is small, God wot, especially in
these elementarie speculatiue, and numerall mysteries) I know no man of our
times, that has given me any light as touching this discourse or has so much
as superficially handled this subject, beside Paulus Scali hiu^, a great Baron
and Nobleman of Hungary; for his admirable and promiscuous learning knowledge
in the tongues, deep and profound Theology, a miracle of his time. To whom
(ingenuously I must confess) I have been more indebted for that poor
knowledge I have gotten, then to any other ancient or modern whatsoever. Many
have to any other ancient or modern whatsoever. Many have written touching
this subject; as, Barotius of Platonicall Numbers, Petrus Bongus, de mystica
numerorumratione, Iacobus Maz^enius, and Petrus Gregorius, as touching
Arithmetic, both natural and artificial: but none of these have come unto my
hands. I could, notwithstanding, have larged this treatise with Nubers
alphabetical, the varation of figures, discourse, of rules, of tables,
peregrine discourse, common discourse, discourse of forms, discourse touching
the key of knowledge, with examples thereto adjoined, universal discourse: but
my intent has been chiefly to keep my self within mine own proper module,
and not to transcend the height of my horizon, laying down out of my poor
storehouse (consisting of notes gathered for many years agone) and collecting
out of others as much as might give any light to this present subject, or which
might further young Students (Divines especially) to take upon them such a like
enterprise, or at least to add something from their learned labors, toward
the full completing and enriching of this painful and laborious piece of
workmanship. For we are all in debted to posterity: and when we have done all
that we can do Deo, Ecclesia, Patriae, by spending our talents for God,
Church, and Country, yet we shall not be able to repay so much as in duty,
love and affection we owe unto them. So, concluding our whole discourse with
twenty Chapters, here I make our Period; that beginning with Number, I may end
with Number.

FINIS.
Numerorum secreta heroico carmine concinnatae.
QVi numer are potest exact, hic singula nouit;
Diuina, humana, infernalia, magnaque parua.
Quod nomen Patris, sobolis quod spiritus esse
Creditur, Haebraice, Graece, textumque Latin.
Nomina suntque december diuini numinis, atque
Quadraginta, alis fed sexaginta put arunt.
Qui se producunt, gignunt, sunt ordine quinque
Namque pecus, stercus; producunt stercora simum:
Fimus alit gramen: lac, gramina; lac pecus ipsi.
Si numer are velis naturae arcana Deique,
Extorrente suo capias nil, nil nisi punctum.
Princip^^ caret vnalis numerus, quoque fine:
Vitamen ac virtute sua infinitus habetur.
Si tamen hic numerus non sit, numerum creat ipse;
Ac numerale regit regnum tanquam Deus aut Rex,
Efficiens summas, primique trianguli ad instar.
Denotat arcanum, Christi vox ter repetita:
Literanam quaeuis non est sine pondere, sensis.
Exprimitur Psalmotriginta Passio Christi.
Septimus atque dies sanctorum Sabbata sigmat.
Stat gradsbusque nouom (mihicrede) hierarchicus ordo.
Sunt triaquae sonat hoc verbum Tetragrammaton altum.
Pact to diuina est, nomen, vel significatum.
Elenat humanam mentem venerabile nomen,
Mentique erectae miscetur fignificatum.
Haec duo Maiores nostri tenuere ad amussim.
Tertium at excellens sancti promissio Verbi,
Nequaquam Patribus, sed Mosi innotuit vni.
Litera quod signat per Tetragrammaton Haebr^a,
Hoc per Tetractin Graeci dixer^ magistri.
Prima Mathematices per quartum regula constat.
Physica quinetiam ratio hinc deducitur omnis:
Perque december Sephiroth signantur nomina diuina,
Vt Iudaeorum sanctissima Cabala monstrat.
Sicque Iouem veteres cum quattuor auribus vmbrant
Iuxta Pythagoricos, quia sit Quaternio summus.
Hunc quoque per numerum sunt hicroglyphica sacra
Per baculum, scutum, serpentem, oculumque peracta.
Quinque habet in pretio diuina ac docta Mathesis:
Haec sunt vnum, pax, totumque reductio and impar.
Est nihil infinito, puncto, nil prius vno.
Principium rerum numeru^que vnarius extat.
Ex vno punctoque simul reliqua omnia fiunt.
Vltra vnum ac punctum nihil est and in ordine rerum.
Istud Arithmeticus, Mathematicus, ac Geometra
Demonstrat, probat, ac validis rationibus vrget.
Quattuor appellant Paradisi flumina prisci
Oceanum, quorum est Princeps dininus Homerus.
Est his diuinis, humanis rebus origo
Existens, manans, foecundans, denique stillans,
In quodcunque genus speciemue migrauerit ipsam.
Angelu exist it diuinae portio mentis,
Magnus homo, parvusque Deus sit rite vocandus.
Eius inaequali numere natura not anda est,
Atque pari nunquam, numero Deus impare gandet.
Quin dico numero, numerus quia manat ab vno:
Impare sed dico, quia Dys quam proximus adstat.
Ex primo, bino acterno, Quinarsus extat:
Quem multi Veteres suprema luce creatum
Appellant mundi radium intellectuallsque.
Vox He hebraea notat quantum valet at que character.
Litera Nau signat quantum senarius ipse,
Quae nota fit coeli, terrae, namque omnia iungit.
Vt natura caret nihilo, nullo nec abundat,
Magnus Aristoteles vt quondam est ore loquutus:
Partibus omnimodis sic hic perfectus habetur.
Sunt numeris completa sacris oracla Iohannis:
Abdit a nam sacrae Triadis mysteria pandunt.
Atque stilum mirata fuit schola docta Platonis.
Sed nemo nouit Triadis been symbola sacra,
Sit nisi Dijs similis, diuino flamine tinctus.
Quattuor aetates munds statuere Poetae:
Quinque tamen sapiers Hesiodus esse fatetur;
Hocque modo nobis statuam Danielis adumbrat.
Sex facit he xameron, septem faciunt que moderni.
Septima quin aet as Christum sub carne videbit.
Sunt quinque ac Veteres qui sumunt nomen Jesus:
Quos Scripturanotat, quibus au^ea nomina ponit.
At que figura velut Christi sit spiritualis
Hoc sacrum verbum quod Pentagrammaton omnes
Dicimus, and quod nos summo celebramus honor:
Corporeum sic est sig number crux semper habenda.
Practica pars crux est, est par sque theorica nomen.
Trisque characteribus naturae tempore Christus
Imploratus erat, quattuorsed tempore legis.
Quinque vocatus erat veniente at sole salutis.
Sex simul ac fuerant cum facta est Passio Christi;
Mors, anima, ac Deitas, sanguis, caro, vitaque iunctim.
Tres parts anni designat musica Apollo.
Hypate designat brumam; aestatemque Neat.
Ver Dorion signat, vel saltem temperat ipsum.
Sic tres sunt voces: mediaest grauis, est and acuta.
Mundanae molis duo sunt extrema putanda.
Est coelum Empyreum, terra est, immobile vtrumque:
Illa mouet nunquam, vasto sed pond^re p^rstat,
Circuitum ad quia nulla sibi sit data potestas.
Hoc fixumque manet, quia robur corperis omne
Virtutemque simul voluendi continet in se.
Ordine stat primus numerus, sequit urque figura.
Atque prior plana est solida quacunque putanda.
Omne tamen corpus solidum est prius vt moueatur.
Circulus est quaedam in seipsum conuersa figura,
A cuius centro deducta est linea quaeque.
AEternum quid ^^t? momentum, immobile punctum est;
Cuineque succedit punctum, cui nec praeit vsquam:
Incipit a se nam, seipso sine fine quiescit.
Est velut atque Deus status immutabilis, vnus,
Absque loco, spacio, fine fine ac tempore constans:
Sic numero prior est, numerum nam continet omnem;
Principium ac cum sit, numeris dabit his quoque finem.
G.I.

