An new interlude of Impacient pouerte newly Imprynted.

Four men may well and easily play it.

Peace. Collhassarde and Concience for one man. Haboundaunce and Mysrule for a
another man. Impacient pouerte, Prosperyte, and pouerte, for one. Envy and the
Somner for a another man.
depiction of three men

Peace begins. THe puysaunt prince and innocent most pure
which humbly descended from ye sete se^piternall
Illumyne his beams of grace to every creature
To withstand the conflycte of our enemies mortal
The devil, the world, and the flesh, these three in special
which sets deuysion between ye soul and the body
Inlike wise envy sets debat between party and party
I speak for this cause, daily ye may se
How that by envy and malice, many be destroyed
Which if they had lived in peace with pacient humilite
Riches and prosperyte with them had been employed
For there as is peace, no man is annoyed
For by peace men grow to great richesse
And by peace men live in great quietness
I am named peace, which envy does expel
Envy with me shall never rest
For envy is one of the pains of hell
When that he soiourneth in a man's breast
Like the burning Fenix in her own nest
Though she can none other hurt ne grieve
yet she does not cease her self to myscheue

Envy. A sir here was a long predycacion
Me thought ye said in your communication
To every man peace was most behooved.

Peace. For soth and so said I.

Envy. That shall be proved contrary by and by
For by peace much people are undone

Peace. What people are tho.

Envy. The armurer, the fletcher, and the bower
Maryners, Gonners, and the poor sowdyer
Yea and also many another artyfycer
Which I do not rehearse by name

Peace. I say the universal people does best obtain
where as peace is ever abydyng

Envy. Thou lie so god me help and halydome
For then were surgyons clean undone
Of them that will fight and break apate
They get good living both early and late
And what say thou by men of law
Their living were not worth a straw
And every man should live in peace.

Peace. That is not for the commons increase
For by peace they profit in many a thing
Peace sets amyte between king and king
In time of peace merchants have their course
To pass and repasse

Envy. Thou lie knave by the mass
For under color of peace much suttelte has been wroughte
And ships are taken ye merchants dear have bought
Was that for their promocion
Nay in time of war
Such a knave durst not stere
By ye mass were it not for shame yt should bear me a blow

Peace. Hold thy hands thou lewd fellow
Thou art of evil dysposycion
thus against peace to repugne
The which from heaven descended down
to bring man out of captyuyte

Envy. A horton why do thou lie
When were thou in heaven tell me by and by
How came thou down with a ladder or a rope

Peace. yt were no sin to hang the by the throat
Thy words be enuyous, not grounded on charity.

Envy. Sir one thing I pray you tell me.

Peace. What is that

Envy. Have ye any wife or no

Peace. Why ask ye so

Envy. Because ye say peace is most expedyent
if your wife made you cockolde you being present
What would ye do

Peace. Give her such punyshement as longs thereto

Envy. A fal^e flatteryng horsouloo
Now thou say against thine own declaration
If thou fight where is then peace become

Peace. I break not peace with doing due correction
For correction should be done charitably
Irascemini et nolite peccare

Envy. I shall mete that at omnium quare
Pace should forgive and not be revenged
Hence horson by our lady of wolpit
I shall rappe thee one the pate

Peace. Go hence wretch thou make bate
yt were alms to set the in newgate
How master constable come nere
Here is a wretch without reason
Take and put him in prison
With as many yrons as he may bear

Envy. By our lady I will come no nere
A constable quod ha, nay that will I not abide
For I am loathe to go shorter tide
yet long horson for all thy pride
I shall mete with thee another day
When one of us two shall goo a knave a way

Peace. O thou wretch thou ought to remorde
That so tar art exyled from charity
Lo he thinks not, how mekely his maker and Lord
Suffered reprefe and dyed upon a tree
Geuynge us example that with humylyte
Every man should follow his trace
That in heaven will claim a place

Impacient pouerte. Keep keep for coxs face.

Peace. Why art thou so out of patience

impacyent po. A knave would have rested me I owe him but.xl pence
He shall abide by gods dear blessed.

Peace. Take heed my friend thus says the text
In little medlyng stands great rest
Therefore pay thy duetye well and honestly
With few words discretely
Another time ye shall be the better trust

impacy. That will I never do while I live let him do his best
I had lever lay all my good to pledge
To get a write of pryueldge
So may I gy by his nose at large
Spyte of his tethe who so ever say nay

Peace. This is but a wilful mind if thou will not pay
Thy very duty, which can not be denade
Giving of thy write and expense in the law
Will cost more then thy duty, this well I knawe
Thy debt therewith can not be paid
yt is only a deferryng of the payment.

impacy. yet the knave shall not have his intent.

Peace. Thou shall pay by rightful judgment
For the law is indifferent to every person

impacy. I se thou hold on his opynion
yet I set not by you both a rysshe
And I mete the knave I shall hew his flesh
Help him thou old churl and thou can

Peace. I se thou art an evil dysposed man
I utterly forsake thy condycion

impacy. Mary auaunt long precious horson
I set not by the nor him, I make God auowe
I am as good a man as thou for all thy good
Let it be tried by ma^hode, and thereto I give the my glove

Peace. Also to warryours I do reprove
For peace loves not to fight

impacyent po. No old fool, thou have thy might
For in age is naught else but cowardyse

Peace. youth with his courage light
Nor strenght with multitude I do ye plight
Are not only the cause of victory

impacy. No good sir, what then.

Peace. Grace and good governance of man
For with good discresion they began
That were the great wynners of victory

impacy. The victory is gotten by discretion
I pray you sir show me this lesson
How to come to richesse, for that is all my care
For I am ever in great necessite
Meat and drink with me is scarsyte
No man will trust me of a penny
And also my clothes are but bare
Good sir what say you therein.

Peace. I hold it punyshement for thy sin
Show me what is thy name

impacy. I am named Impacient pouerte

Peace. For soth that may well be
Thou art so full of wrath and envy
In thee can grow no grace
But if thou wylt forsake sensualyte
And be governed by reason, as I shall enduce thee
Thou shall come to richesse, within short space

impacy. Show me that now in this place
And thereto I will agree

Peace. Thou must love thy neighbor with charity
Do unto him, no manner of disease
Look how thou would he did to thee
Do to him no worse in no degree
And then thou shall our lord please.

impacy* Shall I love him that loves not me?
Those that trouble and rebuke me shamfully
That will I never do while I live.

Peace. Thou must charitably all fautes forgive
Wwat soever any man to thee say
Let as thou hardest it not, turn thine care away
Thou ^halt please god, if thou so do.

impacy. Nay by god there hoo
What is he in all this place
That will do as this man said
Show me or I go
if a man do you a great offense
Will ye keep your patience
Nay be god not so
I put case I break your head
Will ye suffer that in very deed.

Peace. to suffer for christ's sake I shall have mede

impacy That shall I know by gods bread.

Peace. Hold thy hand and keep pacyence
think what christ suffered for our offense
He was beaten scourged, and spite on with violence
And suffered death for our sake
yet he took it patiently
He forgave his death, and prayed for his enmys
Pater dimite illis, his saying was truly
An exam (...) us to take
to be meke in heart: beati pauperes spiritu
Shall Christ say full even.
Et venite benediciti: come my blessed children
To the kingdom of heaven.

impacy* Sir I thank you, for your ghostly instruction
Unto your saying, I can make no delayaunce
I put me under your gouernacion
And for my misdeeds, I take great repentance

Peace. Then to my saying, take good remembrance
Exercise yourselfe in virtue, from this time hence
And unto peace evermore be obedyent
Sit before every sharp word, a shilde of suffraunce
And when time is of your concupissaunce

impacy. Then pacyfye it with benygne resystaunce
Ser gramercy, yt ye have brought me to this estate
By your aduertisme^t I am willing to live in christ's law
There as I have offended him both early and late
I served him not for love nor for awe
Therefore now right well I know
That pouerte and mysery that I my life in lead
yt is but only punyshement for my mysdeade

Peace. Now or we any further proceed
Hold this vesture and put it on thee
From henceforth thou shall be called prosperytie

Prospe. I thank god and you I am in felicite

Peace. Now unto you I shall here show
Of such things as ye shall eschew
First your soul look that ye keep clean
Beware of mysrule in any wise
Play not at caylles, cards nor dyse
Also from miswomen, for by them mischefe may rise
As it does often, this daily is seen
Haunte no tauernes, nor sytte not up late
Let no hassardes nor riotours, with you be check mat
For then will envy come, and make debate
The which shall cause great troble
Be plentyfull of such as god has sent
Unto ye poor people give with good inte^te
For every penny that is so spent
God will send the double.
Take heed and do as I have said

Prospe. Sir therewith I hold me well apayde
As ye have commanded me it shall be done

Peace. Then let us depart for a season
plyenede I will be your protection. Exiu^t ambo

Habou^. Joy and solace be in this hall
Is there no man here that knows me at all
I am beloved both with great and small
Haboundaunce is my name
I have all things as me list
Meat drink, and cloth of the best
Gold and silver, full is every chest
In faith I will not layne
I think ye know not my ways
How I get goods now a days
By a propre mean
Think you that I would
Lend either silver or gold
That day shall not be seen
But I will lend them ware
That shall be both badde and dear
Not worth the money he shall pay
And if he can no suerte get
Of my ware he gets right naught
Without a good pledge he lay
Then will I for mine avail
He shall make a byll of sail
To me full bought, and sold
if the day be exspyred and paste
Then will I hold it fast
He shall not have it though he would
this craft I have long used
And some men do not yet refuse it
this is openly known
What is he in all this town
that will lend without synguler commodst
Should I tend without a profit
Nay than I hold naught worth my wit.

Conscy. All this ye say, is against conscience

Habou^. Conscience quod a, nay then shall we never thryue
For I know him not alive
By conscience that comes to substance
I have all manner of marchaundy
I sell for long days to them that are nedy
And for the payment I have good suertye
Bound in statute marchaunce
Because I may forbear
I sell my ware so dear
I make forty of twenty in half a year
Other men do so as well as I.

Conscy. Even sin, vary shame mary fie
These goods are gotten vntrewely
Many a man is undone thereby
To take this ware to dear

Habou^. They seek to me both far and near
Me think it is a good deed
To help a man at his need
Yet I have other means
Whereby to get great gaynes
I think ye know not that

Conscy. I no God wot

Habost. No ye are but an ydyote
I sold a man as much ware, as came to.xl. pondue
And in an oblygacion, I had him bound
To pay me at a certain day
And when the bargayne was made plain
Mine own servant, bought the same ware again
For the third penny it cost, ye wot what I mean
But was not this a wise way?

Conscy. Thou shall repent it another day
I charge the as far as I may
Such false ways never begin

Habou^. Wherefore this is no sin
yt is plain byeng and sellyng
Lawful it is for a man to win
Else rich shall he never be.

Envy. Wynnyng to be had, with due suffycience
In true byeng and sellyng, is not to discommende
But for thy false vsuri, thou art cursed in ye sentence
I pray God give thee grace for to amend.

Conscy. Is every man accursed, that does bye and sell
Then shall no man with marchaundyse mell
How shall the world then be uphold

Habou^. Nay sir, amysse ye do understand me
All those that occupy false vsurye
And transgresses the laws of God by iniquity
All such are accursed I you told
As for byeng and sellyng, needs must be
And God commanded to lend to the^ that are nedy
So it be not to their iniurye
For luker to them sold.

Habou^. How should I sell, show me your ways

Conscy. ye may not sell the dearer for days
if ye do, it is contrary to Gods laws

Habou^. It is used in our Country

Conscy. yt is the more pytie
One such is able to destroy a City
And God show not his great mercy
All such are dampened by his equite

Habou^. God forfende that should be
How shall men do that be of great reputacion
Which keep their goods on this same fashyon
By usury, dysceyte and by extorcion
I do so my self, wherefore should I lie

Conscy. Thou may be the more sorye

Habou^. It is so now, what remedy

Conscy. Do make restytucion

Habou^. What call ye restytucion?

Conscy. Restore such goods as ye have gotten
wrongfully by oppression.
Then shall I have little in my possession
I will make God amends, another way
I will fast and I will pray
And I will give alms every day
That I have done amysse, I am sorry therefore

Conscy. This is not sufficient, thou must restore
Quia non dimittitur peccatum
Nisi restituatur ablatum
ye must restore to them, ye have offended unto

habou^. Then I shall show you what I shall do
I will put it in my Testamente
That mine executours shall pay and content
For wyle I live I will not have my good spente
For if I do I am but spylte

Conscy. Make amends man for thy gylte
Rather spyll thy body then thy soul

Habou^. Men of substance ar a shamed to fall

Conscy. That causes them to rest in their sin

Habou^. yet ever with thy strongest part renneth the ball

Conscy. yesterday thou can not again call
when thou art dead ye gate of mercy is shut you cannot come in

Habou^. Then let him stand without

Conscy. So of thy soul thou have no doubt

Habou^. When thou see my soul torn set on a cloute
if falshode, usury, and extorcion should not route
Thousands in this realm should be put out
The third part should not bide by saint Paul

Conscy. yet often falshode has a great fall
An example by king Achab with this sothe
Desired the vyneyarde of that poor man Naboth
By counsel of Iezabell that kings wife
Because he would not sell his possession
Of two false witnesses he was peached of hye treason
And through the mouth of a false quest it rane
which caused the poor man to lose both land and life
After that of gods own byddyng
Came Helas the prophet to Achab the king
Saying he should have evil endyng
And so he had, for by the way as he rode
He fell and brake his neck, where dogs lapped his blood
this example to al usurers and opp^ssours as thinks me contrary
Shul cause them of god sore a dred to be.

haboun. Sir ye preach very holyly, but your deeds be often contrary
ye be so acquaynted with couetouse and symony
That makes us to take the same way

Conscy. So every evil disposed parsone does say
The fraylte of man does often offend
then call for grace, and shortly amend
Therefore I counsel thee to pretend
to repent and be sorry for thy mysdede

Habou^. yet thus I will my life led
For of your saying I take no head
ye will mucker up both gold and treasure
ye have riches without measure
And of the flesh ye have your pleasure
ye can find no ways to amend your self I you insure
Therefore rebuke not me for my sin ne good
God be with you, you shall not rule me

Conscy. O dule wit plunged by ignorance
Regardyng nothing by ghostly instruction
Setting more his mind on worldly substance
Then to the everlasting life that is to come
God will stryke when he list, ye know not how sone
therefore to every man this counsel I give
To be sorry of your sin, and do penance while ye live
Here comes envy runnyng in
laughyng, and says to conscience.

Envy. Now in faith I would ye had be there

Conscy. Where should I have be.

Envy. A better sport ye never se.

Conscy. Where at laughe ye so fast

Envy. He to go and she after.
And within a while he cought her
He took of here an incroke
And chopte her on the hele with his foot
Anon be whypte her on the back
A horsone quod she, playest thou me that
And with her hele she gave him a s^at
That he was feign to go back again

Conscy. Good fellow thou art to blame
Such words to have no good thou can.

Envy. I said it to make you sport and game
I cry you mercy, I was to blame
I se ye are some virtuous man

Conscy. Shortly hence that way thou came
For here thou shall not be

Envy. Good Lord some succor thou send me
That I be no not out cast

Conscy. What is thy name, shortly show me

Envy I dare not sir, by Christ Jesus
Except ye keep it pryuely.

Conscy. Fear not say on hardely

Envy. Sir my right name is charytie
Sometime beloved I was with the spirituality
But now couetouse and simony does them so auau^ce
That good institucion is turned to other ordinance
And bonum exemplum, is put to such hinderaunce
That there I dare not apeare

Conscy. Symony is now in the spiritualtye
Bonus pastor ouium, thereto will see
Therefore me think this is a lie
In holy Church symony can not abide

Envy. He goth in a cloak he can not be espied
And couetouse so craftily does provide
that bonus pastor ouiu^, is blind and will not see

Conscy. That ye speak is upon envy
Therefore I think ye be not Charytie
For charity always will say the best

Envy. Among them can I have no rest

Conscy. How do ye with the temporaltie

Envy. There is pride, slowth and lechery
Which puts me from that place

Conscy. Then be ye with the communaltie

Envy. They despise me vtterely
One of them love no another
The sister can not love the brother
Ne the child the father ne mother
There I dare not show my face.

Conscy. This is to me a strange case
What hear ye by conscience.

Envy. Spiritual and temporal set against him maruaylously
Merchants, men of law and artyfycers of every degree
They will hang him and they him espy
Such exclemacion goes through this realm round

Conscy. Why what fault have they found
with him so to do

envy. His wit is naught, they say also
Every man puts his will thereto
To banyshe him for ever.

Consci I know well it is not as ye say
For I am conscience ye hye judge of the law

Envy. Be ye conscience, alas that ever I this day saw
if ye be taken, ye shall be hanged and draw
For they have utterly put you down
And set couetyse in your rowme
Subtylte the scrybe his own cosyn

Consci And falshed the somner, for the courts promocion.

Envy I maruayle wherefore this was done
When riches came before you that much will pay
There he had lived in sin many a day
ye should for money let him go quyte a way
And put him to no shame
Let pouerte do penance for a little offense
He is not able to promote you of.xx. pence
Then should ye have kept your resydence
And gotten your self a good name.

Consc Who so does they are to blame
In mysorderyng them in such wise

envy. y wis cosyn I show you as now is ye guyse
For by couetyse much people does up rise
which is against both you and me

Conscy. Charity I pray you show what remedy
In this matter for me may be found

envy. Shortly get you to wyldernes, or some other regio^
For they will hang you up at the Tyborne
If they find you in this place
And I must depart also

Consci This is to me much sorrow and woe
I will go into some far country
Fare well gentle cosyn charity

envy. I shall pray for you, pray ye form
This is an heavy departing E^plorat
I can in no wise forbear weeping
yet kesse me or ye go
For sorrow my heart will break in two
Is he gone, then have at laughyng
Asyr is not this a ioly game
That conscience does not know my name
Envy in faith I am the same
what needs me for to lie
I hate conscient, peace love and rest
Debate and strife that love I best
According to my properte
when a man loves well his wife
I bring them at debate and strife
This is seen daily
Also between sister and brother
There shall no neighbor love another
where I dwell bye
And now I tell you plain
Of one man I have dysdayne
Prosperyte men do him call
He is nigh of my blood
And he to have so much worldly good
That greueth me worst of all

prospe Jesus that is both steadfast and stable
Ever perseueraunt and never mutable
He save this congreacion.

envy. welcome pouerte by coxs passion
Ho we have ye done this many a day

Prospe. I thank god as well as any man may
ye call me wrong my name ia prosperyte

Envy. Prosperyte with an evil hap
How the devil fortunest that
I knew the impacient poverty

prospe. Whatsoeur I was let that matter pas
And take me as I am.

envy. I cry you mercy I was to blame
To call you by your old name
yet all these people think ye are the same
Impacient poverty as I said before

prospe. Auaunt I tell the, I am a gentylman bore
If I here the report such words anymore
Thou shall be punyshed like a knave.

envy. A knave quod, a cors passion
I am your own cosyn
And nigh of your consanguynyte.

prospe. Thou and I are not of one affinyte.

envy. If I were a rich man, ye would not say so by me
ye would then say I were your next kynsma^ on live

Prospe. I say go hence and make no more strife
I set not by such a pore haskarde

envy. Sir do not you know my name

Prospe. I know the not by saint Iame.

Envy. Charity in faith I am the same
what needs me for to lie
I am your cosen and so will I dye
ye may be glad such a kynsman to have

prospe. Shall we have more a do yet thou knave
I charge the never know me for thy kynne

envy. I pray you a word or I go

prospe. Say on shortly then have I do

envy. Sir, I have of gold three hundredth pound
In a bag fast y bound
At home looked in my cheste
I purpose to go to Jerusalem
ye shall keep it till I come again
I put you best in trust.

prospe Cosyn I would feign do the best
Because ye are nere of my blood

envy. what, are ye now in that mood
Now I am your kynsman because of my good
Before of me he had dysdayne

prospe. As fore that I was to blame
I knew you not, be not angrye
ye are welcome to me cosyn charytie

envy. Then all these matters let be
I come hither with you to dwell
ye must have moseruntes I do you tell
Such as were necessare for your person

prospe. I am content after your prouysion
In every thing let it be done
As ye think most expedient

envy. Sir I shall do mine intent
To get you servants mo

Prospe. I prraye you hertely it may be so
A little season I will from you go
To solace me with some recreacion Exit

Envy. He that sytteth above the moon
Evermore be in your protection
Aha here is a sport for a Lord
That prosperytie and I be well at accord
I shall bring his thryft under the board
I trust within short space
For it greueth my heart right sore
He has so much treasure in store
And I have never the more
I must find some proper shyfte
That from his good he may be lift
To bring him to misrule I hold it best
For he can sone bring it to pass Here mysrule syngeth without coming in
How what rutterki^ have we her
I would he were our subchauntere
Because he can so well sing
Feytes bone shere pour lamour de asynt John

mysru. Mon ^uer iocunde is set on a merry pynne
By my truth I am disposed to reuelyng

Envy. So me thinks by your coming in
What mysrule where have thou been many years
By my troth even among my peers

mysru. By my troth even among my peers
I came now stragiht from the stews
From little pretty I one
Lord that she is a pretty one

Envy. Hold thy peace let that alone
Hark a word or twain to the
I dwell now with prosperity
which has much worldly treasure
If thou can contryue in thy thought
How that he may be brought to naught
In all this world I desire no more.

misrule. Tushe take no thought therefore
I con provide for that in the best wise

Envy. Then let me hear thy deuyce

misrule. I will bring him to classhe, cards and dyse
And to propre trulles that be wanton and nyce
which will not be kept at a small price
How thynkest thou, will not this do well.

Envy. yes but harken in counsel
Thou must change thy name

mysru. I will say I hit mirth

Envy And I will say the same
Peace whyst I se him come

Prospe God save all this honorable company

envy. Sir you be welcome by our blessed (...)
I have thought for you full long
Here is gentylman, I pray you for my sake
Say he is welco^e and into your service hi^ take
For great courtesy he can

Prospe. Sir you be welcome, give me your hand
And show me what is your name

mysru. Sir my name is mirth
Beloved with lords and ladies of birth
At every tryumphe I am them with
They can me not ones forbear

Envy. And ye had sought this thousand year
Such another ye shall not find
wherefore I counsel you in my mind
Let him dwell with you for one yer.

prospe. At your request I am content
Such a prete man for me were expedient
And of his counsel feign would I here.

mysrule Sir ye must sing and dance and make good chere
I would ye had some propre wenche
That were young and lusty at a pynche
Here hele were not so broad as an ynche
She would quycken your courage

prospe. Peace has forbidden me ye outrage

Envy. He would set you at dotage
Because he is old and nature is paste
He would now ever man should fast
if ye do so ye do but waste
And unto you no mede

mysrule A straw for him, ye have no need
Of him to stand in awe or dread
A meryer life now may ye led
Therefore be at your own lybertye

Prospe. By my truth I may say to thee
Syte I to him did assent
Had I never merry day
But lived in fear and dread always
Nothing to mine entente
Another while I will me sport
Sing and dance to my comfort.

envy. And among merry company do resort
For that shall length your life

mysrule Spare neither maid ne wife
Take both and they come in your way

Envy. Of with this lewd array
yt becomes you naught by this day

prosper By my troth even as you say
ye mary now am I well apayde
Me thinks I am properly arayde
if I had a propre trul she should be asaid
In the worshype of the new year

Envy. Russhe up mutton for beef is dear
Have and revel and chance:

misrule. Now let us both sing and dance
Will ye have a french round

Prospe. And thou shall se me bounce above the ground
Hey with revel dashe

Peace What prosperity is it come hereto

Prospe. What devil of hell have thou to do
Shall I not make merry when me list.

Peace. yet I say beware of had I wist

Envy. Hens ye knave or else thou shall lycke my fyst
I trow thy head would have some knockes

Prospe Go set him in a pair of stocks
That I him no more se.

Peace. yet man I say remember thee
And think what I to the have said.
Escheue evermore these ryatours company
And be ruled by reason as I thee badde
Put from the these two parsons by who^ thou art lad
Envy and mysrule with their sinful and great abusyon
Which if thou wylt not forsake, will be thy confuison

Prospe. Auaunt lorden, and take this for a canclusion
These men fro me thou shall not separate
Go out of my sight or by coxs passion
I shall lay the fast in newegate

Peace. It is better to forsake them betyme then to late
This knave would have a broken pate

misrule. Let me alone by gods bread
This same sword shall stryke of his head.
I pray you hence that ye were rydde

Prospe. Shortly have him out of my sight
A little while give me respyte

Peace. And take heed what I do say
Remember in what condition thou was
when I first met the in this place
Full simple in poor array
Now by the grace of god and counsel of me
Thou art come to great prosperyte
And so may continue until thou dye
if thou wisely take heed
Let not sensualyte led the brydell
Be occupied in virtue, and be not ydell
The better shall thou proceed
These wreches will thy goods spend and waste
then shall thou be taken for an out cast
And mocked and scorned with most and leest
Then will no man the help at need

Envy. A sir evil mote thou speed
That so can read his destanye.

misrule Will ye suffer this knave in your company
Then god be with you I will forsake you

prospe. Go hence or in faith I shall make you.

Peace. Then to almighty god I betake you

envy. Let me come to that bragg^r
I shall thrust him through the ars with my dagger
(And here the face Peace out of the place)
How say ye, was not this a good face
To drive a knave out of the place

mysrule In faith thou made him run a pace
Thou looked as thou hade been mad

Prospe. Now by my troth my heart is glad
Some mynstrell now I would we had
To revel and dance, for by saint ^ had
I am so light me think I flee.

envy. ye mary so should it be
For now I hold you wise.
Sir and ye will do by mine advise

mysrule Let us go straight to the flower delyce
There shall ye find a man will play at dyce
with you for an hundredth pound.

prospe. What man is he

misrule Colehassarde came late from beyond ye see
Ragged and torn in a guarded cote
And in his purse never a grote
And now he goes like a lord

Prospe. I pray thee tell at one word
Is he a gentylman bore.

Envy. Tusshe take no thought therefore
For be he gentylman knave or boy
if he come here with a tryfle, or a toye
He can no money lack

Prospe. Now by the bread that god brake
I think long till I him se
Mirth go before and ordain a good dysshe
One of flesh another of fysshe

envy. Nay let all be flesh
A young pullet tender and nesshe
That never came on broche, have with ye or thou go

mysrule What shall I have?

envy. Four quarters of a knave
Roasted upon a spytte Exit mysrule.

Prospe Now by my troth and Colhassard will sytte
I will play as l^nge as an hundredth pound will last

Envy. And ye will play an hundredth pound at a cast
He will keep you play.

prospe. Then let us go our way
I sit on thorns till I come there

envy. That shall make your thryfte full bare

prosperi What will it do

Envy. I say we shall have good chere
When we come there. Exu^t ambo.

Se^ce. When phoebus draws into the occydentall
And observed with clouds mysty and dark
Then trees, herbs, and grass, by course natural
want their chief comfort, thus says many a clacke
And likewise that man in his warke
Is destytute of reason, following sensual operacion
The last time I was in this place
Prosperity unto mysrule put his hole confydence
He regarded not my counsel, he lacked grace
which in time coming shall turn him to inco^uenie^ce
with hassarders, and ryotters, he keeps resydence
At clas he and cards with all unthrifty game
which in contynuaunce shall bring him to shame
To him yet I will resort
if he be brought in poverty
I shall do him all the comfort
And all the help that lies in me
I will never rest till I him se
But seek about from place, to place
And bring him to some better grace. Exit

mysru. Colhassarde art then there
Horeson knave wylt thou not appear
By my troth I had went to have found him here
I hold him gone some other way
And where is envy I can not him espy
I trow he is with prosperytie
Prosperyte, nay, I may call him folysshe poverty
As wise as a drake
I have brought him to dyce, cards, and clas he
And ever on his side ran the loss
That he is not worth a hendfull of moss
Neither has not a hole brat to his back

envy. Passion of god is it come to that
This tidings makes my heart glad

mysru. In faith he has neither gold, silver, ne plate
Colhassarde and I be both at one
He promised me to have half the game
that every thing shall be divided in twain
He to have the one half and I the other

Envy. Then let us be partoners as brother and brother

mysru. I can not say, till colhassarde come
then shall we know, both all and some

Colhassarde. Here is a bag of gold so round
Here in is two thousand pound
Of prosperyte me it won
what man with me is able to make comparyso^
Now shall I take a merchants place
to occupy I trust within short space
To be in credence with Englyshmen
And when I am so well betruste
I may borowe so much as me lust
A subtle craft then find I must
to conuaye under color like fre men

envy. Herke this knave so proud and stout
that had not to his arse a hole cloute
when he came to this land, and now has brought about
To compare with a state

mysrule Now must I have half money and half plate

Calhas. Nay by god there thou spoke to late
None thereof from me shall escape
then had I lived to long

mysrule Thou promised me, when thou began
Half thy wynnyng I shall have

Colhas. Hold thy peace lewd knave
know thou to whom thou do speak

mysrule A horeson thy head shall I break

Envy. For the passion of god sobre your mode
I fear shedyng of knaves blood
Here they fight and rune al out of the place
And then enters prosperiti poorly and says

pouerte O Jesus what may this mean
My goods are spent and wasted away
Also my men are from me clean
I se them not this seven nyghtes day
As long as I might spend and pay
They held me up with false dyssimulacion
And now they forsake me in my most trybulacion

Envy. Come for cox^ bones, why tarry ye so long

mysrule In faith I come as as fast as I can
I am so angry I wot not what to do
That yonder knave escaped from me so

envy. What knave is this I hold him some spy

poverty I am your master, know ye not me

Envy. Thou art come late out of marshall see

mysrule Me think his hair grows through his hode

pouerte Alas Collhassarde has won all my good
And left me never a groate

Envy. Mary so me think, ye have changed your coat
But now ye have one vauntage.
what is that.

Envy. your executours shall not strive for your good another day pouerte
Nor thieves shall not rob you going by the way
Thus ye shall stand out of doubt

mysrule Hens ragged knave or thou shall bear me a clout
His clothes smell all of the smoke

Envy Now by saint Hew that holy bisshoppe
This matter is well brought to pass
He is now a knave as he was
First a knave, and then a man
And now he is a knave again

pouerte. Why say ye so ye be to blame
I am your master prosperytie

mysrule Auaunt lorell and evil to the
Get the out of this company
Begynnest thou now to make comparion

envy. Let him be your under page
Give him meat and drink and no wage
Go brushe his gown and make clean his shone

mysrule Well knave can thou no courteysye

envy. He has such a disease in his knee
He can not change a man a groate
It is not as ye wene

mysrule Come and se my shone made clean

Envy. By my faith he shall wype mine

mysrule This knave is not mete for me
yt greueth my heart when I him se
I will go hence and leave you twain
For envy thou may with poverty rain. Exit

Envy. Nay I had rether he were slain.
I am gone as soon as ye Exit

pouerte Abide still with me gentle charity
O to whom should I sewe, to whom should I plete
O mortal worm wrapped all in woe
As a man all mortyfyed, and mased in my wit
I a captyfe in captyuite, lo fortune is my foo
I am in endless sorrow, alas what shall I do
these captives through their counsel and false imaginacio^
Have brought me to naught yt was of great reputacio^
Woe worth the time that I them knew
I may well syghe, and say alas
For now I find these wodes full true
That peace showed me here in this place
I regarded not his council, I lacked grace
wherefore nedy poverty on me does blow his horn
That every man and woman does laugh me to scorn
Example to all young men when they take in hand
To occupye in the world for your behofe
Look wisely before, and also understand
Evil company destroys man, on me ye se the proof
Make a sure foundacyon, or ye set up the rofe
Of a good and virtuous begi^ni^g comes a good endi^g
And evermore beware of unmeasurable spending.
Here enters the Somner.
Some. I assyte you in our court to appear

pouerte I pray you tell me wherefore

Some. ye be a great slaunderer and full of envy

poverty There will no man say so but you

Some. what wylt thou give me and thou shall go quyte

pouerte By my troth I have not one myte

Some Then open penance and thou art like

pouerte By my troth I sclander no man

Some. Then come and scuse thy self as well as thou can
Heboundaunce enters.
Habou^. What man is he that can me dysmay
For I obtain all thing at my will
Or dare any thing against me say
what soever I do be it good or ill
For if he do he were better be still
I shall him punyshe be it right or wrong
For with in my purse, I can both save and hang
To repunge against me he were better be still
I have a propre trull for my pastaunce
In my chamber I her keep, both night and day
My neighbors therewith, takes great greuaunce
yet I keep her still whosoever say nay
How be it there is one a poor caytyfe I hear say
Has me accused in the court spyritual
And it cost me a.C.li. punyshe him I shall

Some. Open sin must have open penance
God speed my master haboundaunce

Habou^. what knave art thou with a very mischau^ce
That comes in so homely.

Some. Sir I pray you be not angry
I am an offycer of the spiritualte
There is upon you a great scleaunder
ye keep another man's wife in your chamber
And live in great aduoutrye

Habou^. what wretches does so say by me

Some. it is openly known every where
Before my master I charge you to appear
Upon a book there shall ye swear
whether it be so or no

Habou^. what is the best for me to do
Rather than I to the court will go
I had ^euer spend twenty pound

Some Sir if such a way may be found
To excuse you, what will ye then say

Habou^. Now thereof heartily I the pray

Some. ye shall come home to my masters place
And say that ye be put up of malice
Thrust money in his hand a pace
And so shall ye go quyte away

Haboun For thy counsel gramercy: hold here is.xl pence.

Some Come on sir I will do my dyligence. exiunt ambo

Here enters the sumner again, and pouerte follows him with a candell in his
hand doing penance about the place. And then says the somner. Rowme syrs
auoydaunce


