AN HIPPONOMIE OR THE VINEYARD OF HORSEMANSHIP: Divided into three Books. 1.
The Theorick Part, entreating of the inward Knowledge of the Man. 2. The first
Practicke Part, showing how to work according to that Knowledge. 3. The second
Practicke Part, declaring how to apply both hunting and running Horses to the
true grounds of this Art.
In which is plainly laid open the Art of Breeding, Ri ding, Training and
Dieting of the said Horses. Wherein also many errors in this Art, heretofore
published, are manifestly detected. By MICHAELL BARET, Practitioner and
Professor of the same Art.

LONDON, Printed by GEORGE ELD. 1618.

TO THE MOST HIGH, WORTHY, AND RENOVNED KING, JAMES, BY the Grace of God, of
Great BRITAIN, FRANCE and IRELAND, King; De fender of the true, ancient,
Catholic and Apostolic Faith, etc.
IF I should go about (most Gracious and Dread Sovereign) to blaze a Motto of
your Sacred and Puissant Virtues, (which no Fame can equalize, both for Divine
knowledge and intellectual Judgment in all Arts and Sciences,) my weak
apprehension and rude Pen would obscure the very Shadow of your peerless
worths; seeing they extend beyond the reach of any man's invention, being so
resplendent as they rarifie and give light to the eclipsed and dark knowledge
of all your Subjects, (as the Sun gives light and life to all the other
Orbs and sublunarie bodies:) Upon whom God has multiplied his gifts and
blessings to such a Product, as no Nation or Kingdom upon the surface of the
dark Globe of this earth could ever as yet number. And upon the Axis of which
blessings we your unworthy Subjects make our reuolutions, in conformable Peace
and tranquillity, as the Center of our terrestrial happiness; whose poles
being animated with mercy and peace, are made so stable by conformity and
unition, as we receive all our fruition therefrom, not only of temporal but
also of spiritual comforts: So as we may say, God has made all things
prosper in Putiphers house for Joseph's sake. Genesis 39. 5.


For which we all your humble Subjects are bound to pray unto God, that as he
has, so he will still deliver Daniel from the Jaws of Dan. 6. 22.
the Lions; And as he gave power to David to overcome the Bear and the Lion,
so still to strike off the head of Goliath, that will blaspheme 1. Sa. 17. 37.
against God or his anointed; that we may still hear the golden Bells of
Aaron sound in Amos. 8. 11.
our ears, that he do not send a Famine to the Soul, but that it may still
be fed and nourished with the true and living Bread, with free liberty without
restraint, that we may rejoice Leui. 20. 13.
in this Iubile of years; for many Prophets and Kings have desired to see such
things as we see, and have not seen them, and to hear those Luke 10. 24.
things we hear and have not heard them.

Wherefore to show our thankfulness both unto God and unto your Highness, for
such fruition of peace and prosperity, that we receive by having the glorious
light of the Gospel to shine so beautifully amongst us, we are bound in duty
and Conscience, to offer in Sacrifice the Calves Romans 13. 5.
of our lips unto him in whose hands are the Prou. 21. 1.
hearts of Kings, for the preservation of so gracious a Sou^raigne; for every
one (being but as a member) should seek the good welfare, and to maintain the
strength of this bodily Kingdom, of which your Majesty is the head.

Amongst whom, I being one of the meanest amongst the meaner, am bound by the
same bond of loyalty, to discharge my duty, according to the talent which God
has bestowed on me; and therefore not being able to present such gifts unto
your Highness as is worthy your acceptance (for the excellency thereof) rather
then I shall be found with the ungrateful servant to hide my talent in the
ground, I have presumed to dedicate unto your Majesty this Vineyard of
Horsemanship, the first fruit of my lives experience, planted by painful
practice and the charges of my whole estate; knowing the greatest Monarchs have
vouchsafed to receive poor presents of such as were not able to offer greater
gifts.

In which, where I have at any time failed in order or method, (through
inability) so that the truth is not so clearly purged from error as my willing
intention did desire, I most humbly subject my self to the perfection of your
all-seeing Hyperbole.
knowledge, and that you would vouchsafe to adorn the imperfections thereof,
with a favorable and charitable censure of my earnest desire to have this now
withered and dead Art of Horsemanship (being such a famous Art) the 2. Theo. 2.
^.
more ^o flourish in this Kingdom, which has bee^^ ^o ^on* frost-bitten with
the ^^^gealing ry^ne of ^^tient traditions; whereby Custom has taxed such
false impositions upon these noble Creatures, as now they are become most
ignoble and base; In which also I have done my best, to set these blameless
Creatures free from such unjust suggestions, and have laid the cause of them to
man's ignorance, to whom they are properly appertaining. Therefore trusting your
Gracious lenity will admit a tolleration of my unworthy labors, it will incite
others to dig deeper into this Mine, whereby there will be found such
precious pearls, as will garnish the now dejected Art of this so famous
Subject, that there shall be no need to desire any Jewels from foreign
Countries, and also it will imbolden me to persist (during the rest of my life)
to bring such things to light as are yet left in darkness, according to the
measure of my understanding. And in the mean time, I will pray with heart and
mind unto the King of all Kings, that he would confound the wicked practices
of all those, whether Papists or Atheists, that shall either secretly or openly
attempt the subversion of you or your Royal posterity, but that there may be
still one proceeding from your loins to rule the Scepter till Shilo come; and
that as he has made you the greatest here upon earth, so he will crown you
and yours to reign perpetually with him, in his everlasting Kingdom.

Your Majesty's least and unworthiest Subject. MICHAELL BARET.

TO THE MOST HIGH, AND ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCE, CHARLES PRINCE OF WALES, etc.
MOst Excellent Prince: as it is a true saying, that the tree is known by the
fruit: so in like manner the fruit is hoped by the tree; wherefore you being of
such Royal descent, in which are inherent such fullness of Moral and Divine
virtues, there can be no doubt, but this peaceable happiness shall futurely
continue: For as the Earth (which is said to be a Magneticall body) does not
only hold it self, in one certain, and uniform Situation, Elevation, and
Place, by the disponent faculty, and Magneticall vigor of the two Poles, and
by virtue of the gravity unto the Center; but also does attract, and conform
all other substances (of the like quality, (as directory Needles, inclinatory
Needles, Sea Compasses, and such like,) to aspect the Poles, and so unite
themselves in all corespondency, at convenient angles and positions, by a
constant and certain apprehension of the same, and so become as guides to
direct men in doubtful and uncertain passages; Even so, your Grace, being so
truly and firmly touched with the Virtue, Power, and Potency, of so High and
Precious a Magneticall Body, will site your self Parallel to his Axis, and
when you shall approach near his Articke Pole, you will join and make a
straight line with the same: (to whose Poles, all men's endeavors do attract
and conform themselves in all doubtful causes:) because that if a Magnet be
taken from the whole rock, (whence it was united, and did grow in the bowels
of the Earth) although before he was taken away he was but a part of the whole
body, yet after it is separated, will then become a perfect, complete, and sole
Magneticall body, retayning all the proprieties and virtues of the whole nature.

But I insist too much to prove that which no man can or once dare to deny;
wherefore (assuredly knowing your Highness is so richly endowed with all
Heroical Virtues,) I am also imboldned to Dedicate these my rude and
undigested Labors, unto your most Excellent Favor, being (as yet) of such
tender years, as your prosperous time may quicken and revive this low and
debased Art of Horsemanship, and by whom these low shrubbs may spread and grow
up like Olive plants, so as this Realm shall not need to dull the ears of
any other strange countries, (by petition for assistance,) if you will but
vouchsafe to countenance the Fauorits thereof with your Smyling Grace. For I
have planted this Vineyard upon a firm and true ground, and have fenced it
about in such sort by Reason, and weeded and pruned it by Practice, that there
is no Impe, (if conceit hinder not,) but may keep it from such weeds, and
ravenous beasts as would devour or choke him, whereby these excellent and so
necessary Creatures, may be brought to such obedience and subjection, as shall
be needful for the use and service of Man; (for whom they were created, as his
hereditary possession:) Although my Artlesse pen has not made it so
delightful as to revive the dead senses of all scrutenous brains, which no
Tullies Eloquence as yet could ever persuade. And therefore I most submissiuely
entreat that it would please you to accept of this my first and new born
Infant, (being but as yet in the swaddling Clothes, which desires to be Fostred
under your wings, and to be protected under your Feathers: and I hope it will
prove such a thankful Orphan as it will also nourish many Impes, and cause
them to flourish, so, in this plantation, as they shall bring forth such
pleasant grapes, as will relish the Pallat, and delight the eye. And so with my
unfeigned prayers to Almighty God, for your Excellencies most prosperous
success and endless happiness, I rest devoted as unworthy of your least
Favors.

Your Excellencies most lowly, and poor Servant. MICHAELL BARET.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
WEre it not (most courteous Reader) that the great desire I have to do
something, that might either profit my Country or the Commonweal; did urge me
forward to the publishing and setting forth this Treatise (entitled the
Vineyard of Horsemanship) both the insufficiency of my self through the
imbecility of knowledge and also the intricacie and obsourenesse of the Art,
(being so much darkened through the abuse thereof) might have dissuaded me from
so bold an enterprise, but more especially knowing that it cannot be without
scandalous taunts: For so much as it shall come to a public view of Momus and
his Associates.

For neither is my wit so finely filed, as to prove my assertions by strong
reasons and invincible Arguments; nor yet my learning so largely lettered, as
to ^ecke and garnish it with Rhethoricall amplifications and flowing speeches;
But only to set it forth in such plain and simple manner a^ shall be fit for
the instruction of the meanest, hoping that the meekest will take it in the
best sense, and according to my goodwill; for it (being wrought in plano) has
no curiosity to delight the ears of the curious; but yet it is supported with
a strong Pillar which is the truth: Trusting you will not esteem it to be any
deal defaced in being set forth without any painted attire, and by one of so
weak performance; for gold is nothing the worse if it be found on the
dunghill, nor poison any deal the better being drunk forth of a gilded cup.
But rather as Seneca says, Seneca.
Non quis sed quid dicit attendite, rather respect what is delivered then who
or in what manner it is delivered: For in regard that I have neither the Art of
d^lighting, nor persuading; yet if I have any part of teaching, it shall not
grieve me to bestow my small talent into the Treasury of the World, having
proved it only by practice to be perfect; Knowing, that a little water, being
cast into the Sea is preserved, but being kept by it self is soon dried up.
Even so, this little Treatise being committed to the World, will be preserved
(by some) but being kept close, it will soon d^cay. But it is Objection.
objected by some, that this part of Horsemanship is so easy that there need
little instruction for the teaching thereof, and also it is holden by other
some, (and some of them reputed good Horsemen) Theo. 3. d.
that to bring a Horse to his pace is not only idle, but also to spoil his
Answer.
other pace. To whom I answer, for the first, if they rightly consider the
stayed seating of the Horses body, and also the true placing of his Idem. 1.
head, with the easy carriage of his reine, and the proper motion of his going
forward, with the easiness of his going; and moreover, the just and true
handling of his legs: they shall find that the Art has such obscurity and
intricatenesse, that it would require a whole Volume, for the explayning
thereof, rather then a small Treatise.

And as for the second, which hold it to be idle. Is that an idle thing that ^s
necessary for all sorts of people? for if a man have occasion to travail but
two or three miles from the town, will not he be desirous to be carted both
freely, easily and safely, which cannot be so truly done by any Horse, as upon
a pacer: much more then (necessary) ^f he be to travail two hundred or three
hundred miles. Therefore I could wish, that they should ride upon Trotting
Asses all their lives (for penance,) to kee^ t^em from idleness, till they
endeauo^r themselves to search mo^e diligent^y into the truth of this Art: to
teach them to give sentence in that thing they have such small experience in.
But it is the nature of a great number, to envy that in others, which they
cannot attain unto themselves. Thinking that to be idle, which their idle
brains cannot comprehend: and so judge them to be fantastical (as is the
manner of ignorant men) which attempt any thing beyond their reach and the
compass of their knowledge: thinking the world to be no greater then the Cages
of their brains can comprehend. Therefore although they be reputed for good
Horsemen, yet to them I answer, with the Ciuillian, Fama per Ciuillian.
se, paruura momenti habet ad probandum, only fame is a very small moment of
proof. And whereas they say there are many Horses spo^led by this Art, I grant
it to be true. But it is not the Art that does spoil them, but the abuse
thereof. For though meat Theo. 3. d.
and drink, be both necessary and good, yet they may say (by the same
conclusion) because they have seen many surfeit by it, that (therefore) it is
naught: whereas (indeed) it is not the use of the creatures but the abuse, for
as it is the nature of most men to think that which they most affect to be the
best; so many men in their particular knowledge, think themselves the wisest,
in that they do best conceit. And so if at any time, they (by chance) have
made two or three Horses to ^ace, (though never so unseemly) then straight
they hold themselves as excellent as the best, thinking there is no more to be
known. Whereas to make a Horse pace only, without any other respect, it is
the least part of the Art; for it is not the pace only that is to be
respected, but also his comely carriage (in every particular) to be regarded.
And therefore no marvel, though there be so many Horses spoiled, being taught
upon untrue ground.

For (as the learned says) Quod nemo didicit, nemo docere potest, it is hard
for a man to teach that to another, which he never learned himself.

Now seeing the truth of this Art is so darkened with ignorance, and drowned in
the whirle-poole of conceit; I have thought it my duty, as much as in me
lies, to illustrate some dark corners thereof: for (as Cicero says) Non
nobis solum nati sumus, sed partim patriae, Cicero.
partim parentibus, partim amicis, debemus, that we are not borne, only for
our selves, but partly for our country, partly for parents, and partly for our
friends, but the least part to our selves.

But me thinks I hear some Zoylists object and condemn me of Objection.
arrogance, for attempting to set forth this Book to the eyes of the world, my
self being of no greater credit, for the authority thereof: and also for my
education, never to have been brought up amongst Horsemen: and further, my
country wherein I have lived the most part of my life (which is Holland in
Lincolneshire) to be of no esteem for Horsemanship: Moreover, that I justify
my worke^ too much for truth, whereas others (of better judgment then my
self) have left their works, to be examined at the discretion of others, all
which I will answer as well and as briefly as I can.

And for the first, I grant my self to be very mean of credit, to give
authority to my works, but is it not mere vanity, to give greater respect to
a man or to his place, then to his knowledge? For example, ^^ a man get a place
of credit, either by following some Noble Man, or else by some other means,
then are both his words and works holden most Authentical, although he (for
the true understanding of himself) does deserve, neither the one nor the
other. And therefore Socrates being asked whether Archclaus, (who was esteemed
a very hardy and valiant man) by his judgment, were to be accounted happy or
no^l cannot tell (quoth he) I never had any conference with him: Inferring,
that happiness does not consist in the esteem of the worl^, but in knowledge.

And herein does man greatly err: For there is not any thing Act 10. 34.
which regards greatness but man only. Not GOD: for he is no accepter of
persons; and he makes the simple things of the world 1. Cor. 1. 21.
to confou^d the wise: And also the wisdom of the world, is mere Foolishness
with GOD. Not nature: for we see the poor man's 1. Cor. 3. 19,
child to be borne, as fa^re, and well favored, as wise, and as rich (in
respect of it self) as the ^eire of the Noble. And likewise, has not Nature
given to the Ant, such providence, that Man is wished to Pro. 6. 6.
learn at her; and to the Be, Art to gather (as Galen says) from some
flowers M^ate, from others Wax, and from other some Honey: and likewise, to
make her Nest (in her Comb) so Artificially, that the cunning^st workman
cannot perform the like. And further, to the Spider, to spinne her thread so
s^all, (through the quickness of her touch) and make her web so
proportionable, that it would admire the beholders, if custom did not make it
more frequent. All which are sim^le creatures to the judgment of Man, and yet
they have their gifts above Man: then why may not both GOD, and Nature, give
knowledge to some Man (though held simple) in one Art, (if he endeavor himself
thereto) as well as unto others that are of greater authority?

For (as the wiseman saith^) qui addit scientiam, addit et laborem, he which
will be cunning be must be painful. Wherefore (as M. Doctor Hall says) I had
rather applaud my self for having much that I (...) his Me^^.
show not, then others should appla^d me for showing more then I have.

And for the second, true it is I was never trained up under any Cicero true:
who says, that he found more by experience then by reading. But if I had
yielded my self to a teacher, no doubt, I should have trodden, the steps of
my master, howsoever: for there is nothing more consonant to the nature of man
then Imitation.

Thirdly, for my Country, I see no reason why it should be so stained

But yet, if this work had proceeded forth of Yorkshire, or any other place
of fame, then it should have been held very probable, although the work were
frought with many errors. And what can argue greater ignorance, then for one to
give greater credit to the authority of the place, then to the truth: except
it were only nursed in th^se places, and others branded with utter ignorance,
or else they think that men are confined within the limits of their own
Country: and banished from all the rest; and yet if they should travail they
(being more wedded to affection, then reason) will allege the old saying;
Coelum, non animum mutat, qui trans mare currit, he may change the Horison but
not his mind, which p^sseth the seas. It ^^ true, there are many might come
unto knowledge, if they thought they had it not before. For if a man tra^atle
never so far if he be wed to his own conceit, he shall not make any profit
(for all his travail) to help his knowledge, for (as the wiseman says)
Consuetudinem vincere, dura pugna est: It is a great Conquest to overcome a
man's will. And yet if he will not be ^yed to his own Conceit but to Reason,
he shall not only change the Clime, but also his mind.

And for the last, I hold Mr. Morgans opinion. Let no man think he has
certain and undoubted knowledge, which thinks a thing to be otherwise then
he knows it to be, which when he hears the report of the Ancients and
Elders, is then presently danted, thinking it not possible to know more then
they know, or for them not to err. And so suffer themselves like sheep to be
led to the slaughter of ignorance without searching the truth. Wherefore seeing
truth comprehends nothing but sure and perfect knowledge, and knowledge is
g^tten by experience, and experience by practice, and practice by time; and
also I find by practice in time, that this method will bring any horse (of what
age soever) to true and commendable pace: I see no reason wherefore I may not
defend this as truth, although other Horsemen, of far better esteem then my
self, have set down their opinions to be left or taken, at the wills and
opinions of others.

Wherefore if I shall any way distaste the judicial and willing Practitioners
in this Art; I humbly crave their favorable censures for my conceipted
assert^on, (as they may term it) Hoping that when they have rightly considered
the gross abuse of this Art, and the several conceits and opinions of every
man, for Q^ot homines, tot sensus, so many men so many minds: I trust they
will in some sort excuse me ^or standing unto my own, having truly proved it;
for as Varro says, Nusquam deueniet, qui quot videret calls sequitur: He
shall never come to his iourne^es end, which follows every by-path: So he
shall never ariue at the Haven of Knowledge, that is tossed with the
tempestuous waves of every man's brain.

Now because this is such an excellent Art, in regard it is used about so
famous a Subject (for Ea scientia nobilior est, quae circa nobilius subiectum
versatur:) I being sorry to see it in such ruin, through the abuse of many (who
are rather destroyers then builders) have thought good to repair one decayed
place, not being able to build all for want of ability, (not of good will.) I
have wrought one sta^^ by the line of leuel, and squared it, per normam
rationis, and although it be not curiously carved, yet being wrought in
perpendicular w^se, it will agree with the next parallel, and so make a firm
foundation: desiring the ingenious, to allow it a place in the building. And
also, seeing the stream is so shallow through the dryness of the Spring from
whence it does flow, that the Swanne cannot swim, yet the little Tittemouse may
wash her self therein: Trusting that where the water shall chance to stop its
current through the shallowness of the river, some painful labourer will
concaue the superficies, and so make it r^ceptable for the greater sort of
birds.

Now therefore in regard I have done the best that I can, in dinulging this
Treatise to the world, dividing it into three Books, the first treating only
of the Theoricke knowledge of the man, how to conform his will to reason, and
the other two showing how to bring a Horse to the obedience of his will by
breeding and riding both of the Trotter and Pacer, and also to train hunting
and running Horses to their best perfection, though it be not so well as I
would, yet it is as well as I could: (For every man cannot bring gold to the
temple.) And though it be not so excellent, as the curious do desire, nor as
the Art does deserve: Yet I hope the milder will take it in good part, and
censure it according to m^ goodwill. But as for those, who carry such
Tyrannical minds, that will neither do well themselves, nor admit a
tolleration for them that do their best: I leave one of them in the Lake o^
Envy, which does ouerflow them, like an Aegiptian Nyle: and the other to labor
with Sisiphus, and to feed with the Camelian, on the substance of their own
desire: and only take my leave of the true lovers, and painful practitioners
in this Art. Vale.

M. B.

To the Readers.
Loving and best affectionated Readers, I desire you to bear patiently with
the errors that have past either by the Printer or my self in this Impression;
for (it being the first) there are some committed by them, in regard the Copy
was not so legible as it should have been, (I not being with them to direct in
doubtful passages:) and also which has ouer-slipt them by ouer-sight: and
likewise in me by the rudeness of Method (especially in the third Book) I
not having a regular form of explayning my mind, in such differing cases, for
as in the first proof (in Printin^) there are many errors to be corrected, so
likewise in this first Impression: all which (with the help of God) shall be
amended in the second Impression: and in the mean time, I desire you take so
much pains as to correct these errors before you read it.

Errors of the first Book.
PAge 2. line 7. read can to a restitution. pa. 8. in the Margent, re. an unapt
Simile. p^. 12. l. 32. ^ele, which. l. 33. re. for omne. pa. 21. l. 4. dele,
eye. pa. 25. l. 5. re. infama. pa. 52. l. 36. re. apertnes. pa. 53. l. 26. re.
know how. pa. 73. li. 24. re. trifle. pa. 110. l. 13. re. ro^undity. pa. 111.
l. 31. re. cou^teous.

Errors of the second Book.
In the Epistle to the Marquis, re. dignities and to. pa. 9. l. 33. re.
serves. ibid. r^* warm, so it. pa. 10. l. 6. dele, of. pa. 12. l. 10. re. are
of more. pa. 14. l. 3. re. they that are. pa. 35. l. 30. re. Colt will be more.
pa. 48. l. 31. re. whereas. pa. 71. l. 15. dele, as. pa. 83. l. 21. re.
^uddenly. pa. 87. l. 22. r^. and a pretty. p. 103. l. 21. re. legs. pa. 104.
l. 20. dele, and. pa. 109. l. 12. it is. ibid. l. 38. dele but. pa. 119. l. 29.
re. truth is. pa. 122. l. 14. re. slow.

Errors of the third Book.
Page. 6. l. 12. re. opprobrious. pa. 12. l. 32. re. divide. pa. 14. l. 21. re.
if he have. p. 15. l. 16. re. perfect rake. pa. 20. l. 16. re. heart whereby
he: and l. 30. re. meditate. pa. 29. l. 2. dele not. pa. 35. l. 25. and 28. re.
picking. pa. 58. l. 16. re. days of rest. pa. 79. l. 37. re. of his body. pa.
81. l. 21. re. that it will.

THE FIRST BOOK OF the Vineyard of Horsemanship: Being the Theoricke part
thereof, entreating of the inward knowledge of the man.
CHAP. 1. The Original Cause of Arts in general.
WHen I consider, (with my self) of the excellent knowledge and obedience, that
God vouchsafed to bestow on Man at his Creation: I cannot but admire at the
goodness a Genesis 2. 7. 19.
of God, that he should so much dignifie him (above all other his Creatures.)
For he did not only make his Soul (like to himself) immortal; but also gave
him such Knowledge, that he b Gen 3. 6.
could call all other Creatures by their right Names, (although Theo. 39. d
before he never had seen them;) and also gave him such Sovereignty c We are
deprived of our primary knowledge and obedience, and cannot be res^ored again
but by vigor of Art.
and rule over them, that they were all obedient unto him.

But Man (being ungrateful) was not contented with that estate, thought not
that glory sufficient, except he were as God, knowing good and evil: For the
desire of which knowledge, he reapt to himself and all his posterity utter
ignorance; and likewise all other Creatures which before were loving and
obedient to Man, became both so fearful that nothing does now more deter
and fear them then the face of Man, which before was most delightful to them;
and also so disobedient, that look what obedience was given them before by
nature to obey whatsoever man would command without any labor or pain, now is
turned to Rebellion: insomuch that all our lives practice and experience, is
nothing else but a desire (so near as we can) of a restitution of our Primary
Creation. Therefore now we are deprived of all Knowledge, but what is gained by
Art, and maintained by vigor, and practice; and yet that knowledge, (even in
the best) is but as a shadow d 1. Cor. 13. 12.
or glass, wherein we may see our own imperfections, in regard of that
knowledge which God infused in Man at his Creation.

But now in regard that Reason was not utterly taken from Man: he consulting
with himself, what ignorance he was endued withal, through the inordinate
desire of knowledge; by our first Parents, has endeavored himself (so far
as is in his power) to gain that again by Art which was lost at first by just
desert: For as Aristotle says; Omne ens appetit suam ^ The cause of the first
invention of Art. Theo. 33. (h)
perfectionem. The scope and drift of Art is to desire; his perfection. Yet
hereby is the mercifulness of God further shown, in that he did not then
utterly take away all the faculties of the mind, as Reason, Knowledge, Will
and Affection, but left them still in us although (much obscured) that we might
g We are not utterly deprived of natural faculties.
ponder, know, wish, and affect that which might (in some sort) help to a
reducement of our former estate: But these has he left in us, that we might
be inexcusable of ignorance; for though true knowledge was taken away, yet
there was left means of restoring: for whereas Man had this punishment
inflicted upon him, for the breach of the Commandment, that in the sweat of
his brows he should eat his bread: It is ^ Genesis 3. ver. 19.
not to be understood of the toil of the body only, but of the labor of the
mind. Therefore there are many deceived which employ all their wits and
endeavors to gather riches for themselves only, whereas indeed they should use
them to the setting k Worldly men abuse their time in desiring Wealth m^^e then
Knowledge.
forth of Gods Glory: But such is the miserable estate of those that are so
blinded with the World, that they do not regard now how wisely they live but
how wealthily; thinking that if they get Wealth enough, then they have wit
enough.

And so Camelion-like they Metamorphose themselves from reasonable to
unreasonable Creatures, resembling Swine which go under Trees to gather the
fruits that are fallen, but never look up to the tops from whence they are
fallen: and as Swine l Desire of pelf blinds the mind.
go all the day rooting in the earth; even so these men give themselves wholly
to gain the earth: For, for it they rise up early and watch late, for it they
carke and care, for it they chide and braule, for it they quarrel and fight,
for it they hazard life and limb; and at length, when they think that they
have gotten the earth, then the earth has gotten them, and so are devoured of
the earth, when they think themselves full Masters of it. But does not these
proceed from ignorance? for if they would m Ignorance nourishes vice.
address their minds to gather knowledge, as they do both body and mind to
gather pelf; then they should see their wretched blindness and the
inconveniences which do ensue thereby.

For first, it does banish them out of all other Countries; for they are so
tied to the love of it, that they cannot live in any place from their God, (as
they make them) for where their treasure is there is their heart. Secondly, it
makes them unfit n Math. 1. 31.
for Death; For what man is so mad, that if he be to travel a great journey,
will load himself with such a weighty burden as he cannot well bear? Even
so Riches do so clogge and tie men to the World, (through the love of them)
that like Lots wife, they look back, grieuing their hearts to forsake o Genesis
19. 26.
them. And lastly, which is the worst of all, they make a partition wall
betwixt Gods presence and them: For as Christ says, It is as easy for a
Camel to go through the eye of a needle, as for the Mat. 29. ver. 24.
Rich to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Now therefore what shall it profit
a man to gain the whole World, and loose his Mark 8. ver. 36.
own Soul?

Yet if all these Objections will not deter and change the minds of men from
such an extraordinary delight of the world: the very heathen men (which knew
not God (aright,) in regard p Heathen men a witness against Worldlings.
they did not seek him by Faith, but by the instinct of Nature,) will rise up
in judgment against them. For although they were but guided (only) by the
light of Nature, they thought cunning far better then coin; wit of greater
value then wealth and learning of more esteem then lucre. For Bias (when he
Bias.
saw an house on fire, and every one applying themselves to carry such things
as were therein, forth; to save them from burning) ran out and said; Omnia
mea m^cum porto, he took all his wealth away with himself: taking as great
delight in his light burden, as they did sorrow through their heavy loss.

And Aristipp^s travailing to Rhodes by Sea, was cast a-land Aristip.
by ship wrack, and when he spyed (drawn on the sands) Mathematical and
Geometrical figures, he comforted his country men, and told them all was
well: for he had espied the steps and signs of men; and so never left till he
found those men, which entertained both him and his fellows very kindly there;
and when they were to travail home-ward, furnished them with all things
necessary. And at their departing they asked Aristippus what he would to his
Countrymen: Nothing (says he) but that they apply themselves to purchase
such riches, as will not perish by any accident except death.

Therefore because we are all (but especially these) so blinded and benumbed
with such a filthy Lethargy, he that would be cured of this deadly disease of
Ignorance, let him (in some sort) imitate the Serpent: for we should be wise
as Serpents, q Mat. 10. 61.
though he was the first cause of this Lethargy. Now Writers ^ A Simile of
the Serpent.
hold that the Serpent has a hard Scale growing over his body when he is
young; which Scale, by reason that it does not grow with his body, does so nip
and pinch him, that he is driven (for the saving of his life) to seek some
narrow hole, where he does thrust in his head, and then with all his strength
he forces his body after; and by that means does free himself from that
Scale, whereby his body is set at liberty. Even so, when a man feels himself
so masked with the veil of Ignorance, that he cannot add wisdom to his
years; let him first seek a little hole of knowledge, and there put in his
head, which ^s Reason; and then labor painfully with the body, ^ Reason the
root of Knowledge.
which is the other Faculties, till he has unmasked that veil; and then
shall he see that which was hid before, and find that by knowing (as Socrates
says) he should learn that he knows nothing: for plura latent quam patent.

Now seeing Nature is so imperfect through corruption, and that there is no way
to perfect it but by Art; for as Plutarch says, Educatio est altera natura;
Education is another Nature. I am of the mind with Friar Bacon, for he
maintains, that Nature is here to be taken as it is the quality being
corrupted, otherwise as it is Essentia, nihil a^di potest nec demi.
Nature now is but a handmaid to Art, although it is generally holden to the
contrary; and for proof thereof he brings many instances, among which this
is one, besides many other which he alleges, which were too long to recite;
That with an Engine made by Art, one man may draw up such a huge w^ight, that
twenty men cannot move by natural strength: And likewise in Spectacles and
Perspectiue-Glasses, the one to Theo. 38. (h)
help weak sights which are decayed, and the other to make things seem
little near hand, and great far off.

And to make it more plain, on a time one (who was holden to be of judgment
in P^ysognomie) looking Socrates in the face, held him to be very intemperate
both for wine and women, and also a very doult and blocke-head: which when
Socrates Friends told him what such a one reported of him, he answered that
he had spoke the truth; for (says he) I should have been such a one indeed,
if I had not given my self to Philosophy, thereby to be governed. And further
it is holden that Sapiens domin^bitur Astris, a wise man may overcome
himself: t Art active and Nature the passive.
And so Art may be holden the Active, and Nature the Passive.

And therefore if we will suffer our Reason to be led by the procli^itie of
our inordinate will, and so to follow our corrupt ignorance, and will not take
pains to free our selves from that poison and Lethargy, but still to yield to
our natural inclination more then to eleuate our minds to heaven which is
supernatural, we shall utterly deprive our selves of that favorable goodness
which God left in us at the transgression, retaining still our faculties to
help toward our reasonable restitution by Art; and so we shall become
contraria, whereas if we endeavor our selves to get knowledge, we are then but
imparia, by reason we are in some sort lightened with the truth. And therefore
to give our minds always to delue in the earth, according to our natural
disposition, we seek our own confusion, by continuing in ignorance; but to
seek knowledge and wisdom which is contrary to it, we desire a restitution
of our primary estate: for look what difference is betwixt heaven and earth,
light and darkness, the like is betwixt him that seeks to reform himself
by Art, and him that is led by his natural inclination.

CHAP. 2. The Commendation of the Art of Horsemanship.
OF all the Creatures that God made at the a The excellent qualities of a Horse.
Creation there is none (except man) more excellent, or so much to be respected
as a Horse: For in disposition and quality he is but little inferior to Man
(excepting their difference:) in strength he may be compared to the huge
Elephant, for boldness to the Lion, for swi^tnesse to the Roe or Hind, in
smelling he resembles the Hou^d, for toughness he excels the slow toyling
Ox, for love he checkes the Spaniell, and for understanding he may oppose
himself against the Serpent; but for beauty he is a black Swanne amongst all
that Species: and further for the use of man, not only for pleasure, but also
for necessity and prosit, there is none to be compared to him. For, he ^ He is
both delightful and profitable ^or man.
is as delightful a Creature to be hold as any, and then, if a man will
travail upon pleasure abroad, how can he be more delightfully and easily
carried then upon a fair, comely, and well going Horse? And also for
necessity, if a man be upon earnest affayre^ or hazard of life, for to
travail a great journey in a little time, what Creature is so fit to perform
it as a Horse, both for toughness and speed? And further, for Oeconomicall
affairs, what Creature is so fit both for Plow and portage as a Horse? And
lastly, for profit (I pray you) what greater proft can come to a man then a
race of good Mares, and a right Stallion does bring.

Now seeing this subject is beautified with such excellent several qualities,
so that he does parallel all these species in their chief predominations, and
yet all these seueralls included in that species, nay oftentimes in one
indiuiduum: This Art then of Horsemanship must needs be of the greater esteem,
by c The excellency of the Art of Horsemanship.
how much the more it is frequented about so famous a subject, and likewise
both the Procurers and also the Professors of this Art, ought to be had in
greater estimation, then now they are, for now both Horses and Horseman are so
much dei^cted, by the conceited knower, through the abuse of that Art that d
The abuse thereof.
a man can neither commend the one nor delight the other: But yet for the
Professors I would say somewhat more in their behalf, were it not for puffing
up the hearts of such as by intrusion have thrust themselves into that rank,
and so do vsurp that dignity which does nothing appertain unto them; whereby
both the Art is abused, and the subject misvsed. For Ignoratis principiis, nemo
potest artem percipere. Those which are ignorant of the beginning, shall never
truly conceive the Art. Yet this is the least that can be said, for the true
Practitioners, there is both generosus aequus, and generosa qualitas, and they
have been e Horsemanship a generous quality.
accounted, egregia and immediate regni membra: For although God gave unto
Horses such excellent qualities at their Creation, now are they changed in
their use and are become disobedient to man, and therefore must be subjected
by Art, otherwise all their uses will be to no use.

Wherefore that we may the better know how to bring them to true command by
Art, it shall not be amiss to define what Art is, that the grownd thereof may
the better be conceived, lest building upon a false base, it fail before it
be half effected. Now Mr. Morgan says, that Art is no other thing then a
habit f Mr. Morgans definition of Art.
working by true Reason, consisting of many things gathered by experience,
only profitable for the use of man. Wherefore if it be a habit gotten by
Experience, then is it not gotten altogether by authority, (for that is one
veil that does shadow ignorance) neither is it gained in short time, as some
hold, thinking that if he can sit a rough Horse, then he is Horseman good
enough, but it is gotten by experience proceeding g How Knowledge is gotten.
from Reason: Now a man must have a great time of practice to sift the truth
from error, and so to judge thereof by Reason, before he find it truth by
experience, and then a longer time to ground it in himself before he has the
habit thereof, for, H^bitus (as schools defi^e it) est constans et absoluta
aliqua h Dialect. de qualitate.
in reperfect^^* non natura data, sed agendi consuetudine et exercitatione long
a comparata, Habit is a certain and absolute perfection in some one thing, not
given by nature, but gotten by long custom and exercise of working.

Theref^re (as I said before) there must be a habit, both of the mind to
understand and to deliberate thereof by reason, and also of ^^e body (which is
an apt and slight faculty of the same) and these (as it is said are not given
by nature, sed studio et in(...) comparata: Wherefore, i^ I shall not be though
touer much (...) like* I will give one knock at the door of their under
^^nding which are luld in the Cradle of ignorance, because I would have them
awake out of the dream of their conce^pted knowledge* hoping that none will
kick at it except he be pricked: for seeing there is no knowledge in any Art,
except there be a true habit both of the mind and body, there are many deceived
(in their own Judgment) which assume to themselves this Ar^ of Horseman^hip,)
that has neither the Theoricke Part of No^^
themselves to know the secrets of this Art, nor of the Horie to know his
inward disposition by his exterior gesture: nor yet the Practique Part, to have
true facility of hand and body to Theo. 13. (a)
help with the agility of their body the unaptness of the Horses body.
Through which absurdity, let them but rightly consider how many Horses they
have spoiled against one that they have made, and then the^ shall judge the
better of their opinionated knowledge, (except they will be wilfully ignorant)
and so yield to the old say^ng, Scientia sc^olorum, est just a ignorantia, ^
Conceited knowledge is foolishness.
The knowledge of the conceited knower is mere foolishnes.

But it has been an opinion of old that the nature of some Horses be such,
that they will never come to good riding, and Theo. 9. l)
therefore past Man's knowledge to alter Nature, to the which agrees the saying
of Mr. Morgan, that exare^am nullum funi^ulum ^ An a^t Simile.
nectes, neque expumice oleum aut aquam vlla Art exprimes, one cannot make a
^ope of Sand, nor press oil or water forth of a flint? Yet if they will
rightly distinguish of nature, they shall soon perceive their natural
ignorance, in not rightly understanding the true cause; for men's
Philosophiaenon acquiescit, nisi in causa rerum, The true lover of knowledge is
not satisfied, but in the causes of things.

Now if you understand Nature as it is substantia aut essentia, I grant it
cannot be altered nor changed; for as it is so non suscipit magis a^t min^s,
substantiae nihil est contrarium, non potest augeri, nec minui: For there can
nothing be added to the ^ssence that it should be the greater essence, neither
can there be any taken from it that it should be the lesser essence, for
though a Foal* ^row first to be a Colt, and then a Horse, and so change Theo
13. (g)
in quanti^y, yet substantia aut natura perman^t, the nature is unchanged: l No
one horse is a more horse then another* Theo. 18* (^)
But if nature be understood as it is qualitas et d^spositio then it may be
changed, for intenditur et re^^titur, et habet contrarium by Art, for the
accidents are the chief matter for Art to work on: but those men do much
deceive themselves; for by seeking to excuse their ignorance, they lay it open
the more, attributing that to the substance which is proper to the accidents:
Indeed I know all Horses are not alike capable, for there is both a natural
pronenesse, and likewise a natural imbecility, for some will ask both deeper
judgment, greater pains and longer m This difference does not p^o^e an
impossibility.
time, then others; but yet because they are more dull and hard to learn, that
therefore (upon necessity) they will never be reformed, is no good conclusion.

And for Mr. Morgans Simile, in my judgment it does diff^r in the material
and final cause, for there is no liquid substance in flint whereby it should
yield moisture by pressing, nor any such toughnes in sand, that it should
endure stretching, and like as nature has denied them either the one or the
other in matter, so in the final cause also the ends of the flint was rather
to be hard and firm then soft and fluxable; and of Sand to fill empty places
by its stability, then to make a strong Cable by the brittlenes. But a horse
whatsoever a man can teach him by Art, the same he will do by nature; for
there is no foale (if it n The natural pronenesse of a Horse.
be well kept, but will both leap, advance, stop, close, turn loftily, fetch
such yarks behind, that it is very delightful to behold, and also strike an
amble, in going to his gallop, or any such 1. Pr. 13. (h)
other thing which a man would teach him, only here is the difference, by
nature he does it at his own will but by art at the will of his Rider.

Wherefore it may appear by all these proofs that the cause of error in
Horse-manship does not proceed from the nature of the Horse, as many have
holden it, but through the ignorance 2 Pr^^l. 13. ^ (...) Th^o. 33. ^.
of man, not knowing how to reclaim his rebellious disposition which is in the
accidents; for Aristotle says, Natura nihil habet vit^^, nature has nothing
of Vice. Now if it has no error* there needs no Art; for Art was invented
for to correct vice, and so to bring his disobedience unto obedience. ^thick.
li. 2.
And again, the same Author says, that nullum accidens in corpore est pars
naturalis corporis: No accidents of the body is any part of the natural body;
therefore a man may change the accidents as the quality and disposition, for a
Horse may be ^
brought from disobedience to obey the will of his Rider, (by his motions) from
doggednesse to louingnes, from sadness or dullness to freeness, etc. And yet
for all these; Natura tamen constat.

I stand the longer about this point, to illustrate it so much the more,
because there are so many errors crept in through the several opinions of men,
for there are some which think that Mr. Asorga^.
this Art does chi^fly consist in breeding; for they say, if a Horse be not
truly bred he will never be brought to good riding: I grant (it is true) that
breeding is a great help and case to the Art; but if teaching did not help to
a greater perfection then breeding, what use should all those Horses be, for
that are not so rightly bred as they do desire, and in regard that all men ^
(that carry such generous minds, as to love Horses) cannot attain to b^eed
so perfectly because the Clime wherein they dwell is not of such pure Air nor
can get such Horses to breed upon as is desired? should they be discouraged
from persisting in so worthy an Art, with out hope of obtaining the period of
their desires? No surely, for if this knowledge consisted in breeding only,
then ^he Art of teaching were to no use; and Theo. 39. d 1. Chap. 2. Theo. 1.
li. 1. Chap. 1. ^rac. 13 c
also those Horses no^ so artificially bred, would serve to no purpose except
the C^rt: But Art is invented to reform Nature (as I have showed) which is put
a Handmaid to Art, for I have seen diverse Horses, neither so beautiful to
the eye, nor so aptly bred (as is curiously desired;) and some also that have
been bought out of the Cart, and trained up by the true Art of Horse-manship,
which have made Iades of them that have been both very beautiful, and also as
well bred as could be wished.

Wherefore seeing mean Horses may be made good by Art, and good Horses prove
Iades for want of true knowledge c Unlikely Horses often prove the best. Theo.
28. f. and 37. k.
in this Art, (although breeding be very necessary) let them desire to search
more diligently into the secrets of it, and where there does come an error, let
them consider the cause, for vbi cognoscitur vnde morbus sit natus, ibi
facilius potest inuenire remedium. When the cause of the error is known, the
remedy may be found the more easily.

CHAP. 3. A Corolary of the Art of Pacing.
I May be thought very prolixe and tedious in my discourse before I come to the
subject of this Art, but excuse me if it be so; for as Mr. Hall says, he that
uses circumlocution, argues either a weak memory, or else wants apt words
to express his meaning: Even so I, neither having the one nor the other, must
needs use much repetition, more especially in regard the way is not so easily
found, it being a path that has not been trodden before. For this Art of
Horsemanship has been so much abused (being practiced upon false grownds,
attributing all errors to the nature of the Horse, but never to their a The
cause of the abuse of this Art.
own ignorance) that it would desire a whole Book to reform the opinions and
errors of men, before one come to declare the manner of teaching it to the
Horse, because one must learn a thing well themselves before they can teach it
to another: For I hold there is no fault that the Horse does commit, but it is
chiefly from the abuse of the teachers, in not rightly iudgeing the cause, and
so not cunningly knowing how to remove the effect; for Sublata causa tollitur
effectus, take away b Dialect. d^ even.
the cause and the effect will dye: And yet there is no man that if he make but
one perfect good Horse, he for his glory will attribute the cause thereof to
himself, but if he fail in many other, then (to excuse himself in that
cause) he attributes it to the nature of the Horse; but if the Horse could
speak as Balaams Ass did, he would tell him, (and so excuse himself) that ^
Nu^^. 22. 28.
the chief cause were in the man, in not rightly understanding the Art, for
he, (being but a sensitive Creature, obeying by feeling) he did but as he was
forced, and so this famous Creature is made most infamous, and like Nobody is
feign to bear other men's faults.

But for this Art of pacing, it is so much abused, that when I do but think to
speak thereof, I am as one in a Laborinth, not knowing which door to open
first, for as it is a thing necessary, so it is as common and so commonly
abused, that it is almost ^ The necessi^ makes ^t (...).
now generally holden to be the only overthrow and spoil of good Horses; for
whereas before they were put to pacing, they had both a good trot and Gallop,
after they were or should have been paced they were deprived of all, and also
had gotten a perfect knowledge in stumbling. But I would have them know that
these absurdities do nothing at all proceed from the Art, but from the abuse in
teaching; for it is holden so easy a thing to make a Horse pace, that almost
every one will assume it, and so like blind Byards ^un headlong into the gulf
of confusion, because they know not how to keep any order or decorum in their
teaching; for if they by any extremity can make a Horse p^ce, they hold their
knowledge equal with the best: But let them assuredly know, that whatsoever is
forced by extremity ^ Extrem^^y ^ no Art. 1. Pra. 17. c.
is no part of Art; for after the disposition of the Horse is changed, that is,
his disobedience brought to obedience, then Art does work by gentle and easy,
but yet quick motions, ser by that means the understanding of the Horse is
more confirmed then by any extremities, which in regard they are violent, and
omne violence nunquam est perpetuum, whatsoever is violen^, is never permanent*
and therefore that Horse which is brought to his pace by extremity cannot hold
it, because his motion is not given him by reason (which is gentle) but by will
(which is cruel,) for when they see that they fail in their expectation, ^
Will (...) extremity.
and that they cannot make a Horse pace in so short a time as they do desire,
then presently they fall to any extremities because they will have him do it:
and thus the poor Horse is thrust into such torments, that where his appetite
and his action should agree in one, they are now contrary; for as his Rider
does force the motion of his body (which is action) to pace, the motion of his
appetite, (which is lust) being altogether remote from it, there do
continually be-thoughts arise g The cause of by thoughts.
how he should ease himself from such torments: For he neither having leisure
to understand what he should learn, nor finding ease in his teaching, thereby
to take delight, they agree as well together as fire and water, and his pace as
durable as flax on fire.

Yet I would not have them here to understand me so, that a Horse may be
brought to his pace with lenity only, for so in shunning one extreme they
fall into the other; and quicquid h Art depeneth upon one true proportion.
moderamine caret, id in pessimam degenerat speciem* what passes the limits of
the mean does fall into the confines of the extreme: For there must be both
helps and corrections used till he be brought to obedience, but they must be
tempered with such discretion, according to the disposition of the Horse, that
through too much rigor he be made neither restiffe nor mad, nor through too
much lenity he be made careless and sad; but so indifferently mixed,
sometimes with cherishments, and sometimes with chastisements, that the Horse
may perfectly understand his well doing by the one, and his offending by the
other, The manner how shall hereafter be shown.

Again, there are others which hold that a Horse may be brought to a good
pace in ten or fourteen days at the furthest, as well as in all his life
time: But by that assertion they show both their knowledge in the Art, and
their judgment in ^ Art abused by shortness of time.
a well going Horse; for if they did truly know the one, and understand the
other, they would alienate their simple ignorance by their rash judgment. For
first, there must be a time to reform the will of the Horse, and after that to
give him a stayed body, and an even carriage of the same, and then a true
handling of his legs, and also a comely and easy reyne, with Note.
a reforming of other vices which may ensue during the time of teaching; and
when they have considered of all these, I hope they will change their minds,
and allow as great favor to this part of Horsemanship as any other, in regard
there must be a time to teach, then another time to understand what is taught,
and also a third, to gain a habit to his understanding. For he is accounted a
good Horseman in other parts thereof if he can but mouth a Horse, make him
take his way willingly, trot handsomely, and turn readily in a year,
(although to his trot he has a natural inclination:) and yet they do expect
that a Horse should be brought to his pace, with the reforming k The
inconvenience of have.
of all things aforesaid, in such a short time albeit he thereto has no
inclination. But the effect of this have is shown by the event; for what does
follow but an utter dislike of the art, and a general inueying against the
professors, not regarding 1. Pra. 17. a.
the inconvenience of have; for in the true order of Art that is the best have
which works the best event.

Now there are others, which allow the Art but disallow the means of working
by the hand, some allowing trammels, l Ignorance the cause of these. Prac. 1.
lib. 30. 31. and 32 Chap. Theo. 36. a. 1. Pr. 31. a.
others shoes of advantage with long plates before, some heavy shoes, some
waights under the fetterlocks, and wispes, and others sand-bagges behind on the
fillits of the Horse: all which inventions do rather show the delight that men
take in novelties, then the desire they have to the truth; for the best of all
these is but as a shadow to a substance, in respect of true Art by the hand:
But if they had spent as much time in reforming their own ignorance, as they
did in inuenting these indirect means, they would confess that there were no
such want in the Art (as to use any usurping means) but rather in their idle
minds in not taking pains to find out the true causes. For I see no reason
but this part of Horsemanship may be as well taught (by true helps and
corrections) as any other part if they will but afford the like time.

Also there are others which like the hand, but dislike (as they may very well)
the abuse of it; for they have seen so many m. Pract. 1. li. 32. Chap.
Horses so lacerated and torn in the mouth, through the disorder of the hand
and rough snaffles; and also carry their heads so disorderly, continually
looking to the Heavens as though they were either devout, or else Astrologers,
or Astronomers, observing the stars that they wax weary of it and so
prefer such invented means as aforesaid, before the true Art, thinking there
were no other way to bring a Horse to his true pace (by the hand) but by such
extremities. But these professors are the worst of all the rest, and their
ways to be eschewed as a path that leads to the utter ruin both of the
subject and disgrace of the Art, for through their distasteful hand, they
utterly destroy where they should build, and make his mouth so insensible, that
where the Horse should be commanded n The disco^modities that ensue by the
abuses of the hand.
thereby, the more he feels the hand the more he rests upon it, and is the
cause of so many run-awayes; and further tireth a man more to hold him to his
pace then the hardest trotter, and causes a Horse not to stumble only, but
also breaks the largeness of his stroke for his pace, in regard he is so
terrified in the mouth, that he dare not set his forefeet forth, which makes
him fret and chafe and shake his hinder parts very unseemly, and to conclude
quid non? Wherefore I could wish that all such professors were weeded out of
the Vineyard of Horsemanship, as not worthy of growing there, because they
bring such fruit as does more distaste the senses, then give any odoriferous
smell to the understanding of this Art. By this time I hope their minds are
somewhat altered, which hold this Art so easy that any one may undertake it
without any great doubt of performance; which if they are not, I would know
what o Errors the cause of varieties Theo. 36.
should move so many several opinions and variable inventions for the
performing thereof, if there were not some intricatenesse therein? And what
should be the reason that so few Horses amongst many go well, but only the
Art being so obseure that they cannot see the way how to effect it? For though
men's opinions are variable, yet there is but one truth, and although there be
many great diversities in Horses going, Theo. 4. Chapter
yet there is but one kind of well going Horses.

And yet although they will grant some difficulty in it, yet (by the
abbreuiation of time) they will hold it more easy then other trades
Mechanical, for he is accounted an expert and cunning Workman that can
learn his occupation in seven or p Men judge according to their knowledge.
eight years; and yet they think that this Art of pacing may be learned in
seven or eight Months. But the reason hereof is, this Art has a cloak to
cover their ignorance (which is the nature of the Horse) but the other has
none. For in other Trades they are very desirous to obtain both the
intellectiue part by learning, and also the practicke by exercise, and so to
get a habit of cunning, that when they come to work upon the subject, they may
make it formal, the facility of the hand being q Where there is no excuse
there men take pains to preserve their own credit.
directed only by the Judgment of the eye, and then being proportionably
made, the work does continue as it seems to be; and after they have the
knowledge thereof they can make a hundred as good. But if it be not so fitly
wrought nor so curiously set forth, then the fault is not attributed to the
matter, because it would work no better, but to the man because he did work
no better; and therefore in regard they would not be accounted Cobblers nor
Botchers, they take great pains to keep their reputation, because they have
none other excuse.

But in this Art it is otherwise, for whereas those work upon bodies
inanimata, having neither life nor sense, so that whatsoever r The cause of
intricatnesse in this Art.
their hands do, it is so; the Horseman works upon bodies animata, which
have both life and sense, and though he work never so exquisitely, yet if the
intellectiue part of the Horse be not agreeing to the mind of the man, it is a
shadow of the thing but not the thing it self, howsoever it does show to the
eye, for when the Horse comes to be made use of, then he shows the truth
and (as a dog to his vomit) so goes he to his former disorderly will: for as
Aristotle says, quales sunt actus, tales habitus fiunt, as is the teaching so
is the learning Ethick. 2. li. 2. Chap.
perfected. But for their excuse, then they affirm ( vno voce) that it is the
nature of the Horse, and so they attribute that to the efficient cause which is
in the material, and by that means never take any pains to find out their
ignorance, whereby that if by chance they make one good Horse, they for the
most part miss in ten.

CHAP. 4. The Description of a true and well going Horse.
Having heretofore shown (in some sort) the difficulty of this Art of pacing,
and also laid open the errors of them which judge the performance thereof to be
so easy, now I think it will not be amiss to discribe and set forth what a
true and well pacing horse is: not only because I would avoid the scandal of
them which should think I undertook that which I knew not, and speak that
which I do not understand: but also to shun confusion (in my project,)
because it is the subversion of all things. For order being the only a
Confusion subuerteth all things, but order establishes
thing whereby nothing is made something; so (contrarily) confusion does make
something nothing. For the world (before the creation) was a Chaos, that is, a
confused thing without order, but God by order brought it to proportion Theo.
38. ^
and form, and by that means came to be something, and so received a name
according to the excellent form and order thereof (which is Mundus.) Wherefore
I do desire so much as in me lies, to lay the foundation of this Art in the
best order that I can, that it may receive the perfecter form, and be the
longer without confusion.

Now therefore because confusion is such a pestiferous disease Application.
that it impoysoneth the whole subject which it does possess, I would desire
all young favorites of this art, (or which means b A man must first learn
before he can teach.
to be laborers in the Vineyard of Horsemanship) to beware of that infection,
and for order sake first to learn a thing themselves, before they do teach it
to any other: for as Aristotle says, prius sunt Arts, postea operationes,
knowledge goes before Ethic. 2. li. 4. chap.
and practice follows after. Wherefore it is fit that a man should first know
what a true going horse is, before he undertake by practice to make one, for
how should a man work truly not knowing what he works, or give judgment
of that thing wherein he has no good knowledge: now as I said before, there
can be but one manner of an absolute and true going horse, and yet there are
many horses that may be said to go well, but that is in respect of another
that goes ^ There is but one truth, and is not found by comparing one error
with another, but by it self, ^eason giving evidence. A simile.
worse, and yet if that horse be compared with his better, then he is said not
to go so well: but this is no true ground of knowledge, for as it is a
principle in the grantable requests of Geometry that there is no proportion
betwixt a crooked line and a straight; for compare a parrallel line to a
Cilander there is no affinity betwixt them, but join two parrallel lines
together, they make a true consonant, even so compare the better going horse
with the worse, then he is said to go well, but if to the best, then he
goes not well except he parrallel him. Wherefore if a man will have a true
instance to know a well going horse by, I must refer him to the creation, (in
regard all men's works are fraught with errors) for then, God made all things
very good and perfect, and let him there imagine (so well as he can) how he was
before man's fall, and at that mark let him aim (so near as is possible) and
then the nearer his horse does go to that perfection, the better he goes and
nearer the truth. For the cause of invention of Arts, is to no other end, Theo.
1. e
but only a desire of some (though not a perfect) restitution to the primary
creation; therefore the absolute truth cannot be had from the knowledge of man,
in regard it is so ouershadowed with ignorance, (as I have said before) for
that which is reveled Theo. 1. b
(even to the wisest) is nothing to that which is concealed.

But yet I will (so well as I can) define what a true going Horse is, that you
may the better conceive when you have ^ The definition of a true and perfect
going Horse.
gotten the period of your desire. Therefore a true and well going Horse is, a
certain free and easy obedience in his going, not only of the will or
appetite, but also of the body, with a durable and comely carriage of the same,
and neat handling of the other members.

By which definition it does appear that a true pacer does not consist in the
exterior parts, only (as some hold) but in the 1 Pract. 27. d ^ The (...) of a
Horse is accidental and no^ ^^bstantiall. Theo. 37. ^.
interior also; for (as the schools hold) a Horse being a sensitive creature
only, his soul is no substance but composed of the temperature of the body,
which is the natural vigor or quality thereof, and has no being w^^hout the
body, upon which it wholly depends. Now (...) because the soul of a Horse is
an accident insepe^able, and that it cannot be from the body without the
abolishment of the whole creature, they Woolter. de immortalitate animae.
must both work together and rest together: now I say there must be a certain
and free obedience of the will or affection (which is a quality of the soul)
because aequus mentem non habet, in regard he is but a sensitive creature)
joined with the like obedience of the body. I add further it must be certain,
because if his obedience should be variable, then it is no true obedience,
Logic de quali^a.
for truth is not subject to mutabilitie, for whatsoever is truth is constant:
but here must be excepted patibilis qualitas, which proceed from the corruption
of nature, as lamenesse, sickness, death, etc. for, verba in definitionibus
posita, non actum sed potentiam significant, in the definition of things it is
not to be understood of the Act but of the power and inclination thereof.
Again, it must be certain and sure in regard of his rider, that whenever he
shall desire to make the Horse show himself for g How it must be free and
certain.
any grace, he must be so obedient that he will show his endeavor (to the
utmost of his power) both to content the eyes of the behoulders, and the seat
of his rider.

Further, he must be free, so that what he does he does it willingly (both
in will and body) without forcing or urging, but upon the least and covert
motions that can be, he obey with what nimblenesse and alacrity may be
wished: likewise he must be free from by-thoughts, for when his rider would
have him do one thing then he must not think to do another, but his will
must always attend on the motions of his rider, (which is all the guide the
horse has to the understanding of his mind) to know what he would have him to
obey: h A Horse knows his riders mind by nothing but by his motions.
now mad freeness, which is an extreme, is here exempted, because he must
have true obedience, which is the mean.

Again, it must be easy, for if a Horse go never so willingly yet if by any
means he shake a man in his going (so that he does but trouble the mind
never so little) then it is not true obedience, therefore if a Horse does not
carry an easy body i He must be easy going.
for himself he cannot carry a man easily: neither if a Horse be given to
stumble, does he carry a man handsomely k He must go comely.
nor easily, now in all these he must behave himself comely, therefore if he
shake with his hinder parts it is no com^^ndable going, neither if he roll in
his pace, that is* if his body be not set upright for an apt motion of going,
but that he move first on one side and then on the other. Now whereas many hold
that a horse which paceth cannot move except he move first on one side and then
on the other, they are much deceived in a true going Horse, for if it were so
then the comelines of going should be in the extremes, because the sides of
the Horse is the extreamitie of the subject, in regard the motion on the one l
The true motion is not in (...) extreme (...).
side is one extreme, and the motion on the other side the other; therefore
upon necessity the mean true motion must be in the middle of the horse, and
the breast of the horse must divide the air so smoothly (if he go truly) as
the breast of a ship does the waves, and then the motion of his body being given
in the right place (as before is said) he does carry a man so easily as if ^
The incon^^^nce of im(...) motions. Theo. 26. c
he were in a Caruell, and upon necessity in like manner he must lift his leges
so truly that he shall be nothing apt to stumble but go very comely; but
contrarily if he move first behind then he bears upon the hand and lists
up his hinder parts, shaking therewith very unseemly, and much stradleth, and
comes on faster with his hinder parts then he sets forward n The cause of
stumbling.
with his fore parts, so that he cannot have time to raise his forefeete
orderly, but through the low motion of them he is subject to stumbling, and
likewise if he move faster before then behind he does fret and chase, and is so
tender mouthed that he will not endure to feel the snaffle, all which is no
part of a well going Horse.

Further he must handle his legs neatly, lifting all his feet of an equal
height, keeping a true distance of time in the motion o The apt motion of his
legs.
of his legs, with an equal largeness of his stroke carrying an apt
proportion according to the slownes or swiftnes of his pace, for if he be
commanded to go fast, that then he does not lash forth himself into a large
stroke, and so set harder then he did upon his soft pace, but that he keep a
true decorum in his going; for if he set harder in his fast pace, or seem to
go more slowly on his soft pace, then he is faulty, and therefore no perfect
going Horse, likewise his legs must carry such an equi-distance in wideness
that they may describe two parallel lines in their motions, otherwise he does
not go comely. To all which he must be durable, for if he should fail in any
of all these, that he should not continue them, then p He must also be durable.
he were defective, and so no perfect true going Horse. And lastly, he must
have a perfect placing of his eye head and reyne with his nose inward, resting
his jaws upon the thropell, showing his crest in his greatest grace, his mouth
truly relished with the snaffle, neither too much dulled, so that he would
disquiet q His head and mouth must be firm.
the man to hold him in, nor yet so tender that upon the feeling thereof he
should either move a stay or check his head, and so remove it from his true
place, but only to give him the 1. Prac. 24 ^.
mean betwixt them both: All which particulars if they be wrought in one
subject so perfectly, as they may be imagined, then a man may assure himself
be has attained to the knowledge of this Art, otherwise he is in error, and
therefore needs further knowledge herein.

Whereby the conceited knower, which thought he was so skillfull in this Art,
does see that there is more difficulty in it The. 3. Chapter p
then he did imagine; for whereas before he might think that the stroke
only was the full knowledge of the Art, as one word was the signification
thereof: now he may plainly see and easily perceive that it is but the least
part: For I grant, that if a man do desire nothing but the pace only, and
also work it upon that stroke which he is most apt unto by his inclination,
without any further respect, then he may pace a Horse indeed without any great
labor of the body, or much knowledge in the Art.

But when one shall first give him that stroke which he is most inclined unto,
and after change it to another, (for I never yet could find that Horse which
took so perfect a stroke at the first that it should not need to be altered)
and after to a r The. 3. Chapter
third; nay it may be altered seven or eight times, before he can bring him
to such a fair and commendable pace as he desires; and also be driven to
reform both the carriage of his body and the handling of his legs, and
further to give his head the true place, and then to settle his mouth truly
upon the bit or snaffle, he shall find such intricatenesse in effecting all
these, that he will both confess his own weakness in the judgment of
time, and also his ignorance in the knowledge in the Art: and so, whereas
before he thought he had known all, now he shall confess that he knows
nothing.

CHAP. 5. The co^necting of this Art to man.
NOw that I have laid forth the platform of this work of pacing, by setting
out the manner of a well and true going Horse, and have also dressed the grownd a
little, (by paring and weeding it) in setting forth the errors and abuses
thereof. I will likewise proportionate it and make it fit to receive such
stemmes and impes as shall be thought most fit for the nature of the grownd,
that they may bring forth such grapes that shall make the wine more
comfortable, to strengthen and delight the hearts and minds of men, that they
may be the more encouraged to affect and persist in this so famous and
excellent Art.

For as in a Vineyard there must be the grownd first laid out, and after, it
should be weeded, dressed and brought to form, and all stemmes of Vines set,
and frames made to support and bear the Vines up as they grow in height, and
likewise as they grow they must be pruned least they grow wild: Furthermore
they must be set in such a place that the Sun may give heat unto them, whereby
they may be both the sweeter and sooner ripe; moreover the frames would be
made high that the Vines may grow the higher and so receive the greater heat of
the Sun: and lastly, they must be environed and fenced about to preserve the
impes, that nothing come to croppe and about spoil them till they come to
perfection. Even so in this Art An Allegory.
there must be first the ground laid out (that is the Art) then it must be
weeded and dressed from the errors of ignorance, and after that be made formal,
by a good decorum and order; also there must be stemmes set, that is young
learners and diligent practisers thereof; again there must be a frame made to
support the Vines, which is practice and experience; likewise they must be
pruned, that is, when they err to examine the cause, and take it away that the
effect may dye; furthermore they must be set so that the Sun may nourish
them, that is, they must direct all their work in such sort that they may be
ripened with the heat of the truth, and so they shall the more easily obtain
their desire, and then the higher that they grow by the frames aforesaid, the
more shall be their knowledge in the truth. Now lastly they must be environed
and fenced about to preserve the fruits, that is, they in all their practices
and endeauours must work by the rule of reason, which will make such a firm
and sure fence, that the wild beasts of the Forest shall not break down
their hedges nor spoil their grapes, that is their wills and affections shall
not so overcome them, that they Theo. 29. c. Theo. 19. and 20. Chap.
shall pass the bonds of reason, and fall into either of the extremes of
violence or lenity, and so confuse their labors and discourage their practice;
for though this Vineyard of pacing has heretofore been dressed and planted,
yet it is so trodden down and spoiled with the inventions and devises of men
as their fantasies has directed them, but not fenced as reason has guided,
nor dressed as knowledge has counseled, that the weeedes are grown higher
then the true plants, and do so smother and choke them that they can neither
prosper nor become so fruitful as they would neither for themselves nor others.

But this proceeds from our natural corruption; for as Esop b The cause of
this abortion. 1. Pra. 27. ^.
being asked the cause that weeds do grow and prosper without setting and
dressing better then other herbs and flowers did with both; answered, because
that the earth was but the stepmother to these, and to the weeds a natural
mother: Even so, that as it was a curse given of God to the earth (for man's
disobedience) that it should nourish thorns and ^^stles naturally (without any
Art) where before it should have brought forth Deuteronomy. 11. 15.
grass for cattle, and herbs for the service of men by the same instinct: it
is become quite contrary, for now no Art, no herbs, but no dressing, all
weeds. In like manner the knowledge of man Application.
does hold the same proportion with the earth, for there was likewise a curse
laid upon man for his disobedience, that his reason should feed and nourish
ignorance as a natural mother, without any Art; where before it should (by the
like means) The. 1. Chapter m
have fed and cherished knowledge: for obscurata est ratio naturalis, per
inobedientiam primi parentis, our natural reason is obscured d Reason
nourishes ignorance, except it be enlightened by Art.
with ignorance by the disobedience of our first Parents, And therefore now it
is also become contrary; for no Art no knowledge, but no knowledge all
ignorance, wherefore in regard ignorance is nourished with so much ease, and
knowledge gotten by such pains it must necessarily follow, that those
professors which are but as weeds, grow both greater and more then those which
are nourished by knowledge, (being fed by ^ Similis similem sibi gaudet.
their natural mother ignorance) and so choke and keep down the true
practitioners, which are both few and weak (in regard of the other) because
they are nourished by their stepmother knowledge, for knowledge has no
greater enemy then ignorance being contraries, and two contraries cannot be in
one subject: now therefore seeing ignorance is so naturally fed and nourished
in the subject of this world, knowledge must needs pine and wither.

Therefore Aristippus (perceiving how the world was benumd d The answer of
Aristippus to Dionisius.
with this impoysoned disease) being asked of Dionisius what was the cause that
the Philosophers did fret and wear the Thresholds of rich men's houses, and not
contrariwise: He answered, because the Philosophers did know and feel what
they wanted, and the Rich do not. Demonstrating that there could not be a want
of worldly necessaries but it should be felt, being ^ The poverty of the mind
far more miserable then that of the body.
for manintenance of life, and therefore they went to those places for releife,
but if the other did rightly conceive that the poverty of the mind was so much
the more miserable, then of the body, by how much it is the more excellent part
of man, they would in like manner frequent the houses of knowledge, and esteem
all worldly wealth but dross to the wealth of the mind and soul, for it is
the only way to the truth, and then the nearer the truth the nearer the
primary creation.

And therefore he which will be grafted into the Vineyard of this Art, must
endeavor himself to take pains for knowledge ^ The way to knowledge is
painful.
therein: For he which will be cunning must be painful. For as Mr. Morgan
says. Ars infaecunda est sine vsu et usus timerarius sine art, and so by use
and practice he shall get some knowledge of truth. But here, my meaning must
not be so understood, that I speak of the knowledge of truth in genus, (which
is the absolute truth, for no man is able to attain to that perfection) or of
species subalterna, but only species infinite, which if a man has any less,
(howsoever he does conceit himself) he has not the truth but the shadow
thereof.

CHAP. 6. Of the Office and duty of the Horseman.
MAny may think that I exaggerate and insist too much upon the difficulty of
this art, because it is accounted a thing that is both common and apparent
already, especially by them which sectaririuulos, et non petere fontes, which
judge that the little rivers are as deep as the great Fountains: and
therefore are contented only with washing their feet, though all the other
parts of the body be foul. But when I did consider Theo. 3. (l)
with my self, what abuse was sprung up into this Art by such shallow
censurers, and what number they were multiplied unto. I thought (if I had the
wisdom and learning of the Sages) to write a whole book of their abuses would
be little enough, to reprove their opinionated knowledge, and to let them
understand how far they are from the truth thereof, and also to show them the
cause that does hinder them, for seeking any further; before I come to teach
the manner of working, because the spring of the Theorick part must first be
cleansed, before it does run into the river of* he Practicke, for infecting it
with the dregs thereof. For when a Surgeon does undertake the cure of an
old Ulcer, it is fitting that he should first know those humors which do feed
the sore, and then know the cause, and from whence they proceed that they may
be cleansed, and kept back, for poisoning the sore, before he can come to cure
the same, all which to do is more hard then the cure it self. Even a Error
hardly purged from Art. Theo. 22. d
so it is more hard to know the cause of error and from whence it does spring,
and so to purge error from Art, then to teach the ground of the true Art.

But there are many which are so deadly wounded (with an obstinate will) that
it is impossible that ever they should be b Obstinacy is a ba^ to knowledge.
cured: For as I my self have heard some say that they have so much knowledge,
(therein) as they would desire no more, for it has served their turn all
their lives, (they being gray headed, yea and men in great places) and they
would not learn more of any man: which when I heard, I was desirous to make
trial of their knowledge, and so to ride some of those horses which they
accounted to be well going, but in trial I found them so far from the truth,
that I could not but laugh at their knowledge, although I lamented their
ignorance. And then c Mo^: and Deui: medita.
I thought upon the saying of Master Hall, how that it was fitter for young
men to learn then to teach, and for old men to teach then to learn, and yet
fitter for old men to learn then to be ignorant; but there is no man that can
learn so much that he shall need to learn no more, and I hope I shall not
live so long that I shall be too old to learn. Where I leave them wallowing in
their own conceit, and betake me to them which feel their sore and find
their ignorance, and desire to be cured of those griefs, and also to them
which would be grafted into this Vineyard that they may become diligent
laborers therein.

Wherefore whosoever coueteth to be united to this Art, the first thing he must
learn to know must be, what his duty and d Two things to be required in the
professors of this Art, that is, his duty and his office.
office is herein, that he may the better judge of himself how to grow to his
full perfection, and bring forth fruit both delightful and profitable.
Therefore his duty is chiefly to learn how to govern himself, and his
office is to learn how to govern his horse: now the government of a man
consists both of the mind and body: and for the mind he must first subdue
his will, secondly his passions, thirdly he must not be sei^ce nor angry,
fourthly he must be loving and gentle, fifthly he e The government of the mind.
must enter into the disposition of the horse, and lastly he must frame his
will to work according to the inclination and quality of the horse: and
secondly for the government of his body, first he must be of an apt and able
body, secondly, he must have f Government of the body.
a true and com^ly carriage thereof, the better to grace his works, thirdly, he
must have the true use both of hand and foot that he may the more cunningly
help and serve his horse in all his actions, fourthly, he must know how to
help, fifthly, where to help, and lastly, when to help.

These particulers being well and truly learned (as hereafter shall be
discribed) and then well used, will be sufficient to g Knowledge is to no use
without true application.
give a young Scholar a sure ground of this art, for the first, till he come
to further knowledge, and then as he increases therein, he may look more
narrowly into himself, and he shall find more observations then here is
expressed which I have omitted, not only for avoiding tediousnes, but also
because I wou^d not make him an idle trewant not to search for more then is
here set forth, for there is yet an Aliquot part as the Mathematitians term it
behind, and lastly, for bringing confusion and discouragement to the young
learner, troubling his mind with so many observations and several concauities*
for he shall find these enough for to learn, if they be well observed; but
these are as it were accidents inseparable, which cannot be separated from this
Art, if he desire to become a good Horseman, for these are not proper to this
Art only, which is but a part of h These observations are the ground of the
whole Art.
Horsemanship, (although I have continually called it by the whole, but that is
Synecdoche) but also to all other parts else whatsoever, and likewise many
other things which I have set down (and shall hereafter) though that they be
alluded to this part only.

Now for his Office that he must govern his Horse, it does i How to govern
his horse.
likewise consist both of the interior and exterior parts; but for the
interior, first he must know how to govern his Horse, he being an
unreasonable Creature; secondly he must reform his will, for he may be said
to have spent, (although improperly, that is, secundum appetitum,) thirdly he
must subdue his passions, as fierceness and dullness, etc. Now for the
ex^erior, he must bring his body to obedience, that is, first his body Ethick.
3. 2. Chap.
must willingly yield to the motions of the man's body, because he is but a
sensitive Crea^ure; secondly he must yield to the motions of the hand for the
guiding of his head; thirdly to the legs, that upon the motion thereof he
be willing to go or turn with the couertest motions that can be used; and
lastly he must observe that his Horse and he both must make but one body and
will, and then they shall make such a delightful consonant, both to himself
for feeling, and to others for Theo. 38. p. 13. d. l The Man and Horse must
make but one body in action.
seeing, that it will not only bring great content to himself, but also will
so admire the beholders, that they will (like a longing wife) thirst till they
be in like manner graffed into this Vineyard, to bring forth such grapes as do
give such a relish as will so much delight the senses.

CHAP. 7. How a Horseman should govern himself and his Horse.
NOw that I have set down the duty and Office of the Horseman in general, I
will also illustrate it a little more in the particulers, because I would have
him (which does desire to be esteemed a Horseman, so far forth as he can
comprehend) to merit the same name by his desert. For as Socrates, a Desert is
true glory.
(being asked by what means a man might attain to an honest fame and name)
answered if he earnestly endeavor himself to be such a one indeed as he
desires to be accounted: even so he which does desire to be imped in this
stock, must frame himself to be such an impe as shall be held worthy
thereof. For as all are not good Chirurgions which are sent for to cure some
wounds, and so have the common voice of men; but he that can truly judge of
the cause that increases the sore, and can make his salve to work
accordingly: in like manner they are not Horsemen which are set on practice,
and have the applause b No credit in the vulgar applause.
of the common people, but he which knows how to govern and teach his Horse
aright, and so to bring him to true obedience.

Now it may be I shall seem very distasteful to most humors, which would be
glad to know how to make a reformation in c Our natures desire to restrain
others, but to give our selves liberty.
others, but cannot endure to subject themselves; like those patients which
would gladly be cured of an old ulcer, but would not abide the operation of a
corasiue: where I leave them only with this (in regard I do not love to lay a
cushion under their elbow to have them sleep still in ignorance) let them not
think ever to learn to govern a Horse well and truly, that cannot tell how
to govern themselves. Wherefore in regard GOD made man the last of all his
Creatures, to intimate Theo 1. a
unto him, that there should not be any thing wanting for his use, but that he
should come into the world, as to a house full furnished with all things: and
further endued him with reason above them all, that he might know thereby the
better how to keep them in love and obedience: let not man so Theo. 1. g
far degenerate from his first estate, as to be servile and subject d Without
knowledge man is most miserable.
to them which should yield obedience to him; for though we have lost that
sovereignty and dominion which we were endued withal at the first, yet having
means left us by Art, let us seek to reform our rebellious will and
affections, that we may cloth our selves more decently with fig-leaues of
knowledge, without which man is only most miserable; for though God gave him
possession of all his dignity at the first minute he came into the world, yet
through the relapse he was deprived of all: for now what thing comes into
the world so naked as man? and those things which should have been for his
preservation do often times work his destruction, as we see many men killed
or lamed with Horses, and also devoured by other ravenous beasts.

And besides this outward miserableness, there is with us such a little world
of rebellion amongst the faculties of the soul, and also amongst the other
senses, that all the Art that man can use is not able to suppress and keep
them down, thereby to hold them in subjection: for our reason (by which we
should have guided, and governed all other creatures) is so obscured (with
ignorance,) that we could not know how to govern our selves, if we should
follow our inelination and corruption.

Now therefore he that will have a command of himself, e How a man should
command himself.
must seek to reform the disposition of his corrupt mind, by deliberating
and consulting, whether that be well or evil which he has in action, and so
make election according to the Aristo: eth. 3. li. 3.
goodness or badnesse of the Art: for election must not be made without
consultation, and consultation must not be made from affection, but ( sana
mente) from a perfect and sound mind. Therefore he that will govern himself,
must have a perfect mind, and must consult of all his actions, (by reason) how
they are done, if well, then to make his election thereof, if evil, then Theo.
3. b
to consider the cause and take that away, and then from whence it does proceed
and stop that flux; so shall he know the better how to govern his Horse: For
the errors in Horsemanship, do not always proceed from the Horse, neither
from ^ The cause of ^ 16. c. Theo. 16 a. 1. Pra. 24. n. 27. d. g An apt s^mile.
that place (in the Horse) where it is first decerned, (as it is for the most
part holden) but the cause of most errors, (howsoever they are judged in the
Horse,) do chiefly first proceed from the man, though unknown unto him when
it was committed: an^ although at the first it might seem a very small escape,
(yet being unreformed) by much use and practice, it will grow very gross and
palpable.

For instance, as by multiplication in Arithmeticke, a figure being mistaken,
though it be in the first place, which is the least in value, yet by often
multiplying, it will be a great error in the product, and also though the error
be first perceived in the product, yet the cause does not proceed from thence;
nor altogether from the figures of the multiplier, but chiefly in him that
multiplied it. Wherefore seeing that when there is an error in work committed,
the fault is not always attributed to the thing, in which it is first found, but
where it is first acted, I would desire all those which love this Art, not to
think to excuse their errors by the nature of the horse, for so might a man
that has ^ To excuse a man's igno^ance by the nature of the horse is no true
excuse.
a bad visage, excuse it when he looks in a glass, and say it is the
falsenesse of the glass: But I hold this paradox, that it is the ignorance of
the man, to think that a Horse being irrational, should learn more, then a
man that is rational can teach him; and so impute a greater fault to the
material cause, then to the efficient, therefore those who are desirous to
keep this Vineyard from spoiling, must be careful to keep the fences strong,
and rail them about with reason, and then they shall more easily bring their
Horse to the government which they desire.

CHAP. 8. How the Horseman may subdue his will.
Having before shown how a man may govern both himself and his Horse, I will
now also (so briefly as I can) declare how he may subdue his will: but this
is so difficult a thing to effect, because it is so inherent to man that in the
subduing thereof, is as great a conquest as to overcome a strong a It is a hard
thing to bring our will to subjection.
hold. For men are so far led captive under the servitude thereof, that it
has almost usurped the place of reason, and most men follow it even as their
only guide; insomuch as if a question be asked them, their will is the chief
reason in their answer, whereby it is fistulated so deep in most men, that if
I should undertake to make an incision to the bottom, both my memory to so
short and my knowledge so weak, that (I fear) my strength would fail me
before I could launch it to the half, therefore I will but only scarifie it
that the corruption may the sooner break through.

The Cinicke Diogenes perceiving how servile they b The answer of Diogenes to
Alexander the Great.
were, which did only give themselves as servants to obey it, answered
Alexander the Great his messenger, (when he sent to him to know the cause,
wherefore he would not come to do homage to him, as well as all other) why
(says he) thy master serves my man, for what I think good, that my will
does obey, but what his will commands, that he indeuoreth to perform with
all diligence: declaring thereby, that he which has brought himself to that
government, that he can command his will is greater then any Monarch of the
world, that is subject unto it. Therefore of all other enemies this is the most
Theo. 37. m
dangerous, and a Horseman ought to have the chiefest regard to keep it from
rebelling least it should break into this Vineyard, for if it once get in (as
a Master) it will be a very hard conquest to expel it out again, till it
has trodden down the c Will is so ranenous that it spoyl^th the whole
planting.
whole planting. For the refelling of which enemy, he that will suppress it,
must keep a strong fence of reason continually leuelled against it, the better
to defend the force thereof: and therefore he that desires to take away the
sting of the venomous d How to subdue it.
infection, least it should pollute the whole Vine, must imitate the natural
love of Parents toward an unnatural child, which through their tender
affection toward him; have yielded (so long) to his content, that he has
wrought their discontent through his disobedience; insomuch that they are
driven to put him to service, whereby he may the better be brought (again) to
his dutyfull obedience.

Even so, when a man has yielded to his will so long, that it ^ Reason is the
best controuler of a man's will.
is become his Master, the next way to bring it again into subjection, is to
put it to serve under reason, that whenever it shall wish him to act any
thing, he do not presently obey, till he has conferred with reason, whether
it be expedient or no, and if it be fitting, then whether it be time or not,
and yet if it be time, then after what manner it should be effected, but if
none of these, or (at least) if not some one of them, then what damage will
ensue if he follow the aforesaid will; and if (by expostulating thus with
himself,) he find it will yield any good, then to persist, but if reason
persuade otherwise, extinguish that motion, and (again) consult with himself
what is the best, and of that let him make his election, and eschew the other
as pernicious: and by imitating such observations he shall find the strength of
his will much abated and subdued by the lore of reason, and so fortified by the
use thereof, that he shall be able to subdue him in his greatest extremities, and
in time get such a habit of conquest, that a man shall be no more his will, but
himself, and it will (afterward) more easily be ruled as a servant then before
obeyed as a Master.

CHAP. 9. How a man may overcome his Passions.
I Have hitherto spoken of those vices and errors which only a Dialect: de
qualt.
proceed from Man being reasonable, for tres sunt in quibus bestijs praestamus,
scilicet ratione, voluntate and intelligentia, but as for passions they are
incident as well to horse as man; for a horse taking a delight to be at his own
liberty, when he feels b A Horse is disobedient and desires liberty.
himself restrained from the same, so that he most now be at command, then
does he seek remedy by resisting, because he desires liberty rather then to
be tied, and disobedience rather then obedience, for the one of them is
agreeing to their disposition, but the other of them grievous being troubled in
reforming, in which regard therefore a horse may in some sort The. 6. k
be said to have sponte, as I said, although improperly, for it is s^cundum
appetons et fugiens.

Now there are four passions which are called perturbations that are common
both to man and Horse, which cause trouble c Perturbatio est subita animi vel
corporis commotio. Dial. de qualit.
to the mind and body of man, and likewise to the disposition and body of the
Horse; from these four perturbations all the other do proceed which are Lust
or Desire, Joy, Sickness and ^eare; yet I mean to speak but only of the two
first, because they are the only passions from which do come Anger and Love,
these being the two duties a Horseman should observe to moderate both in
himself and his Horse. And although Sickness and Fear be likewise requisite
for a Horseman to know in this, yet I intend not to speak of them in this
place because sickness is proper for the Farriers knowledge, and as for fear,
the chief cause thereof in a Horse is his disobedi^nce, which is the chief
matter this tractate seeks to reform: d No man that is possessed with fear is
ever like to prove a Horseman. Theo. 22. b. Preface 2. c.
but as for fear in the Man, it is such an obstacle to this Art, that
whosoever is possessed therewith, is as far from obtaining the true knowledge
thereof, as a Coward is to gain so much prowess as to be a General in the
field. Wherefore I ^old it vain to minister Physic to such an impossible
cure, for ^ Mr. Walker says, desperato agro omnia concedit medicus: the
Physician cease his care to those sick persons who are past cure.

Now therefore the chief cause of these passions aforesaid, is when a man does
desire to be a practitioner in this Art, if he e The cause of inciting these
Passions.
find it more intricate then he judged it to be, so that he cannot work as he
would upon the subject, then straight he falls into the passion of anger,
and by that means brings in the perturbation of the body, whereby he
falls into extremities, and begins to fret and chafe, thinking to gain
that by violence that he could not work by lenity, and so thinks (as the
common saying is) by one poison to expel another, but by this means he does
rather make a confusion, then bring any order to his proceedings: so that his
desire is clean frustrate The. 3. g.
and cannot work any content whereby he should take any joy or delight in his
labors.

Again, there are others which desire the like practice, and seeing the other
aforesaid so rackd on the tenters of his passion, 1. Prac. 15 r. ^ In shunning
of Silla they fall into Charib^lis. Theo. 2. c.
take such great dislike in their proceedings that they not only see the great
trouble it brings to the man, but also what torment it causes to the Horse,
therefore they condemn the blindness of his affection, because he cannot
find any faul^ with himself till he be grown into such extreme
perturbations, and therefore fearing least they should fall into the like
error, they in shunning o^ it fall into as evil, and because they will not
fall into the extreme of violence, they slip as far into the whirle-poole
of too much lenity, as if one should forbear g The true use is only auailable.
to drink at all because some have surfetted with drinking thinking betwixt
these extremes there is not a mean to be found: and so follow the nature of
the Horse as it is called, altogether by fair means, thinking that to be the
only way, and seek so long to please their Horse, that at length he is
become their Master, and cares not for the displeasing of h This error is too
common.
them. For they think if he be made gentle enough, then he is good enough,
observing that saying, Nobiles and generosi aequi facile freno reguntur, Noble
and generous Horses are easily governed with the bridle. As if Horses were
reasonable Creatures, and would be commanded by persuasions; but whosoever
does think to work his desire by this means, shall as Note this Simile.
soon obtain his expectation, as they who think to cure a mad man by letting
him have his liberty and will. Indeed I grant they may make some Horses to
carry a show of obedience whilst he is pleased; (for it is a common saying, the
Devil is good when he is pleased) letting them go as them lusts, but when a
Man shall come to work upon that Horse, to make him ride at command, then he
will be so rebellious (by reason of his former habit) that he will ask more
pain and judgment to bring him to subjection, then three Colts that were
never handled.

But this is the cause that makes so many horses have such bad ^ Too much
lenity the cause of many errors.
paces and carry such disgraceful reins, and also such dead mouths, and so
many sad horses, which through this abuse, are counted very Iades, and then
they to excuse their ignorance object al these faults aforesaid to the nature
of the horse, affirming that The. 2. i. and 7. f.
he will neither go better reyned, obey the hand, not go more freely whilst
he is a Horse (but for this imputation I hope I have spoken sufficiently
already) but these men in like manner come short of the period of their desire,
for whilst they are working but for the shadow, like Esops Dog, they let slip
the substance: Note.
for when they should come to make use of their practice they are as much
troubled with perturbations as the former, for their Horse is become so
stubborn that he will go but when he lusts, and as he lusts, so that
they in like manner can neither have joy nor delight in their performance.

Wherefore seeing these passions also (like ravenous beasts) do desire to
spoil the young impes, and in stead thereof nourish Theo. 5. ^.
weeds, there must in like manner be a strong fence kept, by reason to refell
and drive them back: for when as a Man by any accident shall be driven into
Passion by these extremes, k How a man may refell his passions.
let him for that time cease from his practice, and set up his Horse, assuring
himself to be in an error, and then let him examine how he came into these
extremities, and after deliberation had, he shall find if he be not partial
in his own affections, that he himself was the only cause, and also that it
did proceed from ignorance, he undertaking to effect that, for the which he
had no true ground of knowledge, and so by this means, whereas before they
both of them thought the cause of either of those extremities did proceed from
the nature of the horse, they shall see most clearly that it was their own
blindness, and that they were guided by such enemies as did rather desire to
destroy then to plant. For as a house that is very clean swept and washed, so
as it may be thought that there is not any dust therein: yet when the Sun
shines bright and An apt Simile.
the beams thereof do reflect into it they shall see it all full of moates:
even so, though they thought their knowledge right good, for the effecting of
their desire, yet when the light of reason does enlighten their minds, they
shall then perceive many errors which before could not be seen. Wherefore if a
man cannot bridle his affections nor overcome his passions, let him send them
also to the school of reason, and there they will be so Theo. 8. e.
curbed and shall receive such a repulse, that they will utterly be
discouraged, and not once dare to encounter against so strong a Fort; for
thereby their forces will be brought so weak, that a man may the more easily
keep them in subjection.

CHAP. 10. That a Horseman should not be feirce or angry.
BEcause that I have (in the last chapter) spoken briefly, of the root from
whence these branches do spring, and also shown the inconveniences (in part)
which proceed from them; therefore (for the avoiding of prolixity and
reiteration,) I will but only declare (so summarely as I can) how to reduce
this extreme to the mean, that those errors which do attend upon these vices
of fierceness and anger may, with more facility be avoided, and the truth the
better advanced: but whereas Theo. 9. g.
I say a Horseman should not be angry, I would not have it understood so, that
he should not be angry at all, for that is mere sheepish, and so he should
fall into the other excess, for humanum est irasci, he is not a man that
cannot be angry: and for a man to be a little provoked, does stir him up to
perform his authority with greater courage, but yet I would not have him to
abuse this liberty, for as soft fire makes sweet malt, so a hasty A Simile.
fire does not only firefange (as it is termed) but also takes away the true
relish of the same: even so, moderate anger causes obedience, but fierceness
repugneth the same, for (as the Prou. 27. 4.
wiseman says) Anger is cruel and wrath is raging, but a furious man
abounds in transgressions.

Therefore although anger is linked so strongly to the nature a Anger is a
natural viper nourished within us.
of man, that he can, no easelier refrain from that passion, then to refrain
either from meat or drink (being set before him) and he having an eager
appetite to the same, yet let him endeavor to suppress it with reason, least
it prove to fierceness, and wax so hot that it will consume the whole
substance of his labor. For (he says again) he that is slow to wrath is
better Pro. 16. 32.
then the mighty man: and he that rules his own mind, is better then he that
wins a City. For he whose discretion deferreth anger, is of great wisdom,
but he that is apt to fierceness provoke violence, and whatsoever is brought
to a horse by violence is not gained by Art, inregard (as Arist. says) it is
the exterior action only, (but Art consists both in the interior action, and
exterior) for whatsoever is exterior only is but a shadow, Theo. 3. ^
or an accident, and therefore no substance, and so has no perminancy, because
it is don unwillingly. For whatsoever is the cause of a cause, the same is the
cause of the thing caused: but violence being the cause of the exterior action
in the horse, so long as that Ethick. 3. 2. Ethick. 22. ^
violence lasts, so long the horse works, (although inuit) but when that
cause cease then the action of the Horse decays.

Now therefore he which desires to prove a flowrishing Impe in this Vineyard,
must temporize his anger, and let it extend no further then the limits of
reason: and proportionate it b How to temper auger. Theo. 31. ^
so, that it may rather tend to the reducement of obedience in the horse, then
to the satisfying of his own will. But for the better knowledge, how a man
should govern his anger, he must observe both the time when to be angry, and
also the disposition of the Horse how to be angry, and so proportionate his
correction as the occasion of the offense is offered. But of this I will speak
more, when I come to show the disposition of the c One cannot pass from one
extreme to another but by the mean.
Horse. Now in regard a man cannot pass by one extreme unto another but by
the mean, which is the truth, and that these extremes has wrought much
absurdities amongst many, (reputed) Horsemen: let a man so examine himself,
that he may truly know the cause, from whence this excess of anger does
proceed, and then he shall find the original to come from his own will and
ignorance, because the Horse is subject to obedience, Theo. 9. ^
(by Art) and he himself ignorant how to work the perfection thereof. And the
Heathen men could say. He that to wrath and anger is thrall; over his will has
no power at all, and he that is governed by his will, (as before I have shown)
more then by his wit, he shall never come to reap the fruit of knowledge in
this Art: for he runs into utter ignorance, d Ignorance and blindness are
led by authority and traditions.
and ignorance is the Mother of fools, and therefore not rightly knowing how
to vnuayle this blindness, they depend upon traditions, and support
themselves by the authority of others, (and so cloak their own simpleness)
as though all things received from old custom were true: And so when they
fail of their expectation, then they follow the torterous inventions of hard
snaffles, extreme commanding bits, and tormenting cauezans, 1. Pr. 6. a. Note
this progression. 1. Pr. 19. ^
all which are as consonant to the true Art, as poison is to the body; but
(likewise) I will speak of these in the Practicke part hereof.

CHAP. 11. A Horseman should be loving and gentle.
AMongst all other of the passions this is the chiefest to be respected, for
the confirming of whatsoever has been before taught: and therefore I have
placed it the last, in regard a Gentleness and love are the only bonds that
tie delight betwixt man and horse.
it is the last thing that a man must use for the grounding of obedience in the
horse: for all the other affections are incited by the action of the horse, and
then this cease, but when they cease, then this of love works, and so (as
an evidence to a Jury) a Horse does know by this how he has pleased his
rider, therefore it is the only uniting of delight betwixt the Man and the
Horse. For as one says, concerdia par^a crescunt sed discordia maxima
delebuntur, small or few things by concord and love do increase to abundance,
but by discord and strife, great things are brought to utter confusion: b A
Horseman must know, when and how to be loving to his horse.
in like manner this Art by fierceness and anger is sacked and spoiled, but by
love and gentleness it is reedified and repaired. Therefore whosoever is
desirous to be combined within the limits of this Vineyard, must endeavor
himself to learn to know, when, and how to be loving and kind to his Horse:
Theo. 10. ^
for as it is the nature of fire to separate and dissolve that, which before
was a substance, even so the heat of ^eircenesse and anger, does separate and
dispeirse that which before was united by Art, and as lyme and mortar do bind
stones, in such wise that they make a strong building: even so love by
cherishing A Simile.
does congeale and unite together whatsoever has been before taught: But I
would not here be so understood that the effect of this Art does chiefly
consist hereof, for so a man may digress from the mean, and pass into the
other extreme, which is too much lenity (as I have said before) and therefore
it must be used but as a preservative to keep that which has been taught
before.

For as Parents though they have a natural love and affection toward their
children, yet it must have a restraint; for it should be no further then it may
be without the offense of true religion, otherwise they make an Idol of them,
and so through 1. Sam. 2. 23. 24. and the 3. 11.
extraordinary affection they bring them to inordinate subversion: even so,
though love toward a Horse is a thing that does fortify greatly the memory of
him, and causes great delight, Theo. 17. c.
yet there must be a limitation of time to know when to love, otherwise they in
like manner make an Idol of their Horse, and so are driven to serve him before
he yield to them. Therefore it is 1. Prac. 13. ^. c How a man may know when to
love.
fitting that a man should also learn to know, when to show love and when not;
for the effecting of which, he must be a Commander of himself, and his
greatest anger must be so qualified, that upon the least yielding of the
Horse, he may be ready to entertain his obedience, that the Horse may the
better know the cause of his anger toward him: and also he must observe the
instant time, for if he shall seem to cherish him never so little before he
obey, the Horse having no other means to Note.
understand the will of his Rider then the sense of feeling does tender him,
then he thinks that that is the perfection of his riders will, and so by
custom it will grow to such a habit, that it will be very hard to make him
proceed any further in his apprehension, thinking that to be the sum of his
obedience. But again, if he omit the first motion of subjection (which his d
The cause of all restiffe qualities do first arise from the man. Theo. 33. ^.
Horse does yield unto) and therefore is not contented therewith, thinking to
make him do more before he leave him, then the Horse not rightly understanding
the cause of this extremity, is caused to pass the mean, and to fall into the
other extreme which is fury, and so falls into some restiffe quality, as
running away, going back, standing still, lying down, yerking and plunging,
and such like: all which, though they be first shown by the Horse, yet the
cause does proceed from the man, by bringing by-thoughts into the Horse, with
too much severity and ouer-slipping of time.

But yet (as I have often said) they have a cloak to cover this ignorance in
themselves, which is, that the Horse is of such a stubborn and dogged nature,
that he would do thus if a man's life should lie on it: Nevertheless, if they
could rightly conceive how and when to love and cherrish, they should
undoubtedly perceive that these former errors did proceed more from
themselves* then the disposition of the Horse.

Now I might insist a little herein, upon those Horsemen (as they are called)
which train up Horses from their first haltring, with lenity only never
respecting, that obedience, which should be first gained; but in regard I have
touched it somewhat before in the ninth Chapter, and shall have occasion to
speak more of it hereafter, I will but only show in this place, the
inconveniences thereof in general, which I have proved by experience to my
great cost: For this Paradoxe I now hold, that the best Horse which can be
bred ^ Note, for it is worth obsernation. 1. Pra. 23. f.
and of the mildest diposition, shall never come to the height of his glory
with lenity only: except there be a true obedience gotten before: for although
he may thereby be made very gentle, and also to go forward willingly (in
regard he goes as himself lusts) yet when he shall come to show himself
against a Horse, that is, at true command, he shall reap such great disgrace,
that he shall be accounted a very Jade, whereas if Art had been joined to the
disposition of him, he would have made a Jade of two such like as the other:
and the ^ A stuborne child will do well so long as he is pleased, or that he
feels it not nip.
cause is, that he has been trained up so idly, that when he feels it nip,
he yields and gives it over in the plain field, not being brought to
obededience, by a true command: and then to excuse themselves they affirm it
is the nature of the horse, and his weakness* so, that he is able to do no
more: but it is rather that he will do no more, for plura patent quam latent,
there is more ability hidden, then he will show in performing.

Therefore he which does desire to ground all his documents firmly, by this
passion of love and gentleness, let him not Theo. 8. a
show it according to the affection he carries to his horse, but let it be
ruled by reason, so, that he may be sure his Horse does deserve it before he
shall receive it: and ever as he does rebel, let him perceive his own fault,
by the countenance of his rider* (to the which a horse will have a great
respect, if the man can temporize it rightly,) and so he shall be sure to effect
his own desire, and reap such joy to himself as his heart would wish.

CHAP. 12. That a Horseman should have at apt and able body.
NOw that I have set down how a man should perform the Theoricke knowledge of
the mind, I should (in the next place) set forth the Theoricke of the
disposition of the horse, but in regard a man does consist both of mind and
body, and that there cannot be a separation of the subject, without the
detriment of the substance: therefore I will omit to speak of the Horse, till
I have (in like manner) declared, how a man should behave himself, in his
exterior parts, that they may be joined to the interior, and so may make one
perfect and complete body, (as well in posse as esse,) because I will not make
a confusion in my proceedings.

Therefore the Horseman must (first) know himself to have an apt and able
body, and also how to govern the same orderly 1. Pra. 24 g. a A horse is
governed by the motions of the man. b A little error in the man causes a
greater in the horse. A simile.
and commendably, for the least disorder in the gesture of the man, causes a
greater in the horse, not only in his teaching, (the horse being governed
chiefly by the motions thereof) but also in the grace of his show, for the
least error that a man does commit in the government of himself, is increased
in the horse, in a double proportion.

For as in the science of Mecometrie in taking the distance of any thing, a
small error at the eye, although it be not any notable thing, yet (there being
one) at the object of the sight, it is much decernable; Even so, though a fault
may seem very small in the man, yet it being extended to the horse, it is more
palpable, and so causes the greater absurdity.

Wherefore a man must learn, first, to govern his own body, before he can
teach the horse any true carriage of his: for Ethic. 2. 4.
(as Aristotle says) in art scientia sufficit ad producendum opus, the
knowledge in Art is (only to bring men's labors to perfection: now therefore
the man must have both an apt and able body, for it must be apt to learn,
before he can be able to teach; ^ Why he must have an apt body.
in that he must first have a facility himself, before he bring any good
facility to the Horse: For if he cannot tell how to scate himself truly, and
use his body apt for motions covertly, and likewise govern his hand mildly,
and carry his legs fit for corrections seemly, he shall never teach his
horse orderly, but he shall be driven into some extreme contrarily: then as I
have said that is no part of true Art; and therefore they are not Theo. 3. e.
meet for this profession, which will sit like logges on their horses backs,
and have no agility to help them, more then they (by inclination) are prone
unto, which is another cause also, of so much reproach to the horse.

Again, he must have an able body to help his Horse as occasion d Why the man
must have an able body.
is offered; now this ableness must as well proceed from the mind as from the
action of the body, for he must not have only knowledge how to help, but
when to help, for if he cannot distinguish of the instant time nunc, he shall
fail in his desire. For as a Wrastler must take the very time of advantage
against his Adversary, or else he loses his opportunity, and A Simile.
so the glory of his prise is either clean frustrate, or else he must use more
strength, if he gain the conquest: even so a man must know by the seat and
facility of his body, when to take the opportunity of the Horse to gain the
advantage thereof, or else he must use more violence for the atchieuing
thereof, if he determine to obtain his desire, and also his body must be
fortified with courage: for if he have not spirit to work his horse ^ He must
be of cou^age.
to obedience, but when he finds him any thing dogged, dares not displease
him for fear of being overcome by him, then he shall be dismissed of the
fruition of the heat of the Sun, which is the truth whereby he might grow to
some perfection of ripeness in this Vineyard, and also by that means his
Horse is made more rebellious, in regard he finds himself the most master.
And further, he must have a strong constitution that he may be the better able
to work ^ He must be of a good strong constitution.
his Horse according to his understanding: For if he be weak in body, so that
he cannot endure the pains which this Art does desire, let him never look
for any true performance thereof; for labor est materia virtutis and gloria,
hunc qui eijcit, and illas reijcit. Labor is both the matter and glory of
virtue, and therefore he which despises the one, must needs fail of the
other. Wherefore when a man feels that he has some reasonable proportion of
this exterior part, let him with boldness work his desire to the restitution
of knowledge, his proceedings being leuelled by the line of reason, and he
shall no doubt bring forth fruit worthy of tasting.

CHAP. 13. That a Horseman should have a true seat, and comely carriage of his
Body.
IN regard the Horses grace in all his actions does chiefly proceed from the
Man, the Horse being a creature only governed by the sense of feeling, as a
blind man is guided by leading, and that he must direct the Horse by the
motions of his body as a Pilot does direct a Ship by the stearing of the helm,
therefore it is fitting that a man should have knowledge how to rule his own
body, that he may the better know how to command the body of the Horse; for
the effecting whereof, a a The Theorick part must be learned before the
Practick can be gained. Theo. 4. b.
man must first understand the Theoricke thereof, before he can tell rightly
how to perform the Practicke part: For else he should resemble some tradesman
(as Carpenter or such like) which does vsurp the trade of a Tailor, or any
other who has both sheares and cloth before him, but yet cannot tell how to
dispose of them aright for the making of a garment. Therefore for the
illustrating of which, I will so briefly as I can set down how a man should
seat and carry himself upon his Horse; because I will not treat of it in the
Practicke part: For there I do not intend to speak any thing as concerning,
how it should be done, but what is to be done, because I would not confuse the
understanding of the reader. For it may be he does think there is Preface.
Theo. 3. p and 4. i
too much spoke already, for such a small knowledge as this Art does desire.

But yet if he rightly conceive, how long this part of Horsemanship has been
used, and (in all generations) how many have spent all their life times to
gain hairs, and yet it is left doubtful, b Uncertainty proves the
in^^^catenesse of (...) A^t.
some holding one opinion, some another, and yet all dissenting from the truth:
and also that the knowledge hereof is not rightly gained in the whole time of a
man's life, there is so many errors crept in both by traditions and authority:
(The reason being, that ignorance is propogated, but knowledge is not) I cannot
think, but then he will imagine that I rather spoke a great deal too little,
(for the purging of these errors from the Art) then any deal enough, (for the
planting of the truth,) because it is more hard to purge error from Art, then
to teach the ground of the true Art. Now therefore I do desire, Theo. 6. b
that they would (with patience) endure the time spending in the reading
hereof, though it be both craggy and rough, because the path has never been
(before) trodden, and especially in regard I have taken more pains to observe,
and collect Note.
such observations as will take away the cause of this ruin, then they shall
take pains in reading and perusing these collections: for it is more pains
for a Gardener to proportionate his garden, and to set it with variety of
flowers, then it is to them which come into it, to gather a nosegay.

But to persist, that a man may the better know how to seat and carry his body
aright, he must observe that his seat must be just in the mid-part of the
horse, (betwixt the stern of his ^ How to place the body.
tail, and his ears (he standing at his greatest pride) because that he may
the more easily command both the fore parts, and the hinder, as occasion is
offered. For in regard that his Horse and he should both make but one body in
their motions (and Theo. 38. l
many of their motions are tending circularly) he must imagine that they
(likewise) should both of them have but one d A true p^opo^^ion.
center, and his head to be the zenith thereof, and as a line drawn from one
part of the circumference, (passing by the center) to the other part (which is
the diamiter) does divide the circle into two equal parts, and likewise that
there cannot be a circle drawn, except one foot of the compass does
continually remain in the center, even so, if a line be drawn from the
vertical point of the man to the Nadir of the horse, and pass by the center
of them, it does divide them into two equal parts, e No true motion except it
be in one and the self same center.
in like manner and likewise they cannot make any true motion except the man be
in the center, or midest in regard he is the chief governor of the motions,
for if there be any excentricity betwixt them, (so that their motions do not
begin and end together) there cannot be any good consonant in their
proceedings; And likewise his actions will be nothing seemly nor commendable,
for though his Horse rise very high before and behind, yet the man's body should
move very little (but only A simile.
to observe time as covertly as he can) even as the pin^cular part of a pair
of scalles does move very little, although both ends of the beam discribe a
great arch.

Also he must carry his body upright, neither yielding too f The man ought to
carry an upright body.
far back (as if he were pulling at a great tree, nor too forward as if he
were a sleep, for those two motions serve to other ends (as hereafter shall be
shown) neither to sit on one side, like a crab, or to hang his body over as if
he were drunken, as I have seen some horsemen do, (which have carried good
fame) for when they would have their horses go sidewise, they would hang their
bodies so far over the contrary side, as if they were to have fallen forth of
the saddle, so that a man might easily perceive, what lesson they were teaching
as far as they could be seen, which is a very gross error in a Horseman.
Neither g How he should carry his legs.
ought he to carry his legs so close to his horses sides, that he cannot give
any motion therewith, except he first thrust them forth, for so, by continual
custom of his legs touching his side, he will be so careless that he will
become very sad, and have no quick motions except the spur be always in
his side, or (at least) he shall be driven to strike so hard with the calves of
his legs, that the beholders may perceive him a good distance off, which thing
also is an absurdity. Neither must he carry his legs (out) staring like stilts,
(without joints, as Saint George painted on horseback,) before his horses
fore shoulder, or, (at the least) against his midde shoulder, for so he cannot
help, nor correct him, but the bringing in of his legs, will be very apparent to
the beholders, and also if his horse should be any thing stirring, he cannot be
able to keep his seat truly, which will be held very rediculous in a horseman.

Therefore for the avoiding of all these extremes he must h How the man should
seat himself.
seek the mean, which is, he must sit with an upright body, his nose being
opposite to the pole betwixt the horses ears, and in looking down, it may be
a perpendicular to the mid seame of the saddle, with his shoulders straight,
not lurking down as if he were to carry a lackanapes, (which gross error I
have seen many reputed horsemen commit,) and his arms kept close to his
sides, (from the shoulder to his elbow) both to strengthen his body, to keep
it more firm and also to keep his hands i How to carry his arm^s.
so stayed, that they fly not up and down, as birds wings do that beat the
air, which if they should do, it is not only an evil show (in the man) but
also his hands, being always chocking upon the snaffle (through the
instablenesse of them) will so dull the horses mouth, that he shall never have
a commendable feeling thereof.

Likewise his legs must be pendant of an equal distance from the horses
sides, his feet so level in the stirrops, as they k How to carry his legs in
the stirrops.
are when he walks on the ground, neither must his stirrup lethers be so
long, that his chiefest labor shall be to keep his feet in them, (for so a man
shall loose his true seat by stretching his legs, as if they were on the
tenters,) nor so short that he shall be raised from his true seat (the pitch of
his knees being dislocated from the points of the saddle) nor ought one stirrup
to be longer then the other (in my judgment) although many worthy men have set
that order down. My reason is, in regard the man must have a true and upright
seat, and nature has l Why one stirrup should not be longer then another.
made his legs (which are the supporters thereof, one not longer then
another, but of an equal length; therefore I cannot see how the body should be
kept direct, the legs one of them hanging sider then another.

For as it is a conclusion in Geometry, put even things to uneven, and that
which remains will be uneven; even so put the equality of the legs, to the
vnequality of the stirrops, (the ^ The grantable request.
one being longer then the other) then the seat must needs be unequal,
therefore they ought to be of equal length to the proportion of his legs, in
such sort as the feet may only have a sure stay upon them, that the body may
be kept the more firm and so the more able to serve the Horse.

Further, he must carry his feet in such proportion to the Horses sides, as
they may make two parrallel lines with them: neither m How to carry his feet.
carrying his toes so farr^ forth that he can hardly keep his spurs out of
his Horse sides, nor so far in, that (whenever he shall need to use the
spur) he shall be feign to turn his legs about as if one would wrest a
scrue, but carry them in such sort, as when he is truly placed in his saddle,
(as before I have shown) he then looking down first on one side, then on the
other without bending his neck, he may see both his toes in like equality.

All which observations being truly kept in the Horses standing, and also held
in his moving, then he may be assured, that he does grace his Horse by his
gesture, so much as is possible, and therefore needs not be daunted for the
taunts of any Zoylous beholders, and further he shall have much condign
praise for the same. And then if he (in like manner) be careful to be governed,
(in all his other proceeding) by his chief Captain Reason, he shall flourish
in this Vineyard with glory, and his branches shall so spread over the frame,
that for his performance he shall merit great fame.

CHAP. 14. The Horseman must have true use both of hand and Foot.
NOw that I have set forth how a man should seat himself truly for the best
grace both of himself and his Horse, it rests likewise to show how he should
use himself in his actions, least that he should work per deceptionem visus,
and so do but only make a show of knowledge, as a shadow without a substance,
like those who are desirous to be esteemed judicious in the Mathematickes
carry an instrument about with them, but cannot tell the use thereof. But there
are ouer-many already of that rank, which are the cause that Horsemen who a
The cause of the contempt of this Art.
are of performance, in some equality, are in so much contempt, by their abuse
who make but only a show of the Art, but when they come to the touchstone they
prove mere counterfeit, by which means are increased the number of Iades, the
cause proceeding from ignorance; for they do not know the true use neither of
hand nor foot, either to amend the Horses reyne or quicken his mouth if it be
dead (as they term it) nor to place their Horses body truly, neither can tell
how to make him turn and go back, but only by haling and pulling the Horses
mouth, all which are as possible to be done without the true use of the hand
and foot, as for a Scholar to learn to read without spelling, or for one to
survey without knowledge either of the scale or Station. Therefore let them
think that they are as far from the truth herein as they are from
perceiving their own ignorance: But because it is so difficult a thing to cure
this venomous disease, I will leave them, and return to those which feel
their own ignorance and desire some instruction to remedy the same.

Therefore it is requisite that a man should learn the use both of hand and
foot that he may the better know how to help and serve his Horse as occasion
shall be offered; for the better understanding b A man must learn the true use
both of hand and foot. 1. Pr. 18. c
whereof, he must observe that the use of the hand is not to cut and tear the
Horses mouth up to the mid-cheeke, as many heavy hands do, by chocking,
gagging and sawing too and fro with their hands, no nor yet to break the
skin thereof by any of the aforeaid means, when he will not obey, nor bring
in his reyne, for so his mouth shall be more dead; neither yet to hold so hard
upon the hand as to make their arms and shoulders ache, when they ^ do either
fear stumbling or running away, for that is a means rather to increase those
faults then to reform them, because they give to the Horse no stay to support
his body, more then nature has ordained. For ^ Fear is the cause of error.
Theo. 9. d.
whereas nature has given him only four legs, to support and carry his
body, they (through the abuse thereof) have added a fifth, for whereas the use
of the bridle is only to guide the Horse, it is now changed in the use, and is
made a stay for the Horse to rest upon; and so by the abuse thereof it tends
more to rebellion then obedience, by reason the Horse when d The abuse of the
bridle.
he foeleth such a stay, he relyeth the most upon it, and then if their hands
chance to slack never so little through weariness, when he feels his stay
fail him, wherein he did trust, then he presently stumbleth if he be thereto
inclined, he trusting so Theo. 4. ^.
much to the hand that he regards not the lifting up of his fore-legges; but
if to the other, then so soon as he feels any liberty, he falls presently
to run away, because his lust or Theo. 3. e.
desire is not reclaimed by art but by violence, for (as I have said) use a
Horse to extremities, and he will not do any thing but 1. Prac. 14. i.
by extremities. And therefore Horseman-ship may be resembled to War; for it
is sooner gained by policy and reason, then by e Horsemanship compared to
War.
strength and will. For let a man hold in a Horse, (which is subject to run
away) never so hard, yet when he is never so little disquieted, it is not the
strength of the man that can command him, for his mouth is so horned with
continual use, that it is become senseless, and then he may as well hold a
Bull by the head, as hold his Horse by strength.

Now therefore the true use of the hand is only to guide the f The true use of
the hand. Theo. 36. b. and 27. c.
Horse by sweet and gentle motions, neither carrying it so hard that it shall
make his mouth more dull, nor so slack, that he shall loose the true and stayed
carriage thereof: but only to hold his reins, of such an equal length to his
seat, that he may keep his arms close to his sides, to stay his hands the more
firmly, for disturbing the Horse in his mouth, that whenever his Horse shall
assay to thrust his head or nose forth, the stay of his hands will not give him
liberty, and also when he comes in with his head, that then his hands do
not follow, but only keep their true place, and so by use when the Horse
shall feel more ease with the bringing in of his head, then with casting it up
he will delight the greatest ease, if he may be suffered thereto.

Now for the better working thereof the use of the foot is very g The use of
the foot.
pertinent, because it has a relation to the hand: for they must both be
combined together for to gain the true command of the horses mouth: For if he
work upon the mouth only with the hand, he shall never obtain his desire: and
again, if he use the foot, and the horse will not obey the hand, upon the
least discontent he will run away, or else show some other Iadish trick.
Therefore a Horseman ought (chiefly to have true knowledge in the use of them
for they are the only keys which do open to the secrets of this Art: in
regard they are relatiues that cannot be separated, because a man shall never
find the true use of the hand without the foot, nor of the foot without the
hand, for their true uses are the one to help the other. For instance, if 1
How to preserve the strength of a Horses neck.
a man would have his horse to make a turn on the right hand, if he use the
hand only, then he shall displace his horses head, and bend his neck like a
Seal, and so cause him to be weak necked, (which thing he should be very
careful to eschew) by forcing altogether upon the reins. Therefore for the
preventing thereof, he must hold both his reins firm, and with the moving of
his hand very little to the right side of his maine, he must lay the left reyne
close to his neck, and follow after with his body, laying the calfe of his
left leg close to his Horses left side, and that will make him fold his left
leg over his right, and with a little use cause him to turn very gracefully
and willingly, so soon as he shall but feel the motion of his leg.

And again, if he would have him to turn on the left hand, then he must use
the like helps, with the right leg, not suffering his bridle hand to pass
the left side of his maine, and so the like use of helps, for all other
reformations, which here I will omit because I intend to speak of them in the
Practick part, being 2 Of helping a Horse with the body.
appertinent unto it. Only I give instance heerof, to show how necessary, and
what relation, the use of the foot has to the hand. Again, there are some
which use to help their horse with their body, bending it that way, and
holding their contrary leg forth, which they would have their horse to turn:
But me thinks it is nothing so effectual nor commendable because the leg
is as well to correct as to help and when it is holden from his horse side (if
he prove slow upon the motion) he cannot correct him, so instantly, as he may
with his leg being close thereunto, nor so covertly as the Art does desire;
and likewise a man cannot make the least motion with the body, but it will be
very decerneable to the spectators; which opertnesse is nothing commendable in
a Horseman. Therefore let all those who are desirous to be laborers in this
Vineyard, covet to help their horse, so covertly as they can, and then they
shall both gain to themselves exceeding glory, and delight, and to their horse
great admiration and fame; for seeing that the hand and the foot are the chief
tools (by which the frame of this Vinieyard is made) if a man can learn to
use them exquisitely, then he shall be sure his branches will flourish and so
spread the better, whereby his fruit shall be more delightful and pleasant.

CHAP. 15. That a Horseman should know how to help his Horse.
BEcause (as I have said) a horse is altogether governed by feeling, therefore a
man must be careful to carry his body so, that he does not use any idle
motions, but (only) such as may tend either to the helping or correcting of
his horse, in regard the effect of a thing is (always) taken from the cause,
for if a man ^ Idle motions procure idle effects.
use the gesture of his body idly (without need) it must needs produce idle
effects. Therefore a man ought first to learn how to help his horse, before the
horse can learn to understand his mind by his motions, for if a horse cannot
rightly conceive the mind of Theo. 4. h.
his rider by his motions, he using ambiguity, or aequiuocation, (which is one
motion for diverse things) then does he straight fall into some disaster by
thoughts; and so does bring a rebellion, instead of an unition. For if one man
cannot know the intention of another mind, except that he speak
significantly Note.
unto him, that he may conceive his will: neither can a horse now hope to
dispose himself, to satisfy his riders desire, except he know the right use
of his helps.

For as in the confusion of tongues, when the tower of Babell A simile, by the
confusion of Babell.
was built,) when one called for one thing, there was another brought, by which
the building was dispoliated, even so if the man does use no decorum in helps,
it must needs make a confusion in his works, for when he would have his horse
to do one thing then begineth he to do another, because he does not rightly
understand his mind by his motions, for although the truth of a man's heart, is
not altogether known by his speech (for he (in policy) will oftentimes speak
on thing and think another, either for fear or affection) yet there is no
such deceit in the horse, for he does show truly the effects of every man's
knowledge, (he not respecting one man more then another, but as the knowledge
is in the man for commanding, even so is his horses obedience in performing. b
A horse does not respect any man, for credit Preface.


Now therefore that a man may the more truly know how he should help his
horse, he must observe four chief helps in working the horse to his
perfection, the first is the body of the man to cause the motion in the horse,
the second is his c How to help the horse with his body.
legs to help the motion, the third is his hand both to guide the motion and
cherish, and the last is his tongue, to help to quicken the motion and to
cherish. Now because the motion of the man is the cause of the motion of the
horse, he must observe that it may chiefly be in those parts of his body, that
the horse may have the best feeling thereof, and yet that it may be the least
apparent to the eye, which are those parts that are next to the horse, and that
is from the middle to the knees, in regard those are the aptest parts, for the
ministering feeling to the horse, and therefore if he would have his horse turn
on the right Note this absurdity.
hand, let him thrust his left knee close to his saddle point, but if on the
left hand, then his right knee, and if to go forward then to yield his thighs
a little forward, but not to raise himself upon his stirrops, (as many reputed
horsemen do) so that a man may see clearly betwixt his seat and the saddle,
for so he does stretch his stirrops so straight, that it does rather cause stay
(in the horse) then help forward, because it is a help to cause a horse stop:
and again, if he would have him stop, then let him seat himself more firm,
in the hinder part of his seat, and thrust his feet more straight in his
stirrops, then usually d The true use of the stirrup leathers. 1. Pra. 29. a
he does, whereby his stirrup leathers may be the more stiff, and that will
make his horse keep a firm body. But if he would serve his horse for any other
motion, as to help his horse in his trot, pace or any other assault, for
delight, then let him clap both his knees close to the points of the saddle,
and only keep time with his seat, to move the better spirit to the horse:
and not to sit as some do, (which are not esteemed the worst horsemen) Theo.
13. ^.
without any motion, (like logges) on their horse backs, with their legs
stretched out in their stirrops, (as if they were on the rack) but as their
horse causes them, (they forcing him by extremities,) having no agility to
help him; therefore (as I have said) it is meet that the man should have an
apt body to help his horse.

Again, he must help his horse with his legs, for they are (in like manner)
means for motion forward, by ierting them quickly forward in the stirrops,
without staying them at that e He must help with the leg.
stresse, and likewise for turning of either hand (as I have shown in the last
Chapter;) but these helps in regard they are so apparent, are not to be used
continually, but only at the first beginning, and ever as the horse does grow
in perfectness, so to mitigate them till they be reduced to the true helps of
the seat (as before said.)

Now the man must also help his horse with his hand (carrying it, (as before I
have shown,) in his turning, laying the g The application of the hand
contrary reyne close to his neck, for weakening of it, and for dislocating his
head: also it does help in his stop with holding his hands a little more
firm: and for the better preserving of his mouth, when he would have him to
stop, let him iert his body back and his feet forward, and with a little use,
that will make him stop the more willingly, if he hold a while so, till he
feel his horse to yield: but these helps, (in like manner) are but for the
first, which afterward must be left, by degrees, as the horse waxes cunning.
And the hand is also to cherish either with the great end of the switch, with
clawing the horse betwixt the ears, holding the rest of his body firm without
motion, or with clapping or clawing the Horse on the neck or shoulder which
will (much) fortify his well doing.

And lastly, the tongue is to quicken the motions with chearing him up, with
the help thereof, as hey, hey, or how, how, h The help of the tongue.
or such like; and likewise with using some inarticulate voice, as by closing
his lips, and opening them suddenly, which may sound, as paw, or else by
laying the tongue flat to the roof of the mouth, letting it depart from
thence, at the (instant) opening of the neither chappe, or by some such like
means, which may stir up the horses alacrety. And also the tongue is to
cherish whilst the hand does clappe or rub, in saying, So my rogue, there my
boy, holow my wench, or such like.

Now the reason of that is, because the mind of the man is as it were the
primum mobile, and the action of the man's body i The motions of the man is an
index to the horse.
does show (as an index to the Horse) the intention of his will: and the horse
(being brought to true obedience) does yield the agitation of his powers, to
the command of the actions of the man's body, (they being perceived by the
tactible sense of the horse) and so the man, and the horse, may be said (as
they ought) to be one subject, through the mutual concord that is betwixt
them. Therefore the man ought to be very careful, to level all his motions by
reason, least the wild beasts (aforesaid) should break into the Vineyard, for
want of knowledge, how to use these helps, for if they bring disorder with
them, then the work a contrariety, and two contraries can never be (at one and
the self same time) in one subject, for if the horse cannot perceive the man's
mind by his helps, then does he fall to k Disorder brings a contrariety.
Theo. 3. ^
rebel, and when he would have him to stand, his desire is to go, and when to
go he coueteth to run, and thereby comes such a confusion, that the fence
is laid open for the devouring beasts, to break down the Vines, and then it
will be hard to expel them till they have made havoc of the whole work.

CHAP. 16. How the Man should know where to help his horse.
IT is needful, (also) that the man should have knowledge in this predicament,
( vbi) because that when the horse does commit a fault, the man may the better
know how to help it, if he can tell where to help him; But for the truer
knowledge thereof he must first know the chief means, by which he shall
perceive from whence the fault does proceed, least (in not knowing the right
cause thereof) he should resemble some Farrier as I have both seen and known)
which has applied cu^es to a horse for the staggers, thinking his pain to be
in the head, when the (poor) Horse has been so foundred that he could a A
lamentable ignorance.
not stand, and also like others, who have roweled the shoulder, and the cause
of his halting has been upon a cloyde in the foot. But for the preventing of
such gross absurdities, he must observe, that the fault is not always to be
reformed in that Theo. 7. ^
place where it is seen, for an error (as it is said) is not an error simply
of it self, but it is the cause also of other errors. Therefore he which will
help his Horse aright, must resemble the cunning Surgeon, when he does
desire to heal an old running A Simile.
Ulcer, does not presently apply to heal the sore at first, till he has
considered from whence that flux does proceed, which does feed it, and so stop
it, and then the soar is soon healed afterward: even so, when a horse does
commit a fault, and that he does stand need of help, he must not think to
help him there where it is seen, but he must expostulate, what Theo. 3. b
the cause is of that cause, and by the staying of that flux, the other effect
will be soon reformed.

Now the seat of the man is a more sure means, to give notice of the cause (if
it be right or true) then the Urine of a man, to show the disease of him, for
by the seat (if it be perfect,) he may distinguish of every fault, from
whence it does proceed, (if he observe the true carriage of the Horses body) for
if his hand be holden in the true place it will tell him the least disorder of
b A true seat judges of the cause of errors.
the head, the action of his body, will feel the willingness of the horses
motion, his legs will show the obedience of the Horse in yielding to his
helps, and by his seat he may judge of the true carriage of his body.

Now when the man does feel a non-obedience in any of these, he must not
think to reform it in the same place, where he does feel the defect, but he
must consult with himself from whence the cause thereof does come* and take
that away, and then the effect of the other will decay. For instance if the
horse lean so hard upon the hand, so that he cannot easily be governed, Theo.
10. b
but either with pain or else with loosing some grace of his seat; then if he
think to reform that fault with the bridle, Note.
(only) he shall utterly fail of his expectation, for so he shall make his
mouth the more hard and insensible, for the 1. Pra. 23. d. c Of a dead mouthd
horse. 1. Pr. 24. P.
cause does proceed from the idle carriage of his body, and the slow coming
after of his hinder parts, therefore he must be reformed by giving his body a
quicker motion, and by trussing his hinder parts more round.

Again, if the horse be any thing free and stirring, so that he will not
endure to rest upon the bridle, he must not seek a d Of a ticklemouthed Horse
reformation therefore by forcing him upon the hand, for that will make him
trusse up his body the more, and make him more bedlam-like: because the cause
does proceed from the eagerness of his inward agitation, and so desires to
go according to his appetite, but being terrified with the bridle, he dares
not to stretch his feet forth, and so dare not rest upon the hand, whereby he
might range his body to his proportionate length: and therefore the man must
help him by his patience, and give him leave to go mildly, till he has
gotten a habit of stretching forth his legs, and then as he is bold to rake
at length he will rely the more upon the hand.

And further, by the action of the body, may be perceived ^ The obedience of
the Horse is known by the action of his body. Theo. 39. ^.
the obedience of the motion of the Horse, for if his body will not yield to
the helps of the man, then he must not think to help that by forcing of the
exterior parts, for the cause does proceed from the interior, because he is
not brought to perfect obedience. And therefore he must help that in
commanding his disposition, for as the action of the man does work according
to the agitation of his mind, so the motion of the Horse does work according
to the willingness of the agitation of his powers, and therefore the cause of
the disobedience of the body, must be helped by reforming the disobedience of
his appetite.

And likewise by the helps of his legs he may judge the tractablenes of the
horse, for if he will not turn on either hand Note.
at the motion of them, then the cause does proceed from the hastiness of the
man, in that he put him to that lesson, before he was ready for it: because
the horses body is governed by the hand, and therefore if he will not obey
without force, he must help that in quickening of his mouth, (as before I
have shown) for if he be truly mouthed, he will obey the least motion that he
can use.

And in like manner, by his seat, he may perceive the true carriage f The true
carriage of the Horses body is known by the Man's seat.
of the horses body, for if it be perfectly stayed, then he shall find great
ease in the horses motion: but if he be lash bodied, then he will shake him and
keep false time there with: and therefore if he lift his fore feet over high,
and work too much with his shoulders, it is because his hinder parts do not
come after fast enough to set his foreparts foreward, and so he must help
that by helping on his hinder parts with his body: But if he lift and shake
behind, then the cause is that he does desire to go faster on with them then
the foreparts will make way, therefore he must help that by raising up of his
parts before, g If an error be in the fore parts the cause thereof comes from
the hinder, and contrarily.
to make them set foreward, that the hinder parts may have liberty to follow
after: and the cause of this operation in the contrary is, that if the Horse be
lighter before then behind, then the working upon his hinder parts does keep
down the fore: because that whereas (before) the hinder parts were made the
more heavy, (in regard he did repose the most strength in them, to strive with
his fore parts) now the other shall bear a proportionate weight, whereby they
shall be made the heavier and the other more light; and so for the hinder parts
if they be the more light, (as most Horses are through the abuse of the hand)
the like reason for the foreparts. And in like manner the cause of all other
errors may be judged of by the like observations, which for to speak of would
be infinite; and therefore these shall only suffice to give a ground for the
rest, with taking pains to consult from whence the cause of other errors do
arise; and also they may be better perceived by practice then by reading.

CHAP. 17. How the Man should know when to help his Horse.
AMongst all the worldly gifts that are bestowed on man there is none more
precious then Time, for it is both the Procreatrix, and deuourer of all
sublunary things, in regard that as in time they flourish, so in time they fade
again; and as those that are vegetative in time do grow, so contrarily, in
time they are cut down; and again, as there are but four irreuocable things,
as Tempus, Iuuentus, Verbum dictum, et Virginitas, so this of time is the
chief of all the rest, because they are a Time the worker of all things.
all comprehended in it, for without it there is not any thing can have
perfection.

Now therefore in regard it is such a necessary thing, that all other things
are concluded, by it: it is requisite that a Horseman should have knowledge how
to use it, and also how to distingush of this predicament ( quando,) least (in
not knowing when to help) he should sooner spoil then b There are three
chief parts of time.
repair. Wherefore that he may the better answer to this interrogation
(when) let him observe the three (chief) parts of time, which is, the preter,
the present, and the future; now the preter time being lost will be a good caveat
for him to beware of the present, that in making true use of it, it may bring
profit to the future. Now for the better Judgment how to use c The distinction
of time is the ground of horsemanship.
the present time, he must abreuiate it till he come to the punctum temporis,
(which is nunc) because the horse is (only) sensitive, and has his chief
apprehension by feeling, and therefore if he does not help in the very
instant, he cannot conceive the mind of the man by his helps, the which that
the horse may the better apprehend, the man must be careful to observe as well
the first motion, of the inward disposition, as of the outward action, for the
horse does not commit any outward action, d Caracters to know the horses
disposition. Theo. 34. b.
but it does first proceed from the inward desire, which the man may very well
perceive, by some of these characters; as either by standing, or by the casting
of his eye back, so that the white thereof may be seen in the fore parts, or
by the laying of his ears (either one or both) in his neck, or by the holding
of his wind, or else by the trussing up of his body, any of (all) which so
soon as he shall perceive, let him help him instantly, upon the first show of
any of the (foresaid) notes, least (if it come to the action of the body) it
will not be reformed without corrections.

Therefore he must observe, that if he be desirous to have him stop, if in
his stopping, he desires to stand so firm with his body that it is not apt
to move again at a Observations for his stop.
the first motion; then he must help him at the very instant, with the
ierting of his feet forward (suddenly) upon the stirrops, for that will help
to set up his body, more roundly together, whereby he shall be more ready to
obey the next motion. And if he look (either) doggedly with his eyes, or else
lay his ears in his neck, it argues an intention of some rebellion in his
desire: and therefore he must refell such perturbations, by the sound of his
voice. And again, if he feel his wind to stop, or that he trusse up his
body, (more then ordinarily he should) then it is a sign of further
disobedience; and therefore upon the first feeling of which, the man must
thrust him forward, (in his seat) to help his horse in his motion, that it may
be the more quick, and so cause him to bestow that strength of wind and body,
in the quickness of his motion, which he would have kept (otherwise) for the
working of his desire. But if these helps will not be sufficient for the
prevention of such qualities, as are intended, (by the show of the said
characters) and that (either through the sullenness of the f When help^ fail
correction must prevail.
horse, or the negligence of the man) they must needs become to the action of
the body: then they must be reformed by the helps of correction, in the which
he must be very careful to proportionate it according to the quality of the
offense, and the disposition of the horse; which I mean not (here) to speak
of till I come to entreat of their use.

And lastly, time is a great fortifier of the horses memory, not only by the
continuing of his labor, and abreuiating it, but g He ought to distinguish
time by rest and labor.
also by the continuing and abreuating of rest, for if the man cannot
distinguish betwixt, labor and exercise, to change the one into the other as
occasion shall be offered; there will be great errors committed through his
ignorance; for if he be any thing prone to obey the helps, then he must
exercise him by a little at once, and often, till he has gotten some habit by
practice, but if he be of any rebellious disposition, then he must put both
himself and his Horse to greater labor, till he has gained some obedience
in yielding to his helps, and ever as he finds willingness, so let him
abreuiate his labor, till it come unto a gentle exercise to delight the horse
in his well doing. And here (in my judgment) they are much deceived, Theo. 9.
^.
which fall into the extreme of lenity, as has been said, that will not put a
Horse to any thing more at the first then he will willingly do of himself,
whereby he does get such a habit of self-will, (as it may be termed) that when
he shall be wrought upon to be brought to obedience, then does he prove so
stubborn, h The cause of mary I^d^s. 1 Pr. 18. a
that it will triple the pains, to reform his desire, more then it would have
done at the first; nay, it makes many horses to be accounted Iades, in regard
they cannot tell how to man^ge them, to gain that after which they let slip at
the first. And the cause hereof is, that they work by the figure Hysteron 1.
Pr. 19. d.
Proteron, in setting the Cart before the Horse, which will excuse lapsis
linguae, but will confuse opus formae, for they do cherish before there be
obedience, whereas there should first be obedience, and after they should
cherish.

And also they must be careful to respect the time of rest; for ^ Of the time
of rest.
till he conceive the mind of the man by his motions, he must not rest long,
and his exercise must be little and often, for if he rest long before he has
some ground, he will forget betwixt times, and so be always in learning, and
by that means oftentimes cause restiuenesse: for as long rest does increase
strength and courage in a Horse, and also does ground that the better which he
has learned, whereby he does it with greater delight; even so, long rest
before he be fit for it, does bring strength and co^rage to the contrary
effect. Wherefore these distinctions (of time) being truly observed, he shall
easily find how profitable this particle thereof ( when) is for the perfection
of his labors.

CHAP. 18. How the Man should know the disposition of the Horse.
Having heretofore set forth the Theoricke Part of the Man, how he should
learn his own duty; now I think it also a He is a comple^t Horseman that can
t^ll how to win the desire o^ the Hor^e to his will. Theo. 33. c
so necessary to speak somewhat of the disposition and quality of the Horse,
that the man may the better judge how to use him in his kind, that so he may
be brought to the right knowledge of his mind, and by that means he shall be
accounted a perfect and complete Horseman, in knowing how to unite and
conioyne the appetite or desire of the Horse to his will, that thereby they two
may be made one subject both in agitation and action. For the concord betwixt
the Man and the Horse, has some affinity to the contract betwixt a Man and his
Wife; An Allegory.
for the Woman before she betake her to a Husband is her own master, and does
whatsoever pleases her self, but when she is married, then she should
depend upon the government of her Husband, and they both should will and do
one thing (if they would increase prosperously:) But if there be a repugnancy
betwixt them, so that one does scatter as the other does gather, the one
willing one thing, and the other doing another; then in stead of setting up
they pull down, and where they should cherish amity, they foster enmity.

Even so, a Colt before he come to be handled, it is its own Theo. 7. c.
master, going at liberty and doing what it lusts, being without subjection:
But when it comes to be backed, then it must be subject to the yoke of
obedience, and yield to the command of the Man, and so bend all its actions to
the will of him, that there may be a simpathy and concord betwixt them: but if
there be, in like manner an opposition the one against the other, and that the
Horse will not obey to that which the Man does desire to have him do, (by his
motions they being quick and gentle) so that when he would have him stop or
retire, he will go Theo. 20. c b No good progression without obedience.
forward, or to go foot-pace, he will either trot or gallop, etc. Then let
the Man force what he will by extremities, (if he cannot tell how to bring him
to obedience) they will agree as a Dog and a Bear, always wrangling or
fighting, for whereas there should be an orderly progression by obedience,
there will be a confused subversion by resistance.

Therefore for the better establishing of this combination betwixt them, it is
requisite that the man should enter into the disposition of the horse, that he
may the better proportionate Theo. 2. l. and u.
his helps and corrections, according to the inclination of him. Now by the
disposition I understand that which many heretofore improperly have termed
nature, the mistaking of which word has much defaced this Art among the common
sort, as I have already showed:) For it is holden, (as it is most true) that no
man can change the nature of the horse: but this is to be understood, of the
nature or essence that the Colt receives at its first forming, for then
presently it does receive its properties, which indeed cannot be changed. As
for instance, it then receives that natural difference from Man, which is to
be an irrational and sensatiue Creature, (although it may be ^ Natural
properties cannot be changed.
said to be a living Creature) and therefore cannot by any means be made
rarionall; and likewise its voice to be non significatina, and so cannot be
altered; and again, nature has given it to go upon the earth, and therefore
Art cannot make him fly in the air, and many such like which only are
immutable from nature: but those accidents which come to the essence or nature
of the indiuidium, which recepit magis a^t minus, et augeri aut minui potest,
either in quantity or quality, by Art may be reformed, and may both be
increased and diminished, as stoutnesse d Accidental qualities may be altered.
and weakness of courage, swiftness o^ slownesse, dullness or freeness, and
such like, in regard the cause of such diversities (for they are not
contraries) proceed from patibili^ qualitas, for the body is moved according to
the appetite or ^ A Horses body is moved according to his appetite. Theo. 33. d
lust of the horse; or else what should be the reason that the more unlikely
horse for shape should beat and make a ^ade of that horse which is more likely
to the eye, if the defect of shape were not helped by Art.

Wherefore seeing this old cloak which has so long covered the ignorance of
men, (I mean the nature of the horse) has gotten such a rent that it will not
keep off any more rain; let them shake it off, and cloth themselves with that
which will hold out water. For let the man enter into the disposition of the
horse, and govern himself, so that he may use him accordingly, he shall find
that many things which before were held impossible will be effected with much
facility.

But because no certain thing can limit an uncertain, therefore it is very
hard to set down a certain grownd, how to know the true disposition of every
indiuidium, for there is nothing Theo. 28. a. 1. Prac. 25 c. Theo. 36. h. ^
There are as many several dispositions as there are Horses.
more general in the works of nature then diversity, because there are no two
things that are absolute, like or dislike one another; for as it i^, quot
homines tot sensus, so many men so many minds, even so it is, quot aequi tot
sunt disposiciones, that there are as many dispositions as there are horses.
Therefore I will not speak thereof any more but only of the two extremes,
which is dullness and freeness, because that all the other are participating
of either of them more or less, but the difference must be judged according as
the man shall find the inclination of the Horse by working, for by practice it
may be better perceived then by prescribing.

But yet there are four chief observations, whereby the man may have the
better ground, how to judge of his disposition of: which the first is his will,
(as it is termed, for he has sponte although improperly, because it is per
appetitum, but not consultationem) the second, his wind, the third, the aptnes
of the carriage g How to know the horses disposition by 4. charaters. Theo. 6. ^
of his body, and the last is, easy command of his mouth: all which (if they
be rightly observed) will give a sufficient instance of the horses inclination.
Wherefore for the better conceiving of them, I will speak more thereof in
their proper places, because I will not confuse the understanding of the
desirous practitioner, (by degression) least he should be discouraged (thereby)
and so, trodden down that he should not delight to grow in this Vineyard,
whereby he might yield fruit both pleasant and profitable.

CHAP. 19. Of the Dullness in the horse.
BEcause those horses which are said to be sad or dull, do desire the
greatest judgment and depth of this Art, therefore it is needful for the man
to know the cause of the same, 1. Pra. 24. k.
that he may the easilier conceive how to reform them: for the cause does not
proceed from the imbecility of nature (as it is imagined) but from the
dogednesse, and stubornenesse of his appetite or desire, and therefore they
will ask both the greater 1. Pr. 15. b. a The appetite of the horse is the
cause of any disobedience.
pains, and the longer time for their reforming, then those which are more apt
and tractable, for the proof whereof I, for my part have not had any colte
(these many years, howseeuer his shape has been, if I have had the first
backing of him, that has proved dull; by the which I have observed, that the
cause thereof is more from the ignorance of the man (in regard he could not
tell how to use him according to his disposition) Theo. 24. e
then through any defect in the nature of the horse, for if nature should be
condemned for all those horses which prove sad in their trayning, then it might
be said that it framed more to be without use, then for use, (because there are
more sad and unwilling horses (by many) then there are free and gentle,)
which thing (for to hold) is very absurd, because Natura nihil Theo. 2. o
agit frustra, Nature never made any thing in vain.

Now for the better illustrating hereof I will use this simile, suppose two
men, (of what stature soever, whether equal or unequal) if one of them be
willing and the other unwilling, Note a good ^^rule.
he that is the more willing will tire two (such as the other) of the adverse
part, and yet the cause is not through the inbecility of nature, (for it may be
that the vnwillinger is of a far more able body then the other) but it is
rather through the idleness and slothfulness of the mind, in that he has
more delight in taking ease then desire of pains. Even so, the cause of those
horses which are accounted sad, does not proceed from the weakness of nature,
(for many of them are of a stronger body, then the other,) but from the
stubbornenesse of his desire or lust, (in that he takes more delight to follow
his appetite, then obedient actions,) so, that he will do no more then he is
forced unto, and that (also) which he does, will be very unhandsome, and
vnseemelily done. And further they object, that those horses which are of a
thick forehand, short necked, dead mouthed, and vnnimble bodied, will very
hardly, (or never) be brought to any good riding: and verify it also by my A
retortion of the simile.
simile, for those men (many of them) which are of such an idle disposition,
had rather starve or be hanged, (as daily experience does show) then to take
any diligent or painful labor.

To which I answer, I confess they will be the harder to be brought to good
riding, in regard they must both have greater pains, and longer time bestowed
upon them, and also they must have the greater judgment, (both in helps and
corrections) for their perfection: but yet to say that they will never be
subdued, it does argue more their idle minds, then any impossibility in the
horse. For instance, if a man have two pieces of wood to work upon, the one
smooth and easy the other knotty and hard: it is no consequence to say, that
the knotty piece will A Simil^.
never be brought to any good perfection, because it requires more pains then
the other, for it may be made formal, (as well) b Ignorance holds an
imposibility.
but it must be both with greater pains, and more care; so for one of those
(before said) horses, it is no consequence to say, they will never be brought to
any good perfection because they will neither so soon, or easily, be brought
to good riding, as the other which are of a more mild inclination, and
perfecter ^ Idleness the nurse of ignorance.
making: for so they condemn themselves both of slothfulness and ignorance in
the Art. For (it may be said) the Horse will never be brought to true riding,
because the man will not take the pains to bring him thereto: for if he does
not take the greater delight in his profession, so, that his desire may be more
then ordinary, the pains will so discomfort him, that he will thrust himself
into the former rank, and had rather be starued in the frost of ignorance,
then he will take the pains to thaw himself with such a laborious
reformation.

And likewise they show their ignorance, in that they cannot d That is no Art
that is known to all men.
tell how to reform such horses, more then every ordinary professor: for every
one (almost) can tell how to ride those horses which will come to riding of
themselves, and therefore he that would be held worthy to be grafted in this
Vineyard, must be industrious and painful, to consider the cause, wherefore
the Art was invented, and so, to weed out such weeds as might smother, and
choke him, before he can grow to such perfection as to bring forth any fruit.

And whereas they may object that those horses which have Objection.
such gross characters (as is before said) are like to those men that are of
such idle disposition, (as has been shown) and so they may be killed, rather
then be brought to any good or commendable riding. I answer, they do not
regard the difference betwixt them. For those men (being reasonable creatures)
(although in that respect, they are worse then the unreasonable) they make
their election by consultation, whereby they choose that which is most pleasing
to their mind, but because they know it is not lawful nor commendable, they to
cloak their corrupt nature, do oftentimes dissemble with the world, and so
(Hypocritically) are brought to take a little pains for ostentation, being eye
and time seruers: but when they come to the trial indeed, then they show the
corruption of their minds, for they will rather fall to unlawful actions,
(they being more pleasing to their sensual appetite) then, to be subject to
live by reasonable and lawful means.

But the horse (in regard he is an unreasonable creature) does not make his
election by consultation, but per appetitum or fugiens, for when he does any
thing, (that is contrary to his inclination) he does per fugiens, rather
yielding to obedience, then to hazard the destruction of nature, (he having a
natural instinct of shunning (if the man have knowledge how to apprehend his
first yielding;) and then afterward he makes his election, per appetitum, he
obeying with delight, and then if he be once brought to obedience, (the man
having knowledge ^ A horse is no time-seruer.
how to keep it by proportionating of his helps and corrections, according to
the quickness or slownesse of his capacity) he may be sure (that in time) he
will come to a true manner of Theo. 2. ^
riding: for they are no eye pleasers, nor time seruers, but time workers,
where their disobedient doggednesse, is brought to obedient willingness. For
there are none of all these which are accounted so dull in their handling, but
when they were Foales, they would leap, skippe, and play as nimbly, and show
as great delight and courage, as any of the other sort: and therefore they may
rightly be compared to some youths, which are both quick and delightful, and
also will show as great spirit (in play) as may be, but when they come to
labor, they go^ about their business so idly, as if they had neither life nor
lust, which their idleness does not proceed from any imbecility of body but
unwillingness of the mind. Even so, the dullness of these Horses does not come
from nature, but the disposition, and therefore Art was invented to help
nature, to a restitution of the primary creation.

CHAP. 20. Of the free Horse.
NOw those Horses which are in opposition to the former, are said to be free,
and so because they are more willing to a The judgment of men i^ that if a
horse go freely, he goes well.
go forward then the other, are held that they may be brought to commendable
riding of themselves, without any great pains taking or judgment in the Art:
thinking that if they go freely enough, then they ride well enough. But
therein they are also deceived, for the Art does not only consist of the
forward going, but also in the manner of going; and therefore there is as great
diligence to be used in this Art for them, as for the other (although in an
other difference:) For there must be great care taken of the man, least that
he, through either too much have or choler, does not pass the limits of the
mediocrity; because if he cannot tell how to mitigate the fierceness of the
horse by his mild government: he shall add more fuel to the fire, and so
cause all to be suddenly (in respect) consumed, for by that means the Horse
will resemble the Prodigal unthrift, that does spend more in a year (through
following his licentious appetite) then would serve him spending all his life
time, (being disposed of by reason:) Even so, the horse, (if b A free horse may
be said to be prodigal.
he be suffered to go after his desire and lust) will spend more of his
strength and courage at the beginning, then he would do in performing great
time of toil (if the man have discretion to govern him) and so by their
franticknesse they are soon tired and oftentimes lamed, because they have no
reason to consider what is good for themselves. And therefore the man must
think that it belongs to his care and duty to husband 1. Pr. 27. a c
Obedience is the true reformation.
his freeness so, that (by his obedience) he may be brought to spend no more
then is requisite, for because the guide and government of the horse depends
upon him, he must seek to mitigate his fierce heat by temperate moisture, and
not suffer him to go after his own lust and desire, but according to the man's
mind (it being ruled by discretion and reason: For the want of true knowledge
hereof is the cause of so many bedlam and runaway Horses as there are.

And here the man must likewise be careful, least in desire of keeping them
from Prodigality, that he suffer them not to fall into the other extreme of
miserableness; for so in shunning Theo. 9. f.
of Silla they fall into Charibdis: For if one for fear least he should add
too much fuel to the fire, put either very little or none at all thereto,
then the fire does either burn dimly, or else goes out. Even so (if he do
not proportionate his helps and corrections, (according to the disposition of
the horse) in not giving correction enough, he will loose a great glory in his
actions, or else in not giving him any, in letting him do what he lust, he
will become so stubborn and idle, that his courage will be (as it were)
utterly extinct, and he will be as ill as the former, doing that he does
without any grace.

Therefore howsoever the man may conceit himself to have ^ No true knowledge
except it can work upon either of the extremes.
knowledge in this Art, yet let him assure himself, that except he can tell
how to bring both these extremes (of the sad and free horse) into the mean,
he is far from the true knowledge therein, and is not worthy to be grafted
in this Vineyard, because his fruit will be tart and distasteful, rather then
any thing sweet and pleasant. But because, the effecting of these kinds, does
consist chiefly of those four observations, which I have set down in the end
of my 18. Chapter: I will omit to speak of them here, till I come to speak
thereof in their convenient place, where I will but only touch them, (it being
enough for the first impression) and so resemble the Physician, which does
prescribe a potion for his patient, but does not show the several operations
of every particular: For (as Mr. Hall says,) Skill Mr. Halls Meditations.
too much shown loses it grace, as fresh colors change by much opening, and
are foiled by too much handling. But if I shall perceive that this my poor
Widows mite shall be taken thankfully then it will encourage me for further
pains (if God permit) to set forth many things more plainly, which heerel
speak of, but supersicially, and darkely, because I would not have the
conceited knower to glory too much in his judgment, till he has taken pains
to gain his knowledge by practice and experience.

CHAP. 21. Of Corrections.
IN the next place by order I should speak of those chief Characters by the
which the man may judge of the disposition of the horse; but because they do
depend much upon helps and corrections, I think it not amiss first to set
down the use of them, that he may the better know how to apply a Theoricke
gives evidence, but Practicke judgment, and so no man can give judgment
without evidence.
them, according to their several ends. And moreover because I will not speak
any thing of them in the Practicke Part of this Work (for making confusion by
digression) I will only infuse them into this box, that he may carry them in
the Theoricke of his mind, till he come to apply them for their necessary
uses: and therefore, except the man do rightly understand this Theorick Part,
it will be very hard for him to perform the Practick.

Now the use of corrections are only to bring the horse to perfect obedience;
for when he will not yield to the helps aforesaid, then the man must command
him by corrections: But b The use of Corrections.
herein he must have a great respect that he do not follow his own will too
much in correcting, lest in stead of the desire of obedience, he beget
rebellion; but that he have a care to proportionate them according to the
stubbornness or gentleness of the Horse.

Wherefore that the Man may record (in his memory) the several kinds of
corrections, and carry them in the treasury of his mind, whereby he may
dispose of them for his better use c Corrections are of 6. kinds.
and profit; he must observe that there be six sorts of them; that is to
say, the Voice, the Stirrup, the Calfe of the Leg, the Switch the Spur and the
Bridle. All which he must have a diligent care to know how to use every one of
the^ in their several kinds, if he desire to get any true knowledge in this
Art: for if he for want of knowledge in them, do use any of them improperly,
that is, when an error is committed, (not rightly perceiving from whence it
does proceed) in stead of the milder correction, he use the sharper and so of
the contrary. Then he does resemble d Not the cor(...) but the ^e that works
effect.
the unskillful Surgeon, which has applied corrasiue medicines to a green
wound, or that has suffered it so long (through negligence) that it has come
to be the gangrean, and so become mortal. Whereby he shall loose a great
deal of time, (both which he has spent before, and also that he shall spend
after) for the reforming of those errors, which will The^. 6. a.
ensue thereby, for (as it is said) it is more hard to purge error from Art,
then it is to teach the ground of the true Art.

CHAP. 22. The manner of correcting by the voice.
AS the voice is a kind of help to comfort and cherish the Horse, so is it
also a manner of correction, because it does bring amazement to him, by the
sudden and sharp sound thereof, not that he does so much respect what the Man
does speak, but the manner of speaking, for if he use reuiling terms in a
mild speech, the horse does hold them words of cherishment, in regard he has
not anima intellectiua, nor likewise Theo. 9. a.
can he conceive of glosing words if they be delivered in the contrary: And
therefore the man must have a greater care how he does speak, then what he
speaks; but yet for the propernesse of the speech, it is fitting he should
use reuiling 1. Pract. 14. f
words in a sharp manner, and gentle speech in a mild sort.

But because it is the gentlest kind of correction, therefore I speak of it
first, in regard it ought to be the first in use, and when that kind will not
prevail, then the other is to be used, (according to the discretion of the
man. (But for his better understanding, he must observe that it is the most
preuayling ^ How the correction of the (...) is to be (...).
at the first handling of the colt (although it is much used amongst many, all
the time of their teaching, with saying, Turn here, back I say, stand, and
such like; with such an exalting sound, that I have hard them a furlong off,
which use (me thinks is more proper to Carters then to Horsemen, because they
have the motions of the body to command the Horse withal. but the other have
not, and therefore, it is not so commendable (for them) to use it (so
generally) after the Horse is made domestical and gentle, and that he has
the use of hand and foot. And yet I do not deny but (whilst the colt is in
commanding) it is very necessary, for the fortifying of the Horses capacity,
for by it he may the more easy and soon conceive the will of the man, because
every beginning (in any thing) is hard at the first, therefore the more helps
and corrections, b Every beginning is hard
(if they be appendixes one to another) the sooner may the Horse know what to
do, (if they be used in due season.

And therefore when the Colt is first haltred, if he be fearful and skittish,
(when the man does desire to come to him by the gentlest means he can,) then
if he use the correction of the Theo 9. d
voice (by speaking sharply and suddenly unto him.) (With saying, Will you
Rogue, Ah thou Traitor, So thou Villain, or such like,) it will help to
bring him into the more subjection, so that he do not perceive the man to be
timorous. And it has the same operation in the stable, for when he does any
thing about him, (there) if he see that gentle means make him any thing
stubborn, then let him use the correction of the voice, and laying his hand
upon the head-straine of the halter, twitch it sharply to his head (upon the
very instant) and it will much 1. Pra. 14 f
prevail (for subjection) and also at his first backing, if he perceive (by
any of those Characters which I have set down in my seventeenth Chapter,)
that he has any dogged inclination, (^) Theo. 17. d.
then those words of correction will be a great means to refell such
perturbations. And further, when he goes forward, if he would have him stand,
if he use the word, Stand, it will be a great help to the Horses capacity,
(till he has gotten the true use of the bridle,) and also, when he w^^ld have
him to go back, if he use the word, Back I say, and likewise in turning, if
he say, Turn, all which are as guides to direct the Horse c Too much of any
thing causes loathing.
to the knowledge of the man's mind, which, when he has gained, then let them
be left, (by little and little:) for if they be too commonly frequent, they
will make the Horse very careless, (through too much custom) for words to the
Horse, are like the report of a piece, which does terrify at A Si^^le.
first, but yet through use, (when he does feel no other grief but the sight
of the fire, and the sound of the report) he will be nothing fearful.
Therefore if they should be used when they have lost their operation, it would
(not only) be held a rediculous thing to the hearers, but also it would work
no effect in the Horse, and so the man might be resembled to the unskillful A
true application.
Apothecary, which does gather leaves in Autumn, to make drugs of, when the
sap and moisture (wherein consists the virtue of them) is dried up, because
he has seen (the buddes) gathered in the spring.

CHAP. 23. The correction of the stirrup.
THe correction (of the stirrup) is also very auayleable, for a young colt, for
it is the gentlest correction that can be used, for the reforming of any
disorder of the fore parts, that is, either the head, the shoulders, or the
carrying of the snaffle on the one side of his mouth, and such like. Therefore
if the horse carry his 1. Pr. 25. l.
head on the left (or nar) side, then the man must correct him with the stirrup
on the contrary side, by striking him suddenly on the ^ The use of the stirrup.
far shoulder: which sudden motion, will bring an amazement to the Horse,
and so cause him to look to that side, that he is disquieted on: And
likewise, if he carry his head on the right (or far) side the like correction
must be used, with the stirrup on the left shoulder, which will bring the like
effect. As also, in his turning, on the right hand, if he do not carry his
body upright, but thrust out his left shoulder, then if he strike thereon with
the left stirrup ^ will make him take up his fore parts more nimbly, and cause
him to turn both roundly and gracefully: And so the like order must be
observed, if he thrust his right shoulder forth, when he would have him turn
on the left hand.

And likewise if he carry not the snaffle truly (in his mouth) but covet to
draw it to the right side thereof, then the man must pull the left reyne gently,
with the same hand, to bring the snaffle into its due place, which (when the
horse does feel) if he follow b The application.
with his head, and so look to the left side? then he must likewise strike him
on the right shoulder, to bring his head again into the its right place, but
he must observe, that in the very Note.
instant striking him (with the stirrup) he keep his left hand firm upon the
reyne, to keep the snaffle from yielding, and shake his right hand to cause
the Horse open his mouth that the snaffle may come to its due place, when he
does look (again) to the right side; and in like manner the stirrup does
produce the like effect, if he carry his head to the right side, when he does
pull his right reyne to bring the snaffle from the left side, (if the man shake
the left reyne to make the Horse open his mouth, that it may glide upon the
snaffle,) when he shall look the contrary way.

Now again, the stirrup does help to correct the Horse in e How to apply the
stirrup when the horse stands.
his standing, for when the man would have him to stop, if he stop so stuntly,
and stand so firmly, as if he were not to move any more, then he must correct
him by ierting his feet forward in the stirrops, adding thereto the
(correcting) sound of the voice, Theo. 17. d.
and it will make him trusse up his body more roundly, whereby he shall be more
apt to press forward upon the least motion. Also, if when he stands, he
carry not a stayed body, but that he coueteth to go back, or triste with his
body or feet, then let him stretch the stirrops straight, in the leathers (by
thrusting his feet forth hard) and it will help to knit his body, so, that he
will stand far more firmly. But these uses (of the stirrup) do rather
belong to the helps then corrections, because they bring no great command,
except there be other corrections limited with them.

CHAP. 24. The correction of the calfe of the leg.
THe calfe of the leg is in much use, for to help the understanding of the
horse, for by it he is kept in continual motion. Wherefore, the man must have
care to observe true time (with them) till he has gotten a habit thereof, for
look: a There ought tobe a true time of motion with the legs.
what distance of time he would have the horse to keep therein, the same must
he keep in the motion of them, and by that means, there will be the better
concord betwixt them. For as in Music, if there be not true time kept,
accordingly both with voice and hand, so that they both begin full and end
close, it will bring a great discord to the care: even so, (in this) if there
be not the like time observed, that is, if there be not a A simile.
true proportion, betwixt the motion of the man's legs, and the Horse, so that
they both begin and end at one iustant, there will come a great discord to the
seat. But for the better effecting hereof, (if he would have his horse to
yield to the correction Note.
of his legs,) he must have a care that he use no idle motions, that the
Horse (when he feels correction by them) may the better know his mind, and
so obey.

Now that he may the sooner work his desire, he must learn (I) b What effect
the ^al^e of the leg wo^^eth.
the effects, the calfe of the leg does work. For first, it does quicken the
horse (in his going) for if at any time, he prove idle, and has no desire to
go forward, then, in the yielding of his body forward, the horse will not
answer, let him give him the even stroke of both his legs, and that will
quicken him up: and so much the more if he use the help of the voice withal.
And secondly, they help to quicken the mouth: for if the (2)
Horse will not yield to the hand, (when he feels the reins more firm then
ordinary,) if he then give him the even stroke of the legs, it will make him
gather his body more roundly, so, that he will depend more upon his legs then
the hand, whereby he may the more easily be commanded. And thirdly, (3)
they correct in turning on either hand, for if (in turning) he will not
follow readily with his body, then to give him a single stroke with the
contrary leg (as aforesaid) it will work great effect. But in all these the
man must have a respect to his seat, for it must be as an index to the horse,
whereby he may know Theo. 14. i.
the cause of his corrections; for when he does desire to have ^ As the motions
for going so the seat for the manner of g^ing.
his horse move more quick, then his seat must be the more loose and instable:
but if when he does remove his seat, the Horse will not answer, ^he sudden
stroke of the legs will make him more careful, against the next time; and
when to move slowlier, then to keep a firmer seat, and cease from the motion
of his legs, and by that means the Horse shall the more easily conceive his
intention. And further, it does stir up his desire, for when he would have
him to stand, if then he stand doggedly or carelessly, the correction of them
will quicken his spirit: or likewise if he will not go back (willingly) but
hang upon the hand, when he does feel it more firm then usually, the even
stroke of both the legs, (if it be a Horse of any courage) will make him
thrust up his body more close, so, that he will be (far) more apt to obey the
hand. Which things being truly observed (of the man) will be sufficient for an
introduction to this part of Horsemanship; and therefore for the use of the
leg, for other lessons (in the Art) I will omit till more conueniency.

CHAP. 25. The correction of the Switch.
THe correction of the Switch, is sharper then either of the former, and
therefore it ought to be used with more discretion, least through the abuse
thereof, the horse become either mad or sad. Now for the better understanding
how to apply it a The Switch must be used according to the Horses disposition.
to the right use, there must be had a chief respect to the horses
disposition; for if he be of a stubborn and dogged disposition, then the much
use thereof will make him so careless that he will not regard it, it being so
mild; and he so stubborn. And again, if it be used much and sharply to a
Horse that is of a greater spirit and free, it will so terrify him, that he
will burst forth into some Iadish extremity: Therefore it must be used upon
necessity, that is, when as either of the former will not prevail, then it
must be used to keep obedience; for instance, when he will make no account of
the Voice, nor the Calfe of the Leg, then adioyne thereto the correction of
the Switch, but let him observe that when he strikes let it be very sharply,
that thereby he may be caused to yield more willingly to the former
corrections.

And likewise for the Stirrup, when the Horse will not look (x)
to that side he is troubled on, let him (in like manner) use the Switch upon
the same shoulder, and that will cause him to stand in greater fear of the
Stirrup the next time. And the like order must be used (with the Switch) for
the Calfe of the Leg, if at any time he seem careless of them, but then it
should be done at the instant time of neglect.

Now the correction of the Swicth is yet more proper to b The use of the Switch
for pacing.
that part of Horsemanship which touches pacing, because it ought to be the
chiefest sharp correction, which should be used in giving the horse his
stroke (for his pace,) And therefore it should be carried in such wise, as it
might be both the fittest and readiest for correction, when occasion is
offered. But the c How to carry the Switch in giving a Horse his pace.
aptest way to carry it, is in the right hand, with the point thereof
downwards, close by the horses right shoulder: that when he will not answer
any of the aforesaid corrections, then he may be ready (instantly) to correct
him therewith on the same shoulder, to quicken him up the more, that thereby
he may be the willinger to obey the next time: and further, it will make him
take up his foreparts more comely, and so he will set them forward more
willingly. But because this Art of pacing, (being simply respected, without the
reforming of other vices) d Being the object of this Tractate.
is but one lesson: therefore one manner of correction is sufficient for the
teaching thereof, (which is the Switch upon the far shoulder,) for when he
will not yield to any of the former, then that must be a relief for the
rest:) Because, if the man should use many several corrections, (whilst he is
teaching his pace) the variety of them would bring such amazement to the horses
capacity, that it will be harder for him to know the meaning of them then to
learn his pace; and so, (not understanding the cause thereof) he will be
brought into perturbations, and so fall to some restiffe quality, which will
ask as much time to reform as the teaching of his pace. Wherefore the Man
must have great care to confine himself within the limits of reason in his
corrections: lest the ravenous Beasts break into the Vineyard, and so spoil
the whole work of his planting.

CHAP. 26. Of correcting with the Spur.
THe Spur is the sharpest correction of all, and therefore it should be used
with the greatest discretion that can be; for there do come more errors
through the abuse thereof then a The abuse of the Spur is dangerous.
of all the rest, (except the bridle:) And therefore it is not to be used but
when any of the other will not prevail. But I would not have any to understand
me so, that I utterly disallow thereof, for then I should take away the
chiefest Instrument which does period and shut up the perfection of the horse.
For I hold that there is not any horse, (of what disposition soever) that can
be brought to the height of his grace, except he be truly commanded
therewith; because no man can work so covertly as he ought without it, in
regard it does exclude all apparent helps and corrections. And therefore when
the horse is come to such perfection that you may use the spur, then (both
for your own grace and your horses) you must use as covert motions in your
corrections as can be. But the chiefest b The true use of the Spur is very
necessary.
thing you must know herein is to judge when you shall use it, least through
the ignorance thereof you metamorphose it, and so use that for a help which
does tend only to correct, as I have seen many do, and I my self done both
to my great toil and vexation, and also to the tormenting and terrifying of
the Horse.

Now because it is the chief conclusion of the Work, and it is like fire and
water, for as they are good seruan^s, but dangerous masters, so it is
necessary (being used by command of reason,) A Simile.
but if it be a master for to teach, then it does burn or drown all; you
must observe that the correction thereof is not to be used at the beginning,
for if you correct with the Spur before the horse know the use thereof, it
will thrust both your self and the horse into extremities: for the horse Theo.
4. n.
feeling such sharp torments at the first, is either discouraged, and so does
prove so sad, that he will not do any thing longer then the Spur is in his
sides, or else so frantic that he will thrust upon his hand, or trusse up
his body and go loosely and very unseemly by shaking of his hinder parts: For
the preventing (c) Theo. 4. m.
of which you must know when to use this correction and how to use it.

Now, it should be used when the Horse is brought to true d When and how to
use the spur.
command of the hand, and that he is acquainted with the use of all your other
corrections: for in regard it is the nature of every thing to fly from that
which it is most afraid of, if he be corrected with the Spur, (so that he
fear it more then he does the bridle) he (by flying from it) will bear upon
the hand, and so will become dead mouthed (which is the Nurse of infinite
errors) although before he was very commandable.

And again, you ought to know the use of all the other corrections, as I have
said, that they may be a perfect ground for him, A good resemblance.
whereby he may the sooner conceive the cause of the correction of it: for he
that does put his Horse to the correction thereof, at the first, does resemble
them that put a scholar to the Latin tongue without the knowledge of his
rules. Which both may be done, but yet not according to Art.

But for the better clearing hereof, you must know that all the corrections
are, as appendixes one to another: and therefore in the manner of correcting,
you must go gradatim, that is, if ^ All corections depend one upon another.
the horse will not obey the voice, then you must use the calfe of the leg: and
if he will not yield to that, then use the switch; but if not to it, then
lastly the Spur; for it must be the last refuge (when not any of the former
will prevail) but the seldomer that it is used the better, so that when you
use it you strike soundly, and thereby you shall the sooner make the Horse to
yield to the other: for easy strokes, and often, will make him sad and
careless thereof, and then there is no other remedy for that, but the
extremity of the spur. Wherefore you must be careful to use the spur
accordingly (as has bin declared) having also a regard to the disposition of
the Horse, and then you shall bring him to such true command, that he will
perform, what you wish, with great ease and delight: for when he does feel
(but) the couertest helps (you can use) he will obey with what willingness
you would wish, or desire.

CHAP. 27. The correction of the Bridle.
OF all these (before said) corrections, there are none which bring such
disaster and gross errors (through the abuse ^f them) as this of the bridle,
for they bring forth errors, but in ^ome particulers, (through their abuse) but
the abuse of it does a The abuse of correcting with the bridle.
^ause a confusion, (almost) in general: for it does daunt and ^iscourage the
horses lust and desire, he being terrified there^y with correction, so that he
can take no delight in his tea^hing; again, it does displace the head, that he
cannot carry Theo. 30. f
^uch grace in his going as he should: besides, it does lacerate ^d tear his
mouth, (whereby it is made insensible) so, that he ^il not (without great
pains) be made commandable: and then that does follow, but a disorder in his
motion, as a loose ca^age of his body, the mishandling of his legs, either by
stum^ing, Theo. 4.
going broad before or behind, or beating hye with his ^re-feete, and all
because he dare not to take such a large stroke with them) as he ought: and
further, it does make him either ^our too much in the shoulders, or else shake
with his hinder ^rts, and so causes him to go both unseemly and vneasely, b
An evil quality is soon gotten, but not so soon reformed.
^r the prevention of all which, you must have a great care to ^rne the true
use of the bridle, least (through the ignorance ^ereof) you cause more weeds
to grow up (in the Vineyard) one day, then you can weed out (again) in a
month.

And therefore know the use of the bridle does tend (chiefe^) c The true use of
the bridle. Theo. 14. f. 1. Prac. 18 e.
to guide the Horse, according to your will and desire, as are I have shown in
the fourteenth Chapter. And although any do often use it for correction, yet
I, for my part, think at is rather an abuse then any good use: except, only
when ^u give him the spur, if he shall chance to thrust himself ^ward over
hastily, and so make a disorderly motion, by bea^g Theo. 30. f.
too much upon the hand, then if you give him only a good ^ecke or two,
suddenly, with the bridle, it will not be much ^isse, that he may the better
conceive, he was not corrected only for his slownesse in going, but also for
his manner of going. And yet this must be done very seldom, and with good
discretion, least it bring a distemper to his mouth, for (as it is said,) omne
nimium vertitur in vitium, every excess is an abuse, and honey being tasted
with the fingers end, is very sweet and A simile.
pleasant, but being taken by handfulls, it does glut and cloye the stomach:
even so, the bridle if it be used for correction, a little, in that point, it
does bring a sweet and quick command to the hand, but if much used, it does so
dull and cloy the mouth that he will not regard it. Wherefore if the horse be so
stubborn that he will not obey with some few corrections thereof, then d
Corrections are to be used very seldom with the bridle.
if you think to make him yield, (to your hand) by the terror thereof, if you
gain that, you shall loose many other beauties, and therefore in my judgment,
they are much deceived, which have spent a great time to invent hard bittes,
and snaffles; for to cause command, when as the gentlest and softest does work
best effect, (as I will show when I come to speak thereof in the Practicke
part.) But to return, if the horse, as I say, will not willingly obey your
hand, when he does feel that correction, the^ cease from that, and examine
your self more strictly in yo^ proceedings, and you shall find that you were
deceived in you judgment, thinking the Horse was more fit to have the spurr^
given him then indeed he was: and so you shall find by some other error (in
the carriage of his body) that he was not truly Theo. 16. g.
mouthed before: for a fault does not consist (always) in the part where it is
perceived, (as I have said before;) because on^ error is not an error simply of
it self, but it is the cause of other errors.

And therefore if the Horse will not stop, nor go back willingly, nor turn
on either hand, as you would desire, if you thief to make him do any of all
these by the correction of the bridle (because you feel the resistance there,)
you shall as soon prevail of this desire, as a Surgeon shall, in curing an
old vlc^ by healing up the upper part; for thereby you shall both spoy^ your
Horses reyne, dull his mouth, and also weaken his neck therefore for the
reforming of these errors, you must have respect to the carriage of his body,
and the manner of his standing, with the free passage of his wind, and the
willingnes^ of his going, all which if they be truly gained, the command of
the mouth will be gotten very easily, without much need of correction by the
bridle.

CHAP. 28. Of Correcting upon several grounds.
BEcause many do use the several kinds of earth, as a correction, for the
conformity of a horse his disobedience; therefore it shall not be amiss, for
to speak somewhat of them (here in this place) to join them to the use of
all the other corrections, that the learner may (in like manner) know how to
use them for gayning of obedience, and when to refuse them, that the Horse may
take the more delight in his well do^ng. For many Horses courage and strength
has been much a The abuse of deep earths.
^bated and spoiled, through the abuse thereof, and also their ^imbs much
weakened. Wherefore it is very requisite that you should have great judgment to
distinguish thereof, and also ^o enter into the Horses disposition, least that
by correction, you bring subversion, and so, where you should bring an
obedience, Theo. 29. ^
you produce a further resistance.

And Further, because all grounds are not alike in all places, for some are
Champion grounds (as they are termed) having ^illes and dayles, and some of
those also plowed grounds: and other are more plain and level, some of them
being also plow^d, and for the most part, more deep and tough then the former,
therefore you must have a great care to know how, and b You must know how and
when to use deep earths.
when to use them, according to the disposition of the horse: But because I
have spoken thereof in the eighteenth Chapter, I do not mind to spend any
thime, in repetition here, and because also I purpose to speak more of the
dispositions in the Practicke part of this book; Wherefore I will but only
apply ^he two chief extremes of Horses, to the two chief extremes of
grounds. Now for the grounds, I call that one extreme ^ What the extremes of
grounds are.
which causes the greatest toil, and that the other extreme which brings
the least labor. But for the better use thereof you must first know what
errors the changing of grounds do reform, least you cause a confusion thereof
by the abuse (as too many have done;) And secondly, what Horses are most
needful to be taught, upon what grounds. Now for the first if d What grounds
reform what errors.
you find that your Horse is lash bodied, so, that you cannot cause him to
carry it firm; then take him gently upon the deep earths, not using any
violence unto him (in any case) but (1)
only let him take his own leisure, for thereby the carriage of his body will
be so confirmed, that you may with far more ease keep it in obedience: or if
he be cold and tickle mouthed, so that he will not rest upon the snaffle, (as
he ought) the deep (2)
earths will cause him to rest more staydly there upon, being used in the
aforesaid manner. And again, if he carry a low forefoote, so that he is much
subject to stumble, if you use to ride (3)
him upon some ass^nt (so that it be not too steep) or upon plowed 1. Pra. 28.
d.
grounds, it will help the same mightily: but in this there must be used more
quick motions, then in the former, and also (x)
there must be great care that he be not over long kept thereon, least he be
made weary, for then his courage will be much abated, and his stumbling the
more increased through the toylesomnesse thereof, in regard he must not be
suffered to go continually after his own will. Likewise if he go broad
either before or behind, deep grounds will reform that, (if he (4)
be not forced too much upon the hand: And lastly, if he be so hard borne that
upon the least discontent he will run away, (5)
then when you feel him begin to thrust upon the hand, put him presently upon
those earths, and in three or four times (so correcting) it will make him more
obedient: But herein also there must be great care had, to apprehend the first
show of obedience; or else this causes many absurdities, as either breaking ^
The danger o^ deep (...).
the wind, hearing him within if he be foul, and so endanger life, or else the
utter de^ecting and casting down his courage, (through the sore labor
thereof,) and also the Horse may get a strain by running feircely thereupon,
especially if thereto be any violence used.

Now secondly, the deep earths are ap^est to reform those Horses, which are
of a feirce and hot disposition, because they are most subject to all those
vices before said, except that of stumbling. But contrariwise, if a horse of a
sad and dull disposition should be used upon the said earths, unless it be
upon great ^ecessity, for the reforming of some of those before said vices,
which may chance to him through the ignorance of the rider. ^hey would greatly
increase his slownesse and dullness, both ^y reason of his dogged and sullen
nature, and also through the ^reat toil he should sustain, (he being
desirous to free himself from such violence;) And therefore the level and
ligh^st earths are best for his use, both to bring delight in his teach^g, and
also to increase his metal and courage, til he has gotten further habit of
well doing. But I would not have you here understand me so, that I speak of
these grounds as a final ^use of the perfection, but only as a correction to
be used ^hen the man (for want of further knowledge) cannot tell how reduce
obedience any other ways.

But here it may be objected, that herein I do much deceive Objection.
^y self; for it is generally holden, and likewise experience ^th approve it,
that slow horses are best upon deep eatths, and ^t Horses upon light? To which
I answer, it is true (in some Answer.
^rt) if they only respect the time of their coming to per^ction; but I
speak here only of learning, which is the part a Scholar and not of a
Professor. And yet I hold this Para^xe that a hot running Horse, (if the man be
of government, ^d understand himself) may be brought (in his training) to
true and more willing riding upon deep earths then a sad ^rse, and my reason
is, that the nonperformance thereof does Theo 2. ^.
^t proceed from the imbecility of nature (as some do falsely ^ject) but for
want of proportionable government, for (as ^ristotle says, natura nihil habet
vitij) there is no defect in name. wherefore if nature be perfect, it must
needs necessarily low that the difference of these two kind of horses, must
be Note this.
the accidents: and then it must be seperable, or inseparable; ^t it is not
inseparable, for then those horses which are holden be best for deep earths,
should be the furthest from true ri^g, (by all the Characters of a perfect
horse:) and also those (f)
(...) which are the strongest composed, should be the dura^st, and so every
strong Cart-lade and Coach-Horse should Theo. 2. s. and 37. k.
the best for those grounds, which how true that is, let any ^n of sense judge:
and I have seen many horses whose line^ents has not been so strongly
composed as the adverse horses, and yet they have made Iades in trial of the
other: g Wherein the chief difference of Horses consist. 1. Pr. 4. b. h The
cause of those differences.
Wherefore this difference must needs be in the accidents seperable, and
chiefly in the interior part, because it does govern and command the exterior
(as heretofore I have shown:) Bu^ yet the cause of this contrariety does
chiefly proceed from the corruption of man's nature, he being more prone to
follow his will, to persecute and torment (when he is angry) then to arm
himself with patience, by the which those sad horses are brought to ride
more toughly, they being forced by anger (^ being more coherent to our nature)
not willing to do any thing but by violence, in regard that what they do, it
is inuit: and the other which are more hot and fierce, are brought to a ra^^
furious prodigality (spending all their substance at once) for they being
thrust into extremities, do spend all their strength 1. Pr. 5. m. ^ From
contrary causes proceed contrary effects.
at the first, and when their fury is over they are become Iades (being so
soon weakened through the abuse of the man,) ^ being more easy for him to
follow his will in fierceness, the^ to restrain his affections to mildness,
which must not be, ^ they think to work the contrary effect, for, Ex
contrarijs caus^ contrarij effectus producuntur, contrary causes do produce
contrary effects.

But to return from whence I did digress, let a man (from these two
extremes) reduce the proportion of his labor an^ ease, as he in his judgment
shall find the proportion of the ho^ses quality inclining to either of them,
and he shall find great ease and helps by this kind of correction, for the
effecting ^ his desire: But this branch of the Vine must be well fenced about
with reason, otherwise this ravenous beast ( Will) will break in and spoil
all.

CHAP. 29. That the Man must learn to know how to correct.
NOw that I have set down the uses of the corrections ^ their particulars, it
remains that I should also show ho^ where, and when to use them, least
through the abuse thereon ^ou pass the mean, and so fall into either of the
extremes: But because (as I have said) no particular or certain thing can a
No certain thing can limit an uncertain. 1. Prac. 25. c
^imit a general or uncertain, in regard there are so many seue^all
dispositions as there are Horses: Therefore I will (as it were) ^estringere, and
only show how you may the best apprehend ^he same, for the enlarging of your
judgment, because you Ethic. 2. 4.
^re the efficient cause in their uses; for as Aristotle says, Nullae
^perationes precedunt Artibus. No action does go before ^nowledge*

Now for the first, how you should correct? I answer: it must b How correction
is to be used. Theo. 28. a. 1. Pra. 25. ^.
^e both with discretion and reason, for you must have such dis^retion as to
proportionate your correction according to the quality of the horse (as I have
often shown.) And therefore ^ou must imitate the Magistrates, who having the
sword of justice in their hands, do not punish all offenders alike, but as ^he
quality of the crime does desire, or the stubbornness of ^he party does rebel.

For they in their justice do make a way to mercy, and so pu^ish (c)
as there may be a reformation of the person, for when the ^ffence is small or
the first, then they reprove him secretly, or ^nflict some small punishment
upon him, but if yet the party ^oth rebel, then to admonish him in the face of
two or three Math. 18. 16. 17.
witnesses, or increase his punishment, then if none of these produce
amendment, then reveal him to the Church, or else commit him to the last
extremity of the Executioner. Even so, ^ou must correct your horse at the first
in such sort as you would only desire a restitution to obedience, with the
least corrections, as the Voice, the Calfe of the Leg, etc. But if yet he c
Correction must be according to the stubbornenesse of the horse. Theo. 5. ^.
^e so dogged that those will not serve, then you may use the Switch, (it being
a sharper correction:) but if still he continue rebellious, then to use the
last and cruellest correction, (which is the Spur.) And in all these you must
have a respect to reason, that it may be your guide, (especially in this last
correction;) for if it does not govern your will, but your will rule it, then
you shall utterly make havoc of all the Vine, in regard that ravenous Beasts
do break down the fence, whereby it is laid open to all the other outrageous
passions: and therefore you must expostulate with your self, that your
corrections should tend no further, but only to the reforming of errors, and
not to satisfy your corrupt and inordinate Note.
will.

But here it may be objected that I prescribe a harder task Objection.
then either my self or others is able to imitate. To the which I answer: it
is true, that it is very hard for a man to bridle his will Answer.
so far that it shall never exeed the limits of reason, because it has ruled
so long (as master) that it will be very hardly brought to subjection: But of
that I have spoken sufficiently in the S. Chapter, and therefore I speak he^re
but only that which both my self and others should do, and not that which
both others and my self do; for, for my self, I am sure no man (whosoever)
could follow his will with a higher hand then I have done, (to the great toil
and vexation both of body and mind) but I have found so small relief thereby
that it wearied me, whereby I was glad to seek means to suppress my will:
And now thus much dare I say for my self (if I can speak it without vaingl^ry)
that I give correction neither with Leg, Switch, nor Spur, hardly once in a
year, but I can (if I were therein examined) give a (...) n^ reason th^reof.

Wherefore, if you desi^^ to b^ ac^ounted a worthy and famous ^ All (...) m^st
be ^^ed by reason.
labourer in this Vi^cyard you must upon necessity direct the objects of all
your corrections by the rule of Reason, and so mix them with lenity, that you
may aim mo^e a^ the reforming of errors, then the satisfying of your will
temp^ing your anger so, that in your ^reatest choler you may command your
self, to apprehend the first motion of obedience in the Horse: Theo. 21. d
because it is not the much correction but the manner of correcting that
works the effect.

CHAP. 30. The Man must know where to correct.
IT is sitting likewise you should know where to correct, that the Horse may
the better conceive, the cause of your correction; for if you should correct
improperly, it would bring a confusion to your labor. But herein I will not
spend any time to reiterate the means how you should know where to correct;
not only because I see this Book will extend to a greater volume then my
intended mind (at the first) was: but also in regard I have spoken thereof at
large in the 16. Chapter. Wherefore for your satisfaction therein I will
refer you to that place, yet I will demonstrate a little how you may connect
and join the use of your corrections to your helps, that when the one will
not prevail, then the other may aslaile.

Wherefore when you are come to such knowledge that you a The first thing is to
know where the cause of any error is.
can tell where the cause of any error is, (that is committed) and tha^ it is
gone so far (either through your negligence, or the horse his stubbornnes)
that he will not be commanded by your helps, then look in the same places that
there is set down to reform any error by the helps, even there must you use
your corrections: Theo. 29. c.
but yet with great caution, that it be done according to the quality of the
Horse, or the proportion of the crime. For instance, if the horse be so slow
that he will not obey the motion of your body, to go forward willingly, then
strike him suddenly, with the just stroke of the calves of your legs: but if
that will not prevail, then you may correct him with the Switch, upon the
right shoulder, which (as I have shown in b This is to be observed in giving
him his pace.
the three and twenty Chapter:) will cause him to bring on that side the more
willingly; but if at any time he seem careless of that kind of correction,
then use the even stroke of your spurs, toward his short ribs, to quicken
him, and after use the correction of your Switch again, for that kind of
correction is sufficient for the teaching of this one lesson, it being so fit
to cause him to take up his far fore leg comely: for you c The far fore leg
is called the leading leg.
must observe, that it is the leading leg, and therefore if he set not that
forth handsomely and orderly, he shall neither have fair stroke nor comely
carriage.

And here likewise you may observe what combination there is, betwixt Art and
Nature; for like as nature has given to a man (for the most part) to be more
apt and nimble on the right side, (both with foot and hand,) so has it given
to a Horse also the like aptness on the left. Wherefore when you are seated on
your horses back, then are you ready with your aptest side, to help to
correct your Horse on that side which is ^ The apt combination of Art and
Nature.
most unapt. But now if any other error chance to happen to the Horse, during
the time of your riding: as carrying his head on the one side, or leaning
ouer-hard upon the hand, or go unhandsomely, either before or be hind, (as in
the aforesaid place I have shown,) and the like for any other error: then if
your helps will not reform those faults, as it is doubtful, you may adioyne
thereto your corrections, using them in the same place, as for example, if he
will not carry his head but on the one side, then give him a sudden ierte with
your Switch on the contrary ^ Of correcting for disorder of the head.
shoulder, and that will cause him to look on that side, he is corrected: but
if he be so sad and dogged that he does not regard that kind of correction,
then you may use the spur upon the same shoulder, and the terror thereof will
cause him to yield his body: and make him look on the other side, (but this
must be used very sparingly.) And likewise if he thrust so hard upon the hand,
that whenever he is corrected you cannot well command him, but he will press
faster forward then he ^ Correction for thrusting hard upon the hand. 1. Prac.
24 e. Theo. 17. c.
should, then correct him once or twice suddenly in his mouth, with the trench,
but if that will not prevail, then give a stroke or two soundly (with your
spurs, justly together) toward the flancke, and that will set up his hinder
parts so roundly, that he will the more easily be commanded with the hand.

Now herein they are much deceived, which use the bridle only for correction in
giving a horse his pace, always chocking him therewith: by which means when
his mouth is dulled, or made insensitiue, they cut and tear it most
shamefully, and Theo. 17. a
yet for all that they shall never cause him to go with such grace, as he
ought, (there being so many absurdities attending there upon) as I have
declared in the twenty seven Chapter.

In like manner, if he go loosely either before or behind, (the cause being
found) as formerly I have set forth,) you may use your helps, but if he will
not obey them, then use your corrections in such sort as I have said, or as
your judgment shall serve, in the disposition of the Horse.

Further, seeing as I have said the several grounds are a kind of correction:
it is behouefull for you to know where, and in what manner to use them? for the
answer thereof you must so dispose of the place of teaching, that it may be as
near such ^ In what manner to use earths for correction.
earths, (as is possible) that may produce obedience, for where the Horse does
offend, even there must he be ready to be thrust upon those grounds, whereby he
may the better conceive the cause of his labor thereon: and therefore you must
observe not to go from those grounds, for exercise, till your horse be
familiar with all your helps and corrections. From which if Note.
you should depart before the Horse have some perfect knowledge of your will,
by the aforesaid means, then when he does commit an error, it will be rather
increased then reformed, because the means of his teaching is taken away, so
that he does neither know the cause of the one nor feel the toil of the
other. And again, if you should correct him, and the ground be nothing fitting
thereto, as upon pauements or such like dangerous grounds, then he may soon
get a strain by a slip, whereby your glory may be much impared.

CHAP. 31. That the Man must know when to correct.
THe last thing that you are to observe, (for the use of your corrections) is
to distinguish of time, when to correct; because the neglect of that is the
abuse of all the other, in regard Theo. 17. a.
all things are perfected in, and by time, as I have discribed Eccle. 3. 2.
in the seventeenth Chapter. For, as the wise man says. There is a time to
sow, and a time to reap, a time to plant, and a time to pluck up that which
is planted. etc. even so, there is a time A simile.
to correct, and a time to leave correcting, a time to labor, and a time to
rest: all which must very respectively be observed by you, if you think to
bring forth any pleasant fruit of the Vine in time.

For as the grape should grow so that it may be nourished with the heat of the
Sun, that thereby it may be ripened in time, least the frost does wither its
substance, and so be without any good relish or pleasant taste. Even so, if you
do not persist An application.
with all your corrections, in such sort as they may be maintained by the heat
of truth, whereby you may work your perfection in time, there will be so many
errors congeald, with the ^ost of ignorance, that your glory will fade, and so
become distastefull, and very unsavory. But because I have spoken so largely
hereof in the Chapter before said, I will but only reduce the corrections to
the helps, (by an orderly progression.) that ^.
you may more aptly judge when to use them: through which neglect is come great
confusion in this Art, in regard they do not rightly conceive the use and
benefit of time. For seeing, there must be an orderly proceeding in all things,
if they think to work commendably: so it must be also in this Art, for Horses
being sensitive creatures, must be directed by motions and helps first: and
then if they will not obey, to adioyne thereto corrections; But herein many do
commit gross errors: for so soon as they be seated in the saddle, they
straight put their ^ The abuse of (...).
spurs to the Horse, whereby he is made so Frantic that he does rush
forward very disorderly; which is one cause of so many headstrong and run
away horses, and also of many other vices which would be too long to
particularize.

But to amplify this point a little, and give instance how you should know,
when to begin and end your corrections: you must first observe the disposition
of the Horse, and according to (1) Theo. 19. f
that, you must first use your helps, and after them your corrections, for
those must go before, and these must follow after, but not contrarily, as many
improperly have used: and then, if he be quick and capable, to use the less
time in correcting, but if lie be dull and sad, to spend the more time in
reforming: and so likewise of all other Horses, to proportionate the time in
correcting, as you in your judgment shall find your Horses disposition to be
near or far off either of these extremes.

And secondly, you must have that understanding to know (2)
when the Horse does begin the first motion of disobedience, either in his
interior or exterior parts, (as in the place aforesaid I The instant time is
(...).
have shown) and then at that instant you must begin your corrections, and he
will more easily be reformed, and so abbreuiate Theo. 35.
much time: For as water making a breach through a bank, if it be taken at
first, the breach is soon repaired; but if it be protracted and let go
further, it will either cause a great A Simile.
inundation, or else ask greater labor, and more time to stop the fl^xe
thereof. Even so, if you apprehend the first show of rebellion, and so
instantly to apply helps and c^rrections, it will be soon suppressed: But if
you ouerslip that (as a thing of small moment) it will increase (as the
disposition of the horse is) and so cause either a great confusion, or else
there must be longer time spent, and greater pa^nes taken, for the subduing
thereof.

And lastly, you must know the end of your corrections, which (3)
ought to tend chiefly to a desire of restitution, and therefore d The
con^inuance of correction.
must not correct him so long as you shall be angry, but only so long as the
horse does rebel: For if you correct when you are angry more for to please and
satisfy your self (for revenge) then any desire of reforming the Subject;
then when the horse does yield or (at the least) make but a show thereof, if
he can not find any ease, but still a persecution is inflicted upon him;
Theo. 10. b. ^ Application for anger.
then is he made to become senseless (in regard he does not know the cause
of his tortures) and so (bedlam like) does run from one error to a worse,
whereby he is made almost incurable.

Wherefore, to conclude this point, seeing time is such an excellent Nurse,
that in it all things are nourished and brought to perfection, (if it be
rightly used;) and contrariwise such a viper that it does eat and devour all
(if it be abused;) and also such a pleasant and odoriferous herb, that it
will keep its smell Theo. 17. ^,
all the year: you must be careful to carry it about you to refresh your
self (with the sent thereof) in all your proceedings, and it will be such a
restoratiue that no infection of the contagious Lethargy of ignorance shall
much possess you.

CHAP. 32. Of the four chief observations for the disposition of the Horse.
THus, having gone through all the helps and corrections, with the uses of
them; it remains now to speak somewhat of those four Characters which I set
down in the 18. Chapter, Theo. 18. g.
by the which a man may have a reasonable knowledge of the horses disposition,
which is so necessary that whosoever is ignorant thereof, shall bring forth
more weeds then fruit in the Vineyard of this Art.

Now the first of these is the consent of his appetite or desire, a Of the
Characters to know the Horses disposition.
secondly, the free passage of his wind; thirdly, the orderly and easy
command of his mouth and head, and lastly, the apt and comely carriage of his
body. And although there may and have been other observations set down for a
man to work upon for judgment in the Horse, yet because I do not intend to
set down any thing, but that which I have found by experience, Theo. 34. a.
I omit to speak of them, in regard I find that all other are springing from
these, as the branches thereof, (as hereafter shall be shown,) and also the
first is the cause of the second, b The first is the chief cause of all the
other. Theo. 35. a.
and both the first and the second the cause of the third and the fourth, which
are the event of the two first; for all other kind of restiffenesse, which may
proceed from the exterior actions of the body, as standing still, running away,
lying down, going back, yerking and plunging, etc. And therefore they grope in
the dark, that did seek and invent so many kinds of corrections, (to reform
such variable restiffenesse) and so little time to consult with themselves what
the cause thereof was, or whether it did chiefly proceed from the man or the
Horse. But because Mr. Markham has so sufficiently laid open those inventions
(with their inconveniences) in his second Work of Cauallarice.
Horsemanship, therefore I will not spend any time therein; but only refer
them (that are desirous to know those invented tortures) to those places,
wishing them seriously to consider (by the seueralty of inventions) what event
of truth they do produce: c The event shows the cause.
in regard the event of the effect (in any thing) does demonstrate the true
Judgment of the cause: And therefore when they see that they found so small
effect was wrought upon the first invention, they needed not have sought for a
second, if they had considered rightly whether the cause issued from the horse
in part or in whole, but they being partial in d Partial judgment is the
cause or error.
judging themselves, (as the natures of most men are) sought wholly for
reformation in the horse, (by further violence) as if Art did depend upon
extremities) and so invented sharper tortures, further to persecute so famous a
subject, ever aiming at the final cause, but not at the efficient. As (when a
Stadium or Image is made) if there be any error, the fault should be attributed
to the matter, but not to the workman.

But herein they resemble the whore of Babylon, which hold e A fit application.
all her counsels and decrees to be perfect, and without error; and therefore
those which are repugnant thereto, are accounted prepostrous Heretics, and
therefore use violence rather then truth, in inflicting severe torments, (one
exceeding another in extremities) and ever failed of their expectation in
regard they followed their damnable blindness. In like manner, they thinking
their corrupt wills were faultlesse and free from f The cause of so many
tortures invented.
error, when they found such contrariety to intercept them, thought it to be
solely in the dogged nature of the horse, and therefore they invented such
violent torments one exceeding another, (to work their desire) and yet could
never find any to work true effect, because they followed their blind
ignorance: For when one had invented one kind of torment, (for they cannot
rightly be termed corrections) then another seeing so small reformation thereby
(not thinking that sharp enough) invented a second more sharp; and likewise
the third, invented a correction exceeding the second, etc. but yet never could
find that kind of correction which would show the true event, because those
did proceed rather from their blinded will then any lightened truth: for the
event does always show the g An evil Crow brings forth an evil egg.
effect of the cause: For an evil Crow, does bring forth an evil egg; and
false grounds of truth produce false conclusions. Wherefore if you be desirous
to work commendably, and to free your Horse from such despicable afflictions;
you must diligently observe these Characters aforesaid, and when any error does
arise, examine and reform your self as well as your horse, and you shall
find him far more capable to yield to obedience (in any other lesson) withuot
much resistance, and thereby you shall keep him free from all restiffenesse,
and find many things easy to be done which before were held impossible.

CHAP. 33. Of the appetite or desire of the Horse.
But now of all the observations, whereby you may judge of the Horses
disposition, this of his desire, is the chief project for you to work upon:
because all the other are governed by it. For as the Sun receives his light
immediately A Simile.
from GOD, and thereby does inlighten, both the Moon, Stars, and the Air:
even so, the Horse receives the first command of his desire from Man, and so
gives motion to his Wind, action to his Body, and government by the Head. And
Another Simile.
as the Schools hold, memory was first created of GOD, immediately, and from
that comes reason, and from thence proceeds Will? By the which Will we may
infer, we desire any thing good or bad: as it is effected; for if good, then
it does ascend, and is governed by reason, and strenthened by memory, (being
the root of knowledge:) but if evil, then it does descend, and gives place
to his passions, and so is become rebellious, it being the fruit of ignorance;
even so, the Horse receives his obedience from man, from which proceeds his
will or desire to do what the man requires, which if it be according to Art,
then he does effect whatsoever is consonant to reason; but if to violence,
then he works by the fruits of extremities.

Wherefore seeing all things, except man, work by the instinct ^ The knowledge
of man is supernatural. 1. 'Pr. 31. n b Reasonable creatures must govern
unreasonable.
of Nature, and he only has a supernatural will, more diuin^ly illuminated;
it is required that you should so command your self, by these supernatural
faculties, that you may be able to govern those natural qualities, which both
your self and the Horse is prone unto; For you being rational should govern
the natural disposition of the Horse (being only sensitive) and the agitation
of his powers. Which thing cannot be done, except you conioyne so aptly, that
you may Theo. 1. g.
be said both to be but one subject: which must not be understood
substantially, but intellectiuely, for although it cannot be said that a Horse
has any intellectiue part, properly in respect of himself, in regard he has
no memory to help understanding, but whatsoever he is capable of, is as it
were a reminiscere, moved by his senses, and so provoke the appetite, but yet
he may be said to have it by accident, and therefore improperly, The. 2. o.
being brought unto him by Art, and maintained by vigor: for as Aristotle
says, accidens in corpore nullum, pars est corporis naturalis, that is, no
accident happening to the body is any part of the natural body.

Now therefore, when you shall think to bring your Horse, and your self to
seem but one body, you must be careful to (c) Theo. 18. a.
conform the desire of the Horse to your desire, being allowed by reason, and
then the action of the body will be brought to yield very pleasingly and
delightfully. Now for the effecting whereof, you must direct your whole
proceedings, by the disposition of the Horse, as I have said, and chiefly by
his appetite, (d) Theo. 18. c.
because it is the ground of all the rest, and therefore if it be willing to
obey by gentle and easy motions, then he may be said to be of a free and
willing disposition, but if he be more stubborn and disobedient, so that he
will not yield, but by greater extremities, then he may be said to be of a
dogged and e True reformation begins first at a man's self. Theo. 29. d
sad disposition. But in reducing any extreme, that may be found in a horse,
to the mean, there ought to be a double caveat, which is, that you seek to
subdue your own passions, by reason, as well as by your will, you desiring the
obedience of the horses passions, for they are as forward to rebel as these:
and therefore if you cannot confine them within the limits of reason, it being
in your own subject, you shall never command your Horses by the same object,
being in a diverse species.

And further, seeing all Sublunary things are apprehended A simile.
by man, first, by his sensitive parts, and so are conveyed to the common
place, where there is election of them by consultation, ^ All sublunary things
are first apprehended by the sense.
and after committed to Memory, and there reserved, as in a treasury till
Reason command Will to dispose of them, as occasion shall be offered, either for
pleasure or profit: in like manner, the inclination of the Horse is first
demonstrated to the Theo. 32. c. and 35. b.
senses, (by the aforesaid Characters,) and after disperced into the other
faculties, whereby there is a knowledge thereof grounded upon judgment; and
likewise the Horse does by his senses conceive, whether his actions are a
greeing to the man's (g) Theo. 29. d and 5. a
mind, by his motions and corrections; and so brings forth, either joy or
fear, as they are repugnant or agreeing to his will* And therefore, you must
be very careful to observe an orderly proceeding in all your actions, that the
Horse may more easily conceive your will thereby, and also to proportionate
your corrections according to the quality of his rebellion: for in the which if
you exceed, instead of building by order, you shall destroy by confusion,
because you move the passions to an excess, and thereby produce unapt motions,
both of his interior and Theo. 11. d h Violence causes restiffenesse.
exterior parts, whereby is increased all kind of restiffenesse, through the
abuse of the Art, in regard it tends only to reduce obedience, and not to
stir up violence.

For seeing all things are changed in their nature, from that Theo. 1. f
they were at the first creation? therefore was Art invented, to bring (in some
sort) a restitution thereof, as I have said in the First Chapter: for though
many things are now become nocent and hurtful to man, which at the first was
procint and serviceable to him, yet by Art the worst may be brought to serve
for use and releife again: for though there be many differences Note. (h) 1.
Pra. 4. g
of vegitatiue, and reptall things, and many of them if they be simply taken,
not being delayed by Art, do poison and utterly deprive man of life: yet the
cunning Physician by extracting them proportionably, and so infuse with them
other simples of contrary operation, can reduce them to sovereign and
preservative potions. Even so in horses, though there be many differences of
the indiuiduums, and also many of them being used Application.
simply, according to their natural inclination, (not being delayed or reformed
by Art, do become very rebellious and troublesome to man; yet the expert
Horseman, by infusing in them proportionably such things as work contrary
effect, can reform their rebellion and so bring them to an obedient and
serviceable command.

Wherefore seeing, the reducing of all things to use, does depend ^ Art cannot
stand without proportion. Theo. 38. a.
upon Art, and Art works by proportion, where the form of the subject is
brought forth; never think to reform any Horse (much less every Horse)
except you by your knowledge be able to proportionate all your proceedings
acding as you shall find your Horses appetite or desire, for else you shall be
sure to come short of your expectation, and whilst you look for fame, you
shall receive great shame: and so be cast out of this vineyard, as a weed not
worthy of a room to grow there: because it is the ground of all other
observations, they all (whatsoever) growing out of it, as their Mother or Nurse.

CHAP. 34. Of the free passage of the Wind.
THe second Charact which you must observe, is the free passage of the Wind,
which (as I have said) does spring from the former, for if at any time, his
desire be to resist, he will a Stopping the wind gives force to resist.
stop his Wind, whereby he may have the greater force withal his other powers
to withstand obedience. For as a man, when he is forced to go any way; that is
not pleasing unto him, whilst he is so pulled or thrust, will stop his wind, to
increase his strength, that he may be the more able to withstand them: but if
he be willing to go, then he gives it the freer passage, to add alacrity to
his body, that thereby he may show the willingness of his mind. Even so, a
horse if he be forced to do that which is displeasing to his appetite, he will
withhold his Theo. 32. b.
Wind to give a further strength to his body for rebellion: but if his desire
be to yield such obedience as you would have him, then does he join the free
passage of his Wind thereto, whereby he may show his willingness to obey you.
And so the first is the cause of this cause, and this is the cause of the
effect of the other.

Now for the further knowledge how these two Characters are to be observed,
because they consist of the interior parts; b How to know the Horses
inclination.
observe the saying of the wiseman; The heart of man does change his face,
whether it be in good or evil, by which may be gathered that the inward
disposition may be known by the outward gesture. For if his desire be not
willing nor his Wind obedient, he will either leare with his eyes in casting
them back, or else Theo. 17. d. and 23. c.
cast one or both of his ears in his neck, or if he stand, he will so frame
his body in his standing, that it shall be nothing apt for the next motion: and
further, when he is caused to go forward, if he be of a chollericke
disposition, he will strive with his body, and so go frettingly and
chafingly: And contrarily, Theo. 19. and 20.
if he be of a sad disposition, he will go altogether unwillingly, his desire
being nothing prone to stir up his powers to quickenesse; and so through
ignorance herein, does come all kind of c The chief cause of all restiffe
qualities, as they proceed from the horse. 1. Prac. 19. ^
restiffenesse, for it is not the cause only of all sorts spoken of in the 30.
Chapter: but also of every hard and uneasy going horse, of stumbling, of going
broad, of a heavy sad horse, of tiring, and consequently of any vices which are
incident to Horses.

For, if his wind work freely, and keep true time with the action of the
body, then does he go willingly, ride toughly, and go handsomely, because
both his interior and exterior parts join together, his wind passing truly
with every stroke of his body: But if (on the contrary) he stop his wind, so
that it breaks time with his body, then he goes unwillingly, tiringly and
unseemly, either before, or behind, or both; his body being violently moved
contrary to his wind, and so brings a confusion to the Art, (being used
violently) whereby it cannot be durable, and his motion being contrary causes
a d Two contraries cannot be in one subject.
subuertion of the subject, because two contraries can never be in one subject,
as I have often said.

And again, because the Arts in all natural conclusions do depend either upon
wind, water or waights, therefore this Art A Simile.
does chiefly depend upon the apt and easy passage of the horses wind; for as
in a pair of bellows, if the throat of the pipe be not made proportionable to
expel so much wind as the clock does draw in, they will go very hard and
uneasy for to blow: Even so if the Horse does not expel proportionably so
much wind as is drawn in, he will go very uneasily (for the rider,) always
keeping in some part, for to help resistance. Yet heer^ in I would not be so
understood, that I hold any such defect in the natural composition of the
horse; for (as it is said) Theo. 2. ^. and 19. ^.
there is no defect in nature, for though there may be such a fault committed
in the making of bellows, yet the cause does not e How this restraint of wind
is not in being cock-thropeld, as it is holden.
consist in the conclusion, but in the workman, for otherwise they could not
be amended. In like manner, when a horse is said to want wind for the
performance of that which is desired; the fault is not in natures works, but
in the ignorance of the Art, because the man cannot tell how to proportionate
the government of his wind to the action of his body, whereby he may work
with ease, and so become more durable.

And herein is a gross error committed of many, who hold that some horses
have not (naturally) their thropell and nostrill wide enough for the issue of
their wind, and therefore to excuse An application.
their ignorance, they have invented the slitting of their nose to give it the
freer passage: Still condemning natures works, but never their own
simpleness. And so, those sort of horses are said to be the worst which are
called cock-thropeld, as if that did proceed from nature; but herein they
deceive themselves, for those (for the most part) are free horses, with large
upright necks, and tender mouth, and the man for f The cause of a
Cock-thropell. 1. Pra. 24 h.
want of true judgment, (in their disposition) does cause this disorder in
them, for he not regarding their natural inclination to bear high, does force
them still higher (with his hand,) by which means they are caused to gagge
their heads so hie, that they bend their necks back, whereby their thropell
does bend like a bow, and in yielding so far back does weaken their crest,
toward the withers, and so make them winny-cragged; which gross absurdity is
the cause of spoiling so many horses, for they think by one and the selfsame
means to work all sorts of horses, (for because Art does consist in working
some horses heads up, therefore they use it generally toward all) But if they
would rightly examine their own judgment, and so work orderly and coolely as
they ought (for his disposition) that is, where they work other horses heads
up, this should be wrought down, and when others do desire quickening, this
should be used coolely, then they should find that his nostrill and thropell
were wide enough, both to receive and expel wind for any reasonable labor. g
Wind is further abused through ignorance.


Yet herein is another abuse, for these horses also being hot and free, they
continually add fuel to the fire till all be consumed: never regarding their
manner of going, but think that if g Wind is is further abused through
ignorance.
they go fast enough they go well enough, nor giving them leisure to learn the
true use of their wind; and so he is put to his trot before he can tell how
to set one foot orderly before another for a foot pace; and also to gallop, ere
he know how to behave himself as he ought in his trot, and so consequently
thrust into the extremity both of speed and wind, although he h A confusion by
teaching.
cannot frame his body to one stroke of a true gallop: Through which disorder,
he is continually held to extremities, by the which he has not time to learn
the facility of the Art; for as A simile.
Scholar in Music, if he be put to run division, before he either have true
fingring or can keep time, equally with both his hands, shall never be
accounted a good Musician, although he be naturally addicted thereto: Even so,
if a horse be put to his height before he have the true use of his wind
(justly,) with his body, he shall never perform that which is desired,
although he has natures helps.

Because his desire, and lust is so much abated (by such contrarieties fighting
in him) he finding no delight, but extreme ^ Contraries confuse the Subject.
toil, not knowing how to ease himself, and so falls into frantic
passions, setting all his powers to work at once till he be no more able to
work. For if he know not how to let go, and receive in his wind easily, to
cool the agitation of his vital powers, his heart will be so overcome with
heat that he will soon faint, because the drawing in of fresh air, does
cool the heart and give agility and strength to the other parts: for no horse
is able to do more then his wind can maintain. Wherefore never think you can
ride a Horse to his true disposition (in the Art) except you can tell how to
reduce the motion of his wind, to agree with his appetite or desire.

CHAP. 35. Of the carriage of the Body.
THus having set forth the two inward Characters which is most needful to be
observed, for the reducing of this work to perfection, it now rests to
speak of the two outward 1. Prac. 15 e. a The outward carriage is as an Index
to give judgment. 1. Pr. 26. a. Theo. 32. b.
signs, (which are the apt carriage of the Body, and the true command of the
mouth) for they are as an index to a Dial, whereby the man may have the surer
judgment of the other inward disposition. For (as it has been often said)
whatsoever is the cause of a cause, the same is the cause of the thing caused,
now the first is the cause of the second, and the second is the cause of the
two last; wherefore the first is the cause of the two last, which are caused;
(they being the event of the former:) Because as the desire is affected, so the
body does obey.

By the which the man may observe that as the exterior parts of the horse, do
demonstrate the disposition of the interior; (b) Theo. 33. f. and 32. c
they being apprehended by the man's outward senses, and so conveyed into the
inward apprehensiue senses, whereby the faculties do judge whether the inward
motion be through delight or fear: Even so, the outward motions of the man do
give notice unto the horse of the intention of his mind, they in like manner
being first perceived by his outward senses, and c How the man's will is
conveyed into the horses inward senses.
after conveyed into his inward apprehensiue senses, by the which he does know
whether he does obey or rebel: And so the Horse being but sensitive by nature,
may (by Art) be said (in some sort) to be reasonable, for there being such a
true combination betwixt the man and him, that all their doings will show both
delightful and commendable.

Now for the better observation, to know how the appetite is affected, (by the
carriage of the body,) there must be a regard (x) Note. 1. Pr. 30. ^.
given un to all the parts thereof; for if it be quick and nimble and move
easily and willingly, and carry himself comely, then you may assure your
self, that the Horses desire is answerable thereto: But contrarily, if any of
these be wanting (although not all: as if he go unhandsomely, or roll in his
going, or set hard, or strive and labor too much with his fore parts, and The
application.
shake and wallow with his hind parts; then you may be assured that those do
proceed from the maleuolence of his desire: or likewise, in the handling of his
feet, if he go either d The combining of the inward and outward motions
together. Theo. 59. d
broad before or behind, or beat himself with lifting his forefeete too hye,
or if he be subject to stumble through low going, or any such, then you may
resolve that there is a contrariety betwixt the inward and the outward motions,
either that the appetite does covet to go faster then the slight of body can
maintain: or else the body being unapt to go, is violently forced on, faster
then the desire is willing to go.

Now therefore, when any of these adiacents do intercept your expectation, you
may conclude that the cause thereof does come chiefly, from your weak
judgment, in regard you went more eagerly then orderly about your work,
neither knowing how to join the whole subject, to agree in a true motion, nor
(e) Theo. 15. k.
letting the horse have liberty to ease himself, through which extremities he
was driven to such disorderly actions, you never aiming at the reducement of
his appetite, which is the chiefest thing to be regarded: For till it be
reformed, all the pains that you shall take, to reform the outward carriage of
the body is altogether without profit: for as Aristotle says, si sit impeditus
Ethick. 3. li. cha. 1.
appetitus facit per vim, if the desire be unwilling, whatsoever is done, is by
violence; which is one chief beast of the ravenous rank, which does break
into this Vineyard; whereby it is brought to such ruin that it does bring
forth almost nothing but weeds.

Further, you may observe the disposition of the Horse, by ^ For as the Horses
motions are as an index to the Man where by he may judge of his inclination so
is the man's motions to the Horse whereby he may know how to obey.
the concord of the motion of his wind and his body: for if that be hindered,
then both his going and standing will be resisting, because they are non
sponte, and then he does not any thing but violently, in regard it is only in
the exterior parts. For as Arist: says, Violentum est id, cuius principium est
foris, in quod nihil patiens et a gens confert: violence is that, whose
beginning proceeds from the outward parts, the which works nothing with
patience and willingness. And again he says, Quod principium quod mouet non
sit internum et rei quod mouetur violenter, sed externa: that beginning that
does move violently, is not moved from the interior but the exterior parts. By
the which their ignorance (in this Art) is laid open, who altogether (g)
Meaning of pacing.
regard the outward action of the Horse, by forcing him to set so far over his
hinder feet, and do never respect the motiof his body to agree aptly with his
appetite and his wind: which is the cause of so many bad going Horses and of
their falling so soon from their pace, all their actions being inuit, and so
neither delightful nor durable: they not knowing how to obey the will of the
Man, nor to frame their inward and outward motions together.

For as there can be no temporary motion (that has time for his limits) can
make his true revolution, except there be a just g All motions must begin and
end in a true proportion of time. Theo. 38. ^. Theo. 31. ^.
proportion betwixt the teeth of the wheels, and the teeth of the nuts: And
also the center of the axeltrees to be equidistant one from another according
to the proportion of both their semidiamiters, and likewise the waights
proportionable to the manner of moving. Even so, there cannot be any apt motion
(in the Horse) except all his parts have a proportional moving one to another,
and his desire which does yield the motion be brought to the same limit of
time, and likewise your self which as the waights does cause the motion, must
be proportionate accordingly to finish all those motions in one period.

CHAP. 36. Of the true order of the head, and easy command of the mouth.
THe fourth and last observation to know the horses disposition, is the true
order and easy command of the head and mouth; and this also (as the other)
does depend outwardly, being the event of the former; for if there be any
resisting in any of the other, it will be apparent in this. For if either the
Theo. 32. ^ and 35. a
appetite be evil affected or the wind distasted, or the body any way
resisting, the head and mouth will never be easily commanded; and therefore
they are far deceived, which (when they could not bring a gentle obedience to
the hand) a The invention of hard bits and snaffle condemned. Theo. 2. l. 1.
Pr. 22. d.
have invented hard chains, and tormenting cauezans, and so many varieties of
sharp and uneasy bittes and trenches to force obedience, ever imagining the
cause thereof to proceed from the deadness and hardness of the mouth, whereas
it did arise from the other parts of the body, and brake out there as the
issue thereof.

But thereby they express their ignorance, in seeking to reduce Art by
violence: For, (as Aristotle says) Si impedita sit Ethic. 3. li. 1. chap.
cognitio, facit per ignorantiam, If knowledge of the cause be hindered,
whatsoever is wrought, is done by ignorance; for, for want of knowledge in the
cause, they have wrought upon the event: and so, when they felt a disobedience
in the mouth, have sought for reformation there, as if that had been the cause
of the error, because it is there perceived: But although (b) Theo. 14. f. and
27. c.
all errors do extend to the mouth, yet they are not to be corrected in the
mouth; because the use of the mouth, (as I have said in the 27. Chapter) is
only to govern the other parts according to the discretion of the man, as the
Pilot does rule the Ship by the stern. c How a Horse may be said to be a Ship.


For, the Horse may be said to be the Ship, his appetite the waves, his wind
the gale that does force it forward, his head the helm by which it is guided,
and the man the Pilot to direct the voyage; and if the Pilot want knowledge to
steare the The Application.
the Helm truly, the ship is in danger of Shipwreck; even so, if the Man
have not judgment to govern his Horse truly by the head, all his labors are
in danger of confusion.

Now therefore, as I have placed it as the last Character (in order) by the
which the disposition of the horse may be known, so is it the last observation
that you shall have for your refuge: For if there be a defect in any of the
other, it may be perceived in this, when it is obscured in them. For, if either
of the interior d A true hand gives certain evidence.
notes be maleuolent, then he does show it in the exterior parts: as if he be
unwilling to go, then does he rest too much upon the hand; or if he desire
to go faster (then he should) he will bear too much thereupon: or if he
will not turn readily, nor go back willingly, etc. then all these will be
felt by the hand. Or if he be loose-bodied and trifle in his going, he shall
feel the loosenes thereof by the hand, in regard he is so tickle mouthed that
he will not rest upon the snaffle, (as he should) to stretch his body forth to
make a true and apt way.

Wherefore, when you shall find any of these to intercept your expectation,
do but examine these four several observations, and you shall find the
cause to proceed from some one of them, and especially from the two former: it
happening from the rebellion of the horses disposition, or else from your
self, through ignorance of the Art, by the which abuse it is Theo 2. l.
ingrafted in the Horse, and so is become habitual. Which cause when you have
found (if you be desirous to be a flourishing impe, and bring forth fruit in
this Vineyard) you must take pains to purge and cleanse it from such weeds, as
may spring up therein, and hinder the Vine from growing, because they will so
ouershadow it that the truth cannot give any nourishing heat, to ripen the
fruit, whereby it may be either delightful or profitable.

Now for the prevention hereof, work after the receipt which is here set
down; for I dare boldly affirm, (having proved it by experience) there is not
any weed of error, that shall spring up in this Vineyard (whether it be
natural or contingent) e A true Application works the best effect.
but here are remedies set down to kill the vigor thereof: if you have but
knowledge how, where, and when to use them. And although it may seem to the
most sort of people, that this is a raw and undigested erudition, in regard
that all vices are not so precisely set down (with their remedies) as they
would desire; let them know that one reason is to quell the f This Art is most
abused by calumniators. Theo. 28. m.
self conceipted knowledge of those which disgrace this Art through the
volubility of their tongues, and will speak more in an hour, then they can
perform in all their life time; and therefore if, I should, or rather could
have made it so easy, that they might easily have understood the applications,
only by reading, then the practitioners should live continually in disgrace,
and be subject to the scandal of every insinuating tongue, (as they are too
much already) for they having a partial knowledge, think that to parallel the
best, in regard they can talk a little of horses, but cannot give any reason
of the cause, and yet make an approbation of their judgment, for ^^ there are
some Colts that will venture to swim in waters wherein A fit simile.
they cannot live, in like manner they will censure of things they cannot enter
into: Wherefore if I should have set forth all vices and their remedies, in an
easy apprehension, they would have usurped too much knowledge therein, and so
would condemn others for practice, when themselves can neither tell what a
wel-going horse is, nor where to help the reformation of any error; and so they
resemble the Germane clown who (as one ^ A Germane Clown.
says) undertook to be ready in the ten Commandments, and being asked (by a
Minister) which was the first? he said, Thou shall not eat. But I could wish
that these should be sent again unto the School to learn to spell, before
they presume to read and understand booke-cases (in Law,) before they be
admitted for Judges; in regard it is more easy to find a fault, then it is to
amend it: For as Thales when he was asked what was Thales.
the hardest thing, he answered, for a man to know and reform himself: and
what was the easiest, he said, for a Man to admonish and reprove others.

And another reason. is, that it is a ground too hard for him, (h) Theo. 18. ^
(that has a deeper apprehension then my self) to plow up through the
diversities of horses dispositions, for no man can set down a certain remedy,
for to cure an uncertain disease, and therefore the application thereof must
proceed from the judicial observance of the man according to the truth of the
Application.
Art. For the Apothecary must not condemn the gardener, when he has furnished
his garden with medicinal herbs, in regard he did not set them in order, as
they should be used, seeing he took the pain to abbreu^ate his labor, to
reduce them in such a small continent, wherein he might gather them at his own
discretion.

Wherefore, to leave the opinionated vulgars to wallow in the filth of their
ignorance; let him (which his desirous to increase his knowledge in this Art)
but carefully infuse that which is delivered, into his memory, and he shall
not fail of his expectation, for there shall not any storm arise, but he
shall find a bush to shroud himself under, nor any mutiny be stirred up, but
he shall have his forces ready to overcome them; for a man's knowledge is
extended no further then his own recordation. For as Socrates says, that
knowledge should be written Socrates.
in men's hearts, and not in sheets of paper.

CHAP. 37. How to know the disposition of the Horse by his shape.
THere is yet another* note to be observed, for the knowledge of the Horses
disposition: but it is more general then the former, and apprehended only by
the outward sense of seeing. And that is his proportion or shape; for as they
are not all of one quality, so they are not all of one shape, the causes a How
to know the horses disposition by his shape. Theo. 4. f.
of both which diversities, do arise from the temperature of the seed of which
they are framed, because (as it is holden) the soul of a Horse (he being but a
creature sensitive) does arise from the temperature of the body, upon which it
subsisteth, and so receives its nature and quality from the same: and therefore
b The quality of the horse is receued partly from the temperature of the seed.
1. Pra. 7. ^
as the composition of the body is gross or pure: so is the soul more subject
to densitie or tenuitie, and his passions more sad or merry, whereby all his
doings in respect of his natural qualities, are more or less capable of
obedience.

Now the diversities of these quallities, as I have said, do proceed from the
differences and food of the indiuidium, at their natural generation, the food
being conuayed into the retentiue part, and when it is digested the nutrition
thereof is concocted into blood, which does disperse it self through the
veins, into all the parts of the body, and so the purest thereof is distilled
into the gignatrix, and so converted into seed, from the which every species
does receive his disposition, according to the quallity of the seed of the
indiuidium, whereof it is formed, and afterward it is increased or diminished
in strength, c The work of nature.
by the goodness or badnesse of the food, upon which the Mare does feed. For
as one says, nature is not the thing it self, but the proper and peculier
strength of the thing, naturally given to the creature in the time of its
framing, and not at the procreation, where it receives that quality both of
being and working.

Now because there are so many varieties in the whole species, Theo. 18. f
therefore there must needs be so many differences of dispositions, because
there is nothing more general in nature, then diversity, wherefore I will omit
to speak of any more in this place, but only of those two chief heads, which
are in greatest opposition, (least I should enter into a Labyrinth, and so
confound my self, in travailing such a intricate and unknown path: for it is
too deep a riuerite for my short wit to plumb; But by these the ingenious may
ground a reasonable judgment of any Horse as he shall perceive them to incline
to either proportion.

And for the first, those horses which have a handsome body, d A horse of this
shap is of the best temper
as, his ribs to bear out in robundity like a barrel, his short ribs
being close shut up to his huckle bone, within the compass of four fingers,
with a proportionable long buttocke, although he be a little high rumpt, if he
be well let down in the gasking, it is tolerable, so as if a plumb should be
let down from the outside of his huckle bone, it would fall perpendicularly,
1. Pra. 1. 3 f.
upon the out side of the brawne of his thigh: and as for his fillet, if he
have these two properties, aforesaid, it must necessarily follow to be good, to
the which if he have a broad breast, then he must upon necessity be well let
down in the chest: for it is a grantable request in Geometry, if equal things
be put to equal, that which remains will be equal.

And again, if he have a large upright neck, and well compassed in the
setting on of his head, for the aptnes of his reyne, with ^ The third of the
grantable requests.
a high thin Crest, a wide law, broad Forehead, a full Eye, a prick Ear,
although it be somewhat great, a large Mouth, a wide Nostrell, and as for his
Limbs, although many desire them thick and strong, yet for my own part, if
they be somewhat slender, I hold him not the worse for it does argue a greater
likelihood of speed and nimblenesse: For as for strength; I think there is
none so simple as to think that nature should work so imperfectly, as that it
made not the legs sufficient A thing that is more curiously observed then by
necessity forced.
to maintain and support the actions of the body, especially, in that, all men
know that know any thing, that strength does not consist in the legs but in
the back. And as for toughness, that proceeds from the interior parts, as
either through the stoutnesse of courage, or true passage of the wind, by the
aptnes of motion, or sound labor, yet if they will object g Objection for
strai^^es.
for danger of strayning, I say it is not upon necessity that slender limd
horses are altogether subject to it, and strong limd horses free; nay, for I
have seen a stong limd horse get a strain, when as a slenderer has gone
free, and yet both of them at one and selfsame kind of labor, which when I
saw, I did conceit the cause was through the grossenes, and vnnimblenes of the
Horse.

But to regresse, when the man shall see a Horse have all these properties, or
at least most of them, for it is hard to find all h Ignornnce is the cause of
many iades.
properties in one particular, then he may presume that that Horse is of a free
and gentle disposition, and so the more apt to be brought to obedience. And
although it may be said, that many such like horses have been approved iades;
I answer, the cause thereof does not arise from the horse but accidentally
from the abuse of the Art, through ignorance of the Man: 1. Pr. 13. q.
they having higher spirits then his apprehension could reach to command.

And for the other sort of Horses, whose shape is in another kind, being
aduersa, for if it were contraria, then it should be a 1 These Horses are of a
more improper temper.
Monster, clean degenerating from nature, if they be flat Ribd, weak
Fillited, being very Spacious betwixt the short Ribs and the Huckle bone, pin
Rumpt, thin in the Gasking place, narrow Brested, shallow Chested, short
Necked, thick Crested, cubbe Headded, it being stuntly set on, bangle Eard,
narrow Iawed, pincke Eyed, thin Faced, little Nostrelles, and a narrow Mouth;
or if his body and all his other parts be thick and strongly set together,
then the man may Imagine, that he is of a sad and dogged disposition. Now
although it is holden of most that these Horses thus shaped, will never be
brought to any good serviceable use, for as it is said, distortum vultum
sequitur distortio morum. Whereby many of curious spirits that take great
delight, both in these excellent subjects, and also in this famous Art, are
mightily discouraged, through the general judgment of the one, and the abuse
of the other; that if they get not such a shaped horse, all their labor and
charge will be (k) Theo. 2. r and s and 28. f.
lost. Wherefore for the better encouragement, if they seriously observe in
every trial, how many of such excellent proportionated Horses have come to the
worse, they may easily alternate their mind, and think that what defects may
interpose nature in her work, by any accident (except it be deprivation) Art
may help to make restitution, which is the cause that the more unlikely Horse,
does oftentimes worse the more likely. But it may be objected that herein I
make a contradiction, in the Objection.
project of this Chapter: for how can a man know the goodness of the Horse by
his shape, seeing those which are esteemed of the best, oftentimes prove the
more Iades? To the which I answer, it is true, if nature were as perfect now,
as at the first, Answer.
then those Horses would be brought to perfecter obedience of themselves
without any art, but else if man had knowledge how to reduce them according to
Art: but since then all they as well as others, are become disobedient and
rebellious, so that they Theo ^. c. (l) 1. Pr. 4. ^.
will never come to the height of their glory without true knowledge in the
Art: for want of which, they suffer greatiniury and disgrace, for I confess
that if Art were joined to nature, they would far exceed the other, for I hold
it better that ^ A horse must have some thing ase, as well as in se.
a Horse has something ase, as well as in se, for they would not only please
the eye for beauty more then the other, but also give better content to the
mind, when their goodness should be put to the touchstone.

Now the cause that those horses which are defective, are brought to better
perfection then the other is this, that they are more consonant to the nature
of man then the other, for man which should repair this decay, is likewise
obscured in (m) Theo. 8. c.
knowledge; so, that when any contrariety does happen contrary to his
expectation, he following his will, falls into extreme passions, whereby
those horses which seem to be more doggedly disposed by their shape, are
sometimes made more durable and pleasing then the other, by violent correction;
but yet n Whatsoever is by chance is no Art, and so one is no proof.
herein they are not reformed by Art, but by chance, for if it happen that one
prove to be good, they fail of their expectation in a dosen: wherefore the
approbation of some few of these, may not applaud their knowledge in the Art,
that they have more knowledge then they which fails in those sort, which
Aristotle.
are said to be of the best shape, for it does rather intimate their greater
ignorance, for as it is holden, every thing is destroyed by 1. Pra. 7. h
his contrary, and maintained by his like; even so, although the better sort of
Horses are disgraced by the contrariety of the Man, yet his knowledge in this
Art may parallel or exceed the other, though he by chance may bring that Horse
(being of such a disposition as is fitting for his choleric nature) to a
better effect, because violence not Art does gain the one, (it being agreeing
to man's nature,) and patience with Art does work the other it being more
repugnant thereto: For as one of them o Art tende^ ^. to the mean.
does exeed in one extreme, so does the other sort in the other, and it is the
end of Art to bring both these excesses to a mean.

But if they object, seeing those horses which are of grosser composition, be
more coherent to man's nature, why are they Objection.
not preferred before the other: the answer is twofold, the first is, Man
having an intellectiue knowledge by the instinct of nature, Answer.
(although much obscured) knows that all things were made perfect at the
first, and so th^se horses which are Genesis 1. 31. (p) 1. Pra. 3. e. 1. Pr. 5. f.
p All men are given to please the eye. (2)
of the beautifullest shape, reason does tell them that they are the nearest to
the Creation, and so chooses them, as they being most likely to prove the best
and delightfullest to the eye, most men desiring to please that sense in all
things) and so do prefer them before the other, they being more delightful
to the eye, and more probable to yield content, although very few know how to
bring them to their perfection.

The second reason is, that the nature of men is to desire to seem wise, and
therefore will seem to find fault where they cannot amend, and to show their
judgment in choosing, and not their knowledge in using, to blind their own
ignorance, q Ignorant men condemn nature for to excuse themselves.
for though they observe a difference, yet they know not the reason thereof:
And so generally condemn nature for making more horses without use then with
use, and likewise disgraceth the Art for want of know, edge in her use, and so
hold that those horses which are of this distorted composition, are not
confined within the compass of Arts limitation, because the concauity thereof
does overthrow the conuexity of their superficial brain. But to resolve the
cause of this difference of their compositions, is (as I have said) from the
temperature of the seed of which these sorts were generated, for the food upon
which the indiuidium did feed being gross, made the seed so subtle, that it
could not concur so proportionably into every part, as the other which was
more pure, did in giving shape and nutriment to the other sort, and yet nature
herein is not imperfect, but that she works not immediately, as at r Nature
is not imperfect but by accidents. 1. Pr. 13. n.
the first, for then the food was naturally good, and needed no Art for
nourishment, but now she works mediately from secondary causes, and therefore
if there be not a reducement by Art, nature will be defective in many things
through the repugnancy of accidents; but not so abortiue as Art cannot help to
1. Pr. 13. d. ^ The earth (...) 1. Pr. 4. ^.
reformation: For though the earth at the first brought forth such fruits as
would give perfect nourishment (of it self) yet now (through the curse) it
waxes old and barren, so that there must be Art for repay^ing, by sowing and
planting, whereby it may bring forth better fruits for nutriment both to man
The Application.
and beast, then it of its own nature would yield; and therefore those horses
which are begotten with such seed as is increased of that food the earth does
bring forth of it self, can t Which Art is to gain a restitution of
obedience. Theo. 20. ^ Objection. Answer. u Breeding does not take away the
knowledge of riding.
never be of such excellent shape, nor have that courage (of themselves) as
those which are repaired by Art.

Yet if any will further object, that if the goodness of a horse does consist
so much in breeding, then if they be well bred they need less knowledge in
the Art: To which I answer, it is true, if they would work obediently of
themselves, for though a man has two pieces of wood to work on, if the one
be knotty and the other smooth, if he choose the smooth for ease, yet he must
use Art to bring it to proportion; and so no horse whatsoever but he must have
Art to gain obedience; And therefore against such curious inquisitors, I
conclude with the saying of Diogenes, who being demanded, why the charity of x
Diogenes answer.
people extended toward the lame and blind, and not to Philosophers, because
(says he) their doubt is as strong, that they themselves may one day be lame
and blind, as their hope is weak that they shall ever prove Philosophers. So
their doubt is strong to make objections (that they may the more cloak their
own ignorance) by finding fault, because their hope is weak that they shall
ever attain such knowledge to be good Horsemen.

CHAP. 38. The necessity of Proportion.
BEcause I have spoken so much of Proportion in this Theoricke Part of
Horsemanship, I will now show the necessity thereof, lest it may be thought a
frivolous speech in this Art, Theo 4.* ^ a No Art can stand without Proportion.
Theo 33. i
because it never has heretofore been handled by any that has as yet treated
of this subject: But whether it be frivolous or no, let any (except he be
wilfully blind) judge, in regard that not only this, but also all other Arts
and Sciences cannot stand without it. For at the first Creation, nothing was
made something by proportion, for thereby it received a form or simile. And
the whole Fabrike of the world was composed altogether by just proportion, and
every one of the celestial orbs, the concaue of the uppermost including the
con^exe of the innermost: by such just proportion, that* the cunning Astronomer
can easily measure the true distance of every Sphere, by their Semidiamiters.
And further, how could the Astronomers and Astrologers know the Apogeon and
Perogeon of the Sun and Moon, and so the difference of their slow and swift
motions: with b Astronomers and Astrologers work by Proportion.
their reuolutions, periods, conjunctions, oppositions, and the several
aspects of the Stars and Planets with their stations, retrogradations,
exaltations, detriments, combustions, etc. And the time of the Eclipse both of
the Sun and the moon, by their revolution concurring justly in the two
opposite Sections of Ca^da and Caput Draconis, and the difference of the Moons
latitude, with her Epicicle, and many other observations, were it not they
observed a proportion in their reuolutions, and so made instruments and tables
in just proportion to the same. And further, to find the variable motions of
the Moon, with her full, change and quarters, and also the flowing and
reflowing of the Seas, if they did not find a proportional course of them,
according to the Moons motion, (observed by the like Tables) in regard it is
said to be the Waters Paramore.

And again, for Horologie if the Gnomen be not made in true ^ Of Horologie.
proportion to the elevation of the Pole, and the distance of hour lines
drawn according to the obliquity of the Horizon, and the Meridian, so drawn,
that it may cut the Equinoctial at right angles perpendicularly, and then to
take the substile, according to the inclination, declination, or reclination of
the murall; the Dial will be very ridiculous and idle. And further for a
Clock, if the plumbe of the minutes be not of such an equal (c) Theo. 35. g
proportion, that it does balance the revolution of the hour wheel, with the
term of time, and the teeth of the nuts to be in true proportion to the teeth
of the wheels, and the center of the Axletrees to be equally distant, to the
Semidiamiters, the clock will neither go truly or run stedily.

Now although here is sufficient demonstration, for the necessary use of
Proportion, yet I will a little further illustrate the excellency thereof, it
being, that no Art nor Science can work without it; all which for to rehearse
would be too tedious, and my Theo. 4. a. and 33. ^.
memory too short, but I will briefly touch some particulars, and by the like
all the rest may be imagined. Now all Proportions of Arts and Sciences (as
Doctor Dee affirms) do arise from The Preface in Euclid.
Arithmeticke and Geometry, as being inseparable twins, and the head from
whence all other do flow; and therefore d The Root from whence all Arts do
spring.
no man can show the reason of any error, (in what Art soever) except he have
understanding in their principles. For though a man may learn a trade by a
lively teacher yet if he be ignorant in them, his knowledge is but blind, in
regard he goes by directions: And so, he differs (as Marcus Aurelius says)
^. Prac. 5. a. ^ Tradition is a Bestuall knowledge.
very little from a beast, for that which they do, they do as they were
taught, and cannot yield a reason for the same.

But for to show more plainly, how all other Arts do arise from these two; it
is either simple or mixed, that is, either by Arithmeticall or Geometrical
proportion simply, or else by them both coniunct: for if it be upon
Arithmeticke simple, Doct. Dee Euclid.
then it deals with numbers only: so far as an unite is indeuisible. And if
with Geometry simple, then it deals with Magnitudes f The lincking of Arts
together.
only: so far as a point is indivisible. But if with Arithmeticke mixed with
Geometry, then it demonstrateth some Arithmeticall conclusion. But if with
Geometry mixed, then it demonstrateth some Geometrical purpose.

And so their uses are either in things supernatural and divine, g And of
their uses.
by application ascending: or in things Mathematical without further
application: or else in things natural, both substantial, and accidental,
visible, and invisible, by application descending. For no man can number any
thing without a proportional progression. And how can a man find out either
Radical, Cubicke, Cossicke, Surde, or any other simple or mixed numbers,
without proportion: Or learn the knowledge of Mechometry, whereby lengths and
distances are measured, if not by proportion of his several stations, and
observations of degrees set in his instrument by the like proportion? and
likewise the knowledge in Embadometry, and Stereometry, which measures all
plain Surfaces, and Solides, could not be attained, were it not for
proportion. And further the Art perspectiue, which shows the Opticke
properties of Radiations, and Reflectes: and Music, which teaches by sense to
judge of (h) Theo. 1. s.
sounds both high and low: and Chosmography, which describes the whole world
both heavenly and elementall: and the art Staticke, which shows the nature of
waightes and their properties; and Anthropography, which shows the perfect
shape, and true proportion of the admirable shape of man, which though he grow
in height, yet if he be extended, as included in a circle, whose center is his
navel, and his knees and eyes the first and third part of his height, and all
his other members made so proportional one to another, that he is called
Microchosmus for the excellency of his shape: and the Art Trochicall which
demonstrateth the properties of all circular motions; and all other Arts
whatsoever, none could be wrought truly if it were not for proportion.

Nay, the Husbandman cannot do any thing without the ^ The husbandman cannot
work without proportion.
aid of proportion: for if in his plowing he does not observe to draw his
furrow by a straight line, that it may be a true parallel to the next adjacent,
his land will lie neither roundly nor commendably. And likewise in his sowing,
if he spread not his seed equally, it will come up very unseemly and
disorderly: and for his carting, if he direct not the spurns of his wheels,
to be in a straight line with the extremes of his eye, he shall be in danger
of miscarying: and further, his hedging must be wrought orderly, and for
ditching it must be wrought slope-wise in such sort, that the bottom may be
parallel to the top (it being wrought by a straight line, or else it will be
discommendable: and likewise his Reeking, must be made by the same proportion
of his Ditching, and made apt to avoid rain, or else it will be both
unhandsome and receive loss by wet, none of all which can be done without
proportion. Now if none of these nor any other whatsoever, (which were too
tedious to rehearse) can be wrought without proportion; it were more then
madness in any man, to think that this Art of Horsemanship should be gained
without knowledge of the same: in regard it is included within the use of
things natural, k In what part of proportion horsemanship is inclined.
both substantial and accidental, etc. For if it be rightly observed, there
is no Art except the Mathematickes, that is so intricate for proportion as it:
neither do they desire much more curious observations for proportion then it;
because the man must have an imaginary proportion as well as a sensitive. (l)
Theo. 13. d.


For it is not sufficient to proportionate his outward motions, to the outward
Iesture of the Horse, but he must also proportinate the command of his will and
affections, according to his Horses inward disposition: or else the fence of
this Vineyard will be so weak, that the wild beasts will break in and destroy
all the planting.

But because the knowledge of proportion is so appertinent and necessary for
this Art: it may be expected of some that I should set down a rule how a man
may find it, whereby he might the more easily effect his desire. Which thing
though it be very hard to do, through the multiplicity of dispositions, yet I
would endeavor my best to satisfy the desirous mind, (m) Theo. 37. f.
were it not that detracting tongues would abuse that liberty, in usurping that
knowledge to themselves by prating, though they be as far off the knowledge in
acting as they are off crowning. For they through there over lofty and self
conceit would then blow forth such contumelious, and reprochful speeches
against the best practitioners (as over many do) in condemning their works,
having but an erroneous knowledge, being fortified only with breathings, to
impair their fame and discredit their estimation, although they (for the true
acting) n I cannot inuay against this carping Momus too often.
are not worthy to lead their Horse to the block. But if they would desire the
true knowledge so much as they do the maintenance of their own opinions, they
would be ashamed to blow the coals of others disgrace (finding so much
ignorance in themselves) and see their own blindness, in considering that
their detracting tongues do proceed from their malicious mind. not being
capable of the like performance: for where August: o Difficile est in prosperis
inuidia carere, sola miserere caret.
there is no light, there is no shadow: and where there is no knowledge there
is no envy. But as Rats and Mice eat and gnaw upon other men's meat, so do
detracting tongues other men's labors.

But yet to conclude, I will not leave this point altogether naked, but give it
one covering to hide its shame, and so leave it to the charitable mind of
others, to relieve it further from the cold: and that is the rule of
proportion, which for its excellency is called the golden rule, for if
conceipted knowledge, and ignorance beget error: what will reason and
discretion yield? and so let it be multiplied by practice, and divided by
experience, and they shall find, that it will yield the truth.

CHAP. 39. The Conclusion.
BEcause I have bin more tedious in handling this Theoricke part of pacing,
then my intended purpose was (at the first) through so many oppositions, which
did intercept me in my proceedings; whereby it may be held of some, that many
things a Ignorance cannot endure labor.
are here spoken of, which are nothing appertinent to this Art: and therefore
need not to be so curiously observed of any, nor is it needful for any man to
trouble his memory with searching into such a bundle of trifles, in regard they
are more superfluous then necessary, for the effecting of the same?

Therefore to satisfy them in this point, they deceive themselves (in their
opinions) in this Art: for if they rightly consider that the cause of a true
going Horse does chiefly consist in the man, they shall find that herein is
not any superfluity for Theo. 4. h
the attayning to the knowledge thereof, but rather a defect of many things,
which (some) I have omitted of purpose, for diverse causes before rehearsed and
others, which my memory was barren of, when I should have handled them in their
proper place, and so left them out, as things coming out of due time. And
therefore to make a compendium of the chief heads thereof in this conclusion,
that the reader may the more easily lock them in the closet of his memory,
which so many particulers would obstupidate. The man must first observe, that
the (1) b Upon what this Knowledge does chiefly consist. Theo. 4. r.
knowledge of this Art does not only consist of the subject of the Horse (as
many do hold, excusing their ignorance with the nature of the Horse) but in
the enlightening of his own knowledge, (to gain obedience.)

Because at the beginning, GOD thought no creature was c God gave knowledge to
Man, and ^ut sense to beasts.
worthy to participate of reason but man, and therefore he let all other
creatures but see their being, and to man he gave to know his being, and
suffered* beasts to see the things themselves, and to man to know the causes of
them. But the wandering ambitious spirit of man not content with this free gift
of his maker, sought to know more, and thereby came to know* d Theo. 1. ^ and 2.
less. And therefore to reduce some restitution to the former estate, Art was
invented to illustrate the dark corners of his understanding, whereby he might
better see and know how to bring these irrational creatures to obedience, that
so they might be made the more serviceable for him as at the first they were.

And secondly, for the Horse, you must consider that the cause (2)
of all errors and restisenesse is his disobedience and rebellion, he doing but
his kind being only sensitive. And therefore it Theo. 34. c.
i^ your duty to gain obedience, not after your will and passion, inuenting
as many several tortures as you find errors; but in Disobedience the cause of
rest^enesse.
discretion and wisdom to judge of the cause, and so to reform the effect.
And thirdly, in regard that it is only appertinent to man, to judge by reason,
and thereby to govern his Horse; you must be careful to know how to join
your self and the (3) Theo. 16.
Horse together, so that you may be said to be both but one subject, and that
must not be in the exterior parts only, as to frame the actions of the Horses
body to the motions of your d The Man and the Horse must be both but one
subject. Theo. 35. d. and 4. h. and 35. f.
own: but also in the interior, that is, the desire of the Horse must be
obedient to your own mind, which must be conuayed into the Horse only by your
motions: for when your motions are agreeing to your mind, and the desire of
the Horse yielding to those motions, and the actions of his body consonant to
his desire, then both you and the Horse may be said to be one subject, the one
being as ready to obey as the other to command.

Fourthly, you must have care that the Horse carry a constant (4)
and firm body, that is a true and comely reyne, and his hinder parts so
firmly knit to his fore-parts, that they may Theo. 4. m. and 26. c
follow steadfastly without any improper and loose carriage, his hinderlegges
ever keeping the same proportion in following after, as his fore-legges do in
their distance of setting foreward.

Lastly, because you are the only agent for the effecting of (5)
this Work, and that the Horse is reduced to obedience, as you have knowledge
to understand your self: Therefore it is requisite e The Horse is brought to
obedience as the man has knowledge to effect.
you should enter into the consideration of your own knowledge (in this Art)
which you may the better do if you compare the truth of your works with the
errors, because that one contrary does make the other more apparent: Now the
means by which you may do this, is by the cause, quality, effect and the end.
The cause of true obedience is your self, 1. The cause. Theo. 1. s. and 8. ^.
you working by reason, and subduing your will and affections by discretion;
and the cause of disobedience is your self also, you working by ignorance, and
so do follow your will more then reason, yielding to the directions of your
affections. Now the true quality is obedience of the horse, he obeying with
2. The quality.
all his powers to your will and command: But the contrary quality is his
rebellion, having a greater desire to go after his own lust, then to yield
obedience to you. The effect of true obedience is the serviceable use of the
horse, after he is made subject 3. The effect.
to your mind, to obey any motion either for pleasure or profit: but the
effect of false obedience is his resistance (by doggednesse) increased by
ignorance, and so to rebel against your will. And lastly, the end of true
knowledge is to bring him to 4. The and.
such obedience (in all things) that he will give full content and delight to
you, that you may receive merit and condign praise for your judgment and
performance: But the end of erroneous knowledge is to reap discontent, you
being made servile to yield to your horses lust, who will ride but at his own
pleasure, whereby you shall receive great disgrace through your ignorance.

All which, (if they be rightly observed in their particulars) will give you
sufficient understanding, what knowledge you have in this Art, that thereby,
when any opposition does arise (betwixt your horse and you) ye may examine your
self in all or some of these, and so have a redress by your own reformation.
And then you shall keep the sense of this Vineyard so strong, that it will
keep out all the wild ravenous Beasts, and thereby keep it so clean from
weeds and spoiling, that the Vines will spread and grow so high, as you will
bring forth such fruitful Grapes, as their relish will be both exceeding
pleasant and comfortable.

Bern: Opinio sola, very similitudine se tuetur. FINIS.
THE TABLE OF THE first Book.
CHAP. Fol. 1 THe original cause of Arts in general. 1 2 The commendations of
the Art of Horsemanship. 6 3 The Corollary of the Art of pacing. 11 4 The
Description of a well going Horse. 17 5 The Connecting of this Art to the man.
22 6 The office and duty of the Horseman. 25 7 How the Horseman should govern
himself, and his Horse. 28 8 How the Horseman may subdue his will. 31 9 How he
may overcome his passions. 32 10 That a Horseman should not be feirce nor
angry. 36 11 That he should be loving, and gentle. 38 12 That he should have an
apt, and able body. 41 13 That he should have a true seat and comely carriage
of his body. 43 14 That he must have true use both of hand and foot. 47 15
That he must know how to help his Horse. 53 16 That he must know where to help
him. 56 17 That he must know when to help him. 59 18 That he must know the
disposition of his Horse. 62 19 Of the dullness of a Horse. 65 20 Of a free
Horse. 69 21 Of Corrections. 71 22 The manner of correcting by the voice. 72 23
Of Correcting with the Stirrup. 74 24 Of Correction by the calfe of the leg.
75 25 The correction of the Switch. 77 26 Of correcting with the Spur. 79 27
Of correcting with the Bridle. 81 28 Of correcting upon several grounds. 83 29
That he must know how to correct. 86 30 That he must know where to correct. 88
31 That he must know when to correct. 91 32 Of the 4. chief observations to
know the Horses disposition. 93 33 Of his appetite, or desire. 96 34 Of the
free passage of his Wind. 99 35 Of the apt carriage of his body. 103 36 Of the
true order of his head, and easy command of his mouth. 105 37 How to know the
Horses disposition by his shape. 109 38 The necessity of proportion in this
Art. 115 39 The Conclusion. 119

FINIS.
THE SECOND BOOK OF THE VINEYARD of HORSEMANSHIP. OR THE PRACTICKE PART OF
PACING. With more true Observations then have hitherto been published. Wherein
is perfectly set forth how to bring any Horse of what age and disposition
soever, to a fair and commendable Pace, only by the Hand. Approved and set
forth by MICHAEL BARET Practitioner and Professor of the same Art: Only for
the encouraging and stirring up of those which have taken delight therein, but
lie slumbring in the bed of Obscurity through the abuse of the Art, by
usurping Practisers.

Musicae occultae nullus est respectus. LONDON, Printed by GEORGE ELD. 1618.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, THOMAS Lord Bishop of Peterborough, long
life, with increase of Honor, and life everlasting.
RIGHT Reverend, there is never a Why but there is a Wherefore; and there is
never an Objection but there is expect^d an Answer; nor never an Answer but
there is presupposed an Objection: But in this there is an objection, which is
that I roue beyond the mark, in Objection.
presenting this Subject to your Lordship, entreating of Horses and Hyponomie,
which is not appertaining unto you, who is called to a far more excellent and
spiritual function. And therefore it is requisite I should render an Answer for
the defense of this my Apology upon which I need not insist unto your
Lordship, that knows to what end all things were created at the beginning,
better then I can any way apprehend, much less write. But yet to answer any
curious inquisitor: Answer.
First, although your calling is Seraphicall, yet in regard (1)
that God of his Fatherly Providence, did at the first create all Creatures for
the use and service only of Man, and so gave a free liberty for all men to use
them, with out restraint; therefore you descending from that Stock which
received that prerogative, may lawfully use them, by an hereditary succession,
and not any way violate your calling, they being made so necessary and
serviceable for all men, (of what state or degree soever) that live upon the
face of the earth.

Secondly, you being a member of this bodily Realm, (2)
cannot be exempted from the benefit and use of them, in as much as they are
made so necessary and profitable for the whole body thereof, seeing that all
the members must be relieved, maintained, and preserved, by the same means the
whole body is sustained (except they should dye and wither;) because all the
parts of the body do participate with the whole: For proof whereof, Metap: de
mate.
there cannot be a better Allegorical resemblance to a bodily Realm, then
the Osmund or Magneticall Epist: to the Pr.
stone, for it (being complete) does retain all the potency and virtues of
the natural qualities: for it has Doct. Ridl: de Mag.
the two Poles (the one of them being of contrary quality to the other) the
Axis, Equator, Meridians, Parallels, and so all the other Circles naturally and
sensibly, as are imagined or fained to be in the Heavens. All which the
directory or inclinatory needles, will attractingly deliniate by their
conformity and union, at convenient Angles, being moved about a Terrella or
round body of the same nature.

In like manner this whole Realm has an Axis to An application.
move upon, the Poles of which being differing, one tends to good and the
other to evil; the estates and degrees of men being the Parallelles, and so
men's motions move upon the Meridian, their desires or wills (as an inclinatory
needle does show the Almicantarax, and Azimuth how far they do decline from
either of the Poles: Amongst which Parallelles, the Tribe of Leui being the
chief, may be compared to the Equator, being the chief parrallel, and does
demonstrate the several attractiue qualities of the Magnet: for when the
needle is on the one side of it, it seateth toward the North, but of the other
side, then toward the South; and so, as Moses stood in the gap, you stand
Psalm. 106. 23.
in the midst, to limit the other Parallelles for declining in their
reuolutions past the Articke, least they should loose that vigor of obedience
to God, and their King, and be touched with the Antarticke or contrary
quality. Wherefore though your calling be differing, yet having your motion,
amongst the other Parallels, or callings, for your temporary or necessary
affairs, the free use and liberty of these worldly blessings of God, are as
appertinent unto you as to other, and so the benefit of this worthy subject.

Thirdly, in as much as God has a general regard to preserve all things that
are under the Heavens, and (3) Job. 28. 24.
does provide for all: yet more especially for his Church, so that indeed the
use of these, and all other Creatures are more proper to his Elect, (in regard
he has the chiefest care over them) although the wicked Vitulus mictandus
liber in Paschua mittitur. Gregor.
have oftentimes the greatest abundance. And therefore your Lordship being one
whom God has dignified with a most glorious calling, and likewise endued you
with extraordinary spiritual gifts, for the edifying and enlarging his Church,
it cannot be denied, Romans 5. ^.
but he does likewise admit of your lawful and delightful (4)
use of them; for, has he given the greater and will not give the less? And
lastly, in respect of my self, which am bound in a dutiful affection both to
your Lordship and your worshipful Sons, Mr. William Dove and Mr. Thomas Dove
Archdeacon, for so manifold favors, and undeserved respects which I have
always received from your hands, from the first time I was known unto you,
whereby I am so much obliged for the same, that if I should not lock them up
in the closet of my heart there to be preserved until the period of my days;
I might be utterly condemned of ingratitude, and with Ovid. Telluris inutile
pondus, having no other means but thankfulness to remunerate the same.

Wherefore seeing the ardency of my sincere love is so much quenched by the
water of imbecility, that it cannot give such a vigorous heat as the bellows
of my desire would provoke, I have blown one little coal of the fire of my
affection; and have presumed bold, to present unto your Lordship this part of
my lives experience, being the Practicke of this Vineyard, hoping the relish
thereof will not be distasteful, the fruit being gathered from moral and
natural stocks, by the hands of practice. Wherein I have endeavored to
repair the decayed estate of this excellent subject to re-establish him in
such a primary esteem, as Art and Nature can effect, both by breeding and
riding. Wherein (also) I have desired to purge this noble Art from such
Authentical errors as have a long time blinded the eyes of many worthy
spirits; and have set forth bounds that they shall not pass, if they desire to
direct their course to the mean: And wherein further I have not set forth any
thing for fear or favor of ancient authority; but only what reason and
experience do approve, never following my own imagination further then the
truth would limit.

Therefore wheresoever I have failed by circumstance, and method, (through
desire in setting forth my mind so truly and plainly) I humbly desire your
favorable approbation, because many inconveniences (both of matter and words)
may slip out of a good scholars pen (much more out of mine) whilst the mind is
fixed in contemplation of things that are hard of themselves; for, Aliquando
magnus dormitat Homerus. And therefore this my simple Work being set forth
crassa (vt dicunt) Minerua: I desire your Honor favorably to pass it over,
and cover it with your judicious censure of my good intent, and charitable
affection, that I had to publish it for the good of the Kingdom: for what
error is committed, was not of neglect but ignorance; and therefore but error
amoris, because (indeed) I would have done better if I could. And further, I
may be condemned of impudency, for presuming to offer this so mean a gift
unto your Lordship, it being so dec^epi^: to which I must needs confess a
great remissenes: But desire and want causes impudence; and therefore I
knowing this to have a little life in it, and being d^sirous to have it
preserved, and my self not being able to give it such a vital spirit as it
should; I have presumed to use your name to give better life unto it.

And therefore, I humbly crave pardon for my attempt, in setting it before so
mean a Work, which offense I trust you will remit, and then I shall be so
infinitely indebted unto your Lordship, as I shall not know how to redeem
those arrerages, but with my hearty prayers unto God for the safe preservation
of you and yours, in peace and tranquillity.

Your Lordships, and yours, in all humble and dutiful Service. MICH: BARET.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE GEORGE, MARQVIS BVCKINGHAM, Viscount VILLEIRS, Baron
of Whaddon, Justice in Air of all his Majesty's Forests, Parkes and Chases
beyond TRENT; Mr. of his Majesty's Horse, and one of the Gentlemen of his
Majesty's Bedchamber, Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter, and one of
his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel of ENGLAND, and SCOTLAND.
IT is a maine infirmity (Right Ephesians. 4. 18.
Honorable) crept into all, and never cured in any, to be (as the Apostle
says) darkened in the understanding; for experience teaches, that the blind
man is incident to many miseries; though the path be straight, yet he will
wander, and though the day be clear, yet he either sees nothing, or if any
thing, yet very darkely, and none are so enlightened but they see obscurely:
which is the cause that all Arts and Sciences are never truly purged from
errors, but still experience brings the causes of them to light, whereby Men's
knowledges are more refined from the dross of ignorence. With the weight of
which, this famous Art of Horsemanship is Turkishly burdened, men's
apprehensiors being so deluded by the false evidence of the senses, that they
are blindly led by the seducing guide of traditions, never seeking any other
path, but that which Antiquity has traced; thinking that former Ages have
discovered the whole World of Truth, and that there were no Islands vndetected,
that were worthy the pains of discovery by any that should futurely attempt
the same. Whereby this Age is so led by opinion, that whomsoever they shall see
to furnish themselves for a voyage, to find more fruitful Ports, they are
generlly holden factious, and will either suffer Shipwreck, or else bring
counterfeit stuff.

Which conceding implication has brought such a confusion to the true
knowledge of this Art, that many worthy Horses are branded with the infamous
title of Iades, which are of a more predominate spirit, and potency then their
knowledge can comprise to bring in subjection for serviceable use; they often
times working upon the effect for the cause, and so hold that which is
contingent to be absolute necessary; and that such Iadish and rebellious
qualities as are produced (for want of judgment how to bring them to true
obedience) are so naturally ingrafted in those horses, that they necessarily
proceed from their vile disposition: Whereby these worthy Creatures receive
most unworthy disgrace, (through men's abuses) and are laden with the burden
of their faults.

Which abortiue imputation (Right Honorable) when I seriously considered, and
by diligent practice observed to be begotten by that monster (Custom) and
nursed by ignorance, and forced, as necessity by the strength of error, for
that such restiffe qualities are but accidents, and so before they were done,
were contingent, and might either be, or not be, being but the procliuity of
their dispositions: I have armed my self with the helmet of courage to enter
combat with that ugly and triple-headed mons^er, (not being dismayed, for the
poisonous stings, of his detracting tongues) to free these oppressed Creatures,
from the torture of this burden, (they being but sensitive Creatures) and to
retort it upon the neck of ignorant Professors, who are (or should be)
reasonable Creatures, and therefore command the unreasonable. And for the
better preservation of their worthy esteem, I have planted this Vineyard of
Horsemanship* and fenced it about with Reason, to nourish such impes as desire
to be grafted therein. Wherein is set forth (as in a glass) the causes of
errors, that this generous Art might be purged from the abuses thereof; and
also to bring a Horse to his highest perfection, that this old and blind Age
can effect, by the Art of breeding and riding, utterly rejecting all violent
means as enemy to the same, but only to work, by true order of motions,
distinction by true time, and proportionating corrections, according to the
Horses disposition, for the gaining of true obedience, to agree with the man
both inward and outward that they both may be one Subject, it being the scope
and period of this Art.

Which I have presumed to present unto your Lordship to be defended in its
weakness under your protection, and to be graced with the countenance of so
worthy a Personage: whom it has pleased God to give such favor in the eyes of
our Sovereign as to grace you with many noble dignities; to be Master of his
Majesty's Horse. Hoping your Lordship (who is of such mild nature and worthy
desert) will vouchsafe to accept of this poor present, as a token of my
sincere good will, and will be as a tender nurse and loving father to the
diligent and true practitioners of this worthy Hyponomie. For although the
Style be rude and oftentimes corrupt through an Icarius soaring, and
transcending desire to amplify it above my illiterated elocution; for dum
numerus addatur, pondus detrahatur; yet the grounds I know to be so true, that
I will approve any part which may be held Paradoxicall, with the hazard of my
life, because I had rather Sillogise them operibus then verbis. And therefore I
most humbly crave pardon for my presumptuous attempt, to set your name before
so weak a Work, desiring your mild censure thereof, for confusa disterminat
consideratio. And thus, committing your Honorable estate to the Almighties
Protection, and my self at your Honors command, I rest,

In most humble and dutiful Service, MICHAEL BARET.

TO THE GENTLEMEN AND MY COVNTRYmen of NOTTINGHAM and LINCOLNE-SHIRE: M. B.
wishes increase of knowledge, and eternal Tranquillity.
Having fraught my Ship (Gentlemen) for a voyage to golden Castile, in the
Vernall time of my age: thinking thereby to have laden it with such Merchandise
as should have yielded sufficient profit for my future time, in the Hyems part
thereof* but trauayling toward the line, being under the Solstice point of my
peregrination, a contrary wind arose and drive me to the Articke clime, where
being wether bet with the extremity of the Frosen Zone, I was glad to take up
such profits as the Polare circle, of that Latitude would afford; and my weak
estate redeem. But though my fraughtage is not so pr^tious as the spices of
Molucca, nor the gold of Ophir and Orients of India, whereby it might be
vendable to heigh estates? yet I have unladen it, being such wares as my Frosen
brain could se^ect, and have made it doneable to the meaner sort. Hoping they
will accept thereof gratefully, it being the fruit of my travail, and the
harvest of my Autumnall season; and also such wares as I am sure are not
counterfeite, but will endure the touchstone, having made sufficient trial of
their operation not by ipse dixit, but by ipse fecit.

But because danger does always attend upon labor, there was as yet, never
any that could either speak or do that which would please all men's varieties,
because their brains are so sickly, and subject to e Danger is a companion of
labors.
take surfeits especially where the feast is, in their conceits too full, or
the dishes not dressed answerable to their weak stomachs: their appetites being
commanded either by conceit of their stomachs, or affection to the Cook: and
so give partial judgment, without equity of the cause, and therefore to cover
their own ignorance, in that thing they would be held skillful in, they
contradict the sayings and doings of others, never taking pains to examine the
truth: neither looking in that end of the wallet which hangs behind.

But this queasinesse does come by propagation from our first Parents: Whereby
it is become a very hard thing for a man rightly to know himself.

For Adam when he had transgressed, laid the fault upon Genesis 3. 12. 13.
Eve, and she to excuse her self laid it upon the Serpent, and never
acknowledged themselves to have sinned, thinking thereby to excuse their
particular crimes. Which selfe-liking is so successively inherent in our
natures, especially where there is so much inquisition, and examination of men's
printed works: that if any thing be spoken or written which may touch their
freehold, then they will presently have a writ of error to remove that
disgrace from themselves: either by defacing the Person, confuting the Subject,
or dispraysing the Method: and so seek to preserve their own idle
reputation, though it be with a reproachful ignominy of the painful and
industrious searcher.

Yet for all this, good minds should not be dismayde to take pains to set
forth that which may yield profit, either to their country or commonwealth, to
which end we should wholly addict our selves, because no man ought to hide his
talent in the ground, nor to desist for Math. 25. 25.
all these detracting tongues and malicious minds, seeing the world has not
bin free of such from the beginning for our first Parents had the Serpent to
envy them, Abell had his Caine to murder him, Genesis 3. 1. and 4. 8. and 12. 9.
and 20. 2. and 19. 4. and 26. 14. and 29. 23. and 37. 4. 1 Samuel 20. 31. Mark.
14. 10. Math. 14 10.
Noah had his wicked Cham to shame him, Abraham had his Abimelech to abuse him,
Lot had the Sodomites to vex him, Isaac had the Philistines to envy him,
Jacob had his Laban to deceive him, Joseph had his brethren to contemn him,
David had his Saul to persecute him, Christ had his Judas to betray him, John
had his Herod to behead him, nay to be brief, all the Apostles and Prophets,
had one or more to afflict them, neither can any in this age live in such sort,
nor speak of any subject that shall not suffer the checkes and taunts of some
Zoylists.

Now if no man heretofore could set forth or speak that which would please all
sects and sorts of men, shall I (that am the meanest amongst the meaner) think
to plant this Vineyard so perfectly, but some Calumnies will seek to destroy
this planting? Nay, but I must arm my self to endure the reproach of the most,
so much the rather, because I differ so much from the traditions of the
Ancients, aiming more to discover the errors of men's, as the chief cause of
absurdities then the disposition of the Horse. For I know I should have pleased
many better if I had laid all the fault still upon the nature of the Horse, and
have given them liberty to follow their own wills, for it is more consonant to
man to study to invent several tortures to inflict upon others, then to seek
any reformation in themselves.

And although to you Gentlemen and Countrymen, to whom I have been more
familiarly acquainted, it may be thought that the fruits of my labors are
idle, as the course of my life, to some has been thought to be, because I did
not addict my self to gather wealth as is their miserable inclinations: Yet if
they whosoever shall have such an uncharitable conceit, will but respectively
weigh my earnest desire by knowledge to build again this now decayed Art; they
will I hope give me thanks for my diligent pains, rather then condemn me of
vain prate, and ostentation, for as much as there is no vice that shall arise
in this Art, but there is sufficient remedies for the same.

For as it has pleased God to give me an ability of mind, so has he also
given me some light how to pollish that excellent part: knowing that no man can
purge his soul from error (the dam of all diseased opinions) except he seek
to beautify it with such knowledge, as is conformeable to reason. And
therefore I have been always a vowed audersary to the opinionated vulgars,
who hold that felicity does consist in adorning the body with wealth, rather
then the soul with knowledge, and so do pamper the shadow, but starues the
substance. For thereby they are kept in slavery to their wills, being
continually environed with grief in getting, and care in keeping.

For as Aristotle says, he that delights in this world must needs fall into
one of these two griefs, either to lack that which he coueteth, or else to lose
that which he has gotten with great pain. Wherefore because wealth and
knowledge are both insatiable (although they be contraries) yet the one is
certain, and the other uncertain, I have continually desired that which is
the more certain and durable, and have less troubled my self to gather
wealth, being so inconstant and soon wasted, then knowledge it being as
permanent as the soul: for of it the more that a man does impart, the more it
does increase, (d) 1. Pr. 11. c.
but of the other the more that is bestowed, the more it does waste.

The consideration of which made Pithagoras to despise those riches which with
liberality are wasted and lost, and with sparing do rust and rot.

Wherefore (Gentlemen and Friends) seeing that the mind is the chiefest part of
the man, and the greatest glory that a man can receive in this world is to
enlighten it with knowledge, I have taken the more pains, to plant this
Vineyard of Horsemanship, and to dress and purge it from such weeds as may
hinder the young impes from flourishing therein, only for the good of my
Country, for the benefit of which I was only borne: For the which my hope
expects b^thing but thanks; wishing a better reformation in conceited
censurers (as concerning this noble Art of Horsemanship) then heretofore there
has been.

For it is a misery to see how pur-blinde the most be (who make opinion the
director of their actions) thinking this Art to be so easy that it needs
small instruction for the knowledge thereof. Whereby it comes to pass that
what Horses they make good is by chance, but what they spoil is of set
purpose: and yet their detraction ever haunteth desire, whosoever is notable in
any part thereof, him they mark with defamation, but in trial their felicity
being grounded (e) The four Cardinal virtues ought to be in every horseman.
Prudence. Theo. 1. s. and 5. a. Justice. Theo. 29. ^. Temporance. Theo. 29. d.
Fortitude. Theo. 9. d. and 22. b. (f) No Man can tell how to rule except he
has first learned to obey.
upon self conceit, their effects are as false as their hearts. But to let
them alone, frying on the gridiron of their searing conscience, whosoever does
desire to be an impe graffed in this Vineyard, and desires the title of that
generous quality, must strive to gain to himself those four Cardinal virtues
which are in every noble spirit. For he must have Prudence, to work discreetly
and orderly without confusion, ever examining his works by reason, and not by
his will. He must also have Justice to proportionate his helps and
corrections (equally) according to the Horses disposition. And likewise he
must have Temperance, to subdue and refell the rebellion of his will and
affections, when they shall be provoked thereto; And lastly, he must have
Fortitude, to conquer the unruliness of the Horses disobedience. Any of all
which if the man be defective (howsoever he may judge of himself) he is as
far from the truth thereof, as he is from drowning.

And though this Method may be thought more Ethnicall then Caualarie, in regard
it does treat more of reformation in the Man, then of teaching the Horse. Let
them know (if they rightly understand themselves) that it does derogate nothing
at all from this Art: for Man being a reasonable creature, is said to be a King
and ruler over a Horse (being unreasonable) and because no Man can rightly
rule, except he has first learned to obey; therefore he shall never truly
know how to command his Horse except he first learn how to command himself,
for what speculatiue knowledge soever a man has, if he has not an actual
government, it is but a shadow.

Wherefore (Gentle Reader) although in these my simple works thou shall find
me gross, unlearned, and barren of such lively graces, and gifts, as (indeed)
should be full fraughted in the brain and understanding of him that will
undertake to speak of such an excellent Art, for to content the most; I
therefore desire thee most heartily, favorably to bear with me, and my good
intended mind, and friendly to accept the ground of my earnest good will, in
regard I have done my best: for since there is none that has natural
conceptions, but they have also natural digressions; if there be some as
aforeshowne, that will maliciously deprave, defile, or spot, these my simple
doings, or corruptly extol the glory of their own excellency, through
dispraise or dispite of this that I have so rudely wrought. Yet I doubt not,
but there will be others that will accept, and further this my willing mind, in
publishing this my lives experience and practice, and so take it thankefully,
in regard it will be a general profit to the world, if the Theoricke be righly
understood, and the Practicke truly performed.

Farewell: M. B.

THE SECOND BOOK of the Vineyard of Horsemanship; Setting forth the Practicke
Part. Wherein is shown how to work according to the true understanding of his
Theoricke Knowledge.
CHAP. 1. How long Horses have been in use.
IT has been a question amongst some, (but whether necessary or no I cannot
say, let the truth demonstrate it) how long it is since Horses first came to be
in use: But since it is a thing of so small moment, or rather a question, in my
conceit very frivolous, I will not stand long thereupon. First, because it is
manifest they had their beginning from the beginning, (in as much as they are
Creatures:) for at the beginning God made the Heavens a Genesis 1. 1.
and the earth and all things therein, if he made all things therein, then he
made horses also, and so received their use, Theo. 1. ^.
for he made them and all other Creatures only for the use and service of man,
except they will say that nature made any thing superfluous, which were very
absurd to conceit. Nay it is a great probability that he made them more
especially for the present use, as very necessary for Man, in as much as he
created Theo. 2. ^.
them such famous Creatures, not only in strength but also in beauty, and
courage above all other sensitive Creatures.

And Secondly, if I should bestow much time to approve that which none or (at
the most) few do deny, I might be held very idle, to spend either paper or
time to confute that which so few oppugn against, except it be such curious
inquisitors as desire to show their fantastic brain more in inquiring how
long they have been in use, then they desire to get knowledge how to use them.

And lastly, because no man heretofore (that I ever read) speaking either of
this subject, or treating of any other matter) has certainly set down in
what manner they had their use, and so continued from the beginning. Therefore
in regard I will not errare a via, and so confound my self in such a
laborinth, I mind not to insist further here upon; but refer it to them
which are of greater reading of Histories, (especially because I intend not to
set down any thing for certain) but that which I know may be supported by
truth. And yet if they Which is the sacred word.
will not be heerewith contented, but will further object, that though they
were created at the beginning, they have not been so long in use, because there
has not been any mention of their use till this later Age of some few hundred
years. I answer, that is no proof that they were not in use before; for many
things have been in long use which have not had long narration: For I never
read where there is any mention made of war (in any place) until the time of
Abraham, (a little before the promise was made unto him*) when Chedor Laomer,
and three other Kings did war against the Kings of Sodom and Gomorha,
wherein Lot, Abrams brothers Son was taken Prisoner, which when Abram heard
he mustred up an host Gene. 14. (9) (12) (14) (19)
in his own Household, and redeemed him; for which Melchisede^h met and
blessed him: And yet no doubt but there was war used long before, although
not before then spoken of.

So in like manner horses, though there be not any thing recorded of them (so
ancient) yet it is to be supposed they have been longer in use then written
testimony does approve (by the great numbers of them that are every where
related:) for it is manifest that Pharoh pursued the Israelites with great
store Exodus 14. 23.
of Horses and Horsemen; And in the time of Joshua, when the Josh. 9. 4.
Kings of the promised land, came to war against the Israelites, it is said
that they came with Horses and Chariots exceeding many. From whence there is
great probability (by the multitude of them) that they were long in use before
that time, although there is no great specialty made of them. And again, in
Salomons time it is said that he had forty thousand stalles of 1. King. 4. 26.
Horses for his Chariots, and twelve thousand Horsemen, by which great numbers
also, it is to be presupposed that long before then both Horses and Horsemen
were in use; otherwise there could not have been found so many expert Horsemen
to have served such a King, (who had knowledge in all things above From the 30.
to the latter end of the Ch*
all men) if long time before then had not gained experience for the knowledge
of so noble an Art.

Wherefore to desist from spending any more time (for the proof of so plain a
case) I could wish that there were greater Favorites of this Art, and more true
Searchers into the true knowledge thereof, for seeing both Horses and Horsemen
Application.
are of such antiquity, it does serve to reprove our Age, (which has had the
benefit of all preter Ages since then) that there is so many now living,
(although they would be accounted Horse men,) that are so ignorant in this
Art, that they neither know what is the office and duty of a Horseman, nor can
tell what a well-going Horse is, nor the true cause from whence any contrariety
does arise in his Horse: For if they did, they would oftentimes be ashamed to
speak (if they did know themselves) when they think they speak wisely: And
so condemn themselves for thinking this Art so easy to be learned since it is
of so great antiquity, and yet is fraughted with so many errors, whereby such a
noble subject is so much disgraced, and such a famous Art so mightily defaced.

CHAP. 3. How to choose your Stallions and Mares.
IT has been an order observed of the most that have heretofore written of
this subject, to set forth the order of breedding, before they treat of the Art
of riding, which order I very ^ A Horse is the matter, and Man is the
instrument.
well allow, because there must be first matter to work on before any thing
can be effected. But because there has been such excellent observations set
forth, both for Stallions and Mares, by so many ancient and famous Writers,
whose opminions, are held very Authentical; therefore I will not spend much
time herein and especially in regard I intend not to set forth any thing to a
public view, but what experience has made probable; wishing them that are
desirous of deeper knowledge therein, to repair to Mr. Markhams works, whose
opinion does parallel the best that has formerly written both for breeding and
trayning them up from their foaling till they come to the use of the saddle.

Yet because I will not leau^ this point altogether naked and untouched, (in
regard this book may come into their hands who have not his) I will briefly
set down my opinion, as an apren^h^sis of their Judgments; craving leave to
set forth my observations and experience as well as they their collections, ^
Not any Art has its perfection.
since no man as yet could write of any Art so perfectly, which has not had
some digressions.

Wherefore whosoever would have a Stallion to breed by, (in hope to reap the
fruit of his desires* for any part of this noble Art of Horsemanship) I hold
that the Barbarian and the Turkey ^ra^lions are the best of all other for
general uses, because ^ The Barbarian and Turkey Hor^e is the best for breed.
I have found in these two kinds such perfect Horses, both for service,
swiftness and proud going, as well for pleasing pace as gallant trot, (with
shape and color) that they have combust all other horses of what race soever,
which have appeared in the presence of their radical splendour, although it is
holden that the Spanish Iennet, the Irish hobby, and Arabian Couser is held
both by Master Blundeuill, and Master Markham, to be the chief for pacing:
And the next unto them is the d A Bastard Stallion is very good.
bastard Stallion, begotten by one of them, on our English Mares, which does
exceed either of them in toughness, by reason of the apt composition of the
purity of their substance, in respect of their hot clime, and the humidity of
our more temperate zone. Which my assertion the Lord of Northumberland, (for a
pure Turk) can approve the one: and that Noble and famous Knight Sir Anthony
Mildmay both for pure and Bastard Barbaries, can witness the other, for
strength, courage, beauty, and touchnesse: out of which race I had rather have
a Horse for the effecting of any part of Horsemanship, either upon pawn of my
life or reputation, then of any other in this Kingdom, having had such full
experience of them.

Now when you have gotten a Stallion of some of these races, and would have
Mares also to cohere with them for to bring the perfectest Colts, let them be
of our ^nglish breed, because they will add a more firm knitting of all the
parts of the colts, but yet there ought to be a care that their shape should be
as near to the true shape as is possible, because it is both the most
beautiful, and also the nearest by all probability, to the primary (e) Theo.
33. p.
creation, to the restitution whereof all Arts were invented. Which should be
of stature somewhat large but not very high, a small Head, full Eye, wide
Nostrell, a prick Ear though somewhat Long, a firm and thin Crest, with a
long and straight Neck, being well compast in the cragge at the setting on of
(f) Theo. 37. d.
the Head, a broad Breast, deep Chested, a round Back, being Barrell-Ribde,
and the short ribs shut up somewhat close to the Hucklebone, the Buttocke
somewhat long so it be proportionable, a flat Leg, and straight Foot, and a
hollow Hoof, to which proportion, both for Sallions and Mares, when you have
obtained, you may resolve your self that you have the perfection of nature,
and then if in proof you fail of your expectation, there is no fault in
nature, but in the abuse.

CHAP. 4. Of the courage of the Stallions and Mares.
But as for the courage of the Stallion, if I shall any deal dissent in my
judgment from the opinion of others, do not utterly condemn me, but weigh
the differences, and then I hope my opinion will be held the more tolerable
with some; for where as it is holden that those horses which will be contained
either within payle, rail, or quickset, especially if he have any prospect,
are not sit for Stallions, because they are not held to be of any great
courage, or gentle and good disposition, but are reputed to be of a fearful,
and heavy weak nature: which position I cannot hold good, although set down
by one whom I much reu^rence. First, in regard of the great danger (1) ^ What
danger such Horses are in.
they are in for sticking or laming through their unruliness. And secondly, it
is not altogether a necessity of nature, for it does not frame every
indiuiduum, either in the extreme of freeness, (2) An instance.
or dullness, but some are composed in the mean difference, or temperance, as
for example, in colors, it is not upon necessity that there must be either
white or black, since there may be either blew or green or such like.

And lastly, it is not consonant to reason, for it does teach that (3) b The
mean is the best. Theo. 28. g. c The best bred horses are soonest spoiled for
want of knowledge. Theo. 37. l
the mean in all things is the best: therefore those Stallions which are of
such a feirce spirit, and hot disposition are worse to breed upon then a more
temperate nature, because those Colts that are so bred are more of them
spoiled, (for want of knowledge in the Art) then those which are held more
dull, they requiring greater judgment to bring them to a gentle command of
riding, which thing gross ignorance does make too apparent, for where one of
those Horses is brought to his perfection there is twenty that are either
spoiled, or at the least a great deal of their beauty and valor darkened. And
again, if they be of such a dogged and cruel disposition that they will bite
or strike, ^ A Stallion of a dogged disposition is not the best to breed on
being of such a high spirit, they are not to be so much commended for
Stallions, although in courage they be exalted in the Suparlatiue degree,
because of the great danger that may happen to a man by a horse of such an
evil disposition, in regard a man's life is to be held far more precious then
the delight of many horses. And therefore I commend the Barbary, and the Turk
above all other; because they are for the most part of a mild and gentle
disposition, and of a mean temperature, being refined by a porportionate heat
of the Sun to their f A Horse is naturally hot.
nature, which makes them of a good courage, and apt to be brought to any
reasonable obedience, if the man has knowledge in this Art, to join it to
nature.

But if it be so, that you cannot get a Stallion of such a temperate
disposition, as you desire, as for the most part it happens, for want of true
observation in former races: then for the better knowledge how you may bring
your race of Colts to a mean courage which is the best: you must observe, that
if your g How to have your Colts of a mean temperature.
Stallion be of a high spirit, and fierce, then to choose your Mares, so near
as you can, of the shape aforesaid, but yet of a more mild and soft
disposition, but if he be more sober and not so full of spirit as you desire,
then have a greater care that your Mares may be of a more free and quick
disposition: (g) A simile. Theo. 33. h.
for as poison of it self if it be not delayed will cause a confusion of the
substance, but if infused with other simples of contrary quality, it is made
restoratiue: Even so, if both the indiuiduums be hot and fiery, the Species
must needs according to reason be more fierce, for if two fires be added
together, they will h The Signs and Planets have operation in all sublunary
bodies. 1. Pr. 5. ^.
cause the greater heat: But if the one be of one excess, and the other of
another, then it is likely the Species will participate the nearer to the
mean: whereby you shall receive your hopeful expectation, if it be not
intercepted by the several Aspects of the Signs and Planets, which have a
continual operation in all sublunary bodies at the time of their begetting by
the 1. Cor. 3. 9.
providence of God, and is the secondary cause of the several diversities of
every indiuiduum, and therefore, Though Paul plant and Apollo water, yet it is
God that must give the increase. (h) 1. Pra. 13. ^ Theo. 37. ^
For although breeding by Art may help something toward the primary creation,
yet it can never make it perfect, both for want of strength of the earth (it
waxing old) and also through notious Aspects of the superior Orbs appointed of
God to work Fatal ends to all living creatures, for a punishment of man's
disobedience.

CHAP. 5. Of the color of the Stallions and Mares.
NOw because there is and has been so much diversity of opinions touching the
colors and marks of Horses, some commending one color and some another, as
characters whereby the goodness of a Horse may be known: some affirming that
the cause thereof proceeds from the complexions, other some from the Elements,
and so are wedded to a traditionall opinion, still desiring to retain the
first liquor their knowledge a Tradition is an enemy to knowledge. Theo. 38. e
was seasoned withal, esteeming those Horses which are either Brown,
Daple-Bayes, Daple-grayes, White-lyards or Iet-blackes, having their whites,
are holden the best Horses, and so have a strong implication of the goodness
of the Horse by his color.

And again, others seeing the former so drowned in the Whirle-poole of this
erroneous conceit, fearing least they should be overthrown with the same
waves, have split themselves upon the rock, holding that the color and marks
of a Horse are of no greater note to judge of his goodness, then to M. Morgan.
judge the goodness of a man by the wearing a Fether in his Hat, and so would
make natural colors of no greater eminency then those that may be taken and
left ad placitum, at a Man's own pleasure.

Wherefore for the unfolding of these ambiguities, and diverse opinions, give
me leave (gentle Reader) to set down my opinion, which I have collected by
experience, for the enlightening b The Horses color is to be respected as
indifferent.
of the minds of them which desire the knowledge of the truth. For although
the horses color does not absolutely give testimony unto us of his goodness,
yet I say that it does intimate unto us his disposition (in some part) as well
as his shape does: For nature having no defect, (God being the Author thereof
by his providence,) it does frame every part of the Metap.
same matter, whereof the whole is formed: and therefore the Colt being formed
of the copulative seed of its Sire and Dam, receives the same quality (so
far as reason can teach,) of the food that they did eat which did produce
the seed, wherefore e How the hair does demonstrate the horses quality.
the hair being an excrement, does receive color of that quality also,
participating of the same subject, and does demonstrate partly the disposition
of the Horse, as the leaves of a tree does the nature of it, they being also
its excrements.

For upon this I dare pawn my credit, if you have a Colt, either Bay, Black,
Dark or Iron-gray, Glead-hued-gray, or Sorrel, if they have no whites
(especially in their forehead) one may boldly say that Horse to be of a dogged
and sullen disposition, and the rather if he have a small pincke eye, and a
narrow face, with his nose bending like a hawks bill. But yet I will d There
are horses good of all colors.
not say that all those Horses which are of the best reputed colors, do prove
the best, because I have seen to the contrary, for some Horses which have
been of such colors as have been accoumpted the worst, as bright Sorrel, and
Mouse-blacke, with Bald faces, and all the legs White above the knee, that
have made Iades of the other. But I iugde the cause hereof does rather arise
from the ignorance of the Rider, then from any imbecility of nature, for nature
is no counterfeiter, to gild a leaden cup with gold or to make a thing to show
to the eye any other then it is indeed.

And therefore as I would not wish that men should be too e The judgment by
color is not utterly to be rejected.
confident in colors, so I would not they should esteem them so lightly, as
that they should hold them of no greater validity then a fether in a man's hat,
for that is a thing inherent to nature for them to have hair growing, because
it is all the Garments that Nature has given them to keep them warm: and if
it be taken away it will grow again, but a Fether may be put to, or taken from
a man's Hat, at his pleasure.

And as it seems to keep them warm, it does set forth the beauty of the
horse, and does (in some sort) demonstrate his disposition, for as the Schools
hold, Omnis rei pars, eandem naturam cum toto participat: Every part of the
thing does participate of the same nature with the whole: But howsoever the
color may be changed either by the Sun or the Air, that is but an exterior
accident, but the marks which they have at their first foaling, is to be of
more account then a feather in a ^ For a Feather may be taken away or put to
at pleasure.
man's hat, both for the special observation of Natures works, and also for the
more beautifying of so famous a Creature: For although it cannot simply and
absolutely demonstrate (as the root of the horses quality) because it has a
more obscure beginning from the first qualities, yet as the Metaphisicks define
Metaph. de col^ribus.
it, Color est splendour corporis, lumine illustrati, color is a splendour or
light of the body to garnish or beautify it.

And here in is the favor and mercy of God shown to man, that he does not
only give us things for necessity, but even for delight also; for he sends
things as well to please the sense as for use.

Therefore, seeing Man is so much subject to serve his eye, the dapple gray,
the white Liard, having a black Mussell, black (f) Theo. 37. p
eyelids, and the inside of his ears black, the dapple bay, the Iet black,
and a perfect Chestnut, having his mane and tail flaxen, if they have their
whites in their foreheads, white snips and white feet answerable, with a true
proportion, they give as great content to the beholders as can be wished; for
such ^ A beautiful Horse is as delightful as any unreasonable Creature.
a horse which has one of these colors and an equal shape, is as delightful
an object (for an irrational Creature) as Man can behold, and as perfect as
Nature can work; and consequently, if such a horse prove bad, I dare say the
cause does not proceed from him but from the man.

Furthermore, whether the causes of such variety of colors in horses do
proceed first from the elements, and so from the complections, I make a doubt:
Although it is holden that every horse does receive his complexion according
to the nature of that Element which is most predominate in him, and also his
color according to his complexion; upon which I will not insist but slight
it over with a swift foot.

First, because it is a rock too hard for me to penetrate, there being such
diversities of opinions, that the discussing thereof, would rather require a
whole volume, then a part of a Chapter. Secondly, because the approbation
thereof does not appertain to this Treatise, therefore I refer it to those
Arts to which it does appertain. And lastly, seeing there are said to be but
four Elements, and so successively four complections, (from h The reason why
it is doubtful whether the cause of colors proceed from the Elements. Theo.
18. ^.
which all colors and dispositions are said to proceed) yet there are so many
several diversities of these, that if all the Artists in the world should
proportionate the least excessive quality in every particular element (
gradatim) one in another; yet they could not prescribe so many dispositions as
there are Horses, in proportion, as one to a thousand, because there is no two
but there is a dissimilitude betwixt them.

But because I would not seem to make my doubt upon a preiudicated opinion
without reason, I will only touch the two excess colors, which do not
consist of any other, and the Metaphisicks 1 White and black are said to be
the essence of the other colors.
opinion for the cause of them: Now they do define white thus; Albedo est
color simplex in corpore teniore, multa luminositate constans: Whiteness is a
simple color consisting in a thinner body with much light. But whiteness is
also found in a body of more density, as in Marble, and therefore that cannot
be a true definition. And again, they define black thus; Nigredo autem est
color in corpore crassiore, exiguae luminositatis particeps: But blacknes is a
color participating in a more thick body of a smaller light.

Now there being words of the comparatiue degree used in both, the definitions
cannot stand with the Logical proposition of the essence, for it is the nature
of the essence not to admit more or less, but here it is said more of the
light to be in k A simple color cannot be without an Essence.
whitenes, as though that light should participate with the genus more then
other colors: and likewise less of the light to be in blacknes, which if it
be, the light is more proper to the color, then the quality the which the
genus does constitute to the colors. For the genus is communicated equally to
all the species, otherwise blackenes were a less color then whitenes; ( huc
vsque Doct. Bright.)

And again, this have I found by experience, that although black and white be
opposite in sight, yet those horses which are so colored are not so in
quality; for I have seen two horses, the one white and the other black, and
yet they have joined l Two Horses of contrary colors may be of equal
goodness.
so like in goodness, as it was hard to judge which were the better, which
could not be if the cause did proceed from the contrariety of the Elements,
for, then they would work a contrary effect. And where it is aforesaid shown
that black Theo. 28. l. m Contrary causes produce contrary effects.
is of a more thick substance, if one should go to the difference of Climes,
and so to the complexion of men in those Climes, I cannot see how it should be
of any such density: for the Ethiopians are all black, and yet they are ayrier
then we that are more white, by reason of the adustion of their bodies, the
moisture thereof being exhald by the heat of the reuerberation of the
Sunnebeames. And Staeflerus does affirm that the Staeflerus.
Moors living in the torrid Zone about the equinoctial, are more agility but
of less permanancy, then we, and their wives do bring forth more speedily,
and with more facility then our Women d^e, and all is through the rarity of
their bodies.

Wherefore to conclude this point, not insisting any further herein, having
prosecuted it further then I did intend: I cannot hold but that the colors of
Horses are of greater esteem then a feather in a man's hat, neither that the
cause of their diversity does proceed either from the Elements or complections,
but (as I have said) partly from the nature of the seed of generation, but
especially from the continual mutability of the Signs and Planets, every one
of them having such differing 1. Pr. 8. d.
motions (by force of the prim^m mobile) that not any two times they equally
agree in all aspects and places, but they vary ^ The chief cause of difference
is from the continual mutability of the Heavens revolution. 1. Pr. 4. h.
either in their houses, triplicities, terms, faces, exaltations,
retrogradations by combustion, or aspect of one beneuolent Planet with a
maleuolent, meeting in some disaster house: or by a maleuolent aspect of two
beneuolent Planets, and many such like, (too tedious to rehearse) any of which
does hinder Natures works, they being the chief Governors of all sublunary
bodies; and therefore although Man may endeavor by Art of breeding to help
some reasonable restitution, yet the effect must be referred to Gods secret
will, because no Man can tell the time when any Mare shall conceive.

CHAP. 6. At what years Horses and Mares are aptest for generation.
THere is nothing that does more captiuate or make men a Custom the Nurse of
opinionated errors. Theo. 10. ^.
servile to the yoke of ignorance, then Custom, the Nurse and damme of all
opinionated errors: For Time, which is both the increaser and diminisher of all
things (humane,) has made our understanding so blind and impotent in this
part also, through the deceivable opinions, and erroneous practice of former
times (whereby they are swallowed so deep and diued so far in the maine Sea
of traditions,) that our old iron Age is not sufficient to plunge them out of
that gulf of ignorance, to keep them from drowning therein; for the most
going like blind men, never going any way but as they are led, suffer
themselves to be led by that deceivable conceit, till they be swallowed up so
deep in the river of differences, that they are never able to find the truth
by any rule of reason: And so they resemble sheep which desire to feed upon
the green downs till they get the rot.

For although they are desirous to have comely Stallions and b Many desire old
Horses to breed upon.
Mares to breed upon, yet they deceive themselves in their age, for the
maintenance of that courage and comlines that should be in the species; in that
they do not rightly consider Natures works nor the cause thereof: For it is
so commonly frequented, (even as a custom) that the Horse which they desire to
breed by, must be an old horse, so that when he is past any other use, (by
reason of weakness and decrepit old age) then he is good enough to breed
upon; as though weak and Note.
feeble age, (which has not lust and strength to preserve it* self) had
sufficient nature to beget another more strong and lusty.

But for the reforming of which traditionall error, to the good of the future
age of my Country, whose happiness I and every one is bound to preserve: I
have endeavored my self (so much as in me lies to purge the truth from the
dregs of this imperfection.

Wherefore they are desirous to join the Art of breeding with Nature, in such
sort as they would receive the Period of their wishes, in the superlatiue
degree; I hold Mr. Morgan his opinion, that whosoever will lay a sure
foundation to build high upon this subject, he must look back to the first
Creation if he desire a restitution to that perfection: For when God had
created all things* and gave them that blessing to increase and c God gave the
power of begetting to all Creatures in their best perfection.
multiply, it was in their greatest and highest degree of their perfection and
strength, and not in their imperfection; for else Nature might seem to be
imperfect, in not producing such natural effects, as might preserve that
necessary good for the ends they were ordained.

But because heat and moisture are the only isntrumental means, whereby all
the faculties of any genus are maintained in their greatest strength, there
must be an equal commixture in the same: Therefore neither a Colt that is not
come to his perfection of strength, nor an old horse that is declining and past
the same, are fittest to breed upon, nor likewise Mares when they are in either
of the said excesses. For a Colt that is d A young Colt is not fit to beget and
why.
but in his increasing and growing faculty, being but the vegetative part, his
seed is not apt for generation, he being not come to his material perfection
and strength; for by reason of the excessive moisture that is in him for want
of years his seed cannot be of a perfect temperature for generation, because
all perfect seed for procreation must be hot and dry, and plenty thereof full
concocted, to temper the coldness, and moisture of the seed of the Mare.

And likewise, if the Mare be young also, her seed will be the more cold and
moist, especially it not being full concocted by the strength of Nature, by
reason her seed in the highest perfection is cold and moist, and so it must
necessarily follow, that those Colts so begotten must for the most part prove
Fillies, or if they be Colt Foales, yet they will be much fleshy ioynted, great
limmed, thick Boned, Heavy, and Dull, according to the natural operation of
cold and moisture, whose property is to conioyne and knit into a Massy lump
without proportion.

And again, if a Colt should be begotten of an old Horse e An old Horse is not
good to breed on and why.
and an old Mare, in regard they want the power and efficacy of their natural
heat vigor and spirit, he will be over cold and dry. through the predominancy
of coldness and dryness, that does reign in them; and then that Colt that is
so begotten will be as the common proverb is, soon ripe, soon rotten, of
little Strength, short lived, of small spirit and courage, and of a badde
shape, for that it wants that heat and perfect moisture (I mean an oylye
substance,) which are the chief preseruers of life and good spirit. And so the
like (by proportion) may be applied to an old Horse and a young Mare, and also
to a young Horse and an old Mare, by reason that the like causes do always
produce the like effects.

Wherefore the Middle age of them both, I mean from six f Horses and Mares of
the middle age are best to breed upon.
years till twelve, or if it be fourteen it is not much amiss in such
Horses as are of a more hot spirity disposition; is the best to breed upon,
they being of equal temperatures. For the Horse being of middle age, and in
his best lust: has his seed hot and dry; and the Mare being in like manner,
has her seed cold and moist having plenty on both parts, and that in the
greatest perfection of heat and natural strength of body, do make a
temperature of such a high degree of perfection, that the Colt will be full of
vital spirit, of high courage and pride, thin and dry bones, great sinnewes
and arteries, and of such a most beautiful and perfect shape, (through the
natural quality of heat, which does refine the whole body from dross in such
manner, as if Art and Nature did strive for supremacy in their works.

But to make this more plain by a simily; As the light of a g A simile of a
Lamp. 1. Pra. 8. b.
candle is maintained by heat and moisture, if there be a true proportion
betwixt the substance of the weike, and the quantity of tallow or oily
substance, the splendour or light is the more perfect and durable; but if either
of them be more predominate or tending to either excess of too much or too
little, that is, if the weike be so big as there is not moisture enough to
qualify the heat thereof, the light will be very violent for the time, but it
will be soon spent: or likewise if the oil or Moisture be more then the
strength of the fire can dry, through the smalnesse of the weike, then is the
light so very small and imbecile, that it gives a very weak light and is
always in going out.

Even so, a Colt if the seed whereof he is framed be of a perfect
temperature, both in heat and moisture, his actions will h Application to the
seed.
be of great splendour, delight and very permanent, but if either of the two
qualities be predominate, then will he either be too prodigal and free, and so
soon decay himself, or else so slow and weak that it will much darken his
glory.

But yet that the cause of these two qualities does proceed 1. Pr. 8. c and d.
^ The Sun is the cause of all vital heat, and the Moon the cause of the
moisture.
from the elements, I dare not say: for the cause of the heat does proceed
from the Sun, it causing a heat in all Sublunary bodies, which is the vital
part: and the moystnesse from the Moon by reason of her humidity, and so it is
the vigetatiue part: for although we live in the air yet we are composed of
the elements, for as a child is nourished in the womb, but yet not made of the
womb, so are we nourished by the air but not made of it.

CHAP. 7. How the Stallion and Mare should be kept with food for the increase
of good seed.
THe next thing that is to be observed for helping to reduce breeding to his
highest perfection, so far as the knowledge of Man can comprehend, is, to have
a care that the Horse and Mare do feed upon such food as will engender the
perfectest seed. For as the vigetatiue part of the indiuiduum is preserved by
the food it does receive, so is the sensitive part made more pure, or gross
according as the norishment thereof has his natural operation: and therefore
such as the natural quality of a Such as the quality of food is such, as the
seed that is increased thereby Theo. 37. b
meat is in operation: such will be the natural quality of the powers of seed
for generation: for perfect and good meat does produce perfect and good blood,
and it brings forth perfect and good seed: for after the meat is concocted
every part thereof is dispersed into the several parts of the body, to
maintain the whole: But the chiefest part is converted into blood, and being
infused into the vital parts, it does reside into the liver, as the store
house thereof, from whence there is conveyed by two veins into the two coddes
they being the vessels of seed, a certain white thick substance, there
residing with a quantity of the purest blood, which by the operation of the
stones is made a perfect seed, fit for procreation. And so that part of seed
which is hot and dry (as the Physicians hold) goes to the right codde, which
does beget the male: and that which is cold and moist to the left which does
beget the female. And the like is to be observed in the Female, but more cold
and moist, by reason of that humidity that does reside in them, to nourish the
vigetatiue part of the Colt in the womb.

Wherefore seeing that the cause of good and bad, hot and The proof of the
former assertion.
cold seed, does first proceed from the meat that the Horse and the Mare do
eat; and that the seed has the same quality of heat and cold, as the food
has whereby they are nourished; and that the Colt does partake of the same
temperature the seed is on; therefore it is behouefull that there should be a
greater care had then has been heretofore of the food on which they shall
feed, that it may be of such quality as will produce a Colt of the best
perfection.

But herein also has our Stepdam ignorance luld many a long time, in the
cradell of accustomed error, whereby they are fallen into such a dead sleep of
conceit, that it is as hard for a Man to awake them, as to raise Lazarus out of
his Grave being four days stinking. For it is a thing generally holden (but
yet Note a mere delusion.
as evil as general;) that whenever they would have their Horse to serve
their Mares, it is meet that the Horse should be put either to Soil, or to
Grass as the Mare is, or else it is not possible that the Ma^e should hold.
Which opinion is also as false as it is common* for I my self have had, and
also have known others to have had, Mares covered with Horses that have been
in strict diet for a match* and yet have holden and brought forth Foales of
sufficient perfection, but yet I hold that the goodness of the Colt was much
abated by reason of the contrary quality of the seed of the Mare, which did
extenuate the strength of the operation of the Horses seed, she being at
grass.

Now if there be such an imbecility in natures works that she cannot show her
force, being let but in part, what defect will there be in that Colt which
is formed of that seed, which b Grass is no good food for increasing good
seed. 1. Pr. 9. a.
is concocted (from them both) of raw and cold food, such as grass is: there
is no man if he have any understanding, but he will confess that Colt must
needs be of that raw, cold, and moist quality, according to the natural
quality of the food, whereby they will be of a gross and fleshy disposition,
and of a dull and heavy spirit.

Therefore for the preventing of these and many more inconveniences (too long
to rehearse) and that they desire to bring their race to the best perfection:
let them observe to feed both their Horse and Mare, with such food as shall
be both hot and dry, according to the true nature of a Horse, because (as has
been said) the Colt does participate of the same quality and temperature of
the food: and because if they both feed of one and the self-same meat, there
will increase an uniform seed without contrariety. For the effecting whereof I
would wish them that carry such a noble and generous mind, as to reedifie the
decayed building of this famous subject; and to exalt him c Good natural
feeding and moderate exercise purifieth the blood and so the seed.
again to the Superlatiue degree, to keep their Horse and Mare in as strict
diet as is used for a match, letting them have moderate exercise, which will
further digestion, and exhale moisture from the seed, and also cause a pure
and delicate brain, and make them both full of lust and courage, and likewise
such good feeding does refine the vegetative part in perfecting the blood, and
composeth a most dainty and good seed, whereby the Colt will be most beautiful
and excellent, and of a high and full spirit. And therefore let their meat be
old sweet hay, well cleansed from dust, and their prouender old clean d What
meat they should eat to cause good blood.
and sweet oats, well mingled with old beans, giving them such reasonable
store as they shall not be forced (through hunger) to feed too much upon hay,
and if their prouender be often washed with strong Ale it will give the beter
courage.

And let their bread be made of four peckes of wheat, and as many beans well
ground, refining them through a meal sieue and very light with barme, for the
lighter it is the sooner it 2. Pr. 22. x
will be digested, and so turn better blood: or if that be held too costly,
then to six pecks of beans, put but two pecks of ^ Wheat is a comforter of the
heart.
wheat, and it will not be much amiss, but yet the more wheat the better,
because it is hot and dry, and so a great comforter of the heart and vital
parts: But whereas Mr. Morgan does wish that the bread should be baked (with
the bran) as it comes from the Mill* I am of a contrary mind, because branne
is void of good nourishment, and does scald the stomach (it being extreme hot
and dry) and so does inflame the blood, which f Branne does inflame.
will be an utter enemy to the designs of this project; for the inflammation of
the blood does corrupt the seed.

Furthermore, for their let it be a fair running spring, or else a clear
standing ponde water (where the other is not to be had,) but let them fetch it
evening and morning a g Of their water and their using therein. 2. Prac. 10. ^
mile or two, for their exercise, observing to warm them a little after their
water, not suffering them to drink their fill at the first, but after they
have taken their first draught, gallop them a little to warm it, and then let
them drink again, and after that gallop them as you did before, never letting
them depart till they will drink no more, and so by this order you shall free
the stomach from such raw crudities, as the coldness of the water would
incite, (if they did drink their fill at the first) and further, in letting
them have their fill it will keep their bodies from drying too fast, because
Nature it self is the best director for the expelling of her enemies,
especially in these creatures, where she can command the apetite.

But whereas Mr. Morgan does wish to put wine into their 2. Pra. 22. h Wine is
no natural drink for a Horse.
water, to qualify the heat thereof, I hold it not proper feeding for a horse
in regard they naturally desire to drink water, and when a horse is in perfect
state of body, as it is to be supposed these must be, nature does awayes
desire that which will preserve 1. Pra. 12. ^. Theo. 37. n. 1. Pra. 8. g.
it, and to fly from that which will hurt it, in that every thing is maintained
by the like, and destroyed by the contrary; and so their own natural heat for
warming their water is better then that which proceeds from any other.

Now when you have brought them home, either from their water, or any other
exercise, (as occasion shall be offered) let them be had presently into the
stable, (it being made clean 1 How to use them after they come from their
water.
and sweet) and rub them clean and dry, letting them be round stopped with great
waddes of straw, and good store of litter under them to keep them warm, that
they cool no faster then nature is able to expel such gross humors, as
otherwise would (n)
congeale by cooling faster then the blood can have its natural course to
nourish all the parts of the body, which is the cause of 2. Pr. 10. ^.
all sickness and diseases. Which done, let them stand upon the snaffle an
hour or more, (till they be through coold,) without any meat except a little
hay in the rack to chaw upon; for 1. Pra. 9. a k Cooling too fast or eating too
hot, will corrupt the blood.
if you should give them meat before they be through cold, it will concoct
sooner then nature does desire by reason of the exterior heat which was
provoked by labor, and so will inflame the natural heat, which is the cause
of imperfect digestion.

Then when they are cold, let their bridles be drawn, and their bodies and
legs well chafed and rubd, letting them have such a quantity of bread or
other prouender, as (in your Theo. 18. f.
discretion) you find their apetite to serve; but seeing no certain thing can
limit an uncertain, therefore no man can describe such a certain quantity of
meat as shall satisfy the appetite of every horse. And herein I differ again
from Mr. Morgan who does wish that there should be a spare diet both in meat
and water, for the perfecting of digestion, and refining the seed. And my
reason is, they being only sensitive, their appetite is served according to the
plenosity of the receptacle parts: For when they have received, or eaten so
much as nature cay digest into good nutriment; then if a man would knock A
reason. l A horse will eat no more after nature be satisfied. 1. Pr. 10. a.
them in the head he can neither cause them to eat one bit or drink one sup
more. And herein they are far more temperate then Man, for they feeding
their appetite sensitiuely (they being sensitive Creatures) cannot consult with
themselves, to draw on their appetite by expostulating of the goodness or
rareness of the meat: But they only feed their stomach for the present, and
do eat so much as is sufficient, never regarding what they shall eat the next,
neither for the goodness not quantity.

Now therefore in regard Nature is the best director, what quantity will best
satisfy their appetite, I think it best to let them be their own caruers;
for if they be restrained and have not enough, then it will be a means
indeed for them to cloy their stomachs with feeding, (if at any time they may
have it) according to the old Proverb, two hungry meals will make m Nature
abhors emptiness.
the third a glutton: Or else if they be continually kept with a spare diet,
then nature not being sufficiently satisfied, there will be neither such store
of good blood, nor such abundance of seed as otherwise there would, and then
if there be a defect in the material substance, the formal cannot be perfect.
And again, if there be want of food the stomach will be empty, and then
(seeing nature abhors emptiness) what should supply 1. Pr. 12. a
that want but moist air, (whose nature is to penetrate into all places of
vacuity, by reason of its tenuity) which will much hinder concoction (through
the moistness thereof) for that nature cannot turn that food which was
received into such perfect blood as otherwise it would, if there were the whole
heat and strength of nature.

And as for surfets and diseases, they do not come (to these 1. Pr. 14. b. n
Surfets do not altogether proceed from full feeding. 1. Pr. 15. k. (i) Spare
diet is Physical. 1. Pr. 12. b.
Creatures) by fullness of feeding, but by the abuse in either of the excesses,
of too much or two little exercise, from whence comes inflammation of the
blood, or else by a negligent care after labor, which causes an obstruction
of blood, by too fast cooling. For the which causes spare diet is to be used to
refell such corrupt and gross humors as does destroy nature, (it being
medicinal) and therefore it cannot be good for a perfect strong body, for to
it medicines does weaken nature.

But to conclude, having kept them in such sort as I have said, for some twelve
or fourteen days (for by that time their blood and seed will be sufficiently
purged from gross humors,) you may then put them together for generation,
referring the end of your proceeding to Gods good blessing. But this I would
have you to observe, that you do not labor either of them for three days (at
the least) before you put them together, more then the fetching of their water,
least it cause too hasty Note.
digestion, by causing a greater heat, then nature would effect for concoction,
for when the state of the body is perfect, then the natural heat does work
the best temperature both so blood and seed, during which time let them be fed
very well' for thereby they will be very lusty, and have great plenty of seed,
so that they will perform the action with such lust and courage, that the Colt
will be of such perfection, as you shall think your charges and pains
sufficiently satisfied.

CHAP. 8. When to put your Horse and Mare together for generation.
AFter that you have brought your Horse and Mare to such perfect state of body,
that their seed is in perfect temperature, then you may put them together to
copulate: but likewise the time of the year is to be respected, for the
effecting of perfect generation. Of the which project since so many in former
ages have set forth their imitated opinions, which have carried the most away
with a successiue authority, I crave pardon, least my differing judgment shall
be read with scurrillity, for my bold attempt, in regard I set down nothing
as carried away with authority, but only that which reason and experience has
made probable.

Now the ancients have holden it as a maxim, that there is no time of the
year fit for to have their Mares covered in, but a The ancients opinion of the
Vernall months.
only the Vernall Months, as March, April, and May, because as they say, in
those Months the blood which is the Principal humor does then reign: and so
fittest for generation through that abundance of blood, which causes them to
have the greatest desire for copulation, for authority of which their
assertion, they bring instance from the earth, which at that time only does
bring forth its blossoms and fruits: And again, they bring forth the ancients
of former times, and many other instances, which I omit to rehearse, because to
answer to them all would be tedious to the reader, and so discourage the young
practitioners with too many ambiguities, and confuse their memory with too many
degressions, and therefore so briefly as I can I will touch these as the chief
heads.

And first, whereas they say that those three Months are the aptest to beget,
because of the abundance of blood that b Why these three months are not the
best
does then predominate: I conclude my answer with Master Morgan, that where
there is any predominate excess there is not a perfect and sound body, and
therefore not fit for generation, for any intemperate excess is the cause of
sickness, and so not to be admitted in those indiuiduums which should beget
and bring forth, for if the blood does exceed in heat, as it must needs if it
abound, then it will soon consume and dry up the radical moisture, and so
destroy himself, as my former instance of a Lamp or Candle does approve, and
therefore (b) 1 Pra. 6. g
perfect generation is not to be referred so much unto any particular time, as
to the perfect temperature of the body, whereby is made pure seed.

And secondly, whereas they bring a strong implication thereof from the Earth,
because it does bring forth its blossoms, and This implication cannot stand
good.
fruits at that time of the year only; it does not follow, that Mares
therefore should be covered at that time only, and not else; for by that
application, that time is best to cover Mares, in The reason.
which they may quicken at the spring, and bring forth at Michaelmas, as the
earth does her fruits, for though fruit does then form yet is it not then at
perfection, till it has the benefit of the Summer to be ripened with the heat
of the Sun. And further, if there were an apt resemblance to the Earth, then
those Mares which were about the Equinoctial should bring forth twice in one
year, as the Earth does yield her fruits, they having The second reason.
two springs, and two Summers, (the Sun making his course twice over their
heads in one year) which to grant were very gross, seeing a Mare goes twelve
Months, after she conceive before she bring forth. And again, although the
Earth retain her Vigetatiue virtue, which is the sap yet by reason The third
reason.
of the Winters cold, it is so imprisoned within her, that it cannot come forth
till it receive a nourishing heat from the Sun: 1 Pra. 6. i. c A proof that
all vigetatiue things have their nourishment from the Sun.
which in Winter it cannot, not that it is further distant from us at that
time, then it is in Summer (as many suppose) because in a circle every part of
the circumference is equally distant from from the Center, but in regard the
Sun is not hot of it self, but by coaction (as the Philosophers hold) and so
when the Sun is in our winter solstice, he sending his beams Diamiterly,
that is, by a straight line they glance into the air without any strong
reflection, and so does yield small comfortable heat; but as it rises higher
so his beams descend more perpendicular, which more and more does reuerberate
upon the Earth, whereby the superficies is comforted, and so the inward
natural heat of the Earth does join with that heat; which is the cause that
the Earth does bud forth her blossoms, and fruits at that time more then
another. But a Mare though she does not receive the like comfortable heat in
Winter as in Summer, no more then the Earth, yet by reason of that natural
heat, which remains in her, she does nourish, and bring forth (in Winter, as
well as in Summer) according to the determinate time of her conceiving.
Wherefore seeing God has given them such natural faculties, as to beget and
bring forth a There was no time limited for procreation at the beginning.
at all times of the year: I think it mere simpleness, being carried away
with the ayrye force of Antiquity, to prescribe that to a particular, where
there is a general power, for when God said increase and multiply, he gave no
limitation of time, for else nature could not exceed those limits.

And again, they have set down times in those Months, as the full of the
Moon, to be the best for action, because that Of the time of the Moon.
then the Mare has great store of menstruall blood for composition of the
Colt, and then is the greatest store of blood in them both; But here Master
Morgan may seem to make a contradiction with himself, for when they are come
to a perfect habit of body, then nature cannot be defective in any part, and
therefore to increase any moist or Flegmaticke substance, will cause a ruin of
the indiuiduum, in abating the vigor of heat which should keep all the members
from gross composition. For I grant that all Sublunary bodies are governed by
the (d) 1 Pra. 6. i.
Moon, but yet I do not hold that at such times they are the best for perfect
generation, because they do then abound with Cold and Moystnesse, according to
the quality of the Moon, by which they are governed. But admit it should be
best, as it is doudtfull, yet the operation might be hindered by 1. Pr. 5. n.
reason of some other disaster Aspect of other Planets, more Maleuolent, and
Predominating in a Malignant House, which might hinder her natural effects,
and therefore no certainty of the best effect at th^se times.

And further they abreuiate the parts of the month to a certain time of the
day, as morning and evening, which opinion I hold indifferent, and therefore
will not insist upon it, and Of the time of the day.
yet there is no proof that then is the best, because there may be also evil
Aspects at such times, which may hinder the expectation of man, which God may
the sooner send, to confound such curious obseruators. But I am of Master
Markehams opinion that the evening is the better of twain, because they are
comforted all the day with the heat of the Sun, which increases courage,
but it is abated in the morning, by the moystnesse and coolness of the night.

And whereas Master Morgan does wish that there should a ^ A curious and
frivolous observation.
respect be had of the Wind, I do vary therein; for (says he) the North and
West winds do cause heat and so makes the seed thin: and the South wind
is gross and moist. But to answer to this position in particular, would spend
too much time for so small a moment: And therefore briefly thus, if men The
reason.
should have such a curious respect to have the winds in the morning, (for
that is the time which he does appoint) to be in such a quarter, the Moon then
being in the Change or Full, before they can have their Mares covered at such
precise times, it may be they shall spend the whole year and scarsly get one
served, so unconstant is both time and wind.

And whereas he holds that the wind does cause cold or heat, I hardly
believe that, because the Air and Wind is e The Sun does alter the
disposition of wether rather then the wind
subject to be changed from cold to heat only by the Sun, as may be easily
perceived by the heat in Summer and the cold in Winter.

Neither do I allow these observations in times for the begetting of a Colt
Foale, because the perfectness of the seed is the surest probability, except
it be hindered by force of the constellations: For if it be concocted by a
true proportionable heat, the food being good from whence it sprung; it will
be the more pure and strong, and so most likely prove a Colt Fo^le.

But I would not have my meaning so mistaken, that I utterly take away
observation of all times, but only that strong implication that the most have
to those three months only, and so make three parts of the year unprofitable.
For seeing both God and Nature, has not given them any limited time for
generation; therefore it were monster-like to observe more the Note this.
traditions of men, then nature, and so confine to a part, having liberty in
the whole.

But whereas I may seem to admit of the whole year, for generation, yet I
mean not in general places, but only there ^ The Garden of ^^den about the
Equinoctial.
where they have the Sun continually to nourish and comfort them with his
heat, and that is in the hot Zone about the equinoctial, where it is supposed
the Garden of Eden was, where God gave this general power of increasing and
multiplying: But in our temperate clime, (where the cold has as great force in
Winter, as heat has in Summer) if there should not be some time observed, it
would produce much defects in Nature, by reason of too much cold that is in
deep of Winter.

Wherefore to enlarge the observation of time, this I have found by experience,
and also reason does induce me thereto, ^ What months are good for procreacion.
that all the months from April to October, are good for procreation; for I
have seen those Colts, which have been soaled at Mid-sommer or Lammas, have
(for the most part) proved the best horses: And the reason is, that every thing
being maintained by the like, and destroyed by the contrary, therefore that
time is best for generation that has the best simpathy to their ^. Pra. 7. h.
quality; for a horse is naturally hot and dry, therefore those months being of
the same quality by the force of the Sun, are the best for their procreation:
But if any make a doubt whether the Horse is hot and dry, let them observe a
horse that is Th^^. 2. o. and 33. b. ^ Whether a horse be hot and dry.
of a perfect temperature, (for that is the grownd of nature) because every
excess causes a deformity, which is no part of the natural body, and from
whence he has his pure shape, his stout and valiant courage, and his agility
in quick and swife running, if it be not by heat, whose office is to purge the
pure substance from dross.

And likewise for that matter they are composed of, it is hot and dry,
(excepting natural moisture) as it may appear by the (h) 1. Pra. 5. e.
parts: For every part does participate of the same matter with the whole; but
the flesh is hot and dry, as may be perceived by the lightness and
spunginesse thereof: And also by his fast The Reason.
feeding and sudden loosing thereof, and therefore the whole must be composed
of the same. For if he were cold and moist, then his flesh would consolidate,
and be more firm and hard, and so would ask longer time in getting;
according the nature of an Ox, etc. And further it may be seen by his dung
(it being the excrement of the food concocted) for it is so purged with heat,
as there is no solid substance left, but only a light dusty ^ A horse is
proved to be hot by his dung.
sponge, after the moisture is exhaled by the Sun. Where contrarily, the dung
of a beast (though it be dried by the Sun) has a substance crusty and hard:
By all which, and more (if it were needful to rehearse) it may evidently
appear that a horse is hot and dry, and therefore the Summer is the nearest to
his nature.

And further, if a Mare be covered at Lammas or thereabout, Of Lammas Foales.
then is the beginning of the year a great relief for the nourishment of the
Colt in her womb, with the chief food that the Mare does eat all the sorepart
of Summer, and after when it is foaled the Mare will have great plenty of good
milk, it being refined by the heat of the Sun, and then at Martinmas time,
(when the grass is cold, and small store thereof) it will have such store of
Milk, that it will have the less desire to feed upon such raw and cold food;
and so consequently all the Winter, if the Mare be kept with such meat as she
should to increase the same, whereas they which are foaled in March or April,
the Of a March or April Foale.
Foale has first cold and bad nourishment in the womb, and after when it is
foaled the milk will be nothing so comfortable by reason of her food in the
winter when it shall stand the most need, and the greatest store in Summer when
it shall stand the less need; whereby it shall be forced (in Winter) to feed
on such food as (then) it can get for want of milk to suffice nature.

And again, those Colts which are foaled after Martinmas Of Martinmas Foales.
(though their milk be good) yet by the extremity of cold in the long nights,
their limbs (being weak and grisles) will be congealed too grossly, and their
courage much abated: So that they will hardly be brought to such strength and
courage afterward, as otherwise nature would effect, they being stockt at the
first; for there is no greater enemy to a horse then cold: ^ Cold nights are
hurtful for a Horse.
Otherwise what is the cause that they prosper not in Winter as well as in
Summer, if they be not housed; and also that late ayring takes so much of them.

But as for the time of the Moon, and day when they should be covered, I
stand not so much upon such preciseness, referring that to God, which is the
disposer of times, (and of all other things:) But yet because he has given the
fruition of food as a secondary means to maintain the species, there ought a
care to be had for the preservation thereof, whereby it may increase the best
nourishment, (by such good digestion, as humane reason can invent) before they
come to perform the action: But I am not minding to spend any more time upon
those points, (I having partly touched them before) least that I should offend
the gentle Reader with too tedious assertions; for although I have been
prolixe herein, yet I am more concise then I would, having much to do to end
so briefly, this being so large a field to walk in for the confuting of
ancient traditions.

CHAP. 9. How and where to put your Horse and Mare together for generation.
THe last thing that is to be observed, (for the perfecting of this
generation) is to know where and how they should perform the action; but
because there are so many diversities of opinions in this, (as well as in the
former) there may be a doubt of a certainty thereof. For some do wish that
the Horse and Mare should go abroad together in some inclosd grounds; (and
likewise if there be more Mares to be served) to let him go^ at liberty
amongst them all. And again, others would have them to be put together (at
their own liberty) in some spacious house or barn, and there to be served as
chance shall alot: And further, others hold that to have the Mare covered in
hand is the best.

Now to show all the inconveniences that may arise through these diversities,
would be too tedious to make account of every particular; therefore I will
briefly touch them, and only set down that which is the most approved:
knowing that all Judgments will not subscribe to my senses, although* I have
been very careful to select the most probable, (by reason and experience) not
often dissenting from all; but always from the unlikeliest: But howsoever some
censures be, I hope the wise will be favorable, for mine is in love and duty.

Now, if to have the horse and Mare, (or Mares) to run together 1. Pr. 7. b.
a The inconvenience of letting the hors^ run at grass amongst your Mares. 1.
Pr. 4. a.
at grass, I hold (of all others) it is the worst; because their food (then)
is the worst, and so cannot produce a perfect temperature of blood and seed.
And again, if the horse be at liberty he may come to some mishap, either by
his own unruliness, o^ by some stroke of the Mares: And further, their seeds
cannot be perfect (although they had the best food)* because the Horse will
cause both himself and the Mares to be of an excessive heat, (by fretting and
chafing) so that their courage (a) 1. Pra. 7. k.
and strength will be much weakened, and their seed much dissolved by the
violence of heat. Moreover, (as Mr. Markham says) the horse being at liberty
and of courage, will so spend The cause of Filly Foales.
himself at the first (by disorder) that the Mares pride will be too strong
for his (in conception) and the Foales (for the most part) will prove Fillies.
And lastly, running amongst the Mares, some will be ready and some unready and
then he will serve the readiest first, (he being in courage) and then those
which shall be ready after shall be in danger of not holding, or else bring
forth weak and uncomely foales.

Neither do I greatly allow to have them go at liberty in a house; for so he
is also in danger of receiving some stroke by the Mare; and further, he may
cover the Mare (at the first) before b The discommoditie of covering the Mares
at liberty in the house.
she be ready, and then the next covering will not be so good, because his
seed will not be so strong, whereby the Colt (if she hold) will not be of such
comely shape, and very like to prove a Filly: And likewise, he will spend
himself too fast, (being in lust and courage) through his disorder, and cause
her to loose her seed, which otherwise she might have kept.

Wherefore for the avoiding of all these discommodities, the c The surest way
is to have him cover her in your hand.
best and surest way in my judgment, is to have the Mare covered in hand, for
thereby both the Horse and Mare may be governed by Man's reason, for they being
led by their appetite do naturally desire to be get and bring forth; not
observing any order in begetting nor the difference in Colts that are brought
forth, but according to the old proverb, they think with the Crow, that their
own Bird is the fairest. But being ruled by Man they shall not spend their
seed, by any disorder, for they may both of them be brought to the height of
lust before they How to make your Mare ready for the horse
come together. For when as you have refined their seed to a perfect
temperature, by the order set down in the sixth Chapter; then for the better
stirring up the lust of the Mare, let a little stoned Nagge woo her two or
three days if need be, till that you see her have a desire to take the Horse,
then take him away, having a care that he never cover her. Then feed them both
well, some five or six hours before night, that they come together: and that
the food may have time to concoct, and nourish all the parts of the body:
whereby they will have the greater store of seed.

Then have the Mare into some close place, and let the said Nagge woo her
again, in the sight of the Horse, which will greatly provoke both their lusts.
Then let the Mare stand so, that if it be possible the horse may have the
heigher ground, that he may cover her the more closly: and as soon as he
comes How to use her at her first covering.
off, let one cast a pealefull of cold water at her shape, which will be a
means to cause her trusse up her body, and so receive the seed more willingly,
and let one presently leap upon her back, and put her to a good round Trot for
a quarter of an hour, for that will be a means that she shall not have time
to cast her seed: but in any case let him neither heat, nor strain her.

Which done, have them both into the stable, and let them stand an hour or two
without meat, and after feed them well that night: and the next morning either
give each of them a warm Mash, or else let them be ridden to the water, and
using them as formerly has been shown, let them drink their fill to cool
the heat of their body, and feed them well He second covering.
the next day till noone, that the meat may be well digested before night: and
bring them together the second time, doing in all things as at the first,
except the stone nagge, for after, he is needless (for then Nature will
provoke,) and also he will be dangerous in causing her cast her seed, which she
formerly received: and likewise if you think good, use her so the third night,
and then no more, for by that time, there is odds but she shall be served: for
this is the surest and best way that ever I could find by reason or practice.

But whereas some hold that once is sufficient, for her to be covered, because
the Colt is begotten at once, and also the first seed is the strongest, and
therefore oftener is superfluous, and weakeneth the seed. To which I grant it
is so, that once were enough, if men knew when that once were, but it is
doubtful whether the Matrix will be so open at the first, as to receive such a
quantity of seed from the horse as shall equally temper the Mares, which if it
be not, then the second or third time is more certain, and therefore this
order will make it the more sure.

And there will not be any great doubt of weakening the seed, they having such
intermission of time, to recover their former lust, if they be well fed in the
intrim, which will preserve their seed hot and strong.

CHAP. 10. How to know whether the Mare has conceived or no.
AFter that your Mare has been thus covered, it is observed, Observe her.
that if she be fully served, she will fall freely to her meat, not offering
to cast or piss, nor bend her ears, nor eyes, after the Neyghing of other
Horses; but the surest observation, How to judge whether she has conceived or
no.
(for her conception) is to try her with a Horse about some fourteen days
after, for if she have conceived, she will refuse to have further copulation;
for by that time their seed will be so mixed and united, that it will curdle and
become thick like cream, which is the conception whereby one body is formed:
and then she will desire the Horse no more. For she being (a) 1. Pr. 7. ^.
only a sensitive creature, when nature is served, her desire is taken away:
she nothing regarding pleasure, but only the end for which she was created,
which was to increase and multiply.

As for her fast feeding, and the smooth lying of her hayr^, which some hold to
be marks of her conception, there is no certain knowledge, for they may come
from other causes, as from good keeping, or the difference of dispositions,
some being more apt to feed, then others, or by good dressing and clothing,
some having naturally smother skins then others, etc.

And again, there are some which will undertake to know whether a Mare be with
Foale or no, by the skin at the hind part of her maine next the Withers, for
they say if one take it betwixt the finger and the thumb, it will be loose and
thick, (if she be with Foale;) wherein can be no certainty nor reason to
approve, it. For the looseness of the skin (there) may be caused for want of
flesh, and the skin of all that have much hair upon their maines are thick
there, because of such store of moisture, which causes the maine to grow so
long: and therefore cannot be any testimony of her conceiving.

CHAP. 11. How to use her after her conception till she Foale.
When your Mare is covered, and you perceive she has conceived, there ought
still a care to be had to preserve the seed in purity from gross humors, lest
it should be impaired of the perfect temperature, before the Colt be formed;
and after ^o nourish and maintain it with good and sound a There ought to be a
care still had that the Mare be kept with good food for the nourishing of the
foale in her womb.
food whilst it is growing in the womb: because it is releiued with such
sustenance as the Mare does eat; and therefore if the Mare feed upon raw and
cold meat, it will loose that perfect shape and strong courage. Wherefore to
preserve the Colt in its true temperature let her seed on sweet hay and good
prouender, for the space of a month, (for by that time the seed will be
concocted into a fleshy lump, and the body fashioned in gross, and then if
necessity force, and the time of year Let her exercise be moderate.
serve, let her be turned to grass: but let it be upon dry ground where the
grass is not rank, but such as she may fill her belly once a day: also there
would be shelter where she does run, to keep her both from the violence of
^^ormes, and heat of the Sun: and for her watring she would have a fresh
river if conveniently, or else clear standing water.

And for her labor, let it be no more but only to fetch her water, for the
first month: and after let it never be violent, but moderate whether it be
trauayling, carting, or plowing, least there be a dissolution of the substance,
by too great heat. And likewise she must be kept from great burdens, least
she be ouerstrayned.

And further, (as Master Markham says) there must be a care that she come not
in the company of stone Iades, least they strain her by forcing to cover her,
which if they should, would endanger the casting of her Foale. Now when she is
toward her Foaling, let her be put into some such couenient close as is well
fenced, least she miscarry in her Foaling: for it is holden What place is best
for her to Foale in.
that they desire to Foale near the water, and that they Foale standing, with
which opinions I will not contest; For as yet I never could see any Mare in
Foaling, although I have been very vigilent therein, but yet I have known a
great company of Mares (by times) Foale in wet fenney grounds, and very few
that have lost their burdens by drowning.

Now after she has Foaled, let her be keept a week or ten How to use her
after she has Foaled.
days, with exceeding good meat, which will be a means to recover her
strength the sooner, and also increase her Milk: and the first drink she
has after her Foaling, let it be a warm Mash, for it is very comfortable and
agreeing to her Nature, for if she drink cold water it will make an
obstruction of the flux of Flegmaticke blood too suddenly, which must needs in
gender evil humors in the Mare. And likewise as soon as she has Foaled let
her Vdder be well drawn, for it will bring away that cloddy milk which has
been long in her Vdder, and dissolve the hard knots the sooner, where the
Milk will be better for the Foale, and of greater store.

Now when she has gotten strength, and the Foale does also begin to be
strong, if she have exercise either at the plow, or Cart, or ridden, it will
be the better, for labor is very necessary Why moderate exercise is good
to purge gross humors, which abound by too much rest: But then it must be
moderate, lest by ouer-heating, the milk be inflamed, and so surfeit the Foale.
But if you mean to travail her, let not her Foale follow, for travail will
much weaken it, and also it will suck before the milk be cold: Therefore How
to bestow the Foale while she is labored.
let it be shut up in some house, and give it some good food to eat, which will
both comfort it, and make it domestical: And when the Mare comes home, let
her be well cooled, and cast some cold water upon her Vdder, to wash the dust
or dirt away and cool it, and draw her vdder before the Foale suck.

And if it be in Summer, let her run at grass in the vneuenest grounds you
have; for (as Mr. Markham says) it will make the Foale very nimble, and have
sure footmanship, in scoping and leaping upon such uneven grounds; but I would
have you to house both your mare and Foale in Winter, if you have but two or
three; (for although I have spoken singularly, yet it does extend to plurality)
but if more, then let them run abroad in such grownds as Mr. Markham has
described, having store of bushes and trees for shelter or else a houell, open
2. Pr. 21. ^ b A horse does naturally desire to be refreshed with the heat of
the Sun.
to the East and west, that the Colts may be comforted with the heat of the
Sun morning and evening, which they naturally do desire; and a partition
overthwart in the midst, to defend them from the winter winds and storms.
Moreover, there would be ouerlayers, upon which may be laid hay and pease and
oats in the straw, for Winters provision, and if the houell be covered over
to keep the fodder dry it will be the better.

But here me thinks I see the apparition of Midas, whose whole felicity is to
convert all things into gold, for having an inferior affection to horses, could
very well find in their hearts to have good horses, were it not for cost, but
yet could be c The miserable estate of many in this Age. Preface. 2.
content to reap the profit of another charges; and these exclaim with open
mouth, against charges of keeping all Winter in the house, or with such charges
abroad, wherein they show wretched care in gerting, and their miserable mind in
keeping; for who can reap the harvest, that does not hazard his feed in the
spring, which they think a small loss, to the increase a fruitful year does
bring: and so, if they did rightly weigh the necessary charges of grass and
hay, which they should be relieved d That is no charges that brings triple
profit.
all Winter with, and the danger of staruing and drowning, and compare all
these with the certainty from these dangers, and to the pureness and value of
a Colt so fed, (for one of them will be worth four of ordinary breeding) they
shall find that keeping after this manner, or in the house will be the
cheaper, for in breeding of many Foales, there must be many Mares and so many
mouths, as Foales and Mares and so consequently great charges and small profit
in comparison of the other, for four Mares in this sort will yield more gain
then a dosen contrarily.

Wherefore, whosoever is desirous to have their profits to soar as high as
their desires, they must keep well in Winter; for if they have nothing to seed
on but grass and hay, the Mare will have small nourishment to increase her
Milk, whereby the strength and courage of the Colt will be much abated
through the grossness of the milk, and extremity of cold, which is an enemy
to the stronge^^ horse, but much more to a young Foale, whose composition has
neither strength nor substance.

But whereas Mr. Markham does wish to provide for them light corn, and wild
oats, I consent not thereto because they must have of the best relief if they
think to hold nature to the best perfection, seeing it is in the declining age
of the World: For thereby their bloods will be kept more pure, and so the 1.
Pra. 12. c.
Colt more strong at three years of age then another at five; and also they
will be the more able to endure the cold, especially having such a houell, to
keep themselves from wet and cold Rimes.

CHAP. 12. When and how to waine your Colts.
THe last thing that is to be observed, before you come to reap the fruits of
your labor and charges, is to know when and how to waine your Colts and keep
them till they be fit for the saddle: But because I shall digress herein also
from the Ancients, if I should enter into the answer of all several opinions,
I should be too tedious, therefore I will be as brief and plain as I can.
For, whereas Mr. Markham would have the Foales run with their dammes to suck
a whole year, I hold Of sucking all the year.
it good (with this prouiso) that they may be housed in Winter and that the
Mare go Foalelesse that year: Otherwise it will weaken the Mare too much, in
feeding that which is in her womb, and also that which sucketh, and it will
likewise hinder them both, for neither of them can have such natural and kind
nourishment as perfection would wish; for it is a maxim, that if the eye be
set upon two things indifferently, it can behold neither of them perfectly:
^^en so, the mare having a natural ^ Duplicibus desid^rij^, remo incidere
potest. 1. Pra. 7. m.
instinct to nourish both indifferently, she cannot produce nourishment for
either of them effectually; because nature desiring an impletion, the emptiest
places will be first filled with the substance of food when it is concocted, and
so the best part will be inuerted to milk, which will be a defect to that in
the womb; whereby there will be a debility in its composition: And also the
milk that the other is fed with all, will be corrupt and unnatural, and the
strength of nourishment taken away, by natures operation to relieve the other.

Wherefore, if you mind to have your Foale suck all the year, let her not
take the horse that year, for one Colt well bred will be worth four that is
contrary, and so every other year is sufficient for a Mare to have a Foale, if
you desire the true perfection herein.

But if you mind to take it off before Winter, or that you When to waine your
Foales.
perceive your Mare to be with Foale again, then take off that Foale which
sucketh betwixt Michaelmas and Martinmas, before the weather be too cold, and
the strength of the grass fail.

And whereas there is an objection to the contrary, alleging Objection.
that if they be taken off so soon, it will be a great weakening and plucking
back of their strength and growth, and will cause surfets (by gross humors)
through the raw digestion of grass and hay which they shall be forced to feed
upon to suffice nature. I answer, it is true, if they run abroad all Winter,
from Answer.
their dammes: for it is such a mortal enemy to the designs of this subject,
that I would not wish any man to follow it. But if you weine them then and take
them into the house, and give them good food, it will nourish and strengthen
them more, by many degrees, then if they should run with the Mares. Thus
having spoken of the times when to weine your Foales, it rests to show how to
do it, which I would wish after this manner.

First, if your Mare prove Foalesse (that year) then you may let it suck all
Winter, and take it off about mid-Aprill, or beginning How to Weine your Foales.
of May, and shut it up in some close house where it shall not hear the
Neighing of the Damme, and keep it there with good oats, and broken beans
mixed together: and let it have fresh and sweet hay, and clean water every
evening and morning, for the space of a Fortnight, for by that time it will
thoroughly have forgotten the Mare, and then put it to grass* for by that time
also the grass will have good substance, which before mid-May is but froth and
sap.

But if your Mare prove with Foale, then take it off at the beginning of
Winter, before any great store of cold come, and the strength of grass gone,
using them in all things as is aforesaid: only adding this, because the Foale
is somewhat young, I will wish you to give it new Milk from the ^ow, for a
week till it has forgotten the dam, and that it fall to eat on such meat as
is formerly said. And after abate your milk by little and little, mixing it
with fair water, till you have taken it clean away: For by this means, you
shall keep it continually in firm strength and courage. And likewise there
would (...) rack set ^^ in the house, to put in Hay, and Oats in the Straw;
and a Cribe to put Prouender in, letting the Foale have good store thereof all
winter.

But whereas it is a general opinion, as a thing of necessity to give the
Foales, the second day after their wainening, the slips of Sauen, or the powder
of Brimstone, or the roots of Enulacampana beaten to powder, in their
Prouender, and many other such like, I differ therein, except it be upon
necessity that they pain themselves of the Worms: because these are
Physical, needless for a sound body, for if there be no excess for them ^
Physic we^kneth nature if it be needless. 1. Pra. 7. ^.
to work upon, then it will make nature the subject, which will be a weaking
thereof. For if it weaken a strong body which has material substance, then
much more a weak body, which is but gristles and froth, and so of a weak
digestion. And further, if it be given them in prouender, it will make them
loath it: and then if nature be not satisfied with the best food, it will feed
more upon the worst, which will not be so nourishing, or else the stomach will
abound with raw and cold humors, for want of repletion.

Having thus wintered them; you may put them to grass at such time as is said
before, for then the weather will be warm, and the grass of full strength,
and let them run till Bartholmew-tyde that the grass begin to decay, and
after let them be served in the houell with such provision as I have shown,
till after Michaelmes, and then house them again, (if you have not many) as
you did in the Winter before, and so every Winter till they be fit for the
Saddle; for this profit will ensue (if there were ^. Pra. 11. c.
no more) by this order, they will gain such strength and courage, that they
will be more ready for the Saddle at three years of age, then others of
contrary breeding will be at five.

And whereas Master Morgan does wish that their stable ^ Paued Plaunchers are
not good.
should be paued with stone, to the end to make them the more apt to endure the
cold, and make their Hooses tough and durable; I am not of his mind, for there
is no greater enemy to either young or old Horse then cold, and therefore the
contrary must needs be the more agreeing to his nature, and likewise they will
not take their rest so naturally of the hard stones as otherwise they would
do, having continually litter to lie upon, for I would not have young Colts to
be stinted to stand all the day, for that will cause great weakness in them,
whereas lying at their pleasure upon warm litter it will batten them very
kindly, and also the warmth, will purge and expel gross humors out of their
limbs, and so make them very clean and nimble.

And whereas he does say, it will make the Hoofes tough A thing contrary to
reason.
and durable, he deceives himself, except he will hold that the more a thing
is worn, it will be the more durable, for with continual standing and moving
upon the stones it will both wear and break their Hoofes, so that they will
rather be brittle then tough: and again, what need a perfect Hoof any
repayring, if his assertion were admitted, for it is naturally tough and
durable of it self; But if not perfect, then the continual use of the stones
will make it worse, for if it be flat, then it will Howsoever it is taken it
cannot be good.
be in danger of Hoofe-binding, in regard the coffin will be so dry, that it
cannot spreed so fast as the flesh does grow, by reason of the moystnesse of
the Frush, and if it be brittle, the stones will cause it to break the more.
Therefore for the remedying of all these dangers, I think it best that they
have continually store of litter to stand and lie upon at their pleasures, for
no (c) 1. Pra. 7. ^
Man can limit a better order then nature it self would work, ever keeping
their house sweet and clean, with dressing twice a week at the least, which
will delight the senses, and fortify the growing faculties.

But if you have more Foales, and that you think it a great How to use them in
running abroad all VVinter.
trouble to have them all in the house, then you may let them run abroad all
Winter in those grounds, where you have your shelter made, wherein must be a
rack to put their hay and vnthrasht corn in, and a cribbe under it to
perserue that which falls down: but let it be of such a reasonable height,
that it may cause them to bend their cragges to reach to the bottom, for that
will raise their creasts, and cause them to have a good fore-hand.

But whereas some wish to put chafe and light corn into the cribbe, for them
to feed on, I cannot allow thereof, because such food is no good nourishing
for them, for it will lie in their mawes so heavy, that the vigor of their heat
cannot digest it, by reason it is so much allied with moisture, whereby (as the
Metaphisickes hold,) is caused a suppuration above nature, so that it being
overcome; gross humors will abound through the weakness of concoction, and so
cause a putrefaction of health. And further, it will so stuff and choke them,
that it will cause them to drink more then nature does desire, whereby their
moystnesse is the more increased.

Wherefore to conclude, whosoever is desirous to repair the chief decayed
places of this famous subject, and bring it so near to the primary restitution
(as can be invented by humane knowledge) he must not respect a little charges
for the time present, considering that it will yield a greater profit
afterward; For three or four Horses thus prefectly bred, will give such
content (if they be well ridden) that the triple value of their charge cannot
buy them; and further they will be sooner ready for the Saddle, (by much) then
others bred after the ancient order.

CHAP. 13. A Corollary to the Art of breeding.
THus having set forth so briefly and plainly as I can, the true Art of
breeding: which consists first, in the right choice of your Stallions and
Mares; and secondly, in reducing their seed to the best perfection for
generation: and thirdly, the orderliest proceeding (in the action) for the
holding in copulation: and lastly, the safest means to keep them in their
perfection, till they be Fo^led, and whilst they come to the Saddle. I will now
likewise illustrate some dark corners, of some opinions which may breed an
ambiguity for the necessity of the Art of riding; least the foot say to the
head, I have no need of thee, Whereby the minds of many might be utterly
discouraged for taking pains in this Vineyard, by thinking if there be not
right ^ The Art of ^iding helps when breeding ^yleth.
breeding, it is vain to persist in riding, holding it impossible for ever to
obtain their period of desire by riding, if there be a defect in breeding. Now
because every man that has a desire to have a good Horse* it may be, is not
able to breed so strictly, nor to buy one that is so bred: in regard their
means are not answerable to their minds, although some have greater means
the^ minds: therefore for their better satisfaction herein, I will set forth
how-farre the benefit of breeding does extend, and how Art is the perfection
thereof: for I do not commend breeding as only necessary, nor yet make so
small account of it as Theo. 1. s b Breeding is but as a handmaid to riding.
Chap. o.
needless, for although it cannot bring a Horse to his true perfection (for
use) yet it serves as a hand-maide to further Art For* must needs confess,
that those Horses which are of such excellent shape and good courage, will ask
a great deal of less time and labor in riding then others, not so perfect,
and likewise it nature be truly purged by Art from rebellion, they A Simile.
will excel the other; but if contrary, then none more Iades, for as fire and
water are two chief servants, but cruel Masters, so are th^^ excellent in
subjection, but very shrewd in rebellion. 1. Pr. 3. a. Chap. p. c Breeding
helps the composition, which riding cannot. Theo. 18. d. Theo. 2. ^.


And again, thus far I commend breeding, in regard it is before riding, and
so may help the composition and shape of the Horse, which riding cannot do,
it giving the material form, and all its natural faculties, as at the first
creation, but yet in as much as it is not now immediately from God, (but from
secondary causes) there is a corruption of qualities, as accidents thereto,
which must only depend upon the true Art of riding for reformation, in regard
the end of all Arts do only tend to the repayring of the decayed universe.

But to answer to some general positions that Master Morgan does allege, to
prove that this Art does chiefly depend of breeding; I will touch them briefly,
and leave the rest to the censure of the wise, that are experienced herein; For
although he has written very well of natural Philosophy, yet has strayed so
far therein, that he has found no way to Art, whereby he does confound it,
and so shows his experience of practice in the same, as appears by his
definition; For he says, Art is but only a quickner up of nature, which if it
were so, bring a Horse to quickness, and then he has the perfection of Art:
But his proposition may easily be proved no true definition, d Art depends in
gayning obedience.
for if they be quick and have no obedience to orderly motions, that quickness
brings a weariness, which will more trouble a man, to restrain, then to
bring a dull Horse to go freely, as every bed-lam Horse does approve: and
therefore quickness must be joined with orderly motions, which only depends
Theo. 18. b. and 20.* ^
upon the Art of riding.

And again, he says, such as is the quality of his works, such is his nature,
he being such in the quality of his nature as he is tried to be. But a good
horse may be made a Jade by evil using, and yet not naturally so; but because
I have spoken sufficiently Theo. 17. h. and 37. h. Theo. 37. q.
thereof in the Theoricke Part, I will not repeat them here again: And further,
he says, except they have perfect breeding that all artificial riding and
practice, can never make them absolute and perfect horses, inferring that it is
not possible to cleanse a river that is corrupt, except they go to the head
from whence that corruption comes, but here he does insist too much upon
impossibilities; for as not by riding, so also not by breeding, can they be
made absolutely perfect; (...) it is as possible for him to make that
restitution, as for to think to ^ Both Man and Horse are corrupted in
propagation.
merit his own salvation by his works, for the loss of both proceeded at one
time, and through one cause; for although they have the faculty of propagation
still inherent, yet it is corrupted for a punishment of man's disloyalty, which
corruption is maintained by continual succession in the species, and so, the
longer from Creation the nearer to corruption and the worse.

And therefore let him and all Philosophers upon the earth, reduce causes to
their best perfection they can, and it will be Theo. 10. ^. ^ Natu^all
corruption cannot be purged.
as possible for them to purge the head of this river from corruption, as to
measure the winds or to exhale all the water out of the Sea: For the best and
beautifullest horse that is can come no nearer to the primary Creation, then
the comparatiue degree; for they were created immediately from God, but these
mediately from secondary causes, and those causes much corrupted by the first
transgression, and increased by the corruption Theo. 37. s. 1 Pra. 4. h
of the Elements wherein they live, and still more and more weakened, by reason
that the times wax old, whereby the world has lost its youth.

And again, he alleges another horned Paradoxe, that it is not possible to
make that perfect by Art, which Nature has made imperfect, and so does insist
that Art cannot bring an Ape to beget an Ape with a long tail; or that a Man
cannot make a crooked tree grow straight; for if it be bended so soon as it is
set at liberty, it will return to his own natural growth: and many such
like, too tedious to rehearse except they had better Application.

But the first may very well be retorted upon his own neck, ^ Breeding can
not reform disobedience.
for it is as easy (by Art) to cause one Ape to bring forth another with a
long tail, as it is for him to purge horses from disobedience, only by
breeding; for the one is as natural (now) as the other: And as for the other,
all that has experience therein can testify, that if a crooked tree be cut
down it may be brought into a straight form; either by cutting away the
excess of wood in full places, and so bring it to a straight line with the
hollow, or else it may be made straight by heating and setring it in a brake,
till it be cold, and then it will so continue. In like Theo. 9. b. (f) Theo.
5. ^. and 8. ^. and 29. ^.
manner to use a horse in his natural growth, (that is, according to his
disobedience) he will never hold longer then extremities force; but after he
is cut down (that is, made for use) he may be brought to true obedience, by
using him according to reason and Art; and then, when his rebellious
disposition is reformed, he will so continue as far as shall give reasonable
content for the use and service of man.

And again, it may be answered by himself, if he would The particular
Nature.
distinguish here, what nature is that he means; for in another place, he
does divide it into a particular and universal: The particular nature he says
is that which in every single body ministers The Universal Nature.
essence to the whole compound; and withal is mother to such actions and
motions, as is agreeing to the subject. The Universal is the Author and
maintainer of all actions and bodies, to the which the several single boches
are in subjection, by their obedience yielding a kind of superiority to that
universal Nature.

To the which I grant, if there be a true Application; for the particular
Nature gives to every single substance its essence, and so of all the parts
compounded both in matter and form, g Art cannot mend the matter and form,
for if it be imperfect it is privation.
whereby it is demonstrated to be that species. As for instance, a Horse is
said to be this horse or that horse, according as his form and shape does
distinguish, which shape no Art can mend if it be not perfect. And likewise it
may be said to be the Mother of all such actions and motions as are agreeing
to that subject; for it gives the temperature of the body compounded with all
his faculties, both natural, vegetative and sensitive: Theo. 2. l.
by which, (as it is prima substantia) one cannot be said to be a more horse
then another, because it has distributed to all alike: and where there is a
defect of these no Art can restore them.

But although she is the Mother of all those natural actions, etc: yet the
reducement of them to man's use (by reason of their disobedience) must depend
upon Art, in the which there is no alteration of Nature (as a defect;) but
only to change ^ But only to change disobedience into obedience. Theo. 2. n.
them from that irregular time and order (which the horse uses of his own
natural inclination) to that regular time and order which the man does desire.
For (as I have said) Art does but teach a horse that which Nature has given
him a procliuity unto; and so the difference is, that Art does bring these
actions and motions to a man's pleasure, where before they were used at his own.

And as for the universal Nature, it is the Author* and maintainer of all the
actions and bodies of every particular species, (as he says) whereby they are
in subjection to the superiority of the universal Nature. For, as at the
beginning God created Gene. 1 ^4. and 25. 20. 28.
all species (as man, beasts, herbs, trees, etc.) of the earth and gave to
every one of them faculties according to their kind, so having given to this
lowest Orb every species of his works, he gave them liberty to increase and
multiply, by the virtue of which benediction, every one brought forth their
kind not only in body but in all other qualities, agreeing to every nature* so
that every single body does participate (by propagation) of that same nature
(being the same image of that Doct. Bright de traduc.
universal nature) from which he is traduced. But yet not of the like
perfection, for their qualities are changed from obedience to disobedience, and
yet the universal nature is perfect; Secundu^ no^ (h) Theo. 2. o.
for although every indiuiduum has not that perfection, yet it may be found in
that species; albeit that never a singular horse (neither in England, Spain,
Barbary, not any other place of the world, has the same complete, yet it may
be found part in this horse, and part in that, whereby the general is
preserved by the whole seed.

Now the cause of these diversities of particular natures from ^ The cause of
corruption.
the universal* is not in Nature her self (for that is perfect) but through
corruption; after the first transgression their whole nature (both body and
faculties) lost that perfection: whereby all their species issuing from their
seed is also corrupted. But yet it must not be thought, that these single
bodies are of another nature, and so as many natures as there are horses, for
that were absurd, and to hold another Creation; for if it were any k Mark this
so there i^ no change of nature but a reducement.
other, then it might have another beginning, and so receive another form: But
the form and shape of all horses whatsoever were created by God at the first,
and so by generation is derived into all the species; whereby it is plain,
that the universal nature is perfect, (as it is the Creature of God) but yet
the qualities of them was corrupted, and so did increase corruption
successi^ely in all ages: which cannot be purged without Art, no more then gold
without fire; For as gold cannot A simile.
be purged from the dross, without the Art of fire, so a Horse cannot be
purged from his gross qualities, but by Art of riding.

And whereas he further insisteth herein, that indiuidua l As a general
cannot be applied to a particular, so neither contra, but one p^rticular may
apply to another.
sunt remota ab Art, that indiuiduums are exempted from Art; tha^ is, in
regard Art cannot make an universal receipt for a particular cure. For
whatsoever is spoken universally, is not spoken to any particularly; but yet to
make particular application, a particular man being a particular agent, may
bring his horse to a particular perfection, using Art according to those means
which he finds has the best operation in his disposition; and so* though
indiuiduums are remote from general Art, yet it is helped by particular
Science.

And further, he proves his assertion, that every nature by working does
declare of what quality it is, by the Sun which gives light to the world,
because it is his nature, and so he does it not with evil will or by motion
of others, but easily and voluntary, whereby it is perpetual: But neither can
there be a fit Application in this simile, by reason that it is not sublunary,
m The Sun is not corrupted and so not changeable.
and so is not subject to transmutation and corruption as they be for he does
retain that glory and light which he had at the first, and likewise is as
durable and as free in his motions, in as much as he is not weakened with any
other accident, but has his whole force of nature still residing: whereas the
sublunary 1. Pra. 4. ^.
bodies are continually subject to corruption (as has been often said)
insomuch, that that which is now said to be natural, was not so from the
beginning, but it came accidentally, afterward, so that as concerning the
actions of a horse, (being rebellious to man) was not natural but accidental;
and therefore his working cannot show his true quality, by reason both of his
disobedience and man's ignorance.

And therefore, seeing their corruption of disobedience is not (n) Theo. 37. r.
Theo. 1. g. and 33. a.
natural but accidental, their qualities may be reformed by Art, God ^auing
left that knowledge in man, as a help to reduce things toward their primary
estate. But to persist to any more of his assertions, or ^o insist any further
upon this, I shall be held ouer-tedious, and therefore, I will restrain my pen
for insulting any further, although I had thought to have lopt many more of his
branches.

Wherefore seeing (by these which has been said) that the Art of riding has
a far greater extent then the Art of breeding, to make a horse more
serviceable for the use and delight of men, I would wish all favorites of this
Art, not to be discouraged to enter into the secrets thereof, since that if
they be not able to breed according to the truth thereof, nor yet cannot get a
horse of such perfect shape as is prescribed; yet if he have the true
understanding in this Art, he may make a horse (o)
of as good performance as the other, if they have not the like managing; but
if they have, then I must needs confess there is both greater hope, and also
they will ask much less time and labor (for the rider) then others not so
perfectly bred, and Chap. b.
shaped.

Yet this do I hold, and will answer it with the hazard of my life (having had
sufficient experience thereof) that many horses that want diverse of Mr. Morgans
curious observations, may be brought to a superlatiue check with the best that
they shall (p)
encounter withal by his order of teaching. For though true breeding help the
perfection of shape, and causes a nimble Chap. c.
body, and a quick and stout courage, yet if all these have not true Art, to
cause obedience, they will be as gold mixed with dross, And albe it cannot
help the shape (if it be defective) yet it will reform his disposition.

For this I do further ^uerre, that if a horse be defective in M. Morgan.
Theo. 37. q q Disobedience increased through ignorance. Theo. 37. h
any of those six qualities, which he sets forth as true marks of a good
horse, they may be repaired by the Art of Horsemanship; for though many horses
be either fearful, dogged, stumbling, hard going, subject to tire, and sad or
dull, by any inclination of their disposition, they may be further increased
by disobedience, and the ignorance of the man, in not knowing how to subdue his
rebellion, and likewise the cause of boldness, 1. Pra. 15. ^.
toughness, sure going, easy going, durablenesse and free going, (which are
his six marks) do not altogether proceed from breeding (as he holds) since
they are increased or diminished r The Art of riding tenderh only to obedience.
according to that knowledge which the rider has in this Art. For there was
never any horse (from the beginning) that had perfection of all these by
breeding, except they had obedience (by Art) for their use.

Nay, Art is of such operation, that if he has an inclination to any of these
contraries, by his disposition, it will purge him thereof, (which I have proved
by experience.) For if a horse (s) Theo. 11. d. and 33. e. and 29 d.
be fearful or dogged, he may be made bold and loving, by true subjection
and kind using, ever observing his interior disposition by his outward action;
and acquainting him by degrees, with such things as he is most fearful of:
And likewise if he be vnnimble footed, and subject to stumble, or hard going,
the cause thereof is in his exterior parts, through improper motions, and so
may be reformed by giving the body a more apt and quick motion. And further,
if he be subject to tire, or be sad or heavy, the cause thereof proceeds
both Theo. 4. m. and 26. c. and 19. a.
from the interior and exterior parts, being always iarring in their motions,
which causes a faintness and weariness in the horse, he never finding ease:
and so it is to be reformed, by stirring up quicker motions of his desire, and
th^n ^o join the motions of his body thereto; whereby he will go with such
slight and ease, that he will take great delight therein, and so by use he
will have such an habit, that he will so continue.

But because I have spoken more largely of these things in the former part of
this book, I do herein but touch them, till I come to show in their proper
place how to effect them. Only (as I say) this I set down to encourage the
favorites of this Art to take pains for the knowledge thereof: because that
if ability to breed be wanting, it may help to supply that want, for all men
cannot go to Arabia nor Barbary for their stallions. And likewise if they have
a horse, that is not so perfectly bred, nor of such comely shape, as is
required; yet having true knowledge how to manage them according to Art, he
may equal the other in all his actions.

CHAP. 14. Of the first haltring a young Colt.
When as you have thus brought up your Colts, till they have attained to the
age of three years old and upward, you may then put them to the saddle, for by
that time they will be of sufficient growth and strength both of body and
courage to undergo the burden of a man, especially if they have been well
kept till then: but whereas Mr. Morgan does wish that they should not be backed
till they come to five ^ At what Age to back your Colt.
years of age, I hold it not so good: First, because they ^ill be the more
easily brought to subjection when their desire is bended before it be too
stiff; and also it will make their bodies to be more agile and nimble with
moderate practice; and so, by such time as they come to the age of five years,
they will be ready to perform any reasonable action, as I have had full
trial.

Wherefore if they should run till they be five years old, there would be a
great loss of time, for then they will be six years old before they be fit
for any performance: And also they will ask a greater time and labor to bring
them to subjection, which is one cause of so many dogged and restiffe ^ One
maine cause of lades.
lades, in regard they (running so long before they be handled) are so
rebellious, that they exeed the knowledge of mo^^^riders to reform them. But
here it may be objected, that to Objection.
1. Pra. 7. n. and 15 h.
Answer.
back them so young, will both abate their courage, and also endanger their
limbs by straining, and cause them to put forth splints, spauins curbes,
wind-galles, and such like. To which I answer, that such accidents do not
necessarily happen through the rareness of time, but by the ignorance of the
rider, and by gross humors abounding in the Colt, and negligent care after
their labor.

For if the Colt be used after such gentle and quiet order as he (x) 1. Pr. 27.
b.
ought to be, he will be found so tractable that he will more easily be
commanded, whereby it will rather preserve him from such dangers, then cause
them, whereas if he run till he be so old, he will oftentimes be so
stubborn, that he will be in greater hazard thereof.

Therefore (as Mr. Markham says) when your Colt is come c How to halter your
colt at the first.
to the age of three years old and a half, (or thereabouts) if he has run
abroad all his life) let him be driven with some other quiet horses into a
house, that shall be free from posts, (for fear of hurting himself against
them through his unruliness;) and there (by the gentlest means that may be)
halter him; the manner how, must be referred to the discretion of your self,
because there can no certain order be prescribed: But yet if he be holden
up among other horses that are more gentle, you may with the more safety go
amongst them, to assay if you can put the halter on his head; which if he will
not endure, but fly back, (as doubtless he will) then let those men which are
standing behind, threaten him with their voice and strike him up again with
their Poles, and when he is gone up, let them continually cherish or rub him
upon the buttocks (with their Poles;) for that will so cause him to regard
them, that you may the more easily cast the halter over his head: Or else, if
you cannot come to his head, to put the halter on with your hands, you may fold
the halter on the end of a long Pole, and (observing the moving of his head)
slip it on e^e he be aware, if he be holden up so that he cannot fly back.

But for the haltring them by strong hand as is the custom of d Of haltring
your Colt by force.
those horse-coursers, which use to sell young Colts, I utterly disallow; for
such violence will cause the Colt to strive the more, especially if he be of
any quick spirit, and so endanger himself the more by ouerheating, for it is
their nature, that if they feel themselves holden by force, they will never
leave resisting, till they have neither strength nor wind, in so much as I
have seen many fall down and beat themselves upon the ground, they have
been made so mad by such violence.

Now when you have thus haltered your Colt and put the headstall close to his
ears roots, for fear of brusing him upon the pole place: get him by the
gentlest means you can, forth of the House, which as soon as he is forth, it
is most like he will desire to run away and plunge, he never having been in
hand before, which if he do, suffer him to run to the length e How to use
him in the halter.
of the chase halter, and there give him such a sudden twitch back, that it
will pluck him upon his buttockes: and so use him as often as you see him
offer the like, never leaving him till you find him yield to that correction:
which so soon as you shall perceive, then let him stand, and two or three
having the chase halter by the end, for fear of breaking away, go your (x) 1
Pra. 15. d
self toward his head by the gentlest means you can, and offer to reach
forth your hand to cherish him about the neck or 24. m. Theo. 22. c.
shoulder; which if he suffer, then cherish him both with your tongue and hand.
But if he will not endure you to come near (f) 1. Pr. 16. e. 17. d.
him, then chase him round about again, never resting till he will suffer you
to scratch his neck, shoulder, head, betwixt his ears, under his fore bowels,
belly, buttockes, flank, or any other place, all which he will let you do in
a very short space, if he be rightly used.

When you have made him so familiar, on the narside as is said, 1. Pr. 16. l. g
Note the cause of many restife qualities.
then go to the far side, and use him in all points as before, till he will
turn also readily on that hand, and suffer you to rub him in all places, as on
the narside; for till he be familiar with you no both sides, he will not be
sure for one man to deal withal.

Having thus brought him to such obedience with the halter, that he will yield
thereto if he feel but the strayning thereof; h How to learn him to lead. 1
Pra. 18. b.
you may then go about to learn him to lead, which you shall do after this
manner. First, you shall lap up the strain of your halter very handsomely, and
take it into your left hand: then hold your right hand very gently upon the
strain hard by the head-stall; and having a switch in your left hand you shall
Note.
carry your left arm close by your side, and the point of your switch shall be
turned back, as a sword is carried in his hangers, both for the aptness to
touch the Colt behind, as occasion shall be offered, and also to prevent the
cause of affright to the Colt, upon the motion thereof, which if it should
happen would be held a gross absurdity in the man. When you are thus prepared,
then you shall assay to pull him on gently with your right hand, to try if he
will move forward, at which if he ^ Violence is an utter enemy to Art.
desire to hang back, then in any case slack your hand again, not once
offering to pull him on by violence, for that will cause him to resist the
more, and overthrow all that you had wrought Theo. 33. h. 3 e.
before, for use him to gentle motions at the first, and he will obey by them,
but if he be used by violence, he will do nothing without it, which is
repugnant to Art, and a discredit to the man. Therefore you must arm your
self with patience for a time, and place your self, with your right shoulder
against his left, for there is the safest place from danger, for then if he
either Note.
rise before, or plunge forward, he cannot endanger you with his forefeet; and
likewise if he should strike behind, he cannot reach you with his hindfeete.

Having thus placed your body, if you offer to move him forward as before, and
he will not obey, then you shall touch him behind, very gently with your
switch, only with turning your hand in the wrest, without any other motion of
your body, which might cause an afright in him; at the which if he do but
offer to move forward though never so little, then cherish him, and assay the
second, or third time, by the which I am sure he will move, except it be a very
stubborn lade, which if he be, then let one stand behind him with a pole, and
touch him gently on the buttucks* till he press forward, which so soon as he
does, though neu^r so untowardly, yet make very much of him: and thus use him
till he will go with your own motions, and so lead him up and down gently,
till he be as cunning on the one hand as on the other: for by this kind of
using you shall make him acquainted with you on both sides, and during such a
time in leading, it will cool him so moderately, as his former sweating will
be nothing hurtful unto him; but herein you must have a special care that you
do nothing unto him rashly Note.
or suddenly, for dread of bringing a fearful skittishnesse to him, and cause
him yerke or plunge whereby he will be more dangerous in backing, and besides
it will require a great time to reform.

Now when you have brought your Colt to such obedience; that he will lead
gently on both hands, if he be cold then you may have him into the Stable, and
there pull off the chase halter, How to use him in the Stable.
by the gentlest means you can, for fear of galling his head, and put on a
flat leather collar, or a broad girth-webbe-halter, then give him some hay to
cool his mouth and refresh him, and being thus in the house let his keeper be
ever doing something about him, ever using him the most to that which he is
most dainty, always cherishing him both with voice and hand when he does well,
and correcting him with the same, and sometimes with a stick, when he does show
any stubborn or dogged tricks; and by this means you may in short time make
him so domestical and gentle, that he will suffer you to rub him all over his
body, his head, under his belly, his lesk, legs, and suffer you to sheare both
head and ears, and to take up all his feet to be shod, all which I know of my
own experience, may be done in a week of time, although the Colt be in the
highest degree of untowardness; if the keeper be any thing industrious and
painful: for by this order I backed a Colt of Sir Anthony Mildmaies the fourth
day, which was five weeks before, and would not suffer any to clap their hand
on the saddle. And likewise I backed a Mare at my L: Bishops of Peterborough
and the third day caused her endure shearing about the head, musle, and ears,
although she was ten years old and would never before be brought to
subjection.

CHAP. 15. Of the excellent use of the Chase halter.
BEcause the Chase-halter is of such an excellent use, and has heretofore
been of so small esteem, that not any but Mr. Markeham, that I have read,
has entreated any thing thereof: although many have written copiously of this
Art. Therefore that it may be had in more esteem then heretofore it has
been, and as indeed it does deserve: I cannot pass it so slightly over, but
speak some what more in the commendations thereof, least that some (like Esops
Cock) should refuse such a Jewel and pass it over without esteem, in regard
they do not know the profit thereof.

But because the uses thereof are manifold, I will but only a The first use of
the Chasehalter.
touch some of them, and leave the rest to the discretion of the ingenious and
diligent practisers, for further observations. And therefore, first it is the
only means to bring a young Colts appetite, Theo. 1. b.
or desire to obedience, which is the foundation of this (2) 1. Pra. 14. c.
Art. Secondly, if he be of never so thick, and strong forehand, it will make
him very commandable of his head, if it be used as is said before. Thirdly, it
will make him have such a (3)
straight carriage of body that he will be apt to yield to the motions of the
man: if in his chasing about he be not suffered to hang outward with his body
to rest his head upon the halter, as many sullen Iades will do: but always as
he does desire to do so, then presently give him a sudden twitch, which will
cause him to rest firmly upon his legs, whereby that when he comes to be
backed he will be more apt to take his way, willinger. Fourthly, it will make
him nimble footed, for by the apt (4)
carriage of his body he will upon necessity handle his feet so orderly, that
he will be free from stumbling, and many other Vices. Fifthly, it will quicken
up his spirits so, that though he (5)
be of a very sad disposition, he will go the more freely and willingly,
which also I have had sufficient experience of: For I (b)
have not had a Colt at the least this dosen year, how sad soever he was
judged by his shape and disposition, that proved sad in Theo. 19. ^
riding, and one chief cause of that prevention was by this means. Sixthly, if
he be a mad fiery Colt he may far more easily (6) Theo. 20. ^.
be brought to command by this means, rather then by any (7) Theo. 34. a.
other when he comes to be backed. Seventhly, it will cause him to rake his
wind, to move with his body more easily; and so find the better ^light in his
moving, if he be not so furiously (e) 1. Pr. 14. e 18. g.
dealt withal, but that he may ease himself when he does first yield, for the
effect of rebellion is the stopping of the wind, and the effect of obedience
is the free raking thereof. And lastly, (8)
the true use of the Chase halter, is as an index to the Horse, whereby he may
the sooner come to understand the mind of his rider: for if he be brought to
such true subjection, by it, that he will stand when he does feel the
strayning thereof never so little, and that he is brought to lead, and turn
on both hands ^. Pr. 16. a. b The application of the chase halter to the head
strain
by it; he will be more easily taught to take his way, if to his trench, there
be added a head strain, with plated cords to go over his nose, like a
musrole, when he shall come to be ridden, whereby he may be governed, till he
find the use of the trench: by which his mouth will be kept from galling, and
he preserved from restiffe qualities; and so save labor and charge either to
get tormenting chains, and Cauizans, or hard trenches and bits to bring him to
obedience.

But what need I to spend any longer time to set forth the (c)
excellency hereof, seeing that this if there were no more, were sufficient to
cause it to be of more regard, then as yet it has 1. Pr. 13. q
been: that is, it will give a Horse such a true ground, that all those six
qualities which Master Morgan does speak of that should be in a good Horse,
may be the far more easily increased and maintained in him. But yet I would
not have the reader to understand me so, that this halter has power to work
Note the sequel
all these things to their perfection; but only as I say, it does but lay the
foundation of the work, which must be built up afterward by the rule or line
of reason, and likewise this may be abused, for it is but an instrument, and
therefore man must make d All instru^ents may be abused.
the application: which must depend upon true judgment, to apprehend the first
motion of yielding.

And likewise he must not think that he understands it, when as he has read
it, for the true application is to learn to ^. Pr. 14. x. 24. ^.
judge of the inward disposition of the Horse, by his outward actions, these
pointing as truly to them, as the index of a (e) Theo. 35. a
Clock to the hour, which must be gained by observation in practice, for the
eye may be deceived, but the hand upon the strain of the halter will not.

And whereas this manner of using a young Colt at the first, may be held too
violent, for heating him too much, before his Objection.
flesh be fully hardened, because it is holden the glut of the body will fall
into the legs, and so is the cause of many diseases thereof; I answer, the
violence will not be so great as is imagined, Answer.
if as I have said, you can conceive of the first motion of obedience: for by
the instinct of nature every thing does desire to flee from that which may hurt
it; and therefore they will yield before they wrong themselves, if then they
may be suffered: and the cause of such violence comes rather through
indiscretion, then by this order.

And for their sweating (if it fall out so) it does not necessarily f Every
sweat does not surfeit.
follow that every sweat does surfeit, for then those Horses, which have their
heates given them in such sort, that they are all on a foame, would be in the
same predicament, which thing experience will deny. And I see no reason
wherefore the sweating of a young Colt, should more engender such surrances in
him, then in any other, if he be moderatly cooled, for age does free neither
Man nor Horse from diseases. And where it may be said, that they are the more
foggy, and so sooner caused to sweat, so likewise they are more pursye, and so
for want of wind, they will sooner obey: for the raking of the wind is the
only mark to aim at, for the knowledge of gayning obedience.

And again, sweat does not so much hurt, if it proceed not Theo. 34. b.
from the vital parts, but from the animal: for this sweat is nothing but
the dissolution of humors in the body, and so is driven into the outward parts
through the pores, by the violence g The cause of sweating.
of heat caused by labor, and so that which is without the skin does dry and
bark outwardly, but that which is within the skin (disolued) by moderate
exercise will disperse it self into all the natural parts again, without
prejudice of the subject. And therefore the cause of surfets, is the
obstruction of blood through the negligence of the man, either in suffering the
horse to cool faster then the blood can have its natural concourse to the
proper use, or else in washing him before he be cold, ^ The cause of surfets.
1. Pra. 7. n. and 14. b.
whereby the veins are suddenly coold, and the blood stopped, and so gross
humors do abound, which causes swelling of the legs, pains, scratches, and
such like, therefore I would wish all that do tender the soundness of their
horses limbs, to eschew washing after labor, as an utter enemy thereto,
howsoever it is generally used, for saving labor in dressing.

But if your Colt be of such a stubborn, and dogged disposition, that he will
not yield to obedience, till he be so labored, that he is all of a sweat,
then let him be kept in exercise by teaching (i) Theo. 9. ^.
to lead, as before I have shown, till he be cold, and his sweating will hurt
him no more then those Horses which are of greater age. And herein many do
deceive themselves, through curiosity, for whereas they think to free their
Colt from such dangers, by not heating him so much at the first, they are feign
to thrust him afterward into greater extremities, whereby he is caused to sweat
ofter by many degrees, and worse then he should do, before he can be brought
to obedience, or else he will prove but a Jade, and then why may not any one
of those heates increase diseases as well as at the first.

CHAP. 16. Of the first Brideling and Sadling a young Colt.
When you have brought your Colt to such obedience, that he will lead gently
on both hands, and that he 1. Pr. 13. b.
will suffer you to rub him all over, and take up his feet gently to be shod
then you may use him to the bridle and saddle, 1 Pra. 14. b. a How to acquaint
the Colt with the bridle and saddle.
after this order.

First, you shall put a head-straine on his head, as I have said before, which
shall be made of three cords platted together, for that is more easy and
gentle for the gawling* of his nose, then if they were laid one over another,
so close as if they were but one rope, to the which you shall put a headstall
of Leather, like to a bridles headstall, with raines answerable thereto, which
shall be buckled to the two rings with buckles set to either end of the reyne,
for the same purpose, like b How to make the headstraine.
the manner of a musrole; but I would not have the reins to be put cross
under the chaps, as they use to do it, but to be put to the ringes, (single)
on the same side that does belong to the reins, because that if they should be
put cross, they would pull it so strait to his nose, that when a man does
slack his hand, the Colt cannot find any ease because the cords will be so
weak, that they cannot open the reins again. Therefore you shall have a
thonge of leather to go under his chaps (in the stead of them) to buckle so
strait as you shall think meet, both to keep the cords in their due place,
and also to put a martingale thereto, if you mind to use one.

Then you shall take a bridle, with a trench so smooth as is possible, of the
bigness of a Canon of the smallest size, and annoint it with honey and salt, to
relish his mouth, which will make him have the more delight to work
thereupon. Then you shall take the reins thereof, and thrown them over the
bought of your left arm, (for being under your feet when you should go to the
Colt) and laying the trench in the palm of c How to bridle him.
your left hand betwixt your finger and your thombe, you shall take the top
of the bridle headstall in your right hand, and hanging it upon your thumb,
you shall go to the Colt very gently, and begin at his shoulder to cherrish
him both with kind words, and your right hand, by scratching him thereupon:
and so go forward to his neeke, and ascend by degrees up to his ears, and
there cherrish him very well, then descending down toward his nose, you shall
hold him gently with your right hand upon his nose, about the place where the
cord of the head-straine does lie. Then you shall put your left hand (in which
the trench is) softly to his musle, and open his mouth d You must do all
things very gently at his first backing.
by thrusting your thumb into it about the bridle tush, for fear of biting up
to the Pallat of his mouth, and when it is opened, as without doubt it will be
by this means, you shall put the trench therein, then pull up your right hand
very gently to keep the trench in his mouth, and put the headstall first over
the far ear, and pulling your hand toward you, put it over the narre ear,
and so buckle the chawle band under his chaps, then you shall take the reins
thereof, and put them over his head, letting them hang loose upon his Crest.

Note, that if in offering to bridle him, he will not suffer you Note.
to put the bridle over his ears gently, that then in any case you strive not
to do it by violence; for although many horses have 1. Pra. 14. i.
that vice, yet the cause thereof does not proceed from them, (^) Theo. 7. f.
1. Pr. 25. m.
but from the abuse of the man; and therefore you must think that error does
issue from your self, in not making him so familiar as you should: For this I
am assured, that this method will train up a Colt to keep him free from any
evil tricks (if it be truly understood.) But in case you ouer-slip your
self, or that you have a Colt which has the like quality, then you shall
forbear to bridle him presently, till you have brought him to suffer you to
handle him about the ears, which may be done in Theo. 29. ^. and 22. ^.
the Stable, by offering to scratch him gently about them; which if he will not
endure, then (with a stick) correct him twice or thrice together, using a
reuiling voice withal, but in any case correct him not too much, for bringing
a distraction to him.

And therefore, if you see that he has gotten such an evil quality thereof,
that you cannot well reform him in the stable, then you shall have him abroad,
and use him as I have shown, by chasing about, till he will suffer you to come
to his head and 1 Pra. 14. f. ^ The application.
handle his cares, which order will cause him soon to yield, for the chasing
him about will make him let his wind have free passage, which is the cause
both of this and all other restiffe qualities, he keeping his wind to give
strength to his body that he may be the more able to resist.

When you have bridled him, look that his head-stall be of a just length for
his head, so that it hang neither so side, that he k The true place for the
trench in his mouth.
may take it in his teeth, nor so short to gagge him, whereby he cannot take
delight nor feel ease; but let it hang in his mouth a little above his bridle
t^she, for that is its true place. Then take a great saddle, (commonly called a
buffe saddle) being covered either with buffe or Calfe-skinne, and let it be
made of such a form as Mr. Markham has delineated in his Cauallarice, with
good stirrops and strong lethers thereto, with strong tabbes, fast sown unto
the Siuilles, they being nailed to the tree for the same purpose; and three
Girths made double of strong Girth-web, lest the Colt should break them by the
force of his wind, which would be a gross error and hard to reform.

Now your Saddle being thus prepared, you shall trusse up The Manner of sadling
a young Colt.
the stirrops, as high as the skirts of the saddle, and throw the Girths upon
the seat, lest the hanging of them down may cause an affright in the Colt, and
then you shall present it unto him after this manner. First (as Mr. Markham
does wish) you shall bring it to his head, and suffer him to smell thereupon,
after you shall rub it against his shoulder, and so along his side (ever
cherishing him) to his buttocks, then you shall bring it back again to his
shoulder, and set it easily upon his back, which if he suffer (as no doubt
but he will, being used in all things as is said) make much of him again;
then take it off and set it on again: And let one (being on the contrary side)
pull down the foremost Girth very gently and reach it unto you, Of
Crossegirding. Note.
which you shall Gird to the hindermost tabbe very slack, (at the first) lest
the Colt feel it nippe him, and so in stirring the other Girths may offend
him, (being loose) and endanger the casting of the saddle, (by plunging) which
would be held a great indiscretion of you.

Then when you have fastened it to the hinder tabbe, (as I have said) let him
reach down (likewise) the hindermost Girth, and give it you, which (in like
manner) must be gert to the first tabbe, and after that the middle Girth,
which you shall trusse to the middle tabbe. And when they are all thus fastened
to the tabbes, you may trusse them straighter (by degrees) till you feel the
saddle sit firm on his back. Now this manner of girding is called
crosse-girding, which is the best way to fasten the saddle on the Colt; for it
will both keep it in its due place very fast, and also it will keep the
Girths about his Chest, so that they cannot fly back, whereby the Colt shall
not have such force to break them, by thrusting out his body with his wind.

When you have thus sadled your Colt, you shall take strong (x) The manner of
his Crooper.
Crooper (made of a long piece of lether) and first buckle one end thereof unto
the hinder part of the saddle, then you shall put it under his tail, and
fasten the other end (in like manner) thereto; at such a due length, as will
neither suffer the saddle to slip into his neck, nor pinch the Colt behind
to keep it back. Then you shall take the reins of the bridle, and make them
of an equal length, (for pulling his head of one side) and pulling them gently
toward the saddle pommell, till you feel (by your hand) the Colt may have
some feeling of the trench, at which length you shall reyne him to the pommell,
for so you shall not bruise his mouth, (of which you must have a great care)
and also it will make him rest a little upon it, to make him the better
acquainted therewith.

Having (thus done, you shall take a long cord, and put one end through the
ring of the head strain, (which is on the near side) and let it go under his
chappes, to the ring an the far side, fastening it thereto, which will serve
in stead of a halter to ^ Pra. 15. b
lead him by: So you shall take the Colt forth, to lead him abroad to make him
acquainted with the bridle and sadle, and the How to acquaint your Colt with
the saddle abroad.
girding of his body; but ever as you lead him abroad you shall make very much
of him, and go to the saddle and clap upon it with your hand, which if he
suffer gently, cherish him excedingly to fortify him in his well doing: But if
he be any thing fearful or skittish, you shall in no wise use any sudden or
rash correction, (for that will make him the worse) but chase him three or
four times about on either hand, and giving him reuiling 1. Pr. 14. ^.
terms; which correction will be sufficient to reform any fault till he come
to be backed.

When you have thus chased him about, and that you see his wind does rake, let
him stand, and clap upon the saddle again, l Many makes no account of making
him gentle on the far side, which is the cause of many Iadifh tricks.
never leaving to clap and shake the sad on both sides, till you perceive he
is careless of you, and that he will suffer it without dread; which (I am
sure) he will endure instantly, if he be rightly used; then have him home
(to the stable) and rub him well all over, and give him meat.

Thus by having him abroad, and using him after this order three or four
times, you shall make him so familiar with you, 1. Pra. 14. g. 17. b.
that h^^ will suffer you to come to the saddle (very boldly) on either side,
though he be a very untoward Colt. When he is made thus tame, you shall let
down the Stirrops and lead him abroad letting them hang down, to make him
acquainted with the beating of them against his sides and shoulders (as he is
led and trotted) for that will make him the better endure your feet in getting
first up, and also the hanging down of your legs, when you are seated in the
saddle at the first backing.

CHAP. 17. How to prepare a young Colt to let you take his back without
violence.
Having brought your Colt to this pass, that he will suffer you in all
things, (as is said) then you may boldly adventure to persist in preparing him
to let you take his back in the gentlest manner, which you shall do thus.
When you have sadled and bridled him, you shall go to him very gently, (being
in the stable) without any stick in your hand, for dismaying him, and put your
foot into the stirrup, which if he endure, entreat him kindly, then assay the
second and third time before you raise your self therein, for nothing causes
confusion in a a Have oftentimes makes wast. Theo. 3. ^.
Horse, more then to teach a new thing before he apprehend the old, for (in
Horsemanship) have (for the most part) makes waste.

Now when he will suffer you to put your foot in the stirrup, you shall strain
it a little more with the weight of your foot, and lift your self up and down
half a dozen times, at which, if you perceive he makes small regard, you
shall cherish him, after How to raise your self in the saddle.
you shall lift your self half way up, and look over the saddle to the far
side, at which, if he neither shrink nor stir, then alight gently and
comfort him again, and let him rest a while, for that will ground him in his
well doing. After that, you shall go to him again, and being half way up (as
before) with your body toward the far side, encourage him both with words and
your hand, by cherishing him on the far shoulder: Then go to his other side,
and do in all things as on the narre, for that will make him so bold that when
you come to back him, he will not take distaste at any part of you; the
neglect whereof has (b) 1. Pr. 16. l.
brought many ladish tricks to the Colt; and so to cloak their ignorance has
holden the cause to be the doggednesse of the Colt, and that he would not have
taken his way no better, whosoever had handled him.

But because I would not have men languish any longer, of such a braine-sicke
disease; let them know assuredly, that if they use a Colt (of what disposition
soever) according to the true understanding of this Method, they may take his
back, and make him go forward willingly, without any yerking, plunging, lying
down, or any other ladish quality. And therefore, by his first backing, you
may judge whether you have used him as you ought; for this I have had
experience of, that a man may back a young Colt, if he be rightly used, to
make him take his way gently (without tricks) as well as to teach him any other
lesson; for it is also but a lesson.

And this may reprove them that will adventure to back a Colt so soon as he
is haltred, and so make great bragges of their knowledge, which is as
commendable, as those husbandmen A confused course.
which will lay grass together in Winter stacke, so soon as it is cut down
before it has time to wither: for as this will cause mow-burning and moulding,
so the other will endanger the melting of his grease, (if he be of spirit and
fat) and also cause many restiffe qualities, which will ask far more time
to reform, then would be required to keep them from them at the first. And
further it is opposite to the Art (howsoever they may esteem of themselves)
for that deals altogether upon extremities (without order) but this in the
mean (c) Theo. 3. e.
with order: Therefore he is not a Horseman that can sit a rough Horse, but
he that can govern him according to the Art.

But to return from whence I did digress, when your Colt will suffer you to
get half way up, then you may use him in all How to carry your Switch at the
first. 1. Pr. 22. g.
things (as before) with a Switch in your hand, observing to carry it in your
right hand with the point upward, running up close by your shoulder, for fear
the motion and sight thereof should bring a distraction to the Colt. To which,
when he is acquainted, then (being in the stable) you may get into the saddle,
and sit still therein without motion for a time, to make him acquainted with
the sight of your body, upon his back, for so you shall the less dismay your
Colt with the apparition of your body, because it will not be so perspicuous,
in regard the house is not of such illustration as the open air. Then alight
from his back and cherish him, letting him rest, and so give him meat.

When you have brought your Colte that he will suffer you to take his back in
the stable, then have him abroad How to use him when you first take his back
abroad.
again, and leading him abroad, so as he shall not be near any other Horses
(for disturbing him,) you shall first let him pause a little, after (taking
your Switch in your hand as before) you shall go to him, and offer to put your
foot in the stirrup, which if he suffer, cherish him; and so do in all things
as you did in the stable, only observe not to get into the saddle, till you
have on^ to hold him, and lead him forward at the first, least he show some
Iadish tricks, you having no means to let him know your mind. Now when he
will suffer you to do thus on the narre-side, acquaint him with the like on the
far-side, the omission whereof has caused many absurdities; for many if they
once bring their Colt to familiarity on the one side, they never regard the
other: like to the unskillful Cook who thinks that his meat is roasted as
soon as the out side is scortched. And so they adventure to back him; whereby
the Colt is so much disastered, by such strange apparitions on the other side,
and upon his back, as he was never acquainted withal before; that he
presently falls to yerking, and plunging, as evil as if he had never been
handled, whereby some get such iadish tricks, as they can never be reformed;
but by great judgment.

Now for the prevention of which restife qualities, I need not (d) 1. Pr. 14.
g. Chap. b.
spend any time therefore, for if you note this decorum, you may back any
Colt, without resistance. And therefore if there be a fault it is in your
self. But if your Colt be of such a dogged disposition, and you have erred in
your judgment, so that he will not suffer you to take his back gently, you
shall use no other correction then reuiling terms; and thereto if it be in the
house you shall give him a stroke or two with a small stick, and not with a
switch, for causing him to be swing tayled. But if it be abroad that he will
not suffer you to take the Saddle, then chase him about as before, for that is
all the manner of corrections ^. Pr. 14. f. 16. ^.
you need use till he be backed. And by this means you may ground any Colt,
whether it be for the Buffe-saddle, Pacing, Trotting, or Coursing.

CHAP. 18. How to Back your Colt at the first.
I May seem to many to set fourth more strict observations then needs, in
making him apt for the Saddle, and backing: because it may be said, there has
been many good Colts backed heretofore without half such curiosity. But if
they would rightly understand the project hereof: that it does tend to the true
taming of any Colte, of what disposition soever, they shall find, (by proof)
that here is nothing superfluous, for the bringing of such to subjection, as
are of high spirit, and of a fearful, and dogged disposition. And although
those Colts which are of such soft mettell, that they will be made domestical,
with much less labor and curiosity: yet if they rightly (a)
consider how many of those Colts prove iades, when they come Theo. 17. h. 37.
h.
to the touchstone, in regard they are not rightly handled before they come to
be backed; and likewise, acknowledge the cause (as certain it is) to proceed
through the negligence of the man; I put no question, but they would not think
that any needless labor or time spent, which does bring such good and
profitable effects.

But because no potion can be discribed, or confected, to cure this deadly
disease, of wilful negligence and ignorance, I will let them continue still in
this obstinate infection: and seek to preserve the young imps (of this
Vineyard) from such contagious and infectious diseases. And therefore when you
have prepared your Colt so, that he will suffer you to do in all things as I
have said: then you shall cause him to be Bridled and Sadled as before, and
look that you have a special care, to put the headstraine, in the due place
of his nose; for if it be over high it will stand in small stead to govern
him, except you use much violence, and by that means you shall chafe and gaul
his nose very shamefully.

And again, if you put it too low, you may bruise the tender Note the true
place of the head strain.
grisle thereof; and further, by pulling it straight, you shall pinch his
Nostrells, whereby his wind will be stopped from its natural passage: either
of which will be accounted a gross absurdity in the horseman. Therefore let it
be placed below the nether-most part of the strength of his nose, just at the
beginning of his nostrell.

Furthermore, you shall have a long girth made of double girtweb well sowed
together, made of purpose like a sursingle, having at either end a strong ring:
and to one of these rings you shall make fast a long piece of strong
hunger-leather whereby you may trusse it round about the Colt, to make the
Saddle more firm: Now this, of many is called a hold-fast. Then put it over
the saddle, and bring it under his belly, and put A Girth or sursingle called a
holdfast.
the other end of the said leather first through the nethermost ring and after
through the uppermost, and putting it through thus three or four times, you
shall pull it very close to his body, and so make the end fast. Now the profit
hereof is, it will keep the The use thereof
Saddle very firm, and sure, and help to keep both the tabbes and girths
from breaking, in that it will so gird in his body, that he dare not thrust
forth his wind (never after,) to break them as is the trick of many sullen
iades. Or for want thereof you may take a strong trace, but it is not so good,
because it will pinch and nip his body too sore, (except there be a great care
had in the trussing of it.)

When you have made your Colt thus ready, let his keeper go to him gently, and
lap up the strain of the long rope, that is fastened to the head strain
handsomely, and take it in his left hand, then take him close by the head with
his right hand, and lead him forth gently into the fields, to some new plowed
grounds, where after he has paused a while, you shall (b) 1. Pr. 14. b.
go your self unto him, and look that your Saddle stand right, the crooper
sure, and all the girths of an equal straitness, and in their right place.
Thus when you see that all things are sure, you shall observe how he is
disposed, which you shall perceive Theo. 17. d. 23. c. 34 b.
by his gesture, but because I have spoken largely thereof in the seventeenth
Chapter of the Theoricke part, I will not trouble you with repetition here
again, but refer you thither: And if you perceive (by any of those
Characters) that he is evil disposed, then let him be chased about (again) to
remove those by-thoughts, which is a present remedy; but yet know that ^. Pra.
14. f. 16. d.
the chief cause thereof is in your self for want of true proceeding.

Then you shall put your foot into the Stirrup, and heave your self four or
five times from the ground, which if he suffer, (as no doubt but he will,
being rightly trained before) you shall 1 Pra. 17. d.
alight and cherish him, and let his keeper lead him twenty or thirty yards,
which will comfort him much: then go to him again, and get half way into the
saddle, then alight and cherish him, and let him be led forward again, and the
next time get into the saddle (gently) and seat your self in such sort, as I
have shown at large in the 13. Chapter of this first part; Theo. 13.
which is briefly with your body upright, your nose, just against the middle
distance betwixt his ears, your feet hanging c How to seat your self in the
saddle.
even down, as if you stood on the ground, and the reins of your head strain
shall be made of such a just length that (keeping your true seat, in every
respect, and your arms close by your side, holding your hands over his
mid-crest) he may have but a feeeling of your hand with his head. Being thus
mounted, you shall take the reins of the bridle d How to hold your bridle
reins.
and lap them one over another to the just length of the other reyne, and so
hold them a handful distance one from another, holding your stick in your
right hand close by your shoulder for amazing the Colt. Then your self sitting
without motion, let his keeper offer to lead him forward some three or four
score yardes, which if he go gently as very like he will, then let him offer
to stop him, and at that very instant you may strain your hand a little
harder, which will be a means to give him some use thereof.

Then let him cherish him, but sit your self still in your seat, and let him
lead him forward, and Trot in his hand as far again, there let him stop him,
and your self doing as before, and after he has cherished him, let him take
away the rope from his head strain, and after he has led him forward, let him
leave him only to your self, you suffering him to go forward, (2) A Colt must
be suffered to go which may he will at the first.
which way he will, whether it be overthwart the field, endwise or howsoever,
for if you should disturb him before he can tell how to take his way, it will
both weaken his neck, gaul and spoil his mouth, or bring some other restiffe
quality to him, which would ask a great time to reform. And observe nothing
at his first backing, but only to carry an upright firm hand (over the midst
of his Crest) for so you shall keep his Note.
head so steady* that he cannot have liberty to throw down his head, (as is
the desire of many young Colts) but you must so temper the carriage of your
hand, that it must not be so hard as to cause him to stay, nor so slack as he
may get the advantage (e) Theo. 14. b. 27. c.
to run away, which is most incident to Colts of the best metal: And
therefore you shall carry your hand so that you may have but a feeling of your
Colt, and he likewise but a feeling of you.

Wherefore if you see that he is disposed to run away in any case do not
think to stop him by force: for that will so f The cause of disorder of the
head.
spoil his mouth, that he will prove headstrong, and get evil qualities (as
writhing of his chappes, hanging out his tongue, and such like:) but let him
go as he will, you doing nothing, 1. Pr. 14. e.
but desire to keep him from dangers, till you feel him begin 15. g.
to slake, which I am sure he will do presently, except you add g You must be
careful to observe his first motion of yielding.
fuel to his fire, and therefore you must be careful to apprehend the first
motion of yielding, and then strain your hand a little to stay him, and so
make a large turn for weakening of his neck, helping him to turn (by laying
your contrary leg to his side) on that hand you mind to turn him, and so
Trot him home (by the gentlest means you can) then let his keeper come gently
unto him, and hold him by the head, till you be alighted from his back, and so
have him into the stable, rubbing him well, and then let him stand.

Note, that if at his first backing, (whilst he is in his keepers hand to lead
forward,) he be desirous to go faster then you Note.
would have him; that then in no wise he hold him by force, but letting the
rope go to full length suffer him to run half a dosen times about him on
either hand (with you on his back) and that will be a sufficient correction,
for that at the first, except you disquiet him through you disorder, for if he
should think to hold him by strong hand, it would spoil all you had 1 Pra.
14. i.
done before, in causing him to strive the more; extremities being repugnant to
Art.

CHAP. 19. Of backing a young Colt after other Horses.
ALthough diverse ancient Horsemen have counseled, that a young Colt at his
first handling, should be taught by following other Horses; and also Master
Morgan does advise that he should both be taught to lead, and to be backed after
the same manner; yet experience has brought me to a contrary mind; the
reasons why, are: First, I must needs confess (1) For a young Colt to follow
other Horses at his first backing is naught and why.
it is a very good way if this Art of Horsemanship did tend to no other end at
his first backing, but to make him gentle to carry a burden or sackes to the
Market, for then they would soon be brought to carry a pack, and follow other
horses without much to do, very willingly; But it has a further extent, for
it aymeth to bring a Horse to true obedience, and to give him a comely, and
graceful Reyne, a commendable Pace, and a handsome a The end of this Art.
Theo. 9. h. 11. d.
carriage of himself in every one of his parts: which can never be effected,
by this order in making him loving and gentle only, since there is still an
inherency of rebellion by nature, that is still unreformed.

Wherefore, no maruayle though he condemn all those Horses as without use, if
they be not of such perfect breeding and shape as he desires: seeing that
neither they nor these can be Theo. 19. b.
brought to the height of their disposition, by such indirect grounds of Art
which he does set down. Secondly, there will (2)
be in that proceeding a great loss of time, for whereas he does will that a
Colt should be exercised in leading after another b A loss of time.
Horse, nine or ten days, before he do any other matter to him: and after
to carry some heavy burden upon his Saddle some several days after; during
all which times he (by this document) should not wear any thing in his mouth,
but only a halter on his head; and then after he is backed, still to follow
another horse two or three days more; in which time any industrious Horseman
may teach a Colt both to take his way willingly, and give him a good ground of
helps and corrections, both by hand and foot, which he will then be altogether
barren of, in that it is so long ere he have a trench in his mouth without the
true use whereof, whatsoever a man does, is most absurd.

Thirdly, this is a cure that does heal an old festred sore (3)
outwardly, but never searches to the bottom, for if he be a Colt of any
sad disposition, it will make him so extreme stubborn, that he will go but
as himself lusts, without any grace at all: And again, if he be of a free
disposition, it will make him so wilful, that when he should be commanded to
Theo. 19. and Chap. 20.
do any thing which he disliketh, will (as a soar festred breaks out anew)
fall to rebellion, he never having the use of motions taught him.

And lastly, he (by following another Horse so long) will get (4)
such a habit thereof, that when he shall chance to meet with one by the way,
he will be very hardly entreated to pass by him, especially if he be any
thing disquieted before: in that custom has made him more frequent to follow
them, then Theo. 14. ^
to be governed by the man. For, although by this order he may be brought to
gentleness, and so be caused to go forward (c) Theo. 34. ^.
(according to his own liking) yet when the man shall think to work him for
further perfection, he will use resistance because he was never brought to
obedience before; by the means of which ignorance he is brought to restiffe
qualities, being trained according to his own will, and not to the knowledge
Theo. 20. ^. 18. a.
of Art, (as I have said in the 20. Chapter of the Theorick.) because this
tends to obedience toward the man, whereby d A difference betwixt the Horse
yielding to the Man, and the Man yielding to the Horse.
they two may be joined in one.

And although there may be said that there is an obedience in this, yet the
difference is, that in this conjunction the Man does yield to the appetite of
the Colt; but in the other to seek a reducement of it to obey the will of the
man, (being led by reason; for the want of which consideration, is the chief
cause of all manner of restiffenes, and of a dead and hard mouth, so that the
Colt will run away upon every discontent. And further, Theo. 17. h.
as the gauling of the mouth is not commendable nor agreeing 1 Pra. 6. a.
to Art, (in that it is thereby hardened and made horny) by rigor and violence;
so to use a Colt, after these directions, will never bring him to true
subjection of the hand; for that his mouth was never quickened with a true
relish, by helps and motions; for although it is not hard and horny by
bruising, yet it will be so soft and dead, that if he be displeased, he will
no more respect the trench (it being so smooth as it should be) then he had a
fuzze or sponge in his mouth, which is the cause that so many varieties of hard
bittes and snaffles were invented. Wherefore no way that I ever found either by
practice or reading, (e)
to prevent all these inconveniences is so certain as to Theo. 10. d.
back a young Colt, after the former order; for so the Colt is continually
governed after the man's directions.

CHAP. 20. Of the commendations of the Head-straine, with the uses.
BEfore I trace any further in this Tract of taming a young Colte, I will
speak a little more of the commendations and use of the Head-straine, because
it is the only instrument that can be used for staying, placing, and making
firm the horses head, and also to learn him the use of the trench, with the
least offense. But here I may seem to dissent from all the former Authors, in
that I allow no sharper instruments for taming and subduing any Colt, then the
smooth trench; and the Headstraine, since there has been and is still (in all
ages) several inventions, some of greater torture then other (to be applied
according to the nature of the Horse) as musrolles, chains, and cauezans, and
likewise great varieties of bits and snaffles, of several hardness and
sharpnes; yet since I have found by experience and reason, that that
Head-straine only with the trench, will bringany Colt to subjection: I omit
the other as superfluous, and speak only of those which work nearest the
truth, craving leave to set forth my experience, as well as they do their
collections.

But whereas some who have deserved condign praise, (in Objection.
taking pains to set forth their works for the good of their Country) hold
that the Head-straine has been a sufficient correction (in times past) to
bring a Colt to obedience, whilst they were of a more pure maturity, but since
(being composed of a more gross substance,) a man cannot subdue their
rebellion Answer.
with such soft and mild corrections: I answer, if the cause of rebellion did
consist in the outward parts, it were true, but Theo. 3. ^.
(as I have often said) it is in the inward parts, and therefore to 35. ^.
use cruelty (in such sort) as to cause a reformation altogether Et multis
locis.
by the outward parts, is as if a Physician should lance the outward parts of
the body, to cure the inward flux of a Consumption. And therefore these
varieties of cruelties, do Theo. 10. d.
rather argue the miserable condition of our age, which does more affect
imitation, then an urgent necessity.

For if any man (coming from a strange Country) use any new fashioned
invention, (though never so cruel) then are w^ ready to imitate him in the
like, thinking that novelties do produce perfect on: Whereby, (like sheep) we
are led to the slaughter of ignorance, in that we will never take pains to
Theo. 19. ^.
consult with reason what digression such Cruelty does make from the truth.
For, when Signior Prospero, first came into England, he flourished in fame for
a time, (through that affectionated blindness we are veiled withal, in exalting
strangers for their strange fashions) and so, though he used such tormenting
Cauezans, as were more fit for a massacring butcher then a Horseman, yet for
all that well was he that could go nearest him in such Turkish tortures: And
besides those, he would Theo. 16. a.
have a thick truncheon to beat those Cauezans into his nose, the further to
torment him, as if Art had consisted in cruel torturing poor horses.

And yet for all this, our eager desire did so hunt after novelties, a
Imitation leads us into wilful ignorance.
that we never regarded whither we went in following the chase, till time (the
searcher of truth) gave evidence of his knowledge, and then a definitive
sentence was given against him (as a just desert) that he was not worthy to be
marched in the rear ward of the meanest professors.

Neither do I much allow Mr. Blundeuills opinion, (although famous with the
most) who being led too much by authority, b Varieties of bittes or snaffles
distemper the hand.
in following other Authors, has spent a great time in setting forth such
diversities of bittes to distort the silly Horses, that the varieties of them
were able to confuse both man and horse; for no man can have such a temperate
hand, as to carry it (as he should) upon several bittes, nor no horse can
conceive how to carry and behave himself (as he ought) finding such
alteration in his mouth: But if he had taken as great pains to make trial of
such varieties by experience, as he did to collect and set them forth, and also
to search the causes of rebellion; he would have turned his pen from the horse
to the man, (for reformation) in as much as he having reason should work by
such order, as is best agreeing to the same.

But here I may be held very peremptorious, to speak against Objection.
the ancients herein, as though they had not taken as great pains to scarch
the truth, and likewise could not have seen, if they had brought such
absurdities, as well as my self: I answer, there is nothing that increases
ignorance more then partiality, and negligence; for when as a man has set
forth some Answer.
things that are probable, then if he commit many gross errors ^ A partial
judge never a true Judge, especially being led by Authority.
after, yet having a fame there is a partial censure of him, that all his
rules are absolute* and so those errors are reformed if they once say it is his
opinion: Whereby, being negligent, they will not take pains to examine the
truth thereof, but tread still the tract of the ancients, (it being more easy
to go to the mine where there is a pit dug already, then to work anew out
of the earth: Which Lethargy, I my self was also benumbed a d For we having
the benefit of their times and our own, it were a shame if we did not purge
this Art from some of her errors.
great while withal, for loving imitation I practiced as well upon those
cruelties as upon the milder, but yet I could never find so good effect in them
as in the Head-straine and trench, which made me think that men were but men,
and that error has intruded it self in all ages; and therefore resolved to
follow them no further then they followed the truth.

But in regard that my self only is of this opinion, my words cannot be so
well credited, that they should be believed; therefore for the further proof
of these my assertions, I will frame one Sillogisme, as well as I can, (in
regard I am no Logitian,) thus.

Nothing that does tend to violence, does work according Celarent.
to the true Art of Horsemanship.

But all hard Cauezans, Bittes, and snaffles do tend to violence:

Ergo, no hard Cauezans, Biittes and Snaffles do tend to the true Art of
Horsemanship.

The Mayor is proved by Aristotle* where he says, that whatsoever Ethick. 3.
li. Chap. 1.
is done by violence, is no Art in that it is done unwillingly, whose beginning
is in the outward parts contrary to nature (and Art does tend to help nature)
so that whatsoever is so done, brings no delight, and therefore not durable.

And likewise the Minor is proved by the same place, for those instruments are
the executioners of a Tyrant, which forces by fear of a greater evil; so
that if they will not presently obey (according to his will) they shall be
lacerated and tortured, whereby they are forced to yield suddenly with the
outward 1. Pra. 14. i.
parts, although the inward parts be still rebelling. By which Theo. 3. ^.
proofs it is plain, that violence is no true Art, so that the conclusion
must necessarily follow.

But whereas it may be objected that herein I deny my self, Objection.
for I spoke of using violence in the first haltring of a Colt, in that he
should be forced till he sweat so much; I answer, they Answer.
which understand me so, deceive themselves; for whereas I speak of chasing a
Colt till he sweat, is no violence (for many will chase themselves in playing
till they sweat, which is not violent but voluntary) for he has liberty to
ease himself as soon as he yields; but that which is brought by violence,
is forced with grief, because he can find no ease. Wherefore to infer by
induction, seeing those Instruments do work by violence, and violence is such
an enemy to this Art, and Art is wrought by the softest and gentlest means to
gain obedience; therefore I commend this head-straine and trench above all the
other, in that they are sufficient to command either young Colt, or any other
Horse whatsoever, if they be rightly used, which I prove thus.

Whatsoever things will reform any one evil quality in all Darij.
Horses, will reform all evil qualities in any one Horse.

But this Head-straine and trench (in their right uses) will reform any one
evil quality in all horses.

Ergo, this Head-straine and trench (in their right uses) will reform all
evil qualities in any one Horse.

The Mayor is proved by the Metaph: for nature has given Meta.
unto all horses one and the self same material substance and nature, so as
there is no new thing in any indiuiduum, that there should need any new
inventions for several qualities, in as much as every single body does
participate of the universal nature, 1. Pr. 13. h.
and so all restiffe qualities proceed from one root, and one cause, which is
disobedience, and therefore no several natures, although they vary in
disposition, which is increased by rebellion, through abuse by man's ignorance,
in not knowing, how to apply his Corrections accordingly: For, to reform any
one evil quality in all horses, does require as many several applications,
as to reform all in any one; for if there were a Horse that might be said had
any natural evil quality more then any other horse, then he might be said to
be a more horse then another, which is gross to conceit.

The Minor is proved, in as much as this Art does tend to reduce all to a
mean, therefore whatsoever is differing therefrom, does decline to either of
the extremes, and so repugnant to Art: And therefore, seeing in all the
actions of a Horse, there is 2. Pr. 36. a.
but two chief things to be respected, as obedience or disobedience, and so in
his mouings, they are either orderly or disorderly, fast or slow, dead-mouthed
or tickle mouthed, etc. Even so in like manner, these two, (I mean the
Head-straine and trench, being also two) will reform any restiffe or evil
quality in what horse soever if they be truly applied; for though there be as
many several dispositions as there are horses, yet all restiffe qualities that
concur (as I say) proceed all from one Theo. 32. a
cause, and so may be reformed by these instrument (if they be rightly used;)
for as one horse is a particulars horse, and yet may have many restiffe
qualities, by disorder and abuse, so these have manifold operations, and yet
the same: and therefore, if any 2 Pra. 37.
have them and cannot find such effect by them, as to reform any quality in
all horses that shall come unto him, he must condemn himself, either for
negligence or ignorance, for not either applying, or not knowing how to apply
the ingredients thereto belonging, the trench serving to quicken the mouth when
it is dead, and the Head-straine to stay his head, that so he may rest upon
the trench, if he be tickle-mouthed; for when the head and mouth is perfect,
there can be no restiffe quality working: and so the conclusion also must
needs stand good.

Wherefore seeing these two, with their uses are sufficient to bring a horse to
an obedient and true riding; let all those that mind to plant in this Vineyard,
make much of these Laborers which will keep the weeds from growing therein:
And suffer Theo. 5.
no other idle and vain loyterers to dwell, lest they nourish such weeds as
the other has plucked up.

CHAP. 21. How to make your Colt take his way, without resistance.
When you have sadled your horse the second time, and made him ready, let his
keeper lead him forth into 1. Pr. 18. ^.
the field, and there use him in all things as at the first day, (especially if
you find him to be any thing stirring) suffering him to go which way he
lusts, observing nothing but only to carry a firm hand, and after you have
trotted him half a mile or there about, (so that he will suffer you to make a
gentle motion of your body) you shall strain your hand a little, to make him a
Your motions must direct him to know your mind.
have more feeling thereof, and (with the help of your leg) assay to guide
him in the right way, to which (if you feel any towardness) cherish him with
your voice, and make a large turn, and trot him home to the stable; letting
his keeper hold Theo. 14. ^.
him till you light; then after he is cold give him some meat to comfort and
cherish him.

Note that if at your first offer to guide him, he refuse, that then Note.
you do not (in any case) force him, for making him thrust out his contrary
shoulder, and weaken his neck (for preservation whereof you must have a great
care) for many inconveniences will ensue thereby, besides it will ask a great
time to b You must observe that he carry a firm body in all his proceedings.
Theo. 15. c.
cause him have a true carriage of his body being once dislocated. Therefore let
him go on, still as himself lusts half as far again, and ever as he is
going forward assay the like, and so the third or fourth time, by which time I
am sure he will yield (though he be very stubborn, if to the use of your hand
you use the help of the leg, by laying the calfe close to that side of your
Colte, which is contrary to that hand you mind to turn on) and so have him
home as before. Likewise have him into the field, in the afternoon your self,
for then Theo. 15. d.
you may be bold to get upon his Back (if before you have not used any sharp
correction to terrify him) and being seated gently, putting him forward by
easing your hand, to give him liberty to go, and helping him with the motion
of your body forward, and ever as he goes seek to govern with your helps,
by degrees, as you shall find his towardness, but if he be slow of
apprehension, so as he will not conceive your mind so soon as you would, be
not dismayed, but labor him still as is said, and arm your self with
patience, for if then you fall to correcting, you utterly spoil all, for order
does not allow correction ^ Art does not commend correction for ignorance but
for negligence.
for ignorance, when he knows not what to do, nor wherefore he is corrected,
but for negligence, when he has learned a thing, and does forget it again,
or else through selfewill do it but when him lusts.

Thus you may use him for two or three days, by which time he will suffer you
to take his back gently, to go forward willingly, and to be guided easily.
Note that if in this time he chance to show any iadish tricks, as Plunging,
Reareing, Running-backe, and such like, that then you must examine your Note.
own proceedings, for the cause is in your self: for if you understand this
Method, and work accordingly I am sure there will ensue no disorder, for the
head-straine is so pleasing and gentle, that the Colt will press forward very
willingly upon it, and will easily be governed thereby, in that it is the same
with the chase-halter, wherewith at the first he was commanded, and therefore
you must observe to guide him chiefly by it, till he has further use of the
trench.

CHAP. 22. How to make your Colt rest upon the trench.
When you have brought your Colt to take his way willingly forward, and that
he will be guided by your hand which way you will, then you may be bold, to
seek to bring his mouth to the use of the trench, that so you may come to
learn him to stop. But thought I cannot make this so plain as I would, in
that there is such ambiguity in the hand, which must be governed according to
the shape, and disposition of the Horse; yet I will demonstrate it so plainly
as I can in treating chiefly of those Horses upon whom the depth of Art does
depend, a What sort of Horses the depth of Art does depend upon.
which are such as are of a thick, and short neck, dead mouthed, and of a
heavy and sad disposition.

Now because the true mouthing of a Horse, to cause him to stop close, and to
place his head orderly, are the grounds of this Art; you must have a great
regard that you fail not in any of 1. Pra. 22. a. 25. a.
them, for if you do you shall fail of your desire: for the neglect whereof
and of their true use, is the general cause of all evil quallities, which may
ensue in riding. And therefore if these b Marks to know when the Colt is
brought to true obedience.
be once truly gained, then is your Colt brought to true obedience, but not
before: and then he may be put to other lessons, which depend upon further
command, and moreover by their uses, you may have knowledge whether he is
perfect in them or no; for it is not his doing but his manner of doing, that
you c The cause of rebellion is in the self.
must regard.

And so the application of the trial of your own judgment Theo. 21. d.
is in the proceedings of your own works, for if in teaching any other lesson,
he prove rebellious, then you erred in your judgment in these for howsoever
you may think that he is perfect in them, yet I dare assure you he is not so
according to Art till he be obedient to your helps and corrections, and know
the use both of hand and foot. To which command of the head he must upon
necessity be brought unto before he can be commanded Theo. 36. a. 32. b. 35.
d.
in the other parts of his body; for a Horse cannot be mouthed well except he
carry his head orderly, and stop closely, neither can he be caused to carry
his head orderly, except he have a sweet mouth, and his hinder parts so
roundly trust, to stop truly, neither can he be brought to stop truly,
except he be well mouthed, and his head firmly placed, howsoever the ignorant
in the true knowledge of this Art, may think the contrary.

And yet further you must observe, (if truly you think to work) that these
must not consist in the outward parts, but also his desire must be agreeing, to
do them willingly or else they (d) Theo. 36. a. 2.
will not continue: and this is the point that many has failed in, which has
been the cause of so many torturing inventions, as before said, for when they
have brought their Colt to do these well, as they think, then when he
begins to be weary, or else any thing disturbed, he will either bear hard
upon the hand, or seek to free himself, by desiring to run away, and so
they presently sought sharper instruments for his head, thinking the other to
be too gentle, judging the cause to be in too much lenity of the hand, whereas
it was in his disobedience, for that his desire was not agreeing to those
outward motions.

And likewise it is the cause of rebellion in those Horses which are ridden for
the Buffe saddle, for many if they be ridden longer then ordinary, or by long
marching forward if they begin to be weary, they will rely too much upon the
hand, (e)
whereby their mouth will become dead, and therefore they invented Theo. 10. a.
strange causes from the cause, for it was that their hinder parts were not
firmly knit, but come slowly after, and so they Theo. 35. d.
press upon the hand; In like manner it is with hunting and (f)
running Horses, for when they are holden hard to the height of The like cause
is in hunting and running Horses.
their speed, many of them will play the Jade because the hinder parts are not
trust together roundly but launcheth themselves, to such length that they are
not able to bring them after.

Wherefore to keep your Colt free from such disorders whereby you shall not
need to seek any other sinister means, you shall observe thus. When your
Colt is made so gentle, that he will suffer you to take his back abroad in the
field, then you shall use him to come to the block, by letting his keeper
lead him to it, and there cause him to stand, by the gentlest (g)
means you can, then you shall come to him gently, with your 1. Pra. 17. c.
switch in your right hand holding it up close by your shoulder (as before,) and
going to his head make much of him, and so go upon the block very softly, for
too much stirring may affright him, when he sees you stand so high above him,
then cherish him, and when you have clapped your hand twice or thrice upon the
Saddle to imbolden him, get into it, and let his keeper put your foot into the
stirrops, and lead him gently from the block and so let him go.

Now when you have trotted him forward some twelve, or twenty score, you shall
make your bridle reins of a just Note.
length with the reins of the head-straine, for till he can tell how to take
his way forward, they should be longer then these, that he may press the
more willingly upon the headstraine, and so the more willingly take his way,
and after you have trotted him about a quarter of a mile further, you shall
begin to work upon his head, by holding your hands somewhat more firm, at
which if he seem to check, ease them again, but keep him still upon his
Trot, some seven or eight score, and then offer the like again, never
leaving, as you see occasion, till you feel him rest a little upon the trench,
(h)
then cherrish him with gentle words, but keep him still This seems a
slight error but it proves great in working.
in motion, for if you suffer him to stand at his own will, before he know
how to press forward upon the trench, it will breed in him a restifnesse of
standing still, which will ask a great time to reform; therefore (as I say)
keep him still in action, and have him home.

Then have him forth again in the afternoon, in like manner, still working
up his head, by holding your hands over 1. Pr. 18. d.
his midde crest, (for so you shall have the greater power to work his head to
the full height that nature will suffer: letting them come and go with sweet
motions. Note that if in the Note.
working up of his head he begin to rest upon your hands, that then you seek
no violence, but yielding them a little, thrust him into a Swift Trot, by
iertting your feet forth suddenly, ^ How to make a Colt go light upon the
hand.
upon your stirrup leathers, for that will make him follow more roundly with
his hinder parts, and as they follow roundly after, so you shall feel him obey
to your hands, for the closer they are shut, the more the fore parts are
raised, after this manner you shall use him for two or three days, and by that
time you shall feel his mouth very tractable, if you spoil it not by striving
too much therewith.

Note further also, that if in thrusting him forward, he will Note.
not come on roundly with his hinder parts by reason of his doggednesse, that
then at the very instant, when you offer to thrust him forward with your body,
you give him a good ierke with your switch, and in three or four times, it
will cause him to gather them up, which when you perceive, make much of him,
and have him home, observing this for a general rule, to leave him A general
rule.
in lust and courage, for that will increase his quickness, and nimblenesse.

CHAP. 23. How to learn him to stop.
YOur Horse being brought to this pass, that he will rest upon the trench,
with his mouth then you may learn him to stop, but not before: for if you
should put him to that before A Simile.
he knows how to rest his head thereupon, is as a man that coueteth to judge
by his feeling with his gloves on his hands. For if you force him to stop
upon the hand before his mouth be quickened, you shall utterly spoil it, and
loose the 1. Pr. 33. b.
grace of his head, besides many other restife qualities, that will a The
fruits of disorders.
iusue, only through disorder, not making an orderly proceeding, (by time) to
know when or how to make your progression. Theo. 3. l. 1. Pra. 17. a.
But whereas I speak here, (till the Colt will rest upon the trench) I would
not have you to understand me so, that I mean he should be are hard upon the
hand, (for that is the overthrow of this Art) in that no Horse whatsoever that
bears hard upon the hand, can ride truly, howsoever he may be judged, (by
many men:) but I mean only so, that you may have but a feeling of his mouth,
with your hand* and likewise he but a sensible Theo. 14. b.
feeling of your hand, whereby he may know your mind, by 27. c.
your motions.

Wherefore when you feel, that his mouth is brought to this temper, you shall
Trot him abroad, (as before) not offering to do any thing to him, till his
mouth be warmed, for if you b The cause of a tickle mouth, stand still, go
back, lash bodied, treadingshort, etc.
offer to stop him (at the first) upon a cold mouth, it will be a means to
make him so tickle-mouthd, that he will not rest upon the hand. Whereby when
he is any thing discontent, he will be subject to stand still, or runbacke,
and it will be also the cause of making him lash bodied in his carriage, and of
short Theo. 16. d.
treading, and triffling with his feet, so that in going forward he will* make
no way. But when you feel that his mouth is stayed, then you may offer to
stop him, by pulling your hands gently toward you and yielding your body
back, using words of help, as stop here, or stand, or such like, at the which
if he will (c)
not yield, then thrust him forward into a full Trot, again, and Theo. 17. ^.
22. ^.
ever in four, five, or six score, attempt the like, and as soon as he does
yield let him stand, and alight from his back, and cherish him, for that will
fortify his apprehension, then after you have led him a little while, mount
your self upon his back again, and ever in his going forward offer him the
like, as you shall see the ground best fitting, observing to cherish him in his
well doing, and correcting him, when he does offend, by thrusting him forward,
to a greater speed in his motion, which will be a sufficient correction, and
the best that can be used for that fault. And thus you shall use him for eight
or ten days together, by which time he will be so perfect, that he will stop
so soon as he shall but feel you move.

Note, that if in his stopping he stop idly, or throw down Note.
his head betwixt his legs, (as is the manner of sad and sullen Colts) that
then at the very instant, when you stop him you bend your body more suddenly
back, so that your head fall d Of a dead mouthd* Horse.
half way to his buttockes and give him a sharp and sudden twitch, with your
hand in his mouth: the profit whereof it this, 1. Pr. 24. o.
that the falling back of your body, at the very time, with the sharp
correction of your hand, will bring his mouth to such a quick feeling, that he
will in short time be brought to stop, only with yielding of your body
back, without strayning of your hand at all.

Note also, that then you must keep a firm and constant body, Note.
with a true seat, holding all your joints so straight as if they were all in
one piece, so that when your body bends back, Theo. 17.
your feet may go forward, and discribe the like part of an 15. d.
arch or circle, (below) as your head does (above) your seat being the center.
For the lash carriage of your body, will cause the like in the Colts.

Now the use hereof is, that the falling of your body back, will raise the
Colts fore-parts, and your feet moving forward will cause his hinder parts to
follow so close, that he will the sooner be brought to stop upon his buttocks.

Note further, that if the Colt be of any quick, and free spirit, Note.
that when you offer to stop him at the first, you use no violent or sudden
motions with your body, for that will so disturb Theo. 12. ^
him that it will make him half frantic, and fretting, as I have 26. e.
said in the 20* Chapter of this first part, but when you stop him use such
gentle and easy motions, as will be scarce discernable e A small motion for a
free will serve for the first.
to the eye, for that will be a sufficient proportion of help for him, in that
the cause of a dead mouth proceeds from the doggednesse and unapt carriage of
the Colt, which such Colts for the most part are free from.

Note again, that if your Colt be of such a stubborn, and Note.
unwilling disposition that he will not go forward as you would have him, to
carry a straight, and upright body, that then at Theo. 25. a.
the very instant, when you give him the switch you accompapany it with the
even stroke of the calves of your legs, which will be a mean to cause him to
gather up his hinder parts more roundly, and also it will be a preparatiue to
bring him to the Theo. 26. e.
use of the spur, the which when you are driven to use, let it 31. a.
be joined with other corrections, in such sort, as I have said asore.

Note yet, that if you see your Colt to be of such an untoward Note.
stubbornenesse, (that for all this) he will not obye to your hand, then you
shall have him into the field, and there labor (f) 1. Pr. 28. d.
him for two or three hours together, till by this your labor and toil, you
cause him to obey, which so soon as he does, alight from his back, and
cherish him; for this will make him yield if he be never so stubborn, for the
cause of all resistance is the unwillingness of his desire, and it is fortified
by the keeping of his wind, which this labor will force to let pass, and
as soon as it raketh freely, the body will yield instantly.

But herein you must be very cautious to give him ease at his first yielding,
least in seeking obedience you find rebellion; Note.
and so dant the Courage and spirit of your Colt, and thereby stir up
perturbations in that he obeys and cannot find ease. And this is a weed that
does flourish mightily in this Vineyard, which has smothered a great part of
the planting, for that men measure time more by their will then reason, and
seek for more at one time then the Colt has ability to perform, or capacity
to apprehend (at six:) But of this I have spoken more largely in the eight,
ninth, and tenth Chapters of the Theoricke Part.

But to couclude, note that if in his stopping he stand so stiffly with his
feet upon the ground, that he is not apt for a new motion, see then you iert
your feet so daintily forward, in your stirrops, and yield your body foreward,
in the small of your back or wast, using the clacking of you tongue, or such
like sounds of encouragement, which will stir him up, and cause him to stand
so aptly, that he will be ready to move, whenever you would have him.

CHAP. 24. How to bring his head to its true place.
AS there is an orderly proceeding in all Arts and Sciences, so likewise in
this; for when your Colt is brought to go orderly forward, and to stop
justly, then you must also go about to place his head; which if you should
desire before it 1. Pra. 25. a.
be brought to its full height, and he have the true feeling of the trench,
he would loose his grace in the carriage, and it would dead his mouth by much
tempering with it, whereby he will fall into many absurdities.

And therefore, the want of due consideration of this predicament quando, (as a
shower of rain) has sprung up so many weeds in this Vineyard, that they
ouer-grow and choke the Theo. 17. a.
true stemmes. But to leave these and come to the subject, how to work the
Colts head to its true place; In which you ought a This Tractate is a true
ground of all the parts of Horsemanship.
to consider, whether he is trained for service, or for pacing, trotting,
hunting or coursing, for although this Book does treat most of pacing; yet all
this which I have as yet spoken of, is a true general ground for all the parts
of Horsemanshippe. Theo. 37. ^.


And likewise you must consider whether he be of a large upright Ibid. ^.
neck, wide iawed, and so of a free spirit: or that he be of ^ thick fore*
hand, short neck't, and so heavy and sad, and after as you see his shape, and
find his disposition, so you shall work Theo. 3. i
for the command of his head: But because this does belong to 32. 33. 34.
the Theorie of a man's knowledge, and that I have spoken 35. 37.
thereof more largely, in the Theoricke Part, I will not make any repetition
here again, but refer you to those places, where you may know how to find
a horses disposition, (by those four Characters there set forth, and how to
use him accordingly.

Wherefore if you intend to train your Horse to the buffe Saddle (for service)
you shall take a Martingale to place his ^ How to mouth a Horse for the Buffe
saddle.
head, which he shall we are till he come to be bitted; because those
Horses, must have a precise stayednesse, in the carriage of their heads: Which
Martingale, let it be made of a long piece of leather, such a one as I wished
your Crooper to 1. Pr. 16. x.
be of, and to one end thereof you shall sow a buckle, then put it first under
his Girths, and so let it be brought betwixt his fore* legs, and put it
under his chappes, betwixt them and the leather of the Head-straine; then
buckle the ends together, but yet so slack that it pull not down his head,
till he be acquainted therewith. c The chief grace of a horse is his rain.


Now because there is nothing that graceth a horse so much, in all his actions,
as a comely and stayed reyne, it behooves you Theo. 4. q. 14. b.
to be very careful to place his head in the best and easiest manner that may
be, that he may take delight therein, otherwise he will hold it no longer
then extremity does compel him. Theo. 37. e.
Wherefore if he have a large upright neck, when you would work his head
down, you shall not hold your hand over the midst of his crest (as you did
during the time of working it up) d How to hold your hand to bring down an
upright neck.
but you shall hold them lower betwixt his mane and the saddle pommell; for so
you shall have the more power to keep his head round; and you shall carry your
hands somewhat more firm then you did before, letting him go very gently
forward at the first, raking but a foot pace, that he may have the more time
to work upon the trench, which will be a means to cause him bend in the
cragge, to chaw upon the same, which when he does, you shall let him stand,
and cherish him, Note.
then let one (being a foot) straiten the Martingale a little to restrain the
liberty of his head, but not so much as it may any way seem to force it down,
(for that will make him strive the more to have his head at liberty) but only
to stay his head for going too high with his nose, whenever he shall chance to
throw it up, and thus you shall bring in his musle by degrees, till you have
brought it to its due place.

But if he be any thing stubborn, or so short neckt that he Theo. 37. ^. e
How to place the head of a Horse that has a short neck.
will not bring in his head by this gentle means, then you must not seek to
make him yield by force of hand, or strength of Martingale, (for so you shall
make your self a great deal more labor) but you shall put him into a good
trot, and so keep his Theo. 36. d.
body in quick motion, which will cause him to bring in his 36. c.
head very soon, for that will make him use his hinder parts 16. ^.
more nimbly, which before he kept to give his body the more strength to
resist the hand, and thus you shall use him, cherishing him when he yields,
and correcting him (after that manner) when he offends, till you have
brought his head as you would wish, and there keep it firm, by bringing the
Martingale to that just length, as it shall neither pull his head down lower
through its straightness, nor give his head liberty to go higher, by too much
slacknesse, and so you shall keep his head continually in the right place very
easily, if you keep your hand firm upon the Head-straine, and preserve his
mouth in quickness, by sweet and gentle motions of your hand.

Note that the true use of the Martingale, is not to bring Note.
in the Colts head by the violence of it; but it must be wrought down by
giving him an upright carriage of his body, and true relish of the mouth (by
the hand) and then it is only to keep it firm there without alteration: And
therefore they are much deceived, who (when they have a Horse that is subject
to throw up his head or hold it out) think to reform them by the Martingale
only, for if his mouth be not refined, it has small effect of it self no
longer then it is in use, for when it is taken away and his head set at
liberty, he will be as evil (if not worse) then he was before.

Note also, that when you begin to bring in his head, that you Note.
pull it not lower then it was, but keep his neck at the full height, for
otherwise you will lose a great beauty of his reyne, hiding the grace of his
crest, and cause him to hold his head low* like a fearful beare-whelpe; and
therefore, have a care that when he does bring in his musle, that his head does
rest f The motions of a man provoke the Horse.
upon his throple, and therefore, if he fall too low with his neck, that then
presently you remove your hands upwards toward his mid crest again, and
quicken him with your tongue and the moving your self in your seat, yielding
your body forward, and that will cause him to look up with his head; which so
soon as he does, cherish him, and carry your hands down again; for if you
should hold your hands continually aloft, he could never carry a round reyne,
or if you should hold them continually low, you should pull down his head, and
therefore (as I say) you must remove them upward or downward as you (g)
see your Colts disorder, till it be firmly stayed, and then you Theo. 11. a.
must also keep a stayed hand, for any disorder in you will cause a greater in
him.

But if you purpose to make your Colt either trotter, pacer, hunter or courser,
then you shall place his head with the headstraine ^ How to place the head ^f a
tro^ter or hunter.
and trench only: but before you begin to do it you must (as I say) judge of
what disposition your Colt is, by his shape and mettle; for if he have a long
and upright neck, and his head well set on, having a wide iaw to receive his
Theo. 37. e.
throppell, then those horses (for the most part) are free and nimble bodied,
and in these you may save a great labor in the Theo. 34. f.
working up their heads, for they are subject to rise too fast of themselves,
and then if you should work them up too, they would be weak neck'd,
cocke-throppeld, withye-cragged, from which would ensue many other
inconveniences; but because I have spoken (in the four Chapters hereof before
coted) I omit them here referring you thither.

And therefore as soon as your Colt will take his way orderly, you shall use
all your best endeavors to keep his head ^ How to place the head of an
upright neckt horse, by the hand only.
down, by holding your hand firm upon the head* strain, and let your hands
work upon the trench to sweeten his mouth, by moving your fingers up and down
as if you were playing of an Instreument, and so you may place his head without
much ado.

But this you must observe, that as his head is thus easily placed, (if he be
used as he should be) so he is soon distempered, being of such a free spirit
if he be used contrary, and therefore you must be very cautious to be
patient, for if you disturb him once, so that he get a trick to rise with
his head, it will ask more Art to bring it down, then to work the other up.
And therefore you must carry a very mild, and gentle hand* upon the trench,
and pretty firm hand upon the headstraine.

But if your Colt be of a thick and strong forehand, short k How for a short
neck'd horse.
neckt, and narrow iawed, then he is of a more heavy and sad spirit, and will
not so easily be caused to come in with his musle, in regard he will desire to
hold out his head like a Swine, and 1. Pra. 21. ^.
therefore to bring him to an uniform reyne, will require great Theo. 19. ^.
labor, deep judgment, and long time; but yet if he have his mouth
quickened, and his body truly placed, the head is half commanded.

Therefore you shall begin to bring in his head (at the first) Chap. d.
as I set forth before upon his foot pace, and so use him in all things as
there (except the Martingale) in stead whereof you Theo. 15. d.
must use the headstraine in keeping your hands well stayed upon l The
headstraine is the grownd of thi^ work^.
it, for that will make him follow steadily with his whole bedy, and then his
head upon necessity must also be stayed, for there is no Horse which carries
a firm body, can have a loose head, nor any that carries a staid head can
have a lash body, but they must both be stayed or both lash.

But if he be so stiff necked, that he will not bring in his head, by these
gentle corrections, then Trot him even forward two or three miles, and ever in
six, eight or ten score, offer the the like, but if he will not yield that
day, have him forth the second, third or fourth day, increasing his labor as
you feel him rebellious, till you feel him bring in his nose which so (m)
soon as you feel, alight from his back and make much of 1. Pr. 14. x.
him, and after you have walked him a little, get upon his back again,
exercising him in the like homeward, and by thus using 15. e.
him a week or eight days you shall cause him to carry his head with such
ease, that he will take great delight therein, if you carry an equal hand
upon the bridle and headstraine, as necessity, and time requires.

Note that in the bringing in of his head, if (when you hold Note.
it down more hard then ordinary,) he strive to have it up, and so gape with
his mouth, or thrust out his tongue, or use any (n)
such unseemly gestures, that then you examine your self how Theo. 7, f.
you have proceeded, for your own error is the cause thereof, 16. a.
in that you have not given him the true carriage of his body; and therefore
you must keep your hand still at the fame stay, (o)
and put him to a more quick motion of his body, till he by the Theo. 16. c.
yielding in of his head bring his upper chap down to his lower, 1. Pra. 23. d.
and so shut his mouth, which so soon as he does, presently ease your hand,
to let him feel ease in his obeying. Chap. m.


Note, that if he will not keep his head steddie, but throw it up as he goes,
which is a gross error, (although many take p If the time be spent in one
motion it is lost in the other.
great delight therein) that then you use no other correction, then this last,
for it will cause him to mind his way, and have no time to use idle motions
with his body, whereby he shall not have time to cast up his head, for there
is never a time that he casts up his head, but there is a loss of time in
the moving of his legs.

Note also, that if in using this correction so often, he come to press too
sore upon the hand, thinking to go onward upon every discontent, and so come
to be in the same predicament of a free Horse, and use any disorder, in being
too busy in his going, that then you put him into a ring turn, and stir up
your q The ring is a good correction to cause obedience.
self, to make him turn first on one hand, and then on the other, by forcing
him with a good strength, holding the reins of your bridle and head-straine
during that time very hard, and laying the reins that are on the contrary
hand, to that Theo. 15. i.
you turn on very close to his neck to keep it straight from bending;
whereby he shall be driven to move his fore parts altogether, and forward him
in his turning, by following him with your body, laying also the contrary
leg to that hand on which you turn, close to his side, and keep thus in
action till you feel him to obey your hand to go quietly, then let him go
forward again at his own ease. And these two kinds of Theo. 12. ^.
corrections will be sufficient to reform any fault in a young 14. b.
Colt, if you have agility of body, and true knowledge of hand and foot, how
to use them aright, for this order will reform him if he be too eager in
going, and the other will quicken him if he be sad and dull, But for the true
application of them in Theo. 17. ^.
time and order, according to the disposition of the Horse, must be referred
to your judgment, to proportionate them as you find your Colt, tractable or
rebellious, otherwise you shall be driven to use greater violence, and then
you degresse from this Art.

CHAP. 25. How to teach your Colt to turn.
THe next lesson that you shall learn your Colt, is, to teach him turn on
both hands, willingly without any violence: (a)
which will never be effected except he have a true carriage of 1. Pr. 24. a.
his Body, his Head truly placed, and his mouth well relished; For this lesson
will try how you have proceeded in the former, a Circular motion it differing
from the horses appetite.
(if you desire to have him do it in every respect as he should) in that it
is a motion differing from his desire, and therefore if he be not at true
command, he will never make a strait turn gracefully. And therefore those
(who accoumpt themselves Horsemen) are herein to be reproved, which will go
about to make their Colt take his way, place his head, stop, turn, retire,
and all in one week; Whereby (through their insatiable ignorance) they get the
reward of Esops dog, for they Theo. 16. e.
bring him to that pass (by disorder) that all their desire is returned
without any profit, in that they can never bring him to do any one of them,
according to the ground of Art.

Wherefore, (to leave these) when you have brought your Colt to such command as
is said, (which a painful, and obseruati^e Horseman may do in a month,
although he be very untoward,) you shall observe first that (in this as also in
any other lessons) you keep his body, head, and mouth in the best order, for
they are the ground of all other lessons, and therefore Note.
if you omit any of these, you shall feel the trouble afterward, Theo. 35. g.
for thereby he will have the more liberty to rebel; which being 36. d.
observed, you shall Trot him to some gravel, or plowed earth, that you may
the better see his steps, and he be in the less danger of slipping, and there
put him forward gently in his foot pace, and draw forth a large ring, in
breadth some ten b How to make your Colt turn.
or twelve yards, on your right hand, and so walk round about it till (by his
tracke) you have made it descernable: then holding your ^and firm upon the
reins of the headstraine and trench (to keep his head firm and his body
straight) you shall lay the right reine of the head-straine, close to his
neck, and Theo. 15. i.
laying the calfe of your right leg close to his side, you shall move your
body a little toward the left hand, and pulling your left reine somewhat more
strait, you shall cause him to turn on your left hand, and there describe
another ring in quantity like the other, pacing in it as in the other: then
make your change to the other again on the right hand, laying the left reine
close to his neck, and your left leg to his side, and turn him by pulling
the right reine a little, (but not so much as to cause him to move his head)
and go to the right ring again, and so you shall exercise him in these
turnings, till he will turn as soon as he shall feel you but begin to move
either hand or leg, which will be done in two or three days.

And then you shall put him to a gentle Trot, first on one hand and then on the
other (using still your helps) and as he increases in knowledge, so you may
increase his speed in his Trot, and enlarge his time of exercise. For in this
lesson they will be desirous to ease themselves (if they may be suffered) or if
they Theo. 17. i.
have a stinted time they will look for it, it being so painful to them till
their body be used to it.

Wherefore, although the ancients of this Art, have prescribed a certain
number of turns on either hand, and a certain number of times, yet I do not
greatly approve thereof, because (c)
there is such diversities of Horses, in aptness, strength, and Theo. 18. f.
courage, that there can be no limitation set forth for such vncertaines, 28. a.
for if it make one Horse it will mar ten, because Theo. 29. b.
that motions, helps, corrections, labor, and time, must be applied 24. k.
as you see your Colt of aptness, and ability. And therefore 13. c.
your own discretion must be the disposer hereof: for if 1. Pra. 23. f.
you should stint your Colt to a certain number of times (at the Theo. 29. c.
first) he by custom would bring it to restifenesse, for when his 17. c.
labor and time shall be increased, he will fall to rebellion, and i.
through idleness, according to that old saying of Horace. Horace.


So long as a Tun, or a vessel does last,
Of the first liquor it keeps the taste.
And therefore in this lesson use no certainty, but sometimes use fewer, and
sometimes more, ever observing to to have him do it without staying, and with
grace, and leaving him before his strength be much abated; that he be not
daunted by too much, nor wax stubborn, with being too remiss, which must be
distinguished by reason, and not will: for when reason does fail, the appetite
does prevail, but of this I have spoken more largely, in the Theoricke, from
Chap. 7. to 11.

When your Colt will Trot his rings on both hands willingly d Of the single
ring.
and readelie, then to bring him to a better command, you shall use him but to
one ring, in which after you have Trotted him some certain times on your right
hand, you shall make him change to your left hand (in the same ring) by holding
your right reins close to his neck to keep his head straight, and Theo. 14.
i.
his neck from bending, and keeping your hand more firm then ordinary, to
restrain the liberty of his body that he may gather in more round, and
holding the calfe of your left leg more close to his side, you shall make a
strait turn on your right hand, and changing upon your left hand in like
manner, you shall discribe half a circle from that circumference to the
midst, and then changing, from that center or midst, on your right hand
again you shall make another half circle, by changing ^ How to make your
change in the ring.
upon your left hand to the other side of the great circle, and then Trot him
about upon the left hand, as long as you think good, and then change upon the
left hand within the circle, observing the like helps answereable to the left
hand as is set down for the right, and so use him in those changes till he be
so perfect, that as soon as he shall but feel you strain your hand and use
any help, he will presently turn with all his fore-parts firmly; for that
turn is as strait as any Horse, (but those for service) shall have occasion to
use. When your ^ How to learn your Horse to gallop the ring.
Colt is likewise perfect in his changes, that he will Trot them orderly and
truly, then you shall put him to gallop the ring, by letting him gallop gently
without violence either of switch or spur, first letting him strike two or
three strokes, and then Trot, and then a little more, and Trot again, and so
increase by degrees, till he will gallop the whole ring about with lightness
and nimblenesse. But let him not gallop the changes till his body be firmly
knit, by galloping the ring.

Now for your helps and corrections herein, Note, that if he Note.
prove slothful, that then you revive his spirits with your voice, in saying,
How, hey, or such like: and with all move in your seat Theo. 15. h.
more quick, and iert out your feet suddenly in your stirrops, 23. c.
shaking you rod over his head; but if that will not prevail, Theo. 25. a.
then give him a sound lash or two under the belly, near the flank, for that
will make him gather in his hinder parts roundly, h The hinderparts are the
first that slack in any motion.
which is the first part of the body that slaketh in any motion. But whereas
some wills to correct him with the bridle, to quicken him, I am contrary, for
that will bring many errors, as I have shown in the fifteenth Chapter of the
Theoricke, Note, that when you enter the ring you begin on that hand, he is
the most unwilling to turn on, and likewise to end on the same, 1. Pr. 29. c.
for by that means you shall make him as ready on the one hand as on the
other, and therefore it is holden a rule in Horsemanship to begin and end both
on one hand.

Note that if in Trotting or Galloping the ring he carry not Note.
his body upright, but thrust out his shoulder, or throw his hinder parts out
of the ring, that then you give him a stroke with your Stirrup, upon the same
shoulder, and if that prevail not, Theo. 23. ^.
then to strike him thereupon with your rod, or if it be behind, 25. ^.
then to correct him first with the single stroke of your leg on the same
side he does offend, which if he neglect, use the rod, but if he be
careless still, then use the spur, or if he use any miscarriage of his
head, that he will not carry it Theo. 23. b.
straight, then you* shall also use the stirrup on the contrary shoulder, and
that will make him look the contrary way. Now whereas some again do wish to
correct the colt with the bridle, when ^e writheth or gapeth with his chappes,
they are deceived, Chap. h.
for that cause is in his hinder parts, and therefore reform them and those
faults will be amended.

Note that when you put your Colt to gallop your changes in Note.
the ring, (if he be for service) that then you hold the reins of your trench
more firm to straiten his liberty, and pulling the calves of your legs close
to his sides, iert them suddenly k The motion of your time must direct the time
of his motion.
forward, never ceasing so to do, till you come to the large ring; for the
firm holding of his head, and the bringing in your legs will raise his fore
parts, and the thrusting them forth again will bring after his hinder parts,
and give him such a stayed body, that he will turn so loftily and with such a
grace, that he will greatly delight all the beholders, (if you observe true
time with your own body:) And also it will make him so agile, as he shall far
more easily be brought to bound, or any other salt for service.

But if he be either for hunting or running, then you shall l A firm seat
causes a firm and low motion in the horse.
keep your legs stayed, and help him in his turning only with your hand
and body, for the smoother and lower he galloppeth, in his turn it is the
more easy, and loses the less time.

Many other observations for errors might be set forth, for the better
confirming this point; but because both these and (m)
many other which I have set down (when they chance) do Theo. 7. f.
come through the indiscretion of the man, rather then the 1. Pr. 16. e.
horse, I have passed them over concisely* because I have written largely of
the helps and corrections* with the^r uses and abuses, in many places of the
Theorick from the fourteenth to the twenty sixth Chapters therein. Only these
have I set down for a relief, if you transgress the limits of a mediocrity,
which n Whatsoever passes the mean is an error.
is the cause of all errors.

And further, I omit them in that they are more appertinent to the Buffe saddle
(in service) then to the designs of this work; but the use of the ring (thus
far) is very profitable for the snaffle horse, for it will make him have such
a constant Note.
and firm body, that he will not lash it out to any disorder, whereby he will
gallop truly, roundly, and smoothly, so that deep and sk^lping earths will be
both alike to him.

And further, it will make him so well acquainted with his helps and
corrections, that he will not mispend his strength after o What profit the use
of the ring turn brings to a snaffle horse.
his own lust, but will be governed by them, and likewise be at such command,
that he will answer them so long as he is able to ride. Again, it is very
auayleable if he shall be put to the wild goose chase, or run any race to
and again^* for if (in that) you get but once the leading, it is not possible
the other should ever get it from you, for he will have such a perfect mouth,
that he will stop suddenly at either hedge or ditch, and turn presently
another way, or he will be so ready to give by-slippes with such ease, that he
will beat the other even in his windings. And likewise in running a race back
and again, he will be so ready to turn at the post to his best advantage,
that he will ouer-slippe no ground, so that herein you shall gain more ground
of your adversary, (if his be a roauing horse) then he shall ever be able to
redeem till the wager be lost how purely soever he may be fed.

CHAP. 26. Of causing your Colt to retire back.
When your Colt will stop, and turn on both hands orderly and willingly,
then you shall cause him also to retire back easily, but because it is so
coherent to the Lessons before set down, that if he be brought to true
command (a)
both of head and body in them, he must needs be willing to go Theo. 36. d.
back; therefore I think it needless to spend any time in demonstrating 35. b.
how to effect it, since it is wrought in the former; because it is gained, if
(when you teach your horse to stop) you cause him to stand with such an
upright body, as he should, then he will be ready to go back (at your
pleasure) so soon as you shall but straiten your hand: Yet in regard many have
Theo. 36. f.
set forth such irregular means being violent, to cause him to go back (if
he be stubborn) I will only show wherein they err, and so pass from this
lesson.

Now the means that they wish should be used to cause b A violent forcing a
horse to retire.
him go back, is; that if he will not retire with your hand, that then you
should with your rod strike him sharply upon his breast, or fore legs,
(using rating terms) to force him thereto by terror. But if that will not
serve, then to have a footman, to put him back with his hand, or with a
cudgel to strike him on the legs or nose, and so by greater terror to force
him yield back; which violent terms, I wish to be neglected, for (as I have
said) it differs from the Art, (being forced) and 1 Pra. 14. i.
again, they apply to an improper place, being deceived in the Theo. 33. c.
cause, (as well in this as in other errors, judging the cause to be where they
feel the effect,) and so if he resist upon the hand Theo. 35. a.
(by the like) they invented sharp bittes and other torture^; (as if there
were the cause where it is perceived) but of this I have 16. g.
said more in the 16. Chapter of this first part.

Therefore know that when your Colt will not go back willingly, the cause is
in setting his body so, that his hind c How to make your Horse retire upon an
easy hand.
legs do keep back his fore-parts from yielding: And therefore if he will
not retire by the strayning of your hand, you shall set it up by moving your
body in your seat, and thrusting your feet forward (suddenly) in your stirrops;
but if that prevail not, give him an even stroke with both your spurs, which
in twice or thrice using, will so quicken him, that upon the motion of your
legs* he will move his legs, upon which motion draw in your hands, and he
will retire at your own pleasure.

But I have set down this observation here, (as a remembrance) whereby you
may know how to help your self (if you have erred in your former
proceedings;) for if you did observe 1. Pr. 33. c.
to use him as I have set down for the teaching him to stop; you shall not
need to seek any other relief for the effecting of this lesson; in regard
that if he be truly mouthed, and his body aptly placed, (as is there shown)
he will upon necessity go back at your own pleasure: But if in his going, he
go disorderly with his hinder parts, (in throwing our either of his hind
legs, or carrying his body on either side;) then you shall give him a stroke
with your rod, or (if that will not serve) use your single Spur on that
side (upon his buttocke or flank) that he does offend, and that will reform
him.

CHAP. 27. The use of obedience.
IN all your proceedings from the beginning to the end, your (a)
chiefest object must be, first to gain, and then to keep obedience; for so
all your intendments will succeed delectably: But if otherwise, then whatsoever
you desire to effect will be altogether upon extremities, for seeing (as I have
said in the first Theo. 1. b.
Chap. of this tractate) that there is an universal disobedience to 18. b.
man (as a punishment inflicted for his transgression) in all Creatures,
therefore there is no horse, howsoever he is domestical, and so said, to be
obedient, so long as he goes according to his own lust, but when you shall
bring him to go after your desire Theo. 9. b.
and to set forth that for his further grace orderly, which you still and h.
11. d.
feel to be detained, (having further ability, for Art does tend to the
highest perfection) then will he presently put forth the vigor of this
inherent contagion, and so show his natural inclination: For as a shower of
rain does cause weeds to put forth (a)
(amongst better herbs that are sown) being before naturally A Simile.
preserved in the earth, (through the transgression of man:) so Theo. 5. b.
when you desire to work your Colt to his full and true grace in his actions,
he will show forth that rebellion (withal) which Theo. 26. c.
was naturally remaining in him (through the same cause:) which upon necessity
must be brought to obedience, if you think to bring him to his best
performance.

And therefore as weeds are easiliest plucked up before they A Simile.
have taken too deep rooting, so your Colt will the easiest and soonest be
brought to obedience at his first handling, (before it (b) 1 Pra. 14. x.
has taken root by custom) for that he cannot tell how to use himself either
in halter or bridle, to resist with much violence.

But because it may be thought a thing doubtful, whether there is such an
universal disobedience in all horses or no, so that I may seem to insist too
much thereon, I will make a more plain implication thereof by the universal
inherency of vice c A proof of an universal disobedience in horses.
in man: if I shall not be held too profane in mixing spiritual things with
natural.

Which, (howsoever others may judge it) yet in my opinion it is not so, since
one cause is the effect of both their corruptions, and so much the rather, in
that Christ himself has used the like (though in another sense) for the
better capacity of man, in many places of Scripture: as where he says, Can a
man gather grapes of thorns or figs of thistles? And again, The tree is
Math. 7. 10. 33.
known by the fruit: And David says, Be not like to the Horse and Mule which
have no understanding. And many other places Psalm. 32. 9.
having the like speeches, all alluding to the life and disposition of the old
man.

For as man did stain himself and all his posterity, (by his transgression)
with vice, and so became enemies to God; so An Allegory.
likewise horse and al other Creatures, were polluted by the same Col. 1. 20.
Theo. 1. b.
transgression, and became disobedient to man (as a punishment due to him;) and
as man cannot restore himself to his first estate (of himself) but by faith
in Christ, being humbled by repentance; so a horse will not conform himself
to his primary Ephe. 2. 8.
estate, without he be subdued by man, and brought to obedience Theo. 2. r.
by Art: And as this humiliation must not be in part, but 1. King. 21. 27. Luke
1. 75.
in the whole man both inward and outward; so this obedience must not be in
part, but in the whole Horse both inward and Theo. 35. d. 33. d.
outward. For as outward humiliation (if the heart agree not) is but hypocrisy
and no true humiliation; even so the outward Math. 23. 25.
obedience of the horse (if the appetite be not answerable) is but counterfeit
and no true obedience.

And as the outward gesture of the body should show the Theo. 35. f.
true humiliation of the heart; so the outward action of the 2. Sam. 12. 16.
horse should show the true obedience of his appetite. And lastly, as humility
being thus wrought in the Man (in sincerity) Theo. 33. h.
does bring forth the fruit with patience; so obedience being Luke. 8. 15.
thus wrought in the horse (by Art) will command all his actions Theo. 6. ^.
with willingness.

By which it may evidently appear that the whole scope and drift of this Art,
is chiefly to reduce obedience, and to maintain the use thereof in all the
practice of it: and that the man must Theo. 5. a.
work it by reason, and not by violence if he desire a primary restitution.
But me thinks some present this objection, that Objection.
as all men cannot be brought to true conversion by humiliation, for Pharao,
and Ahab humbled themselves, but yet not converted; so all horses cannot be
brought to their right use by obedience, for some are so sad and dull, that
no obedience will make them any better then iades.

To which I answer, that in both these there is a double respect to be had of
man, that is (in the first) the Godly and the Answer.
reprobate; Now the Godly has the election of grace by Christ, (1) Romans 11. 5.
whereby all they are brought to true humiliation, and so through faith,
recover their former state, he being truth it self that does work it: But
the reprobate being given over to themselves, and not guided by the spirit, are
not converted by their humiliation, because it is but outwardly and so
Hipocriticall, which for avoiding of imminent dangers they made a show of that
they did not intend. And for the second there is (2) Theo. 1. g. 5. x.
a two-fould respect to be had likewise in man, for all men's faculties being
obscured, none has the truth absolutely, but yet some are illuminated more
therewith and some less: and so they which have it in greater measure, may
bring any horse to such obedience as shall give sufficient content for any
reasonable performance for such use as they were ordained, though not in the
highest degree.

But those which have the less, can hardly bring the best (d) Theo. 19. d.
Horses to that period, and so there is much of their glory obscured, and as
for the other they make them iades, or else bring Violence caueth fear, but
^ot obedience.
them to a servile obedience by violence, whereby they are forced to do that
which they do with outward action; and thereby they may be said to
counterfeit, not being taught by Art, and so may be applied to the objection,
in as much as a Horse goes well or evil, according as he that taught him had
Theo. 7. f.
knowledge, and so if he go not well the cause is that his knowledge Theo. 4.
f. 19. ^.
that rid him was vayled with ignorance, in that there is not two sorts of ends
of a Horse; for that his soul and body is composed of one matter and
substance, and therefore may be brought to true use for man, unto whom they
were made to be subject, but man consisting of soul and body distinct, has
two several ends having two governors to lead him, to wit, the Flesh and the
Spirit, and so his end tends according to either of which he gives himself
as servant to obey. Wherefore if you desire to make true use of this obedience,
you must learn to know how to bring him to it, according to Art, as well as to
desire to have him perform it, which you shall the better do if you well
observe the Theoricke part, for it is as a garden furnished sufficiently with
herbs to cure any disease that shall infect this subject if with discretion
you can rightly tell, how, where, and when, to apply them.

CHAP. 28. How to bring your Horse to a perfect and true Trot.
AFter you have brought your Colt to such obedience, that 1. Pra. 23.
he know your helps and corrections, then if you delight in a Trotter, and
have a Horse which has a bad and slouingly A general rule.
Trot, you shall seek to amend it, after the same manner that is set forth for
the gayning of his mouth, and bringing him to his stop. But first, you must
observe this as a general rule, both in (1)
this lesson and in bringing him to his pace: that your self carry a firm
body and a true seat, least, thereby you cause a confusion in your Colts
apprehension by using improper motions in the gesture of your own body, in
regard the Horse must be commanded by the motions of it, the use whereof I have
spoken more at large in the twelfth Chapter of the Theoricke.

Secondly, you must observe that he also carry a firm and (2)
stayed body in his going, and likewise carry his head truly, with an easy
command, to be ruled thereby willingly, for so he will have the greater grace
in his going: but I have spoken of this (also) at large in the three and
twenty, and four and twenty Chapters of the same. Thirdly, you must have a
regard in his (3)
going, that he take up his feet, and set them down orderly together, that is,
that his narre fore-foot, and his far hinder Theo. 35. g.
foot join so in one that they may begin and end together, and so likewise his
far fore foot and his narre-hinder foot: Fourthly, (4) Theo. 37. l.
you must observe that in the taking up of his feet, he lift both his hinder
and his fore-feet of an equal height: and that his forefeet lift not too high
for beating, nor so low as to make him either subject to stumble, or to seem
to be idle in his going, which will be a great disgrace in all his actions.

Lastly, before you begin to amend his Trot, you must observe (5) Theo. 8. ^.
whether the cause thereof proceed from his eager desire 19. a.
of going, and so by his freeness he is (as the common saying is) more hasty
then wise; or that it come from a sad and slow 20. a.
desire of going, whereby through his heavy motion he cause great pain, but
small pleasure: which seueralls being observed, you shall with more ease effect
your desire.

But to proceed, being seated upon your Colt, you shall put him to an ordinary
Trot, upon a gentle hand: and if he be a Colt of a fiery and hot disposition
so that he will not go with a stayed body, nor take time to move his feet
orderly, then your Theo. 9. e.
self must needs be patient, and keep your seat without motion, letting him
rest the more upon the headstraine, and walk him gently abroad till he (of
himself) can tell how to move forward orderly upon the hand, (which he will
do in two or three days at the furthest) and then work him to his perfection
after the order hereafter, (making a difference betwixt a free, and a dull
Horse.)

But if he be of a more heavy and sad disposition, then you shall use quick
motions with your seat, and make less use of the head-straine, for it will
make him rely too much upon the hand, in coming on slowly with his hinder
parts: but carry a 1. Pr. 24. f.
pretty stayed hand upon the trench (except sometimes you use it to in courage
him when you feel him go pleasingly upon the trench) and put him foreward to
a quick and speedy Tro^, for that will make him tread shorter with his
fore-feet and gather his hinder feet in more nimbly.

But if you see that this will not prevail, then yield your Theo. 16. ^.
body somewhat forward, and put him into a round Trot a mile or two, (as you
did for to make him stop:) and ever as you think 1. Pr. 23. ^.
good, strain your hand, somewhat quick (but not too hard Theo. 15. d.
for displacing his head, keeping your body upright,) at which if he desire to
stand, iert your feet forward in your stirrops, (without inter^ission,) and
revive him with the sound of your voice, and the shaking of your rod; which at
the first will bring an Theo. 31. d.
amazement to him, but take no notice of that, but put him forward again,
using the like as you shall see good, (but yet not too often together for
dauleing him;) and thus you shall solicit him, never leaving till you feel
him begin to take up his body, and tread shorter, which so soon as he does,
immediately let him stand, and cherish him, that he may the better conceive
wherefore he was troubled: then put him gently forward home, observing to
keep a true time (with moving 1 Pra. 25. ^.
your body upward in your seat) with his moving, and as he a The motions of
the man and the Horse must begin and end both in one proportion.
waxes cunning, so you may quicken your own motions, which will stir up
his: for if you should move quicker then he has skill to handle his feet, it
will bring a disorder in his going, by chafeing and trifling, and so shall not
take any delight therein (not finding ease;) or if they be too idle or too
slow, then they will bring him also to such a slow and idle carriage, that it
will be a great labor to remove his body from the same: especially if you
labor him too long at a time. Wherefore in Theo. 17. g.
this, you must observe to have him often forth, and exercise him a little at
once, till he can tell how to take up his feet nimbly: for his exercise must
be short, because he should do that he does with alacrity and spirit. And
thus you shall use him for the space of three weeks or a month, in which time
you shall bring him to such nimblenesse, that he will Trot as short and
cleanely, as your heart would wish.

But for observations herein there need not any, except it be in your self,
for if your Colt commit any error, the cause proceeds 1. Pra. 25. k.
from you: either in that you cannot serve him in your seat, Theo. 36. d.
or that you fail in the true command of his mouth: or else in 29. b.
your corrections, in proportionating them in either excess, or 31. c.
else in giving them before or after time; or in letting him rest 17. ^.
too long, or follow him too fast; or lastly, in leaving too soon, or taking
too much on him at one time, all which you must be able to distinguish, if you
think to work every Horse to his height: and therefore if you transgress in
any of these, you pass the limits of this Art, and so if you make any Horse it
is by chance, and not upon any true ground.

And yet note, (for your further help if you have erred) that after your-Colt
know the meaning of your helps and corrections, A general rule.
when you begin to give him any new lesson, you do not desist till you
perceive some inclination to yield thereto, which so soon as he does
(although it be never so unhandsomely) make much of him and set him yp for that
time, which will much enlighten his senses. Note.


Note that if he go any thing frettingly, so that he will not keep true
time with his feet, or shake behind through the loose carriage of his body, that
then you have brought him to the same predicament of a free Horse; by using
your self too rigorously toward him: and therefore you must let him have time
to stay his body again (by your patience) and let him rest the more upon the
head-straine, for (b)
that will make him bold to set his feet forward orderly and 1. Pr. 32. c.
carry his body steddily. Note.


And note, that if in this lesson he prove sad and idle, that in the instant
time of the help of your body, you give him a good lash or two upon the narre
shoulder suddenly, which will revive the slow moving of his body: but if this
will not prevail, then a How to make him b^ing his hinder parts round.
give him the even stroke of both your spurs, holding your hand more firm
upon the trench, and that will cause him to bring his feet together roundly,
whereby he shall be the more apt to stir quicklier, and more nimbly: but you
must have a care not to use your spur, but when any other correction will not
prevail, least it force him too much upon the hand; by terrifying b How to
reform the heigh lifting of his fore feet.
him too much, and so run away, or else cause him to strike, or go back, or
show any such iadish tricks. Note, that if he lift his forefeete too high,
then you must reform that by making his hinder parts to follow more quick,
and roundly, whereby he shall not have time, to lift his fore-legges so hie:
and likewise let him rest well upon the head-straine, for that is the best way
that ever I tried, to cause any Horse to keep his fore legs down.

Note, that if in his going, he lift low either with his fore or hinder parts,
or with both, that then you must thrust him the more c How to reform his low
going.
upon the trench, and use very quick motions with yuor body, and correct him
according to the measure of his disposition, lest he fall to rebel, and that
will make him lift his legs more gracefully, if you temper your hand, that
he may find ease, when he lifts to go forward.

But because this is a very difficult point to observe for him that is but a
Scholar himself, in regard it depends upon the d The sense of hand and
seat, is the marrow of this Art.
exquisitest touch both of hand and seat, (which is the marrow and pith of
this subject or Art.) Wherefore because it is so intricate, that very many,
spending their time to gray hayres, cannot find this proportion, and yet
reputed good horsemen, it shall not be amiss (till you have greater
judgment) to take the benefit of some new plowed earth, (which shall be near
^ Of deep earths.
to some hard way or green meare,) to ^ase you in your working up of his
legs: Upon the which earth you shall first, (for Theo. 28. ^.
twice or thrice) walk him up and down with a gentle hand foot-pace, that he
may know how to use his leg upon that earth, without offense; then (before
you alight) have him upon the said firm ground or meare, and there put him to
his trotte; then after he has trotted a little forward, straighten your hand
a little more, and by the moving of your body forward in your seat, and ierting
your feet forth in your stirrops suddenly cause him to stand more roundly to
the hand, which will make him lift up his fore-feet: then alight from his back,
and walk him a space in your hand to give him breath, then get upon his back
again, and use him as before, and thus, what by the clogging of his legs, by
the deep earth, and the uncertain The benefit thereof.
footing thereof, he will be so nimble footed when he comes to the firm
earth, that he will lift his feet voluntarily of himself, if you but help him
never so little upon the hand.

But if he be so sad, that when you change from the deep to the firm
grownd, he will not go upon the hand willingly, give him a good stroke or
two with both your spurs, as soon as you change upon the firm earth and
force him to stir upon the hand, a little as he stands, and so alight,
without trotting any further, till you feel him desire of himself to go
forward.

When you have exercised him thus upon his foot-pace, that he can tell how to
demean his feet from stumbling, then you shall still keep a firm hand upon
the head-straine, and trot him with a good spirit thereupon, and ever in twenty
or thirty yards straiten the reins of your trench, to shorten his liberty,
which (what with his fast going, and the deepenes of the plowed ground) will
make him lift all his feet very orderly: after you have trotted him after this
manner a little while (for it must not be long for wearying him, through the
toil thereof) have him upon the hard ground, (as before, ere you light) upon
which work him with your hand and seat, till you feel him lift his feet very
loftily and orderly, which he will soon do, for the changing of him from
deep and uneven earth, to firm and smooth, will bring him to be very lofty
and quick in his going, if you be not too greedy to cause him to do too much
at a time, and if you observe to end upon the firm grownd, before you alight,
except he begin to be too busy with (f) 1. Pr. 32. a.
his feet, and then you shall use him continually upon the plowed ground, till
they be brought to a true time.

And thus use him for ten days or a fortnight before you depart from that
earth, for the place being a fortifier, and the earth a correcter, if you
depart and leave these instructers, before he be so perfect that you can
command him your self e When to depart from deep earths.
whenever he shall offend, and you be not near such a place to have
relief, then you must be forced to tamper with him Theo. 19. a.
you self; and then if you be not perfect in your judgment, to know where
and how to help, you shall overthrow whatsoever before you set up; which
neglect does much disgrace the man, and confound the Horses sense.

Note further, that in all this lesson you observe to keep his Note.
head steady, and to keep his body in a straight line, for if there be a
disorder in either of them, it will much darken his grace and glory; and
therefore if he carry his head on either side, correct him on the contrary
shoulder, as thus: If he carry it toward the left hand, correct him on the
right shoulder, either with stirrup or switch, and that will make him look to
that side Theo. 23. b.
on which he is troubled, if you give your hand liberty for his mouth to glide
upon the trench.

But if that will not serve, turn your heel to his shoulder, and tickle him
thereupon with your spur, and that will cause him to yield in his shoulder,
and turn his head presently, which so soon as he does, let him stand and
cherish him, but (in any case) do not strike him hard therewith, least the
pricking swell and so impostumate in the flesh, (for that the shoulder is full
of carnosity) and the blood fester, and so fistulate therein.

CHAP. 29. How to make your Colt trot side-wayes.
When you have brought your Colt to trotte truly, and comely, and to carry
his head and body firm and stayed; then (if you please) for his further grace,
and to show your judgment in the Art, you may make him trot side-wayes, which
you shall do, by keeping your hands firm upon the reins of your trench, and
laying the contrary reyne close to his neck, and your leg close to the
contrary side, to that hand you would have him to go on, holding your rod
also on the contrary shoulder: And so, by using the same motion with 1. Pra.
18. e.
your body, as you do when you would have him to beat his trot standing, in
his very motion you shall make him go sidewayes by the aforesaid helps.*

For instance, when as you have trotted him forwad a little, and then stayed
him, you shall straighten your hand to keep him from pressing forward, and
move your self up and down in your seat, to keep his body still in action.
In which motion (if a How to make your horse trot side-wayes.
you would have him go on your right hand) you shall lay the left reyns close
to his neck, and thrust your left knee close to that point, fitting most upon
your left buttocke, and putting your leg back, lay it close toward his
flancke, and by laying your stick close to his left shoulder, you shall cause
him to go toward your right hand, which so soon as he does, let him stand and
cherish him, then make him go toward your left hand, using the like on the
contrary side, as the laying your right reyne to his neck, your right knee
close to that point of the saddle, sitting most upon your right buttocke, with
the same leg close to his flancke, and your stick upon his right shoulder,
cause him to go on your left hand, and thus by keeping your body moving, use
him till he be so perfect that he will go on either side, so soon as he
shall but feel the motion of the reyne to either side of his neck, or your
knee to the saddle, without any other apparent motion.

For, whereas I have set forth to use such manifest motions at the first, that
any body may perceive them, it is because your Colt may the easilier
distinguish of them, whereby he may the more easily conceive of your mind,
which after he does, you shall observe this as a general rule (as well in all
other lessons A general rule.
as in this,) that as he has knowledge of your will, and increases in
cunning, you shall mitigate your motions (by little Theo. 22. c.
and little) till they be so covert that a perspicuous eye cannot 15. e. (g)
perceive them.

When you have brought him to such perfection that he will trot as it were
standing, then you shall make him also trot sidewayes, after you have trotted
him some distance forward, by giving him the contrary motion aforesaid, without
intermission on that hand you would have him to go on, for so he will keep
the same time and grace in going, that he kept in trotting forward.

Note, that if in this lesson he does at any time press hard Note.
upon the hand, and so desire to go forward, that then you give him a sudden
iert or two with the trench (in his mouth Theo. 27. c.
and thrust your legs forward withal, to keep his hinder parts 15. d.
in; and it will be a present remedy for that. But whereas many teach that when
a horse, either upon his teaching to stop, advance, turn, or go side-wayes,
if he press forward upon the hand, that they should cause him to retire back
as far as he An old custom but a gross error.
pressed forward, thereby to make him understand his own fault the better; I
wish a neglect thereof, and my reason is, that it will make his body so apt to
go back, that it will be far (2)
unfit to move forward as he should, those two motions being contrary.

And further, it being used as a correction, he is forced back upon a
discontent, and by that means it will make him subject Theo. 9. i.
^o go back upon occasion of every the like, and so bring a b They cloak
this error with the nature of the horse.
^estiffe quality (as experience has taught me) for it will make him so ready
to fly back with his hinder parts, (which should ^ee continually kept up, to
make him stand to his mouth) whereby he will be so tickle mouthed, that he will
hardly be brought to rest upon the trench as stayedly as he should, or when
you would have him.

Note, that whereas I wish you to correct him in the mouth, Note.
you do it very seldom, and when as no other means will Theo. 14. a.
prevail, for fear of dawling or bruising his mouth, or displacing of his
head, for if you preserve his mouth as you ought, there will be small need of
using that correction.

Note, that in his going sidewayes you keep a straight and upright seat, and
likewise that your Colt carry his body firm, Theo. 13. c. 18. a.
and his head in its right place, so that all his body move together in a
straight line, your self moving so firmly with him, as if you both were but
one entire subject; for so he will foulde one foot over the other more comely
and easily.

And note, that if in his going aside he strike either forelegge Note.
or hinde-legge one against another, or tread one foot upon another, then use
no correction for that, but use patience Theo. 9. ^.
toward him, for the pain in striking one foot against another, will be
correction enough, and cause him to reform himself, if you give him but time
and liberty.

Note, that if he go faster aside before then he does behind, or likewise
contrarily, as if he be slower before; then give him a good iert with you
stick on that buttocke he proves slow; or else a good stroke on that flancke
with your single spur; and likewise if it be before, then correct him on that
shoulder that erreth, either with your stirrup or your stick, and force him
suddenly with your hands upon the reins to cause Theo. 12. ^.
him move all his fore-parts together, for that will make him take them up more
quick.

Note, that if he go readilier on the one hand then on the other, that you
begin, and end on that hand he is the most unready, 1. Pr. 25. h.
for that double exercise will make him more nimble and (c)
cunning; For you must observe it as a point of Horsemanship, to end on the
same hand that you begin on, in this lesson, as well as in teaching him to
make his ring turns. And lastly, note, that whereas I wish you to hold the
reins of your bridle more hard, when you would have him to go on either hand,
that limitation must depend upon your discretion, for when he is any thing
toward, you must give him liberty, to take delight Theo. 12. d.
therein, so far as he loose no part of grace in the carriage of his head and
body: for then his chiefest helps must be only by your own seat, other-wise
you shall dead and harden his mouth. All which things if they be truly
observed, you shall make your Horse go with such a beautiful and gallant
gesture, and obey by such secret motions, that it will ravish the beholders,
and he will perform it with such willingness, that they will think he does
it of his own courage and pride.

CHAP. 30. Of Ambling or Pacing.
Having spoke sufficiently (in the Theoricke,) of the abuses, that are grown
in this Art of Pacing, whereby it has been till this day practiced, and yet
not certain truth found how to bring a Horse to his perfection: I will also
here set forth Theo. 13. b.
that which I have found by experience, by treading the path of the Ancients,
and the opinion of our times, and how this age has been entangled in the
snares of such variable inventions* whereby the more they have striuen to go
forward, the more they were inthralled therein: and then likewise lay down
that order, which I have also proved by practice, to bring any Horse to a true
pace according to the truth of this Art: for some have (a)
wished to bring a Horse to his pace by the helps of Tramels, some with heavy
shoes, some with rowles of lead like pasternes Theo. 3. l.
under the setlockes behind: some likewise with wispes behind, others with
shoes of advantage, having broad plates of iron set to the toes of the hinder
shoes, three or four inches long, others by hanging waights of sand or such
like upon the fillets behind, but yet amongst all these they could not find
that way to gain their content. And it is no marvel, for a man must needs
reap such fruit, of the same nature as the seed is he Theo. 28. g.
does sow, for false grounds must needs produce false conclusions, yet for all
this many are so ouerruled with a self conceit, and (to preserve their
reputation by words) will not let to say, that they will make any Horse to pace
well in a short time, when as in proof of deed, they can never make any one
Horse Theo. 14, a.
pace truly in all their life time, by any of all these indirect means. For
it it more hard to effect it in working, then to make brags thereof in talking.

Wherefore to show how far they have erred from the right path, that does
lead to this Vineyard, I will show how far the a Of the abuse of Tramels.
goodness of every one of them does extend, and what inconveniences they
produce. And first for the Tramells; although Master Markeham affirms that
they are only the best way to bring a horse to his pace, for as there is but
one truth (although many inventions) so he affirms them to be it: yet I
Theo. 10. d.
digress from him in this point, albeit in many other I cheiflie applaud him,
having found by practice, most of his grounds are very probable, but yet not
being desirous to be led by authority (too much) I have found that the true use
of the hand, is to be preferred far before the true use of them, in that a
man may bring a Horse to a more stately pace by it then by them, for if they be
never so truly used, yet they cannot make perfection without the hand, which
the hand (in its true use) will do without them. And yet thus far I grant
they may do well: that if a Horse be of a temperate disposition he may be
brought to an indifferent pace by them, (if they be set at the b What Horses
are the best to Tramell.
just length of the stroke of his body, and put rightly on his legs;) but yet
there will be a great defect, in the carriage of his particular parts, if they
be not reformed by the hand, and also if they be any way abused they work many
absurdities, even in the best Horses, as here-after I will show in that he must
go as he is tied upon necessity.

But if he be a free Horse that is to be put into them, (except there be a
great care had at the first) he will spoil himself by c The inconvenience
they bring to a free horse.
striving, and so get some lamenesse by chafing and brusing his legs, which
will cause them to swell or breed the scratches, or such like: or if not so,
they will cause him to tread short, in that his desire is to go, (through his
freeness) that when he feels himself restrained that he cannot tread so
large as he would, he will get an use of trifling; and also they will make him
subject to stumble, his fore-legges being kept back that they cannot go
orderly with his body; or if none these, (as it is very hard to keep him from
some of them) yet they will pull on his hinder legs so fast, that he will
go broad, and very ill fauouredly, which upon necessity must needs loose the
relish of of his mouth, and the placing of his head: or else he will shake
with the hinder parts, or beat too much with his fore-parts, having too much
liberty: or else keep false time with his hinder parts and so seem to halt of
his hinder leg: any of all which if he once get (as it is not almost
possible to keep him free from them all) they can never be reformed by any
means except the hand.

And again, if he be a sad Horse, in regard he has not a free motion of his
body, they will bring on his hinder legs so fast d What inconvenience to a
sad Horse.
(through the slow moving of his body) that he will be subject to roll in his
going, and so set hard, yea, I have seen many of them, have such unapt
carriage that they have wallowed like a Bear: and further, in regard that he
cannot be quickened up with his hinder parts, no faster then the Tramelles will
suffer him, he will loose the sense of his mouth, and have no agility of body,
so that in his going he will neither show grace nor spirit, Theo. 35. g. 1. Pr.
31. b. ^ A slow motion the cause of a dead mouth.
the slow motion being the chief cause of a dead mouth, because the truth of
Art, is to bring all the parts of the body to one and the selfsame proportion
of quickness; besides they will bring him to many of the other vices
aforementioned in a free Horse.

All which inconveniences I have observed (both from my own experience, and
also by othermens works) have insued by this order, which I could never
reform by any means but the hand, and in reforming whereof I have spent as
much time, to gain that which was lost by them, as I have spent in bringing
another to his true pace by the hand, without any other helps.

But admit it were so, that they would produce none of these disorders, (as it
is not possible to the contrary) yet let the best f The use of tramels is
violence and therefore no Art.
Practitioners use them in the best manner that can be, it is no Art (as I have
said) but violence, for they force the Horse to go as he is tied if he go at
all, for they work upon the exterior Theo. 3. e.
parts continually, and so he is compeld to yield in them, although his lust
and desire be still repugnant: by which means 33. h.
that which is the effect is made the cause. Whereby when he ibid. a.
is taken out of them, he falls clean from his pace, after he feel
himself at liberty, that he can resist: especially if you go about to bring
him to further command to purge him from any error he has gotten by them. For
in regard his body is not made subject by his will, but his will by his body,
when that violence is taken away, that his body may follow his will, the Horse
will go after his natural inclination, he not knowing Theo. 33. g.
how to help himself, not feeling those means by which he was taught:
neither can the man command him, in that his body 1 Pra. 28. e.
had not liberty before to fall off, whereby he might be taught the true use of
the hand.

Wherefore, seeing all these inconveniences, may, and do arise from the
Tramels, and many other which I omit for breuity sake, and after cannot be
reformed but only by the hand: and further, he that works the best by them,
can never conclude without the hand, therefore not only these, but all the
other inuersions are not worthy to be accepted as laborers in this Vineyarde,
in respect of the true use of the hand, in so much that they cannot stand
without it, but it will both begin, work, These cannot conclude without the
hand.
and effect without them: for by it the interior parts are first brought to
obedience, and so the outward parts agree in their action, accordingly; whereby
the pace is made, both easy and delightful to the Horse, and also durable and
pleasant to the man.

CHAP. 31. Of the abuse of heavy shoes, pasternes of lead, wispes, and shoes of
advantage.
OThers not finding any good effect by the Tramels, have used heavy shoes
behind, to keep the hinder parts of the Horse down, to cause his hinder feet
strike further forward within his fore parts. Which although I do not allow
them excellent, yet they are more tolerable for a learner to use, (till he
come to have his helps and corrections perfect) then the former, in a Heavy
shoes to be preferred before trammells.
that they are not so much differing from the Art, as the other, for by that
means the Horse is still governed by the hand and the apt motions of the body,
whereby he may after be kept in command. But yet though they do good in some
Horses, 1. Pr. 28. d.
it does not follow they do so in all: for if he be of free and quick
disposition, they will make him to go stuntly, and harsh with his body, and so
set hard, by reason his desire is to go forward, and then the weight of those
shoes do so hinder or load his heels, that he is forced to use more
strength to go with his hinder parts, and thrust on his fore-parts by reaching
so far forward, whereby the body is caused to rock and set b The abuse of
them for a Free Horse.
hard, by reason of that conflict betwixt his fore and hinder parts, whereas
there should be a concord in all motions, otherwise there is a repugnancy to
Art, when one part is stirred by a greater violence then another.

And likewise, if he be a sad horse, his hinder parts of themselves Theo. 35. g.
are slow, and therefore those shoes will do much hurt 1. Pr. 30. ^.
to him, for they will make (as the Proverb is) him have such leaden heels,
that they will very hardly be caused to follow roundly after, whereby will
follow many of the former inconveniences.

And therefore, whosoever is desirous to practice by them, for a help, till
he have knowledge to keep his horses body in ^ Their abuse in dull horses.
command, (by his seat and hand) he must be careful not to have them stand
on one day longer then is needful, for else they will so ground the horse in
such a slow motion and long stroke, that he will go very hard, unwillingly and
disgracefully, Theo. 4. e.
which will ask* long time and deep judgment to amend, if he be desirous
to have him go as well and easy as he should.

And as for the pasternes of lead, and wreathes of hay, (or such like) they are
both of one operation; but yet the pasternes are The abuse by pasternes of lead
or wi^pes.
the worst of two, they will so bruise and chafe him about the fetlocks;
nevertheless I cannot commend either of them, for working any good effect,
(for a pace) in that they are worse then heavy shoes, to increase any of the
former errors, and besides they will cause him to go filthily and broad,
stradling behind, in that he will be desirous to move first there where he
feels himself most troubled, neither can he bend in his fetlock joints (as
he should) so that he cannot use them nimbly to stand to his mouth, but will
rest much upon the hand.

And for the shoes of advantage, they are worse then any of Of shoes of
advantage.
the former, for they do not only bring forth all the aforesaid errors, but
also are in danger of laming him before, by beating him of the back sinews on
the fore-legges, (with the plates) as he brings his hinder legs after, or
either stifle him or wrest him in the fetlocke-ioynt behind, they forcing him
to lift his legs so unnaturally, being so combersome that he cannot help
himself, if at any time he tread awry, or upon any uncertain grounds: And
further, I have seen them cause a horse to creep so low with his hinder
parts, as it has been an utter disgrace for him so long as he was a horse,
for that (by these) howsoever he went, he felt no comfort, but they were
always as a clogge to annoy him.

But the cause of all these inventions proceeds for want of The cause of all
these erroneous inventions.
knowledge in the true motion of a well going horse; for first, his inward
parts (as I have shown) must be obedient to the man, and then if his body be
once set upright (as it should be) to move properly, then all his members will
move answerably; for a true pace does not depend upon the bringing after his
hind legs, (as these inventions do tend, and as most suppose) but in
setting his body so that all the parts move orderly together, and so begin and
end in one and the self same time; Theo. 3. c.
by which, if the fore-parts go forward orderly and easily, and and 4. a.
take a large stroke, then the hinder parts (beginning and ending with them)
must needs do the like; (but of this I have said more in the Theorie, the
fourth Chapter.) Now therefore seeing there must be no unequal motion in any
part, there must be no unequal hinderance to cause it, for Art does work
only to preserve nature, (in its best) but nature uses an equal order in all
things, and therefore where there is a let of motion by any 1. Pr. 30. ^.
of these indirect means, so that the horse cannot use all his 31. b.
parts as nature has framed, those which are at liberty and can yield, will
sooner be brought to observe that slow time Note.
with the members let, then they can be brought to observe that orderly time
with those which are at liberty: for when as one member is troubled, all the
body does participate with the same, and therefore much less can they be
brought to the other when they are more troubled.

CHAP. 32. Of the abuse of waights and deep earths.
BEsides these inventions before rehearsed, there are others which have used to
bring horses to their pace, by waights of sand or some such like ponderous
thing, laying it behind their saddle, upon his fillets, to keep down his
hinder parts: Wherein I can but wonder to see the blindness of such as cannot
see their own ignorance, but will enterprise that wherein they Theo. 20. d.
have such slender knowledge to effect the means according to Art. For this is
so preposterous, and differs so far from the truth thereof, that they who
have no better knowledge to bring a horse to his pace (but by this) are more
fit to ride upon Asses that are to no other use but to bear waights, then to
have that dignity, either to lead a Horse-mans Horse to the block, or ever to
come a Horseback; whereby they should A deserved esteem.
have the benefit of such worthy Creatures, that does seek to violate them by
such means as is the hazard of their utter ruin, for there can no good come
thereupon, but evil altogether.

For if he be a stirring horse, what with those waights behind, The abuse by
bringing a horse to his pace by Wa^ghts.
and his own weight, which is too heavy of it self, being so blockish, and
the striving with him for his pace, upon any slip he will endanger the
swaying or breaking his back, or else stifling; and generally (if not these)
whether he be a free or sad horse, or what disposition soever, it will utterly
deiect his courage, and give him such a filthy carriage that he will be apt
neither for good reyne nor any other gesture, to grace himself, by reason that
those waights load him so behind continually, that he cannot use his body as
he should, besides many other gross errors it does breed, which I omit
because it is so absolute evil, that it is not worthy of bestowing time to
particularize them: for the using of waights is a discredit to the man by
ignorance, a disgrace to this Art by abusance* and a wronging of the horse by
violence. For if that Art is most agreeing Theo. 4. d. 32. c.
to nature, that does work the best perfection, and does preserve the integrum
or whole horse, (both inward and outward) in the best lust and grace; then that
is most disagreeing to them both, that does overthrow, the whole integrall in
all the parts.

But as for deep earths, although some (also) hold them to be (c) The use of
deep earths.
a spoiling of a young Colt, in that it toyleth him too sore, and thereby
weakneth his limbs, and so causes him to put forth splints, spauens, and such
like; and also abateth his courage and so make him subject to tire, etc. Yet I
say that these extremities are the abuse of them, for their use is not so evil
as is imagined; for they are better to bring him to obedience, then any 1 Pr.
30. f.
of the former, because they force the body only: and the wind is kept fresh
to work according to the appetite, when the body is set free from those bonds
wherein it was tied, and which did Theo. 34. a.
so trouble him, that he could take no delight* whereby his appetite commanding
his wind, and his wind his body, so soon as he feels himself at liberty,
his body will follow the inclination of his desire.

For as the whole man is composed of soul and body, and all his voluntary
actions are according to the heart, whether good or evil; whereby, what
wickedness soever the body does, Theo. 30. c.
it does first proceed from the heart: Even so, the whole horse consists of
his sensitive soul and body, and all his voluntary A Simile.
actions proceed from his appetite or desire, and thereby, what restiffe
quality soever any horse shows, it first comes from Theo. 35. a.
them, and therefore whatsoever the body does, except the the whole Horse agree
in one, it is but counterfeite or a shadow.

But the deep earths (if they work much mischief) it is in Theo. 28. d. 1.
Pra. 28. d.
their abuse, for they are good in diverse respects, for (by them) the whole
horse may be brought to agree in one; for if he be so stubborn that he will
not yield his wind to move with (a) 1. Pra. 23. f.
his body, the present putting him upon them will cause him to slake his wind,
and then the present liberty again of the 28. f.
hand, and changing him from them, will make him feel such ease in his going,
that he will work more easily and delightfully.

And further, besides the joining of the inward and outward b For what errors
deep earths are good.
parts in action, they are good to reform many disorders in the carriage of
his body, and the staying of his head, and handling of his legs, if they be
used no further then the correctiue part, otherwise they may be abused, as
drink is good in its use, but if it be abused it causes drunkenness.

For, if your Horse be so tickle mouthed, that you cannot make him stand to
your hand (by any means) upon the even ground, and so become lash-bodied, that
he either beat himself before or shake his buttocks, the deep earths will
establish them both, by using him thereon, till he find that slight to let
his wind go with the time of his bodies motion: or if he strike short in his
pace, and chafe himself, they will bring him to step more largely, and ride
coolely, if he be used upon them Theo. 28. d.
as before; or if he lift his fore-feet too hye, (by his eager desire) or carry
them so low, that he is subject to stumble (by his slow and unwilling desire)
the deep earths will reform both these, although they seem contraries, but
yet they are not so, for they are in diversity, and so the diverse use of the
hand, (according to the willingness or unwillingness of the winds passage)
will amend them: for if he lift too hie, then use the (c) 1 Pra. 28. b.
Head-straine more, but if too low, then the trench, (as I have shown before)
for a trotter.

Thus the deep earths, although they are hurtful by too much toyling, you see
are manifold in their use, and are better to help him that has not facility
in his hand and seat, then heavy shoes, because they may be taken or left at
pleasure; for they bring the inward parts to subjection, and help to bring a
Horse to a very graceful pace, if the hand be truly tempered, and the body
have apt motives answerable, as hereafter I will show. And thus much in brief,
for the general use of them, but for further particular application I omit,
because the benefit may be better understood by practice then demonstration,
Theo. 28, e.
(and in that I have spoken thereof before,) which must be applied according to
the disposition of the Horse, by the discretion of the man, for you must
consider that they being still one and the same, they work but one and the
same thing of themselves, but the variety must proceed from application.

CHAP. 33. Of the abuse of the hand.
ANd in like manner, as the grounds are good in their use and bad in abuse,
even so also is the hand, whereby it is Theo. 28. ^.
held very comtemptible, (with the most) and so is made a stale to bring in
other sinister helps, which they invented, because they could never find the
use thereof, and so it is almost Theo. 3 ^.
held to be without use: like Esops Cock which preferred a Barly-corne, before
a precious Stone, preferring his appetite before a It need no moralizing, the
application is plain.
the esteem of such a rich Jewel. But as the sweetest Rose is soonest subject
to Canker, and the Moth does soonest breed within the finest Cloth, even so
abuse is soonest wrought by this, for that it is nearest the truth, which
ignorance does most pollute: and through that abuse does spiring a world of
mischiefs, Theo. 3. n.
as displacing his head, deading and gauling of the mouth, loose body, treading
short, and trifling, and many other. But again in its right use, if all the
other inventions should join in one they were not able to abide the censure,
when they shall be tried by the effect in making a true going Horse. For
although Theo. 4.
there may be many inventions, and diverse sorts of Horses going, yet there is
but one truth, and one kind of well going; and that I dare affirm (having
found it by practice) is only the hand, for by it a Horse may be refined to
go so easily, and comely, that the finest Lady, may make his back her Cradle,
to Lull her tender self a sleep.

Now whereas the hand may be abused diverse and sundry ways yet it is chiefly
from these four causes. First, in that he b Four things were in the hand are
chiefly abused.
is put to his Pace before he know how to go forward by the motions of the
body, or to stop by the help of the hand: and this is a general evil,
almost in all sorts of Horses, in that they 1. Pr. 23. a.
are suffered to go after their own will, but not according to (1)
order: for I my self having many horses coming to my hands, cannot find one
amongst a hundred (of what age soever) that is taught to stop and go orderly
forward as he should, for as spelling is the true ground of reading, so are
these two (stopping and going orderly) the true ground of all riding. Secondly,
it (2)
is abused in the true placing of the Horses body, for when he is put to his
pace before he can tell how to carry it aptly for the same, he cannot be
brought to it, but by great violence: for they fall straight to such improper
motions that all the extremities Theo. 14. e.
they can use are not able to make him yield his body, for that one man is not
able (by strength) to deal with a Horse, which abuse is the cause of all other
inventions, besides the torturing Theo. 3.
of his mouth, with hayling and gagging it, and yet if he be caused to Pace by
this it is so vgely, that it much darkeneth Theo. 4.
the Art, and disgraceth the Horse: for as a Child that learneth to write, can
never write well, (though never so fast) except A Simile.
he can tell how to hold his pen, break his letters, and Join distinctly; so
a Horse can never Pace well except his body be truly placed to go orderly,
and use his legs truly.

Thirdly, it is abused, by shortness of time, for when they see (3)
that he will not come to his Pace so speedely as they expect, then passion
does stir up their will, and so force him to Theo. 3. p.
that in three days which would ask three weeks, nay in some Theo. 8 9. 10
Horses very near three months, whereby the Horse is driven into such
amazement, by torturing of the mouth, and massacaring him with corrections,
that it increases by-thoughts in his Theo. 11. d.
mind, and so seeks to ease and free himself by some restife quality, not
having time either to conceive what he should do, or to have liberty to go
as he should, but such teachers are more fit for bedlam to be governed
themselves, then to have the tuition and government of others.

And lastly, the abuse hereof is, in not proportionating of helps and
corrections, according to the disposition of the (4)
Horse, for if through anger he exceed in correcting more then the quallity of
the offense, then the Horse will become senseless Theo. 38. ^.
in the mouth (the corrections being sharper then the trench) and so fall to
run away or show other iadish trick, and this point is the hardest, (but yet
the very sinews) of all the parts of Horsemanshippe: for if a man can truly
judge of Note here the only glory of a Horseman.
the disposition of the Horse, whether he be gentle or dogged, sad or free,
and so from those two extremes, to know how much he does participate of either
of the^ (for every horse does vary one from another more or less therein) and
after their inclinations Theo. 29. a.
use the like proportion in his helps and corrections, without doubt he may
be bold to effect any lesson by the hand, better then by any other means
whatsoever: and so Theo. 10. ^.
consequently, bring a Horse to a far more excellent Pace.

And therefore the want of knowledge of this true ground, has made such an
inundation of errors, that the most have drowned themselves, in the waves of
imitation, whereby they have made Shipwreck of the poor Horse to the great
disgrace of the Art: for by these means, arises such a mutiny within
themselves, that the strong hold of truth it beat down, whereby usurped
inventions do reign as tirants: and so they change Art, in making the subject
an adiunct, in that they hold it cannot work of it self, except it be
supported with some other less needful coniunct.

CHAP. 34. Observations for the bringing your Colt to his Pace by the Hand.
THus having gone through the laboriousest part of this Art, which is to
detect, and lay open the errors which are crept into it, through the abuse, and
ignorance of men: and in producing Read the Theo: Part.
the causes thereof; I will now likewise set forth how you may bring your Horse
to a fair, and commendable Pace (by the hand) and keep him free from any
disaster, or evil quality.

But because your self must be the chief efficient herein, I will first
prescribe what you must observe, whereby you may the more truly and easiy
effect what you desire.

And therefore first, observe to carry your body very steddily (1) Theo. 12.
and firm, from your middle upward, with your elbowes close to your sides,
both to help to keep your own body steady, and your hands firm, for
checking his mouth too much, for deading it, holding them a full handful
distance, and also it will help mightily in the knitting your Horses body.
Secondly, you (2)
must observe to help him in his stroke, by keeping the same time of moving in
your seat, as you would have your Horse to keep in his going: but this must
be limited according to your Theo. 13.
discretion, for words cannot express it: neither must it be according to the
Horses desire altogether, for then it will cause Theo. 19. and 20.
some to be too slow, whereby they will go hard, and in other some too quick,
whereby they will make many feet but yet make no way.

Now because there is a two-fould motion in the seat used, Of motion in the
seat being of two sorts.
the one direct forward, and the other indirect, as moving first from one
buttocke, and then to the other, and so in like manner the whole body,
correcting the Horse first on one side in the The direct motion.
mouth, and then on the other; I will show which of them I have found best by
my experience, and how they may be both applied. And first, of the direct
motion, I hold it is the best for most Horses, but especially for those which
are more sad and dull: for the even moving forward of your body, and the
ierting forward of your feet in the stirrops, will cause all the parts of his
body, to go so even, and justly together, that he shall feel far the more
slight and easy in his going, (if he be not daunted too much with the hand.)
But the indirect motion, I The indirect motion.
cannot approve so well; except it be at the first entering of horses to their
stroke, which are so forward in going that they will not take time to move
their bodies orderly, and that are such strict Trotters that they have no
inclination to move their fall Theo. 4. ^.
side aptly for a Pace, and then for such if you use the moving first of one
buttocke, and then of the other, (to cause them move their sides by the like
time) it will make them sooner find the sleight of that manner in going, but
then you must be careful to use your hands still to help him forward in the
even motion, for that will make him carry his fore-parts more comely; which so
soon as you feel him to set close, then you must leave Note.
that motion, and use the former, to make him strike forward orderly with his
whole body: for if you should use that as a continual motion, and use all
your body in like manner, and your hands, to correct him in the mouth first on
one side and then Theo. 36, ^. 27. a.
on the other, it will spoil his mouth, displace his head, and cause him to
carry it very vncertainlie, first on one side, then on the other, (as he
feels the motion of the hand,) or cause him to carry it continually on one
side, or (at the least) out of its due palce: and further, it will make him
stay one side (of his body) Theo. 4. ^.
whilst he brings on the other: whereby he will be subject to roll, and
set hard, and so much the rather if he be any thing sad.

Thirdly, you must observe to keep your horse in continual (3)
motion without intermission (in all his parts) (except it be when you let him
stand for breath to cherish him) and that it Theo. ibid.
move directly in the midst, for both his sides must be always going; but
this must be conceived, intellectiuely, and judged Theo. 16. b.
by the quickness of your seat.

Fourthly, you must observe continually, that the far side is (4) Theo. 30. c.
the slower (in every horse) and the more hard to be brought to command to
keep time willingly; and therefore, you must observe with great care, that the
far foot which is called the Theo. 30. ^. The leading foot.
leading foot, strike slightly forward and largely, and then the other legs
will be more easily brought to the like.

Fifthly, you must observe to keep true time with your helps (5)
and corrections, and also to use them at the very instant; for as soon as
ever you feel him begin the least disorder that can be, then you must begin to
help, and likewise when you once Theo. 17. ^.
perceive he makes small account of your helps, then you shall instantly use
corrections, and likewise you must instantly cease at his first yielding, that
he may the better conceive the cause Theo. 31. ^.
thereof.

Sixthly and lastly, you must observe not to hold him above a (6)
day at the most, to one certain pace, till he can tell how to go fast or
softly as your self will, least his body be seated to a low Note.
manner of going, (he being suffered to take ease therein) for then you will
hardly get him to a higher rate, (except it be with some other inconvenience)
when you would; and also you must have a care that you take not too much on him
at one Theo. 17. h. and i.
time, till he can tell how to go with ease and delight, least thereby you
make him weary, and so cause a disorder in his carriage, and abate his courage,
and be a means to stir up bythoughts, and so ^adish tricks; neither must
you leave him too soon, but let him add somewhat every time (for so you ^.
Pr. 27. a.
shall keep him flexible) otherwise he will loose his obedience and wax
stubborn, whereby you shall not command him Chap. 1.
when you would. All which things if you observe carefully, and work truly,
you shall bring your horse to go delightfully, and comely.

CHAP. 35. How to bring your Colt to his pace, by the hand only.
When you have brought your Colt to perfect command of his body, and mouth,
then you may be bold to offer him his pace, without any danger of adverse
accidents, (a)
if you observe those cautions in the last Chapter, which you may effect after
this manner.

First, let the place where you mean to give him his pace, be along by a wall,
pale, or hedge side, and let not your road be a The distance of the place of
exercise.
above five or six score in length; for that distance is sufficient for any
horse to go, without a turn or sobbe, till he can tell how to demean
himself therein, and further by his often turning at every end it will make
him keep his body round, and also learn him to let his wind go by the
motion of the same: Whereas, if he should have his pace given him by going
continually even forward a mile or two, (as most use) it will make him more
slow with his hinder parts, and set his wind (so doggedly) that you cannot
command his mouth, but with great force, and so spoil it with striving too
much therewith.

Now, when you are seated in your saddle, you shall put him forward gently upon
his foot-pace, and ever in his going cause b Of the serving your horse with
your body.
him to mend his foot-pace, by moving your self forward and backward in your
saddle, and with the same time keep your legs in motion, (by ierting your
feet forward in your stirrops) letting your hands go and come, with gentle
motions, (observing the like time:) But if when you thrust him on faster, he
will not couch his hinde-legges as he should, but desire to trot, then give him
a sharp touch in the mouth with your trench, which at the first it may be
will but amaze him, or cause a stay, but be you careless, and suffer him not
to stand, but Pr. 22. g.
keep him still in going by the motions of your body, and let him rest most
upon the head-straine, (for that must be cheefely Note.
used, till his body be stayed upon his pace, to preserve his Theo. 12. ^.
mouth from deading:) likewise you must observe that your body must be the
only agent to help him in his stroke, till he can tell how to lift his full
side truly.

And thus you shall exercise him for half a quarter of an Ethic. li. 2.
hour, (or indeed as you find your horse) at which if you find Cap. 2. Quia
singularia non cadunt sub aliqua art, aut certa regula. A general rule.
no alteration, be not dismayed, but use patience, (for every beginning is
hard) and alight from his back lest you disturb him too much, before he can
tell what to do, and lead him home* for you must hold this for a general
rule, in what horse soever, that after you begin to work for his pace, not to
ride him, but lead him home, till you have brought him to some command, or else
in going home so often (as you must) before he can tell how to use himself
therein, he will desire to go so fast toward the stable, that you shall not
be able to keep his body in command, and so spoil his mouth.

Then let him rest, an hour and a half, or two hours, and have him forth
again, working him still with your body and hands as before, never letting your
elbowes stir from your sides, Theo. 12. d.
no^ chocke him in the mouth, except he desire to go faster then he should, and
then it must be very sparingly.

Likewise, you must mitigate your hands upon the headstaine reins, lest he
press too hard thereupon (and thereby Note.
come to have a low fore-foote;) but let them come and go with slack reins,
except he be tickle mouthed, and then let him rest the more upon it to stay his
head: And thus, you shall use him in exercise six or seven times a day, and
within two days you shall feel him begin to set close, (though he be very
Theo. 14. f.
untoward) having the true grounds of hand and foot aforesaid: For I have had
hardly one horse in a year, (though he were void of any good government) but
I could make him strike, within that time; to which, so soon as you feel any
inclination, alight from his back and have him home, for that will make him
go the more cheerfully the next time.

Note, that when he begins to set close, you make not above two or three
turns at a time, least you take too much of Note.
him, before he find ease in his going, and thereby he get a haunt to fall
from his pace, (through dislike) whereby you shall Theo. 9. ^.
be driven to strive too much with him, neither shall you suffer him to leave
his pace voluntary (for his ease) howsoever it has been used heretofore, in
that it should be kept constant to make his body firmer; for if he be
suffered to trot for ease it That is bad ease which brings greater pains.
will increase the greater pains; and thereby get such an use thereof, that
you shall have more to do to make him hold his pace when he should, then to
bring another horse thereto.

Note, that if he prove sad upon your motions, that you quicken him up with
your voice, or if that prevail not, then correct him with the rod upon the
far buttocke or shoulder, Theo. 25. ^.
for there, and those are all the kinds of corrections you shall use, till he
can tell how to behave himself upon his pace.

Note, that if in your favoring him at the first (for his well This is worthy
of noting.
doing) he prove negligent and idle, and so fall from his pace, that then you
do not hold him to it by force, but thrusting him up to go faster, by
quickening of your motions, for that will make him hold it more willingly, in
that it will confirm the carriage of his body if you press him not too far
at once, For Art of it self depends upon voluntary actions.
till he be cunning in the handling of his legs, and will yield to your
serving him with your seat, but ever as he increases in cunning, so you may
increase his labor, leaning him always in his well-doing.

Note, that when he is come to such perfection that you may travel him
forwards, that then you begin to leave your apparent Theo. 15. i.
motions, and carry your self more firm in your seat, and use only a covert
motion of your legs, and a sweet relish of your hand, sometimes upon the
head-straine, and sometimes upon the trench, (to bring him to the use thereof,
as your discretion shall direct you,) which will be done in three weeks at the
most if the error be not in your self.

When he is brought to such cunning that he will obey your Theo. 32. and 33.
motions, and if he does not carry himself as he should, nor keep his pace
willingly, then the cause thereof is, in that his wind does not agree with his
body in equal motions; for reformation whereof, if the Switch prevail not,
then you may give him two or three sound strokes with both your Being applied
to the quality of the offense.
spu^res, serving him still with your helps, letting him have liberty of his
head to go forward so soon as you feel him consent thereto, which in twice
or thrice using, will make him frame himself orderly upon the least motion you
can use.

Note, that if he keep not the like time of motion* with both his sides, but
that he make a false time with his far side, (for Note a general rule.
that as the side that every horse will desire to mistime) and thereby get a
halting stroke (which of many is called the hitchcocke, being indeed the fault
of the man) that then you hold your hands a little harder, and thrust him
forward more violently Of a false stroke or hitchcocke.
with your legs, which will cause him move his sides equally; to which, if
he will not yield his hinder leg, but keep it still back to resist, then
let him feel your spurs sharply, and hold hard upon your head-straine, for
that will make him stretch his far fore-foot, and then his far hind foot must
needs follow keeping time in its motion: but if this prevail not at twice or
thrice offering, do not persecute him too much therewith, Violence of the hand
is to be avoided.
for so you shall be driven to use violence with your hand, which your chiefest
care must be to avoid; but you shall put him forth to his full pace, (almost
to his gallop,) ever working 1. Pra. 24. e.
your hands to, and fro, to keep his body within the limits of your motions:
for if the former corrections will not prevail (through his stubbornness) to
cause his far side to come to the like time of the largeness of the stroke
with the nar-side: k Idleness is the cause of all errors.
yet this will so quicken him up, that he shall have no leisure to keep false
and idle time, for it will force his wind, whereby either his far side will
be brought to keep time with the narre, or else of the contrary: either of
which so soon as he does; suffer him to go more easily, to conceive your
mind, and then by serving him with your seat, you may bring them in the true
distance of time:

Note, that this false stroke is a mischeife the hardest to reform (of any
error that shall oppose) and therefore in all your The false stroke hardest to
be reformed.
proceedings, from the beginning to the end; you must observe that he take up
his far-fore-leg* (which is the leading leg) and Theo. 30. c.
set it forward with the like time* and distance, to his neare-leg, for that
will make him have the fairer forefoote: which you must help only with quick
motions, and a gentle touch upon the trench, letting him play easily forward
upon the head-straine.

Note, that if he desire to go faster, then you would have Theo. 27. c.
him, so soon as you feel him press forward let him go, for the space of
four or five score, and then stop him, and withal hold your feet out
straight in your stirrops, to keep his hinder Theo. 23. c.
parts round, and so hold him, serving him with the motion of your body till
you feel him come in, to your hand, and then let him go forward gently, which
in few times* ^sing will bring him to find the slight how to let his wind and
body go together.

Note, that the Spur is the chiefest correction to conclude Theo. 11. ^. 26.
b.
and shut up all other corrections, and that no Horse can* be brought to his
high perfection, and grace, (without the true use thereof:) for as too little
will never bring him to such excellency as Art can effect (for although he may
be said to go well, yet there is an aliqu^t part reciding which would give him
a further grace) in like manner if you torture him too much Theo. 20. d.
therewith, it will bring him to such distemperature, that he will refringe
the limits of your command, and so break out into gross absurdities:
wherefore you must use a proportionable mean therein, according to his
inclination.

When your Colt is thus freed from all abuses, and that he Theo. 4.
will take his Pace fast or softly, (in good order) without rocking or shaking:
then to bring him to know how to behave himself, as occasion shall be offered,
you shall use him upon deep, and uneven grounds, letting him have time to
reform himself, and force him not on too fast, nor toil him too long
thereon, but let him go at his pleasure, your self doing nothing to him, but
keep him in his true time, by help of your motions, sometimes changing him
from deep to light earths, and again, from light to deep, which will bring
him, (in the whole Colt) to such agilitie, courage, and nimblenesse, as he
will seem to fly upon the earth through his alacrity: and thus by using him
(after this manner) in six or eight weeks you shall bring your Colt to such
an excellent and comely Pace, as if Art and Nature had conjoined to extirpe,
and devour the errors of old Adams transgression.

CHAP. 36. How to bring an imperfect mouthed Horse to his Pace.
BEcause it is holden an impossible thing to reduce a horse to his Pace, which
is spoiled before by disorder, or those either which are come to many years
before they be brought to it, The man is the only obstacle herein.
therefore it may be, there will be expected great secrets to be revealed for
the performance thereof. But the causes being considered in the one, and an
orderly proceeding observed in 1. Pra. 13. ^.
the other, there is no such ambiguity therein, but if the truth be rightly
understood, as I have said, the chief cause of these, and of all other Vices
do consist in the want of true knowledge how to bring his desire, or affection
to obedience, and his outward gesture, to agree therewith; for the want of which
concord, he does first resist with his wind, and that gives strength to
Theo. 34. a.
his outward parts, whereby he makes improper motions of the body, which
brings a dead and rebellious mouth.

Wherefore whenever your have a Horse that has a broken Pace, assure your
self that if you observe these causes, you a Of a broken paced Horse
shall bring him to his perfect Pace, by reforming of them to an unity, without
any other sinister or indirect means: which to perform you shall use but
only the head-straine, (as before) in 1. Pr. 30. 31. 32. 33.
stead of any of them for the use of it with the trench, will work a better
effect then them all: for a Horses mouings, are, either orderly, or disorderly,
fast or slow, dead mouthed, or tickle mouthed, Pr. 20. c.
and so these two, (to wit, the headstrain, and trench) will bring any of thief
extremes to the mean, (in their right application.)

For look what is said for the ordering of a young Colt, use but the same
order to him for the reformation of his disorderly Pr. 22. 23. 24. 25. 26.
motions, and then when he is brought to true obedience (in that sort) you may
command him, with the helps of you body, to give him his Pace truly and
largely as you shall wish. Only Pr. 35. a.
this observe, that whereas I wish to bring a young Colt to a perfect
understanding of all your helps and corrections, before you go about his
Pace, that in this you may abbreuiate a great time that would be spent therein,
in that he has been used before to Travail, whereby he can tell how to take
his way, (though not as he should.) For if you should go about to refine his
mouth, and to confirm his body never so precisely before; yet when you shall
go about to hold him to that Pace, wherein he had his former qualities, that
motion would put him in mind again of such errors as he had gotten a habit of
before Custom brings a habit as well in evil as good.
in that manner of going; and will be hard to reform (in a strict carriage,)
without increasing of them or worse; (as I have found by experience, to no
small trouble and toil:) in that he can tell how to frame his body to resist.

Wherefore for the surest and speediest expedition, you shall work to reform
those faults, upon that broken Pace he has, The cause of a horse not pacing
truly, is in the abuse of his head and body, and not in his legs.
and as he is purged of them so he will better and better mend his Pace, for
those disorders are the cause that he cannot tell how to handle his feet as he
should for his Pace. In which look what order I set forth for the bringing of
a slouingly Colt to a strict and true Trot, in like manner use him for
reformation of his Pace, keeping his body in continual action, to cause him
Pra. 27. c.
that he shall not have time to hold his wind, to work his froward Cap. 1 For
to force him upon the hand will make him strive the more.
will: but if he will not fall to your hand gently, thrust him forward to a
good round Pace, almost to his galloppe, (without much regard of the trueness
of his stroke,) four or five times up and down your road, and that will make
him fall to your hand, which so soon as you feel, let him ease himself, and
then you shall feel his hinder parts yield to the motions of your own body.

And likewise if he be an old Horse, and yet has neither Of an old horse
good carriage, nor any step to his Pace, you shall use him in all respects
as the former: but only, in that he cannot tell how to behave himself any
thing for his Pace, you must help him into his stroke by the gentlest means
you can, by the helps and motions of your seat, (as in the young Colt) and if
he be 1. Pra. 35. b. ibid. k.
a heavy headed Horse, so that you cannot command his head, to cause him bring
in his hinder parts, thrust him up as before, to quicken his motions, upon which
if he desire to go faster then he should, correct him with the trench twice or
thrice together, and then give your hand liberty: for as in the former, so you
must observe in this, not to work for his grace in carriage, till That cannot
be taken away which one never had.
he can tell how to go upon his Pace, for you cannot spoil his reine because
he never had it; But if he be a free and hot horse, so that he will not rest
upon the hand, then you shall favor the trench, and let him rest more upon the
head-straine, for that will make him press more orderly upon the hand forward.

Now for observations herein, you must note all what has Pr. 25.
been said before, but these further, that of what age soever your Horse is,
you must imagine him to be as a Colt, that cannot tell how to take his way, in
regard he is put to that Pace he Note.
was never used to before, and therefore you must let him go after what manner
he will, till he can strike truly, and then reform him to his perfection, as
in the other.

Note, that you must consider whether the cause of your horses Note.
broken pace came from too much lenity or cruelty, for it Of a broken pace.
proceeds from either of these two extremes, which may be The cause of a bad
pace, is the abuse of the man by one of these extremes, as Theo. 10. 11.
perceived either by his negligent care, or by his busy and eager desire in
going, and then you shall reform them by the contrary means, using the
gesture of your body to the intention of your mind, that the horse may the
better distinguish thereof: For set apart the understanding of the mind, and
no man has fruit or profit of that thing he perceives not, so set apart the
sensitive apprehension of the horse, how he should obey by motions, Sonus enim
cordi^, intellectus est.
and he will show small fruit of all your labors.

Now these cautions being truly weighd, are sufficient for instruction to the
ingenious, if he can apply them to the former. But yet to him that is but a
Scholar himself, and is not so expert, as to have such facility of hand and
foot as he should, the several grounds are very profitable to help him in
the bringing his horse to obedience, if he use either deep or ascending Of
deep earths.
earths (up a hill) especially for high spirited horses, but they are very
hurtful for heavy and dull horses, the causes Theo. 28. b.
being shown before; where I have spoken sufficiently how and. c. 32. c.
they should be applied for the reformation of several errors, which must be
tempered by the man's discretion, and so they will take away the cause of all
other needless inventions; for (as I have said) all errors are acted by the
body, and the body is governed by the wind, and it is ruled by the affection
or Ignorance the cause of all the other inventions.
desire, and this by the motions of the man, and he is (or should be) directed
by reason, the which being director of all his proceedings, to apply his helps
and proportionate all his corrections, according to the necessity of the crime,
the manner Knowledge best gotten by practice Theo. 5. Chap.
how must be gained by practice, more then by reading, he shall much
fructify in this Vineyard, for that there will no weeds grow therein to
choke the Vine: but it will flourish being nourished with the heat of truth.

But if there be a preiudicated opinion, and so give Will the reins, then the
whole fence will be broken down, and all this planting laid wast; for that no
admonitions, can prevail with a stiff-necked opinion, because that if men
will frame distinctions at their pleasures, there is no truth set forth but it
may be overthrown and defaced.

CHAP. 37. How to reform a natural hard-going horse.
THere are many which are swallowed up in this gulf, in that they have not
directed their course by the true points of this card (what are the causes of
things) but have sailed afthe Theo. 7. ^. Chap.
compass of windy and ayery opinions, whereby their brains are made the more
shallow and barren, for that they Theo. 3. a.
are not watered with the dew of consultation. For (as Schools hold) the very
marrow of knowledge, does proceed from the cause to the effect; and again, from
the event, to get the knowledge of the cause. For the cause of these hard and
uneasy going horses, is not in the nature of the horse, but in the ignorance
of the man: But this I hope is laid so naked already, that all the World may
see its shame.

Wherefore, this error is not so much in the horse, (as some Morg. 52. Chap.
Theo. 4. h.
affirm) but in the man, because he knows not how to reduce himself and
his horse to an unity; but he uses such improper motions and helps, as the
horse has no certain knowledge what to do.

For instance, in war let a drum (which is used to signify A Simile.
unto Soldiers when and how to prepare themselves to battle) give an
uncertain sound, there is no preparation made, in that they know not the
meaning thereof: Even so, if the man does not use his helps and corrections so
as the horse can conceive his mind, there is no obedience, (but a continual
resistance) Note.
in that he feels them, but wants true distinction to give Quid opus est
iubell are et non intellegere iubellationem.
notice what he would have done. But this is the fruits of yielding to
authority, desiring to eloke themselves with costly and gorgeous ignorance
rather then to cloth themselves with plain and homely truth.

But as Austin says, Quid prodest clauis aurea, si aperire quid volumus, non
potest? aut quid obest lignea, si haec potest? etc. What Preface.
avails a golden key if it cannot open what we would have opened? or what
hurts a wooden key, if it be able to open? seeing our desire is (or should
be) to have that thing opened which is shut; but our desire thus haunting
after ambition, reapeth Our desire haunteth ambition. Sodomes Apples.
no better fruit then Sodomes-Apples, that are delightful to the eye, but
touch them, and presently they go to ashes; whereby they aim at Narcissus
shadow, till they be drowned in their own conceipted labor.

But because I would not have them still to grope in the dark at noone day, let
them assuredly know that the cause of any natural The cause of a hard going
horse.
hard-going horse is, for that he was not brought to true obedience at the
first, but (going after his own will, has gotten Theo. 1. Chap.
a habit of improper motions, both in his interior and exterior parts: And so,
cannot tell how to behave himself to Pra. 26. b.
go better, because he was never taught after the grounds Chap.
of Art.

Wherefore, whosoever is desirous to reform any of these Theo. 4. e.
to an easier and better pace, let him never think to effect it, Theo. 31.
except he reform all those four chief heads which I have 32. 33. 34. Chap.
set forth in the Theoricke; for if any one of them be unreformed, that will
overthrow all the rest, the use whereof I have shown Pr. 20. 21. 22. 23. Chap.
in the handling of a young Colt; because that he must begin to reform where
the first error was begun; for first, his desire must be stirred up to go more
freely, and his wind caused to pass more willingly, and so his body must be
placed to go answerably, his mouth quickened, and his head placed truly: and
then you may be sure to bring him to a delightful pace very easily.

Now, although this may seem but a hard and harsh document, for the reforming
of such an intricate task, I stand the less thereupon, because I have touched
every branch sufficiently before for the effecting thereof, and therefore I need
not spend any time of repetition again, since here is no more to be No errors
can come but from those causes.
said then the before related causes, being also the cause of this natural hard
goer which being truly considered, will reform him better then the
extremities of any hard or tormenting snaffle or bitte. Only this observe,
that when you put him to Note.
his full pace if he desire to take such a large stroke that he Note.
roll and set hard, that then you restrain your hand and fit loose in your
seat, for what with his own uneasy going, and your self shaking on his
back, will make him seek means to set more easily, for there is never a step
that he sets, which ^ His own pain will make him seek for ease, if you
regard his first yielding.
is uneasy for you, but it grieueth him as much, or more then your self, his
uneasy going being increased with your own weight, and so his own torment
will cause him to seek ease, when his body is so placed that he can tell how
to find it, and that you give him liberty to go softly, when you feel him
begin to yield, and withal if you keep your seat more firm, for that will
help to keep his body stayed till (by custom) he get a habit of himself.

And further, note that he in his going move his body equally Theo. 35. ^.
in every part thereof, so as the forepart seem not to move before his
hinder, nor it before the former, and likewise to have them more quick and free
without intermission, (except it be when you let him stand to breath,) and
then be sure to have his desire to be ready to go at your first motion, which
you may perceive by his wind.

CHAP. 38. Of Restiffenesse.
REstiffenesse is also another weed that is sprung up in this Vineyard, which
does mightily hinder the Vines from Theo. 8. a.
flourishing, being nourished by will, and so spread into the more branches; for
there has been such small care to pluck it up Pra. 20. b.
by the roots, that it has been nourished by invention of so many several
sharp Cauezans and Bittes, to make them yield by violence, when they found,
(according to their using) lenity would not prevail: And likewise there has
been as many The further a man goes in a false path, the further from his
iournies end.
several inventions, to reform these, as they found restiffe qualities; and
yet not being grounded upon truth, they have still failed of their purpose;
whereby these are increased in number and cruelty, as there are horses to
inflict, or matter to invent; still feeling themselves as far from working
reformation, by such cruelties, as to bring a Lion to subjection by force.

But because Master Markham has touched them sufficiently in his Cauallarice,
I will refer those which are desirous to be further resolved therein to that
place, for since their inconveniences are there so indifferently portratured, I
think it needless to spend any time in the displaying of them here, they
(being so far degressing from the true Art:) for by their sharp and durable
tortures, they make the Horse as it were mad and senseless, because he cannot
feel ease when he yields.

But here I will leave these and go to the causes of restifenesse, The cause
of restifenesse.
wherein I shall vary from the opinion of Master Markham, for he houldeth that
they are both natural, and accidental in the Horse, but I say they are only
accidental to the Horse by the man's abuse of the Art: for I never saw any Colt
or Foale, which had any natural restifenesse of himself, (except it be
nourished by abuse:) for by his natural inclination he will neither go back*
stand still* lie down, strike, rise a fore, plunge, or any such like, excepr
he be made sullen, or dogged by restrayning him of his liberty. And further
(having Theo. 18. b.
experience my refuge) I dare maintain; that any Colt may be kept free from
any restifnesse at the first, nay further, Theo. 35. d.
that they may be kept free from the Vice of Stumbling, enterfeiring, going
broad either before or behind, for the cause of The cause not natural of
stumbling.
these is not natural, (as some imagine) but accidental, coming from the
abuse of the hand, and the unapt motion of the body, for there are none subject
to these till they be handled: and I (also) have amended many Horses of those
faults, being put into my hands, only for that end.

And therefore, whatsoever restiffe quality may spring up in Restifenesse is
sown by neglect and conceit.
this Vineyard, is sown there by the hands, either of man's ignorance, or
negligence, in either not observing, or else not knowing how to order his
proceedings in such sort, as the Horse might conceive, how to obey his mind,
but because I would not Restifenesse in standing still or going back.
have you ignorant altogether herein, I will show briefly how these causes
come from the man, and where to reform them. Now the chief cause of standing
still or going back, is that he is corrected too much with the hand, or
bridle, that he dare not press forward, and thereby when he feels that he
cannot free himself, from the correction of the body, he stands still, to
get breath to resist, and so having ease becomes 1. Pra. 23. b.
restife, or else he goes back, thinking to free himself thereby How to
reform them.
since he cannot have liberty to go forward.

But you may reform these faults, by letting a Footman* lead Pr. 21. a.
him gently forward, (as you did a Colt at his first backing,) till he be set
on going, and let him go which way he will, letting him rest most upon the
head-straine, only using (at the very instant) the help of your bodies
motion, to let him know the use Theo. 29. d.
thereof. Which when he conceiueth, you may then adioyne The cause of lying
down.
your corrections, to make him go forward at your pleasure. Now the cause of
those Horses which are subject to lie down; is by the extremities of
correction also, whereby he is made so Theo. 29. d.
stubborn he will lie down upon the least discontent, for that at the first
his correction not being proportionated according to his disposition in
striving to resist, he by some accident chances The reformation.
to fall, whereby he dismounteth the man, and so gets a habit thereof: And
for reformation hereof you shall (as before) Theo. 15. ^.
let a Foote-man be by, that as soon as ever you do but begin to feel him
nestle with his feet, that then he may be ready, to Continual motion the
preventing of bythoughts.
take him by the head presently, and pull him on hastily giving him reuiling
terms, and your self doing nothing, but help him by thrusting him forward
with you motions, and so use him till you feel a willingness to yield to them,
and then to prevent him the better, you shall have a care, to keep his legs
always in motion, (when he stands) till you can command him your self. The
cause of striking.


Now if he has gotten that iadish trick of striking, the cause thereof may
be as well from too little correction as too much, whereby he is not brought to
true obedience, or that it Not the correction it self, but the manner thereof
prevails.
is increased by too much, and so will answer one blow for another. And for
this the chase-halter is very good, for if he be chased about in it, letting
one follow him with a long pole; and ever as he shall resist double his stroks,
and what with the correction, and The reformation.
the labor in running about, he will presently be reformed.

And likewise, if he be subject to rise before, or plunge, the The cause of
rearing and plunging.
cause of these also is in the abuse of the hand, as well as in correction, for
when they feel correction so sharp, and cannot free themselves by any
means, they presently fall to these disorders (by the help of a heavy hand)
thinking thereby to ease To reclaim rearing.
themselves. Wherefore if he be apt to Rear, you may assay to keep him down
by the head-straine (for that will make his fore parts more heavy,) and so he
will be the more willing to press forward: or if that prevail not, ever as
he rises beat him down with your stick betwixt his ears, or by striking
him upon the knees, and that will cause him to keep them down: or else when
you begin to feel him rise, keep your hands firm upon the head-straine,
and with your whole body turn him about, thrusting him forward with your
legs, for this will reclaim him if the other fail; if you be also careful
to keep his body moving, that he has not time to stand, till you feel his
desire somewhat abated. And for plundging, let To reform plunging.
him have his head that he has no stay to rest upon you hand, and keep him
also in motion, for then he cannot have time, nor leisure, to frame his body
thereto: for the letting him stay upon your hand gives strength to his
fore-parts, whereby his body has the more help to raise his hinder parts.

And further, the cause of running away, and skittishnesse, is for want of true
obedience of the hand, and wind, and therefore The cause of running away and
skittishnesse.
when he is either displeased, or sees any thing that is strange, he is ready
to run away or fly on the one side, in that he goes not freely but
unwillingly, for his wind is kept to resist upon the least occasion, and then
not having a perfect mouth, he will run away or skew more through
stubbornness, How to reclaim skittishnesse.
then timerity. And therefore to reclaim skewing, or starting, is to stir
him to a more quick going, and correct him on that side he flies on without
partiality, and cause him to go to that, which he flees from, and then
cherish him when he approaches thereto, which will fortify his boldness.

And for a runaway, though there has been many ways How to reform a
runaway.
approved, yet the best (that I ever could find) and the least danger, is, to
let one have him in the Chase-halter, and your self being on his back thrust
him into his galloppe, and when he desires to break off, let him give him a
sound twitch with the halter, and your self at the instant cause him to stop
(as before Pr. 18. d.
is shown) at which if he will not yield use him so the second, or third time,
or till you feel him let his wind pass, and then let him stand, and cherish
him, and thus you shall use him, Note.
till you feel him yield to your hand, which he will do in short time, for
this quality is most incident to hot fiery Horses, which are never taught the
true use of the hand at first, because most A lame knowledge.
think that when a Horse goes forward freely they are perfect, although
otherwise they be most lame.

And further, the cause of stumbling, is in the unapt handling The cause of
stumbling.
of his body in going, so that he has not time to handle his feet, in such
order as he should, in regard his hinder parts follow faster then his foreparts
can make way, (with true order,) and then The habit of stumbling gotten.
he stumbleth, which comes to a habit, by the abuse of the hand: for if (when
you feel him apt to stumble) you for fear hold in his head, (thinking thereby
to prevent it) then you Note.
shall increase it: because you give him a help to support his body more then
nature has ordained, whereby he will rely the Nature the best supporter.
more upon the hand, and when you slack it never so little, that stay upon
which he trusts fails him, and then he stumbleth Stumbling is not reformed
by spurring.
the more, Now this is not to be reformed by spurring (as most think) for if
he shall be but twice or thrice corrected therewith, so soon as he shall but
trippe never so little he will run headlong forward, and thereby stumble
more dangerously; But How to reform stumbling.
it must be reformed by changing the carriage of his* body, and letting him
have his head, for he is as fearful of falling as your No horse willing to
fall.
self, is to have him: and when his body is set for a true motion, and his
lust stirred up more quick, he will take up his legs more loftily, and set
them forward orderly, if you temper your Theo. 15. 16. 17.
hand, and helps accordingly.

And for enterfeiring, the cause thereof is not altogether in The cause of
enterfeiring.
nature (as is thought) but through the restraint of the hand that he cannot
have liberty to move his legs directly forward, by two straight lines (as he
should) but crosses his feet, The reformation.
whereby one strikes against another. And therefore you may reform this,
(except nature be imperfect in shape) by giving him his motion in the true
place of his body, and letting him go direct, upon a pleasing hand, for then
he will handle them Theo. 4. l.
so that they shall not strike one against another: for he may go narrow and
yet not enterfeire, if his body be firmly knit, as well as our selves do, and
yet strike not one ancle against another.

And lastly, if a Horse go broad either before or behind, the The cause of
broad going.
cause is still in the abuse of the hand, and miscariage of his body, because
that if it be before, the foreparts are holden back by the slownesse of the
hinder, so that they both agree not truly in moueing, and that his mouth was
so terrified at the first, that he durst not dare to use his fore-feete
rightly, but stradleth with How to reform stradling before.
them; and this may be reformed also by the pleasant touch of the hand, letting
him rest upon the head-straine, to cause him stretch his legs forward, if you
be not too hasty with him till he have knowledge how to reach them out most
largely, helping him with the motions of your body to his true time. And Theo.
12. a.
likewise if he go broad behind; then the hind feet were forced on faster then
he could tell how to frame his foreparts to go The cause of going broad behind.
so fast; for want of which aptness, he was driven on by force, and so caused
that disorder. Which must be remedied by the means before said, and by letting
him have time whereby he may come to move all his parts alike, and then as he
grows The remedy.
cunning so to quicken up his motions: And this observe for a certainty, that
whether this fault be behind, or before, or both, Note.
that the further he strikes, and sets forward with his legs, they must
upon necessity go the narower: For instance, suppose A Simile. geometrical
diagram Euclide. 1. li.
a quadrant as ( a) and let it resemble the wide going Horse, and the four
angles his four feet: then suppose another a longer square as ( b) and let it
be of the same quantity, and stand for the even going Horse: now you see that (
b) although it be of the same quantity to ( a) yet it is narrower being further
extended: So likewise a Horse the further he stretches his feet forward in
going, the narrower they must needs go, and yet their distance at the setting
on of his body is still of the same quantity.

Now for the further help to reform these, and so the most of the former,
deep earths is much auayleable, for a young practitioner, Theo. 28. d.
using still the former helps: and also to bring your Pra. 32. b.
Horse back to his* Chase-halter, (as if he were a young Colt,) Pra. 13.
will help much to gain obedience, whereby you shall save great labor* in
toyling both your self and him: for there can never be sure building upon
false foundations, and I see no reason, that it should be any disgrace to the
Art or professor, to bring a false In teaching, a Horse has the like relation
to the man, as the Scholar has to his Master.
grounded Horse back to proceed orderly, then it is for a Schoole-maister, to
bring a Scholar (that has been rudely taught) back, to learn him syllable
truly, seeing there is the like relation to them both.

And whereas it may be objected, that it is doubtful whether these two, (that
is, the trench and musrole) will reform all restife Objection.
Horses, seeing there are so many differences of Horses, and varieties of
restifnesse: I answer, that that point is cleared before, Answer.
for restisnesse of what kind soever it is, does not proceed from the Horse,
but as a material cause, and not as the efficient; and 1. Pra. 20. ^.
so the man being the efficient, these errors are increased by him, Man the
cause of any restifenesse in a horse by abuse.
and there are as many means to reform (by them) in their true use as there
are means to increase them by the abuse, and therefore if they be applied
according to the quality of restiuenesse, and of the Horse in whom it is
residing, there need For the end of Art is to preserve the mean
be no more doubt of their reclayming, then of heat and moisture to preserve
the vital powers, for as by these two, life is preserved, so by those two
obedience is maintained, one maintayning orderly motion, and the other
correcting disorderly, if hepes and corrections be aptly adjoined.

FINIS. Aut face, aut tace.
THE TABLE OF THE second BOOK.
CHAP. Fol. 1 HOw long Horses have been in use. 1 3 How to choose your
Stallions and Mares. 4 4 Of the courage of the Stallions and Mares. 6 5 Of
their colors. 8 6 At what years they are aptest for generation. 13 7 How they
should be kept with food, for the increase of good seed. 16 8 When to put
them together for generation. 22 9 How and where to put them together for
action. 28 10 How to know whether the Mare has conceived or no. 31 11 How to
use her after her conception, till her foaling. 32 12 When and how to waine
your Foales. 36 13 A Corollary to the Art of breeding. 40 14 Of the first
haltring a young Colt. 48 15 Of the excellent use of the chase-halter. 53 16 Of
a young Colts first bridling and sadling. 56 17 How to prepare a young Colt to
suffer you to take his back w^tho^t viol^nce. 61 18 How to take his back at
the first. 64 19 Of ba^king a young Colt after other horses. 68 20 The
Commendation of the Head-straine, and the uses. 70 21 How to make your Colt
take his way without resistance. 75 22 How to make him rest upon the Trench. 77
23 How to learn him to stop. 80 24 How to bring his head to its true place.
83 25 How to teach your Colt to turn. 89 26 Of causing your Colt to retire
back. 94 27 The use of obedience. 96 28 How to bring your Colt to a true trot.
99 29 How to make him trotte sidewayes. 105 30 Of Ampling or Pacing. 108 31 Of
the abuse of heavy shoes, pasternes of lead, wispes, and shoes of advantage.
112 32 Of the abuse of waights, and deep earths. 114 33 Of the abuse of the
hand. 117 34 Observations for the bringing your Colt to his pace, by the hand.
120 35 How to bring your Colt to his pace, by the hand only. 122 36 How to
bring an imperfect mouthed Horse to his pace. 127 37 How to reform a hard
natural going horse. 131 38 Of restiffenesse. 133

FINIS.
THE TIHRD BOOK OF THE VINEYARD of HORSEMANSHIP. WHEREIN IS PLAINLY SET FORTH
HOW to apply both Hunting and Running Horses to the true grounds of this Art,
both in Trayning, Dieting and Riding. Being more truly purged from errors then
any heretofore published has been. By MICHAEL BARET Practitioner in the same
Art.

Cicero, Falsa veritatis color tincta tanto nequiora
Sunt, quanto and esse falsa minime cognoscuntur.
LONDON, Printed by GEORGE ELD. 1618.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, VIRTUOUS, AND WORTHY, SIR FRANCIS FAYEN, Knight of the
BATH, and his Honorable Brother Sr. GEORGE FAYEN Knight: M. B. prays for
increase of Honor, and everlasting felicity.
Honorable Knights,
WHen Jupiter, (as the Poets feign) had made man, he seeing him such an
excellent creature, brought him to Momus that carping God, to see what fault he
could find with that proportion, which when he had curiously examined, he
greatly commended both the form and the feature; but yet there was one thing
which he did dislike, and that was because he had not made a window against his
heart, that one might see whether it and his tongue did agree.

Even so, I (if it were lawful) might except against the Creator, because I am
so enable that I cannot set forth to the world my mind in so plausible a style,
as my heart does desire, through which defect, men's hearts judging according to
the evidence of their senses) I look to be condemned of arrogance for making
these weak labors to be legible in the world, whereby they may term me a
fool in Print.

But seeing I shall fare no worse then many that have gone before me, I am
nothing danted, but am armed with patience, to be a partaker with others of
scandelous clamors; for (as one says;) The inconsiderate multitude do much
resemble dogs that bark at those they know not; and likewise it is their
nature to accompany one another in those clamors: So it is with this sort of
people, who wanting that knowledge which reason requires, and that loving
affection, that Christianity desires, condemn that they know not, and loath
that they like not; but though some malignant spirits may deface it, yet many
worthy breasts, (I hope) will embrace it.

For the subject or matter is worthy, and the groundworke (upon which this
plantation is framed) is true, though some stems of error may spring out of the
earth, for there is no man which has not his by* slips, errors, and
wanderings, but yet I have purged this Vineyard from so many as my weak
knowledge could discern: whereby the young Impes shall not be choked, if it
but understood by reading, as I conceived in writing, (because no man can
infuse Knowledge with his pen:) for (as Aristotle says) Vnumquodque recipitur
per modum recipientis: Every thing is received according to the natures of them
that receive it; for the Be gathers honey, and the Spider poison from one and
the self same flower, but the cause of that diversity is not in the slower,
but in their natures: And likewise the Sun reflecting his beams, both upon
the fragrant flowers, and also upon the dunghill, it causes the first to be
mo^e pleasing and odoriferous, and the other to be more loathsome and
contemptuous; the cause of which does not proceed from the Sun, but from the
difference of their natural vapors; the like cause may be applied for
diversities of effects in other men's written labors.

Wherefore, seeing men's fancies are as variable as their faces, both in regard
that nature has her greatest delight in variety, as also, that most judge
either partially, or as the ear or eye gives evidence; the first being
without equity, the second uncertain, and the third doubtful: because that
having no other evidence then the sensitive apprehension of the eye, the heart
gives sentence according to the exterior evidence, and so is deluded, in
regard the eye is no substance of light (whereby it might inlighten, and so
penetrate into other substances) but a thing which only has a procliuity and
aptnes to receive light from another by accidence, and therefore can see no
further then the accidence of any substance; yet for all these ambiguities, I
have thirsted with a parching soul which will never be quenched till I have
satisfied many of my good friends, for whose sakes I have attempted to plant
this Vineyard of Horsemanship, in the World, to remove those that will be
removed from their ancient errors having divided it into three Books.

The first Theorically showing the office and duty of the Man; the second
entreating both of breeding and riding young Colts, showing how to manage them
(in a true ground) for all the parts of Horsemanshippe: the third, showing how
to diet and train, both hunting and coursing horses, to bring them to the
height of their glory.

The last of which Books I determined (if fatal and inevitable death had not
prevented) to have dedicated to the thrice worthy and honorable Knight, S.
Anthony Mildemay, deceased; whose death all Horsemen may continually deplore;
for he was both a father and a foster-nurse to all the Professors thereof, of
whose worthy bounties I have so plentifully (though undeservedly) tasted, that
if I should bury them in the grave of oblivion, I should be such an ungrateful
and unsupportable lump that the earth would groan under my burden* nay,
Horses themselves may with Aethon the Horse of Pallantis (as Virgill records)
power forth tears, for loosing such a worthy Master; for his noble breast did
never repine at any charges that might either increase or maintain them in
their superlatiue glory, whereby he has left such a race as will give a
counterbuffe to any opposer in England.

Wherefore (Right Worshipful) seeing the divine providence has appointed you
an hereditary Successor of that worthy house, I have presumed to subject this
book unto your mild and kind acceptance, together with the Right Worshipful
Knight Sir George Fayen, in both whom is the bright star of Virtue, Honor,
and love to those excellent Creatures resplending: Knowing that as you are
brethren by nature, so you continually live in such a reciprocal unity, going
always hand in hand, being combined with the bonds of Amity, Virtue and
Nature, in such sort, that if I should separate such a sweet coniunct, I were
not worthy to breath; more especially being tied thereunto with the chain of
your favorable love toward me, when you did employ me.

Since which time having examined all my proceeding by experience, and purged
my preter-errors by reason, I have sent my lives practice into the World, as a
token of my well wishes, which I hope will give such light to the practisers of
this Art, as they shall not need to grope at noone day, (as I my self have
long done, being blinded with ancient traditions) which though it be not so
plausibly styled as many would desire, yet I hope the matter will bring profit
being truly understood; desiring your Worships to pardon my boldness in my
attempt, and that your kind favorable acceptance would smooth the rough and
craggy path of my performance, so shall I be bound to you in all duty,

and ever remain at your Service, MICH: BARET.

TO THE READER.
THus, (gentle Reader) I have adventured through the hard and craggy Rocks of
inevitable ignorance, to make the path more spacious and so more passable, for
those which are desirous to travel in that tract which leads to the chiefest
place of this Plantation. In which peregrination, because there has so many
wandered out of the way, through the number Imitation as a mist darkeneth our
understanding.
of so many cross by-ways that are trodden by the steps of those which have
trauayled in the thick mists and desert places of the ancients; I have taken
pains to set down notes in the margeant (at every doubtful turn) which will
serve as guides to direct them when they are in distress, and oblivion should
obscure this path. The which travail, being (now) finished, I had thought to
have commanded my pen to a full period.

But being further incited by some gentlemen, my very good friends, to persist
further in this so famous Art, to set forth my opinion and experience of the
other excellent part The cause of this last book.
thereof, to wit, the training up of hunting, and running horses, persuading
me what light and benefit would come thereby (to the good of my Country and
Nation) in in showing how these Impes also might flourish in this Vineyard, and
how they might suppress and keep down those weeds which may gr^w therein,
whereby they might bring forth fruit also most pleasant and profitable.

I have (for their sakes) adventured the Pike of my Pen to Old hard forn*
march among the boisterous and roaring Cannons, of emulatiue and slanderous
tongues, to satisfy their desire, and to show by Application, how and what
Appendix these have to the former Principles, and wherein likewise they who
have spent their whole time in this part (and are esteemed The Cha^
of many as a Phoenix) have slided out of the way, and yet not perceived,
because they have (likewise) had the nature of the horse to veil their crooked
paths: But because my Strarons i^ although
assertions are (many of them) opposite to the practice of this our time, I
look that there will be Iudasses to betray them, (by detraction) having a
Pharisaicall conceit of their own traditions, and so cannot endure any
counterbuffe.

And therefore I am nothing danted to prostitute the truth, for any Zoylist,
because my intention is not (in the publishing of this) to revive and quicken
the numnesse of their preiudicated conceit, but only to plant such Impes as
whose roots are not eaten with the canker of obstinacy, whereby they shall not
be maimed, but complete; for no man can be approved a perfect Horseman, who
has not knowledge in every part thereof

And therefore, gentle Reader, if this my great pains taken, and the whole
course of my time spent, in an honest care for erecting the truth, shall be but
thankfully received: it will encourage me to prune and dress the whole Vine,
from the highest to the lowest part thereof: For although I have set forth the
platform and grownd of this whole plantation, yet I have left the chief
Stem thereof vnpruned, That is how to ride horses for service to their
perfection.
(although it be planted) for diverse causes (to my self best known;) which
hereafter (if God permit) I mean also to graft in my second addition, as this
shall be accepted, and as time and leisure will consent, besides the providing
for my necessary affairs: And so farewell. But as for the other whose
ambitious conceit has carried them so high, that they seek to beat down
other men's honest and fruitful endeavors, I leave them only with these
Verses of Mr. BASSE.

Read Sir, if you will, but if you will not, choose,
This Book (Sir) will be read if you refuse,
But if you read I pray commend my wit,
It is (in truth) the first that e're I writ:
Who reads and not commends, it is a rule,
He Is either very wise or very fool:
But whosoere commends and does not read,
What ere the other is, he is fool indeed.
And who does neither read nor yet commend,
God speed him well, his labor's at an end:
But read, or not, or how, I pass not for it,
I rest your honest careless friend M. Baret.
THE THIRD BOOK of the Vineyard of Horsemanship, wherein is shown how to
apply both Hunting and Running Horses to the true ground.
CHAP. 1. How to choose a Hunting Horse.
THis Part of Horsemanship is so noble and generous, that it deserves to have
many lines written for the commendations thereof, (to show forth its
excellency;) before The^. 1. ^
I come to handle it in particular, not only to show the goodness of God
toward Man, in creating such creatures to his use, The natural instinct of
desire and flyeing*
as well only for pleasure as for profit, with the which he might recreate
himself; but also to show the lawfullnesse thereof (approving it by his
ordinance,) for that he has given such natural gifts, unto such creatures,
as the Horse, Hound, Hare, and other such like Beasts, that they should so
naturally accurre one to another, and all for his solace, as first, for the
Hare to have such inated fear of those which would devour her, that she (being
so small) is not able to resist, whereby she is driven to seek her safety,
only by flying, for the which cause nature has made her most swift for such a
small creature: and also to the hound such an eager desire to pursue, and such
a tender nose to guide him by the sense of smelling, that he can Of the Hound.
trace all her unknown turnings, and doubles to continue this delightful
Chase. And further, he has given the Horse such natural affection and love to
the Hounds, that he does seem The unity betwixt the Horse and Hound.
to swallow the earth for the desire of their noise, nay he is so chary of his
feet (if he be thrust amongst them through his tiders ignorance,) that he will
make a false step rather then tread of any one of them: and also he is of
such puissant strength, courage, and swiftness, that he will carry his Master
Of the Horse.
through the deep and toil some earths, and broken swaches, for contentment
in his solace.

And moreover this Art deserves to be freed from such false defamations, as
those Cormerous penny-Fathers of Midas sect Auaritious minds are repugnant to
liberal and generous spirits.
does impute, which through their filthy auaritious mind, they would convert
all their time and actions into gould, esteeming it as the only God, whom they
adore, whereby they are led captive (as slaves) in that insatiable servitude:
as if that were the only end and delight, for the which all creatures were
ordained: And for to excuse this their niggardly rapine, they account this
delightful recreation but prodigality, by increasing such extraordinary
charges, and that it is the only spoiling and laming of many good Horses. But
because Master Markham, has defended these unjust Taxations, and spoken so
sufficiently In his first Treatise and Cauallarice.
therein, that for its excellency I cannot tell how to frame my Pen to portrat,
or set it forth in such lively and glorious colors, therefore I refer those
(which delight in this noble exercise, to his works, for he has written so
copiously in the lust defense thereof that if I should speak any thing it were
but a reiterating of that which he has said.

And yet the excellency thereof does so stir up my affection, that I cannot
choose but speak a little therein. For the pleasure thereof (in my affection)
is so great, that it exceeds all other The pleasure of Hunting.
so much, that if it brought no other profit, then the delight to follow a
pack of good dogs (having a good Horse) that were enough to counter-vaile
the surcharge, (for a generous mind,) for I esteem it above all other earthly
pleasures whatsoever. But it adds also a further profit, for the exercise
maintains health, and causes an agile and apt body, and increases knowledge
how to help and correct his Horse, as occasion The profit of Hunting.
shall be offered; whereby if he should go upon any Martial service, he will
be ready to perform any desperate exployt with great scelerity and quickness.
Besides, the use of riding up and down steep places and deep earths, will so
fortify and imboulden his courage, that he will very valiantly dispatch, A
Hunting Horse serviceable for war.
any occuret, or discovery, in service. And so (for that use also) one hunting
Horse may be made more serviceable for war, then four other (through his
toughness and speed) if the man have likewise skill to keep his body clean
by good feeding, and true diet.

But leaving to speak any more hereof, because my Artlesse The shap of a
Hunting Horse.
Pen would but over veil its worthiness. I will deliver how you shall choose
your Horse for that use, and which by all probability are most like to yield
the best content, (both to the eye, and in the field) if Art be thereto
assisting. First, therefore let Theo. 37. d.
him be of a mean stature, that is, some sixteen hand of height, (or
thereabout:) his head also of a mean bigness, his chaule 1. Pra. 3. f.
(if it may be) let it be thin and wide, and his care not too little, and if he
be somewhat bangled, or wide eared so they be sharp, it is a sign of
toughness, his forehead broad, having a bunch standing out (in the midst)
like a Hare, his eye full and large, his nostrell wide, with a deep mouth, all
his head lean, a long and straight neck a firm and thin crest well reared,
a wide throple, a broad breast, deep chested, his body large, his ribs round,
and close shut up to his huckle bone, a good fillet, long buttocke but not very
broad, being well let down in the gascoyne, and many that are a little sickle
hought are very tough and swift, his limbs would be clean, flat, and
straight, but not very big, his joints short, especially betwixt the pasterne
and hoof, having little hair on his fetlocks, a straight foot and a black
hollow hoof, not over big, and if it be somewhat long, it argues speed:
which Horse, when you have gotten, assure your self, that for the outward
shape, you have as good as nature can promise.

And for the shape of a running horse, there is not so much difference betwixt
the shape of him and the hunter, as there is in their ends of trayning, for the
hunting Horse must endure long and Note the ends and shape.
laboursome toil, with heates and colds, but the running Horse must dispatch
his business in a moment of time (in respect of the other) showing swiftness
and speed. Wherefore you shall so near as you can, have him in all proportion
as in the former; only there may be a dispensation, with these few The shape
of a running horse.
things, as if he have a longer chine, so that his side be longer streaked, he
will take the larger stroke, especially upon light earths, and if his limbs be
more sleuder and his joints more loose, if that they be not so short in the
pasterne, he may be very excellent, and swift for a course.

And as for their colors, although there be most men that observe Of their
colors
them as a sign of goodness, yet (as I have said) I differ in that, and
esteem of them no further then as indifferent, and to 1. Pra. 5. b.
beautify the other parts, to give content and delight to the eye; And those
are either the brown Bay, Dapple Bay, Black, a Sad Chestnut with Flaxen Maine
and Tail, so that they have white Star, Snip, or white rach, with a white
foot; Dapple gray, Cap. f.
or white Lyard with black Musle, Eye, and Ear: any of which colors will
give a great grace to the former shape, although they be no perfect fignes of
their goodness: for as the goodness A Simile.
or badnesse of a man does not consist in his complexion, but in his inward
virtues, neither do these demonstrate the The inward parts the cause of good
or bad.
goodness or badnesse of the Horse, for that proceeds from his disposition.
And for his inward parts if he be not of such a perfect composition as is
desired, yet if he be reformed according to Art, may prove exceeding good, for
if you should so curiously desire to have a Horse so complete in shape,
color, and Hard to find a complete Horse.
quality, by a natural composition, as some do prescribe, you should spend
the most of your life before you should achiue your expectation, for there are
many horses which are defective of such a perfect shape, in many parts, and
also in color; and yet 1. Pr. 8. ^.
by Art have been brought to great performance, And therefore seeing Art was
invented to perfect nature, endeavor your self to search into the bowls of
it, and you shall find, that the unlikeliest Horse will oftentimes worse the
more likely.

CHAP. 2. The Authors Apology.
THe whole Pilgrimage of former ages, and also of our times, Theo. 1. The
miserable estate of man.
has been, and is hurried on the sands of error, ignorance being the coatch,
tradition, custom, obstinacy, and selfeconceit the wheels, contention, and
emulation the Horses, and negligence the Coatch-man which does carry us into
the gulf of confusion, wherein we are so congealed with the Ice of opinion,
that no reflect of the beams of truth has power to Obsequium amicos: veritas
odium parit.
thawe it: through which partial conceit, there was rieuer any as yet, that
taught the truth, could receive love or credit, if they did not allege proofs
from the Ancients and Elders, for their better approbation: but were esteemed
Heretical, and sowers of Sects, and dissentions, thinking all truth to be
included, in the apprehention of former-times. And to reward their The preface
to the Second Book.
pains, and good will in setting forth the truth, they persecute them with
malice, and envy, as false seducers, in teaching new doctrine contrary to their
Ancient imitation.

Wherefore, seeing he that walks amongst or upon Pikes, had need to foot
charily, and he that goes an vnbeat path in Although here sie is not a proper
term yet: by application.
the deserts and craggy ways amongst Wilde-Beasts, had need to have a faithful
and sure guide; and that in setting forth a nearer way to find the truth is
held new doctrine, and so Heresy, I may be held as bold as blind Byard, to
cast my self amongst all these dangers, in maintayning such strange Paradoxes,
and impossibilities, as they are holden. But yet all this does nothing Math.
10. Epist: to the 2. Book.
deter me, but rather encourage me, for the servant not being greater then
his Master, I do not look for any other favor then my betters; and therefore
to maintain the truth, I will arm my self, (with patience) against the
malignant censures of such as are wedded to their own conceits, and condemn
me to be a seducer into errors, and a sower of such Heresies in this Vineyard,
as heretofore has never been holden.

But to such (if there be any, as I fear too many) I answer that I would not
have them deceive themselves, in holding those Paradoxes, which are true
assertions; for this I dare affirm Legere enim et non intelligere negligere
est. CATO.
against any gain-sayer whatsoever, that this Treatise will teach the true
manner of bringing any horse to good obedience, (in what is reason) if it be
read advisedly, and have a tolerable and true construction, for I have
collected it by the authority of the best instructers, having time the
maintainer, practice the worker, experience the controuler, reason the
directer, and truth the supporter.

And further, I would have none to be so choleric as to account me brainlesse
(by mistaking my mind through their opbrious opinions) that I should so
unadvisedly shake the foundation of this Art, by making distinctions, according
to The truth defaced by abuse.
my fantasy. For I hold that the former grounds are very true, being held in
general, but they are false in their uses and application Theo. 6. b.
particular, in that their motions, helps and corrections 7. c.
are not directed by order but by will; and that they are not 8. a.
proportionated according to the disposition of the horse, and in 15. a.
quality and quantity to the time, place and crime, and also in 6. b.
not rightly understanding where to seek for reformation, when Et multis alijs.
Cap.
there is any resistance, but have continually wrought upon the shadow,
neglecting the substance, aiming always to reform the outward parts, never
respecting the chief, which is the inward: for the appetite or desire, is as a
primum mobile, to command all the other parts in their motions, through which
neglect Theo. 3. p.
(when they have failed) was brought in that false imputation 7. h.
that the nature of the horse was the chief obstacle, to ouershadow their own
errors.

Therefore he that is strayed aside, and does desire to be set in the right
path, let him but seriously observe and diligently practice, what is here set
down without preiudicacy, and he Ars longa, breuis vita.
shall find, that these are no Paradoxes, but certain truths, but he must
take pains to apply one place to another, for it is a great pains for a short
time, which being once gained, the pleasure will abate the pain, according to
the saying of the Poet.

If that in Knowledge thou take any pains.

The pain departs but Knowledge remains. Musanius.


And further, whereas they think that I have sailed too far already, beyond my
compass, in setting forth that doctrine, 1. Pr. 28. 35. and 36. Chap.
to bring any horse to a true pace, or trotte; And that I shall now split my
self upon the rocks, by teaching to make the hunter and courser to run
truly upon the spur, and also upon That is held impossible with many that is
hid from their apprehension.
each kind of earths of what disposition soever, they are, for as much as it
is holden impossible to those which are swallowed up with the waves of
tradition; yet I know it to be justifiable if they be taught after this
method, but then they must not think to effect it by their pure and good
feeding only, as many hold, and glory in their knowledge; but first to bring
the whole horse to an uniform motion, in all the parts, to answer 1. Pr. 27.
Chap.
to his helps and corrections obediently; for otherwise (as the Proverb is)
he shall be better fed then taught; and so, (as a wanton child) will be
stubborn, and ride but when his lust, and after that, to increase his
goodness and toughness, by feeding, as this method following shall instruct.

CHAP. 3. The order of a good Stable.
THe Stables for all sorts of horses ought to be made formal and convenient,
and kept neat and sweet, for that there is no Creature (sensitive) does take
more pleasure in clenlinesse No irrational Creature delights more to be
kept clean then a horse.
then they; but the cause that I have omitted to speak thereof, in this last
book, was because there is no man which takes delight in a horse, but he will
also desire to have his stable in some sort correspondent; and further, there
need not such exact observations for the situation and making of a stable for
those horses which are for ordinary use, as there does for those, wherein the
greatest excellency of the horse and deepest judgment of the man is to be
shown. For if those Horses The ends to the which horses are trained to be
regarded.
which are for serviceable and travailing use, should be daintily kept at
home, it will make them so tender, that whenever they shall come to lie in
other places, (as occasion shall be offered) if they have not the like warmth,
and order, it will make them the more subject to take cold.

But because, there is an urgent necessity, to have the stable Neglect herein
overthrows the whole designs.
handsome, warm and neat, for hunting and running horses, for that there ought
to be a continual care had, to maintain them in perfect state of body, and in
the best strength, wind, and courage: I will briefly describe and set forth
the manner The situation of the Stable.
of erecting a perfect and plain Stable, without any curious additions.

And therefore, first for the situation thereof, it would be All evil smells
surfeits.
upon dry and firm ground, so that he may come and go clean to it in foul
and winter weather, neither would there be any filthy smell, privy, hogsstye,
hen-house, or such like, near to it, to give any filthy stench or unwholesome
savor; also there would The walls thick.
be a channel (made current) to euacuate the noisomeness of of his own piss.

Likewise, the walls would be made very thick, with brick, or else some
other stone, not only to make it strong for being broken down by knaves, but
also to keep both the excesses of weather from him; I mean, that neither the
cold windy storms in winter do invade him, nor the heat of The Stable close
and dark.
the reflection of the Sun in Summer annoy him, and so hinder digestion.

Moreover, it would be made close and dark, that when he comes from his
labor (and has filled his belly) he may take his rest as well on the day as the
night; and therefore it would be remote a good distance from the noise of
other horses, which would disquiet him.

Furthermore, it would have a window toward the West (if it be possible) to
set open to give light, whilst he is in dressing, Of Planking it. 1. Pra. 12. c.
and to let in Air at your pleasure, and specially to set open to cool and
sweeten the stable, whilst he is forth in ayreing: And for the planchers,
although some have wished to have the standings paued, I cannot approve thereof,
some reasons before I have shown, and more I could show if it were needful;
but I hold it the best to have them laid with good Oaken planckes (two or three
inches thick) with holes bored through them in diverse places, to cause the
wash draine through them into the channel, which will keep the litter more
sweet and dry, whereby it will be the more wholesome for his body, and also they
will be more warm and easy to lie upon, if at any time he chance to spurn
his litter from under him, by tumbling or waltring him, as many not of the
worst horses oftentimes do.

Besides (as Mr. Markham says) they would be laid level, The Planchers would
be leuel.
not higher before then behind, that he may stand of an equal height with all
his feet, for if he rest too much upon his hinder legs it will cause them to
swell, neither can he lie at ease, because his hinder parts will be slipping
down: And likewise the ground behind would be level with the Planckes, that
if at any time he chance to go back, he may stand still of an equal height
with all his body: And let the cribbe be set of a reasonable The height of the
Cribbe.
height, that the bottom be not so high as the points of his shoulder, that if
at any time he be stirred in the stable, he be not in danger of laming by
rushing against it, and it would be deep, because that then he cannot so
easily set his feet therein, if he chance to rise before; and further, that
he may feed, with holding of his head at a reasonable height, for that will
help to strengthen his crest, and it would be made strong and the boards
closely joined in the bottom that there be no lime nor mortar therein, to
close up the crannies, for that is very hurtful and suffocating for the horse.

And let the Rack in like manner, be of an indifferent height, The height of
the Rack.
neither too high, for causing him bend too much in the hinder part of his
neck, to feed at it, and so cause him to be withycragged; nor yet so low as
to cause him bend his neck on the one side, and so spoil and weaken his
crest. Likewise, it would not be set sloping, but stand upright with the wall,
for that is the best, both to keep his neck firm, and also to keep his head,
and mane clean from dust, and seeds of the hay, and let the holes for the
staves be pitched some four inches distance, The distance of the Rackestaues.
that when the staves are set in, they may be three inches distant one from
another, which is a reasonable scantling, for they will not be so strait but
that he may fill his belly with ease; nor yet so wide, as to pull the hay out
too fast, and so make spoil thereof: And also the walls on both sides, and
Let the walls be boarded.
before his head would be boarded from the cribbe to the rack, to keep him
from gnawing upon lime, earth, or any such filthy thing (which many Horses will
desire,) for that will lie heavy in his maw, and be very unwholesome.

Moreover, there would be a loft made over him, to lay the The loft would not
be joined for shrinking.
hay and straw therein, and the boards would not beioyned, but rapited one
over another that no dust nor filth fall upon the Horse (if they chance to
shrink,) whilst his hay is in dusting and shaking above. And let the
partition be large, that he may have liberty to tumble at his pleasure, and let
there be a convenient room in the stable that his keeper may lie by him; for
The keeper should lie near his Horse.
thereby he shall be ready at hand, if any occasion shall happen, especially if
it be toward a match; and he may also have the better judgment of his horses
disposition by the manner of his feeding. And lastly, there would be a press
made, to keep the bridles, saddles, and other necessaries safe, clean,
handsome, and ready, when soever they shall be used.

Thus have I set forth the fashion and order of a convenient and necessary
stable, discribing it in a plain form without any curiosity: to which
whosoever is addicted, and disliketh this Nothing acceptable except it be
costly.
for the plainness: there are Italionate fashions set forth to satisfy their
selfe-liking humors, but yet this is sufficient to give content to stayed minds
if it be kept sweet and clean.

CHAP. 4. Of the Trayning a young Colt up to Hunting and Coursing.
IT has been, and is still an usual opinion of those who have a young Colt,
and would have him trained up either to hunting The abuse by custom.
or coursing, that so soon as he is made gentle to back, for to train him
thereto altogether by lenity and gentleness, Theo. 9. h.
suffering him to go (in his rake, and gallop) as he shall think good of
himself, never using him to farther command then he will willingly perform:
least he should be too much forced at the first, whereby his courage, and
strength might be abated, The event tries the truth.
and lamenesse by straynings might be caused, before his joints be fully knit;
as if he had still continued in the first state of his original nature, to
perform and show forth all his natural powers freely and of his own accord.
But what event comes thereby, the number of good Horses (in performance,) in
comparison to the quantity, or multitude of iades will testify: and the
sequel of the causes will make manifest.

For the efficient cause of making a good, or bad horse, is not Theo. 19. ^.
so much in his nature, (as it is imagined) but in the Man (although his
procliuity, be a great help:) (for he is the material Horse, the Material
cause.
cause:) and your helps, corrections and motions are the isntrumental, and the
apt and willing performance of his actions, is the formal cause, showing the
event of the true or false grounds of Art: for as the ends of all Arts and
Sciences do tend to the most excellent effect and best use, so the causes
hereof do work to the chief and higest end, that is, to bring a Horse to the
best obedience, and most delight for man, which can never be effected in a
young Colt, if he be continually trained up, to do no more then he of his own
inclination will maintain: for first, there is such an inherent rebellious
nature (1)
remaining in him, if at any time he be put to more then pleases Theo. 9. a.
1. Pr. 27. c. Theo. 9. h. The sequel.
himself (before he be brought to true command,) that he will play the jade,
in as much as his doggednesse is rather increased, then subdued; for although
he may be imagined very gentle, and to run very swiftly, when he is by
himself, or runs with another that he can command within himself, A
Horses goodness is tried in being over held with speed.
yet when he shall come to be matched with one that can command him, he will
then fall off* when he feels it nip, because he was never at any true
subjection.

Secondly, there follows a stockish or soft deading in the (2)
mouth: for it not being refined by Art, (if he be a free and Theo. 11. ^.
hot Horse,) he will not be commanded by the hand, and so 20. b.
through his eagerness, he will run himself off his legs or A free horse
choketh himself by disorder
else choke himself, in his wind, by being holden so hard upon the hand,
especially if he be put upon deep earths, for that his desire is to run
continually after his own lust, never yielding to the orderly command of the
hand, thereby to sob A thick forehanded horse made dead mouthed by lenity.
and ease himself. And again, if he be a thick fore-handed Horse, he will be
so heavy headed, that a man can have no further power to make him yield his
head, then to hold a Bull by the Horns, whereby he might raise his foreparts
handsomely to cause him to go freely and easily in his riding: for want ^
whereof he can never be brought to any great speed.

And further, since they are never taught the true use of the spur, when the
free horse has done what he will of himself, if he then be put to the spur,
he will settle to just nothing: and if he be a sad Horse, one may as well strike
his spurs into a post (for motion) as into his sides, (when he is any thing
strained) and so is he utterly defamed as unworthy for any further use then the
pack or plow.

Thirdly, when they are thus trained, their body is never knit firm and round,
whereby they can have no slight in the carriage thereof, for if he be a long
sided horse, he may take a large stroke at the first, (so long as he has
strength) but when that fails, he cannot be able to bring his hinder parts
after roundly, through which he gathers so slowly and runs with such
pain, that a round running Horse, though he take a shorter stroke, (if he
run nimbly,) will beat him out of the field.

As for example, if two Horses be to run a course of 4. miles, and one of
them strikes 23. feet, and the other but 20. feet, yet in regard he that
strikes but 20. feet takes 6. strokes against the other 5. stroke, he
striking 6. times against the other 5. will strike 120. feet, against the
other 115. Now there being 1760. yards in a mile, there must needs be 7040.
yards in 4. miles, and so 21120. feet, in which distance running, he loosing,
5. feet in 120. will loose, 880. feet in 4. miles, which you shall prove by
multiplying 21120. which is the number third by 5. the second number, and the
product will be 105600. which divided by 120. being the first number, will be
880. feet, as you may see in the margent: which their speeds are in proportion;
as, 24. to 23. for as 5. is the difference betwixt 120. and 115. if 5. be
divided by 120. the quotient will be, 24. and likewise divided 5. by 115. it
will be 23. Even so, divide 880. which is the difference of the excesses in 4.
miles, by 21120. the complet number, and it will be 24. but divide it by 20240.
which is the less excess, and it will be also 23.

All which gross errors, are crept into this Art, under the veil of following
the Horse after his own nature, and many other which I could allege if it
were needful, but for to clime all the branches that spring from this truncke,
would spend too great a time and therefore I pass them over, since these I hope
Theo. 5. Chap. Theo. 6.
are sufficient to give taste of the bitterness and tartness these weeds have
brought to this Vine, (being nourished by custom) and to give a Caveat to such
as desire to flourish in this plantation, for letting them get too great a
head. But as for those that are grown and festred so fast with them, that they
are smothered in them, if I should unfold every twist, to set them at liberty,
yet they would not hold up their heads to take fresh air. And therefore if
these will not persuade them, neither will they be persuaded, if one should
spend his life to reform them.

Wherefore who so is desirous to avoid these absurdities, and get to
themselves, and their horses condign praise, let them never go about to
train their Colt for hunting or coursing till Theo. 15. 16. 17. 29. 30. and
31. Chap.
he be brought to such obedience as he will answer to their helps and
corrections; and that he can tell how to take his way forward, and have gained
his mouth, and placed his head, taught to stop and turn, else if he think
to erect his work, 1. Pr. 22. 23. 24. 25. and 26. Chap.
before he has laid these as a firm foundation, it shall never be finished
effectually, (the manner how, has formerly been taught) for the proceeding
disorderly, and self knowledge is the cause of making so many Iades when they
come to be tried.

CHAP. 5. How to bring a Colt to a true Rake.
LIkewise there has been a neglect in this point, (to wit) of Raking, for
that these horses have not been rightly taught to go orderly forward upon
their foot-pace, but are suffered to go according to their own lust therein;
esteeming Want of consideration makes weighty things of small esteem.
it a thing of such small moment (as it should seem) that the profit is not
worthy of the time to stand upon it.

But yet, if it be rightly considered, they shall find that there is as great
knowledge to bring a horse to a perfect foot-pace, as in another lesson:
Because that except a horse can demean himself well in this (as he ought) he
shall neither gallop truly, nor maintain his speed durably, (howsoever the
contrary may be imagined;) for that it is the ground of all other parts of
Horsmanshippe, (not only in this but also in The necessity of a true rake.
any other) as the Gamuth is, for him that learneth to sing.

For there must be as great care observed to have him keep his desire in
continual motion, and to carry a firm stayed body, Theo. 33. 34. and 35. Chap.
and to have the motion of his wind to concur with the motions of it, as in any
other action or performance whatsoever. Only in this there must not be such a
precise respect had for the true placing Theo. 36. and 1. Pra. 25. Chap.
and carrying of his head, as in the former, but only to keep it from both the
excesses of throwing it up or ducking it down, for those horses that use them,
do neglect that time in the motion of their bodies, whilst they trifle with
their heads, yet he must have liberty to go upon an easy hand, otherwise The
feet are neglected whilst the head toyeth.
the body will never be brought to its true length, for the best advantage,
neither in his gallop nor height of speed, especially if he be a high
spirited horse, and have his head restraind, he will hardly be brought to rake
coolely, whereby A restraint of the hand spoyleth a free horse.
he will fret and chafe himself, and also displace his body, by striving for
liberty, that so he will not move his legs orderly as he should.

For working the perfection whereof, it is meet you should know when your horse
has a true rake, and how to bring him No man can effect truly that is
ignorant of the end.
to it, lest you wander out of the way (by ignorance) not knowing when you come
to the period thereof, and so rest before you come to your iournies end.

Wherefore know that a horse never raketh truly, except he go forward
willingly and coolely upon a loose hand, (as if he The true order of raking.
were at his own liberty, not having any body on his back,) and that he
keep the same time with his head (in his going forward) as he does with the
motion of his legs, as if he numbered all the steps he makes. Likewise
there must be a true distance of time in the motion of his legs; one
following All the parts of the whole horse must agree in one time.
another so orderly, as if four Belles were rung in a true ^ound, his wind
still answering the same motion: And also his hinder legs must follow after
easily and pleasingly, so that the step of his hind foot may reach over the
step of his fore-foote, (at the least) the breadth of it; for if he either
step short, or but even with the same, then it is a sign that he is not 1.
Pra. 1. 27. Chap.
brought to such command of all the parts of his body as he should; and then
the inconvenience thereof will be found, when he shall be put to sore riding,
being haled to the height Theo. 7. and 16. a.
of his speed, not having time to sobbe; for one error is not simply of it
self, but it brings forth more.

And how this is to be effected, because I have handled the How to bring him to
it.
order before (although not verbatim, yet it is to be referred to this by
application) I will but quote the places, and refer the working thereof to
your own discretion. For if he has been Theo. 33. 34. 35. and 36. Chap.
ridden and ordered (from the beginning) as I have shown, he will have such an
apt carriage, that he will be the sooner brought to his perfect trotte. Only
note to serve him with Pra. 1. 22.
your motions in due time, quickening and slowing them as you 23. 24. 25. 26.
and 35. Chap.
feel his desire to be slow or quick in going; not using any violent
correction for distempring his mouth, and dislocating his body. Theo. 6. and 9.
Chap.


But if your horse be stirring and free, and therefore will not be governed
to keep his head low that so he might rake with a large step with his
fore-feet, as he should, then let him rest the most upon the head-straine, and
use him gently, for that will make him come down upon the hand, and lift his
Pra. 1. 36. f. 22. and Theo. 11. Chap.
fore-feet orderly, and likewise if he will not keep time with both his hind
legs, or that he will not stretch forth his forefeet largely, stay your hand
still more upon the head-straine, and keep your seat exceeding firm in your
saddle thrusting out your legs stiff in your stirrops, and you shall feel
by your seat an orderly reformation; for your firm seat will keep his body
steady, and the head-straine will make him press forward and so help on his
leading leg.

CHAP. 6. Of Galloping.
When you have brought your Colt to such perfection in all things as
aforesaid, and that he will rake orderly, then you may go about to bring him
to a true and stayed carriage Some things must be omitted for order sake.
in his gallop: For although I have not heretofore spoken of bringing him to
his rake and gallop before now, yet you must think that upon necessity you
cannot bring him to a true command in the other, but he must sometimes do them
both in his former teaching (though ilfauoredly) or else he will get such an
habitual custom of seating his body, that it would be a world of toil to
bring him to do them truly: for the changing Variety does sharpen the
appetite.
him sometimes from one pace to another, is as a preparatiue to make him capable
of any: and it will stir up his spirits, to make him do that (which he is
cunningest in) with better courage and grace. Yet howsoever he may be put to
any other Note.
pace in the interim, yet there must not be had a curious respect of his
demeanor, in them all, but only in that he is in learning, A Horse should
not be troubled with more lessons then one at one time.
otherwise it will bring a confusion to his apprehension, and a loathing to his
appetite, if he should be continually held to such a strictt carriage in them
all, for that he should never find ease at any time in going, whereby he
would never do any thing but upon extremities: if he should be tied to do
that thing exactly, which he knows not how to perform (in any sort)
indifferently.

Wherefore (as I say) when you have brought the whole horse Pr. 1. 33. Chap*
Theo. 4. 13. 16.
^o such a constant concord in all his former lessons, that he will do them
according to Art: then you may likewise teach him to carry his body truly in
his Gallop* by the like observations: whereby he may have such a perfect
habit, that he launch not out his body further at one time then another, and
that he can command all his integrals with ease, that all his actions may be
performed slightly and durably. Which you shall the sooner Slight causes
du^ablenesse.
do, if you know what a true Gallop is, and wherein also the chiefest
advantage both for ease and continuance consists. For want of which
knowledge, many have simply gone about Tradition is mere blindness.
that which they knew not what to effect; for in that they have seen some
desire to bring their horse to a soft hand gallop* (not expecting any more)
they presently have undertaken to effect the like, thinking that if they can
bring him to gallop softly, or Blind opinions.
go two up and two down, that he is brought to the highest degree that can
possibly be performed by Art.

Which conceit, if it were true, then every Butchers Nagge Absurdities
confuted.
that will gallop betwixt London and Rumford, would parallel the best for
speed, which thing experience does confute; for although they may be tough (by
labor) yet there is none of them that has any indifferent speed to a mean
Courser: For that manner of gallop will cause him have such a tickle mouth upon
the hand, that when you come to work upon him to help him in his running, he
cannot tell how to frame his body to rest upon the hand orderly* but will
launch forth past his compass, and so spend himself by violence, that it will
be hard for you to keep a true seat in his running. And if it be in hunting,
Theo 4. Chap.
he cannot make speed, especially upon deep earths to continue, for that there
is (as it were) a stop of his hinder parts, Time a true judge.
whilst he raise his fore, and likewise of his fore-parts whilst he raise his
hind; in which motion there is a great loss of time (which is the true
moderator in all doubts.) For as a Ship which A Simile.
is forced to rise and fall (with the violence of the billows) cannot make so
great a course in so short a time, as when she saileth upon the still seas; so
that horse cannot go so speedily nor easily, that waueth up and down in his
gallop, as he that goes upon a smooth motion.

But the best gallop for ease, truth and speed, is to have his What a true
Gallop is.
body firmly knit, and all the parts to move jointly together forward in his
motion, to go smoothly, resting pleasingly upon the hand, and though that the
fore and hinder parts rise and fall a little, when he gallopeth softly, yet
they must be so knit An imaginary line passing through his body and chine is
the mean motions.
that the faster he goes the less they rise and fall, and when he is at his
full speed, to have his body (in the mean motion) to describe a parallel line
with the ground, not letting any two of his feet to rise or fall together, but
as his body is always moving forward, so his legs must be always one
setting before another, whereby his body will glide forward with great facility,
both for himself and his Rider: and he will rest so pleasingly Note.
upon the hand, that his head will be a means and help to keep your body
firm: and likewise your hand a means to keep his body steady, and to help
it (by your body) if at any time he shall desire to ouerlash himself,
(through eagerness) Theo. 18. a.
whereby you shall both agree together as if you were but one subject.

And for the advantage of his speed, it is not in the fast using Advantage of
his motion for speed.
of his legs, (although it may seem so to the eye,) but in the true relish
of his mouth, and the apt carriage of his body, for if they two be truly
commanded, then his legs upon necessity must needs perform their office, for
his hinder parts will gather so roundly within his fore parts, that they will
stretch themselves so far forward as Art and Nature can extend. The effecting
The coming on with the hinder parts causes on the fore parts.
whereof I have quoted in the last Chapter, and may also be reduced to this, by
fit application, they being the true grounds of the whole Art: only in
general observe, to keep a true seat, to help the Horses hinder parts, (if
at any time they shall slake,) and apply your helps, and corrections, according
to Theo. 12. x.
the instant occasion. 13,


CHAP. 7. What Pace is best for these sort of Horses.
IN my judgment there has been also another great neglect An abuse through
custom.
in this Art, in that there has been no greater care had to give a Colt that
Pace at the first which might bring him to his highest perfection, both for
speed and toughness, but suffer him to go after his own irrational appetite
so long, that he will not be brought to any such carriage of his integralls, as
might bring him to such excellency as those ends would wish. ^. Pra. 4.
In which my assertion, although I may seem to descent from others, and so
some may belch the malice of their preiudicate opinions against me, for
following my own fantasy and rejecting the general judgment of so many
ancient and wise practitioners Truth is found by experience not by authority.
in this Art; yet I dare be bold to set it forth having the truth to back me
as a sure fortress: and experience to direct me as a most lively and perfect
teacher.

But to the point, there are some which err herein; for that they make no
account of any Pace; but so soon as their Colt is once backed, he is straight
put to his rake, and from thence to 2. Pr. 4.
his gallop, without respect of any other conditions: as if there were
immediate notices, or understanding of things naturally ingraffed in a Horse to
know the mind of his Rider, without knowledge of some mediate or second means.

And again, there are others that are stained with the same Whether a natural
Trotter or Pacer be best for speed.
pollution, although not so grossly, which think that a Horse having a natural
good Trot, or Pace, is the most speedy and tough; to both which objections,
because I have touched them in the two last Chapters, (and in other places) I
will not stand to make any large discourse, but only to let the gentle Reader
see light to find the truth, like a candle in a lantern. For this Theo. 2.
and 3.
I hold, that no horse of himself will perform whatsoever to the highest of
his nature: except Art be thereto adjoined: which I prove thus.

No Horse that has not an apt motion and carriage in the Celarent.
whole integrum (by Art) can of his own inclination have the best speed and
toughness: But natural going Horses cannot have any apt motion, and carriage
(without Art) in the whole integrum.

Therefore no natural going Horse, of his own inclination (without Art) can
have the best speed and durablenesse.

The Mayor is proved by the whole tractat of this Book, for The Mayor proved.
that all Horses having an inherent rebellious disposition in them successively
by generation, (by reason of the transgression) Theo. 1. 2. 3. 5.
they will not frame themselves of their own accord freely, and obediently, to
do that which remains in them, but 1. Pr. 23. 24 25. 26. 27. 28. 37.
they will still retain something for their ease, except they be reduced to
obedience, by Art, without which the whole subject 2. li. 1. et alijs locit.
cannot be brought to such a concord in carriage, and motions, as shall yield
the best advantage both for speed and toughnes. The Minor proved.
And the Minor is proved by the uncertain carriage of those Horses bodies,
which go after their natural inclination, for a Horse having no intelligence
but sensitiuely, if he be suffered A Horse has no intellectiue mind.
to go after his voluntary motions, he not having any inorganical actions,
intellectiue of the mind, to give him notices of any thing, without some
organicall instrument, will not perform what his ability is able, as man will
do, because of his engendered and bred notices, which are the organs of Arts,
and therefore whosoever thinks to bring his Horse to perfection, by An apt
Simily.
trayning him after his own will, is like to have as good success, as he
which thinks to direct a ship to any port, by stearing the helm without
knowledge or help of the compass or card.

For the apprehensiue faculties are the difference of man The difference
betwixt man and beasts.
from brute beasts, he having notice of many things in his organicall, or
spiritual actions, which are engendered and bred in the heart, he apprehends
understanding, knows and judges of things as well universal, as singular:
by reflection, that is, by Theo. 4. ibid. 4.
considering, and examining things done or devised. Whereas brute Beasts (in
which species are Horses) do only apprehend, by the sensitive intelligence,
of singular and simple objects. Wherefore seeing man has primary knowledge in
the mind immediately being inorganicall, therefore he must (by his experience
Man's knowledge is confirmed by experience in external things.
gotten by external things, perceived by the exterior senses) bring the Horse
to such obedience in apprehending the desire of his mind, that he will
voluntarily yield thereto: for the body of the man working according to the
desire of his mind, it must convey that intention to the Horse by his helps
The conclusion perfect without proof.
and corrections, which are as organes to confirm the sensitive intelligence
of the Horse, that thereby he may know what to do, he not doing any thing
aptly but by immediate or secondary causes. Which propositions being clear the
conclusion stands good.

By all which it is apparent, that not any Horse what Pace soever Sab: Foxde
Arist. et Plato. consention. li. 5. 2.
he has, whether he be a natural Trotter or Ambler, can go truly indeed,
except he be reduced from his natural disobedience, (by Art) howsoever he may
be judged to go well, but this fallacy in judgment proceeds, in that the
soul judges not of external things but by the interior, or exterior senses,
and so if these have knowledge to give sentence of things aright, then the
soul pronounces senceerly; but if they err, then the soul gives sentence
according to their information: Intellectiue and sensitive senses observed, by
the distemperature of the brain.
not that the mind does err of it self or primarily, but by accidence, being
obscured by the thick mist of ignorance, by corruption. Which Sabious Fox,
makes manifest by an example of Ajax: whose interior senses (being moved by
the brain) erred, and were not able to discern betwixt external objects
through the brains distemperature: and therefore he ran upon herds of
sheep, which he thought to be Ulysses Soldiers, and killed a Ram supposing
that he had shine Ulysses. And yet notwithstanding all this, his soul judges
uprightly, that manifest injuries is to be revenged, but his interior senses
erred, and were deceived, by means of objects of the exterior senses, in that
they attracted unto the mind colorable similitudes, and images. And the like
instance may be given by the blind man in the Gospel, that Christ restored to
sight, For at the first he saw men walking like trees, which error was not
Mark. 8. 24.
in his mind, for if it had not been hindered by the exterior senses, it would
have censured truly, but the cause was that the optic The mind does judge
according as the sensitive part apprehends.
nerve was not yet perfect, (which is the origanicall instrument, whereby the
exterior object is conveyed to the interior senses) and thereby his mind erred
in judgment, he giving sentence, according to that evidence the interior
senses did receive.

And in like manner, those Horses that are said to go well of A thing
oftentimes is not so indeed as it seems.
their own natural voluntarinesse, the mind judges it so, not because it is
so, but in that the interior senses are obscured with ignorance, whereby there
is an impediment or let, that the Theo 4. 1. Pra. 27.
mind cannot judge rightly of the Horses going, as it would, if better notices
were given by the intelligence sensitive to see, and apprehend when a Horse
runs well indeed; for this I know No Horse has true riding except the answer
the spur.
by experience, that I had rather bring a Colt that cannot tell how to go at
all, to go well, then one of those which are accounted to go well, for as
much as they have but a voluntary command, and therefore they have neither apt
carriage, nor any true obedience, so that they have neither numblenes for
speed* nor sensitive obedience, to increase toughness, whereby in that, they
cannot tell how to demean themselves for swiftness, nor in this, they will
run no longer then they shall feel ease for if they be ouertopt with speed
they will sattle suddenly, because they were not brought to true obedience by
Art, and therefore I conclude, that a true artificial Pace is the best for
Objection.
either hunter or courser both for slight, toughness and speed.

But whereas it may be objected, that the Pace is not so appertinent to these
Horses, (especially for coursers) for that many running Horses are void of any
good Pace (either for Trot or Answer.
Amble,) and yet so speedy that they can hardly be bettered. I answer, it is
true in some sort, that is, being compared with Theo. 4. e.
those Horses, which are trained (as they are) upon false grounds, being judged
by the deception of sensitive apprehension, and (n) Incontrarijs, contraria
magis elucescunt.
not by the inorganicall operation of the mind, (and so it is holden that one
Horse cannot have both speed and toughness) but if they would yield to reason,
that they have a relation one to another, and so seek a reducement by Art,
they should find the contrary: for that one Horse so trained, will make 2.
Pra. 2.
iades of three of the other: and yet no fault in the Horse, (being sensitive)
but in the man (being intellectiue:) for if those Horses which have that
procliuity to swiftnes (naturally) should be maintained by art, they would
far exceed the other both in speed and toughness.

Wherefore seeing the glory of many famous Horses is much darkened, by the
deceivable objects of the senses, because the Theo. 1.
soul or mind cannot give judgment of the truth, through false evidence: I
will give that partition wall one rent, whereby the interior faculties may the
more clearly see how to distinguish the truth from error. For since no Horse of
himself will either go truly, nor come to the height of his speed and
goodness without Art; therefore those Horses which are brought to a true Pace
by art, will have the best speed and durablenesse, Barbara,
which I prove thus:

All those Horses which have the truest and aptest carriage in the whole
subject, and have a natural procliuity, are most swift and durable.

But all true artificial Paced Horses have the truest and aptest carriage in
the whole subject: The Mayor proved.


Ergo, all true artificial paced Horses having a natural procliuity are the
most swift and durable.

The Mayor is proved, for that through the fall there is such an inherent
rebellion in them, that they will not perform that Theo. 2. 3 4. 18. 30.
which is required, except there be obedience gained in the whole Horse, (by
Art) so that he has his proper and true motions; 1 Pra. 25. 26 27. 28. 29. 30.
36. 37. 2. Pr. 5. and 6. (p)
and that he will obey the mind of the man: for so they will both agree in
one, as if they were one whole and entire body: because the reason of the man
can so proportionate the strength and courage of the Horse, that he will be as
a steward over his sensual desire, and neither suffer him to launch his body
out of compass, nor spend himself, (through his eager desire) more then shall
be requisite for the time, so that he will have both strength and lust to use
when it shall be most needful. Liberty brings idleness.
But contrarily, if he be suffered to go after his own will, then he will be
void of command, through which, when any idleness possesses him, he will
make no good course that day. Many paies too dear for this garment.
if a man's whole estate (as oftentimes it is) should be hazarded upon it. But
when it falls out otherwise, to free themselves from this gross imputation,
they have also another cloak to cover their shame; and that is, a Horse will
make a better Again they cover their ignorance with a worse, alleging the
horse was sick, for sooth.
days work at one time, then at another. But I dare say, that if a Horse be
brought to true obedience, and that he is (as he should be for a match) in
perfect state of body: (otherwise he is more fit to ride upon an Ass, then a
Horse, that will attempt to bring a Horse into the field, to undo many a man,
through his will) he will at any time, show forth his willingness to the
utmost of his power. But I had almost forgot my self, by laying open the
inordinate affection of such as will hazard the undoing of themselves, their
wife, and children: rather then they will have their Horse strayned, or caused
to do more then his own will is consenting unto.

And yet further if he be suffered after his own will or desire, The Horse
rides the man and not man the Horse.
then he will have the predommancy over the man, and carry him as himself
lusts, for which if he be crossed, he will either do just nothing, or else
run away, and so resemble the prodigal unthrift, that being led by his
sensual appetite, spends A simile. Theo. 20.
more in a day then by reason would require a year, and lauisheth so much when
he is young, that he has nothing to maintain him in his age. The Minor proved.


And the Minor is proved, in that Art brings command by obedience and so the
whole Horse, both in his interior and exterior parts, is in subjection to the
man, or otherwise he could never be brought to such a true pace as Art
requires; that is, to have all his body move at one and the self same time,
All the body should agree in one.
and which motion also to agree with the antecedent and consequent, to give the
best advantage both for speed and toughness, for as one cannot pass from one
extreme to another, but by the mean, so no horse can go from his pace to his
ga^lop, as he should, but by a mean. Now that mean should also agree with the
same motion to both the extremes: As it is in Geometry, that from two points
there may be a straight line The first of the grantable requests.
drawn, to signify unto us that there must be a motion from one limit to the
other, and that motion must be equal to the two excesses, and agree to the
same; for as that line is the digressiue motion from one point to the other,
and agreeing to the same, so a true artificial pace is the mean motion from
one of the said excesses to the other, in that it has Pra. 2. li. 5. Chap.
the best concord and agreement to them: For as a true take requires an apt
and true motion for the nimblenesse of the legs, and constant carriage of the
body, to contitinue Pra. idem 3 Chap.
without flexiblenesse, and the gallop also to have the like motion to move
sorward orderly: ^uen so that pace, which is betwixt them, must have the like
concord to them, which Pr. 1. li. 36. Chap. Theo. 4. Chap.
cannot be in any pace so aptly, as in a true artificial pace, because the
true rake is an introduction to a true pace, and this also agreeing to the
motions of a true gallop; for what horse soever will maintain a true motion
upon his pace, and go fast or softly thereon at command, he will also do the
like upon his The Conclusion.
Gallop, both swift and slow.

Thus the mayor and minor standing perfect, the Conclusion must necessarily
follow, for because if there be a true respect had of both those paces, there
must needs be a third, although heretofore nothing at all regarded, for a true
rake, cannot go The Proportion betwixt a rake and a gallop.
so fast indeed (howsoever they may speak in words) as to extend to a gallop;
nor a true gallop cannot go so softly, as it shall not need the help of a
third; for if the rake extend after three miles an hour, the hinder parts,
will be lash, and if the gallop be slower then after four miles an hour, it
will bring no apt carriage for speed, in that the fore-parts will be raised too
high, which motion is contrary to Art. Objection.


And whereas it may be objected, that the bringing a horse to his pace, does
utterly spoil all his other paces, and abateth Answer. Theo. 3. Cap.
his speed: I answer, the cause of that abuse is not in the Art, but in the
abuse of usurped Professors; for there is no such repugnancy in it, that it
should decay nature, but repair it: for it (in the true use) bettereth all,
for he will go so smoothly with his fore-parts, and follow so roundly after,
with his hinder parts, that he will glide forward with such facility and
advantage, The motions of the man motions of the man month the appetite, and
it the body.
as his height and length can maintain, in that his appetite or desire still
works forward, which urges on the body, and the leading leg makes way so
orderly, that he will shoot forward fast or softly, as the motions of the man
does direct him.

But if he be brought to this pace by distemperature of the hand, then he
will run hye both with his head and foreparts, The abuse of the hand causes
high running.
and so indeed although he may be speedy for a time, yet he cannot be
durable, nor gallop with ease upon deep earths, and so spoil his speed,
because he cannot see his way, to use his feet rightly, and through his eager
desire in going, Theo. 20. Pr. 2. li. 6. Chap.
he will press so hard upon the hand, that he spends his strength and wind
as well by striving thereupon, as he does with the violence of his running,
whereby his speed and toughness is so soon abated, not finding any ease, and
by that The cause of bending the Thropell is not iin nature, but in the man.
means he strives with his fore-parts, and beats himself with lifting his
fore-legges so high, that he loses time in his gallop, and is forced to bend
his neck so far back, that he choaketh himself with his own wind, in
that his throp^e Pr. 1. li. 25. and 34. Chap.
does bend compass like a bow, and then to excuse this absurdity also, the
fault is in the defect of nature, and say that he is Cock-threpeld, and
therefore cannot have wind to perform that which is desired, as if Nature did
not use an orderly number in her composition, especially in every perfect
subject. A pace is necessary for the hunter.


Now a true pace is not only a means to increase speed, and toughness for
the Courser, but also it is very necessary for the Hunter; because thereby he
will got at ease unto the field, both for himself, and his master: And when
he has done his days work, and is wearied with toil, he will come
homeward so easily upon his pace, that he will cool himself very
temperately, before he come home, and also his master and he will be much
refreshed by the same, that they will neither of them be so stiff, when they
are cold, as they would be if they should cool suddenly, by coming
foot-pace, or else A natural Courser may be made very serviceable both for
hunting and running.
take their rest suddenly after heat.

And therefore a natural pacer is not altogether to be rejected, neither for
a Hunter nor Courser, if he be truly brought to obedience, and have an apt
carriage (in his motions,) both of head and body: For I have brought a natural
pacer, which has been a deep and hard rouler, so that he could not tell how
to gallop, or go any pace, after the rate of twelve miles an hour, and also
so extreme sad that one might as well have stricken his spurs into a post
as into his sides for any motion; Pr. 1. li. 36. Chap.
and I have reduced him to such an obedient quickness, that he would answer
the Spur as freely at the latter end of the day, as could be wished: And
also to such speed, that no ordinary horse could bid him ride; only by
reforming his natural going to that carriage and motion, as if he had been an
artificial pacer.

CHAP. 8. Of what Age a Colt should be, before he be put to sore labor.
THere is yet another veil, which custom has spread before the exterior
senses; so as the soul is hindered from judging the truth, including
uncertainties within the limits of No true judgment upon false evidence.
a certain time. For it is generally holden that there is not any horse that
should be put to any sore labor, or be straind to the height of his speed,
before he be six or seven years of age, which is a tradition holden from
the opinion of the Ancients, following the natural ability of the horse so
far, that they One error brings forth another.
strayed beyond the bounds of their knowledge in this Art, and then to excuse
themselves, affirm that no horse can be able to perform any matter of speed,
or toughness, till he come to those years.

Which opinion is not much unlike the judgment of many An apt Simile.
Farriers, that when they undertake to cure a strain, administer such things
as they conceit* and then (finding small effect) counsels that he should
run a certain time; during which running, time cures that which their
knowledge could not perform: Even so, when they have found that they could not
effect their desire (by their grounds of Art) before such a time, they
suggested this supposition; whilst (in the interim) Theo. 17. Chap.
time works more upon the horse then their Art.

And further they suggest (to preserve their reputation) that if he should be
put to sore labor and toil before he come to those years, it would be a
means to hazard strainings, and the putting out of splints, spauens, cu^bes
and such like; for that his joints are not firmly knit, nor he come to his
best strength and courage.

To which opinions, I ask whether they have not seen A horned question.
some one horse of younger years, beat the aforesaid horses which have been
dandled withal till that age: Which if they have, why might not they also have
performed the like if they had been trained by the true Art? But if they have
not, then they are to be condemned of a preiudicated opinion, to hold A
younger horse beat the elder.
that which they have no reason nor experience for; for I know there is not any
that has made experiment herein, but they have seen the contrary, or else
their observations have been very weak.

But I hear some object, that all horses are not of like constitution,
Objection.
and some have abler bodies then others, and so come sooner to the maturity of
their goodness; but yet no consequence that others should do the like. I
answer, first this makes Answer.
a contradiction with the former allegation, for they hold it as a general
custom, and then if there be any that is of such procliuity, they are exempted
from that generality, and then those horses if there be an intermission in
their proceedings, that they be not followed according to their inclination,
it will cause a loss of time, if they should be neglected till the accustomed
time, whereby their towardness will be hindered through a sovereign liberty,
they not being suffered to go forward, There is no stay in the agitation of
the interior powers.
but are still kept in a stay, get such an idle habit, that they decline from
their towardness, to a wilful stubbornness, through this restraint, in that
they are thought too young, for seeing they are let in going forward, they
must needs go back; for it is a Maxim, that not to go forward, is to
decline; (d) The senses judge according to the kind of action.
so that they will hardly be brought after to their best perfection: in as much
as their apprehension, is intelligence sensitive, they feeling ease so long
together, think that to be the perfection of their labor: and when they shall
be put to more then they were used unto, they will presently give it over in
the plain Idle trayning causes fal^e hearted horses.
field, not being used to sore labor before, which is the cause of so many
traiterous and false hearted Horses.

And further, it is a great darkning of their glory, for if they which are so
prone by nature were well followed by true Art, without question, they would
sooner come to commendable performance, then they which have not such natural
towardness, An Allegory.
and then when Art and Nature had displayed the glory of their lights; the
splendour thereof would be so glorious, that all other, would be combust that
came within the reflect of their beams; and in that respect would far exceed
the other both for time and goodness.

But contrariwise, if those which have not such gifts of nature be not
protracted, but reduced, (without intermission) by Art; Theo. 2.
they may come to better these, which are neclcted at the first, (for it is
often seen the most unlikely Horse, to beat the more likely) but if not; yet
they may be brought, to that height (in as short time) as the ability of their
bodies can maintain, having a willingness to do that they are able, both for
speed and toughness.

And again, I would know, whether there has not been Whether sore labor be
the only cause of those infirmities
many Horses, which were never strayned young, (by sore riding) which have
been subject to splints, spauens, curbes, and such like, which if they have,
then that is not the cause of such infirmities, (as there are many:) but the
cause of them naturally is through the impurity of the seed, whereof they were
generated, and therefore being so subject to them, their grief will increase
(by labor) of what age soever. And likewise the same demand may be, whether
that straynings, are only Whether young horses are only subject to strains.
proper to young Horses or no; which if not denayed (as experience makes
plain) then the cause thereof is not only in sore labor; but rather, through
the improper carriage of their body, and the unapt government of the head, so
that they cannot Theo. 35. 36.
handle their legs nimbly.

Wherefore, these opinions are but inordinate affections, Note.
that many carry to their horses, in suffering them so long at the first, (both
in their first backing, and afterward in their trayning) The Earl of
Northumberlands Horseman.
that some have lost their lives, (which I speak to my hearts grief, being
them whom I heartily affected,) rather then they would seek to displease their
colt to gain obedience; And others have hazarded their whole estate (to the
great loss both of themselves, and their friends) rather then they No good
conclusion can follow upon false grounds.
would put their Horse to any thing more then he would do of himself:
following uncertain grounds of time, and the Horses nature, so long, that they
have had issue of their certain estate, being convicted by a certain
evidence, which certain time, and truth did give sentence. In the which rank,
Faelix quem faciunt aliena p^ricula cautum.
I my self have formerly marched, till experience did sound a retreat, being
maimed with the shot of foolish had-I-wist, which I will set down (as a
caueate) for future impes that shall flourish in this Vineyard, least they fall
in the like relapse, and likewise buy their experience too dear. Which though
it be rude, I hope it will not be distasteful to such as are willing to be
Young riding not the cause of slownesse or lamenesse.
instructed, in that they make profit, by mine, and many more losses.

For (in running a Bell match) I was never more shamefully beat, (in my life)
both for speed and toughness then I was with a four years old nagge,
(which, was hunted very sore all that Winter: (and yet was sound in every part,
of the whole One of master Lancelot Carletons race.
Horse;) which was the first instance I had to awake me from the slumber of
this Sirennicall opinion. And afterward it was my hap to run a match
against a five year old nagge, (of a middle sise,) being almost but now backed,
which had such an exceeding natural speed, that (if Art had been joined
answerably to his inclination,) he could hardly have been paralleld betwixt
the North and South, of which Horse I did afterward note his proceedings,
(being much conversant with the Gentleman that did owe him:) and so I found by
the event, that his natural procliuity was much hindered by his trayning. For
there were three other young Colts trained up with him, which at the first not
any of them was able to command him to ride (he being so very swift:) by the
which they were continually True trayning causes good wind.
held to the height of their wind and speed, whilst he ran (every
breathing course) within himself: by reason of of which sore labor, (although
they were but Colts,) they be came so well winded, that in one Winter they all
would beat him, in that he ran always within himself, so that he lost the
advantage of his body, whereby his speed was abated, and he became so thick
winded, that when he felt it once nip, he would give it over, and when he was
put to the spur, the more he was spurred, the more he settled: and yet at the
first he would have answered the spur very obediently: through which liberty,
he became so idle, that he would not stretch forth his body, but lost three or
four foot at every stroke. Feeding does not make a good Horse except Art be
assisting.


Which when I saw, I was desirous to examine the cause, (for my further
experience) but when I had approved, I found it to be in the manner of his
trayning, for (as the proverb is) he was better fed then taught, (although the
Gentleman was reputed an excellent horseman) for he had neither carriage of
body, nor relish of mouth, fit for a horse that is for that use or end. Which
when I had reformed, (in short time) I brought him to ouerrunne There is no
error that has not some veil to cover its shame.
all the aforesaid horses; and afterward wanne a Bell course, against six
Horses, contrary to the expectation of all the field: which thought it brough
an admiration, yet it was colored with that old saying, a dog has a day,
and that was his day to run so well. But it is strange that a Horse should
have but one good day in all his life: for he never made the like course after,
but the reasons thereof I will omit, least I should dull the ears of the
Reader, with such a rude and prolixe discourse. Which circumstance (loving
reader) I have set down (as I say) for thy better instruction, least thou
should rely too much upon former traditions (as I have done) and so be
inthralled, Note.
and entangled in that net. And therefore, to keep thy self free from that
snare, hold no man's opinion authentical, further then reason, and experience
shall induce thee.

Wherefore seeing (as I have shown) that young Colts have beat old horses, and
such Colts as have had a better inclination, Delays are dangerous.
have been made worse, and those which have had a worse inclination have been
made better, and that the withholding of them from their true exercise, (till
such a certain time) brings a habit of idleness, and increases rebellion,
in not being kept in subjection, but (as a wanton child) Sensitive creatures
regard their own ease more then glory.
will do but what them lust, so that they will never show forth their greatest
grace and glory; let none, that will not respect the pleasing of their Horse
more then their own profit, or the truth, regard so much the time, as their
Horses inclination, following his towardness, by Art, and practice, and
thereby he shall bring his Horse to his highest perfection.

CHAP. 9. The first ordering of a Hunting Horse.
IF you take delight in this noble sport of hunting, either for the health of
your body, (by riding, and ayring,) or for the delight to see the Hounds Hunt,
or else for the trayning of your horse, 1 Pra. 22. 23 24. 25. 26. 2. li. 5. and
6.
to find the excellency of his goodness, and indurance; for the better
obtaining of your desire, I would wish that he should first be brought to such
perfection (in all the former lessons) by Art, as has been dilated: and then
to add thereto the order of diet by feeding, that thereby he may come to the
best worth that is within him. Therefore when you have wayed 1. Pr. 27.
your Colt so, that he knows how to behave himself as he should in true
obedience, which you may do in a quarter of a years practice, after he be
first backed. Then you may (for his better increase of courage, and strength)
if it please you, put him to grass, and so let him run all summer, from
midde May till Bartholomew-tide, or at the least, from the midst of Summer
till that time, for then the weather is too hot, to give him such exercise as
he should, which if it be otherwise (being Note.
rightly considered) it does more hurt then good, and so better to be idle then
ill employed, although some love to be practicing, allbeit be without knowledge
or reason: but the fruits they reap thereby is answerable, being as good never
a whit as never a deal the better, nay oftentimes the worse, in regard of the
errors that come through neglect.

Wherefore your Colt having run all Summer till Bartholomew-tide, at which
time (as it is generally holden) let him be The time to take your horse into
the house.
taken into the house, because the weather (in the day) waxes somewhat cool,
that he may be exercised, (though he be fat) without danger; and the
grownd (likewise) begins to be cold and soft, (except great drought) so
that he will not he at nor beat his legs; And also the grass at that time
loses his nourishing sap and moisture, so that the nourishment thereof
concocteth to raw crudities, whereby the flesh they get afterward is not
natural nor sound, by reason Long and cold nights are not natural for a horse.
that the nights then begin to be long and cold, which is an enemy to the
horse, and abateth as much lust in the night, as he gets in the day.

But whereas it has been holden, that a horse should not be clothed nor
dressed for two or three days, at his first housing, When to cloth him at his
first housing.
I see no reason (but custom) to induce one thereto: Wherefore because it is a
thing of small moment, and turns to no great profit or loss, I will slight
it over, and leave it to men's fantasies as indifferent. The nature of wheat
straw.


And for his food, whereas it has been used, to give wheat straw (at his
first housing) to take up his belly, I am contrary 1. Pra. 7.
thereto, for it being hot and dry according to the nature of the horse, will
dry up his body too much, and inflame the liver with heat, which will cause a
distemperature in the blood: and also make his body costiue, both by the
dryness thereof, and also in that the dung will be retained so long in his
body, that it will heat of it self, for want of such full feeding as would
expel the excrements, according to the inclinations of his nature.

Wherefore, if you desire to keep your horse in perfect state of Natural
feeding does best satisfy the appetite.
body, feed him with such food as is best agreeing to his nature, good, old and
sweet hay, yet if it be somewhat rough, it is not much material, (especially
for a full feeding horse) for he will eat of that more sparingly, if he have
any reasonable proportion of prouender. But if you see he feed too fast upon
hay, if you mix or blend it with a third part of wheat-straw, it will not be
much amiss; and let moderate exercise (morning, and evening) do the rest that
wheat-straw should have done.

Thus being taken into the house, you shall rub him all over How to order your
Horse at his first taking into the house.
his body with a hard wispe, and sheare his jaws, head, and ears, and cut
away the superfluous hairs from his musle and eyes; then take out his yard and
wash it, clensing all the dirt and filth from his sheath, that is gathered by
his Summers running. Then let his feet be well opened betwixt the quarters, Of
Shooing.
and the frush, (for hoofe-binding) and let him be shod handsomely, the shoos
being made according to the form of his hoof. All which diversities, because
Mr. Blundeuille and Mr. Markham have entreated of sufficiently, I will not
stand upon them here, but refer those which are desirous to be further
satisfied therein, to their works: Only during the time of their training,
let the webbes of them be neither too broad nor too narrow, but of a mean
scantling, about the breadth of a full inch, being strong, with sloped spunges,
neither set so close as to bruise his heels, nor so open as he may clap one
foot upon another if he chance to ouer-reach, and so either pull off his shoe,
and break his hoof, or else hazard a strain, (having one foot fastened upon
another) or over throw both man and horse.

Then you shall cloth him with a single cloth, made of sackcloth, The manner
of clothing.
and let the sursingle be stopped round with wads of straw, both for ease and
warmth; for that single cloth will be sufficient for him, at his first coming
from grass, because he is as yet used to cool air, whereby he will not be
in much danger of taking-cold, and the weather also at that time is somewhat
warm: but after, you shall add more clothes to him, as you find the
disposition of the air and the temperature of his body.

But herein is to be condemned a rank of ignorant horsemen, Ignorance
brings no other fruit then abuses.
who if they once get the name of keeping a hunting horse, will oppose their
judgment against the best, and will lay on many clothes without discretion or
reason, thinking that their place should give an approbation for what they do,
although they are so blinded with ignorance, that they cannot see their own
errors and hurt they bring. For if a horse hane many cloths The abuse of many
clothes.
clapped on him without need, they will keep him so hot that he will sweet too
violently, and so make him faint, and take away his stomach, and also he will
be the more apt to take cold upon the least occasion that shall be offered.

Therefore (as Mr Markham says) if you see that his coat, How to know when to
increase clothes upon your horse.
be slight and smooth, then you shall cloth him with a single cloth, and as
the weather waxes colder, that his hair begin to stare, about his neck,
flancke, or buttocks, then you shall add another made of woollen cloth, which
is an ordinary proportion for a hunting horse; for if he have any glutte
within him those two clothes, with the warmth of the stable, will be
sufficient to help nature to expel her enemies: she being the best Physician.

CHAP. 10. Of dressing and inseaming your Horse.
AFter you have cleansed your horse from such gross excrements, as he has
gotten by running, then you shall dress Of Currying.
him after thim manner. First, you shall wash the snaffle of your bridle in
fair water, and put it on his head, and put the reins through the caule-band,
(for sl^pping it over his head,) and so tie him up to the rack: then take a
curry-combe* and curry him all over his body (to raise the dust,) beginning
first at his neck, holding the left cheek of the head-stall in your left
hand, and curry him from the setting on of his head all along his neck to his
shoulder, and so go all over his body to the buttocks, down to his cambrell
hough; then change your hand, and curry him before on his breast, and laying
your right arm over his back, join your right side to his left, and curry
him all under his belly, near his fore-bowells, and so all over very well,
from the knees and Cambrell-houghs upward: after that, go to the far side,
and do in like manner. Then take a dead horse tail, or a dusting-cloth of
cotton, and Of dusting and the brush.
strike that dust away which the curry-combe has raised. Then take a round
brush made of bristles, and dress him all over both head, body and legs, to
the very fetlocks, always clensing the brush from that dust which it gathers
by rubbing it upon the curry-combe.

After that, take a hayrecloth and rub him again all over, Of the hayrecloth.
very hard, both to take away the loose hayres, and to help to lay his coat;
then wash your hands in fair water, and rub him all over with wet hands, as
well head as body, for that will Of wet hands and a clean cloth.
cleanse away all those hayres and dust the haire-cloth left. Lastly, take a
clean cloth, and rub him all over till he be very dry, for that will make
his coat smooth and clean.

When you have thus dressed him take a woollen cloth, and lap it about his body
on both sides, past his mid-ribbe, then Of saddling.
saddle him, and throw the other over him for fear of getting cold. Then take
another hayre-cloth (for you should have two, one for his body and another for
his legs) and rub all his Of dressing the legs.
legs exceeding well from the knees, and Cambrell-houghs downward, to his
very hoof, picking and dressing them very carefully about the fetlocks, from
gravel and dust, which will lie in the bending of his joints.

Note, that whilst you are dressing your horse, that you do Note.
not trifle the time idly, either by slow working or prating, as many use to
do, letting their horse stand naked and lean upon him, to hold chat with
whomsoever comes into the stable, through which negligence, a horse
oftentimes gets cold, especially after he has been clothed and kept
warm, for then the air is as penetrable to him as to us, if we should be
naked, which is the cause I wish that his cloth should be cast over him whilst
his legs are in pricking and dressing; for although it is holden that a horse
will not take cold whilst he is in dressing, yet he may take cold of his body
if he stand naked whilst his legs are in pricking and dressing, for that the
rubbing of his legs will not free his body from that danger.

When you have thus dressed him, you shall take a mane Comb, and wet the sponge
in clean water, and comb down his mane and tail, to make the hair lie
close and handsome: which done, take his back, and rake him a mile or two to
fetch his water, (for that will help to refine his mouth, which he has lost
during the time of Summers running, and also stay his body upon his rake,) and
let him drink as much as he will at once, then gallop and scope him up and
down to warm the 2. Pr. 4.
water in his body, and so bring him to the water again, and let him drink
what he will, then gallop him again, and thus x Of watering your horse.
do till he will drink no more: then ^ake him home and set him in the stable
upon good store of litter, and tub him well all 1. Pra. 7. g
over with clean straw, then pick his feet with a crooked iron picker made
for that purpose, and cloth him, and stuff him (x)
round with sost waddes of straw as before, and after he has stood a while
upon the bridle, draw it, and give him such a Of feeding.
quantity of oats (clean dressed in a sieur from dust and filth,) as your
discretion shall direct, according to his eating, or allowance No certain
quantity of meat can be described for all sorts of horses.
proportionate: after, you shall dust, and shake a pretty quantity of hay and
put it into his rack, fast bound in a bottle, to make him labor more upon it,
and that he pull it not down too fast to make waste. Then shake his litter
under him, and shut the window, and door, and so let him stand, till one or two
of the clock in the afternoon, at which time you shall come to him again,
and shake his dunge from his litter, and rub his body and legs with a hair
cloth, and give him another serving of Oats, and so let him stand till the
time of his evening watering, then you shall shake up his litter, and make
clean his standing, and dress him in all points, as in the morning, and water
him, and give him meat (as before.) And thus you shall use him morning, and
evening for the space of three weeks or a month, for by that time he will be
so inseamed, that his flesh will be hard and firm, and his mouth quickened, and
his body brought to its former carriage.

Now for observations herein, Note, that during this time of General
observations.
his inseaming, if twice a week you travail your horse four or five miles
(or as you find your Horse) it will be a help to bring his body in state the
sooner: for it will cause his wind to rake the better, and the glut and gross
humors, the quicker to disolue (by that moderate exercise,) for though that
thereby he may be brought to sweat a little, yet it will bring no damage to him
if he carefully be used at his coming into the stable.

But whereas it may be objected that if a Horse be caused to Objection.
sweat before his flesh be hardened, that it falls down into his legs, and
so causes the Scratches, and Swellings. I answer, Answer.
that is not a general cause, and so no necessary consequence, for it is not
upon necessity that every Horse that so sweateth is subject to such like, nor
every Horse that does not so sweat is free from the same: for I have seen,
(by experience) 1. Pra. 14.
to the contrary in them both, which is that a lean Horse, through disorder
subject thereto, and contrarily fat Horses by good order preserved therefro:
for I my self having a Horse. of great esteem in my charge (for trayning) was
free from any such surrances for the space of half a year, although he had
had diverse sweating heates, till after he was in good state of body, and his
flesh very firm and hard, I but Hunting him one day, in that it was the
afternoon before we found any sport, I I set down my own folly for a caucat
to others.
hunted betwixt some two or three hours, not following the chase sore, but
crossed oftentimes for his better ease, and night drawing on, I left the company,
and raked him gently home: and being near home before he was any thing cold, I
rid him into a river very near to the belly, and there unadvisedly washed him,
and within two or three days after he became to have swelld legs, and so the
Scratches, very dangerously, (although I galloped and warmed him after his
washing.) Whereby I gathered that it was not so much his heating that caused
them, (for that he had oftentimes had greater heates then he had at that time,)
but the negligent care of riding him into cold water whilst his legs were hot,
because they sweld so high as they were washed but no higher.

Wherefore it is good for every one that have a care to keep their Horses from
any such dis^ases, to avoid washing (especially Sweating of it self is
indifferent.
in Winter whilst cold humors abound) least they cause an obstruction of the
natural course, for then the heat and cold will strive together, and provoke
an inflammation in the legs: and then gross humors break forth and choppe the
skin, for sweating, simply of it self, causes no more hurt to a Horse then
it does to a man, if he be used as he should.

Note also, that during the time he is inseaming, and that he is put to no
further exercise then the fetching of his Water: that in his rake to and fro,
and in his gallope after his Water; you have a care that he carry himself in
every particular, as he 2. Pr. 5. 6.
should; till he has gotten such a habit that he make it as it There must be
care to maintain obedience as well as to gain it.
were his natural carriage: otherwise though he be brought to never such true
riding before if he be not still maintained by the same, but suffered to take
liberty at his pleasure, he will carry a lash body, when he should hold it most
firm, and so all the former pains, and care will be lost: for Art does not
only consist in bringing to obedience, but also in keeping the same.

Note further, that in his galloping after water, if sometimes you give him a
watering course sharply of twelve or twenty Variety brings delight.
score, (as you find your Horse) it will quicken up his spirits, and cause him
gallope more pleasantly, and learn him to gather his legs nimbly, and to
stretch forth his body largely.

And note, that every night, (except it be any day that he has had sore
labor) you stop his feet with cow dung, after you How to keep his hooses
tough.
have picked them, for that will keep them cool, and make his Hooses tougher:
and also that you anoint the tops and upper parts of them either with Hogs
grease alone, or else with Hogges-grease, soote, and tar, mixed together, for
that will cause them spread, and keep them from brittlenesse, and make them
black.

CHAP. 11. Of the exercise in Hunting.
THere are so many things that offer themselves to be spoken of in this
Tractate, that if I should enter into all the particulars to show the errors,
and causes, that are sprung up therein, it would require a very large
discourse. Therefore I will contract them into as compendious, and breife heads
as I can, and (for breuity sake,) speak of the chief points, leaving the rest
to the consideration of the discreet practitioner. Wherefore, True labor
causes ability both of wind and body.
when you have thus brought your Horse to that state of body that his flesh is
become firm and hard, (although he be not clean, for heats by labor must
effect that:) which you shall perceive by the thickness of his flesh upon his
short ribs toward the shutting up of his hucklebone; by the grossness, and
thickenesse of his flank, and by the fatness, and fullness of his chaule;
then you may have him into the field to learn him how to carry himself upon
several grounds: and to use him to the cry of the dogs, to increase his
delight: which you shall do after this manner.

After you have served your Horse for night, you shall come to If he be not
laid.
him early in the next morning, as about five of the clock, and first sift him
the quantity of half a pecke of oats, (for they will be well digested by such
time as he be dressed, and in the time of ranging to find sport:) which he shall
eat, whilst your are making clean your stable: then you shall bridle him, and
tie him to the bare rack, and dress him: and after he is dressed, saddle him,
then throw his housing cloth over him, and so let him 2. Pr. 5.
stand till the Hounds be ready to go forth. At which time you shall take his
back, rake him gently into the field until such time as some game presents it
self unto you.

But because it is the first day of his hunting: so that he cannot tell how to
behave himself upon vneauen grounds; you Have makes wast.
shall not put him at any time to above half his speed, that he may have the
better time to learn how to carry a stayed body, and handle his legs both
upon deep and light earths. Neither shall you toil him too long, for wearying
him till he Long royle is to be eschewed at the first till the body be firm.
be acquainted with that exercise: for daunting of his spirit and causing him
to be lash bodied: but to thwart, and cross from place, to place, to make in
with the dogs, to use him to their cry, because a Horse does take great
delight and pleasure therein, and it will also stir up his desire to follow
them the more willingly.

Thus you shall spend the time in Hunting for two or three How to use your
Horse after Hunting.
hours (or as in your discretion you feel your Horse, or the sport afford,)
then you shall have him home, and set him into the stable, having care that
there be good store of fresh litter under him to stand upon, and tie him (in
his bridle) up to the rack, having a little fresh hay in it for him to chaw
upon in his snafle to cool his mouth, and to sharpen his appetire: then rub
him exceedingly with dry straw both head, neck, under the forebowels, belly,
flank, and his legs, withal the other parts of his body: then take off his
Saddle and rub his back very well, and so cloth him up with all speed for
taking cold, and 2. Pra. 9.
wadde him round with loose wispes of straw, and if he be very hot throw
another cloth over him loose to keep him that he 1. Pr. 6.
cool not too fast, and so let him stand an hour, (or till you feel him
somewhat cold,) often stirring him to and fro (in his stall) gently with a
stick, for that will keep his legs and his joints more nimble. Then draw his
bridle, and give him such a quantity Note.
of prouender as you shall think good, but not so much as to take away his
stomach, which will be somewhat weak through the heat of his body, and want
of water: and putting hay in his rack, and taking away the loose cloth for
keeping him hot too long, let him rest for two or three hours, or there 1. Pr.
6.
abouts: during which time you shall make a mash ready, of half a pecke of
malt, and put no more water to it, then it will sweeten, and you think your
Horse will drink, and let it stand covered till the water has gotten the
strength of the malt, Of making a Mash.
which you shall perceive, by your taste, for it will be very sweet, and also by
your feeling, for it will be clammy like honey, and rope like bird-lime, which
you shall give him to drink when it is so cold that you can hardly see it
smoke, least the smoke should strike up into his nose, and so cause him to
take a dislike, and let Though the smell be strange to him at the first, yet
the taste will provoke him.
him have no other water that night: and therefore if he will not drink it at
the first, let it stand by him all night, and set it so that he spill it not
neither with his feet nor head.

Now this mash is very profitable, for it is comfortable for his stomach, and
it will keep his body in a temperate heat, after his labor, and also it will
cleanse, and bring away such grease, The benefit of a Mash.
and gross humors as are disolued by that days exercise. After that, you
shall give him as much prouender, as you think he will eat, and rub him all
over to cleanse the sweat away that is dried, and barked outwardly, and rub his
legs very well, 1. Pra. 14.
then put fresh hay in his rack, and shake good store of litter under him,
that he may rest the better and shut your stable close, and let him rest that
night.

The next morning come to him, about six of the clock, for that is early
enough, (because the mornings rest is as delightful and comfortable as well for
a Horse as a man: for then the brain is more thin and pure, the meat being
concocted whereby the sleep is more sweet;) but open the door very softly for
The cause of quiet sleep. Met ap.
disquieting him, if he be laid, which if he be, let him lie till he rise
of himself. Somnus est sentientis facultatis requies.


Then go to him, and the first thing you do, look to his dung what color it
is of; for if it be greasy and foul, then it is a sign that the former
days exercise did him good in dissoluing Observations from the dung.
some of that foul glut that was in him; but if you perceive no alteration of
color, nor that it is greasy, then it is a sign that, that day made no
dissolution, and therefore you may take the more of him the next.

Then look in his manger, and see whether he has eaten Observe how he
feeds.
up all his prouender; which if he have not, sweep it clean away and bridle
him up, but if he have, give him a little serving more, to eat whilst you
make clean his stable: After, bridle 2. Pr. 10. Chap.
him and tie him to the Rack, and dress him, and have him forth to the water
as aforesaid, for this should be a day of rest: And thus you shall use him to
the field thrice a week, till you have brought his body to such cleanness,
that you may judge both of his speed and toughness.

Now for observations, you shall note, that you use him in General
observations.
the days of his rest (which must be every other day at the least) in all
points as you did during the time of his inseaming. But whereas it has been
usual to give a Scouring the day of his Of Scowrings.
rest, I cannot greatly commend that custom, except it be upon necessity,
(that nature is oppressed or hindered by sickness;) for nature has strength
enough of her self to expel her enemies, so long as the body is perfect and
sound; and therefore scourings to such horses will do more hurt then good, for
they are Physical, and so weaken the body, and are as needless to a horse
that is sound as to a man.

Note, that when you come from hunting, you wash not your 2. Pra. 10. Chap.
horse that night, but rub him exceeding well, and the next morning after he
is dressed, or after he is come in from his water, take a peale of water, and
wash all the gravel and filth from under his fetlocks very clean, for that
will cool his legs and preserve them from foul surrances. Theo. 8. 33. Chap.


Note, that if you have good store of game, that you be careful not to take
too much of your horse, to feed your own Et alijs lo^is.
delight, till he be come to have a stayed and firm body, so causing him to
ouer-reach and daunt his spirit; nor give him liberty to go as him lusts,
but be ready upon any disorder to help him with your motions, or to correct
him if need require. 2. Pra. 6. Chap.


And for that cause I do not greatly approve that one should go into the field
without spurs, for if a horse commit a fault either through neglect or*
doggednesse, if he be suffered at that time, the next time he will be the
worse; and I hold he A Horseman is maimed if he be unfurnished.
is not meet to be an Horseman that cannot wear them, except he abuse them,
for he is like a mad man, that must have his knife taken from him, else he
will do mischief with it.

And note, that if your horse be so hot and free, that he will not easily be
commanded, but will put himself more fiercely forward upon deep earths then
he should, and so snapper and falter with his legs or his body, or bear so
high that he choke himself with his wind, or such like, that then you use
2. Pr. 6. Chap.
to hunt him with the head-straine, for it will amend such faults through the
gentleness thereof, whereby he will use his foreparts more orderly, and rest
so stayedly upon his head, that you thereby may help to govern his legs; so
that you may cause him to strike a furrow or gallop upon any earths, as your
self would wish.

CHAP. 12. Of the manner of food and time of feeding.
SOme may think because I have spoken of no other food for the hunting horse
(in these last Chapters) but oats and hay, that I allow no other feeding for
them, but to clear that supposition, the cause that I have omitted to speak
of the diversities of foodes till now, was to avoid digression, for confusing
of order, and obstupidating the memory of young impes, that Theo. 4. Chap.
desire to grow in this Vineyard. And therefore, I did defer the touching of
them there, being minded to speak of them more conveniently, which being
known, may be used, as necessity requires. And again, it may be thought,
that 2. Pr. 3. Chap.
this food which I shall prescribe, is not sufficient to bring a horse to his
strength and purity of wind; because it is not so Nothing of esteem except it
be curious.
costly and curious, as formerly has been set forth; for many think that
nothing can be good except it be costly: but howsoever it may be judged, yet
I am sure (having had experience thereof) that this food will be sufficient for
the feeding and dieting of any hunting horse, for giving him strength and sound
nutriment for the maintenance of his great toil, and the nearest to the help
of nature; and so the rest to be superfluous, being invented by some
preiudicated fantasies, that would be held singular, through too precise
curiosity, or else Generous minds wronged by Parasites.
soysted in by some Belialls, that would bring in great bills of charges, and
reserve the surplus, for themselves to spend upon their lasciuity.

But howsoever such inventions first sprung, whosoever shall use them, by true
examination shall find them enemies both to Art and Nature, as hereafter shall
appear. Wherefore if you will maintain your horse in his best strength and
lust, after he is ^nseamed, you shall to his oats put a third part of beans
being spelt upon a Mill, because he will eat them better then if Of Beans and
Oats.
they were whole; for then they will sooner weary his chappes, and the strength
of the beans will be more in his taste, for that they are so great they cannot
be so well mixed amongst the oats, but some horses will covet to weed the
oats from them.

But if to avoid this, any think that Pease are better to mix Of Pease.
with Oats, in regard they are smaller, and so need no spelting; I answer,
that as they are the smaller, so they have the more store of husks, and the
meal is not of such strength, and nutriment as that is of Beans, and so more
faint and pursiue. And as for Fetches and Tares, which many use to sow only
for horse Of Fetches and Tares.
Prouender, they are altogether the worst; for they are no perfect grain, but
a kind of weed that is increased by reason that the land has no better lust
nor strength to yield better fruit, and therefore that must needs be a weak
effect that proceeds from so weak a cause.

Wherefore (as I say) you shall at his first taking up, for the space of a
fortnight (or thereabouts) give him only Oats Note.
and hay, till the gross humors be something dried in his body, and that his
flesh begin to harden, for if you should feed him with such strong food, before
he were in some case to abide exercise, then it would increase those gross
humors, which are reciding in him, rather then convert into good blood; for
that (by reason of corruption) they do naturally abound, and will be chiefly
fed (as the earth does naturally feed weeds before Theo. 5. b.
good corn) if by art and diet they be not first represt: and so will inflame
the body, and cause diverse diseases.

Therefore (as I say) when you perceive that he begins to 2. Pr. 11.
have good flesh, to preserve it the better, you shall add to his Oats
Beans; for they will increase strength and lust, and so Being well dried.
keep him till you intend to hunt him; and for the better increasing of his
courage and wind, you shall make him bread after this manner.

You shall take four pecks of Beanes^, and two pecks of wheat, and grind them
together, and sift the meal Of Bread for hunting.
through a temmes, of an indifferent finenesse, and kneade it with warm water,
and good store of barme, and let it lie an (x) 1 Pra. 7. ^.
hour or more to swell, for so it will be the lighter, and have the quicker
digestion, then work it exceeding well with a brake, or tread it well with your
feet, (being clean washed) and bake it in great household loaves (as a pecke in
a loaf) for so it will have the less crust, and not dry so soon; with which
bread you shall feed your horse after it is a day old, (being well chipt)
sometimes giving him Bread, sometimes Oats, as you see his stomach best
likes; for this feeding increases good blood, and gives strength and lust
sufficient for any ordinary hunting.

But if you think to hunt him upon a match, then let the one (g) Of Bread for
a match.
half of the corn be Wheat, and the other half Beans, and let it not be
ground too fine, for so there will be the less bran in the bread, and dress
the meal through a boulter, and knead it with new Ale and Barme beat together
(but let there be good store of barme) and use it in all other things, as the
former. Now this bread is more healthful, and yields as much strength,
courage and wind, as any other whatsoever, That is the best that agrees the
best with nature.
if there be true labor adjoined, although many use drugges and diverse other
grains to increase wind.

But whereas many use to put a proportion of Rye into the 2. Pr. 13. d. (e) Of
Rye.
Bread, I hold it not so good, for the former is sufficient for strengrh and
nutriment, and if the horse have such plenty of that as nature does desire, his
body will continue in perfect state without it; yet because a horse is hot of
himself, and his heat may be aggrauated by his labor, so that he may come
to 1. Pr. 7. Chap.
be bound in his body: Therefore seeing Rye is cold and moist; I wish that you
should grind the quantity of a pecke by it self, and so bake it in a great
loaf, and use it as Physic, giving him a quantity thereof, when you first
draw his bridle, to cool his body after his heats, or otherwise, as you
perceive his body (f) Physical things are to be used sparingly.
costiue: Whereas if it should be ground among the other grains, then in what
state soever your horse were, he must feed thereon, and so if he were loose in
his body the Rye would increase it.

Now for the quantity that you should give your Horse at one Of the quantity of
food.
time, there cannot be any certain limitation thereof, but it must be
proportionated according to his appetite; only be sure to give him his full
feeding, for that will keep his body in better temper, and in greater strength
and lust: And then, if upon such store of meat you perceive he feed too fast,
do not therefore scant him, but give him the greater labor, for that will help
both his strength and wind.

And for the manner of feeding, let him eat one meal of Of the manner of
feeding.
Beans and Oats, and another of bread, for so his stomach will continue the
better, for variety will sharpen it; whereas if he should feed long upon one
kind, it would cause a loathing, and let him eat the oftnest of that he best
likes; or if you please, you may give him both at one meal, (especially if
he be of a dainty feeding) always giving him that the last which he eats
the best, and has the best digestion, otherwise 2. Pra. 6. Chap.
he will not feed so well, and his stomach would be more oppressed.

And again, if he be a small feeder, give him a little at once and Of a dainty
feeding horse.
often, for fresh meat will draw on his appetite, but give him so, that he may
have a little left in the manger, to eat at his own leisure betwixt the times
of his feeding.

Now for the times of feeding; four times of full feeding, in The time of
feeding.
twenty four hours is sufficient, that is, after his morning watering, then
at one or two of the clock in the after noone, or as the days are in length,
to give time for digestion, before he 2. Pr. 6. Chap.
be watered at night, else if he be full fed, and put to exercise before, it
is very dangerous; likewise after his evening watring, and about nine of the
clock at night. And as for that you give him in the morning, when you come
first into the stable, 2. Pra. 11. Chap.
it must be but a little to preserve his stomach from cold humors that might
oppress it by drinking fasting, and also to make him drink the better.

CHAP. 13. Of Scowrings, and their uses.
SCowrings are also another thing wherein this Art is abused, and the horses
glory much darkened; for thereby his body is made an Apothecaries Shop to
receive such unnatural drugs as does weaken it, and deject his courage, which
Art does chiefly tend to maintain.

And also, it is a further abuse, by those which assume to apply (a) The cause
of the abuse of Scowrings.
scowrings to a horse, that neither know his disposition nor the operation of
them, no nor yet the cause and time wherefore and when they should be
ministered: And yet they think that if they can but talk of giving a scowring,
they should be esteemed with the best, and so indeed many are, but their 2.
Pra. 9.
esteem is far above their deserts; for through such ignorance they make
horses that are sound and of an able body (by The event of the abuse.
nature) to be weak tender, and apt to take surfets upon the least occasion,
(as hereafter shall be shown,) for they conceit their knowledge so much, as
they think to make him sounder (b) Thinking is no knowledge. 2. Pr. 11.
then nature can work, but by such uncertain grounds they hinder the strength
of it. Like those men, that if they do but fear a sickness, presently betake
them to Physic, (though Nature had strength enough to prevent it) whereby
they are Note.
made the sooner sick, and makes their bodies more subject to diseases, their
pores being opened by it.

But I would not be so understood, that though I speak of the abuses of
Physic, I utterly disallow thereof, for it is a most excellent, and judicious
Art, that judges of the nature and operation of simples which receive their
virtues from the heavenly powers: and so are to be esteemed as Gods
instruments, whom he has ordained for the preservation of bodily health; and
the wiseman says, Honor the Physician with that honor that is due unto him
because Eccle. 28. 1. 3. 4. 7.
of necessity: for the Lord has created him. And the knowledge of the
Physician lifts up his head, and in the sight of great men he (c) Scowrings
are good in their true use.
shall be in admiration, for the Lord has created Medicines of the earth, and
he that is wise will not abhor them. For with such does he heal men, and
^aketh away their pains.

Neither that I disallow of scowrings for Horses, for they are Of the abuse of
diet.
also needful, and necessary: but I speak against the abuse of them, being
used without necessity, and practiced by those that have no knowledge, but use
their fancy without fear or wit. Scowrings needful through scantenesse of
meat.
But through their ignorance they are caused to be more necessary the horses
body being distempered by them: and again, they are caused to be more
needful, through the scanting him of his food, in that they will not give him
enough to 1. Pra. 6.
satisfy nature: and so the retentiue part not having sufficient substance
(after the mea^e is concocted, the expulsive part does (d)
deny its office, (to expel the excrements) whereby it is retained They are
urged also through hot spices.
so long within the body, that it does heat and dry, and so the body is made
costiue. Or else there is the greater necessity of them by ouerheating the body
in giving him Anise-seeds. liquoras, and such like, to cause him have (as they
say,) long 1. Pra. 12. ^. 6.
wind, that so also the body is bound, and becomes evil affected, being food
contrary to a Horses nature. The effect of abuse of diet.


And then forsooth, to excuse their ignorance, affirm the cause thereof, to be
the hot disposition of the Horse and therefore must have a scowring the more to
afflict and punish The reasons.
him: so that this order of dieting, (if it be rightly considered,) is not
preservative, but rather destructive.

For first, it hinders nature, (by restraining him of his food,) (1)
that it cannot receive that strength and nourishment it should.

Secondly, it is hindered in that he cannot have that rest and (2)
full feeding the day after his labor, (which is a means to help his strength
and lust:) but he is distempered by scowrings, and disquieted of his rest,
which is worse unto him then his former days labor.

Thirdly, it weakneth the Horse, for there is no scowring, but (3) If it work
upon the body.
it is Physical, and should be joined with rest, but here is a double
persecution, one day to labor, and another to take scowrings.

Fourthly, it opens the pores, and his interior organs, that he (4)
is more apt the next day to take cold, going abroad before he get strength,
and his body be perfect.

And lastly, it is opposite to Art, for if the Horse be sound, (as (5)
this must be supposed) it weakneth nature, by violence, not giving her liberty
and time to free her self, but will force a dissolution before there be any,
and so hinders nature, which Art tends to maintain, for so long as a Horse
is strong and lusty, Theo. 1.
nature has ability of it self to expel her enemies after they be once
dissolved.

Wherefore to leave these, and such like gross errors to those which do
affect them: I would counsel those that will be counseled, to use such diet as
shall keep their Horses in the best state and health, for by that means
Nature will have the greater power over her enemies; which is such feeding as I
have formerly set forth; For as Kitching Physic is best for a man In the last
Chapter.
(except he be dangerously sick) so is this natural diet for a horse. and use
no restraint, but let him be his own caruer, for he will 1. Pr. 2. l
eat no more then will suffice nature: and it will keep his body in good
temper, for I have seldom seen, that those horses which are full fed with
such meat to be subject to costiuenesse, and therefore I conclude, that those
horses which are sound and strong, need little other scowrings then good meat
and their fill of it, if they be also ordered as they should when they come
into the stable.

But because no man can tread a path so sure but his foot may He that is much
in action shall sometimes miscarry.
sometimes slip, because danger is a companion of labors, and likewise no
horse though he be never so sound, but is naturally subject to sickness and
diseases, and likewise disaster accidents may happen though the man be never
so circumspect, for as oftentimes a man takes a sickness or a cold, which
himself cannot tell how, nor when; even so may a horse, and yet the man not
know till he perceive it by some event, because the knowledge None but God
knows things truly before they happen.
of man is comprehended in things after they chance; and that the sight of his
eyes is no substance of light, whereby it might penetrate into other
substances: but only a procliuity to receive light (from another) by accident,
and so can see no further then the accidents of any thing.

Therefore because I will not pass from one extreme and go to another, but
touch the mean, I will not slight them over The mean betwixt the extremes
is the best.
as needless, seeing they are good in their true use, but will set down such
scowrings, as I have found good, (by reason and experience:) and refer them
that loves the multiplicity of them to Master Markhams works, where they may
satisfy their desires with variety.

Wherefore if at any time, (through a soaring conceit,) you Which neglect is
not greatly to be excused.
shall give your Horse such a strong and sore heat that you find it has
distempered his body, and it becomes hard and bound, so that nature must have
relief or else it will turn to a greater evil: you shall take Rye meal, or
the crummes of the A scowring made of Rye and Butter. 2. Pra. 12. f.
Rye-bread (before expressed, in the last Chapter,) but the Rye crummes I rather
prefer, and work it with as much fresh and sweet Butter, as will make it
like paste, and make balls of it to the quantity of a Walnut, and give four or
five of them, in the morning fasting, and then (having his clothes trust, fast
about him, and wadded round with wispes) get upon his back, and gallop him
gently, in some grieve close or yard, till he begin to sweat under his ears,
then have him into the Stable, and rub him well, and cover him warm, letting
him stand upon the bridle an hour or more. After, give him a quantity of your
Rye bread, and let him stand some two hours, letting him have a little hay in
his Rack to chaw upon as his stomach shall serve, then give him a warm mash
to drink: after, feed him with prouender, 2. Pra. 10.
or bread as much as he will, and so let him rest, giving him sufficient store
of hay in his rack.

Now this scrowring is so gentle that it does nothing abate the strength of the
Horse, and it has that virtue and operation, The virtue and profit of this
scowring.
as it will cool his body, and will scour and purge him of all such glut, and
bad humors, as are disolued in him. But if he have taken a cold, through
which, or any other cause he begin to be sick, and forsake his meat, then you
shall take half an ounce of Diapente, and brew it with a pint of the best
Maligosacke, A scowring of Diapente and Sack.
and give it him in the morning, and use him in his exercise as before, only in
stead of your Rye bread you shall give him other bread, or beans and ^ates, or
clean oats, which he has most desire to; this scowring I have found the
best, (though there be many other,) for it will comfort his stomach and
sharpen his appetite, and will purge him from what grease or humors The
excellency of this scowring
soever though it has been long in his body, for I applied it to a Horse that
has been so far spent, as he was almost without hope of recovery, having
forsaken all meat, and could scarcely stand, and yet in short time after he
had it, recovered his strength and appetite: and it is so sovereign and
comfortable, that you may use it (if necessity require) two or three mornings
together. But because this Diapente is rare, and not ordinary to be had in
every Apothecaries shop: I will set down (in another place) the making
thereof, that you may be sure to have that which is good, to use at your own
pleasure.

There is also another scowring which is highly commended A scowring for him to
be put to his water when he drinks.
by Master Markeham, which although I have had no experience of, yet I will
set it down that others may use it as they shall find the operation thereof.
Take of Anise-seeds three ounces, of Cummin-seed six drammes, of Carthamus a
dram and a half, of Fenegreeke seed one ^unce two drammes, of Brimstone one
ounce and a half, beat all these to a fine powder, and searse them, then take
of Sallet oil a pint and two ounces, of Hunny a pound and a half, and White
wine four pints; make all into a strong stiff past, with as much wheat meal
as shall suffice, and work it well: keep this paste in a linen cloth, (for
it will last long,) and at night after you come from Hunting, and your Horse is
thirsty, take a Ball thereof (as big as a man's fifth) and dissolve it into a
gallond or two of cold water, which will turn the color like Milk, and offer
it to your Horse in the dark, least the color displease him, which if he
refuse, care not but let him fast, till he take it, which he will do in
twice or thrice offering, and after he has once taken it, he will drink it
before any other water. Thus far Master Markeham. Which drink (as he
says,) your Horse can never take too much nor too often of it, if he have
exercise, otherwise it feeds too fast, and that it is a present remedy from
all inward infirmities whatsoever, and therefore wishes no Horseman to be
without it, for it will last three or four months.

CHAP. 14. Of Making a Match for Hunting.
BEcause there are many that take great delight in this noble sport of Hunting,
and for the love and delight they take in their horses, are desirous to defend
their speed and valor with the price of their purses, in making of matches for
their glory; I will as plainly as I can, set down the true grounds of making
a match, that they may have the better assurance of their judgment. No truth
can be gathered by uncertain ties.
For there are and has been so many deceived herein, for that they have no
certainty to work upon, but rely upon flying reports, and conceited
fantasies, that this generous exercise is much darkened, and is accounted, but
chance or fortune, being as it were led in darkness by other men's ignorance,
whereby they have received such damage and loss, that they condemn all those
that delight therein, as prodigal and vain, to hazard so much upon such
unstable delights,

But to purge this Art from the dregs of such false imputations, All Arts of
themselves are true.
know that the cause of such uncertain grounds does not proceed from the Art,
(for all Arts simply of themselves are grounded on the truth,) but from the
pretended knower, The 3. Epist. ^^ the Reader.
which will be a follower of his own will, without reason or premeditation,
and flatter his own fantasy in thinking his Horse does fly if he run but
upon any reasonable speed: and that he is whole running when he will not run
a quarter of a mile, (at the height of his speed) without a sob.

Wherefore to work the more surely, before you attempt to Observations in
matching.
make any match, observe first that you train your horse after such hounds as
are very swift and speedy, and then if you can (1) Train after swift hounds.
at any time command them upon deep or light earths, then you shall the less
doubt of his speed and toughness. (2) Theo. 20. 33. 34


Secondly, have a care that he carry a firm body, and that he handle his
legs aptly, upon several earths, and that he be at such command of his
mouth, that he will ride at what 1. Pra. 21. and 2. Pr. 6.
rate your discretion shall direct.

Thirdly, that he be whole running, so that he will run a (3) Of whole
running.
traine-sent or a feure miles course, without slacking his speed to sobbe,
which he will do if he be so truly trained as he should, for then the motion
of his wind will agree so reciprocally with Th^o. 31. and 32.
the motion of his body, that he will run so slightly that his wind will
answer to every stroke he strikes with his legs without jar, though he be
at his full speed; whereas if he The cause of false running. 2. Pr. 8. d.
be used to slack his speed, whilst he lets his wind rake, he will look
for it, and then if he be ouertopt with speed and cannot have that liberty,
he will settle suddenly like a Jade.

But whereas it is holden that one horse cannot both be Objection.
swift and tough, and therefore not possible by Art to reduce a 2. Pr. 7. n.
horse to both those qualities? I answer, that opinion is crept Answer.
in for want of knowledge in the Art, for it being invented to support and
maintain nature, if a horse have any natural inclination to speed, it does
not only help to increase but also to husband it so, as he will spend no
more of it then shall be necessary, 2. Pr. 7. p.
and then he will still reserve some till the time that he Theo. 20. and 34.
Chap.
should most use it; which thing I dare confidently affirm, this Tractate
rightly understood will effect.

Now of matches in hunting, they are either traine-sents and Of hunting matches.
the Wild-goose-chase, or else traine-sents and a Bell-course either single or
double, that is, once over, or to and again, and therefore the number of
traine-sents, and the exercise after, is to be made as the swiftness or
toughness of the horse is approved.

But because the Wild-goose-chase is such an unmerciful Of the
Wildegoose-chase.
and unreasonable toil, (as the name it self does import, without any
mediocrity or order, I will pass over it as an exercise not worthy of the
time, because it is the hazard of the spoil The unreasonableness of it.
and ruin of such excellent creatures; for if two good horses be met, the
match cannot be tried, till one of them be half spoiled (if not both) nay
oftentimes they are both brought so weak that they are neither of them able to
go, and then when they are so Turkishly tormented, the match is feign to be
drawn, and so depart as wise as the term of their exercise.

Through which unmerciful delight they abuse the liberty of The
unmercifulness of it.
their Sovereignty, and turn it to rigor, (as a tirannous King) contrary to
the commandment of God, for we should be merciful Luke 6. 36.
as our father is merciful, which is not only extended in his promise, but
also in his providence, which preserves as well the unreasonable as the
reasonable Creatures; and therefore they should be used to the ends for which
they were ordained, Ecclus. 7. 2^.
(for the use, service, and delight of Man,) and to have a care over them, if
they be for our profit: And I pray you what care or pity is there shown
toward them, when they are so cruelly persecuted, and wilfully spoiled by such
extreme labor.

Therefore seeing it is oftentimes the subversion of such excellent Theo. 2.
Creatures, he is not worthy to have a good horse that makes no more account
of him, but to rack his goodness upon such unreasonable and unmerciful
tenters; (although there may be shown much Horsemanship) seeing there may be
trial enough had both of the goodness of the horse; and skill of the man in
traine-sents.

But if you have a horse that is suitable to the former observations, Occultae
musices, nullum esse respectum.
and that you desire to have his glory shown, because secret virtues are to no
use, if they be not revealed: then you may adventure to make a match of so
many traine-sents, and such a bell-course (afterward) as you shall find to be
the best advantage for your horse; which should not be made peremtorily Of
traine-sent matches.
(upon a will) but upon some reasonable probabilities of the adverse horse,
because neither words nor santasies will cause a horse to run any deal the
better, and there is no horse so It is simpleness to say I had not thought
this.
good, but there may be another as good; and then if you have a good ground,
you may be the bolder to stand to it: for, (as the common saying is) a match
well made is half won.

And therefore be cautions, that you make no match upon a sudden, nor in
drinking, except you know the Horse very well, and then to make your match to
run such a number of trainescents, and such a course as shall be the best for
your self, and The disaduan^^ge of weights
let not your adversary make your play, especially if he challenge you, and
likewise be careful that you give no advantage in weights, for that will
settle a horse very much when his strength fails him, in that he must carry
it so long; for if it hinder him but a horse length, in the first traine-sent,
whilst he is strong and fresh, it will increase in the next the more, as his
strength waxes the less, and so at the last will beat him down extremely,
it continuing certain, and his strength abating, which it will viperously
consume; except he be of such speed, But it will exceed Geometrical
proportion that is always doubling.
that he is able to command the dogs, and the other horse at his pleasure:
But there can be no proportion of distance given for that advantage, because of
the uncertainty of the horses ability.

But if it be so that you give advantage of waights, look you let him not
have that liberty, to carry it in his saddle, but The disadvantage of carrying
weight in the saddle.
that the man carry the dead w^ight, otherwise you will injury your self; for
if it be in the saddle it lies close and firm upon his back, and the man
has more liberty of ease to help his horse when he feels him somewhat
weak; but if it be upon the man, then he caryeth the like burden to your
self, and it will as well burden him as the horse, and will more trouble the
horse then if it were in the saddle, by reason it is further distant from his
back, which will have the greater force to displace the horses body, and so to
hinder his stroke, when both the man and the horse begins to be weary, even
as a If a pin be not set in the midst of the beam, the longest end of the
scale has the greater force.
weight that is further remote from the center of the beam, has its greater
force to counterpoyse.

But if it chance that you are challenged with a horse you do not know, and
that you never saw him ride in the field, whereby you can have no judgment of
the difference betwixt your horse and him, then I would wish you to take a
deliberation Of the equality of horses.
(before you give an answer) till you have enquired of some trusty friend that
you know has judgment and can give some certain report of his speed and
manner of riding, which if it be any thing answerable to your horse, be not
too confident to hazard too much money, till you have a better trial, and in
riding you may dispose whether you may have a better match afterward.

But if he be of a different disposition, then to run so many traine-sents,
and such a course as you judge to be best for To make a match according to
your own hors^ riding.
your self, and forest for him; as thus: If your horse be a sound feeding
horse, and will endure heates and coldes, then it is very likely he is of
strength, toughness and well winded, (if he have true training accordingly;)
And therefore if you make your match to run six or eight traine-scents, and
the course Theo. 32. and 2. Pra. 8.
to and again, it will be the better for you, and to lead the first
traine-sent, and lead it so upon deep earths that it may end in such a place,
that when your adversary shall lead, it shall not be Of matching a tough horse.
nigh any light earths, and likewise your last train, that if it be possible
he may be driven to lead his last train upon deep earths, to the first
staff of your course, (because if you lead the first, then upon necessity he
must lead the last, and it must end at the starting place of the course, and
let the liberty of your law be as little as you can.

But if you find him not so tough, yet very speedy, then the Of matching a
swift horse.
fewer traine-sents the better, and to run the course but single, (which would
be upon askelping earth) and use the best means you can (contrarily) to have
the greatest benefit upon light grounds in your traine-sents, letting the
liberty of your law to be as large as you can possibly, (as three horse
lengths) that you may husband your speed and preserve it till you run the
Course.

All which being observed, if then you loose, blame no body but your self,
either in that your judgment faild in his disposition, or that you were
deceived in not training him according to the truth of Art: Of which if you be
sure, then be not danred before the match day, howsoever other opinions (though
Fancy is a corrupt Judge.
never so many) may oppose: For the bias of many men's fancies does so draw
them, that they will speak after affection, and as they would have it, and so
many are (Syren-like) drawn from the truth in giving more credit to others
words, then to their own judgment, although they have sure grounds thereof,
The preface to he first Book.
as if horses would run any deal the better either for great bragges, or
wagers: or that they would temporise and so respect one man more then another:
or that such men should speak by a Divine Oracle, and could not choose to be
otherwise, though they never see the Horse gallop.

But if your Horse be a weak feeder, and so tender that he Of a weak and
tender horse.
will not endure heates, and colds, and yet run exceeding speedily, then you
shall utterly forsake Traine-sents, and run a three or four mile course, as
shall be shown hereafter.

CHAP. 15. How to order your Horse for a Hunting Match.
When you have had such trial of your Horse that you dare adventure to make a
match of him, and that he is matched for so many trayn-sents, and such a course
as you find him best disposed for, then you shall (according to the limited
time, which would be a month at least,) endeavor to bring him to such a
perfect strength, and purity of Wind, as Art will Extraordinary toil must
have extraordinary means.
assist. For though he may be in good case for ordinary Hunting, yet he may
be defective (in them both) for such extraordinary toil as he must undergo
at such a time: and for to keep him so strictly (except it be upon such urgent
cause) Delight with frugality is commendable.
were but needelesse, and would increase to great charge.

Therefore if you know that you have Hunted him very sore before time, so that
you think there is matter of dissolution in his body that is not expeld, or
that you perceive by his countenance and gesture that he is not so pleasant and
delightful as he was wont to be; you shall first give him the scowring of
Sack, 2. Pra. 13.
and Diapente, which will cleanse his body and revive his spirits. But if you
perceive him to be of a cheerful countenance, and that he will scope and play
in your hand, (he being of that spirit) then give him no scowrings, for they
will work upon the strength of his body, not having any other matter to purge,
and so weaken it, which must be your chief care to preserve by 2 Pra. 11.
Wind the supporter of strength.
good feeding and true labor, for that will cause good Wind, which is the
assister of strength, for if he be never so strong, when it fails his
strength decays.

Therefore finding your Horse to be healthful and lusty (to The first
fortnights order.
keep him so) you shall (for the first fornight,) feed him with the second
bread before mentioned; and feed him strongly therewith, and for change of meat
give him Beans and 2. Pr. 12. ^.
Oats once a day, or oftener, if he eat not his bread well* and let him have
hay in his rack (well dusted and shaken) to chaw on at his pleasure, for he
will not eat much of it, if he be not scanted of better food: now when he
will ride well upon this feeding, you may be sure he will ride better upon
purer, if it be not much differing, for the more his Wind is freed, with more
ease will he maintain his task.

And for his manner of labor, I hold it not the best His manner of labor.
to hunt him after the Hare (as some use) although the Hounds be very swift,
for that is deceiptfull, in regard the dogs will be much at Default through the
coldness of the sent, whereby the A firm foundation is certain.
Horse shall have many sobbes, so that when he shall come to run a
trayne-sent without any intermission, his wind will not be so durable.

But let a Cat be led in a string upon such grounds as is agreeing to your
Match, for that sent will be so strong that he must run it wholly as if he
were upon the match, following as fleet hounds as you can get. But as for the
number of traine-sents you should use in trayning, that must be directed by
your own What number of Traine-sents are to be used in Trayning.
discretion, that is, as your match is, or as you find your Horses disposition
in strength and feeding. For if you toil him too much it will weaken his
limbs, and daunt his courage: or give him too little, it will make him feed
foul and so pursiue, and then being forced to Ride longer then he has been
used, will cause restifenes, thinking to give over before he has half done:
either of which would be accounted a gross absurdity in you.

And therefore if he be to run six or eight Trayne-sents, and the course
too and fro, let him not be put to such sore labor above twice in that month,
and let them both be in the first fortnight, that he may have the last
fortnight of time to recover his strength, and let all the rest be sometimes
half his task, and sometimes three quarters, as you shall find your Horse in
strength and wind, but use no certainty for bringing him to that custom. And
let the last days work of the first fortnight be a Trayne-sent more then your
match, that thereby you may How often he is to be exercised.
try his toughness, and so repose the more upon his truth. And likewise twice
a week is sufficient labor to keep him in breath, for so his strength will
not abate but increase.

But if your match be to run fewer Traine-sents, then you may oftener run
the whole number according to your own discretion: provided always you
strain him not (at the least) for ten days before your match, least he
shall not have time 2. Pra. 12.
to recover his strength. And give him after every breathing course a quantity
of Rye bread to cool his body, and to keep it in temper.

And for his days rest, use him in all things as is said before: only Pra.
ibid. 10. 11.
if he be somewhat longer abroad, evening and morning to air, it will sharpen
his appetite, by reason his vital heat will be the more retained in his body
to cause concoction: but let 1. Pra. 6.
him not go forth too early, nor stay forth too late, but so as he may have
benefit of the Sun morning and evening, to refresh Of the last fortnight.
and comfort him. And for the last fortnight, let him be used, (for his days
both of labor and rest,) as in the former, saving that his exercise must be
more moderate: and therefore to increase both his spirit and wind, let him
have of the best bread, and feed him there with exceedingly even as much as he
will eat, for if he be in any good case before, this will make his wind more
pure and quicken his courage; and for change of meat give him of the best
white or cut oats, for they have the most substance to give strength: for the
skegge oate is so light The difference in oats.
that they yield no such strength, and are so full of hulles and chafe that
they oppidate or hinder his wind. And let them be dried in the Sun, and beat
in a clean bag, and then winno^ed, and picked from all dust, and filth: and
for variety, if you wash them sometimes in strong Ale they will be very
comfortable, Ale is comfortable.
for though it is holden that it causes pursiuenesse, yet such a quantity does
no hurt but good, for it will revive his spirits, and cause him to sleep the
better.

Thus you shall feed him to as great lust as you can, letting him have hay in
his rack, till a day before his Match, and then give him no more, that he may
have time to digest it, that so it may be avoided with the excrements, except
it be a little in your hand to scowre his teeth, after you have fed him with
bread, with which you shall feed him very well the day before he run, and
give him a reasonable supper, that he go not too empty into the field, for
such a days work will ask substance to maintain strength. Likewise, give
him a quantity of bread in a little ale before he go into the field, for that
will make him cheerful: and so let him be led into the field, referring the
success to Gods good blessing.

CHAP. 16. Observations in running.
When as you are come into the place where you are to 1 His hoofes would be
picked.
begin your Traine-sents, you shall first pick his feet that there be no
gravel nor stones to annoy him, betwixt his hoofes and the shoes, and scrape
all the dirt or clay round 2 His legs chafed.
about the upper part of his hoofes off, and wipe them clean: then chafe his
legs very well, and for his saddle and bridle they would be made fit before
he come to the field: being a 3 The saddle and furniture answerable.
light saddle well sinewed, and stand sure on his back without hurting, with a
couple of woollen girths, because they will not be so subject to chafe, as if
they were of girth-webbe, and they will give more liberty to his body for his
wind to pass more easily: the stirrops and lethers strong and sure, but yet so
light as is possible, being let forth to the just length of your seat, that you
may behave your self more artificially* for the ease both of your self and
your Horse. For if they be too short, you can never Theo. 13.
hold a firm seat, your kees being kept from their true place, so that if you
leap, you will either be in hazard of dismounting, or else sit so loose that
the uncertainty of your body will be more Theo. 14.
trouble and hinderance to him then his leap, if you served him accordingly.

And surther, you cannot have liberty to spur when, and as occasion shall be
offered: And again, if they be too long, you cannot have any stay of them to
help your horse when he begins Theo. 24.
to be weak, and likewise, it will be hard for you to Theo. 15. 17.
keep your stirrops, which to loose is disgraceful.

Likewise, that the reins and head-stall of the bridle be made sure to the
snaffle, that there be no miscariage through neglect: and that the snaffle hang
in the true place of his mouth: then he 1. Pra. 15.
being unclothed mount upon him, and seat your self truly in your seat, and
take your reins to such a proportionate length, as you may command your Horse
without moving your seat; holding your switch down by your right fide, with
the point backe-ward like a sword, and with your elbowes close to your 1. Pr.
17.
sides, yield your body somewhat forward, houlding your feet straight in your
stirrops, and so begin your business chearefully.

Note, that when you switch or spur your Horse, you have a Theo. 6.
care to keep your seat firm, for a little disorder in your self, will
cause a greater in the Horse, especially when his strength is weakened: and
therefore when you switch, do not fetch your hand so far as to remove your
elbow (much) from your side, but lifting your hand up toward your ear, bring
it suddenly How to switch.
down and strike him with a short iert, for that will be sh^rper, then if it
were further fetched, and strike him in the flancke, for there the skin is
tenderst and thinnest. Neither when you spur, do not fetch your legs far
to strike him on the side, How to spur.
like a mallet, for then the calves of your legs will so beat him on the
sides, that they will force his wind, as if they would drive it out of his
body: And beside, you shall in so doing loose your seat. But when you spur,
you shall fetch your leg no Theo. 6.
further then your ordinary seating, and bring your spurs quick to his sides,
with the strength of your legs from the knees downward, for I am sure it
will be so sharp as to draw blood; and then also you will spur so covertly
as your adversary will hardly perceive: and spur him not under the fore ribs
near his heart, till you be driven to the last refuge.

Note, that if there be any forceable wind, that ye be mindful to ride for the
best advantage of your Horse, that is, if the wind be on your face when your
adversary leads, then to Advantage taken by the wind blowing.
ride so close to him, that his Horses body may break the force of it from
yours, and yield your self so low that his body also may shelter your body,
which will greatly help the strength of your horse.

And likewise, if it be on your back, ride so behind him, that your Horse may
have the force of the wind, to set him forward, and break it from him that he
may have the less benefit thereof. And Note, that if you perceive to have the
speed A small thing will go far with good using
of him, that you be careful to preserve it till you come to the course, and
there to husband it also, till such time as you shall dispose of it for the
best profit: for prodigal running whilst a Horse is fresh, is the loss of
many a wager, and disgrace to the Horse, though the fault be in the man.

Note, that at the end of every Trayne-sent you have straw and dry clothes to
rub and chafe your horse withal, to make him as dry as the time will permit
before you begin the next sent, and that you have two or three clothes
steept in neats-foot Of ordring him at the end of every Trainesent.
or sheeps-foot oil, or such like, to chafe his legs withal, to keep them
pliable, and nimble: or if he has had a strain that you doubt an inflammation,
then dip some linen clothes in cold water and bathe his legs therewith, and
that will assuage the heat The Triars what to observe
for that present. Note, that your Tryer may be always provided of such a
Horses, as shall be able to come up to your adversary, to switch him up if at
any time be ride not fair, and without the compass of law: and that he be
always with the adverse Horse to see that they give him no comfortable thing
in his mouth, by conueying it in pretense of rubbing him about the head or
musle, or by changing his snaffle, that may be anointed with some nourishment;
nor that he have no releife, either by holding straw or clothes over him to
keep him from the wet, if it chance to rain, but only to use such things by
rubbing and dressing as the law and match does allow. And likewise Note.
to observe what state the adversaries horse is in, and how he indureth his
labor, which may be perceived, either by his countenance, or by the working of
his flanck, or by the slacking of his girths: for if his wind fail, then his
strength abateth, and his body will wax thin, so that he will not fill his
girths as 2. Pr. 11. 16.
before, and therefore if they gird him above once after he is come into the
field, or that once at the first sent, it is a good sign for you, if he be
close girt when he begins the first trainesent.

And thus much briefly for this noble sport of hunting, wherein a great deal
more might be spoken, bnt it would be too tedious for a young favorite, to
shake every branch, till he Variety hurts them more ti^l it be grounded.
have gathered the fruit of the chief arms; and therefore if any be of such a
dainty stomach that cannot feed on this mess because there is no more variety
of dishes, or that the Cook has not set it forth with such sweet sauce as
their queasie stomachs A conceited sickness is incurable.
can digest, let them repair to Mr. Markhams Cauallarice, where they may be
fully satisfied, except their stomachs be so sickly that no dainties can
content them: but then look to themselves, that they surfeit not through their
curiosity.

CHAP. 17. How to make a horse lie down at your pleasure.
Since there are so many diversities of horses dispositions as there are
particular horses, receiving their predominant quality, according to the
beneuolent or maleuolent aspect and 1. Pra. 5. n. The cause of horses different
qualities: and that one horse is better then another.
quality of the Planet that is exalted at the time of their conception; whereby
some are so bold and loving, that they will lie and take their rest freely and
voluntarily of themselves, and so are more serviceable with less Art; and
others so strange and timorous, that they will not lie down but when the
necessity of nature compels them, whereby their back and limbs are much
weakened, so that they are not able to maintain that labor and toil (without
great help of Art) that is expected; for it is upon necessity that that horse
which must endure great The necessity of lying and rest.
toil abroad, must rest freely at home, because it is a great comforter and
nourisher of his powers: Therefore I will teach you an easy and infallible way
how to bring any horse to such command as he will lie down at your pleasure.

Which thing although it has heretofore been set forth by diverse that have
written of that subject, yet I have approved of Practice brings true evidence.
them by practice, that their order is very doubtful, to bring almost any,
much less every horse to that subjection, without some inconvenience and
danger.

For, whereas some have used for the effecting hereof, to take him by the head
as he stands in the stable, and strike him with a stick upon his
fore-legges, and so to use the help of his voice, (as down sir, down, and
such like) and never to leave striking till he begin to bend in the knees, and
so to use him till through fear of the blows he kneel down, yet this is
The danger that arises hereby.
both dangerous and doubtful, for if he be a churlish and stubborn horse he
will endure many strokes, before he yield, and strive to free himself from
such correction by disorderly resistance, in regard he knows not wherefore he
is so corrected, notwithstanding all this, it is doubtful whether he will
obey till he be so sore beat upon the legs, that his sinews will be so sore
bruised, as he will be in danger of laming, by swelling or putting forth of
splints. But if he should, yet it would bring this inconvenience, that he
would be dangerous to ride into water, for if any thing should but trouble his
legs (by chance) he would be ready to lie down in the water, through fear
of his former correction.

And again, others have counseled to set him upon good How to cause him lie
by casting.
store of straw, and so tie his forelegges together, and fasten another band to
them, and cast it about his fetlocke, on his far hinde-legge, and so cast him
as they use to cast Colts when they are gelt. Which although it goes somewhat
nearer the truth then the former, yet it is not tolerable, for it brings
this inconvenience, that it will gaul a horse very sore behind under the
fetlocks, by being so often cast, as he must before The inconvenience of it.
he be brought to it, and if he be stubborn after he has been so used twice
or thrice, that so soon as he perceives what you go about, he will set his
legs so ashore, that one man shall not be able to deal with him, and then the
more violently that he is forced, the more he will seek to resist so long as
is possible.

Wherefore to prevent all these absurdities, you shall (if his standing be
large) throw good store of straw under him, (as before) then take a soft girth
and tie the one end of it about his How to make a horse lie down willingly of
himself without any danger.
far fore-legge, under his fetlocke, then with the other end tie up his foot
to the sursingle under his body, having a care that it be well wadded with
straw upon his back for pinching it, then take another girth, and cast it
twice about the narre fore-legge, under the fetlocke, for slipping up, and
holding both the buckles in your hand, set your right shoulder to his left, and
using the help of your voice, (as before also) pull his foot from the ground,
which being done, he must of necessity fall upon his knees, and being down
cherish him, and unloose the girth under his belly, (which must be tied upon a
drawknot, Note well, for here is all the doubt.
for the purpose) and let him rise with all his legs at liberty; for if he
should be suffered to rise before it be unloosed, he would feel a restraint,
and so cause him strive the more, and therefore if he chance to rise before it
be unloosed, cause him to go down again, and make what have you can to
unloose him.

Then cherish him, and leave him for an hour or two, after come to him again,
and use him in the like manner, and so four or five times a day, and by the
second day at night he will kneel down so soon as he shall but feel his
leg tied up, though he be a very stubborn horse. Which when he will do yet
let him not rest too long, for then he will think he has In every lesson there
ought to be a daily addition till he has learned it.
done what he should do, but after he will kneel down willingly, and have no
desire to bring in his hinder-parts to lie down, suffer him not to rise so
soon as he would, but keep him down (by holding the girth still in your
hand) upon his knees half a quarter of an hour (if need so require, but I
never had such need) and use the help of your voice withal in saying down,
down, and in two or three times so doing he will couch his hinder parts, and
lie down of himself, which when he is down cherish him exceedingly, and
unloose his girth, and let him lie so long as he will.

And when you have used him thus a day or two, then you need tie up his leg
no more, for so soon as he shall but feel you take up his narre leg, and
hear your voice, he will bend himself to lie down. Then to make him do it
more artificially, you shall take a stick and beat it upon the straw, and
withal use your voice, and hold the girth in your The voice must give him
notice of your mind, otherwise he will do it when his foot shall be taken up
to be shod.
hand, and so cause him to lie down, and within ten days or a fortninght at
the most (though he be never so untoward) you shall bring him to lie down so
soon as he shall but see you clap with your stick upon the straw.

But if his standing be so strait, that you have not liberty, but as you
desire to have him lie he rests against the wall, or partitions, then you
shall have him into some empty house or barn where he may have store of straw
under him, and use him as is said before.

Now the use hereof is great both for pleasure and profit, for it The use
thereof
is delightful to the beholders, to see such strong and lusty creatures made
so submissiue by Art, and it does set forth the love and mercy of God toward
man, that although these creatures have lost that voluntary obedience, which
they should Theo. 1. 2.
have yielded to him if he had stood in his first state, yet he has left
such knowledge remaining in man as to repair that decay (in some sort) to the
primary creation, by Art, so far as is necessary for the use of him, that he
might with the Prophet David ponder and say with himself, What is Man that
thou art Psalm. 8. 4.
so mindful of him: and the Son of Man that thou so regardest him? And yet
not to be proud thereof, but with true humility to give him thanks for his
Fatherly providence, in that he has not taken away that sovereign rule,
whereby these and all other creatures might have been without use (as we have
deserved,) but to acknowledge it to proceed from his love, since we have not
any thing which we have not received, for in him we live, move, and have our
being.

And again, it is very profitable for all sorts of Horses, whether What profit
it brings in service.
they be for service, hunting, running, or travailing. For if he be for
service, if he will lie down at command, it is a great ease for a man when he
is laden with his armor in getting up into the saddle; and the Horse also
will take his ease more freely, (when he rests.)

And for either hunter, or courser, it is very pertinent, for then as soon as
he has filled his belly, (at his times of feeding) and What to the Hunter and
Courser.
his bed soft shaken, you may command him to lie down, which will be a great
preserver of his back, and strength, and keep his legs nimble and warm, what
with the heat of his body, and the litter. And when he finds ease thereby,
he will take such delight, that when he is weary with lying of one side, he
will rise and lay him down on the other, which will make him more able to
endure his labor abroad.

And for the trauayling horse it will make him so domestical, that all strange
places will be alike to him, for wheresoever he What profit to the trauayling
horse.
comes, he will covet to lie down so soon as he has but slaked his
hunger, (if he may have but litter, and room) which will refresh him as much
as his meat.

CHAP. 18. How to exercise and train a Running Horse.
THe difference betwixt the exercise of a Running Horse, and a Hunter, is not
great, but only in continuance of labor, for this depends upon long and
weary toil; and that upon a quick and speedy dispatch. 2. Pra. 1.


Wherefore if you perceive (either by his making or trial) that he will not
endure any long time in sore labor, and yet find him to be of great speed,
then you must let his exercise be after such sort, as shall increase both his
speed and wind, which Idem.
would be after this manner.

First, during the time of his trayning, let his feeding, dressing, (1) 2. Pra.
9. 10. 11. 12.
watering, clothing, and his exercise on his resting days be in all respects,
and in all things, as is set down for your hunting horse; And for his days of
labor (in stead of trayning after the dogs) The days of labor for his heates.
you shall give him his heates upon some plain meadow or heath ground, that is
firm and hard, for so you shall bring him to that height of speed that Art and
Nature can effect: by reason he will stretch his body to the utmost length
(without fear or dread of stumbling or over reaching) when he feels such
smooth and hard running, and he will gather his legs so roundly, that he 2.
Pra. 4. Sure footing brings slight.
will run with so great advantage as is possible: without any such toil of
body, or fainting of courage, as would ensue if he were trained and exercised
upon deep earths, or broken swarthes, before he have a steady carriage of body,
or true know ledge how to handle his feet.

Secondly, there would be such intermission betwixt the (2) Twice a week is
sufficient for to bre^th.
days of his breathing courses, as he may have time to recover his strength
and lust, which would not be above twice in a week; for if he should be
exercised oftener, the often frequency, would make it more loathsome to his
affections, and abate his lust, and so take away delight: besides, it would
abate his 2. Pr. 15.
strength, and weaken his lims, for want of knowledge, all which ought to be
carefully preserved: which will be the better done, by seldom exercise,
(though it be sometimes the longer and sorer) if he have time to recover his
strength (again) before 2. Pra. 14. Use makes perfectness.
his next breathing course: for it will less grieve him, and cause a better
wind, then if he should be oftener exercised, and easily; in as much as often
exercise causes weakness, and gentle heates are deceiptfull, except you will
indent with your adversary, A most rediculous exception.
that he shall ^unne no faster then your Horse will go willingly, which were
most absurd.

Thirdly, have a care to the ability of your Horse, and to his (3)
knowledge or nimblenesse, and as these increase so increase his labor, for if
you exceed in them, it will cause weakness and so lameing, by
backe-sinew-beating, or ouer-reaching. Which care being had, then train him up
continually with other 2. Pra. 8. 11.
Horses, (if it be possible) that have the speed of him, whereby he will be
used to such true labor, that a sore course will not Objection.
trouble him when he shall be hardly matchep. But whereas it (d)
is objected, that sore and long labor will pull a Horse from his speed, and
decay his strength, being strained before he be 2. Pr. 4.
at his full perfection, to which since I have spoken sufficiently before, Answer.
I mean not to press much in the solution thereof, but only to set forth
their uncertain judgment in a Horses speed, What a swift running horse is.
for howsoever a horse runs off the score, he cannot be said to be a swift
running Horse, except he continue it to the last, in regard he is said to run
the best that comes first to the race head: and it is not possible that a
Horse which is used by a violent forcing to set all his powers to work at the
first, should be able to continue, but is like light thorns on fire that is but
a flash, and so consumes himself by his feirce and disorderly running, whereby
that is but a shadow of speed, which vanishes as soon Theo. 4. 20.
as that light abateth, he being used to run after such an indirect means:
whereas if that Horse be reduced to a better A whole running horse is the best
speed.
government, or an other Horse that has any natural speed, will not so soon
decrease, but will maintain his whole running without looking for ease by
sobbes, and so in the end prove the 2. Pr. 19. n.
greater speed, (though he be not so arrant swift at the first) as Theo. 32. 33.
shall hereafter be proved) in regard his wind does rake so aptly with the
body, and gather such a stout courage, that he will not 2. Pr. 5. 6.
daunt for his sore labor, but (like a hardy Soldier) ride in blood to get
the conquest and glory of the day.

Now after he can tell how to frame himself, to launch forward orderly upon
skelping earth, if sometimes you have him into the field to hunt him after the
hounds, it will be very profitable, To hunt a running horse sometimes is
profitable.
to learn him to ride upon broken swarth and deep earths, and to preserve the
senseablenesse of his mouth, in that he must ride at the command of the man as
occasion shall be offered by the dogs: yet be careful that you hunt him not
over long, but so soon as you have ridden three or four good sents, (that he
has sweat) have him home, and order him as 2. Pra. 11.
before. Note, that if you have not Horses of such speed to train him, as can
command him to ride; that then you do not therefore favor him in staying for
the other, for that will increase idleness and thick wind, in letting him
run after such an easy rate within himself, but keep him at his full rate,
and ever (now and then) let another run at him to hold him to his speed (so
far as he can) and then after him another, for that will cause him to run
with the better courage, and increase A general answer.
his desire to run still at the other Horse, when he sees he can command
them. And take this for a general answer, for any doubtful assertion that I
shall maintain in this whole Tractate, which through the strangeness may seem
paradoxes Theo. 19. 20.
unto any, that howsoever they do not rightly understand me, though in some
places my speeches might tend to either excesses, yet I presuppose the effect
thereof to the mean, because violence is the subversion of Art, for as too
much lenity brings rebellion, so too much cruelty, faintness and dullness.

CHAP. 19. Of Matching a Running Horse and clearing the doubts.
THus having trained your Horse, and approved him to have such excellency, as
you dare attempt to match him to run for a wager: you must be careful least
you give your adversary 2. Pra. 14.
any advantage against you, unless you will obstinately loose your money, and
disgrace your Horse.

And therefore, (for making the better and surer match) observe what cautions
are set forth in the making of a Hunting match, and observe the same here, for
I have there set down the chief things to be observed for such Horses as are
to try their goodness by long and sore toil, and apply them to the More
advantage to be accepted against coursers then hunters.
best advantage your judgment can minister: but because there are diverse
advantages that there I omitted, for that they are not so appertinent to those
Horses, as to these that are to dispatch upon a sudden encounter, I will here
touch them as summarily as I can, whereby you shall the better understand your
self ^ow to clear such points, as would give advantage against you, and how
the doubt of them extend.

Therefore, first observe to run such a course as is most agreeing to you
Horses disposition; for if he be hot and very speedy, The horses disposition
must be thus grounded in all matchs.
then the lightest, leauellest and hardest earths are the best: but if not so
purely composed, so that he is more slow and craving; then make your match to
run such a course, wherein are deep letches, and broken swarthes, that his
truth and toughness may recover what speed loses.

But here it is objected, that an euen-leuell course is not so Objection.
good for a hot Horse, because that he will spend himself outragiously, and so
run himself out of wind.

I answer, that it is doubtful to adventure much upon a horse Answer.
that is of such a bedlam disposition as will not be governed but after his
own appetite, for then whether it be level or descent, he will run so long
as he is able, and then if he be held any thing hard to it, he will yield
upon what ground soever, but if he run within himself, so as he is able to
command the other This is a great help.
at any time, then it may be thought that the descent of a hill will give him
the more breath, but (as I say) if the other hold him to such a rate that he
shall not be suffered to slake his speed, then he shall find small relief
thereby; for as it is a help to him, so it is to the other, and then if he
have not time to ease himself when he climbeth up the hill, his former ease
will yield him no relief at all, if the adverse horse be true: And therefore
that is but a thought indeed having no good ground, Mere suppositions are
mere simpleness.
for the true trial of this is, when there are some equality of speeds to be
compared: For although one may cast a boule further down a hill, then he can
on a level ground, yet he shall A Simile.
loose a greater advantage when he comes to cast it as far up the hill, for
then he must use his strength the oftener to cast it home, and yet the man has
more advantage in casting the boule up the hill, then the horse has in
running, for the motion does consist in the bowl, though the force come from
the man, but both the horses motion and his strength proceeds from himself.

Wherefore he that desires to run such a horse upon vpwiths and in-withs,
for the better advantage, seeks helps by greater pain; by which it is
plain, that what horse will spend Note.
himself disorderly upon level and easy grounds, will do more upon vnleuell
and strong earths, howsoever it may be alleged to the contrary.

And therefore if at any time you be to run against such A bedlam horse has
small help by descending grounds.
a horse, (knowing your own to be true, and of good speed) do not repine to
run such a course with him, for if that be all his refuge and hope, his stay
is no stronger then a reed that will break with the wind, and his hope but
Bastard-like, that will never recover inheritance, by reason there is no
descent, but there is a climbing either before or after; where he will so
choke himself with his violent and disgouerned running, that it will spend
him twice as much as the descent shall help him.

And now for waights, though a small difference brings a 2 Pra. 14. The
advantage of waights.
matter of moment in a hunting horse that must endure long time and toil
(according to the old Proverb, a lamb 2. Pr. 1. 18.
will weigh an old sheep in a long carriage) yet it brings not such
disadvantage in a running horse, that must dispatch his labor in a trice (in
respect of the other) if the difference be not too great, or the advantage
given the stronger and swifter horse, (through simpleness of judgment:) Half
a stone is no great matter for four miles if he be a strong horse.
For if the stronger horse carry half a stone, or more then the other, that is
not so very great advantage (for a four miles race) as it is thought to be;
for it may be he is more able to carry that, then the other is to carry his
weight, especially if he have any thing the better of speed, without either of
which or Wilful folly is not to be pitied.
both, whosoever will wilfully hazard himself against the Pikes of his
adversary, (by giving advantage in weight) he does not deserve to be pitied,
or to have a remedy given him for to cure his wound.

Yet because there is no man but shall sometimes be ouerreached in making a
match, I will show you how the disadvantage in waights may be mitigated, (so
far as reason and experience has led me) whereby there will be proved no
such great difference.

But first understand me, that I would not have you too forward in giving
advantage thereof, unless you know assuredly, that you have a greater
difference in the goodness of your horse; The best remedy to recover the
disadvantage of weight.
yet if by any urging occasions you are brought into this relapse, the next way
you have, is to feed strongly, and breath so soundly as is possible for the
impairing of his strength, and withal to train a stone, or a stone and a
half heavier then you are tied to run in your match, and likewise let your
horse have heavy (but yet handsome) hunting shoes all the time you train: For
the feeding home maintains strength, and sound Note the effect.
exercise causes good wind and toughness, and the continual carrying of
such an extroradinary weight, will so use him to ride with that burden, that
when he shall come to ride his match, and is disburthened of that
extraordinary weight, it will make him so light and give him such ease, that
the weight will work small advantage (for the other) in regard he will have
run his course before his strength be so far spent, as that weight shall
have power to work any hinderance.

There is also another advantage which would not be past over without some
taste, whereby you may the better judge Advantage by distance of way.
also how it is advantage or disadvantage, seeing it is not so indeed as it
shows in words: And that is to have advantage given you by a certain
distance of way, either at the beginning, or at the ending, or both. And
therefore if your Adversary knows his horse to be better then yours, and he
(to Of starting before.
work you in by cunning) offer to give you tweluescore, or a quarter of a mile
advantage, and so you to start so far before, you may be deceived therein,
if your adversary run with discretion: For it must be first presupposed that
your adversary has the greater speed, otherwise he were simple to A man's
conceit is a weak Judge.
give any advantage, and then when you start you have no directions to run
by, but only your mere conceit; which being doubtful, you may either
(through fear) spend your horse too fast at the first, not knowing how you
hold your distance; or else suffer so long (lest you should spend too fast)
that he shall come up to you, and then your advantage is lost. Whereas he has
always before his eyes the distance of way that is betwixt you and him, and so
feeling the running of his horse, he may proportionate his rate so as he sees
the part of the given distance gained answerable to the part of the race that
is run, and so he may run within himself as occasion shall afford.

There is also another advantage given, which is to start both To have the
advantage at the last is the best.
together, and to have such a distance given you, as he is to overrun you,
so many score as you shall agree upon, at the last, which is the better and
surer, for so you have not only the advantage of so much liberty, but also the
like advantage to proportionate the part of distance lost, to the quantity of
the race spent in running, (as he had before of you,) that you need spend no
more then shall be needful; whereas he running doubtful (as you before) must
run away so fast at the first, lest he should not gain that ground he
should, that his horse (except he be very tough) cannot maintain it, and then
you shall beat him in his own play.

There is yet another advantage, and that is to have advantage Advantage upon
advantage.
of such a distance of ground, both at the beginning, and at the ending, which
may well be called advantage upon advantage, for so the hindermost horse must
be kept at his full speed to recover the given ground at the first, and then to
gain so much ground again at the last, which is double advantage, besides the
disadvantage in judgment of running (as before;) and therefore be careful
how you give that advantage, except you know your horses speed and toughness,
is in proportion to the other, as six to five.

Yet there is another advantage to be given, which being rightly considered is
rather a disadvantage, and therefore may Disadvantage upon advantage.
well be called a disadvantage upon advantage, and that is to give you so much
ground at the start as shall be agreed upon, and you to keep the like
distance still at the later end, in which through the uncertain grounds, the
man has to proportionate his speed, it includes all the other inconveniences,
being directed by nothing but a slippery imagination, and so the better horse
may be shamefully beat.

And thus I have briefly set forth the several advantages with their
differences; but before I conclude, I will now prove my former assertion, that
a horse which runs hot at hand, but 2. Pr. 18. d. (m)
will not hold it, cannot be truly said to be of such speed as another horse
that is not altogether so speedy at the first, but yet durable. Euclid. 4.
Book.


For instance, take a number as 20. and divide it first into two equal parts
as 10, and 10. and let that be supposed the ^
tough or whole running course; then take the same number again and divide it
into two unequal parts, as 15. and 5. and let that be imagined the hot running
horse: Now multiply 10. by 10. and the product will be 100. then multiply 15.
by 5. and that product will arise but to 75. and yet you see that 15. and 5.
added together makes 20. as well as 10. and 10. makes 20. although the
product of that is not so great as the product of this by 25. And the reason
is, that the difference of the excess from 10. which is the mean, (being 5.)
is not multiplied equally in it self: for 5. being the multiplyer, multiply
10. by 5. and it yields 50. and multiply 5. by 5. because it is the excess,
and it produces 25. which being added to 50. makes 75. as before; but multiply
5. again by it self, and it brings 25. more, which being added to 75.
makes 100 answerable to the product of 10. and 10. so that you see, though 15
is more then 10. and has the vantage at the first, yet 5. is less then the
other 10. by the square of 5. which is the excess, and so loses that
advantage by the quantity of the square of the excess, as is demonstrated.

Even so, the whole running horse (though not altogether so Note the
Application.
speedy at the first) holds his speed from the first to the last, whereby
there is no loss, but produces the best advantage, as it does being
multiplied in it self, but the unequal or false running horse, although he
have the advantage at the first, as 15. has of 10. to the outward sense, and
so may hold it half the course, nay it may be as to 75. yet by reason that his
running tended not to the mean, but to the excess, he will loose that
advantage at the latter end, in as much as he has a less proportion of
strength and wind to maintain him at the last, and so the further he runs,
the more he setleth, as the last five does of the last 10. whereby it is
plain that long and true training does not pull a horse from his speed, but
rather increases it although he run not so violently fast at the first, 1.
Pra. 18. d.
as he did, seeing true and whole running horses are to be accounted the
swiftest horses, and do worse the other which rested to be proved.

CHAP. 20. How to cloth a running Horse.
AFter you have brought your horse to such perfection that he is fit either for
a bell-course, or that you have made a match upon him; you shall first see that
your stable be 2. Pra. 3.
dark and close for warmth, and that he may take his rest as well in the day
as the night, and look also that both the manger, rack, walls and all other
places be kept clean from cobwebbes and filth, and let him have continually
good store of litter about him, for that will make him have the greater desire
to lie when he feels ease therein, which will much increase his strength and
courage; and it will make him piss 2. Pra. 17.
more willingly, when nature shall desire, which many horses will hold (to
their hurt) if when they piss, they feel it sprinkle upon their legs: And
further, to keep the moistness and rawnesse of the earth, from ascending,
which might engender cold.

And for his clothes, whereas before (during the time of 2. Pra. 9.
his training) he had no more then an ordinary hunting horse, yet now when he
is kept for a match, he shall have more store, The profit of many clothes.
not only to keep his body in such a moderate natural heat, as shall be able
to dissolve any raw or gross humors, (if they shall abound) which would bring
some impediment to the horse, if they should be suffered, for thereby the heat
shall still be able to disperse them into the outward parts, and so expel them
away by sweatings as he sleeps, which will be a great means to purge his
body, and to keep it pure and clean; but also they will make him very agile
and nimble: for he being used to be pestred with so many clothes, when (as
Mr. Markham says) he comes to be stripped naked for to run his breathing
course, he will feel himself so light and pleasant, and feel the cool air
so pierce him, that he will desire to run with what speed and courage his
ability is able to perform.

But yet there would be a mean prescribed in this limitation, for as too few
cannot purge well, so too many will force nature 1. Pra. 9.
too much, and cause weakness and faintnes in all his powers. Wherefore for an
ordinary quantity of clothes; First, take a How to cloth a running horse
narrow piece of Cotton and cast it round about his body, to lap about his
heart, having a breast plate about the breadth of half a yard, to tie before his
breast; and next that take a clean linen sheet and cover all his body
therewith, for that will be pleasing and clean for his body, and keep him
from what annoyance might offend him by sweating, either by his foulenes, or
extraordinary warm keeping; for the heat of his body will dry it as soon as
nature cease working, and the humors euacuated: and next above it lay a
woollen blanket, or a cloth made of thick cloth, and next that a housing cloth
made of canuas, and above all another made of strong sackcloth; and let all
these be made so large as they may, to tie close upon his breast, to keep his
heart warm, for there he is in the most danger of getting cold; then gird them
round about with a sursingle, and 2. Pra. 9.
wadde him round as you did the hunting horse, and let him have no more, for
these clothes are an indifferent proportion for a temperate season, and may
be increased or diminished by your discretion, as the weather shall change hot
or cold.

Now for his dressing, let it be still after the manner of the The order in
dressing a running horse. 2. Pr. 9. 18.
hunting Horse, only whereas you use to dress him twice a day, if you dress
this but once it is no great matter; for if he should be so often stripped naked
from his clothes, he would be in the more danger of getting cold, by reason he
would be so often laid open to the peircing air: which thing to prevent also
you shall not take his clothes fully off when you dress him, but unloose them
first before and fold them down to his buttocks, (but so as those sides that
must be next his skin, be kept warm,) and dress his fore-parts, with what
speed you can, then fasten them before again, and fould up the hinder parts in
like manner up to his shoulders, and dress him behind; then cloth him up
close, and wadde him about with soft wispes, then rub and dress his head and
chafe his legs very well, and when you have done, take out his Yard, and
pick it from filth and wash it in cold water, and anoint it with Hog's Grease.

And be sure that you keep your Stable very close whilst you are in dressing
him, for a little Air will be very peircing to him when he is naked: And
therefore dress him likewise about the midst of the day, when the Sun is
at his greatest heat, to qualify the coldenesse of the Air, except it be
your breathing days, and then dress him not till he go forth to air at
night; for you must be careful you unclothe him not before he be cold.

CHAP. 21. Of Ayring.
THus having set down the general observations of his clothing and ordering
in the house (after he is matched) it rests to show you how to order him in
his ayring, watering, feeding, etc. And first for his exercise in ayring, you
must regard The end and profit of ayring.
to what end it tends, and what profit it yields. Now it tends to help
nature to expel her enemies, if at any time the body be evil affected or the
wind stopped, by too much feeding and rest.

And therefore it brings this profit, that the ayring every morning and
evening: First, it purifieth the blood and purges (1) (2)
it from gross humors, (if the air be clean and pure*) Secondly, it helps
his wind (by exercise) and learneth him to conioyne the motions thereof, to
agree reciprocally with the actions or motions of his body, by such a common,
frequent, and mediocrite practice. Thirdly, it increases lust and courage (if
he (3)
be not too early ayred. And lastly, it sharpeneth and provoke (4)
the appetite and stomach (if at any time he forsake his meat, which running
horses are much subject unto, by the excess of either too much or too little
exercise) for that the coldness of the air will drive his natural heat from
the exterior parts to the interior, to further concoction, that thereby his
meat will be sooner digested.

For the reaping of which profits (to help your horse so far No good effect
without right Application.
as this effect has power) you shall observe to apply it according to your
horses constitution both in time and manner. But for the time, whereas Mr.
Markham does counsel to air him early or late, as the state of his body
stands, as if he be fat or high of flesh, then to air him before break of
day and after twilight; but if lean or low of flesh, after Sun rise and
before Sun set: But if neither too fat nor too lean, then to air him in
the twilight, from which I am something dissenting, (though his Works I do as
much applaud as any that heretofore has written; And my reason is.

That, (in Art) whatsoever may any way hinder the strength and lust of nature
is to be avoided:

But night ayrings do hinder the strength and lust of nature: In Darij.


Ergo, night ayrings (in Art) are to be avoided.

The Mayor is plain, for that the use of Art is to no other end, then to help
toward a restitution of that estate wherewith The Mayor proved.
things were endued at the primary beginning.

The Minor is proved in diners places of this Tractate, in that Th^o 1. The
Minor proved.
the air, in the night is contrary to a Horses disposition, for he is hot and
dry, and the air then being cold penetrateth very 1. Pra. 7.
sore, (by reason of repugnancy,) and thereby abateth the lust of a h^rse (as
we may see by those Horses which run abroad all Wi^t^r) and it is then very
moist withal, in respect the shadow 2. Pra. 9.
of the earth does hinder the reflect of the Sun, that it cannot exhale the
moisture that falls, (as may be seen by the dew, and cold ^ime that falls
in the night) through which though it is thought to purify the blood yet in
reason it is otherwise, for it increases cold humors the more, which do abate
the strength The conclusion true.
of the horse, by obstructing and corrupting the blood: and so the conclusion
is grantable.

Wherefore come to your horse some half hour before Sun rising, (whether he
be fat or lean, or of what state soever) for The time of coming to your horse
in the morning.
then by such time as you have rubd his head and body, and chafed his legs,
the Sun will be risen, that so you may have him forth to air: for the Sun
being a comforter of all living creatures, will comfort and cheer his spirits,
he having a natural desire to be refreshed thereby, as is evident by such (e)
1. Pr. 11. b.
Horses as are abroad all the night, who when the Sun rises will covet to
such places, as they may stand under shelter, and have the benefit of the
Sun, to be comforted by the heat Note.
thereof, after the coldness of the night.

Therefore (as I say) have him out at that time, for then the air will be so
temperate, as it will help digestion and, nothing at all impair nature: and
though your horse be fat, yet do not think to abate his flesh the faster, by
having him early forth, for so Of a fat horse how to use him.
you shall diminish his flesh and strength, and yet his ability for labor will
be little helped: but you shall still observe the same times for his ayrings,
and keep him out so much the longer, and 2. Pr. 8. 10.
let sound heats do that by true labor and long ayrings, which early and
late ayrings should do: for it is that which causes perfect wind and
valerous courage; and therefore that Horse which is somewhat high of flesh, is
better to work on, then he A fat Horse has more substance to work on then a
lean.
that is low, because he has more strength and substance to endure labor:
whereas the other must be so fostred, and favored (in his training,) to get
strength and flesh, that he oftentimes proves pursiue and thick winded, when
he comes to be tried, (for want of true exercise, and labor.)

And likewise for the manner of ayring, whereas he wishes that you should lead
your horse in your hand and so to walk a Of the manner of Training.
foot by him whilst you are abroad, I also differ therein, (except he be a
Horse that is very clean, and has been so long trained as he has gotten a
perfect habit of a true rake, or that he has any old strain, and must be
favored for fear of renewing it, which if he have none of these, as soon as
you come 2 Pra. 20.
into the stable in the morning, (if he be risen) and have rubd him, (as is
said, for once dressing in a day will be sufficient for a running Horse, if he
be well rubd and chafed at other times, as he should) you shall take his
bridle and wash the snaffle in Beer or Ale, and bridle him up; then you shall
see that all his clothes be handsome and fast about him, then set your Saddle
upon his back, above his clothes, and gird them close under his belly with
the girths, and wad him round about the heart with handsome waddes of straw;
then take a new laid egg and break it in his mouth, and cause him swallow it
down, and so get upon his back, and ride him upon a gentle rake, up and down
such places as he may gain the best advantage Airing on horse back is better
then in hand.
both of Sun and air, and where you may have convenient watering
thereabouts, and a hill (if it be possible) to gallop up after his water, for
this manner of ayring a Horseback is far better then a foot, both for his
mouth, wind and exercise of his body.

When you have had him forth so long as you (in your discretion) think
sufficient for the state of your body, you shall have 2. Pra. 15.
him home, and use him as is set down for your hunting Horse. Note that whilst
he is abroad to air that he rake orderly both 2. Pra. 5.
with his wind and body, till he be cunning therein: and when he desires to
stand, that his wind settle to rest gently as his body does, otherwise it will
bring a contrariety, and cause a hinderance in the passage thereof, when he
shall come to be sore strained.

Note, that you fail not to exercise him thus every day both morning and
evening, but upon the day you intend to give him his breathing course, which
then you shall give him instead of his morning ayring, and then at night use
him as before. Note, that if you see the weather disposed to a thick fogge,
rain or snow, that then you forbear to air him, for then it is better he
should stand in the stable, then to go abroad, because the moistness thereof
will pearce through his pores, and so redound to some offensive grieuances.

CHAP. 22. Of his Watering.
COncerning the watering of a running horse there is a difference betwixt some
men's opinions and mine, but because I have spoken thereof heretofore, I will
but touch their opinions briefly, and refer the taking or leaving of them, as
(in their judgment) they shall find reason to persuade. Now whereas it has
been a custom to water a running Horse in the house, and to have him drink
but once a day, and likewise to put Liquoras, or such like, into the water to
help his wind, all these I do except against, and why?

For (first) watering in the house is very hurtful, for if he be any Of leting
a Horse drink in the house.
thing subject to take cold, it will be nourished by drinking cold water, (if
he be not heated after:) because that waterish humors are enemies to a horse,
and will increase unnatural superfluities: Note this Simile.
for as standing water does putrify and gather filth, so will a horse gather
much corruption, and excrementall humors by drinking cold water, if the
coldness be not mitigated by exercise, to disperse the natural heat into all
the parts of the body. And further, if he should drink at any time (in the
house) after labor, before his radical moisture has quenched The danger of
letting a horse drink and not heated after.
that excess of heat gotten by labor, the receiving of cold water suddenly
into his body, (and not having any exercise to heat the same) will so ouersway
the quantity of natural heat, that it will benumbe his body and make him
shake, and so hazard either the mortal disease of foundring in the body, or
else hinder concoction, with over raw humors, so that he cannot have good
digestion, for want of which, unwholesome crudities will engender. 1. Pra. 6. 2.
Pra. 10.


And therefore water your Horse as little as you can in the house, but let him
fetch it abroad, that you may heat it in his body by galloping, and so
preserve him from such dangers as may ensue thereby.

Secondly, if he drink but once a day, his body will be brought Whether a
running horse should drink oftener then once a day.
very dry and costiue, in that it cannot have sufficient moisture, to quench
that excess of natural heat, which will abound, if he be restrained from
drinking when the necessity of nature requires, and so that heat will get
such prodominancy of the natural moisture, that he will dry too fast the
moisture, not having a proportionated quantity to keep his body in a mean
temper A Simily.
for the nourishment of nature, and so cause an inflammation and distemperature
of the whole body, for as too much oil quenches the light of the lamp, so if
it have too little, it will consume more speedily. A running horse would be
watered as often as he is ayred.


Therefore to keep your Horse in perfect state, I wish all those that will be
counseled, to water him every evening and morning whilst he is abroad to air,
and let him drink what he lusts, so it be warmed in his body as before, for
he will not drink so much as shall harm him, for that his food must be so
perfect and clean from grossenes and dust, that it will not much provoke thirst.

Thirdly, to put Anise-seeds Liquoras or any other such Apothe 1. Pr. 7. h.
caries drugges in his water, to make him long winded, it is unnatural,
unwholesome, and yet works no sound effect, but Liquoras water is unnatural
for a horse. 1. Pra. 6.
only a conceipted illusion: For as I have said, Nature approves best of that
which is the most pleasing to her self, and to assimulate such nourishment as
will maintain the vital powers in the best estate, to give her strength to
withstand her enemies: and therefore such kind of drugs are not consonant nor
agreeing God provided grass for cattle and green herbs for the service of men.
to her being Physical, and not to be used but upon urgent necessity, for when
the body is well affected and has a good appetite, if a Horse be driven to
drink liquoras-water it will weaken nature because his stomach will not digest
it so well, nor desire to drink so much of it as of ordinary water: and so it
is Liquoras water is unwholesome.
unwholesome, in as much as it is no natural releife, being differing from his
appetite, and so changes his constitution by exalting of overmuch heat, not
taking sufficient to delay it, and by that means also his body will be made
dry, and so much the rather because such spices are hot. And whereas it is
supposed to increase wind, I grant it does so in a sinister sort, being
differing Liquora water is both a sinister help of the wind.
from this end wherefore it is ministered, for if he were to use any exercise
without any strong coaction of the body, as to neigh, play, or such like, then
it might produce some likelihood, as it does in a man that may use it to help
his wind, in singing or sounding a wind Instrument, without further action of
the body, but for strength of bodily exercise, it is more hurtful then A true
Simily.
profitable. Let a man that is dieted with such drugges to help wind (and
will not likewise use his body to true and sound labor) be to run against
one that has ordinary good feeding, and has used his body accordingly; he
shall find that he which More have lost then won by this diet*
has exercise and strong feeding, will worse the other, though he be never so
curiously dieted, by such kind of meats and drinks: although they be both at
first of an equal speed, nay there is ods that he will beat him, because his
is natural feeding, and this unnatural. Even so, by application it may be
said of horses.

Wherefore I wish to avoid such kind of drinks, if you desire to bring your
horse to his best strength and wind, and let good and sound feeding, and true
labor do that which liquoras water should do, because it will endure the
touchstone, when the other will prove counterfeit, for I have seen more that
have been so dieted loose, then ever I saw to win.

There is also curious diversities, what kind of water is best for a running
Horse, but because it is not much material (for What water is best for him.
there is not such difference in effect as in words) I will not press thereon,
for so the water be not stinking nor muddy, but either a clean standing water,
or a running spring, it is sufficient. And let him have his fill both evening
and morning, before you come in with him, for it will do him no harm, (so as
he drink not at any time whilst he is hot,) in regard a Horse that is in
strict diet, will be subject to an excess of heat, and drinking sufficiently
will be a means to cool and abate the same.

CHAP. 23. Of the food of a Running Horse.
THere are many that make a kind of superstition in feeding a running Horse,
(above a hunter:) which is rather to make it seem more curious then necessary,
for thereby they allude so much to feeding, that they take away the Art of
riding: 2. Pr. 12.
holding it to be the only means to bring him to his highest perfection both
of strength, courage, wind, and speed. But whereas they think to make the Art
more intricate, and themselves more famous, they abuse it, shows their own
Error nourishes many inconveniences.
ignorance, disgraces the Horse, and works the undoing of many good minds
that delight therein, and have no knowledge, but only rely upon such
preiudicated brains: Therefore for confirming the knowledge of the weak
iudicialls herein, let them know that there is no such curiosity in this, more
then in the other (as it is holden) for they both stand upon maintaining his
strength, wind, and speed, (which consists upon true natural feeding) only
the difference is in continuance of 2. Pr. 1. 18.
time: that for long toil, and this to dispatch suddenly; and so to have his
speed supported in the highest degree, during so short a time, which cannot be
done by a Physical diet to decay nature, but by such feeding as will increase
it.

And therefore to abandon curiosity, you shall use him, (for the first
fortnight after he is matched,) in all respects, as you did the hunting horse,
(for his kinds of meat, quantity, manner 2. Pra. 12. Idem. 11. Idem. 21.
and time of his feeding.) Only whereas I wished to give him a quantity of
prouender in the morning before his water, you shall give this nothing, except
it be a new laid egg or two, down his throat, before he go forth to be
ayred: at the end of which fortnight if you perceive that he has gotten an
able and strong body, and that the beans cause pursiuenesse, so that he
sweateth too much in his breathing courses, you shall for the last fortnight
take the beans clean away, (except he be a dainty feeder, which then you
shall use sometimes, still to stir 2. Pr. 12.
up his appetite,) and feed him with the best bread prescribed for the hunter,
very soundly; for it is very strong and of good digestion, and helps the
wind. But whereas before, you needed but to chip the bread, you shall this
fortnight cut the crusts clean away, and give them to some other horse, (for
they are hard of digestion, and will heat and dry his body too much.

And for change of meat, instead of beans and oats, you shall give him
clean oats, but let them be of the best, and Oats well dusted and washed with
whites of eggs are excellent feeding.
well dried first in the Sun, and put into a clean cloth or bag, and batte
them thoroughly with a cudgel, then fan or winnow the hulles and dust away
that is raised by beating, after take the whites of so many new laid eggs, as
you shall think good, for the quantity of Oats (as if two pecks, then half a
score or a dozen) and wash the oats therein, and dry them in the Sun again
and give them your horse, as you shall see best, for this is both a light
feeding, and most sovereign for his Of moist washed meats.
wind. And give him also oats washed in two or three whites of eggs (at a
time) and Ale beat together, for that will cool his 2. Pra. 15.
body, and keep it moist, and is also good for the wind, though some hold it a
pursiue feeding.

With these meats you shall feed him the last fortnight sometimes with one,
and sometimes with another (but let bread be 2. Pra. 12.
his chief feeding,) giving him every meal so much as he will, but only the
night before you intend to give him his breathing course, (in the morning,)
when you shall feed him more sparingly, that his stomach may be empty, lest
if you give him Note.
his heat before his meat be concocted, the excess of heat cause too sudden
digestion, and so oppress the stomach with raw crudities, and cause
sickness or loathing the meat: either of which is sufficient for the loss of
a match.

And for that fortnight also, you shall (the day before his breathing When to
musle your horse.
day) put a musle of Canuas upon his mouth, having two holes before his
nostrells, to receive wind, and let it not be too strait, but that he may
have liberty to open his mouth freely, and let it have two strings to reach to
the top of his head, and tie behind his ears, to keep him for rubbing it off.
But if he be a sore and gross feeder, (that he will ear his litter, or gnaw
the rack, or walls,) let him wear it the whole fortnight except When to
mussle a ketty feeder.
it be the night after his breathing course, which then (howsoever he is) let
him feed at his own pleasure both of hay, and bread that night, for the hay
will do him no harm, so it be sweet and clean dusted, for it will be clean
digested out of his body before the next breathing day: through which liberty
he will so fill his belly, and take his rest so kindly (not having any thing to
disquiet him) that he will be so fresh and lusty the next day, as if he had
done nothing the day before: but after you shall let him have no more hay, but
only a little which he shall pull 2. Pr. 15.
out of your hand, to cleanse his teeth after his feeding. And thus you shall
continue in all things, till the match day without altring or changing any
thing, lest likewise you alter and change his body by unacquainted and strange
food: for you shall find (by his heates) that he will make a true course
upon this feeding.

But for putting oatemeale, butter, or Anise-seeds in the bread. I hold they
may be better spared, then used, for any good or profit they yield; for though
oatemeale be strong, yet it is so Oatemeale is a solid substance and a drier.
solid, that it is not so quick of digestion, nor so sprity, as wheat, and it
is also a great drier up of blood, so that the bread will be too much costiue,
having a double proportion of dry food to that of moist, (for there will be
both it and wheat drying, and but only beans, moystni^g:) and likewise there
will be a double proportion of a densit or solid quality to one of Asper or
light, (for both it and beans are heavy, and only wheat Phisi: de materialis.
light:) through which it will be so ponderous, that it will lie Vnumquodque
enim natura, et suasponte, in suo simile gaudet.
in his stomach and not digest so soon as it would do, if wheat had the
predominant quality, (as it should indeed) because it gives more quickness
and spirit, agreeing the nearest to the horses disposition.

And for butter, I see no reason why there should be any put Butter will make
bread heavy.
in, for though it may be held soluble, yet it is an unnatural ^^ssoluter: and
besides, it will make the bread heavy and sad, and so hinder digestion (as
before) as the experience of such cakes and crusts, which have it put into them
do approve. And for 1. Pr. 6. 2. Pr. 13. 22.
Anise-seeds, I have spoken sufficiently already, working more damage by over
heating the body, and drying it, then they do good in helping the wind.

And likewise there is a pretended curiosity, in dressing the meal so often
till it be refined to the purest substance, thinking by such pure food to
bring him to his superlatiue excellency, but in this they pass the limits of
reason, in following a conceipted curiosity, rather them conducted by a
careful advise, to consider what hinderance it might bring: For herein they
stray What damage meal too fine dressed brings.
(also) out of the true path, for when the meal is so very fine dressed, there
remains nothing but the chief and pure substance, which though it may be
made very light by putting good store of barme in it, yet when it is once above
a day old, it will dry and harden extremely, (as may be seen by manchet or
fine white bread,) for that the greatest part thereof must be 2. Pra. 12.
wheat; and if oatemeale be in it, it will dry and cake the more, by reason of
its density, and aridity, whereby it will be compact so close, for want of
asperity, that the heat by reason of its lenity, Metaph. de Male
cannot exhaust the humidity, from the inner part till the utmost be first
concocted, and thereby will not be expelled so soon, not being fully digested,
and then if he have any heates by exercise, (as oftentimes it comes to
pass,) before it be excrementall, it will oppress his stomach, and through
violent concoction, breed raw crudities, and so instead of purifying the blood,
corrupt and inflame it, and thereby distemper his body, A surfeit by bread is
dangerous.
and bring a surfeit, and then (as in a man, so in a Horse) a surfeit taken by
bread is most dangerous: and further, it will cloy his stomach, and take away
his appetite. And it will be so much the worse to digest, because the quality
of wheat and oatemeale is siccans or drying, so that it will be of such durity
and hardness, (being dry for want of humidity to mollify it) that it will not
so easily be expoliated: And therefore no maruayle, though running horses are
so much subject to such aridity and dryness in their bodies, when they are fed
with such hot and drying food, and also restrained from water when nature
desires 1. Pra. 6. 2. Pra. 22.
for to quench thirst provoked by heat.

Wherefore (as I say) let your bread be but only beans and wheat, not being
ground nor dressed too fine nor course, but Note.
so as it shall neither have so much bran as to putrify the blood, not so
little as to make it too solid, but that it may have such asperity and
subtiley, as the heat may distill into all the parts to give it quicker
digestion.

But because heat is the Vigetatiue organ for nutrition, therefore Wheat does
help to quicken the vital powers. 2. Pra. 12.
it must have a predomination over the moisture, or else they will not
fructify nor grow to pure perfection (as may be seen by the difference
betwixt winter and Summer,) therefore in regard wheat is hot, and so a help
to quicken and stir up the vital spirits and courage, (being the purest and
cleanest food,) let the greater part be wheat: and for that bran which is in
the bread (so it be not much) will do more good in scowring the maw, and
furthering digestion, then harm, by corrupting the blood, and stirring up
inflammation.

CHAP. 24. How to use a Horse after he is matched, in his breathing courses.
I Having heretofore spoken of the time and manner how to train a running
Horse in his breathing courses, to bring him to his state of body and truth of
wind, therefore I will but bre^fly touch some things that may give further
light for the perfecting of the same.

Wherefore let the times and manner of his breathings be still used as you did
in trayning, before he was matched, yet not upon the same grounds, but let him
be had to some place where 2. Pra. 18.
he may stand near to the latter end of that race he is to run his mateh
upon; that so you may exercise him sometimes thereon, both to bring him
acquainted therewith, and also that he may know his standing, to stir up
his desire, in running toward Too much frequency of any thing will cause
rebellion.
his Stable. And yet I would not have him breathed continually upon the course,
for that will cause a bedlam kind of running: but sometimes upon some spacious
and pleasing grounds, not only to keep him in subjection to your motions, but
also to give him as long and sore a course, as you shall think needful to
keep him in perfect strength and purity of wind; Note.
for if he be put to no further labor then the length of the race, (during
that month) that small exercise will increase pursiuenesse, except he be
scanted of his meat, which by 2. Pra. 21.
any means I would not wish. And when you breathe him, if it be possible,
have some horses upon the course, to set upon him, to quicken and revive his
courage, but let him not have a sound bloody course indeed, not of a fortnight
or 2. Pra. 15.
ten days at the lest before the match day; and give him his last heat
(before the match) in his clothes, and run it merely The last course in his
clothes and why?
over, for that clogging and unweildy running in his clothes, will be so
troublesome to him, that when he shall come to be stripped naked to run for the
match, he will feel himself so light and nimble, that he will seem to fly,
and so much the more being held to that, which he was able to perform in his
burdensome clothes.

And likewise, let your horse be led sometimes over the race, How to lead him
to the race.
when you breath him, to make him the better acquainted therewith (against the
match day:) And lead him very easily and gently, letting him stand dung, either
by whistling or letting him smell upon other dung, for if it be mares dung, it
will make him piss (if he be stoned;) and if horse-dung, it it will cause him
dung: But if he has not staled of all the way as he is led, when you come to
the place of start, unloose his How to use him at the starting place.
wispes and straw them upon the ground, under his belly, and piss your self
thereon, which will provoke him to piss the sooner: which when he has done,
untie his clothes before, 2. Pr. 16.
and thrust them behind the saddle, and mount your self therein, seating your
self as I have shown before; then let one strip the clothes from his buttocks
and carry them to the race head, that they may be ready to cast over him when
he has done his course, and your self start him forward gently, till you
feel his wind rakte, and after run courageously.

And when you are come to the end of his course, hanke him up gently, bring him
back again to the staff, and after you How to use him after his course.
have let him pause there a little, (to let him know the end of his labor,)
gallop him back again to meet his clothes (if they be not come) and throw
them presently upon him, and gird them fast with the sur-single, and so tide
him home after you 2. Pr. 11.
have somewhat cooled him, to the stable, where he shall be presently set up,
letting him be rubd, chafed, and used in all things as is said, only let him
have no hay in his rack, nor give him any thing to eat till he be cold, that
his bridle be drawn and you have given him a quantity of Rye bread to cool his
body, which shall be given him in stead of wheat ears, because they will dry
his body too much, it being before heated with the 2. Pr. 11. 12. and 23.
violence of his labor; and you may (if you please, or need require) give him
a mash every week once, till the last fortnight, after his breathing course;
and after feed him (as is preseribed) according to your own discretion.

CHAP. 25. How to judge of the state of a Horses body.
BEcause no man can tell how to work truly, upon any subject, except he have
a judicial and good ground; and that no horseman can tell how to bring his
horse to his best actions, and keep him in health, except he have judgment in
the state of his body, thereby to square all his proceedings Theo. 30.
Therefore I will give you some light how to have the surer judgment thereof,
to pierce the thick mist that might seem to infect it by the contrary
surmising breathings of such as are swallowed in the gulf of conceit, being
driven therein by the waves of their ouerflowing opinions. For there are many
of this rank, so soon as they come into the stable, and do but feel upon
the outward parts, (as the ribbe, flancke and ^aw, Rash judgment reproved.
will in a rash judgment give verdict upon the state of a horses body, and so
assume to themselves more firm knowledge, thereupon, then he that has both
the feeding and training him.

But how deceiptfull the evidence is that is given by the mere tactiue senses,
is briefly touched already, for the ta^^able 2. Pr. 7.
sense can give no further evidence, then only of the outward superficies; for
no quality of the senses can go but to the surface of any thing, and therefore
cannot show the disposition of his inward state.

Wherefore: when you your self have the whole managing of Theo. 7.
the horse, and know that you do nothing without reasonable consultation,
assure your self that your Judgment will weigh How to know his state of body.
2. Pra. 18. and 24.
against a thousand other: Which that you may have the better ground, examine
your self whether you have proceeded truly in his training, and so, whether
you find him to have strength and lust to perform his breathing courses, and
whether you have fed him full and home as you should; likewise whether you have
not abated his strength by too great toil, 2. Pr. 12. 15. 23. and 24.
or increased pursiuenesse by too little; which things are the true grounds
(being examined by reason) and yet they are hid from many that may come into
the stable, (as strangers) you only having evidence by action.

But yet understand me so, as not utterly to condemn the former Characters,
for they are true sometimes, though not always, One thing does not prove
another reciprocally, except they be contradictories.
and so no sure proof of his estate but a sign thereof, for he may feel
clean in those places, and yet not clean otherwise within; but if he be
clean within, then it does necessarily follow he will be clean there, for
the gross fat and glut may be dissolved from the outward parts, by gentle
breathings and warm clothing, or by a spare and scant feeding, which are
deceitful; but then when he shall come to be tried indeed, he will be so
pursiue and thick winded, that he cannot maintain and hold his speed, for
want of true labor; and so the manner of clensing is known to your self but
hid from them: and so they may be deceived, for though he feel clean, yet
they cannot tell how he was cleansed.

And in like manner the dung, being simply respected, may The dung is a
meritrix, as the urine of a man is.
be said to be a Meritrix, for the knowledge of the state of his body, as well
as the water of a man, to know his state of body by, for it will alter
according to his diet, and as he feeds much or little, or by the alteration
of the air, and yet continue in good state of body; for I have seen it alter
upon the alteration of weather, which being temperate, he being in good state,
has also dunged very good, but the air changing from that disposition, his
dung has also changed to be It is the nature of heat to shrink from cold, and
so contra, whether of them is predominant.
dry and hard, and yet no change of meat, nor exercise in the interim, nor
change of countenance, to show any male-affect in the body, which made me judge
the cause to be in the coldness of the air, that did imprison his natural
heat within him, and so dried and made his body costiue. And further, I have
seen a horse, that when he was led for his course which has dunged so hard,
that all the field has past a definitive judgment against him, and yet he
has returned conqueror, though he was thought ouer-hard matched, and a man may
be bound in his body, but feel no impediment thereby. Wherefore if your horse
chance to be bound, if you know it is not upon any doubtful cause, and that he
has not been long so, or that his Of two evils the least is to be chosen.
countenance is not cast down, or his belly not shrunk up in the wast, yet
he may make a good course, for of the two it is better he should be hard then
soft, and therefore as it is, so it is doubtful to be judged of.

But if his body be laxatiue and his dung soft, then it is an infallible Soft
dung argues weakness.
sign of weakness, because nature is hindered by purging, (howsoever others
hold,) and therefore whether the cause thereof be known or unknown to you;
it will soon weaken, and therefore prevent it (so soon as is possible) as an
enemy to nature. And also if it be greasy and slimy after his heat, it is a
sign of foulenes; and here it brings into my mind to answer a doubt, which I
heard opposed betwixt two, and Objection.
the question was, because that a horses dung is greasy after his heat,
whether there were any fat growing on the inside where the excrements are or
no? To which I answer briefly, no; for Answer.
if it were so, the expulsive part could not have force to expel the
excrements, because they would be hindered from passage, by the roughness of
the knots, and thereby retained so long therein, as it would burn and scald
the body: and when the horse were fat he could not avoid his excrements at
all, by reason it would grow so much as it would stop the passage, and so cause
an utter subversion. Objection.


And again, it was objected if it were so, how comes that glut into the
inner part which auoydes amongst the excrements? Answer.
I answer, that as nature has given an attractiue faculty to disperse the
nutriment of the food, from the retentiue part, into every part of the body, to
nourish and maintain the same, passing through the arteries, veins and pores,
even so likewise has it given an expulsive faculty, to expel from every part
any excrement, that might offend or hurt it (by the same means) and so that
fat when it is dissolved, is but an excrement which nature expels by those
organes in that place, to be expelled with the other excrements, lest it
should destroy Grease remaining about the heart after it is dissolved, is
mortal.
the whole subject; and therefore if any remain dissolved more then nature can
expel, it cloyeth the heart and stomach, and so becomes mortal, except it
be remedied by a new dissolution, and purged by scowrings, which then is
needful for the helping of nature being oppressed.

But for the color of dung, after the horse be once clean, it is The color
of his dung is deceitful.
also deceiptfull, for it may be black or tawny, by too long keeping in the
body, (the horse not having always a like appetite) and yet not much hurtful
to him; and again, (before he be clean) he may have his dung of a perfect
color, not being exercised truly to heat it, and also by scowrings or such
kind of feeding as many use, which then is like but a counterfeit piece gilt
over: but if you have all these Characters in the best, and your own practice
tells you they are true, then you may affirm, his body is of as perfect
state as Art and Nature can perform.

CHAP. 26. Of the necessity and use of Sweating.
THere is no means so available and necessary to purge a horse, from such
gross humors as are engendered by feeding, What Sweating is.
as sweating is; for it is nothing but a superfluous moist excrement left in
the flesh and other parts, (after concoction) and is the faculty of action, for
heat being stirred up by the percution of motion, does expel it (after it is
dissolved) from the Meta; de continentibus.
heart and inward parts.

Wherefore it being an excrement of gross humors, that arises of nutrition,
there is no Horse but must be purged from the same, if there be any regard of
health, or abillity of body for labor: in regard, that what feeding soever a
horse has (though The groser the food is themore it will cause the horse to
sweat.
never so pure, much more being gross) but after concoction there will recide
a quantity of this excrement (according to the quality of the food, and the
horse) which must be dissolved by heat, and expulsed from the inward parts, and
so distild through the pores of the skin, to euacuate it by sweating, or else
it will corrupt the blood, and break out into ma^gy-scabbs, and such The
purity of the heart causes agility.
like, because nature desires to keep the heart free (so long as she is able)
from such infection, that it might dwell in a pure and clean palace, it being
the Prince of the vital powers.

And further, if they be not expulsed by heat of exercise, they will cause a
sad melancholy to rule in him, that he will be so vnlistfull and pursiue, that
a small labor will so heat him within, as it will overcome and faint the
heart, and so cause yielding, his body being made so gross by them, as it has
no such tenuity either to euacuate them or that the air (by his rarity) cannot
penetrate sufficiently to delay that excess of heat, as may be seen by those
horses that have run at grass without exercise.

Wherefore seeing sweates bring such benefit and profit, let Sweats are
profitable in their true use.
them be used so as they may produce the best effect, for the better knowledge
hereof, they are given to a Horse, three manner of ways.

The first and best is to give him his sweat abroad without (1) The best way to
give a sweat.
his clothes, as your breathing courses; for it is given by action both of
wind and body, and is most natural, because the heat proceeds first from
the vital parts within, and so does drive those humors, which are dissolved,
to the outward parts which is distilled through the pores of the skin, and so
abateth that superfluity.

The secondly way is to give him his heat also abroad, but (2) The second way
to cause a sweat
then it must be in his clothes, which is not so kindly and natural, for
where the other had the heat beginning first from within, this is more
violent, because the thickenesse of his clothes adjoined to his exercise
forces the heat more outwardly, and so abateth his strength the more, and yet
does not bring him to such purity of wind as the former, because it has not
the like exercise, nor the humors is not so naturally expeld from the vital
parts.

Now the last is the worst of all, which is to give him a sweat (3) The third
and worst way to cause a sweat.
in the house, by heating clothes and loading him therewith till he be forced
to sweat without any motion, Now (as I say) this is the most unnatural and
worst, being altogether violent, for it is provoked only from the outward
parts, (having its beginning there) by the heat of fire, and of the clothes
that are heated therewith, which casts the Horse into such extremity of
Sweating in the house as ill as a stoue.
heat, that it (as it were) smothereth his vital spirits, and weakneth him as
if it were a stoue: whereby it does far more hurt, then any way good.

Wherefore, if through the unseasonableness of the weather you cannot give
your horse such a heat near unto your race, as you would, rather then you use
either of these violent sweats, go half a dozen miles to seek a place where
you may breathe him, which though it be but half a mile, yet it may be
enlarged by often doubling, which will work far better effect then either A
slender natural heat is better then sweating by clothes.
of the other, for you dwell in a very unfit place if there be not such a plot
in that distance, either of dead fog or sandy way to yield you that releife.

But if your horse be an old strained horse, yet recovered again, but so as you
dare not heat him when the weather is hard (by frosts) for renewing it,
whereby you are in danger of loosing the wager, then you may make a virtue of
necessity (although I would not wish any man to be too confident in lame
Horses,) and give him his heat abroad in his clothes first, by galloping him
till he be in a full sweat, which when he is, have him presently home, and
straw good store of litter under him, and lay more clothes upon him, then
stuff him round with great wisps round about his heart and before his breast,
and so keep him stirring to and fro for half an hour, having a cloth to wipe
the sweat from his face and neck, as it arises: and when he has sweat
sufficiently, abate his clothes by little and little, till he come to his
ordinary clothing, then rub him and use him as after his breathing courses,
and let the first drink he drinks be a warm to mash, for that will cause
the gross humors that are dissolved purge away with his dung, and it will also
comfort him after that peircing sweat, but in any case I would not wish you
should give him this kind of sweat after the last fortnight, for it will
weaken him so much, as that will be time little enough to recover himself; But
for the last manner of sweating I will spend no time about it, because I would
not wish any to use it, for that horse which is so lame that he will not endure
to gallop in his clothes till he sweat, is not fit for any man to hazard money
on, except he have so much he cares not what becomes of it.

CHAP. 27. The applying of Scowrings to a running Horse.
IN regard I have spoken sufficiently of the abuses and inconueinences of
needles Scowrings, (where I entreated of the hunting Horse) and likewise have
set down those which I have found 2. Pr. 13.
(by experience) to be most auayleable to cleanse him from such glut or grease
that might be caused by gross feeding or excess of labor, I will not here
recapitulate them again, but only show how those may be applied (in like
manner) to the Courser.

Wherefore understand, that (in this (as well as in the other) if you give him
his natural feeding, with true riding, and also 2. Pr. 22. 15. 18. 23. 13.
have care to use him orderly after his heates, and to keep his body from
distemperature by drugges or spices, then he will be the less needful of
Scowrings.

But yet if you perceive by any of the before said characters, that his body is
foul, costiue, or evil affected, and that you conceive Idem. 15.
Nature is not able (of herself) to overcome the same, but that they still
continue and increase: then for the preventing of a further mischief, you may
give him such a Scowring as the necessity of the cause requires. Therefore, if
it be only The application of scowrings.
the binding in the body: then you may give him that Scowring of Rye crummes
and butter: and likewise if you perceive that the cause arises from some glut
that was dissolved, but not expelled, 2. Pra. 18. Idem. 25.
then you shall give him another heat to dissolve it anew, and give him an
ounce of Diapente brewd in a quart of Ale, warm: but if it be a cold, then
give him two mornings together half an ounce of Diapente, brewed in a pint of
Mallago-Sacke, each morning warm, or if he be low of flesh, and a small
feeder, you may (if you please) give him a ball, (the quantity of your fist) of
that past there prescribed: dissoluing it into 2. Pra. 18.
his water. Any of which you shall apply to your Horse the next morning after
his breathing course fasting, and after use him in all respects as is there set
down. But give it him so as he may have two whole days to feed and rest, to
recover his strength before the next breathing day.

Many other scowrings I might set down, that are in use amongst good Horsemen,
and I my self have also used, but because Many other scowrings good which are
nor here expressed.
I would not have you use any but upon necessity, and that I will not trouble
you with such varieties (although many of them are good) I have contented my
self with these few, having found them of sufficient operation: referring them
to Master Markhams first treatise, and his Cauallarice, which delight in
varieties.

Or, if any be so curious, as to think that Nature is not provident enough;
for preserving of health without their assistance, thinking by drugges, and
drenches, to prevent sickness, before there be any appearance of it, let them
repair to Master Morgans Morgan. 41. 58. 59. 60 61, and 62. ca.
works, where they may have such varieties, as they shall never need to be
out of Action, for preventing of diseases from the time of their foaling till
they be dead, but by such means they shall find by experience, that in
shunning of Silla they will fall into Charibdis, for in seeking to prevent one
mischief that is doubtful or long in conceiving, they will cause many more
certain and sooner, by diuerting his body from its natural constitution, in
hindering Nature with such Physical potions.

CHAP. 28. General Rules to be noted before you run.
YOur last fortnight being expired, and the appointed time come, wherein you
are to try the event of your success; you shall some two days before the race
day, wash his mane and tail very clean with warm water and soap, and plate
them in small plates, against the race day; and the day before the race, let
your horse be shod (that he be not disquieted in the morning before he run,
and that he may be the better acquainted with them before the race,) but let
them be such shoes as shall be best agreeing to the race; which if it be a
How to shoe your Horse for a race.
soft moore or swarth, let them be but thin plates, or half shoes (like a
half Moon) but if it be hard and grauelly, let them be whole shoes, but
yet so light as is possible; to have strength to support his body: and see you
give him his full feeding that day till night, which when after he is come
from ayring, after you have rubd his legs well, you shall annoint them with
Sheepes-foot oil, Linseed-oyle What Oils are best to supple his legs.
or Whale-oyle, and give him an indifferent supper of bread, but no more that
night, and the next morning have him out to air somewhat earlier, then you
were accustomed, that he may empty his body of that which is digested, and to
refresh 2. Pra. 21.
his spirits, then after he is come in, give him a little quantity more, the
value of a two penny wheaten loaf, steeping it in Ale or Beer, for as if he
be too full, it will hinder and endanger his wind, so if he be too long
fasting and empty, his stomach will be oppressed with moistness and so cause
faintness in his labor; which after he has eaten musle him, and shake up
his litter and shut your stable close, letting him take his rest till the time
come that he is to be led into the field.

At which time after he is dressed, and his legs well chaft, take How to
prepare your horse for the field.
his Saddle and pitch the pannell and girths with shoomakers wax, to prevent
all dangers by the looseness, having a care that the stirrops be fit for you,
and the bridle for his head, then take a clean linen sheet, and lay it
handsomely next his body (for neatness) then lay on the rest of his clothes,
and fasten 2. Pra. 20.
them on with the sursingle, and wadde him round as before; and if you have not
a cloth for the purpose, take a covering and throw above all, for decentnesse,
and make it fast before his breast and under his belly: Then vnplate his mane
and tail and frisle them, for that will be a great beauty to him; then give
2. Pra. 24.
him a mouthfull or two of bread and Ale again, and so lead him to the course
with all gentleness, ever provoking him to empty his body so much as you can.

Then, when you are come to the place of start, rub his legs very well, and
use him in all things as you did the hunter: Then 2. Pr. 16.
having a bottle of Ale or Beer, take some in your mouth, and spirt some into
his mouth, and nostrills, for that will make him cheerful, and strike into
his head to make him sneese, and open his pipes for receipt of wind: And if
you have any Vinegar in the field, throw some upon his coddes, (if he be
stoned) for that will cool them, and make him gather them into his body, then
put back his clothes and mount your self, and set Eadem.
forward (as is said) performing your Course with judgment and discretion.

CHAP. 29. The Epilogue.
THus gentle Reader, I have at last finished the plantation of this Vineyard of
Horsemanshippe, wherein I have taken the greater pains, so to pare and dress
it, that the weeds should not grow therein, to choke those impes that are
nourished in it, and to pluck up those which had so ouer-growne it, that there
could be no tract found to give delight to such as desire to walk and
recreate themselves in that pleasant grove: And for thy good, I have made that
common which might have withered in the grave, being at the first selected to
my self for my own private meditation.

In which Tractate, as thou may see the cause of all restiffe qualities (that
are found in any horse) is disobedience, and the 1. Pra. 26.
cause of that was man's transgression at the beginning, and so they would have
been altogether without use if there were Theo. 1.
not some means of restitution to their primary estate by Art: the desire of
which, was the cause that this Art was invented: Theo. 26. Theo. 3. Pr. 29. 30.
31. 32. 33. Theo. 8. 2. Pr. 7.
And the cause of the intricatenesse of this Art, is ignorance, wherewith all
man was also invested that the first, which did so obscure his knowledge, that
he could not see how to work directly by gentleness, but sought indirect means
by violence, and the cause of that is because man is led after his own will,
which works according as the exterior senses do give evidence by the
exterior parts.

And also, that the cause of reducing a horse to his best obedience, is the
reforming of man's corrupt qualities, by subjecting Theo. 8. and 9. Theo. 30.
31. 32. 33. 34. Et multis alijs.
his will and all his passions to be governed by reason, to make the whole
horse agree (both in action and motion) together in his interior and exterior
parts, being governed by the man, that both man and horse may be said to be
but one body, because the man is a reasonable creature, and has the government
of the horse, and the faculty of discipline to bring a reciprocal concord.

All which I have endeavored to explain as methodically and as plainly as I
can, for I confess that my imperfections are so great (for wit, learning and
wririting) that I am far unable to discharge and perform such an intricate
enterprise, as my good intension has undertaken; yet I had rather utter my
barbarous A good intension excuses Barbarism.
rudeness to lay open the abuses thereof, then with a fearful silence to have
the truth defaced; wherein though sometimes I may miss the mark, yet I have
not shot so far as to be condemned of detestable error.

Therefore I desire thee (learned and judicious Reader) that if I have past any
thing obscurely, that may seem doubtful unto Nature has not given excellency
in all things to one man.
the weak and simple Reader, (through the harshnesse of method, (for I
oftentimes conceited more then I could well utter) to assist him with thy
understanding and knowledge, least being in doubt, he take the wrong path, and
wander out of the way.

But for Calumnies which wound and diminish others fame, by words, and strikes
and peirces through other men's works, by the all peircing darts of their
venomous tongues, I ask neither aid nor favor of such a filthy and pernicious
sect, which cannot be avoided.

Of the which Viperous kind, Iustus Lipsius has very worthily painted out,
whereby they may be discerned in their colors; Iustus Lips. de oratione calum.
for he holds them filthy and loathsome, filthy in that they are base, idle,
and prattling, and so loathsome having the name of filthiness; base for that no
generous and good spirit has ever How Calumnies are said to be base.
been stained with that spot, but only sad and malign natures that envy
others and distrust themselves: and so like little dogs bark at guestes,
which free minds commanded entertainment.

Secondly, they are idle, for no man has leisure to enter into How they are
said to be idle.
other men's affairs, that has employment of his own business: but for want
of that, all their whole employments are in walking and talking, so that no
report of any man can stand before them unblemished or vnslandered, but what
should I repine at these, seeing neither King nor Counsel can be free from their
idle brains: for whatsoever is done by them either public or private, is by
these censured and scourged.

And lastly, they are pratlers, for as they speak much, so they speak much
evil: and all their talk is not only of some body, How they are pratlers.
but against some body; mingling things true and certain, with things vain
and uncertain, for they being ignorant busy themselves with those things, to
whose height their sense and understanding cannot reach.

Now this Sect must needs be wicked and prodigious, seeing they are begotten by
such viperous monsters: for Lying and The Parents of Calumniators.
Envy are their Parents, and Curiosity their Nurse; for Lying aspires and
animates Calumny, without which it languisheth; Lying their father.
for what Backbiter was there ever that contented himself with the truth, in
regard that so he has no power to hurt, for so he should fail of his
purposed end: and therefore that they may wound the sorer, they will not stick
to add, and attract others fame, so that if there be any doubtful speech or
sentence, they will choose the worst sense; and therefore as the Physicians say
of their cupping glasses, that they draw out nothing but impure blood: so I may
truly say of a slanderer, that he neither attracts A Simile.
nor receives any thing into him that is not evil.

And again, Envy is their mother, who in the malignant womb of her wit
conceiues and brings forth those impious infants; Envy their mother.
for they never seek to defame mean and simple people, but such as they see
eminent in some extraordinary virtue or quality; or in some other thing worthy
of admiration.

And lastly, Curiosity is their Nurse, for if it did not nourish them, they
would have nothing to live on, for through these Curiosity their their Nurse.
curious inquisitions they are never at home but always ranging abroad, asking
what news of this man? what estate has that man? what credit or virtues has
such a one? And so they curiously desire to pry into all men's affairs,
altogether seeking their infamy by their opprobrious speeches.

Many other detestable qualities does he repeat of this degenerated sect,
which I omit for breuity; only these have I summarily collected, to give
approbation for the detecting of their malicious and envious hearts, for though
they speak friendly to a man's face, yet so soon as he is departed, will
speak any thing that may work his disgrace and overthrow; who are branded
with all devilish devises, which being laid open to the World, may be the
better known by their proper marks, when they shall envy any thing that may
bring a future good to them that shall afterward succeed.

Seen: Quae decipiunt, nihil habent solidi, tenue est mendacium prolucet si
inspexeris. FINIS.
The Table of the Third Book.
CHAP. Fol. 1 HOw to choose a hunting horse. 1 2 The Authors Apology. 5 3 The
order of a good stable. 7 4 Of trayning a young Colt to hunting. 10 5 How to
bring your Colt to a true Rake. 13 6 Of galloping. 16 7 What pace is best for
these sorts of horses. 18 8 At what age a Colt should be put to sore labor. 26
9 Of the first taking up of a hunting horse. 31 10 Of dressing, and inseaming
him. 34 11 Of his exercise in hunting. 38 12 Of the manner of his food, and
time of feeding. 42 13 Of Scowrings, and their uses. 46 14 How to make a
hunting match. 51 15 How to order your horse for a hunting match. 56 16
Observations in running. 59 17 How to make a Horse lie down at your pleasure.
62 18 How to exercise, and train a running horse. 66 19 Of matching a running
horse* and clearing the doubts. 69 20 How to cloth a running horse. 74 21 Of
Ayring. 77 22 Of his watring. 80 23 The food for a running horse. 83 24 How to
use a horse in his brething courses after he be matched. 87 25 How to judge of
the state of a horses body. 89 26 Of the necessity and use of Scowrings. 92 27
How to apply Sweatings to a running horse. 95 28 General rules to be noted
before you run. 97 29 The Epilogue. 98

FINIS.
CVRES FOR THE DISeases in Horses.
CHAP. 1. How the true knowledge of Curing diseases is intricate.
IT has been a custom amongst all those that have written of this subject,
to set forth the diseases of Horses and their cures in the latter end of their
works, to the end that they might A horseman should as well learn to cure as to
ride.
have a remedy for any disease that shall happen: because he is not holden a
Horseman that shall be defecti^e in part of the Art. Wherefore because I would
not have this book to be accounted maimed (in wanting a chief member) I will
observe the like order and set forth such receipts as I have found either by
experience, or the best probability to be good: for in regard there are many
diseases that my lives practice (not dealing with any cures, but in my own
hands) has not had occasion to approve, Men must yield to authority in things
that transends their knowledge.
I cannot truly auerre that all these receipts are infallible; therefore I
will yield to the authority of worthy Master Markeham, who has merited most
worthily for his d^ligent collections herein: because I wiill not oppose
against any thing, but what I can defend by experience, or reason.

And because many things which others have set forth for curing* are not
wholely their own, but borrowed from diverse Authors, it shall not grieve me to
tread in another man's steps, seeing I cannot trace it of my self, rather then
the gentle Reader shall be destitute of all relief, when he shall have need;
in regard this book may come into such men's hands as have no other: Not
weighing the tongues of Backebiters, that will say I write nothing of mine own
(in this part) for I grant, I which have no such plentiful vein (in this
knowledge) will not stick to dig other men's mines, and to borrow of their
treasures* so Too many of ^his rank.
that I may thereby profit the good of any: for it is better if ^ man feel a
want to confess it, then like blind Biard to launch so boldly forward in
unknown meadows till they be plunged in the mire of their own ignorance: in
desiring to be esteemed more excellent. This Science abused by prating Leaches.


For there are too many of unskillful Leaches, that will assume to have such
knowledge in curing, and in the causes of diseases, and natures of simples, as
shall parallel the best experienced Farrier; and yet can give no good account of
the quantity of the one nor operation of the other, for if they can but talk
of the four elements, and that the fire is hot and dry, and the air hot and
moist, etc. though they be altogether ignorant how to make application* they
think their words shall give an approbation of their profound judgment, and
that their knowledge does reach beyond the Moon, and must be credited
whatsoever shameless and false reports they utter in the commendations of
their own skill; for I have heard them that have not been ashamed A shameful
and rediculous lie.
to say, that he has taken out a Horses heart, and washed it, and put it in
again, and so has cleansed it from such corruption as troubled him, and cured
him, which wrought a great admiration to many of the hearers, and was partly
credited. But there are too-too many of these dog-leaches which blind the eyes
of weak and simple judgments, and make them believe their words are Oracles,
and though they kill many, if they cure any, those any, must cloak their
ignorance in killing many.

Now besides killing by medicines, they also lame by their Many horses lamed by
these absurd Leaches.
tirannous Surgery, or else if they cure, they oftentimes make such an
eyesore as it is a great blemish to the Horse so long as he lives, for they
lame either by applying salues and oils improperly, in using hot oils or hot
pultresse unto a limb where is most sinews, and veins, and thereby causes
inflammation, and so apostumation, whereby they loose the use thereof by
launching and cutting after it is putrified, or else by burning and searing
with hot irons, and so seares and shrinkes up the sinews, that he loses the
use of that member: or if it be in Burning and searing is no true cu^e.
a fleshy part, then they will scarifie and cut it so cruelly* or (if it be
fistulated) cut clean away the flesh so unnaturally, as it would pity a Jews
heart to see how these good creatures are tormented, which gross cures bring a
disgraceful blemish, either by knotting, want of hair where it was burned, or
want of flesh to fill up that empty place, where it was cut away.

But is it no maruayle though they commit such gross errors, since they have no
other judgment, then custom (the nurse of ignorance) has endued them
withal, being led by imitation Custom is a deceiptfull teacher.
of their teachers; not having any true natural knowledge in the Horses
disposition, neither in the quality of the disease, nor the cause thereof, no
nor the natural operation of those simples they infuse, to make either drink
or salve or ointment, more The cause of these errors.
then they read, giving credit to that without examining of it by due
consideration, or though they read yet do not understand, but presumes to
practice not knowing how to give a proportion according to the operative
quallity of the medicine, or nature of the horse; and thereby if they fail,
they cloak their ignorance, Theo. 3.
with that he was so far spent, that he was incurable before he came to their
hands.

But howsoever these may deaf the ears, (by sounding the alarm of their own
conceits) of such as have no judgment in a true march; yet for the great love
and affection that I A charitable wish.
carry to these so serviceable and worthy creatures, I wish that they were
either musterd out of this land to minister their tyranny upon their enemies;
or that they would blow the coals of their dark knowledge, with the bellows
of affection, to warm and light their judgment, that the thick mist of
ignorance might be exhausted, and so see their own error: for then they would
see that to be a good Farrier desires more time, To be a skillful Farrier is
hard.
pain and knowledge, (then is judged) for finding the causes, the qualities,
and to incorporate the things proportionably: which things are as needful to
be known for the right cure of a horse, as for a man.

Wherefore seeing this knowledge is so intricate, if I should detect, and lay
open the abuses in particular, and to show the causes of all sickness and
diseases, both natural and accidental, with their approved cures, I should be
caught in such a Labyrinth as no Ariadne's thread could wind me out: For
though I am not altogether ignorant in some natural causes, nor how to give
proportion of compounds, yet in regard I have Farriers should have kn^wledge in
the nature of simples.
not that knowledge in the true nature of simples, as they should have that are
professors therein, I will not insist much hereupon, but summarily set down
such receipts as I have orally received, from Master Markeham and other
approved good Farriers, which in my own particular practice I have found good
and uncontrollable, but above all, I will here insert a little Tract written by
that famous and renowned Italian Signior Dionigio Grilli Master of the Stable
to the most Illustrious Prince Alexander Cardinal Farnese, which being never
before this day Englished, I thought good to enrich my country therewith,
especially so much as my self have proved to be most good and perfect, or that
I have collected out of Master Markehams works, whom I have followed as my
master herein, for as much, as I have approved them to deserve as great esteem
as any that I ever read or practiced.

But here it may be objected, that if I be so ignorant in the Objection.
knowledge of the nature of simples, I may be condemned of insolency with the
former tancke, in undertaking to censure of other men's judgments in that thing
I have no knowledge.

I answer, that if I should compare my knowledge with Answer.
theirs I am not much inferior, as concerning a general knowledge, for I know,
and can say, that the fire is hot and dry, and the water cold and moist, and
that such an herb is hot, or moist, in the first, second, or third degree,
etc. yet for particular judgment, A general knowledge is but flowing, except
it can apply particularly
to show in what quantity they are so, and how much they differ, and in what
different quantity in each several degree, to make a compound, agreeing to the
nature of the Horse, and so to apply particularly, in these I say I have small
iudement, for that which is spoken of in general, is not spoken to any in
particular. And therefore though I have not so much judgment, as to make a
true particular application, yet I have so much knowledge as to feel my own
ignorance, and to see how far I am from the knowledge thereof, and so
likewise the judgment of many men by the operation and effect of their potions
and salues.

But herein conceive me so, as not curiously to desire such an exact and
absolute judgment in them, as to apply so far as they have any natural
quality in healing, for that is impossible, it being only proper to God, and
hid from man, through depraved Knowledge; for else he might distill such a
quintesence out of such herbs and weeds, as the earth nourishes, as would
preserve life ad infinitum, for God made all things upon the earth for man's
good, and therefore no sore though never so mortal, but there was a
preservative herb, and so would have continued, if Adam had not brought
ignorance to his posterity, and death as the wages of sin.

By means of which ignorance, neither Hipocrates nor Galen themselves could
ever attain to the absolute and true quality Hipocrates and Galen were subject
to error.
in every degree, and part of any one simple, much less in all those they have
written of; but yet having writ so learnedly and iudiciously, as none in our
age can confute them, we must comparatively reverence and yield to them, in as
much as it has pleased God to bestow on them such extraordinary understanding
therein, as may give some light to our dark judgments: and yet not to think
them absolute, because we cannot confute them, in regard it has pleased God to
cast us out of the Paradise of knowledge, lest we should have the benefit of
them and live for ever.

But to persist, whereas most have set forth so many several Man is shut out
of the Paradise of knowledge.
cures as there are diseases, nay oftentimes three or four receipts for one
disease, that may argue a weakness in judgment in the cause, or a
doubtfulnesse of their effectual operations in their qualities: Therefore I
will content my self only with a few, knowing that one receipt has cured
half a dozen diseases, that are not so far differing in quality as in their
Diseases are not so much differing in quality as in name.
names: and refer those that desire to have varieties for practice upon
several horses, to Mr. Markhams Maister-Peece, where is not only carefully
collected his own experience, but also the opinions of the antientest and best
Farriers, which is so complete, that not any cure (worth note) of any
Practitioner) but is there included.

And again, though some be so curious as they esteem of Costly things are
esteemed the best with curious minds.
no cures, except they be costly, thinking that to be the best that is the
dearest, as if there could no good thing come out of Galalee, nor any virtue of
healing from weeds and things of small esteem, and as though nature had made
them superfluous and without use: yet I purpose not to set forth costly and
curious compounds, since I have found that such extraordinary charges Meaner
things are often times to be preferred before costly.
may often times be spared, whilst meaner things will work the better effect,
being of a contrary quality to the disease they are applied; for the causes of
all sickness and diseases either inward or outward, is the excess quality of
heat or cold, which The causes of sickness and discases.
if it be inward and natural, then that distemperature proceeds from heat,
in as much as horses are naturally h^t, and must be remedied by such potions
and drinks as are cooling, they accidentally proceeding either from heat by
the inflammation 1. Pr. 6. 7.
of the liver and the humors, either by excessive heating and sudden cooling,
or else from cold, by foul and raw feeding, or too much rest, which ingenders
gross and cold humors, and then must be helped by good feeding, and
comfortable drink, to drive that cold rawnesse from the heart and vital
spirits into the outward parts. But if it be outward, then it accidentally
proceeds either from the inward parts, (as before) The cause of outward
surrances.
or else outwardly, by a prick, bruise, cu^, or such like, which draws those
gross humors that are residing in the body, to that place (they having a
natural desire to rest there, as the water does desire to run into the Sea,
being their proper place) and so causes inflammation, and apostumation by
excess of heat, which to repress, I have found nothing so effectual, as
often to apply cold water, old piss, barme, or the dregs of Ale or beer,
blew clay and vinegar, and such like, which are of a cold quality, and which I
have found to prevail, when all the curious and chargeable Oils, and hot
Pultesses, have failed, being ministered according to the judgment of the best
Farriers; for by these I have lost two horses my self, but by the other have
preserved diverse.

Neither do I intend to spend time in filling empty papers, to fet forth
receipts for impossible cures, as broken wind, rotten Impossible Cures.
lungs, or mourning of the chine, bursting, all broken bones, or if they be
dislocated indeed as the sholder shot, or hipping and broken backed, all which I
hold impossible, for though I have seen diverse practiced upon, yet I could
never see them cured, by reason he is of such strength and weight, that they
are hardly set right; but if they be, yet he is so weighty they cannot so
continue, because he is unreasonable, and so not able to govern himself in
such a case.

And thus much briefly, I have thought good to speak of the intricatenes and
abuse in the professors thereof, for though I be not able to instruct so
exactly as I desire, yet I wish that every one would ^ruel^ examine his
knowledge more seriously then they have done, and s^ there shall be many
excellent horses preserved, which are ignorantly spoiled, which is the cause A
proof from the lesser to the greater.
that I have insisted the more herein, without any insinuation, for as no one
Plaster (though never so sovereign) can heal a wound (though it be green)
but there must be one still applied after another, much less^ then in an old
fistulated ulcer, as this Art is, being impostumated by ignorance and custom.

But whereas I may be held very ^u^ctiue to oppose generally Objection.
against the Professors hereof, and to approve of my cogitations, and
imaginations, to condemn others that have labored therein? I answer, I do
most worthily reverence and Answer.
esteem of all the true Philosophical professors, that direct their practice
by the causes and effects, to reduce them to the Theo. 2.
good and conservation of these famous Creatures, which are so profitable,
delightful, and necessary for the benefit both of Worthiness consists not
in words but deeds.
King and Commonwealth; but against the usurped Professors who care not how
they torture and kill, so they may gain their own profit: for approbation and
worthiness, is not in the applause of vulgar words, but m^rited by their
indust^ious practice, Plato in Tim^o.
though they have not the true splendour thereof: For we only behold the
external and utter side of divine and simple natures much like the glimering
of a Candle, or sparkling of fire, a great distance from v^ in a dark place.
But if any kick in that I have pressed so far as to pass the limits of
mediocrity, it is the A conceipted knower is wo^se then a fool.
earnest desire I have to sound such ala^u^ as may awake those that are cast in
a dead sl^mber of ignorance, who though they have not their A. B. C. yet will
contest against the judicious and the best learned: like those which if they
can but talk a little of Tectory, will assume to Erect a House, as well as the
best Artist, although they cannot tell how to frame one joint to agree with the
next in right angles, nor can tell how to work any Geometrical proportion.

Weerefore to give some light to such as are desirous to have knowledge in
curing, and have not learning how to enter into the dark and obscure secrets
of nature, I have here inserted you the excellent and approved cures of the
famous Italian Dionigio Grilli one of the best Farriers of the world, as they
were dedicated to the Cardinal Farnese, and as I have my self approved them in
mine own particular practice.

CHAP. 2. A most excellent receipt for any Inward sickness whatsoever.
TAke of Aristolochia Rot: one ounce, of Bay Berries one ounce, of Gentian one
ounce, of Anise-seeds one ounce, of Trifora magna, which is a composition to be
bought of any Apothicary, one ounce, of Ginger one ounce, beat the hard
simples into a very fine powder, then take a quart of white wine and put to it
a gyll of the sweetest oil Olive, and warm it on the fire lukewarm, then
put to it a spoonful and a half of this powder, a spoonful of the
composition Trifora magna, and as much Methridate, and stirring it well together
give it the Horse to drink fasting, and exercise him moderately both before
and after, and then keep him warm; Now if any of these simples be not to be
got, then take two sponfull of the powder Diapente, and mix it with the wine
as aforesaid, and it will be sufficient.

CHAP. 3. A Suppossitary for any inward Sickness.
IF your Horse be so exceeding weak and sick that you dare not administer to
him inwardly by the stomach, you shall take of common Honey six ounces, of
Wheat flower one ounce, of Salt-Niter one ounce and a half, of Anise-seeds in
fine powder one ounce, boil these to a hard thickness, and then make it into
Suppossitaries, and having anointed your hand well with oil Olive, thrust it
up into the Horses foundament, and then hold down his tail hard for a good
space after.

CHAP. 4. A Glister to cure any inward Sickness.
TAke of the oil of Dill, of the oil of Camomile, of Cassia and of the oil
of Vyolets of each half an ounce, of brown Sugar Candy three ounces, of
Mallows half a handful, boil these to a decoction in running water, and
then administer it to the Horse in manner of a glister, and in the extremity of
any sickness it is a certain cure.

CHAP. 5. For the Yellowes.
FIrst, let the Horse blood in the neck vein, and according to the goodness
or badnesse of the blood so proportionate the quantity you take away, then take
a quart of sweet wine, or for want thereof a quart of strong Ale or Bear, then
put to it four sponfull of the Juice of Selladine, and half so much of the
juice of Rue, and let them boil on the fire, then take it off and strain into
it half an ounce of the best English Saffron, and three ounces of the best
honey, and so give it the Horse lukewarm to drink, then Rake him up and
down a little, and so set him up warm suffering him to fast two hours after,
and give him to drink with his meat a sweet mash, but no cold water by any
means.

CHAP. 6. An excellent Pill for the Yellowes.
TAke half a pound of the best Honey and of Safforn beaten to very fine powder
and the meal of Fene-greeke, of each a like quantity, and mix them with the
honey, till it come to a stiff paste, then divide it into two several bals
and dipping them in sweet Sallet oil, draw out the horses tongue and force him
to swallow them, then ride him up and down an hour and more, and so set him
up warm, always provided that you ever let him blood in the neck vein
first, and if you also let him blood in his eye veins and in the roof of his
mouth, it will be much better, because the chawing and swallowing of his own
blood is exceeding wholesome and Souereine.

CAHP. 7. For the Staggers.
FIrst, by all means let him blood in the neck vein, and let him bleed very
well; for the abundance of blood is the cause of the disease, then with an
incision knife open the skin of the forehead as high as the fore-top, and
with a cornet raise up the skin, and put in two or three cloves of Garlike,
and then stitch up the hole close again, with a needle and a little silk, and
then binding a little flax or lint to the wound, be sure to keep out the wind
or air which may do hurt, Then take of the seed of Cresses, the seed of
Poppye, the seed of Smallagde, the seed of Parsley, the seed of Dill, of
Pepper and of Saffron, of each of these two ounces beat them all to a very
fine powder, then put them to a pottell of Barley water, and then strain it
very well through a strayner, and give the Horse a quart thereof to drink
early in the morning fasting, and then Rake him up and down gently an hour or
more, and so set him up and sprinkle his hay with water, but let him drink no
cold water till he be well recovered.

CHAP. 8. For any extreme cold whatsoever, or of what nature soever.
TAke of Cloves, of Nutmegs, of Ginger, of Galls or the fruit of Oaks, and of
Cardimonium of each a like quantity of Fenell seed some what more then of the
rest beat and searse all these to a very fine powder, then put two spoonful
thereof to a quart of White wine, and strain in two penyworth of the best
English Saffron, and then beat in the yolke of a couple of eggs, and so give it
the Horse to drink early in the morning, and then air him abroad two hours
or more, and be sure to keep him warm, and by no means let him drink cold
water, nor let him eat any hay but what is sprinkled with water, and once a
day (which should be at noone) if the time of the year serve give him the
tender green crops of Reeds or Sallowes, to eat from your hand, for they are
very souereine, and thus do diverse mornings together, and it will not only
cleanse away all manner of cold, but also open his conduits and set his wind at
liberty.

CHAP. 9. For the Lax or Flux of Body, by any means.
TAke Wood-ashes finely searced, and mix them with as much Bolarmonyacke made
into fine powder, and mixing it well with his water, let him drink thereof
morning and evening and it will stay his scowring, but if it be so violent* by
either the eating of a feather or any other poison, that this will not stay it,
then take the intrals of a Hen or Pullet, and mixing them with an ounce of
Spycknard, cause the Horse to swallow it and it will presently stay the Flux.

CHAP. 10. For a Horse that is Hyde-bound^r in great poverty.
TAke of clarified hogges-grease two ounces, of the juice of Dragant-worte one
ounce, of Incense half an ounce, of the Sirrop of Roses three ounces, dissolve
all these in a pint and a half of honyed water on a soft fire, and give it the
Horse to drink fasting in the morning, and exercise him a little thereon, then
set him up warm and let him fast two or three hours, and it will Scowre out
all his infection, loosen his skin, and make him feed very suddenly after.

CHAP. 11. An excellent receipt for the pissing of blood.
FIrst cleanse his yard if any filth or corruption be barkt thereunto, by
washing it with Butter and Beer made warm together, then let the Horse blood
in the neck vein; and lastly, take the water or juice of Leekes or of Onyons,
that is, the water wherein they have been steeped twelve hours at least, and
close stopped* to the quantity of a pint, then as much White wine and iumble it
well together till it look slymie, then give it the Horse to drink, and do
thus diverse mornings, and it will stay that flux of blood, and bring his urine
to the natural and ordinary color.

CHAP. 12. A most excellent receipt for the Stone, or for a Horse that cannot
piss but drop by drop.
TAke of Saxifrage, of Nettle roots, of Parsley roots, of Fenell roots, of
Sperage roots, of Dodder, of each of these a little handful, boil all these
on a gentle fire in a pottell of White wine till a third part be consumed,
then put in a handful of Salt, of oil Olive, and the Larde of a Goat, of each
a Gyll, of Hon^^ half a pound, and then give the Horse a pint and better of
this to drink every morning fasting, being only made lukewarm, and if it
chance either by the boiling or standing to grow too thick, you shall resolve
it with Whitewine, and after the first boiling but only warm it: and here you
must Note, that by all means you must bruise the roots well before you boil
them, and not strain them till all the moisture be spent, and then strain them
hard with fresh White wine and give it the Horse to drink also.

CHAP. 13. For the Worms or Botts in Horses.
TAke of the tender crops of Broom half a little handful, and as much Sauin,
and choppe them very small, then with sweet Butter work it into pills or
Balls, and having kept the the Horse fasting all night, make him early in the
morning swallow two or three balls thereof, then chafe him a little, and set
him upon his bridle, making him fast at least two hours after, but by no
means let him touch any water till it be night.

CHAP. 14. An excellent Purgation or Scowring for any Horse that is either
Sick, Surfetted, or has his grease molten.
TAke of Cassia an ounce, of Filonio Perseo and of Tryfora magna, being two
compositions, of each half an ounce, of syrop of Violets two ounces, and
dissolve all these in four ounces of Mell Rosatum, and with a Horn give it
the Horse fasting, then rake him up and down gently an hour or two, and after
set him an hour upon his Bridle, then give him a sweet mash, after clean
dressed prouender and sweet hay, but let him touch no cold water for two days
following. And thus much for all manner of inward diseases in Horses, which are
to be cured by drench or potion, and although the multiplicity of the names of
inward diseases are far beyond these which I have reckoned, yet is there not
any inward disease whatsoever, but may be safely cured by some one of these
which I have already recited. Therefore I will now proceed to outward Sorances,
and although in both I differ from the method which my author Seignior Grilli
uses as touching the Marshalling of the medicines, yet I will keep his matter
and meaning most truly and with a great deal more ease and benefit to the
reader, whom I am much more curious to please then he was, who only placed his
receipts as they came to his memory.

CHAP. 15. An approved medicine for the Dropsy or Feltrick in Horses.
THis is a disease most incident to horses that are nourished with foul foggy
and moist feeding, as for the most part your Fenne Iades are, so as in those
places you shall have continual experience thereof, being a foul unnatural
swelling of the Horses body, especially under his belly. The cure whereof is,
first, with your Fleame strike him in diverse places where the swelling most
appears, and let the corrupt blood drop out the space of an hour and more,
then wipe his body clean, and take a pint of strong lee made with vryne and
ash ashes, and dissolu^ into it an ounce of Populyo, and an ounce of Dyalthea,
and being made very warm, therewith bath and anoint all the sweld place, and
morning and evening after the Frycasse* chase or Trot the Horse up and down
for the space of half an hour, and for a morning or two give him to drink a
quart of Ale, and two spoonful of Diapente brewed together, by let it but
immediately before his chasing.

CHAP. 16. Of outward Sorances: and first o^ the strengthening of the Sinews
whether they be hurt by strain, stroke, or wound.
TAke of Swines grease, of Horse tallow, of May Butter, of oyl^ Olive, of ^^ch
of them five ounces and a half, of the ointment called A^rip^a one ounce and a
half of new wax two ounces and a half, and of Camphyr a third part to all
the rest, melt them all together on the fire, and make thereof an Vngu^nt, and
being very warm, anoint the greiued part therewith morning and evening, and
what you use not preserve in a close glass or gally-pot, for it will last all
the year.

CHAP. 17. A most excellent Powder to cure any Fistula either in the Pole, the
withers, or any other part of the horses Body.
TAke of Roman Vitrioll two ounces, of Roch-Allom and Rose Water of each two
ounces, and boil all these together on a quick fire, till they come to be as
hard as a stone; then b^at it into a very fine powder, then when you dress the
sore first d^p your Tent in Vnguentum Aegyptiacum and then roll i^ in this
Powder, and so put it into the hollownesse: this Powder also being sprinkled
on any old sore will dry it up and heal it.

CHAP. 18. For the Farcy.
OF all the Diseases and Sora^ces which do belong to a horse, there is none
more hateful and vild then this which is called the Farcy, and though being
truly looked into with Art and judgment, it is as easy to cure as any other
Sorance, yet when any ouerslip or escape happens, it is then utterly incurable,
or at the least so difficult, that it is seldom or never cured without some
foul eye sore or deformity, the only reason thereof being, that this disease
grows from purrifaction of blood and foulness of body; so that except the
body be first thoroughly scoured and cleansed, it is impossible with any outward
medicine to work any cure or ease at all. Therefore for the safe curing of
this discase, you shall first le^ the horse blood in the neck vein and take
from him good store of blood, for there is little dout to be made of his
weakening; the^ take of the composition called Triforamagna* of Aloes patico, of
each two ounces, of Barley Bran two ounces, dissolve ^ll these in a pint of
oil olive, then di^de it into two parts and give them two mornings together to
the horse, with a horn, being mixed with a pint of white wine, then take as
much black soap as a Walnut; and half so much Arsnicke beaten to powder, and
make them into a salve, then with the point of a knife open all the hard knots
or pustulles and put into them the quantity of two barley corns of this salve,
and it will eat out the chores and kill the po^sonous humor, then when you see
the wounds red and fair, heal them up by anointing them with fresh butter,
molten hot, and the Powder of Bole-Armoniacke strewed thereon.

CHAP. 19. For a Horse that has a Stinking breath.
TAke of Cinnamon, of Cloves, of Gallingall, of Comminseeds, of Anise-seeds, of
Coriander-seeds, of each of these three ounces, of Fenegreeke eight ounces,
beat all these and searse them to a fine powder, then mix with them two pound
of wheat meal, and with white wine make it into a stiff past, then in an Oven
or stoue bake it as hard and dry as may be, and then beat it into a fine
powder, then give the horse every morning three of four spoonefull of this
powder, brewd in a pint of white Wine, and a pint of Ale mixed together, and it
will take away all ill and corrupt sauors of the breath.

CHAP. 20. A most excellent Plaster to cure any wound, gald back, or other
hurt whatsoever.
TAke of Rosin, of common Pitch, of each six ounces, of Masticke, of Incense,
of each one ounce, of Turpentine, of Galbanum and of Armoniacke, of each three
ounces, melt, dissolve and incorporate all these together upon a gentle fire,
and make them into a plaster, and when you use it, spread it upon a cloth
somewhat thin; But if you use it to any outward part, where no skin is
broken, then lay it on with floxe a great deal more thick: This plaster as
it cures any wound, gall or hurt, so it r^peneth, breaks and heals all
manner of impostumations, or byles, it is also an excellent defensitiue
plaster for the staying and drying up of evil humors, and also most
sovereign for the asswaging of all manner of Swellings.

CHAP. 21. For Sinews that are cut or severed.
TAke of new Wax, of Rosin, of each two ounces, of the marrow of a Cow four
ownces, of Gum Arabeeke two ounces, of oil of Roses, three ounces, melt and
incorporate all these together on the fire, and then when you use it warm it,
and either anoint, tent, or plaster the sore.

CHAP. 22. For a Mallander or Sellander.
TAke the Lard of Bacon one pound, of red Lead, Verdigrease and golden
L^thargie, of each two ounces, boil them all very well together, and having
cleansed the sore and made it raw, anoint it therewith morning and evening till
it be dried up.

CHAP 2. An excellent Powder for any sore eye.
TAke of Sal* armoniacke, of Tutya prepared, of Sagyna called in Latin Panicum
Iudicum, of Ginger, of each of these half an ounce, of the best Sugar Candy
two ounces, mix them all together, and beat them, and searse them to as fine a
powder as is possible, then dissolve a little thereof in the juice of ground
Iuy, or in the water of Eyebright, and therewith dress the sore eye, and it
will cure it.

CHAP. 24. An excellent Water for all manner of sore eyes.
TAke of the leaves and roots of Veruine, of ordinary honey and of Roman
Vitryoll, of each a like quantity, and being bruised and mixed together, put
them into a Still, and distill them, keeping the water in a close glass, then
when you have occasion to use it, put out a little, and add to it the fat of
a Hen, or a little Capons grease, and therewith anoint the sore eye and it
will heal it.

CHAP. 25. For any Bone, Spauen, Splent, Curb, Ring-bone, or any other bony
excression.
FIrst, shave off the hair, and scarifie the skin with a sharp knife just
upon the top of the excression; then take gray soap as much as half a Walnut,
and so much Arsnicke beaten to powder, and mix them well together, then
spreading some of it on hurds according to the quantity of the grief, bind it
to the same and remove it not for eight* and forty hours, then take it away,
but stir not the asker or scab, but only anoint it with fresh butter, till
it fall away of it self and so heal: As for the Bogge or wet Spauen which is
but only a flux of blood in that part, it may easily be cured by taking up
the vein on the inside the hinder leg only, provided that in taking up the
vein, you bind fast above, and then cut the vein asunder.

CHAP. 26. For pinching with the Sadle on the Withers, or other part of the
back, the navel gall, and such like.
TAke of Oil de bay, of Costus, Foxe-grease, of the Oil of Sauine, of each of
these one ounce, then take of wo^mes, to the quantity of an hundred, and scour
them well in White wine and salt, then put all into an earthen pot close stopped,
and boil them well, then add an ounce and a half of Oil Olive, then boil
it over again till it come to a perfect unguent, then strain it well into a
glass or gally-pot, and keep it close, then when you use it warm it, and
dress the sore therewith, and it will heal it.

CHAP. 27. For the Scabbe, Scurfe or Mangy.
TAke of wild Spurdge, of Sellydon, of Brimstone, of each three ounces, of
Hog's Grease and Q^ick-siluer mix two ounces of new wax, two ounces, and of
Tallow two ounces, melt and incorporate all these together, and therewith
annoint the horse after you have made the sores raw, and washed them with old
piss and Copporas boyld together; and in any wise let the Horse blood in the
neck vein, and take good store of blood from him at the beginning of the Cure.

CHAP. 28. For any hurt in the Fetlocke whether it come by casting in the
halter, or otherwise.
TAke the yolke of an Egg, and as much vnsleckt lime as being beaten with it
will bring it to an Ointment, then mix with it the ^uyce of a head of
Garlic, and a little soote, and with this anoint the sore till it begin to
heal, then to skin it up, take of Oil Olive, of Oil of Roses of each one
ounce, of Turpentine three ounces, and of new wax one ounce, melt them all
together, and put a fourth part of Verdigrease thereunto, and with it skin up
the sore.

CHAP. 29. For the Mules, kib'd heel^s, Scratches, pains, or other such
noisome Sorance.
FIrst Clip off the hair, and lay the Sores as raw and bare as may be, then
wash them with strong old piss, then take of vnsleckt lime, of salt and of
soot, of each a like quantity, boil them with strong Vinegar till it come to
be thick like a plaster, then soften it with Hog's Grease, till it become an
Unguent, and then as hot as the Horse can suffer it, do anoint the sores
therewith till it be whole.

CHAP. 30. For any hurt or sore upon the Cro^et of the Hoof.
TAke an Ege or two, and beat it with Soote till it be thick and stiff, then
add to it a good quantity of Oil O^ue, and a spoonefull or two of the pounder
of Hearts h^^ne, and boil them all together till it come to a very thick
salve, and therewith dress the sore till it be whole.

CHAP. 31. For any Strain or grief in the shoulder, or any other joint or
member.
TAke of Oil de Bay, of Dialthea, fresh Butter, and the Oil of Turpentine, of
each of them two ounces mix and boil them together on a soft fire, and when
they are well incorporate, as hot as the Horse can suffer it, anoint the
offended place, twice or thrice a day, and give the Horse moderate exercise by
walking him gently up and down and it is a certain and an approved remedy.

CHAP. 32. For all manner of sweld legs whether they be putryfied or otherwise.
SWeld legs (at the first beginning) may be cured by the often lauing or washing
them with cold water, as also they may by such use be defended and pre^ented
from such Sorances, but if by negligence or other casualty the Horse happen
into this grief, you shall take of Honey a pound, of Turpentine four ounces,
of common Gum four ounces, of the meal of Lyn-seede and the meal of
Fenegreeke, of each four ounces, and of the powder of Bay Berries well searst
three ounces, then mix and boil all these very well together then take it off
and put to it a pint of White wine, then boil it again till it be very
thick, and with this as hot as the Horse can suffer it, lap the Horses leg
or legs about plaster-wise, and renew it not above once a week, but when you
ride him, and it is a certain well approved medicine.

CHAP. 33 For Cloying, Pricking, or any other hurt in the quick of the Horses
foot.
FIrst, with a paring kniffe cut the Hoof and lay open the wound as plain as
may be, then take of wax, of Hoggesgrease, and of Turpentine of each one
ounce, of Verdy-grease a quarter of an ounce, boil them all on a gentle fire,
and being reasonable hot dip a few flax hurds therein, and with the same
dress the sore, renewing it at least three times a day, and it will heal it.

CHAP. 34. An excellent Bath for any griese inward or outward that a Horse
has, whether apparent or hid.
TAke of Sauine, the bark and leaves of Laurel, of Pelletary, of Rosemary, of
Sage, of Rue, of each of these four ounces, and boil them in a gallond of
White wine, till a half part be consumed, and with this bath the horse where
the grief is apparent, or general (if no grief appear) outwardly, and it is
a most approved good medicine.

CHAP. 35. For a horse that refuses his meat through the extremity of Cold.
TAke Rue and Pepper of each a like quantity, and beat them in a mortar
together till they be thick like a salve, then take a good lump thereof, and
put it into the Horses mouth and force him to chaw and hold it therein a good
space, and as soon as you let him open his chaps he will fall to his meat and
eat eagerly, or if you but chop Brionie into little morsels and give it him to
eat, it will bring his stomach again suddenly.

CHAP. 36. For a Horse that is foundred.
OF Foundrings, there are two kinds, the one in the body, the other in the
feet, and to them we may add a general foundring, which is when a Horse is
Foundred both in the body and feet at one instant (as many times it happens)
and the Cure is, first, to let him blood in the neck vein, and save the blood
in a clean vessel stirring it much about for cluttering, then put unto it a
dozen whites of Eggs, and as much Bran or Wheat-meale and Bolarmoniake as will
thicken it, and therewhere with charge his back and legs from the knees
upward. Then take a pint of sweet wine, and more then half so much of his own
blood, of the best Treackle and of Diapente, of each a good sponefull, of Man's
ordure the quantity of a good Nut, brew and mix all these very well together,
and give it the Horse to drink with a Horn: then take of vnsleckt lime a
pretty quantity, and as much Orpment, and dissolve them in running water like
an Unguent, then let it stand for an hour or two after it is so prepared, and
then take as much Mel Rosarum as will bring it to a very stiff substance, and
with it being made very hot both anoint the upper part of his Houes,
(especially about the cronets,) and also stop the bottomes or soales of his
feet therewith: and also if you take good store of blood from the Toae veins,
the cure will be both more easy and more speedy.

CHAP. 37. An approved medicine for the Canker.
THough all Cankers hold but one general nature, yet there is difference in
the cure; for the Canker which is outwardly on the flesh and that which is
inwardly in the mouth may not take one general application, though one and the
selfsame medicine will heal both, because to the outward parts may be
applied poisonous corrosiues, as Mercury, Auripigmentum and such like, but into
the mouth must needs come none but sharp natural medicines, which will not
offend the stomach, therefore for any Canker, first make a strong Allomwater
of Allome, Honey Sage-leaues, Woodbine-leaues, and cl^ane running water, well
boiled together, and with this water and the leaves rub the sores till they be
red and raw, then take strong Wine-Vinegar, and a half part of the powder of
Allome finely beat and searst, and a half part of Ginger likewise finely beat
and searst, and an equal quantity of life Honey, and mix them all very well
together, and therewith anoint the sore morning and evening until it be whole.

CHAP. 38. The Authors Farewell.
THus most loving, courteous, and best affected Reader I have resembled the
part of a careful Husbandman and have gathered the harvest that the seed of
my barren soil has yielded, which (I grant) was at the first gleaned after
other men's Carts: and now having thrashed it with the flayle of practice; and
winnowed it with the fan of experience, I have sown it a The Authors
willingness to profit his country.
on the Furrows of the world, that it may be watered with the dewey showers of
your charitable affection, hoping that it will fructify the more, being sown
in the Vernall, or Spring time of the year, when the Vigetatiue faculty is
most predominate: the which if it will yield but such increase as is worthy to
be carried into the Barnes of your kind acceptance, I shall think my pains
fully recompensed. And (for your further good) will encourage me to till this
ground again, for a new crop, (so that I may have but this straw to redeem my
present necessity) which I hope will make such bread, as will nourish all the
imps, and laborers that shall grow, or take pains in this Vineyard, (if it be
not reaped with the infectious sickle of preiudication.)

For I grant, this is defective in wanting the strongest grain to b The Buffe
saddle is the
give nourishment* which I did omit, both because it was not of such present
necessary use; and also that it would have made this c ^^fe g^ound (...).
Book so great and vnportable, as many would have bin destitute of relief for
want of ability to purchase the same: For notwithstanding ^ (...) minds are
(...) cannot be (...).
it is multiplied to a far greater quantity then my intended mind at the
first did think to produce. In the which (by Gods assistance, as he shall
inlighten mine understanding) Theo. 3. d.
I will also purge that part from such choking weeds as are grown therein
some what amply; and confine this within d Many things consume the memory.
a more summary limit, only illustrating such points as are obumbrated by
unfolding so many doubts: which I will set forth Dialogue-wise for the more
facility and ease of your apprehensions; till which time accept of this my
simple good will, and so I bid you heartily farewell, desiring a prosperous
success to these my willing endeauours, to have this famous Art meritoriously
to flourish in this Kingdom.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF ALL THE Cures for Diseases in Horses, contained in this Book.
CHAP. Fol. 1 HOw the true knowledge of Curing diseases is intricate. 1 2 A
most excellent receipt for any Inward sickness what soever. 8 3 A Suppossitary
for any inward Sickness. ibid. 4 A Glister to cure any inward Sickness. 9 5
For the Yellowes. ibid. 6 An excellent Pill for the Yellowes. ibid. 7 For the
Staggers. 10 8 For any extreme cold whatsoever, or of what nature soever. ibid
9 For the Lax or Flux of Body, by any means. 11 10 For a Horse that is
Hyde-bound or in great poverty. ibid. 11 An excellent receipt for the pissing
of blood. ibid. 12 A most excellent receipt for the Stone, or for a Horse that
cannot piss but drop by drop. 12 13 For the Worms or Botts in Horses. ibid.
14 An excellent Purgation or Scowring for any Horse that is either Sick,
Surfetted, or has his grease molten. 13 15 An approved medicine for the
Dropsy or Feltricke in Horses. ibid. 16 Of outward Sorances: and first, of the
strengthening of the Sinews whether they be hurt by strain, stroke, or wound.
14 17 A most excellent Powder to cure any Fistula either in the Pole, the
withers, or any other part of the horses Body. ibid. 18 For the Farcy. ibid. 19
For a Horse that has a Stinking breath. 15 20 A most excellent Plaster to
cure any wound, gald back, or other hurt whatsoever. 16 21 For Sinews that
are cut or severed. ibid. 22 For a Mallander or Sellander. ibid. 23 An
excellent Powder for any sore eye. ibid. 24 An excellent Water for all manner
of sore eyes. 17 25 For any Bone, Spauen, Splent, Curb, Ring-bone, or any
other bony excression. ibid. 26 For pinching with the Sadle on the Withers, or
other part of the back, the navel gall, and such like. ibid. 27 For the
Scabbe, Scurfe or Mangy. 18 28 For any hurt in the Fetlocke, whether it come by
casting in the halter, or otherwise. ibid. 29 For the Mules, kib'd heels,
Scratches, pains, or other such noisome Sorance. ibid. 30 For any hurt or sore
upon the Cronet of the Hoof. 19 31 For any Strain or grief in the shoulder,
or any other joint or member. ibid. 32 For all manner of sweld legs, whether
they be putryfied or otherwise. ibid. 33 For Cloying, Pricking, or any other
hurt in the quick of the Horsesfoote. 20 34 An excellent Bath for any grief
inward or outward that a Horse has, whether apparent or hid. ibid. 35 For a
horse that refuses his meat through the extremity of Cold. ibid. 36 For a
Horse that is foundred. 21 37 An approved medicine for the Canker. ibid. 38 The
Authors Farewell. 22

FINIS.

