Informaco^n for pilgrims unto the holy land.

Fro Calays to Rome. by France
Fro Calays to Boloyne lyeux.x. miles.xx.
Pycardy
To Montrell lyeux.x. miles.xx. To Abuile lyeux.x. miles.xx. To Amyas lyeux.xi.
miles.xx.
France
To Cleremount lyeux.xiiij. miles.xxviij. To Paris lyeux.xiiij. miles.xxviij.
To Monhery lyeux.vij. my es.xiiij. To Estamps lyeux.vij. miles.xiiij. To Tury
lyeux.x. miles.xx. To Orlyaunce lyeux.x. miles.xx. To Weson lyeux.vij.
miles.xiiij. To Swame lyeux.v. miles.xv. To Nouil lyeux.iiij. miles.xij.
Barry.
To Burges lyeux.vi. miles.xviij. To Donleroy lyeux.vij. miles.xiiij. To Culuer
lyeux.vij. miles.xxi. To Molyns lyeux.vij. miles.xvij
Burbony
To Veroins lyeux.v. miles.xij To Palisse lyeux.iiij. miles.viij. To Pacaudiere
lyeuxs.iiij. miles.xij.
Lyones
To Rona lyeux.iiij. miles.xij. To saint Saffryn lyeux.iij. miles.ix. To
Tarrara lyeux.iij. miles.ix. To Brayle lyeux.iij. miles ix. To Lion lyeux.iij.
miles.ix. To voelpillera lyeux.v. miles.xij
Dolpheny.
To Burguin.lyeux.ij. miles.vi. To Durdupin lyeux.ij. miles.viij. To
ponthenezin lyeux.iij. miles.xij.
Sauoy
To Aquebelleto lyeux.ij. miles.viij. To Chambery lyeux.ij. miles.viij.
Ancipiunt montane
To Mountmelyon lyeux.ij. miles.viij. To Aquabel lyeux.iij. miles.xv. To
Shawmer lyeux.iiij. miles.xij. To saint John de Murian lyeux.ij. miles.vi. To
saint Michael lyeux.ij. miles.vi. To Orela lyeux.i. miles.v. To saint Andrewe
lyeux.i. miles.v. To Modon lyeux.i. miles.iij. To Burget lyeux.i. miles.ij. To
Vsse lyeux.iij. miles.ix. To Tromylion lyeux.ij. miles.vi. To Lynnyngbure
lyeux.i. miles.iij. To Suza lyeux.vi. miles.xviij.
Ytalia / permonte^ Senis. and incipiu^t miliaria.
To Velona miles.x. To Turin.miles.x. To Sheuaus.miles.x. To Salis.miles.xvij.
To Versel.miles.vij.
Lumbardy
To Nouera.miles.xij To Myllan.miles.xxv. To Meriniano.miles.x. To
Lood.miles.x. To Plesaunce.miles.xx. To Florencehole.miles.xij. To
Burgosanctdouy.miles.viij. To Palma.miles.xv. To Regio:.:.miles.xv. To
Modina.miles.xv. To Ansella.miles.xiiij. To Bonony.miles.vi.
Incipit Scarparia
To Plenora.miles.viij. To Liuana.miles.viij. To Scargalazo.miles.iiij. To
Florincefola.miles.x. To Scarparia.miles.x.
Finit Scarparia
To Florence.miles.xiiij. To Sancassan.miles.viij. To Tauernell.miles.vij. To
Pogepons.miles.v. To Sena.miles.xij. To Boncouent.miles.xij. To
Sayntclerigo.miles.viij. To Palya.miles.xiij. To Aquapendent.miles.xi^. To
Mountflascon.miles.xiiij. To Viterbe.miles.viij. To Rassilion.miles.ix. To
Turbecan.miles.xiij. To Rome.miles.xiiij. Su^ma.ix.C.lij.
From Rome to Naples
Fro Rome to Merena.miles.x. To Belletir.miles.x. To Saramoneta.miles.xv. To
Pepirn.miles.xij. To Tarrasena.miles.xij. To Fownde.miles.xij. To
Mola:.:.miles.x. To Sesa.miles.xv. To Capo.miles.xviij To Verse.miles.viij. To
Naples.miles.viij. Su^ma miliar. C.xxx.
Fro Rome to Venyce.
Fro Rome to Castellanoua.miles.xiiij To Liuita.miles.xiiij. To
Naruya.miles.xiiij. To Terne.miles.vi. To Spoliat.miles.xij. To
vircano.miles.xv. To Seruello.miles.ix. To Musha:.: miles.iiij. To
Belforde.miles.xij. To Macherato.miles.xiij. To Racanato.miles.x. To
Modondelarett.miles.iij. To Osmo.miles.vi. To Ezy:.:.miles.xiiij. To
Sinagaye.miles.xv. To Fauo.miles.x. To Chatholico.miles.xv. To Rymene.miles.xv.
To Portesesenato miles.xv. To Rauenna.miles.xx. To Auelana:.:.miles.xlv. To
Furnasa.miles.xx. To Fosson.miles.v. To Brondalo.miles.vij. To Cloge.miles.iij.
To Venyce.miles.xxv. Su^ma miliar.CCC.xli.
Fro Venyce to Myllayn
Fro Venyce to Padwa (per mar and aqua^. Miles.xxv. To Vincente.miles.xviij. To
Verona.miles.xxvij. To Piscaria.miles.xv. To Lowna.miles.xij To
Bressa.miles.xv. To Cocay.miles.xij. To Bargamo.miles.xviij To
Myllayn.miles.xxx. Su^ma milliar.C.lxxij.
Informacio peregrinaco^is ad sanctu^ sepulcru^ by the duche way.
First to goo to Dover. and fro thens to Calays by water.miles.xxx. Grauenynge
fro thens.iij. miles duche Donkirk.iij. miles Newport.v. miles
Oudenbarugh.iiij. miles Brugis.iij. miles Vrsyll.iiij. miles Gaunt.iiij. miles
Dyrdermount.v. miles. Mawhemlyn.iiij. miles. Marscot.v. miles. Dyest.ij. miles.
Arsull:.:.iij. miles. Beelsyn.ij. miles. Masecright.ij. miles. Gulpe.ij. miles.
Acon.ij. miles Goylke.iiij. miles. Berghle.iij. miles. Coleyne:.:.iij. miles.
Bmme.iij. miles. Remaghe.iij. miles. Andernake.iij. miles. Coueleyns.iij.
miles. Bobbarde.iij. miles Wesell.iij. miles Bagragh.vi. miles Lorygh half a
mile. Benge:.:.i. mile and an half. Menske.iiij. miles. Wormys.vij. miles.
Spire.vi. miles and an half. Brussellis.iij. miles and an half Faynge.iiij.
miles. Kanstatt.iij. miles. Elsyng.:.:.i. mile. Gyppyng.i. mile. Geelsyng.ij.
miles. Vlme.iij. miles. Me^mynge.vi. miles. empton.iij. miles.
Nesselfauge:.:.iij. miles. Fylsshe.i. mile. Atteruange.ij. miles. To Lerme.ij.
miles.
Et ibi mons magnus vocat Mountlerme
To Lerme.ij. miles. Nazare.iij miles.
Hic videatis quia su^t due vie. vna ad Venisiam and alia ad curiam romana^. Et
hec est via ad curiam romanam.
Vmbst.i. mile Laundeth.ij. miles. Lawdek.ij. miles. Mount Nicholas. and.
Chapel.iij. miles. Molles.iij. miles. Merane.vi. miles. Payle.iij. miles.
Skolter.i. mile. Trent.v. miles. Vrfrette::.iij. miles. Veron.vij. miles.
Scala.xij. miles. Octia.xviij. miles.
Hic pertransiuimus aqua^. et soluimus quiliber.iiij. katerinos. Et aqua vocat
Pows.
Merandula.xij. miles Saint Martyn.v. miles Doneporte.v. miles. Castle John.x.
miles. Doleyn.x. miles. Florusole:.:.xxx. miles Skarpery..x. miles.
florance..xiiij. miles Castellu^ sancti Cassiani.viij. miles Castellu^ sancti
Donati viij. miles. Seen.xiiij. miles. Bonecouent.xij. miles. Sanctu^
clericum.viij. miles. Redecoffre.xij. miles. Aquependaunt.xij. miles. Saint
Laurence.v. miles. Beitsen.iij. miles. Mountflasske:.:.viij. miles.
Viterbce.viij. miles Sowters..x. miles. Rome.xxiiij. miles.
Via de Roma ad venisiam
Fro Rome to Castellonouo.xij. miles. Arenyane.x. miles. Castellane.viij.
miles. Castle Leonarde.v miles. Outreole.iij. miles. Narnya.vij. miles. Sancti
Emini.vi. miles. Sancta Fida.xij. miles. Tode:.:.iiij. miles Perose.xx. miles
Pount le pater.v. miles. Engobin.xv. miles. Cantyane.x. miles. Fyrmynyane.xv.
miles. Vrben.iij. miles. Mountfloure:.:.xij. miles. Remell.xij. miles. Fro
thens to Venyse.vij. scote miles per aquam.
A venisia vsque Nazare
Meistre.v. miles Treuyse.x. miles. Conyngane.viij. miles Seriuale.vi. miles.
Affortyma.ix. miles. Vngaron.iij. miles. Hospitale:.:.iiij. miles Saint
Martyn.vi. miles. Burgh^.vi. miles Lampettes.iiij. miles Vngaron.vij. miles.
Buttestane.v. lmyes. Alandre.i. mile. Netherthorpe:.:.i. mile. Valespergo.i.
mile. Burnell.ij. miles. Mulburgh^.iij. miles. Motre. ij. miles. Steresen.ij.
miles. Isebroke.viij. miles. Naza^e.vij. miles.
Chaunges of money fro England to Rome and to Venyse
Calays
AT Calays ye shall have as many plackys for half a noble english. or for a
dukate. xxiiij. plackes. That is best money unto Brugis.

Brugys
At Brugis ye shall have as many plackes for half a noble or a dukate as ye had
at Calays / For a gylden.xix. vplackes. And for a gylden of lylyars.xxiiij..
And.xvij. mytes for half a noble / Or for a dukate.xxxi. lylyars. It is Braban
money / And in Braban vplackes ben called styfers. A placke is worth.ij.
grotes of flemysshe callid penyes. To a grote.ij. half penyes. to an half
penny.ij. farthinges Xlviij. mytes to an vplacke. to a grote xxiiij. to an half
penny.xij. to a ferthynge.vi / A lyly placke is.iij. half penyes flemysshe. A
lylyar is worth.xxxvi. mytes. Three plackes ben worth.v pence english. V.
gyldens and a placke be worth ij. nobles english. A gylden is worth.iij.
shelyng / of english money. / This money woll serve well to Coleyn.

Coleyn
At Coleyn ye shall have reynysshe gyldens and coleyn penyes. Ye shall have for
a gylden.xxiiij. penies. For a coleyn penny.xij. hallardes or myrkyns. all is
one. And they woll serve to Menske..iiij. halla^des ben worth an half penny
english.

Brugys
Take in your change fro Brugys of gyldens with a round balle and a cross
above on the one side. they ben good unto Rome. and the best by all the way.
Take none english gold with you from Brugys / for ye shall lose in the
change. And also for the most part by the way they woll not change it.
Renysshe gyldens they know well by all the way. Awd in them ye shall lose but
little or naught.

Menske
At Menske ye shall have bemysshe and blaffardes and other hallardes. A
renysshe gylden is worth there.xxi. blaffardes. and as many of bemysshe.

A dukate of Venyse is worth.xxvi. bemysshe and iij. hallardes. A bemysshe or a
blaffarde is worth there.xi. hallardes. they last to Kempston. Bemysshe woll
serve well to Rome. And.xij. bemysshes is.xi. pence english.

Kempston
At Kempton ye shall have ferars and crousars. for a bemysshe.xi. ferars. For a
crousare.v. ferars. For a gylden.xix. shelynges and.iij. ferars. Xlvi. Crousars
for a gylden and a ferar.

Trent
At Trent ye shall have kateryns and marketes. For a bemysshe.ix. kateryns. And
of marketes to a bemysshe.iiij. Two kateryns and two bagantines for a market. A
maker is a galyhalfpeny. at Venyse called a soulde.

Bolen^
At Bolen^ ye shall have boleners and other kateryns and bayokes A bolener of
Bolen^ is worth.vi kateryns unto Rome. and at Rome.

Seen
At Seen a bolener of Rome is worth but.vi. katheryns and an half. And the same
bolener is worth at Rome.vi. kateryns A dukate is worth at Bolon^.xlvi.
boleners. A gylden at Bolen^ is worth. xxxv. boleners. It is good silver. And
of bayokes xlviij. to a gylden. A bayoke is worth.iiij. kateryns An old
bolener of Bolen is worth.i. penny englyssh. And they ben best from Bolen^ to
Rome.

Rome
At Rome ye shall have bolendynes of Rome and bayokes and other kateryns / For
a dukate of Venyse.lxviij. bayokes / For a dukate of Rome.ij. less / or for a
dukate of Florence. And of bolendynes for a dukate.xlviij. For a gylden.xxxvi.
boleners. Of bayokes to a gylden.liiij And for a dukate x. papal grotes of
bolendynes of Rome. Of bayokes iiij. to a papal grote. To every bayoke.iiij.
kateryns. To eueri kateryn.xij. pychelynes called in Rome denares.

It^m from Rome to Venyse old boleneres of Dolen^ woll serve well all the way
and grotes of Venyse. and souldis called with us galyhalfpenyes and kateryns.

And be well auysed that ye change not to many kateryns / For they last but
little way there be so many diverse chaunges of them in diverse lordshyppes. And
the kateryns of the one lorshyp woll not goo in the next lordshyp:

Venyse
At Venyse ben grotes and grossettes and s^ callid there souldes and
bagantynes. For a dukate of Venyse is worth.xxiiij. grossones. and a s. and of
grossettes xxviij. and.ij. s^ for a dukate of Rome or of Florence.iiij. s^.
less for a grote or a grossone. All is one. Viij. s^. for a grosset.iij s^.
for a soulde.xij. bagancynes. For a dukate of Venyse ye shall have.v. li. and.
xiiij. s^. A. li. is worth.xx. s^ that been galy halfpenyes. And to every.s^.
xij. bagantynes.

Curphu
At Curphu ye shall have torneys. black money xxiiij. for a venyse grosset.vi.
for a venyse. s^. At Curphu. at Modn. and at Candy a soulde of torneys is
but.iiij. torneys / Therefore beware and ask if ye bye any thing whether they
say a soulde of torneys or of silver /

Modon^
At Modon^ ye shall have but.v. torneys for a soulde sometime. and sometime more.

Candy
At Candy ye shall have.v. torneys / and sometime vi. as the Seignouri woll
set it. And there they have besaundes called parper. A parper is worth.xxxij
corneys.

Rodes
At Rodes ye shall have gillottes and Ionettes and asperis. A gillot is worth
a Ionet and an half. A Ionet is worth.xxxij. denares of Rodes. An asper is
worth half a Ionet. that is.xvi. denares. A gillot a Ionet and an asper ben
silver of Rodes. save ye asper is money of Turkey and silver A venyse dukate is
worth.xix. Ionettes and. viij. denares.

Cypres
In Cypres ye shall have grotes of silver and half grotes and other denares of
black money and besau^tes. A besaunt is worth.xlviij. denares. And.vij.
besauntes and an half to a dukate of Venyse. A grote of Cypres is
worth.xxxviij. denares / A dukat of Venyse is worth.ix. grotes and an half. An
half grote is worth.ix. denares and sic de singulis A grosset of Venyse is
worth there but.xvi. denares / A. s^. but.iiij. torneys and sic de singulis.

Surrey
In Surrey ye shall have dremes and half dremes Two dremes ben worth.iij.
venyse grotes. A dreme is worth.vi. s^. of Venyse. A dukate of Venyse is
worth.xix. dremes. Dukates. grotes. and souldes of Venyse woll go well in
Surrey and none other without great loss.

A Good prouysyon when a man is at Venyse and purposes by goddys grace to
pass by the sea to port Iaffe in to the holy land. and so to the sepulcre of
our lord Ihesu Criste. in Ierlm. he must dispose him in this wise.

First if ye shall goo in a galey. make your covenant with the patron^
betyme. And chose you a place in the said galey in the ouermest stage / For in
the lowest under it is right evil and smouldryng hot and stynkynge. And ye
shall pay for your ship freyghte. and for meet and drink to port Iaffe and
again to Venyse. l dukates. for to be in a good honest place. and to have your
ease in the galey and also to be cherysshed.

If a man shall pass in a ship or a caryk. then^e chose you a chamber as nyghe
the mids of the ship as ye may / For there is leest rollynge or tomblynge
to keep your brain and stomach in tempre. And in the same chamber to keep
your things in saufgarde. And bye you at Venyse a padlocke to hang on the
door when ye shall pass in to ye land. And ye shall pay for meet and
drink and ship freyghte to port Iaffe and again to Venyse.xxx. dukates at
the leest.

Also when ye shall make your covenant take good head that the patron^ be
bound unto you all before the duke of Venyse in a.M. dukates to keep all
manner couenauntes with you. That is to wit. that he shall condute you to
certain havens by ye way to refresshe you. and to get you fresshe water and
fresshe bread and flesh.

Also that he shall not tarry longer at no haven than. three days at the most
without consent of you all. And that he shall not take in to the vessel
neither going nor coming no manner of marchaundyse without your license for
to disease you in your places. And also for taryenge of passages by the sea.

And by the havens that here ben following he shall led you if ye woll.

Venyse
First fro Venyse to Pole by water.C. miles From Pole to Curphu.vi. C. miles.
From Curphu to Modon.iij. C. miles From Modon to Candia.iij. C. miles. From
Candia to Rodes.iij. C. miles. From Rodes to Baaffe in Cypres.iiij. C. miles
From Baaffe to port Iaffe wythouten more..iij. C. miles.
But be well ware ye make covenant that ye come not at Famagust in Cypres for
no thing. For many english men and other also have deyed. for that air is
so corrupt there about and the water there also.

Also se that the said patron^ give you every day hot meet twyes at two
meeles. The fore none at dinner. and the after noon^ at supper. And that the
wine that ye shall drink be good and the water fresshe and not stynkyng. if ye
come to have better. and also the byscute.

Also ye must ordeyne for yourself and your fellow if ye have any three barelles
each of a quart. which quart holdyth.x. galons. Two of these barels should
serve for wine and the third for water. In the one barell take red wine. and
keep that ever in store. and tame it not if ye may till ye come homeward again
without syknesse cause it. or any other special need / For ye shall find this
a special note and if ye had the flyxe / For if ye would give.xx. dukates for
a barell ye shall none have after that ye pass much Venyse. And the other
barell shall serve when ye have spent out your drinking wine to fylle again at
the haven where ye shall come next unto.

Also ye must bye you a cheste to put in your things. And if ye have a fellow
with you. two or three ye need then^e to bye a cheste that were as broad as the
barelles were long. And in the one end ye need lock and key and a little
door. And lay the barel that ye woll came first at the same end. For if ye
shipmen or other pilgrims may com^ thereto they wol came and dry^ke of it. and
also stele your water which ye would not mysse often times for your wine. And
in the other part of the same cheste ye may lay your bread. chese. spyces /
and all other things.

Also ye must ordeyne you byscute to have with you / For though ye shall be at
table with the patron^: yet notwythstondyng ye shall full often times have need
co your own vytaylles / As bread. chese. eggs. wine. and other to make your
collaco^n / For so me time ye shall have feeble bread and feeble wine. and
stynkynge water. so that many times ye woll be right feign to ete of your own.

Pylgrymages in Nazareth
Primo vbi sepultus fuit sctu^s stephanus prima vice quando fuit lapidatus in
Gazar damula. que distat a Ierlm per iactu^ balistie. Item Albiera castru^ vbi
est ecclesia beat marie virginis. in qua recognouit perdidisse filiu^ suu^
pueru^ Ihu^s. Item puteus Samaritane. Item ciuitas Neopolosa vel Cicher. in qua
sepulta sunt ossa Joseph qui fuit venditus in egyptu^. Item ciuitas Sebasten in
qua fuit Incarceratus and decollatus sanctus Johannes Baptista. Item castrum
Iehenen in quo Cristus mundauit december leprosos. Item in ciuitate Naym cristus
resuscitauit a mortuis filium vidue. Item in ciuitate Nazareth est ecclesia in
qua virgo maria fuit annu^ciata vel salutata ab angelo. Item fons de quo puer
Ihu^s portabat aquam matri sue. Item vbi iudei volueru^t precipitare cristu^
Ihu^s autem transiens per medium illorum ibat. In descensu montis Thabor vbi
cristus discipulis suis dixit. Nemini dixeritis visionem hanc. quo tempore
transfiguratus est.

Item ciuitas Capharnaum in qua Cristus fecit multa miracula. Item mare Galilee
in quo cristus fecit multa signa.

Item in ciuitate tyberiadis est vbi cristus vocauit matheu^. Item vbi cristus
resuscitauit a mortuis filiam Archisinagogi.

Item vbi xp^s comedit cum matheo. Item mons vbi xp^s saciauit.v. milia hominu^
de quinque panibus. Item alius mons vbi xp^s saciauit qua tuor milia hominu^ de
septem panibus. Item ciuitas Sydon^ vbi mulier dixit cristo. Beatus venture qui
te portauit. Item ciuitas Tiris vbi xp^s saciauit filiam chananee.

Peregrinaco^es damasci.
Primo est ecclesia sancti Saluatoris in qua su^t plures muros vbi fuit
miraculu^ de Iudeo qui percussa ymagine crucifixi cu^ gladio sanguis viuus ema
nauit. quo visus Iudeus erat co^uersus ad fidem et multi alij. Item vbi sctu^s
georgius interfecit dra cone^ et liberauit filia^ regis. Item iuxta damascu^
cristus dixit paulo. Saul saul. etc^. Item in muro damasci adhuc est fenestra
vbi and per qua^ sanctus paulus exiuit. Item infra ciuitate^ est ecclesia and
domus vbi sanctus paulus fuit baptizatus. Item domus ananie discipuli qui
paulu^ baptizauit.

Item ad quatuor miliaria vltra damascu^ est ecclesia sancte marie de Sarena.

Peregrinaco^es montis synai
Primo. ciuitas Gazara in qua sctu^s Sampson And at Ierlm there is good wine
and dear.

Also se that the patron^ take charge of your harneys within the ship till ye
come again to the ship. ye shall tarry there.xiiij. days.

Also take good head to your knyues and other small Iapes yt ye beer upon you
/ For the Sarrasyns wol go talkyng by you and make good chere: but they woll
stele from you if they may.

Also when ye shall take your ass at port Iaffe be not to long behind your
fellows / For and ye come betyme. ye may chese the best mule or ass that ye
can / For ye shall pay no more for the beast than for the worste. And ye must
give your ass man there of curteysye a grote of Venyse. And be not to much
before neither to far behind your fellows for by cause of shrewes

Also when ye shall ride to flume Jordan take with you out of Jerusalem bread.
wine. water hard eggys / and these. and such vytaylles as ye may have for
two days. For by all that way. there is none to selle.

Also keep one of your botelles with wine if ye may when ye come from Flume
Jordan to Mountquarantyne. And if ye goo up to the place where our lord
Ihesu Christ fasted.xl. days It is passyngly hot and right high. And when ye
come down again For any thing drink no water. but rest you a little. And
then ete bread. and drink clean wine without water / For water after that
great heete gendreth a flyxe or a feuour / or both. that many one have deyed
thereof.

Faciatis lxam in banco recipe ducatos de vene lijs de po^dere and de nouo
sacco sieve ducatos sieve grossos venicianos sieve argenteos.

Tributa in terra sancta.
In primis in naui apud portiaffe ad patronu^ pro saluo conducto et pro
speciebus and confecco^ibus ad dominos sarracenorum..i. ducat Item apud
portiaffe.vij. d and. xvij. gross. Item in rames ad dn^os.ix. g. Item ad scim
georgiu^.i. g. Item pro asino de rames ad Ierlm.vi. g. Item in Ierlm ad
sepultura^ bte marie.iij. s^. Item in monte oliueti vbi xp^s ascendit.ij. s^
Item in sepulcro prima vice.i. g. and an half. Item in sepulcro scda vice.iiij.
g. Item ibidm. tercia vice.ij. g. Item apud Bethleem.i. g. Item ad sctm
Iohe^m.i. g. Item in peregrinaco^e fluminis Iordani.x. g. tem pro tributis in
diuersis locis.vij. g. Item ad co^sulem in Ierlm.i. ducate and iiij. g. Item
pro drugemamio.xv. g. and an half Item ad consulem in rames.ij. g. and an half.
Item alia vice pro spiebus ad dn^os.ij. g. and di^. Item pro asino de rames ad
portiaffe.iij. g. Item in curtesij pro asinis and drugemamns et in alijs
exspensis.ij. ducates and an half.
IN the seven and twenty day of the monthe of June there passyd from Venyse
under saylle out of the haven of Venyse act the son going down. certain
pilgrims toward Jerusalem in a ship of a merchants of Venyse called John
Moreson. The patron^ of the same ship was called Luke Mantell. to the nombre
of.xlvi. pilgrymes. every man payend some more some less as they might
accord with the patron^. Some that might pay well paid.xxxij. dukates. and
some.xxvi. and.xxiiij. for meet and drink and passage to port Iaffe. And
from thens to Venyse again. So they passid forth eest southeest by the land of
Slauony. leuynge it on the left hand / It is two hundrid miles from Venyse.
And there is a great cite called Jar under the domynacyon of the Venycians.
And in the same cite lies Simeon Iustus. And they passyd forth by an isle of
the right hand called Lyssa. In which ben great hills and mountains. And in
those hills growyth great plentee of Rosemary in length as it were fyrses.

After they came to a strong wallyd town of the Emperors of Constantinople
called Aragose. four hundryd miles from Venyse. And they saylled so forth
till they came to the isle of Corphu on the right hand. and Turkey on the lift
hand. eight mile between both lands.

On Frydaye at even they came to the haven of Corphu. There is a good town and
two strong castelles stondyng on two high rocks. It is a good isle and a
plenteuous. There they speak greek. It is under the Venysyens.

On Sunday next after noon^ they saylled from thens eest southeest. leuynge the
land of Corphu on the right hand. and the land of Turkye on the lift hand.

On the Wenesdaye next after. to an isle on the lift hand called the isle of
Modon^. It is a great isle and a plenteuous. It is.iij.C. miles from Corphu And
there growyth wine of Romeney. There is a good town and a strong castle. It
is in Greece. and under the Venysyens.

On the Thursday next after noon^ they sailed from Modon^ eest southeest.
leuynge the land of Modon^ on the right hand.

On Frydaye next after they passyd by a fair haven town.xx. miles from
Modon^. callid Corona. It is under the Venysyens. And so they sailed forth till
they came an hundryd miles from Candy. And there they sailed up and down three
days and two nights in great peril beside great rocks. and durst not pass
for the wind was against them. And one of the rocks is called in Greek Ouogo.
which is to say in englisshe. edgyd. An edgydhyll It is shapen like an egg.
Upon the lift hand. vi. miles within. there is stondynge yet of ye temple
wherein Appollo was worshipped. And in the same temple Elena the wif of king
Menelaus was rauysshed of Paris of Troy and lad in to the country of Asia.
And ye same isle where the temple was which was called of the greeks in old
time Delphos in latin Cirigo.

On Wenesday in the morning next after they came to Candy.iij. C. miles from
Modon^. There is a strong castle and a large. and a fair town without the
castle well walled. and a strong haven wallyd strongly / This isle is a great
isle and a plenteuouse of all manner things. They be Greeks in that isle And the
Venysyens ben lords there. And every year or every other year there is chosen
a duke by ye same Venysyens. There growyth the wine called maluesey. Sometime
they were called Cretes. It is of them wreten (in actibus applorum (Cietenses
semper mendaces male bestie) In that land.xxx. mile from Candy is an old
broken cite. which was called Cretina. And a little beside there stondyth an
old broken church. which was build in the honor of Ihesu Crist. and
hallowed in the worshypp of Titus epreus. To whom Poul wrote in actibus aplorum
Ad titu^) A little beside that place there is an hill called Laborintus. and
that is a merueylous place within forth. wroughte out of hard stone of the
rock. and the great hylle above. A man may goo within that place diverse
ways. some way.x. miles. and some way more / and some way less. And but if
a man be well ware how he gooth in. he may so goo he shall not come out again
there be so many tornynges therein. In this isle as they say there were sometime
an hundred cytees and an hundred kings. In this cite the said pilgrims tarried
a month. And there was great heete / For from May to Halowmasse there grows
no grass. it is so brent with the heete of the son.

And then^ about Alhalowmesse begynnyth grass herbs and flowers to spring.
And it is there then as Somer in England. so in the winter it is temperate
no cold but little. There is never snow nor froste with yse. And if there
come any froste with a lytyl yse. they woll show it each to other for a
merueylle. And fro, May till the later end of Octobre there is no reyne nor
clouds but right selde. but ever the sone shyneth right clear and hot. And
abowte saint Martyns time the son is as hot there. as it is in August in
England. And so it is in Rodes and Cypres. and all that country eestwarde.

From this haven they passyd the Wenesday next before ye Assumpco^n of our
lady. and saylled eest southeest. leuynge Turkey on their lift hand.

On our lady day the Assumpco^n they came to Rodes before noon^.iij. C. miles
from Candy on ye right hand. There they tarried.xviij. days. There is a fair
castle and a strong. In which castle ben the knights of the Rodes / And
there is a good cite well wallyd with double walls. and a fair haven closyd
with strong walls and toures. And on the eest party of the haven. there
stondeth on a strong wall.xiiij. mylles of stoon, every wyndmyll as it were a
strong toure. Of that place it is wreten that Poul wrote (ad Colosences) to
that same place.

The first day of the month of Septembre in the even tide they sailed from
Rodes toward Jerusalem.vij. C. miles eest southeest. leuynge Turkey on their
lift hand. So they saylled forth fro Rodes and never stryked saylle till they
came to port Iaffe.

In the vigill of our lady in the feast of the Natiuyte they came to port
Iaffe. and there they tarried Mondaye and Tewesdaye in the ship. till they had
their sautconduyte. And on wenesdaye in the morning they entered in to ye land
at port Iaffe. At port Iaffe begynnyth the holy land. There Peter raised
from death to life Thesbitan the servant of the apostles. There is
Indulgence.vij. years and.vij. lentes.

And a little beside southwarde. there is a stoon where Peter stood and fysshed
when our lord called him. and said to him (sequere me)

At port Iaffe they paid are they came out of the ship every pilgrim one
dukate of Venyse. for mangery and for saufconduyte to the patron^. And at port
Iaffe every pilgrim paid for trybute.vij. dukates and.xvij. grotes.

On Thursdaye they took their asses and rode to Rames. There they paid every
man a grote venycyan to his ass man for curteysye. And there they were
received in to an hospytall. and there tarried all day.

On Fridaye in the morning they went to saint Georges where he was martyred.
And there is an old cite. which is called Lida. There every man paid a grote
venycyan. and came again to Rames. where they tarried all that day. which Rames
is a great cite and much people therein And there was borne Joseph of Aromathye
as it is said. And at saint Georges is.vij. years and vij. lentes.

On Saturdaye betymes in the morning they rode toward Jerusalem. And a
little fro Rames is the sepulcre of Samuel the prophet. Also fro Rames is.xij.
miles to the castle of Emauns. where the two discyples knew Christ in brekynge
of bread after his resurrecco^n.

Also a little over the mydwaye toward Jerusalem is the valeye of Terrebynti
on the lift hand. where David overcame Golyam.

From Rames to Ierlm is.xxiiij. miles. So by.ij. at after noon^ the same
Saturday they came to Jerusalem / where they were received in to an hospytall a
little from the sepulcre. And therein they were all that day. and all that
night.

On a sunday in the morning they began their pilgrymage. And a friar of mount
Syon went w^ them to enfourme the places. and the perdons of every place.

These ben the pylgrymages within the cite of Ierlm.
The first is before the temple of the sepulcre door. There is a four square
stoon white. where upon Criste restyd him with his cross when he went toward
the mount of Caluarie. Where is Indulgence.vij. years and.vij. lentes.

Also the house of the rich man. which denied Lazare the cru^mes of bread.

In the sepulcre church of our lord on the north side of the temple. is a
chapel where Criste apperyd first to his mother after his resurrecco^n / and
said (salve sancta parens)

And on the right hand of the awter there is a wyndowe in which stondyth a
pyllar to the which Criste was bounden and beten with scourges in Pilates house.

On the lift hand of the awter in a wyndowe stondyth a little cr^sse. which
is made of a pyece of the holy cross.

Also in the mids of the same chapel is a round stoon of diverse colors.
where saint Elyn proved the cross that Crist deyed upon with reysynge of a
deed man to life. In each of those places ben.vij. years and.vij. lentes.

Also without the same chapel door. is a round stoon and an hole in the
mids where Crist apperyd to Mari Mawdeleyn after his Resurrecco^n in lyknesse
of a gardener. and said noli me tangere) There is Indulgence.vij. years
and.vij. lentes.

Also a little from thens is a chapel where Ihu Criste was prysoned while his
cross was in shapyng. There is Indulgence.vij. years and.vij. lentes.

And there is a another awter where ye Jews cast lotte for the clothes of
Crist.vij. years and.vij. lentes.

Also in the eest end of the temple. there is a chapel descendyng.xxxij.
grecys. where saint Elyn found the cross In that place is Indulgence (a pena
and culpa)

Also a little above is a chapel in worship of saint Elyn. There is.vij. years
and.vij. lentes.

Also above in the temple a lytyl from thens. there is a pyllar of marbyll
under and awter. on ye which Criste was set, and crownyd with thorns.vij.
years and.vij. lentes.

Also a little from thens is a fair chapel.xix. steps high.iij which is
the mount of Caluarie where Crist suffryd passion for all mankind. And there
is a morteyse in the clyffe. which did cleue when Crist yielded his spyryte.

Also there is the morteyse in which ye cross stood. In this chapel is
Indulgence (a pena and culpa)

Also before the temple door is a place as it were a sepulture where Crist was
laid when he was taken down of the cross. And there he was noynted and
lappyd in clothe. There is also (a pena and culpa)

Also in the weste end of the temple is a chapel in the which is a four
square stone. where ye angel sat. and said to the three mary's que^ queritis)
Also in that chapel is a another little chapel in which is ye sepulcre of
Ihesu Crist where he was buried and rose fro death to life A pena and culpa)

Also in the mids of the quere there is a stoon and an hole in the mids.
Where Crist said to his discyples Here is the mids of the world.

Also in the cite without the temple ben certain pylgrymages. The first where
the Jews compellyd Simon to take the cross of Ihu^ when he went to the mount
of Caluarie. vij years and.vij. lentes.

Also there is a place where Crist put down the cross. and turned unto the
wy^men. saying (Nolite flere super me sz super filios vestros) vij. years and
vij. lentes.

Also there is a place where our lady rested her seeng her sone beeryng the
cross. There is a church called Ecclesia de spasmo vij. years and.vij. lentes.

Also there is an arche wherein ben two stones. upon the one sat Pylate when
Ihesu was demed to death. And in the other sat Ihesu. vij. years and.vij.
lentes.

Also the stole of our ladi.vij. years and.vij lentes Also the house of Pylate
in which Crist was scourgyd and demed to the death. There is (a pena and culpa)

Also the house of Herod in which Crist was ladde and in scorn clothed in
white. There is Indulgence.vij. years and.vij. lentes.

Also the place where Crist forgaat Mary Mawdeleyn her sins. There is
Indulgence.vij. years and.vij. lentes.

Also within the utter gates of Salomons temple is Probatica piscina. There is
also Indulge^ce vij. years and.vij. lentes.

Also a little from the same temple is Porta aurea.

Also the gate of saint Stephen by ye which he was lady to be stoned to death
(vij. year and.vij. lentes.

Pylgrymages in the vale of Iosephat.
First the place in which saint Stephen was stonyd to death.vij. years
and.vij. lentes.

Also the water of Cadron where the body of ye cross lay many years for a
bridge.vij. years and.vij. lentes.

Also a chapel in the mids of the vale wherein is the sepulcre of our lady
descendyng.xxviij. grecis.vij. years and.vij. lentes.

Also a lytyl thens is a chapel where Crist.iij. times prayed to the fad. It
is under a roche of stoon in the earth. there is Indulgence.vij. year and.vij.
lent. Also in the same vale is a church of saint Iamys ye less. in which he
was the time of the passion of Crist. Where he promised he would never ete ne
drink till he knew Ihesu risen. And there is the sepulcre of Zachary the
sone of Barachie. which Jews slew between the temple and the awter. There is
Indulgence.vij. years and.vij. lentes.

Pylgrymages of the mount of Oliuete
A little entryng upon the mount of Oliuete is the gardyne in which Crist was
taken with the Jews.vij. years and vij. lentes.

Also a little above toward the same mount is a place where Crist said to his
discyples Vigilate and orate ne intretis in temptaco^em.vij. years and vij.
lentes.

Also a little from thens is a place where saint Thomas of Ynde received the
gyrdill of our lady ascendynge to heaven. There is Indulgence.vij. years
and.vij. lentes.

Also a little fro thens is a place in ye same way where crist wept upon Ierl'm
saying (No^ relinquet in te lapis super lapide^.vij. years and.vij. lentes.

Also a lytyl fro thens upward is a place where thangel apered to our ladi with
the palm. saying Gale die eris assu^pta in celu^).vij. year and.vij. lent.

Also above there is an hill on the lift hand called Galilee. in which place
Crist appeared to his discyples after his resurrecco^n A pena and culapa)

Also there is a place where the children of Isre cast branches of olyue
trees in the way. and did him worship.vij. years and.vij. lentes.

Also a quarter of a mile fro the thens is the mount of Oliuete south fro
Galilee. In that place is an old round church where our lord ascended in to
heaven. And there is seen the steps of his foot) A pena and culpa)

Also a little fro thens descendyng dou^warde is a broken church of saint
Pilagie. where thapostles made the Creed. There is.vij. years and.vij. lentes.

Also in ye same way is a place where Crist preched often to the
appostles.vij. years and.vij. lentes

Also in the same way a little more descendynge is a place where was a church
of saint Mark In which place Crist taught the (Pater noster) to the
appostles.vij. years and.vij. lentes.

Also a little thens is a place and a stoon on which our lady rested her upon.
visytynge the holy places.vij. years and.vij. lentes.

Also the church of saint James aforsayd.

Pylgrymages in the vale of Syloe.
In the vale of Syloe is a well where our lady wasshyd the clothes of Ihesu
Christ. There is.vij. years and.vij. lentes.

Also a little without is a place where Isaye ye prophet was sawed with a saw
of tree.vij. years and.vij. lentes.

Also a little thens on the right hand a lytyl decendynge is a water rennynge
out of an hill. Which is called Natatoria Syloe.vij. years and.vij. lentes.

Also a little thens above hanging on the hill ben places like caves. where
the apostles were hyd in the time of the passion of Christ.vij. years and.vij.
lentes.

Also a lytyl from thens is a place which is called Archeldemak or Campus
sctu^s. which was bought with.xxx. pence that Crist was sodle fore.

There is.vij. years and.vij. lentes.

Pilgrymages of mount Syon
Act the high awter of mount Syon there is a place there Crist made his
maundy with his discyples.vij. year and.vij. lentes.

Also on the right hand of the water is a place where Christ wyssh his
discyples fete on Sherethursday. saying (Mandatu^ nouum do vobis).vij. years
and.vij. lentes.

And without the church on the south side is a little fair deuowte chapel.
where the holy ghost descended on the appostles on Wytsonday. There is (a pena
and culpa)

Also in the cloystre byneth is a chapel where saint Thomas of Ynde put his
fyngre to Cristes side or wound.vij. year and.vij. lentes.

Also at the eest end of mount Syon is the place where the Pascall lamb was
roasted.vij. years and.vij. lentes.

Also the oratori of our lady vij. years and.vij lentes.

Also the sepulcre of David. Solomon. Ezechie and other kings of Iudee.

Also at the north side of the church is a stoon^ upon which Crist stood
when he preched to his discyples.vij. years and.vij. lentes.

Also a another stoon^ where our lady sat and herd the prechyng of her
sone.vij. year and.vij. lentes

Also a little more weste north weste is a place where our lady deyed. There is
Indulgence (a pena and culpa)

Also a little thens is a place where saint John the Eeuangelist said mass
before our lady.vij. years and.vij. lentes.

Also on the north side a lytyl beside mount Syon is a place there Cayphas house
was. In which place Criste was put in prison. And there is the stoon that was
put on the sepulture of Christ for he should not rise. By the which it is said
in scripture (Quis reuoluet nobis lapidem ab hostio monumenti. erat quippe
magnus valde.vij. years and.vij. lentes.

There ben Iacobines and keep that place worshypfully.

There Peter denied our lord And a lytyl from thens where he wept the denyenge
of our lord.vij. years and.vij. lentes.

Also a lytyl way from mount Syon is the place where the Jews would have
arested the body of our lady saint Mari in the beer.vij. years and.vij. lentes.

Also within the chiryerde of mount Syon on ye north side is a place where
saint Stephen was buried the second time. There is Indulgence.vij years
and.vij. lentes.

Also where saint Mathewe was chosen one of the appostles.vij. years and.vij.
lentes.

Also the church of saint Angel which was the house of Anne the bishop.vij.
years and.vij. lentes.

Also a little thens in the high way toward the hospital from mount Syon
at an high stoon^ wall in the right hand is the place where Criste appeared to
the three Mary's on Ester day in the morning.vij. years and.vij. lentes.

Ibi similit est castellu^ David
Pilgyrmages of Bethleem
From Ierlm to Bethleem ben five miles and in the high way three miles from
Jerusalem is the place where the sterre apperyd again to ye kings of
Coleyne.vij. years and.vij. lentes.

Also a place where was a church where Elias the prophet was borne. Also the
sepulture of Rachelis the prophet.

In Bethleem is a fair church of our lady in which is a place where Crist
was born under the high awter vnd earth A pena and culpa.

Also a little by in the same chapel the cratche of our lord A pena and culpa.

Also above on the right hond of the quere is an awter where Crist was
circumcided. There is a pena and culpa)

Also on the lift hand of the quere there is an awter where the three kings
made them ready to their offrynge.vij. years and.vij. lentes.

Also in the cloystre of the same temple or church is a chapel descendynge
vnd earth. where saint Ierom turned the Bible out of Ebrewe in to Latin.vij.
years and.vij. lentes.

Also in the same chapel a lytyl thens is ye sepulcre of saint Ierom.vij.
years and.vij. lentes.

Also right nyghe by is the sepulcre of the Innocents.vij. years and.vij.
lentes.

Also two miles on the north side from Bethleem is an old broken church where
the angel apryd to the shepeherdes.vij. years.vij. lentes.

Pilgrymages of saint John
Five mile from Bethleem and fyues mile from Ierlm in mount Iudee is a church.
And at the hye awter our lady saluted saint Elizabeth. And there our lady
made the psalm of (Magnificat).vij years and.vij. lentes.

Also in the same church bynethe in a wall on the right hand is a stoon
which hid and closyd saint John Baptist in his chyldehode when Herod sought
the children of Israel the Innocences. and slew them.vij. years and.vij.
lentes.

Also a another church above the roof of the sam^ church in which the angel
apperyd to Zachary the fader of saint John. saying Eo quoth non credidisti
verbis meis eris tacens vsque in diem natiuita it is eius) And in that place he
made the psalm Bn^dictus dn^s deus israel. There is.vij. years and.vij. lentes.

Also a quarter of a mile is a church where saint John Baptist was born A pena
and culpa)

Also four miles from thens toward Jerusalem is a church. wherein under the
high awter is an hole where a piece of the holy cross grew. And there was
sometime the orcharde of king Solomon In that place is Indulgence.vij. years
and vij. lentes.

Pylgrymages in Bethany
From Jerusalem two miles on the eest party toward Flume Jordan in Bethany is
a temple where lazare was buried. And in the said temple is a little chapel.
there Crist stood when he raised Lazare from death to life.vij. years and.vij.
lentes.

Also the house of Simon Leprosus where Mari Mawdeleyn anointed Cristes fete.
and wyped them with her here.vij. years and.vij. lentes.

Also in a place half a mile thens, where the said Mary and Martha said to
Criste Domine si fuisses hic. frater meus. etc^)

Also a little thens is the house of Martha and also the house of Mary Mawdeleyn.

Pylgrymages of Flume Jordan
From Bethany to mount Quarentine ben.xxi. miles. In which mount is a chapel
wherein Criste fasted.xl. days. There is a pena and culpa)

Also in the top of the same mount is a place. where the devil set Crist
and tempted him (Omnia regna mundi) saying (hec omnia tibi dabo si. etc^)

Also five miles thens is the cytee of Ierico. in which Ihesu Crist preched
often times.

Also four miles and an half from Jericho is a chapel of saint John the
Baptist / where he said (Ecce agnus dei).vij. years and.vij. lentes.

Also there by is the wilderness where saint Johan Baptist walked.

Also half a mile fro that chapel is Flume Jordan. where Ihu^ Crist was
baptized of saint John Baptist. And there is also Indulgence a pena and culpa)

Also I counsel you to have with you out of Venyse Confecco^ns Confortatiues
Laxatiues Restrictiues Grenegynger Almondes Ryce Fygges Reysons great and
small. which shall do you great ease by the way. And Pepyr Saffron Cloves
and Maces a few as ye think need. and loof sugre also.

Also take with you a little caudron. a fryenge-panne. Dysshes. platers.
sawcers / of tree. cups of glass. a grater for bread. and such necessaryes.

Also ye shall bye you a bed beside saint Markys church in Venyse / where ye
shall have a fether bed. a matrasse. a pylowe. two pair shetes / and a quylte.
and ye shall pay but three dukates. And when ye come again bring the same bed
again and ye shall have a dukate and an half for it again though it be broke
and woren. And mark his house and his name that ye bought it of against ye come
to Venyse.

Also make your change at Venyse. And take with your at the leest.xxx. dukates
in venyse grotes and grossones. Ye shall have at Venyse for a dukate of
Venyse.xxviij. grotes and an half. And after ye pass Venyse ye shall have in
sum place but. xxvi. and.xxiiij. And take with you three or four dukates in
souldes. that been galyhalfpenyes of Venyse. for every grote of Venyse.iiij.
souldes. And take with you from Venyse.i. dukate or.ij. of torneys. it is
brass money of Candy. It woll goo all ye way by the sea. Ye shall have.viij.
for a soulde at Venyse. at Modon. and at Candy often but.v. or.vi. at the most.

Also hyre you a cage for half a dosen of hens or cheky^s to have with you in
the ship or galey For ye shall have need to them many times. And bye you half
a busshell of mile sede at Venyse for them.

Also take a barell with you for a sege for your chamber in the ship. It is
full necessary if ye were syke that ye come not in the air.

Also when ye come to haven towns. if ye shall carry there three days. go
betymes to land / for then^ ye may have lodging before a another / for it
woll be take up anon. And if any good vytayle be ye may be spedde before a
another.

Also when ye come to diverse havens beware of fruytes that ye ete none for no
thing. As melons and such cold fruytes / for they be not according to our
complexyon. and they gendre a blody flux. And if any english man catch
there that syknesse. it is a great merueylle but if he deye thereof.

Also when ye shall come to port Iaffe. take with you out of the ship unto
land. two botelles or two gourdes. one with wine a another with water each of a
potell at the leest / For ye shall none have till ye come to Rames. and that is
right feeble and dear

(...) fuit mortuus. Item in monte synay est monasteriu^ sa^cte marie rubo in
qua requiescit corpus sancte katherine. Item post tribuna istius ecclesie est
locus vbi xp^s apperuit moysi in medio rubi. Item in medio montis est locus vbi
Helias fecit penitencia^. Item in su^mitate montis deus dedit tabulas legis
moysi. Item viridariu^ vbi onefrius fecit penitencia^. Item alius monsscte
katherine vbi angeli posueru^t corpus eiusdem scte^. Item mare rubrum.

Peregrinaco^es terre egypti
In ciuitate messare vel cayre sunt multe ecclesie xp^ianorum int quas est
ecclesia sancte marie de Colu^pna. in qua est corpus sancte barbare. Item
flumen quoth venit de paradyso. Item vine a balsami Item monasteriu^ sancti
Antonij and pauli primi heremite. macharij. and alia multa. Item a predicta
ciuitate messare per tres dietas in patria egypti est q^dam patria noi^e
Menpheluto. in qua est monasterium Iacobitarum noi^e Elmarath. vbi est capella
vbi beata maria stetit per.vij. annos cu^ filio suo Ihu and Joseph. Et
celebratur ibi festu^ ab om^ibus xp^ianis terre egypti in die Ramis palmarum.
Item in ciuitate alexandrie sancta katherina fuit marterizata. Item ibi est
mortuus sanctus Elemosinarius Iohes patriarcha. Item ibi fuit sctu^s marcus
euangelista et postea sepultus.

Reditus and reuersio dictoru^ peregrinoru^ versus angliam
Apud portiaffe reueniendo and velando die Iouis proximo post festu^
translaco^is sa^cte Thome apud Salyna vel Salay^na.xiiijo. die Iulij die
sabbati velabamus dsus mirram. In vigilia sancti petri aduincula in nocte apud
mirram illa nocte ad catamo. Ciastino die post testu^ sancti petri vela^uimus
vsus rodes. Dies martis post festu^ predictu^ apud rodes. Die Iouis fecimus
velaco^em versus candiam. In vigilia assumpco^is beat marie in candia. Die
martis proximo velabamus dsus modon^. In.xviijo. die augusti in modona. In
proximo die lune velabamus apud aragosiam. Xxvio. dic illius mensis in portu
arogosie. Iijo. die post velabamus dsus parensiam. Viijo. die mensis octobris
in parencia. Iijo. die velabamus dsus veniciam. Iiijo. die. videlt die veneris
circa hora^ decimam in venisia. Proximo die post missam vsus ferariam. Die
martis in matutina in feraria.

De breuitate et vanitate huic mu^di.
Audite oe^s in pplo negligentes aliquando cognoscite. Ite ad sepulcra
mortuorum et videte exempla viuenciu^. iacent ossa. perit homo. et tamen
reseruat^ causa eius in iudiciu^ refuit et ipree similis nobis aliquando homo
in vanitate viuens in sclo. studens diuicijs. multiplicauit agros. plantauit
vineas. implens horrea sua in appotecis multis. et letatus est in habundancia
sua. Et ecce sublata su^t om^ia ab oculis suis. Iacet in sepulcro redactus in
puluere^. De fluxeru^t carnes quas delicijs nutriuit. Abcesserunt nerui a
co^paginibus suis. sola su^t ossa que remanse ru^t in exe^pla viuenciu^.
Cognoscant reliquias mortuorum viuentens putant eu^ requiescere corpus et
habitat in inferno anima eius. et non videbit vlteri^s lumen.

Here follows the langage of Moreske and of other countrees also.
I whada / ij ettenin / iij telate / iiij. arba / v camate / vi set. vij
saba.viij temane.ix tessa.x asshera.xi hadasshe.xij attanasshe. xiij
telatasshe.xiiij abatasshe.xv camatasshe.xvi settatasshe.xvij sabatasshe.xviij
tematasshe.xix tessatasshe.xx esshere.xxi wahadaesshere.xxij tellatyne.xxiij
wahadatellatyne. (etc^ vsque ad.xl.

Bread ghobbis. wine nebete. water moy. flesh laghe. fysshe semek. Come tale
goo roa. Good morrow sabalkir. Good even mesalkir. Content besmelle. Give me
attyne. Fressh terre. salt mala. little swyre. Potage tabahaghe. It reyneth
mataha. Much kytir. Wind awa. Now dilawaght. how much bekem. Will you
detryght. I will anastare. Give me hate. Gramercy ectharlak herak. Much good
do it you sahagh. Ye be welcome mar hababak. Sytte down hocoyte. Rise up
coome. Will thou goo betrightrea. ye ee. Thou shall be paid to morrow Zee fook
bocula. Nay legh. Good taybo. Evil maletaybo. Naught fusshare. To night
delile. In the morning agade Anon fissa. soden stawa. Fire nare. What
tidings aschabare. There howne. Here menn ahowne. Sleep neyme. I will not goo
maberet roo I goo hanna roo. Milk leben. A hen digiage. These inben. An ass
homaghe. An horse pharasse. A mule begel. Eggis beyet

Greek
I ena.ij dua.iij. trea.iiij. testera.v pende.vi hexe.vij esta.viij octo.ix
ennea.x deca.xi endecaena.xij end cadoa.xiij decatrea.xiiij decatessera.xv
decapente. xvi decahexe.xvij decaesta.xviij decaocto.xix decaennea.xx
choshi.xxx trenda.xl serenda.l penynda. lx exinda.lxx esteminda.lxxx
octoinda.lxxxx emnin da.C chato.Cxx enacho.CC duacessia.

Give me doiso mo. Bread ypsome. Salt alas. Appill mela. Butter foter. Flesh
creas. Moton prouido. Peeis pidea. Fire fotia. Wine crasse. Water nero. Chese
galatiry. Eggys ouago. Porke grony. Fyssh^ opsaria. He^nes oringha. Gose
pappia. Muscles mydea. Oystres ostridia. Vinegre accide Cheryes charasse.
Candyll kiry. Cup cuppa. Percely colomyndo. Garlyk scorda. Oyneons croundea.
Grapis stephile Shone pappoche. Hosen calsshe. Sherte camisa. Cappe takkia..
Fig sica. Nay oche. Yes nesshe. See ne. God save zass. Gramercy spolate. A
penny cartsa. Good night calamitra.Good morn calemera. Good even calaspera.
Good day calaporn^. Have ye exe. How much posso. Dame hyra. Mine mo. Bring
hither ferto do Draw onogale. Take drink na pnme. To ete na fao. Enough sone.
No more detholoplne. Sire offend. Tell me the way diximo strata. Welcom^
calasartis. That tut. With good will mitteka wylt thou telysale. Where is the
tavern ecke canowte. Whyther ghost popays. Come hither ela do. Sytte cattese.
Goo ame. Anon ligora. Bring me ferme. Potage fayte. Dysshe mecrutea. God
oaths. Be with you metacena. My lady kyramo. What say cheleys. I understand
ye not den so gre to. Whens come apopoarkistis: whyther wolt thou pothelles:
Goo nay pass. To the town stachoreo. To land geys. Drink piss. The sea
thalas. House spite. In to break thy fast pame na istone. Ete bread fae ipsome.

The nombres of the langage of Turkey.
I bir.ij equi.iij vg.iiij doit.v bex.vi alti.vij yedi.viij zaquiz.ix doguc.x
on.xi. oubir.xij on equi.xiij on vg.xiiij on doit.xv on bex.xvi on alti.xvij on
ye di.xviij on zaquiz.xix on doguc.xx on ygrimi.xxi ygrimi bit.xxij ygri
equi.xxiij ygri vg.xxiiij. ygri doit.xxv ygri bex.xxvi. ygri alti.xxvij ygri
yedi. xxviij ygri zaquiz.xxix ygrimi doguc.xxx tut.

Staciones in Roma.
Dominica in Septuagesima ad sanctu^ laurencium extra muros Dn^ica in
Sexagesima ad sanctu^ paulum. Dn^ica in quinquagesima ad sanctu^ petrum. Feria
quarta in capite Ieinuij ad sctam sabina^ Feria quinta ad scm^ georgiu^ ad
velu^ auteum Feria sexta ad sanctos Iohe^m and paulum Sabbato ad sanctu^
triphonem.
Dominica prima Quadragesime ad sanctu^ Iohe^m ^aternens. Feria scda ad sanctu^
petrum aduincula Feria tercia ad sancta^ anastaciam Feria quarta ad sancta^
mariam maiorem Feria quinta ad sanctu^ laurencium in pamsperua vbi assatus fuit
Feria sexta ad sanctos apostolos Sabbato ad sanctu^ petrum apostolu^ iuxta
sanctos Iohe^m and paulum
Dominica secu^da Quadragesime ad sancta^ mariam de dompnica Feria scda ad
sanctu^ clementem Feria tercia ad sanctam balbinam Feria quarta ad sancta^
ceciliam Feria quinta ad sancta^ mariam transtiberim Feria sexta ad sanctu^
vitalem Sabbato ad sanctos marcellum and petrum
Dominica tercia Quadragesime ad sanctum laurencium extra muros Feria secu^da
ad sanctu^ marcum Feria tercia ad sancta^ potencianam Feria quarta ad sanctu^
sixtum Feria quinta ad ecclesia^ scto^rum cosme and damiani Feria sexta ad
sanctu^ laurencium in lucina Sabbato ad sanctam susannam
Dominica quarta Quadragesime ad sanctam crucem Ierlm. Feria secunda ad sa^ctos
quatuor coronatores Feria tercia ad sanctu^ laurenciu^ in damasco Feria quarta
ad sanctu^ paulum Feria quinta ad sanctu^ martinum in monte Feria sexta ad
sanctu^ eusebium. Sabbato ad sanctu^ nicholau^ in carceribus
Dominica in passione dn^i ad scm^ petrum Feria secu^da ad sanctu^ grisogonum
iacentem in Iarra Feria tercia ad sa^ctos cornelium and ciriacum Feria quarta
ad sanctu^ marcellum Feria quinta ad sanctu^ appollinarem Feria sexta ad sctm
stephanum in selio monte Sabbato ad scm^ Ioh^em ante portam latina^
Dominica in Ramis palmarum and scm^ Iohe^m laternensem Feria secunda ad
sanctu^ achilleum Feria tercia ad sanctam priscam Feria quarta ad sancta^
mariam maiorem Feria quinta ad sanctu^ Iohe^m latnensem Feria sexta in passione
in capella Ierlm Sabbato pasche non est stacio
Die Pasche ad scta^m mariam maiorem Feria secu^da ad sanctu^ petrum Feria
tercia ad sanctu^ paulum Feria quarta ad sanctu^ lamencium extra muros Feria
quinta ad sanctos apostolos Feria sexta ad sancta^ mariam rotunda^ Sabbato ad
scm^ Iohe^m laternensem
Nota de significaco^e singsorum membrorum ecclesie
Si qis scire preoptat qid singla me^bra ecclie significat hic audire potest.:.

In premis dicend est qid sit ecclia. Ecclia est congregacio fideliu^. Hostiu^
ecclie fide^ signi. Due pertes ecclie duos pplos signifi.s^ iudeicu^ and
gentile^. Singlilapides xp^ianos signi. Turris ecclie confessionem signi
Colu^pne ecclie prelatos signi. Fenestre diuinas scripturas signifi.
Tintinnabula signifi. predicatores. Altar. cruce^ xp^i signifi Corporale.
sudariu^ signi. Calix sepulcru^ signi. Patena. lapide^ super sepulcru^ positu^
signi. Vinu^ signat deitate^. Aqua signi. humanita te^. Dexta pars gaudiu^
signi. Sinistra pars vallem lacrimarum signi. vnde sacerdos stans in dex tera
part altaris recedens ad sinistram significat adam missu^ in paradysu^ in
vallem lacrimarum.


