INFORMATIONS, OR A PROTESTATION, AND A Treatise from Scotland.

SECONDED WITH D. REIGNOLDES HIS LETTER TO SIR Francis Knollis.

AND Sir Francis Knollis his speech in Parliament.

ALL Suggesting the usurpation of Papal Bishops.

1. Cor: 12. 5.

There are diversities of Administrations but one Lord.

Math. 15. 13.

Every plant. which my heavenly Father has not planted, shall be rooted out.

Imprinted. 1608.

The Printer to the Reader.
WHereas it has pleased God to hide me (as he did Jeremy and Baruch) on this
Ierm 36. 26
side the seas, notwithstanding the Archbishop of Canterbury sent over two men
to seek me (of whom I hard after they were gone hencee) and I doubt not, but
the same God will hide me still, until I have done his heavenly Majesty all
that servicc which (in his counsel) he has appointed me to do here. I am
resolved (through his grace) to be as helpful as (I can) in pulling down the
tower of Babel. Which to do I am persuaded, every christian is as well bound in
conscience as to build up the tower of Sion. Promising withal, in the presence
of God, to give over this course, and humbly to submit my self to the censure
of authority, for the manifesting of my repentance, when I shall learn, that
Diocesan Bishopps are by the ordinance of God, and (as heretofore, so hear
after) with all diligence and humility, to inform my self, touching that
question most necessary to be known in these times, of all those that esteem
the kingdom of Christ.

If I be demanded, whither I have not heard of, or seen D. Downams Sermon at
Lambith: I answer, I hear that many sound divines do greiue, that so learned
a man should discover such weakness, But they think that the sermon, especially
the Epistle was by the instructions of the Archbishop, whose chaplain he is.
And I see that he does not answer M. Jacobs reasons, though he be carping at
his book: and one other thing of note, which was never yet heard of. viz. That
not one Minister of such a particular congregation, as may, and ought to come
together on the Sabbath, is once named, or specially mentioned, in all the New
Testament, but only Diocesan Bishops, from which Bishops those 1 Peter 2. 13
14.
Ministers are sent, as governors are sent from the King. So that Mimisters
are but curates to the Bishops, as to those who only hold their calling
immediately from Christ. Therefore (if this Doctrine be true) me thinks one
prayer in the Communion Book should be put out: viz. Almighty God, who only
workest great mervailes, send down upon our Bishops and curates the healthful
spirit of thy grace. For though heretofore it might seem to us a mervaile, if
God blessed Diocesan Bishops and Ministers as being their curates, because they
were not (as yet) known to be by Gods Ordinance: yet now (if this doctrine be
true, that all having charge of congregations, be either Diocesan Bishops, or
their curates) we are not to mervaile if God bless his own ordinance. But I
hope that this doctrine and the whole Sermon, and consequently the usurpation
of Papal Bishops will be impleaded at the bar of their conscience, who have
a mind to read: and understanding to judge what shall be written.

In mean while I thought it convenient to pubthese Informations, praying the
brethren of Scotland not to be offended, if their be any errors in the
Protestation, or Treatise of Kirk government: but to consider, that I received
them from Englishmen, who have not (belike) perfect intelligence of Scottish
affairs, but as things go from hand to hand. As may appear by naming Leith
to be the place where the Sermon was preached, for which M. Murray is
imprisoned, notwithstanding the Provincial Synod, before which it was preached
(as I hear) approved the same. But that it was preached by M. Murray and at
Edinburgh: I heard not, till after the sermon was imprinted. As for the Letter,
and Speech mentioned in the Title page of this book, I join them with the
other, because they (likewise) inform the Church of the usurpation of Papal
Bishops. And the rather, because the Letter does not only make good that
(which toward the end of the second part of the Treatise) is said, to this
effect: viz That the most learned defendours of the truth against the Roman
Antichrist, condemn the said usurpation, but also it confuteth sundry points
of D. Downams Lambith Sermon. And secondly. Because the Letter, together with
the Speech of so worthy a Counsailor of this State, should be some Incitation
to his Majesty's most Honorable privy Council now being, not to depend upon
the mouths of Bishops and their Chaplains (who, in this case, are rather to
be mistrusted of godly wise men, as Achabs 400. Prophets were of King
Iehoshaphat 1 king 22, 7,
) but closely to sound the judgment of learned men, (such as do not'aspire to
dignities, and therefore do not study to please the mighty) and then to
plead (not for Baal, but) for Christ his Kingdom in his Church, Judge. 6. 31.
which he purchased with his most precious blood.

A PROTESTATION OFFERED TO THE PARLIAMENT at S. Iohnstons 1. Iulij 1606.
THe earnest desire of our hearts is to be faithful, and in case we could have
been silent, and faithful at this time when the undermined estate of Christ
his Kirk craves a duty at our hands; we should have locked up our hearts
with patience, and our mouths with taciturnitie rather than to have impeshed
any with our admonition. But that quhilk Christ commands, necessity urges,
and duty wringeth out of us to be faithful office bearers in the Kirk of
God, no man can justly blame us to do it; Providing we hold our selves within
the bounds of that Christian moderation quhilk follows God without injury
done to any man, specially those, who^ God has lapped up within the skirts of
his own honorable styles and names, calling them Gods upon earth.

Now therefore (my Lords convened in this present Parliament, under the most
High and excellent Majesty of our dread Sovereign) to your Honors is our
exhortation, that ye would indever with all singlenes of heart, love, and
zeal, to adva^ce the building of the house of God; reserving always into the
Lord his own hands that glory, quhilk he will communicate neither with man,
nor Angel, to wit to prescribe from his holy mountain a liulie Exodus 25
Hebrew ^, 5
pattern according to which his own Tabernacle, should be formed. Remembering
always, that there is no absolute, and unbounded authority in this world,
except the Sovereign authority of Christ the King, to who^ it belongs as
properly to rule the Kirk, according to the good pleasure of his own will, as
it belongs to him to save his Kirk by the merit of his own sufferings. All
other authority is so intre^ched within the marches of divine commandment,
that the least overpassing of the bounds set by God himself brings men under
the fearful expectation of temporal, and eternal Heb, 12 25 28, 29.
judgmentes. For this cause my Lords, let that authority of your meeting in
this present Parliament be like the Ocean sea, quhilk as it is greatest of all
other waters; so it conteyneth the self better within the coasts and limits
appointed by God, than any River of fresh running waters have done.

Next remember that God has set you to be Nourish Fathers of his Kirk, Isai
49. 23.
craving at your hands that you should maintain and advance by your authority
that Church which the Lord has fashioned by the vncou^terfaited work of his
own new creation (as the Prophet speaks) He has made us, and not we our
selves, but not that ye Psalm 100. 3
should presume to fashion, and shape a new protrature of a Kirk, and a new
form of divine service, quhilk Cod in his word has not before allowed;
because that were to extend your authority further than the calling ye have of
God does permit. As namely if ye should (as God forbid) authorize the authority
of Bishops, and their prehemi nence above their brethren, ye should bring into
the Kirk of God the Ordinance of man, and that thing which the experience of
preceding ages has testified to have been the ground of great idleness,
palpable ignorance, unsufferable pride, pitiles tyranny, and shameless ambition
in the Kirk of God. And finally to have been the ground of that Antichristian
Hicrarchie which mounted up on the steps of pre-eminence of Bishops until that
man of sin came forth as the ripe fruit of man his wisdom, whom God shall
consume with the breath of his own mouth. Let the These, 2. 8,
sword of God pearce that belly which brought forth such a monster, and let the
staff of God crush that Egg which has hatched such a Cocatrice. And let not
only that Roman Antichrist be through wen down from the high Bench of his usurped
authority, but also let all the steps whereby he mounted up to that unlawful
pre-eminence be cut down and utterly abolished in this land.

Above all things (my Lords) beware to strive against God with an open and
displayed ba^ner by building up again the walls of Jericho, quhilk the Lord
has not only cast down, but also has laid them under an horrible
interdiction and execration: so that the building of them again must needs
stand to greater charges to the builders, than the reedifiyng of Jericho, to
Hiel the Bethelit in the days of Achab. For he had nothing but the
interdiction 2. Kin, 16, 34
of Joshua, and the curse pronounced by him to stay him from building again of
Jericho: But the Noble men and States of this Realm, have there verence of the
Oath of God made by themselves and subscribed with their own hands in the
Confession of faith, called the Kings Majesty's published ofter than once, or
twice, and sworn by his most excellent Majesty, and by his Highness Nobility,
Estates, and whole Subjects of this Realm, to hold them back from setting up
the Dominion of Bishops. Because it is of verity that they subscribed and swore
the said Confession, containing not only the maintenance of true Doctrine, but
also of the Discipline professed within the Realm of Scotland.

Consider also, that this work cannot be set forward without the great slander
of the Gospel, defamation of many Preachers, and evident loss and hurt of the
peoples souls committed to our charge. For the people are brought almost to
the like case, as they were in Syria, Arabia, and Egypt, about the 600. year
of our Lord, when the people were so brangled, and shaken with contrary
doctrines, some denying, and others allowing the opinion of Eutiches, that in
the end they lost all assured persuasion of true Religion; and within short
time thereafter did cast the gates of their hearts open to the Devil to
receive that vile, and blasphemous Doctrine of Mahomet: Even so the people of
this land are cast in such admiration to hear the Preachers, who so openly
damned this stat ly pre-eminence of Bishops, and then within a few years
after, accept the same dignity, Pomp, and superiority in their own persons,
which they before had damned in others, that the people knows not which way
to in cline, and in end, will become so doubt full in matters of religion and
doctrine, that their hearts will be like an open Tavern door, patent to every
ghest, that likes to come in.

We beseech your Honors to ponder this in the balance of a godly, and prudent
mind, and suffer not the Gospel to be slandered by the behavior of a few
number of Preachers; of who^ we are bold to affirm, that, ifthey go forward
in this defection, not only abusing and appropriating that name of Bishops to
themselves only, which is common* to all the Pastors of God his Act. 20* 17. 28.
Phil. 1: 1, 1. Tim, 3: 1. 2 Titus 1, 5. 7 1, Pet 5. 1: 2
Kirk; But also taking upon themselves such offices that carry with them the
ordinary charge of governing the civil affairs of the Country, neglecting
their flocks, and seeking to subordinate their brethren to their jurisdiction:
If any of them (we say) be found to step forward in this course of defection,
they are more worthy as rotten members to be cut off from the body of Christ,
than to have superiority and dominion over their brethren within the Kirk of
God.

This pre-eminence of Bishops is that Dagon which once already fell before 1:
Sam, 5, 2, 3. 4
the Ark of God in this land, and no band of irone shall be able to hold him up
again. This is that pattern of that Altar brought from Damascus, but not
showed to Moses in the mountain; and 2. Kin; 16. 10
therefore it shall fair with it, as it did with that Altar of Damascus, It
came last in the Temple, and went first out. Likewise the Institution of Christ
was 2, Chro: 29. 16 18, 19.
anterior to this Pre-eminence of Bishops; and shall consist and stand with in
the house of God, when this new fashion of Altar shall go to the door.

Remember (my Lords) that in time past your authority was for Christ, and not
against him, ye followed the light of God, and strived not against it, and
like a child in the Mothers hand, ye said to Christ, Draw us after thee. God
Can, 1, 3.
forbid that ye should now leave off and fall away from your former reverence
borne to Christ, inpresuming to lead him, whom the Father has appointed Math,
17: 5.
to be a leader of you. And John 10, 3. 4 29,
far less to traile the holy Ordinances of Christ by the cords of your
authority at the heels of the Ordinances of men.

And albeit your Honors have no such intention to do any thing which may
impair the honor of Christ's kingdom, yet remember that spiritual darkness
flowing from a very small beginning does so insinuate and thrust the self into
the house of God, as men ca^ hardly discern by whatsecret means the light is
dim, and darkness creeping in got the upper hand and in end at unawares all is
involved within a mistie cloud of horrible Apostasy.

And lest that any should think this our admonition out of time, in so far as
it is statute and ordained already by his Majesty with advise of his Estates
in Parliament, that all Ministers provided to Prelacies should have vote in
Parliament; As likewise the general assembly (his Majesty being present
thereat) hes found the same lawful and expedient, we wald humbly, and most
earnestly beseech all such to consider, first that the kingdom of Jesus Christ,
the officebearers, and laws thereof nether should, nor can suffer any
derogation, addition, diminution or alteration besides the prescript of his
holy word, by any inventions or doings of men, Civil, or Ecclesiastical. And
we are able by the grace of God, and will offer our selves to prove that this
Bishopprik to be erected, is against the word of God, the Ancient Fathers, and
Canons of the Kirk, the modern most learned, and godly divines, the doctrine
and Constitution of the Kirk of Scotland since the first reformation of
religion, within the same Country, the laws of the Realm ratifiyng the
government of the Kirk by the general and Provincial Assemblies,
Presbiteries, and Sessions; also against the weil and Honor of the Kings most
excellent Majesty, the weal and Honor of the Realm and quietness thereof, the
established estate and weal of the Kirk in the Doctrine, Discipline, and
patrimony thereof, the weal and honor of your LL. the most ancient estate of
this Realm, and finally against the weil of all, and every one of the good
subjects thereof in soul, body, and substance. Next that the Act of Parliament
granting vote in Parliament to Ministers, is with a special provision, that
nothing thereby be derogatorie or prejudicial to the present established
Discipline of the Kirk and Jurisdiction thereof in general and Synodall
Assemblies, Presbiteries and Sessions.

Thirdly and last, the general Assembly (the King his Majesty sitting,
voting, and consenting therein) fearing the cor ruption of that office, hes
circumscribed and bounded the same with a number of Cautions. All which to
gether with such other as shall be concluded upon by the Assembly, were thought
expedient to be insert in the body of the Act of Parliament that is to be made
for confirmation of their vote in Parliamen, as most necessary and substantial
parts of the same. And the said Assembly has not agreed to give thereunto the
name of Bishops, for fear of importing the old Corruption Pomp and Tyranny of
Papal Bishops, but ordained them to be called Commissioners for the Kirk to
vote in Parliament. And it is of verity that according to these cautions neither
has those men, now called By shops, entered to that office of Commissionarie to
vote in Parl iament, neither since their ingyring, have they behaved themselves
therein. And therefore in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall hold that
great Court of Parliament to judge both the quick and the dead, at his
glorious manifesta tion, and in name of the Kirk in general, so happily and
well established with in this Realm, and whereof the said Realm has reaped
the comfortable fruit of peace and unity, free from heresy, schism, and
dissension these 46 years by past; also in name of our Presbyteries from
quhilk we have our Commission, and in our own names Officebearers, and Pastors
within the same; for discharging of our necessary dvty, and disburdening of
our consciences in particular, We except and protest against the said
Bishopprike and Bishops, and the erection, confirmation or ratification thereof
at this present Parliament. Most humbly craving that this our Protestation,
may be admitted by your Honors, and registrat amongst the Acts, and Statutes
of the same incaice (as God forbid) these Bishoppricks be erected, ratified or
confirmed therein.

A TREATISE OF KIRK GOVERNMENT CONSISTING OF two parts, whereof this former
contains a Demonstration of true Christian Discipline according to the word
of God used in the Kirk of Scotland.
THis writing is not directed to carry out invectiue speeches, with reviling
and wrathful words against any in the Kirk of God, knowing that the wrath of
man, accomplisheth not the righteousness James 1. 20:
of God; But this writting is appointed to be ane pleader even in the gates of
Jerusalem for Sion sake, and for truth and righteousness sake, breaking forth
from Sion, as the light, and salvation Isai, 61: 1.
as ane burning lamp to all beleivers, wishing that it may be read of all with
indifferency, considered of all with wisdom and sobriety, and embraced of
all that love truth and righteousness according to the merit and sincere
meaning thereof. It shall be divided in to two principal heads. The one shall
contain an Demonstration of Christian Discipline and true Kirk Government by
Ministers and assisting Elders, according to the word of God, practiced in the
Apostolic and Primitive Kirk, used and practiced in the Kirk of Scotland
these many years, received and embraced by all the professors; within the
same, and established by laws and Acts of Parliament to the glory of God
through Christ Jesus, and to the weill and comfort of the whole Kirk within
this Realm. The other part shall contain an Refutation of the Episcopal
Domination and Lordship, begun to be urged in our Kirk of late by Conformity
with England; quhilk is of late gredely embraced even by those, who not only
had professed, teached, and practiced the true Discipline of the Kirk of
Scotland, but also with solemn oath had sworn and subscribed to it. The
matter is of greatest weight concerning the true Discipline and Gubernation of
the house of God, which is the Kirk of the living God. Therefore O Lord of
light the author of every good donation, James 1. 17. Psalm, 43, 3.
send out thy light and thy truth, and direct this heart, this hand and pen
aright, unto the glory of thy great name, and clearing of thy everlasting truth.

Now all by matters being set a side, it shall be expedient and needful for our
proceedings to lay down some positi ons, and principals, as grounds to build
upon, enforcing all, that have forsaken the Roman Synogogue to consent.

First the Lord Jesus by the appoint meant of his Father is only head. Ephesians. 1.
21: 22: 23. King, Lord, and suprem Governor of his Kirk, quhilk with his
blood here one earth he has sprinkled and wished. Apoc 7: 14. and having ledd
captivity captive, ascending up to the heavens. Ephesians: 4: 8. sits at the
right hand of God the Father. Col. 3. 1. Heb: 1. 3. ruling his Kirk powerfully
by his spirit, and Scepter of his word. Isa: 11. 1. 2. 4. and 49. 21. psalm.
110. 2. Heb: 1. 8. Only King and lawgiver having power only by his laws to
bind the conscience of man Isai. 9. 6: 7. and 33. 22. James. 4. 12. Revel: 3:
7. 1 Timothy: 6. 15 And therefore let no mortal man, equal himself in this high
prerogative with the Son of God being in his Kirk only Monarch and only
Head. Isa. 29. 13. 14. Mich: 4. 7. Luc: 1 32. 33. 1. Cor: 3: 18: 19. Ephesians: 1:
22: and 4: 15: Col: 1: 18. and 2: 8: 9: 10. 18: 19: 23.

Secondly this supreme Governor Isai: 9: 6: Christ Jesus; has not left his
Kirk which is his body, mained, or imperfect, destitute of right Covernement,
Laws, and Offices, needful for the same, but has appointed a certain
Minissterie heir on earth graced with gifts, an with an calling accordingly,
with certain laws, limitting their function, and Gubernation, and therefore,
let no man think, that Christ has left his Kirk to be ruled at the lust and
arbitrament of men, whatsoever. Col: 2. 18. Item, what is of Christ that is to
be received, and that quhilk is of the AntiChrist, is to be rejected.

Thirdly, this Gubernation of the Kirk with Offices and Functions, and
allpoynts necessary, for accomplishment thereof is set down in the written word
of God, the only square and rule of Doctrine and Discipline, within Christ his
Kirk, apt and able to make the man of God perfect to every good work. 2. Tim:
3. 16. 17. whereupon this follows, that whatsoever is prescrived in this
word, is to be followed and no prescription can have place against it. Item it
follows, that the Laws of the Government of the Church, and Offices and
Functions thereof, are not changable, and imperfect unless we will say, that
the scripture is imperfect, or Christ his Kirk, quhilk is his Body, is
imperfect in respect of the Constitution thereof, we weil say, that the estate
of the Kirk of the New Testament is inferior to the estate of the Kirk of the
Old Testament, quhilk received the whole Ordinancss, and Laws, by Moses, from
the mouth of God, quhilk Moses although he was great with God, yet he was but
ane Minister. Number. 12. 7. Heb: 3. 5. and it was not lawful to him to alter or
change ane pin of the Tabernacle be himself, but as it was said to him, Do
althinges according to the form that thou saw in the Mountain. Exo: 25: 40.
Act: 7. 44. Heb: 8. 5. And so it was in the building of the Temple. 1. Chro:
28. 11. 12. 13. 2: Chro: 29. 25. But so it is, that no faithful man will
admit those inconveniences and therefore, it must stand, that the word of God
contains althinges needful for the Government of the Kirk, quhilk is the
kingdom of Christ Jesus heir on Earth; so that whatsoever may be alleged by
man for Kirk Covernement without the warrant of the word, as easily is it
repelled, as alleged.

Now let us proceed and learn of the scripture what is said therein anent this
Kirk. To this Kirk excellent glory is attributed every where in the
scripture: If you will consider either the Head of this Kirk, the Body, or
members, For the Head, King, and Lord of this Kirk the Son of God Christ
Jesus, is the Prince of peace. psalm. 72. 3. 7. Isai. 9. 6. 7 and Lord of all
glory. Isai. 60 1. 2. Act: 3. 15. 1 Cor: 2. 8. Heb: 2. 3. 7. 8. King of Kings
and Lord of Lords. 1. Tim. 6. 15. Revel: 17. 14. et 19: 16. If ye weil consider
the Body quhilk is the Kirk of God, and spouse of Christ, she is called the
City of God. Psalm: 48. 2. 3. Zach: 8. 3. The house and Kirk of the living God.
1 Timothy: 3. 15. Prove: 9. 1. The Temple and Mountain of the eternal God. Isai:
2. 2. Zach: 8. 3. the Vinyard, Isai: 5 1. Cant: 8. 11. 12. Math. 21. 23. and
Garden enclosed. Cant: 4. 12. the loye of the whole earth, Psalm. 48. 3. Ezech:
20. 0. 15. Dan. 8. 9. et 11: 16. 41. 45. the Heritage, Isai 19: 25: the
kingdom of Heaven, Math: 13: 24. 31. Christ his Sister, Cant: 4: 10. his love,
Cant. 4: 1: 7. his spouse, Cant: 4: 10. his Queen, Psalm: 45: 10. Christ his
Body, 1: Cor: 12. 13: 27. Ephesians: 1. 22. 23. et 4: 4. 16. If ye consider the
Members of this Body, under the Government and protection of this great and
glorious King knit and bound up in ane Body. Ephesians 4. 16. with the perfect
band of love. Romans 12. 5 10. they are called the chosen generation. Deuteronomy. 10.
15. 1. Pet. 2. 9. the Holy Nation. Exo. 19. 6. 1. Pet: 2. 9. the peculiar
people. 1. Pet. 2. 9. Exodus: 19. 5. the Inheritance of God. 1. Pet. 5 3. To this
Kirk apperteineth the Covenant. Ephesians: 2. 12. Rom: 9. 4. the worship of God. Romans
9. 4. the Sacraments 1. Cor: 10. 1. 2. 3. 4. and 12. 13. and promises. Rom: 9.
4. of Peace. Luc. 1. 71. 74: 75. et 2: 14. Isai 52: 7. et 55. 12. John 14: 27:
Col: 1. 20. Gal: 6. 16. of love, Ioh. 14: 23. and Salvation. Zach. 2; 8. Isai:
49: 6. et 43 3. of the presence of God. Zach: 2. 10. 11. Isai 43: 2. Ioh: 14:
18: Ezech: 37: 26: 27: and 48: 35: 2 Cor: 6. 16. of graces and glory. Zach. 2:
5: Isai 60: 15. and of his Protection. Psalm: 34: 17. 18. 19. 20. and every
where in the Psalms, and in many other places many excellent and glorious
things are spoken of this Kirk the Spouse and Body of Christ Jesus.

The use whereof is to let us understand, how precious and how glorious in Gods
sight is Christ Kirk, that is the Society of his Sancts, which he hes acquitted
with his own blood. Act. 20. 28

2. To let us understand that She is not under bondage, or subjection, to be
ruled and governed by the lust, or arbitrament of men whatsoever. Math. 15: 9.
Col. 3. 8. 18. 19. 1. Tim: 3: 14. 15. So that no man should presume to
prescrive laws. Iam: 4: 12. and limits, for the Government of this Kirk,
without Commission of Christ Jesus the Supreme Governor Isai: 9: 6: who has
beutified her with so many great graces, power, and glory.

Now let us descend more particularly to learn out of scripture, what is
prescrived anent the Government and ordering of the Kirk heir on earth; For
Scripture is the only sure Canon and rule to be followed (as was before
declared) against the which no prescription nether of Angel, nor of man what
soever, should prevail. Gal. 1. 18.

How comely and pleasant a thing is it to behold in the scripture the soci etie
of the Sanctes, like an Army, Psalm 110 3. Can: 6. 1. 3. Col. 2. 5. march in
their ranckes, under the conduct of their King and Lord Christ Jesus, Isai 52.
12. Heb: 12: 2. some commanding in his name and some obeying. Heb: 13: 17. all
ruled and maresheld, by the laws and limits of the word, Deuteronomy: 4: 2. et 12.
32 And again the commanders and rulers ordered in their own ranckes according
to their Functions, and gifts, al to the glory of God, edification and pre
servation of one Body. Ephesians: 4. 12. And to speak more plainly of the Kirk
Discipline. We define it to be the spiritual Ioh: 18. 36. 2. Cor: 10. 4. 5. 6.
Government: 1 Pet: 5. 1. 2. 3. Act: 20. 28. of the house of God. 1. Tim: 3.
15. Which is the Kirk, or Society of the Saints here one Earth, under the
commandment of the only Head and King the Lord Jesus, Ephesians: 1: 22. 1. Cor: 12.
5. by the Ministry of men. 1. Cor: 4. 1. 2. Cor: 4: 1. furnished from above
with gifts, Ephesians: 4: 8. Rom: 12: 6. 1. Pet: 4. 10. calling, Rom: 10. 15. Heb.
5: 4: and power, Ioh: 20: 21: 22: 23. according to the prescription of
Scripture, as said is. For Kirk Government are set out in the word of God. 1
The persons, to who^ is given the charge of rule and Government. 2. Their
Calling. 3. Their Gifts. 4. Their Office, and power distinctly their power
junctly, and manner thereof. Which all by the grace of God shall clearly be
demonstrate by only Scripture.

The persons are Extraordinary, and Ordinar, Extraordinary as Apostles,
Prophets, Evangelists, whose offices serving for a time have ceased. As for
the persons Ordinar, we shall find their institution with their Offices,
expressed in these places. 1 Timothy 3 2. Tit: 1. 5 6. 7. Act. 6: 3. 4. and 14.
23. and 20. 17. 28. etc: Ephesians: 4: 11. Rom: 6. 7. 8. 1. Cor: 12. 5. 8. 1 Pet: 5.
2. 3. 2. Tim: 4. 2. Heb: 13: 17. 2 Cor: 5. 20.

Vocation or calling is common to all the office bearers and Ministers with in
the Kirk, quhilk is a lawful way, whereby persons graced with meet gifts
are admitted to a spiritual office of one certain flock, and Congregation,
Here three things are necessary, First without lawful calling, let none
presume to this honor, to exercise any spiritual Function or Ministry, Rom:
10. 15 Heb. 5. 4 Math. 9. 38 Secondly let no man presume to clime up by
intrusion, or to enter in any other way, than by the Door, Ioh: 10. 1. Thirdly,
none ought to enter in without inward testimony of gifts and graces, and good
conscience before God of who^ and for whose service is the calling; Isa: o 67.
8. 9. Ier: 1. 6. 9. Math: 10 1. Ioh: 20: 22. 23. This Ordinar lawful calling
consists of two parts, Election, and Ordination, Election is the lawful
choice of the person graced with meet gifts for the office whereunto he is
called. Election should be after triell, Act: 1: 21. 22: et 6^. 1. Tim: 3. 10.
By free choice and at the judgment of the Church. Act: 1. 21: 23. et 6. 3. 5.
et 14 23. The Ceremonies thereof by Humiliation, fasting and Prayer. Act: 1. 24.
et 14. 23. Ordination is the seperating and designing of that person chosen
unto the Office of the Ministry. Act: 13. 2. Likewise to be used with fasting
and prayer and by imposition of hands of the Presbytery. Act: 13. 3. et 14.
23. 1. Tim. 4. 14. et 5. 22. Their gifts, properties, and conditions in
Doctrine and manners are distinctly set down and limited in scripture,
prescriving what man every one must be. The Pastor must be apt to Teach and
exhort, Deuteronomy: 33. 12. Mal: 2. 7. Rom: 12. 8. 1. Cor: 12. 8. 1. Tim: 3. 2. no
young Scholar, 1 Timothy: 3. 6. able to devide the word aright 2. Tim: 2. 15.
holding fast the faithful word, Tit: 1. 9. able to exhort, rebuke, reprove,
by wholesome doctrine. 2 Timothy: 4. 2. In ma^ners he must be a lover of goodness.
Tit: 1. 8. wise, righteous, holy; temperate, in his life, unreprovable, of good
report, etc: 1 Timothy: 3. 2. 3. 4. 7. Tit: 1. 6. 7. 8.

The Doctor or Teacher likewise must be apt to Teach, Mal: 2: 7: Rom: 12: 7. 1:
Cor: 12: 8. and to deliver sound and wholesome doctrine according to the word,
Tit: 1. 9. mighty in the scripture, Act: 18. 24. able to revince the gain
sayers etc: Act: 6: 9: 10. Tit: 1: 9.

The name of Elder in scripture is used diversely: sometime for the name of age,
1. Tim: 5: 1. Sometime for Office, 1: Tim: 5. 17. 19. Iam. 514. again
signifiyng office, sometime largely it comprehends Pastors, Doctors, and those
that are called morespecially Presbyters, Seniors, or Elders. Act. 14. 23. 1.
Tim. 5. 17. 1. Pet. 5. 1. Here speaking of Elders particularly, we understand
those that labor in the oversight of the manners of the people, whom the
Apostle calls Presidents, and Governors, Rom: 12. 8. 1 Cor 12: 18. Then
Elders must be men of wisdom, knowledge, and sound judgment endued with the
spirit of God. Number: 11. 25. Deuteronomy. 1. 13. able to discern, vigilant and
diligent in overseing, Act. 20. 28. Rom: 12. 8. Sober, gentle, modest, loving,
temperate, etc: 1. Tim: 3. et 5.

The Deacons must be men of good report keeping the Mystery of faith in a pure
conscience, endued also with the ho ly Ghost, Grave, Temperat, not given to
excess of filthy lucre. Act: 16. 3. 1. Tim: 3. 8. 9. 12. 13. This far
concerning their gifts, and properties, their office, care, function, and
charge, is severally set out in Scripture as follows.

The Pastor should feed the sheep of Christ Jesus in green and wholesome
pastures of the word, sheewing them the waters and way to life, Psalm: 23. 1. 2.
Deuteronomy: 33: 10. Rom: 12: 8. Ioh. 21. 15. Act: 20 28. 1. Pet: 5: 1. etc: having
continual care to watch over the souls of these which they must give an
account of, Heb: 13. 17. discerning the diseases and ap plying the word
according to every disease, and every time and occurrant danger. Ezech. 33. et
34. chapt: praying and blessing, and sealing up to the faithful the promises
of God by the Sacraments, loving, cherishing, and defending the flock, from
ravenous beasts. Ioh: 10. 11. 12.

The Office of an Teacher, or Doctor, has been mentioned before, whose chief
and special charge is to Teach, plain, pure, and sound Doctrine, preserving
knowledge, resisting error, building upon the only true ground stone (which is
Christ Jesus) Gold, silver and precious stones etc. 1: Cor: 3. 11. 12. et 1.
17. 12. 8. 1. Tim: 4. 16. et 6. 20. Ephesians: 2: 20. Heb: 6. 1. 1. Pet: 2. 2.

The Elder or Presbyter his office and distinct charge before also was
mentioned, their chief care is, to be ready assistants according to the
ordinance of God, to the Pastors and Teachers, helping to bear their burding,
caring for the weil, quietness, peace, and good order in the Kirk, taking heed
to themselves and the people. 2. Chron: 19. 8. Act: 20. 17. 28. and 21. 18.
Rom: 12. 8. 1. Pet: 5. 2. 1. Cor: 12. 28.

The Office of the Deacon is to collect the benevolence of the faithful, and
faithfully to distribute the same according to the necessity of the Saints by
the direction of the Kirk, Act: 6. 3. Romans 12. 8. This much anent the offices,
and ministeries institute and prescrived by Christ in his word, which albeit be
diverse and distinct both in gifts and functi ons, yet they as members of one
Body, serve for the use of the Saints and edification of the body of Christ.
Rom 12: 4: 5: etc: Ephesians: 4: 11: 12. 13: 16. 1. Cor: 12: 7. 12: 25.

Unto these Office-bearers and Governors Christ has given also a certain
limitate power to be exercised by them, according to the word in his Kirk. A
power severally, Math: 16. 19. 20. Rom: 12. 3. 6. 7. 8. and a power jointly
with Paritie and mutual consent to be exercised for avoiding of Tyranny. Math:
18: 17: 18: 19: 20. 1. Cor: 5: 4. 5. both having one authority from the same
head and author Christ Jesus, both tending to the same end: both comprehended
under the name of the Keys of the kingdom of Heaven.

The Keys of the kingdom of heaven are given jointly to the Rulers of the
Kirk, that whatsoever they bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; Math: 18. 18.
This power is not to be used according to their arbitrament and will, but at
the will and according to the Testament of him who has given this power, and
has limited it in his written word, presciving the order, usage, and end
thereof, Math: 18. 15. 16. 17. 18. 20. The order and usage is this, If the
offense of thy brother be private, admonish him privately between him and thee,
with loving admonition with an brotherly care to woone the brother offender. If
he refuse to harken unto thee, take two or three brethren with thee for the
same purpose; if he weil not harken unto them, show the matter unto the Kirk,
The care of the Kirk in like manner, is to deal with him, as with ane
brother, not to hold him as an enemy, 2. These. 3. 15. but gravly, and lovingly
to admonish, perswad him and to pray for him; to prove if at any time the Lord
will give unto him repentance. 2. Cor. 10. 8. et 13. 10. 2. Tim: 2: 25. 26. If
the offender be obstinate and can not be drown unto repentance, then in the
name of the Lord Jesus with consent of the Congregation reverently and with
prayer Excommunication is to be used in casting him out of the Kirk, and giving
him over to Satan for the destruction of the flesh etc. and is to be holden as
ane Heathen and Publican. etc. Math: 19: 17. 1. Cor. 5. 4. 5. Thus far
touching private offense. If the fault be public, the faulter is publikly to
be rebooked, and admonished, 1: Tim: 5: 10. The admonitions always must be
done circumspectly, seasoned with truth, gravitie, love, and peace, ever aiming
for the safitie of the offender, and notthe destruction. And a special care is
to be had of every weak offender, with discretion of offenses. Mat: 18: 15.
Gal. 6: 1: 2. 2. Tim: 2. 24. Romans 14. 13: 19. Iam: 5: 19. 20. If admonitions
prevail not to draw him to repentance, the^ to proceid to Excommunication as
said is.

If the offender be brought to repentance, let the repentance and receaving
again to the Kirk be according to the proportion of the offense, if the
offense be public, the repentance and recep tion public; if private,
private, always let the repentance be in submis sion without hypocrisy,
giving glory unto God. Math: 18. 15. Luk: 17. 4. 2. Cor. 2. 6. 7. Moreover,
there is given liberty and power to the rulers of the Kirk, to exercise this
Christian Discipline according to the necessity of the estate of the Kirk, and
according to the occurrant dangers and diseases in Assem. blies convened
together in the name of the Lord Jesus, consisting cheifely, of Ministers,
Doctors, and Elders. Assemblies are Particular or General. Particular as
Presbyteries or Provincial Assemblies. General consisting of on Nation
convocat together, for the Common weil, peace, and quietness of the Kirk. The
warra^d of these Assemblies, with the practice is evident by the word: Math.
18. 17. 18. 1. Tim. 4. 14. 1. Cor: 5: 4. etc. and 14: 32. Act: 15: 6: 12. 22.
25. and has the practice of Kirkes at all times, and necessities, as said is
before. This much shortly anent the power, offices and Ministeries in the Kirk
Government according to the Institution of Christ expressed clearly in his
word: And all for the edification and preservation of the Body of Christ, and
for the repayring of the Sanctes, to the honor of God by Christ Jesus through
all generations for ever. Ephesians: 4. 12. I add hereunto two demonstrations
needful viz. That these offices, and Ministeries as they have been set down
are perpetual, and sufficient for the Government of the Kirk of Christ.

The first thus I prove. 1. The Apostle Paul comma^deth Timothy to keep this
Governeme^t, and precepts given there anent, to that glorious coming of the
Lord Jesus. 1. Tim. 3. 21. and 6. 14. 15.

Secondly, all the offices within the Kirk mentioned. Romans 12. 6: 7. 8. are
called members of the Body of the Kirk, ver. 4. 5. 1. Cor. 12. 27. 28. 29.
which is the Body of Christ Jesus. Ephesians: 1: 22: 23: et 4: 12. whereupon
follows this probation, if the Kirk of Christ quhilk is his Body be perfect,
and must continue un to the coming of Christ, these Offices and Ministeries
must have the same continuance, except we will say, that Christ his Body is
imperfect, or mained or the Kirk of Christ shall cease here upon earth, before
his coming, quhilk both are absurd.

Thridly, if Christ Jesus be only Lord and Governor of his Kirk, which is his
kingdom heir on earth, and seeing he must rule and Govern his kingdom unto
his coming by his own officers, and by his laws, by himself institute and
prescrived in his word. Rom: 12. 3. 6. 7. 8. 1. Cor. 12. 28. and 14. 37. Ephesians.
4. 8. 11. 12. It follows that these offices and laws, continue unto his
coming, except we will say, that Christ shall cease to be Governor of his
Kirk, and those laws to be imperfect.

Ferdly, seeing the object and ends whair about these offices ar occupied, and
whairunto they are destinat (quhilk before has been declared) must have
continuance, therefore, the offices and Ministeries appointed for those uses
and ends must also continue to the end, quhilk necessities no man can avoyde or
elude, as for example: There must be heresies, and offenses etc: and therefore
there must be a correcting power in the Kirk 1. Cor. 11. 19. with offices and
ministeries meet for preventing, restrayning, and expelling the foresaid, or
like corruptions.

As for the Second, to wit that the foresaid offices and Ministeries are
sufficient for the Regiment of Christ his Kirk heir on earth, thus I prove it.
1. If they be not sufficient, then Christ can not be honored as perfect
Governor of his Kirk, neither is his word perfect, but some thing may be added
thereunto, which is absurd, Deuteronomy. 4. 2. et 12. 32.

2. If these be imperfect then man may erect new offices, and add new
Ministeries, and give new gifts and graces accordingly: and if man may add he
may also detract; which both are false and absurd. 111. These offices and
functions before mentioned, have gifts and graces needful, and sufficient, for
the discharge of the Ministry of the word, of the Sacraments, and of
Discipline, for the Edification of the body of Christ etc. Ephesians: 4: 11: 12.
therefore they must be sufficient. IV. If these offices and Ministeries of the
Government of the Kirk under the Gospel be insufficient, and imperfect, then
the estate of Christ his Kirk under the Gospel must be inferior, unto the
estate of the Kirk under the law, which had the accomplishment of all offices,
ministeries, and laws needful, and sufficient for the regiment thereof, But
none will grant that the estate of the Kirk of Christ is inferior to the
estate of the Kirk under the law. Therefore the aforesaid offices are
sufficient, for the Government of the Kirk of the New Testament. And therefore
this form, and order of Government, by the foresaid offices, and Ministeries,
of Preachers, and assisting Elders, being grounded upon the written word of
God, and practice of the Apostles and Kirkes in their time. Rom: 12. 6: 7: 8.
Ephesians: 4. 11: 12. Act: 14: 23. et 20. 17. 28. 1. Tim: 5. 17. Tit: 1: 5: etc. It
can admit no prescription: or change by any mortal man, or by any humane
tradition whatsoever.

Which form of Discipline as it has been practiced in the Apostolical and
Primitive Kirk, (quhilk is evident by scriptures before aledged) so has it the
testimony of antiquity in the ancient Kirkes, as is collected not very
obscurely out of Ignatius Epist: ad Trallen. Tertul: in Apoc. cap. 39. et lib:
de Baptism: Christian. Cyprian lib: 2. Epist. 5: et lib. 3: Epist. 10. 18. 22.
et lib. 4. 5. Augusti. de verb. Dom. in Math: Sermon. 19. But more clearly out of
Ambrose in 1 Timothy 5: 1: Ierom in Isai, 2. et ad Rustic. Epist: 16. Possidonius
in vita Augustini, Socrates Eccle. hist. lib. 5. ca. 20. and others also
alleged be the defenders of this christian and true Kirk Government. Amongst
the quhilk I cannot pass by for proofs sake, the clear sayings of Ambrose,
and Ierom. Ambrose writteth thus upon 1: Tim. 5: Whence it is that both the
Synagage, and afterward the Kirk had Elders, without whose counsel nothing was
done in the Kirk. Quhilk by what negligence it is grown out of use I know not,
unless perhaps by the slouthfulnes or rather pride of the Teachers, whilst they
alone will seem to be something.

Ierom ad Tit. cap. 1. Until schisms were made in religion by the diuely
suggestion, the Kirkes were governed by the common counsel of Elders, and in
the same place speaking of the corruption that followed, thereafter adds this:
But this was rather by custom, than by the truth of the Lords disposing.

This form of Discipline according to the word, the Kirk of Scotland has used
many years by past, being authorized and ratified by the three Estates in
Parliament, received and practiced by all the Preachers within the whole
Realm, with on consent, and concord, even by the^ also, who now have made
defection from it, taking upon the^ Episcopal authority. Siclik it has the
testimony of all the reformed Kirkes in Europe, in France, in Freisland, in
Geneva, in Helvetia, Polonia, Vngaria, in Palatinatu, in Germania, Saxonia,
Bohemia, in Suedia, Dania, and all other reformed Kirkes except England alone.
Siclik also it has the testimony generally of the Divi^es of later times, as
Zuinglius, Martyr, Aretius, Calvinus, Bucer, Hiperius, Bullingerius, Musculus,
Hemingius, Beza, Olevianus, Iunius, Sadael, Nowel, Fulke, Whitakers, with all
other learned and famous Preachers in the Countries reformed, professing truly
the Gospel only England excepted: wherein also the best, yea the greatest part
have sought, and daily seiks the liberty of the same Government, according to
the word, and most clearly have defended it with their pen, and most pithie
writtings, and most constantly have avouched it, by their manifold sufferings,
at home, and abroad for the glorifiyng of God, and the witnessing of the truth
of Christ Jesus: All, that before has been briefly said anent the deduction of
this purpose, may be more largely entreated, and more particularly handled, if
any within this land will prove so obstinat, as to refuse consent to the truth
of Christ Jesus.

THE SECOND PART OF KIRK GOVERNMENT. CONTAINING AREfutation of Episcopal
Government by Lord Bishopes.
IT pleased our Heavenly Father to compass us with compassion and mercy, when
we were lying in darkness, and under the shadow of death, by sen ding his own
dear Son Christ Jesus Psalm 103. 4 Isai 9. 2
with the brightness of his Gospel, delivering us from Idolatry, and super
stition, and the darkness of the former times under the bondage and tyranny of
Antichrist, and that by the Ministry of few, not the greatest, to the great
admiration of the world. And forder, of the same mercy, it has pleased him,
from time to time, to multiply the number of the faithful, and to increase his
graces among men, for the beutifiyng of his Kirk within this land, and finally
to croune his own work adding the keepstone of sincerity both of doctrine and
Discipline, as it was prophesied by that holy Martyr M. George Wiseheart;
quhilk two glorious staves our Kirk has brooked, with Concord, Unity, with
peace and prosperity, many years Zach. 11. 7 Plal, 122, 7
within the gates of Jerusalem in this land, whereby our Kirk, by the unspeak
ble bountifulnes of God, became famous, renoumed, and in great account, before
many others among foreign Nations, and Kirkes reformed in Europe. For the which
belongs everlasting praise to this our bou^tifull God through his Son Jesus
Christ our dear Savior. But now of late has risen ane whirle wind among our
selves (like the whirle wind that devoured the children of Job) shaking the
four corners of the house of God, and throwing Job. 1, 19,
down the kepston; and this wind of discord, Schism, and dissension, is not
come from the wilderness, but rise^ from our own bowels: and the riches of the
Temple dispoyled, not by Assyri ans, Chaldeans, or Arabians, but by the
Preistes, and Ministers themselfes hombredd, and borne in the bosom of our
Kirk, and fostered sometime by the sincere milk of the Gospel, who also have
made avoumemt of the same sincerity both of Doctrine and Discipline, not only
in Preaching and practicing, but also with solemn Oath binding themselfes
thereto. From quhilk an manifest slyding back, and Apostasy is seen this day,
and lamented with greiff by the godly, and mocked be the enemies the Papists
and Atheists, whose number, strength, and power, daily in cresseth by this
lamentable renting, and inbringing of Episcopal Gubernation be Lord Bishops,
quhilk before had been banished with Antichristian corruptions from the Kirk of
Scotland. For the working of this Mystery many intentions have been proponed,
many sheapes, and colors have been changed. As for example in the beginning
nothing (for such) was meened but Ministers to have vote in Parliament, and
that to vindicat the Ministry from poverty and contempt etc. quhilk practice
God even then at the beginning, discovered unto his servantes, and they unto the
world, foretelling the effects that visibly now appears before the (eyes of
the world: viz. renting of our Church overthrowing of Christian Discipline,
setting up a few Episcopal men, with contempt, bondage, and poverty of the
rest: which this day is to be seen, to the great grief of the godly, and
hinderance of the Gospel hereby day lie falling to decay, much a do also has been for making of a constant moderatorin every part, which carried but a show
for a time, and to be away only to posses Bishops, with parpetuall domination,
quhilk also by the godly, and learned was discovered, and abhorred, knawing
that of old from the same practice, have proceeded the degrees of Roman
Primacie, defacing and overthrowing the true Government of Christ his Church.

Atlast, after many overshadowing clouds, the effect and operation of this
work has broken through the cloud with thunder flacks striking upon god ly,
sincere, Teachers of this land. The end of all is: The Altar of Conformity
must be set up, and Kirk Government must be turned over into the hands of
Lord Bishops, supportters of the Altar etc: Which kind of Government if it be
lawful, or can stand with the word of God, that we have to examine in this
part. In the former part the order and Form of true christian Discipline, with
Duties, Offices and Ministeries, according to the Institution of Christ, has been declared, by the clear, and sound grounds of the word: which government,
offices, and Ministeries thereof, we have demonstrat to be perpetual,
sufficient, and to have continuance to the glorious coming of Christ Jesus.
Now this part shall contain a Refutation of the contrary Gorvernement by Lord
Bishops and their Episcopal Domination: insisting upon the same grounds, laid
down before, and thus we proceid.

Whatsoevir is contrary to the Institutiof Christ and his wrettin word, is
Antichristian, and is to be banished out of the Kirk of God.

But Government by Lord Bishopps with Episcopal domination is contrary to
the Institution of Christ and his written word.

Therefore it is Antichristian, and is to be banishit out of the Kirk of God.

The Proposition can not be denied by faithful Christians: the word of God
being of absolute perfection, both for substance and Ceremonies: against the
which no exception can be made except by Atheists, or Papists, holding the
Pope of Rome may dispe^ce with the word, or equalling his traditions with the
word. The controversy therefore staudeth in the Assumption, whether the
Government of the Kirk apperteineth to Lord Bishops or not, and whither to
Lord Bishops apperteineth a Lordly Domination? Quhilk both to be contrary to
the word of God, thus we prove.

The first proof does arise from the Examination of the right use of the name
Bishope, which against the mind of Scripture is abused, making it a name of
special office with a special dignity, prerogative and Prelacie above the
rest of the disposers, and Teachers of the word, appropriating unto Bishops
Lordship, or Lordly domination, making Prelates of Pastors, and Princes of
Prelates.

The name of Bishop (EPISCOPOS) signifies as touching this Argument, ane
Inspector or Overseer, caring for the^, that are committed to his charge:
Quhilk name is common to all Pastors, Doctors, or Teachers, and Elders in the
Kirk: As is evident by express Scripture in these places following. The
Apostle Paul sending for the Elders of the Kirk of Ephesus Act. 20. ver: 17.
And speaking to the same Elders he cales the^ Bishops. Take heed thersore to
your selves, and to all the flock whairof the holy Ghost has made you
overseers (EPISCOPOVS) to feade the Kirk of God. Mark (faith Ierom) how
calling the Elders of one City of Ephesus, he intituleth the same men Bishops.

In like manner the Apostle Peter ca. 5. v. 1. 2. uses the same word, speaking
to the Teachers and Rulers of the Kirk, Feed the flock of God (says he)
quhilk depends upon you caring for it, or (according to the original)
Episcopountes, that is, doing the part of ane Overseer, or Bishop being common
to Pastors, As may further appear by these places, Phil: 1. 1. Tit: 1. 5. 7.
and 1. Tim: 3. 1. 2. From quhilk places these conclusions are necessarily
inferred. 1. The name of Bichop being common to Pastors, Teachers, and Rulers,
it is not to be appropriate to any one with title power, or prerogative above
the rest.

2 Here is restrained the function and charge of these Overseers to one flock
over quhilk the Holy Ghost has placed them; Therefore presumption it is
against the holy Ghost, to a Bishope for to claim the charge of many Kirkes,
and over many Bishops, or Pastors, and he not resident at one Kirk: as the
miserable abuse and practice is begun in this Realm.

The Second proof: The Scripture has disposed and distributed by Christ his
Institution, the Regiment of the Kirk, and offices, and Ministeries thereof to
Pastors, Doctors, and Elders, making no mention of special offices, titles, or
dignities, of Papal Bishops, (so call led by his Majesty Basil: dor: page 44.)
or Prelates etc. Therefore the Regiment of the Kirk, cannot be claimed by Papal
Bishopes or Prelates by Scripture, or by Christ his Institution, and so the
usurpation of Papal Bishops and Prelates in the Kirk Government must be
Antichristian. The first part is evident, and clear deducit in the former
part of this Treatise out of scriptutes, wherein is expressed the Institution
of the foresaid offices and Ministeries of Pastors, Doctors, and Elders.
Whereupon the other part touching Papal Bichops with their titles, dignities,
and prerogatives etc. Hes this clear inference, that they are not warranted by
scripture, as said is. For if there were any sick Bishops, or Prelates with
office, Titles, power, and dignities above the rest, then the scripture would
have set them down more distinctly, and precisely, than any of the rest; for
the hieer place that one occupies in the kirk, of the more necessity he is
unto the Kirk, and for this cause the more careful would Christ (the Head of
the Kirk) have been in poynting him out, and distinguishing him from other.

We see in the Old Testament, the High Priest, his Title, Office, Function, and
special Administration, and juris diction, is more particularly, and pre
cisely set down, than the Office of any of the inferior Priests, and Levites.

And so in the New Testament, if any such had been above the rest, their title,
power, dignity, and office more particularly and precisly had been poynted out,
then of Pastors, Teachers, and Elders etc: But the contrary we see in
scripture; wherein the offices, Ministeries and power of Pastors, Teachers, and
Elders is clearly set forth. But no sick thing of Papal, Bishops, Prelates, and
the rest of that order. Therefore can these no ways stand with scripture.

3. Quhilk forder is to be cleared by examinyng, and trying the Titles,
Dignities, and Domination of Papal Bischops, Prelates etc: Who following the
Roma^e Antichrist, claim to themselves a twofold power, Civil, and
Ecclesiastical; quhilk are the two Horns of the Secund Beast, Apoc: 13. 11.
As some good Divines do expond. Quhilk both powers by the devise of Satan, as
two swords, have served the Pope of Rome that Antichrist, to tread down, the
greatest powers on earth of Emperors, Kings, and Princes, and daily does serve
for the suppressing of the truth, and faithful professors of the same. From
that Antichrist, this mystery of iniquity has flowed to Cardinals,
Archbishops, and the rest of that disordered order etc. Against this injquity,
thus we co^clud.

Whosoever does participat with the Antichrist in usurping a Civil power, and
practicing the same in the Kirk directly against the word, and Institution of
Christ, they are of that Antichrist, and there usurpation Antichristian.

But Papal Bishops and Prelates in the Kirk vsurps Civil power, directly
against the word and Institution of Christ.

Therefore so doing they are of that Antichrist, and their usurpation
Antichristian.

The proof of the Assumption (quhilk the adversaries deny) is plain be
evident Scripture, as follows.

1 Our Master and Savior Christ speaking unto his Disciples, contending for
honor among themselves, says: Ye know that the Lords of the Gentles have
domination over the^, and they that are great exercise authority over them: but
it shall no be so among you. Math: 20. 25. etc. Mar: 10. 42. Luc: 22. 25. etc.
In quhilk words expressly he forbids, his Apostles, Lordly, or Princely
Domination, putting ane bar and evident difference, betwixt Civil, and
Spiritual power: showing expresely by this interdiction, these two powers so
to be different that they cannot meet in one person whatsoever. Quhilk ground
has been always as ane strong wall against the Pope and Bishops of Rome,
exercising both the powers, whereupon Barnard speaks thus boldly to Pope
Eugenius: Lordship is forbiden unto the Apostles: Therefore dare thou being a
Lord usurp Apostleship, or Apostolical usurp Lordship. Thou art plainly
barred from both. If thou will have both, thou shall lose both. Barnar. lib: 2.
de conside. cap: 4. For it is not convenient (says Ambrose) that one man
should have adouble profession.

2 Christ says, My kingdom is not of this world, Ioh: 18. 36. Christ refused
to accept the honor of a worldly kingdom, John: 6. 15. That he might admonish
us, (says Chrysostom) to contemn human dignities, and show us that we need
no wordly affairs. Hom: 42. in Johan. Item Tertull: de Idolat. cap. 8. Christ
has manifested that the glory of the world is not co^petent to him self, and
his. How may the^ a Bishop, or Minister accept that honor quhilk his Master
has refused. For no servant is above his Master Math. 10. 24.

3. Christ being required in partition of an heritage betwixt brethren,
refuses flatly to be Judge, saying, who made me Judge or devider, over you?
For this same cause Christ, as Minister of the Gospel, refuses to condemn
the Adulteress woman, what presumption is it then to our Papal Bishops, to
exercise ane Lordly authority and Civil power in judging upon matters civil,
criminal and treasonable, in Court, or Parliament, Secret Counsel,
conventio^s of Estate, in Courts of Stenartrie and Regalitie upon wrongs and
injuries of blood, infestments of land, etc. as the practice be Papal Bishops
is begune in this Realm. Quhilk can no ways be compitent to the Disciples,
Ministers and servants of Christ Jesus, quhilk the Master Christ Jesus has for
saken. Therefore this usurpation must be of the Antichrist. Hilarious ad Auxent.
I pray you (Bishopps) who believe these things, what votes had the Apostles to
preach the Evangel? With what Commissions were they authorized, when they
preached Christ and converted almost all the Gentles from Idols to God? Singing
an Himne to God in prison among chains, and after whippes took they any
dignity from the Palace? They will not show where any of the Apostles sat at
any time as judge of men, or divider of bounds, or distributer of lands. To
conclude, Ireade that the Apostles stood to be judged; that they sat in
judgment I do not read. Barnard de consid: lib. 2.

4. The whole charge of the Minister of the Gospel is restrained to the
continual exercise of ane spiritual calling, and Ministry only. 1. Tim: 4.
13. etc: 2. Tim: 2. 3. 4. et 4. 1. 2. etc: and therefore not only Civil
Domination, but all handling also and meddling with secular and worldly affairs
is contrary unto this charge. Chrysostom: Hom: 11. ad Ephesians. 4. Doctrine by Sermons
is commended unto us, not rule or the authority of ruling.

5. No man (says the Apostle) that war reth, intangleth himself, with the
affairs of this life, because he would please him that has chosen him to be a
soldier. 2. Tim: 2: 4. Hiercm expou^ding this place concludes: Much more
ought we to be free from worldly businesses that we may please Christ. Ambrose
adds ane clear distinction of the functions and cause thereof; Let a
Minister approve himself to God that devoted to him, he may fulfill his
Ministry which he has undertaken being careful in Gods matters and free from
worldly business. For it is not convenient that one man should have a double
profession.

6 For this purpose serves whatsoever is written in scripture anent the
calling, office, and exercise of the Ministry of the word, the greatness
thereof, and the necssitie enjoined to Ministers to Preach the Gospel
continually: In so much that the Apostle says, Woe be to me, if I preach not
the Evangell. 1. Cor: 9: 16. Hence it is, that the manifold duetyes of the
Ministers of the Evangell are declared by similitudes of workmen in the
Vineyards, of husband men, of builders, of soldiers, and watchmen, and other
such importing continual labor, pains and travel, Math: 9. 38. and 10. 10.
2. Tim. 2. 15.

7. Some of the ancient Councellers also have taken a streait order for
restraint of Ecclesiastical persons from handling or meddling with any secular
honor or affairs: The fourth Ecumenical or universal council holden at Chal
cedon 450. years after Christ his birth where were assembled 630. Bishopps,
forbids expressly ane Minister, or Ecclesiastical person, upon pain of
Excommunication, to resaue any secular honor, Council. Chalced: Can: 7. In like
manner in the same Council, it is more particularly decided, and precise ly
decreed, Council: Chalced. Can. 3. That no clarke or any bearing spiritual
function, should undergo so much as the Tutership, or curatrie of one Orphan:
Quhilk decree seameth to be very precise and strait against ane natural duty
and charity. Yet the spirit of God has directed the Council be the light of
the truth to keep rightly the distinction that is betwixt Civil and
Ecclesiastical office and function; holding fast the grounds of scripture
before alleged. And for this cause it is decreed in an other cou^ sell, that a
Bishope should only attend unto Prayer, reading, and preaching. Council: Carth:
4: cap: 20. Thus much for overthrowing the first Horn of the Beast, to wit,
Civilpower, usurped by Prelates and Bishops. etc.

Now let us assay the force and strength of the Second Horn, of spiritual
power and Jurisdiction, quhilk Prelates and Bishops, following in this also the
Antichrist, usurp above the disposers of the mysteries of Christ, Pastors,
Ministers; and Teachers etc and not over one Kirk alone, but over many in one,
or more Dioceses, quhilk injquity has flowed also from the Antichrist of Rome,
and thence is derived to the Orders of his Clergy; Archbishopes, Bishops,
Arch-Deanes, Deanes, etc. setting up, by the devise of Satan, ane Hierarchy,
that is, a Spiritual principality in the Kirk of God, overthrowing
altogether the Ordinance of Christ Jesus in ordering his Kirk officers
(whairof has been spoken more at large in the first Treatise) and in place
thereof; intruding upon the Kirk Satanicall, and Antichristian, devises, and
Traditions: whereupon this conclusion grows like unto the former.

Whosoever leaving the Institution of Christ expressed in his word, usurp
spiritual authority and jurisdiction together with civil power in the Kirk,
They communicate with Antichrist, and their usurpation is Antichristian;

But Papal Bishops, and Prelates practice this Antichristian iniquity, against
the Institution of Christ and his word:

Therefore they communicate with the Antichrist, and the practice and
usurpation is Antichristian.

The Assumption we have to prove: Quhilk is plain by scripture expressly
condemning in Ministers of the word, both civil power, (as we heard before) and
spiritual authority or power, above the rest of the Ministers and disposers of
the word, as inferiors to the^. Quhilk we prove, as follows.

1. Christ coming into the world, and taking upon him the shape, or form of
ane servant, Philip. 2. 7. witnesses that he as Minister of the Gospel, came
not to be served, but to serve. Math: 20: 28. and no servant is above his
Master. Math: 10. 24.

2. Christ recommending to his Disciples humility, with Paritie and equa
litie, expressly forbids among them Superiority or Domination. Math: 20. 25.
etc. and 23. 8. 11. Mark. 10. 43. etc. Luc. 22. 25. etc.

3. Christ gives unto his Apostles and Disciples, alike, the Keys of the
kingdom of heaven, and they resaue alike power, Math: 18. 18. Ioh: 20. 23.

4. The Disciples and Apostles observing their Masters command, equal
themselves, not one clayming superiority, or Primacie above the rest: but all
professing equality, call them self servantes. 2. Cor: 4. 5. Ministers and
Dispensators. 1: Cor: 4. ver: 1. 5. Messengers, 2: Cor: 5. 20. etc. And no
place there is to be found, whair they are called, Princes, Lords, or by any
such name sou^ding to superiority, or dominatio^, in any wise.

5. The practice of the Apostles sending by like authority Peter, and John, as
Messengers, and erand bearers to Samaria, Act: 8. 14. Quhilk the Apostles wald
never have commanded, if Christ had not given them a like power, neither, Peter
(whom some make to be Prince of the Apostles) would have obeyed, if Christ had
given him Primacie, or Superiority above the rest.

6. Peter himself disclaiming all such Primacie and Superiority, equaleth
himself with the Ministers and Elders of Kirk, calling himself fellow Elder.
1. Pet: 5: 1. expressly forbidding Ministers and Elders, to take domination as
Lords, above the heritage of God: ver. 3.

7. The Apostle John sharply cheeketh and rebooketh Diotrephes clayming to him
prioritie or preferment above the rest. John Epist. 3. ver: 9 10.

8. Against the spiritual superiority of Papal Bischops do serve all those
places before cited; wherein the name, power, office, properties, and duties of
a Bishope, are communicate with Pastors, Teachers, and Elders. Act: 20. 17. 1.
Pet: 5. 2. Phil: 1. 1. Tit: 1. 5. 7. 1, Tim: 3. 2. 3. 4. etc. Quhilk places are
plane, pithie and sufficient alone, to overthrowe, pretended prioritie of Papal
Bishopps, Praelates. etc.

With scripture agrees learned and sinceire Antiquity in ancient Christian
Kirkes, whereof we shall bring a few for exemple, speaking most clearly in this
purpose.

Cyprian lib: de simplicit: praelat: The office of a Bishop is one and
undivided, part whereof is absolutely held of every Bishop. Idem. Cypr: lib.
Epist: 3. Every Bishop does rule and govern his own portion of the Lords
flock, being to give an account of his doings to God.

Athanasius Epist. ad Liberium Episcop: Romanum. All the blessed Apostles were
endued with the fellowship of equal honor and power.

Chrysostom: Hom: 43. in Math: What Bishop soever shall desire primacy in earth,
shall find confusion in heaven, and he, who shall covet to be first, shall not
be in the number of Christ his servantes.

Hieron, in Epist: ad Evagrium: Where soever a Bishop shall be, either at Rome,
or Evgubium, or Constantinoble, or Rhegium, he is of the same worth, and of the
same preisthood. Idem. ad Tit: cap: 1. After the age of the Apostles one of the
Bishops was set above the rest, whom they peculiarly called a Bishop. But this
was rather by custom, than by the truth of the Lords disposing. That it may
further appear even by Hierom himself, that the usurpation of Papal Bishops
prevayled by custom against the truth, mark well what he writes upon Heb:
13. 17. viz: He divides the care of the Kirk equally amongst many. In saying,
obey them that are set over you.

Besides these and others a fore cited against the authority and practice of
Papal Bishops, many mo testimonies may be drawn out of the same Fathers, and
Doctors, with others also of the same judgment, quhilk are alleged be
menteners of Christian Discipline, against authority of Papal Bishops: as out
of Cyprian. lib3: Epist: 10. 14. 27. Tertullian, de Ieiun August: lib: 19. cap:
19. de Civitate Dei. Item lib: de opere Monach: Hierom, ad Oceanum et in Tit:
1. Ambrose lib: Epist: 5. et 33. Chrysostom: hom: 2: in epist: ad Philip: Hilar:
adver: Constan. Nazian: orat: ad Maxim: Bernard: de consid: lib: 2. ad Evgenium
Papam.

For this same purpose are alleged some testimonies of Councels, as Carthage,
Chalcedon, Constan: etc.

Siclik against the authority and prac tise of Papal Bishops do witness all
Protestant Kirkes in France, Helvetia, Polonia, Hungaria, Bohemia, etc. and in
any Nation truly professing the Gospel in all the world, only England excepted.

And among the late writers, the most learned and notable professors, defenders
of the truth against the Roma^e Antichrist; all writing against the Lordly
usurpation of Civil and spiritual power in Ecclesiastical persons, as may be
seen by their several writtings, Lastly out of English writers, eve^ some of
them of the other side, matter may be fetched, against the Lordship of Papal
Bishops, Jewel, in defen: Apolog: adversus Harding page 714. D: Bilson in his
Book in quarto page 126. D: Bridges, of the Prince Supremacy, page 926. M.
Elmar Bishop of London, in his book printed at Straesborogh. See a Petition
directed to Her Majesty. pa. 7. 8. 9. quhilk we bring to prove rheir consent,
and witnessing unto the truth. Although as Cyprian says, Humane testimonies
are not to be expected, when Divine suffrages go before. Cyprian Epist: 5.
lib: 2.

As for objections in the contrary, what can be moved to move any of the
simplest against such clear light of holy scripture, and so many testimo nies
of Divine writers? As for the new obtruded Lord Bishops to the Kirk of this
Realm, we have not heard much of their reasoning as yet, for their part only
shreuding them self by authority and arm of man: whence they allege Donation
with power etc. To the quhilk albeit many things may be replied: yet we answer
thus only with the Apostle, The weapons of our warfaire are not carnal, 2:
Cor: 10. 4. The abuse and present practice the more is to be lame^ ted, that
such injquity is done in so great light of the Gospel, after long profession
of the same, that in place of light, men should embrace darkness, and love the
honor of the world, more tha^ the honor of Christ Jesus, not only coming
against the truth, but also against their own profession and avoument, having
preached, and practiced, the true Christian Discipline by Ministers and Elders
according to the word and Institution of Christ, opponing them selfs always
unto Antichristian authority, and practice of Papal Bishops. Is not this to
begine in the spirit, and end in the flesh? And who has bewitched you so?

Now for conclusion: seeing holy Gal. 3. 1, 3.
scripture, practice of the Apostolical and Primitive Kirk, and Christian
Kirkes in succeeding times, the learned and sincere Antiquity both in
Counsels and by writing, with all reformed Kirkes, every where truly
professing the Gospel, with the best of the leater writers of our time,
Foreign and within this Isle, stand on our side for Kirk government by
Ministers and assisting Elders according to the word, against the Government
of Lord Bishops, their authority and practis in the Kirk of Christ we being I
say, compassed with such great cloud of witnesses, let us hold fast the true
Heb, 12. 1:
profession of Doctrine and Discipline according to the word, without wavering,
or halting, praying continually, That the God of our Lord lesus Christ the
Father of glory, might give unto us the spirit Ephesians; 1. 17
of wisdom, and revelation, in the acknow Col, 1. 11.
ledgment of him, strenthned with all might throw his glorious power: that we
being like Philip, 2. 2
mindit having the same love, being of one Heb, 13, 21.
accord; and of the same judgment, we may do that which is pleasant, and
acceptable in his sight, through Christ, to whom be praise for ever and ever,
Amen.

DOCTOR REIGNOLDS HIS LETTER TO SIR FRAVNcis Knollis, concerning Doctor
Bancrofts Sermon at Paul's cross. 9. Feb: 1588. In the Parliament time.
ALbeit (Right Honorable) I take greater comfort in laboring to discover and
overthrow the Errors of Jesuits and Papists, (enemies of Religion) tha^ of the
Ministers of Christ; yet seeing it has pleased your Honor to requyer me to
show mine opinion of some things, which certain of these men mainteyne and
stand in, I thought it my duty, by the example Deuteronomy, 33 9
of Levy, who said of his Father, and Mother, I regard them not, nor
acknowledged he his brethren, to declare the truth, without respect of persons.

Of the two points therefore in Doctor Bancrofts Sermon, which your Honor
mentions, one is, concernning that he seems to avouch, The superiority,
which Bishops have among us over the Clergy, to be Gods own Ordinance, though
not by express words, yet by necessary consequence; In that he affir meth,
their opinion, who oppugn that that superiority to be Heresy. Wherein, I must
confess, he has committed an oversight, in my judgment, and himself, (I
think) if he be advertised there of, will acknowledge it. For having page 18.
said first, that Aerius affirms, that there was no difference by the word of
God betwixt a Priest, and a Bishop, and afterward, that Martin and his
companions, do maintain this opinion of Aerius, he adds that page 19.
Aerius persisting therein, was condemned for an heretic by the general
consent of the whole Church, and likewise page 69
that Martins, and all his companions opini on has herein been condemned for
heresy.

Touching Martine, if any man behave himself otherwise than in discretion and
charity he ought, let the blame be laid where the fault is, I defend him not;
but if by the way, he utter a truth, mingled with whatsoever else, it is not
reason that that, which is of God, should be condemned for that which is of
man; no more tha the doctrine of the resurrection should be reproved because
Act, 23. 8.
and held by the Pharisees. Wherefore removing the odious name of Martin, from
that which in sincerity and love is to be dealt with, it appears, by the
aforesaid words of D. Bancroft, that he avoucheth the Superiority which Bishops
have over the Clergy to be of Gods own ordinance; For he improveth the
impugners of it, as holding with Aerius, that there is no difference by the
word of God betwixt a Priest, and a Bishop, which he could not do with reason,
unless he himself appro ved the Bishops superiority, as established by Gods
word: and he adds, that their opinion, who gain say it, is Heresy, whereof
it insueth, he think it contrary to Gods word; since Heresy is an error
repugnant to the truth of the word of God, as, (according to 1 Timothy 6. 3 Titus
3. 10. 2: Peter 1. 19 and 21.
the Scriptures) our own Church The defense of the Apology part 1. and 7.
devision 2 answ. to the Rhem. Titus 3. 10
does teach us.

Now the Arguments which he brings to prove it an heresy, are partly
overweake, partly untrue: overweake that page 18.
he begins with, out of Epiphanius; untrue, that he p. 19. and 69
adjoyneth of the general consent of the Church. For though Epiphanius do say,
that Aerius his assertion is full of solly, yet he disproveth not the reason
which Aerius stood on, out of the scriptures; nay he deals so in seeking to
disprove it, that Bellarmine the Jesuit, Tom 1. cont. 5. lib. 1 ca: 15.
though desirous to make the best of Epiphanius, whose opinion herein he
mainteyneth against the Protestants, yet is forced to confess, that Epiphanius
his ans; were is not all of the wisest, nor any way can fit the text.

As for the general consent of the whole Church, which D. Ba^crost says,
condemned that opinion of Aerius for an Heresy, and himself for an Heretic,
because he persisted in it, that is a large speech: but what proof has he
that the whole Church did so? It ap; peareth he says in Heresy 15.
Epiphanius. It does not, and the contrary appears by in epist ad Titum 1 et
Epist 85. ad Evagrium:
S. Jerome, and sundry others, who lived, some in the same time, some after
Epiphanius, even S. Austin himself, though D. Bancroft cite him, as bearing
witness thereof likewise; I grant S. Austin cap; 53.
in his book of heresies, ascribes this to Aerius, for one, that he said,
Presbiterum ab episcopo nulla differentia de beri discerni: but it is one thing
to say, there ought to be no difference betwixt the, (which Aerius saying
condemned the Churches order, yea made a schism therein, and so is censured by
S. Austen, counting it an heresy as In Argu. pre fix: lib. 3 Tom: 2
in Epiphaus he took it recorded, himself, as de heref. ad quodvnit deu^ in
prefatione
he witnesses, not knowing how far the name of Heresy should be stretched)
another thing to say, that by the word of God there is no difference betwixt
them, but by the order and custom of the Church, which S. Austen Epist. 19
says in effect himself, so far was he from witnessing this to be heresy by
the general consent of the whole Church. Which untruth how wrongfully it is
fathered on him, and on Epiphanius (who yet are all the witnesses that D.
Bancroft has produced for the proof hereof, or can for ought that I know) it
may appear by this, that our learned country man (of godly memory) Bishop def.
of the Apol. part 2 ca, 9, divis. 1 page 198,
Jewel, when Harding to convince the same opinion of heresy, alleged the
same witnesses, he cyting to the contrary Chrysostom, Ierom, Austen, and
Ambrose, knit up his answer with these words: All these, and other more holy
Fathers, together with the Apoflle S. Paul, for thus saying, by Hardings
advice, must be held for heretics. And Michaell Medina De sacrif. hom, orig,
et con^^^, lib, 1, ca, 5:
a man of great account in the Counsel of Trent, more ingenious herein than
many other Papists, affirms, not only the former ancient writers, alleged
by Bishop Jewel, but also an other Ierom, Theodoret, Primasius, Sedulius, and
Theophilact, were of the same mind touching this matter with Aerius. With whom
agree likewise in 1, Tim: ^
Oecumenius, and in Epist, ad Tirum.
Anselmus Arch: B: of Canterbury, and an Collect. can. li. 7. ca, 87. e^ 1^7
other Ansel mus, and Poliear, li. 2 Tit, 19. et 39.
Gregory, and ca; legimus, did 39 ca; olimp; dill. 95.
Gratian, and after them how many? It being once enrolled in the Canon law for
sound, and Catholic doctriue, and thereupon publikly taught by Author gloss, in
ca, did, citat, ho doricus caol Ave: lat. in council Basil. Daaren. de sacra
Eccle mimst, lib 1 cap 7
learned men; All which do bear witness against D. Ba^croft, of the point in
question, that it was not condemned for an Heresy by the general consent of
the whole Church: For if he should reply, that these later witnesses did live a
1000. years after Christ, and therefore touch not him who page 19
said, it was condemned so in the time of S. Austen, and of page 69
Epiphanius, the most flourishing time of the Church that ever happe^ed since
the Apostles days, either in respect of learni^g, or of zeal, first they,
whom I named, though living in a latter time, yet are witnesses of the former.

Oecumenius the Greek scholiast treading in the stepps of the old greek
Fathers, and the two Anselmes, with Gregory, and Gratian, expressing S. Ieromes
sentence word by word. Besides that, perhaps it is not very likely that
Anselmus of Canterbury should have been Canonized by the Pope of Rome, and
worshipped for a Saint; that the other Anselmus, and Gregory, should have such
place in the Popes library, and be esteemed of as they are; that Gratians works
should be allowed so long time by so many Popes for the golden foundation of
the Canon law, if they had taught that for Catholic, and sound, which by the
general consent of the whole Church, in the most flourishing time that ever
happened since the Apostles days, was condemned for heresy: cheifely in a
matter of such weight, and moment, to the Popes supremacy; which as they do
claim over all Bishops by the ordinance of God, so must they allow to Bishopps
over Priests by the same ordinance, as they saw at length: and therefore have
not only decreed it now in the ^ess: 23: c. 4 Can, 6 and 7
Counsel of Trent, but also in anot. marg ad cap, legimus did. 43.
the new edition of their Cano^ law have set down this note, that on Hughes
Gloss allowed by the Archdeacon (saying, that Bishops have differed from
Priests always as they do now in Government, and Prelatship, and offices,
and Sacraments, but not in the name and Title of Bishop, which was common to
them both) must be held hereafter for S. Ieroms meaning: at least for the
meaning of the Canon taken out of S. Ierom, though his words be flat and plain
against this gloss, as Bellarmine Tom. 1 Contro 5 lib 1 cap
himself confesses. Whereto may be added, that they also who hauelaboured
about the reforming of the Church these 500 years, have taught that all
Pastors, be they entitled Bishops, or Priests, have equal authority and power
by Gods word. First the Aeneas Silvius histo Bohem cap 35 et Pigh hierarch
ecclef* lib. 2. ca 10.
Waldenses, next Defens pacis part 2 ca 15
Marsilius Patavinus: then Tho Walden Doct, fidei Tom 1 lib 2 cap 60 et Tom 2
cap ^7
Wickliffe and his scholars; afterward Aeneas Sil vius loco citato.
Husse, and the Hussites: last of all adversus falso nominat ordin epist et
adver. Papat Rom
Luther, in epist ad Philip 1 et Titus 1
Calvinc, Apol, Consest Wittenb cap 21
Brentius, Decad. 5 sermon 3
Bullinger, Loc. Com. Tit de minist verbi.
Musculus and other, who might be reckoned perticulerly in great number, since
as here with us both Jewel lo^^citat. et Pilkington in the Trearise of burning
Paul's Church.
Bishops; and the Queens D Humphrey in Ca^p. et in Duraeu^: Iesuitas-part 2,
rat: 3 and D Whit ad rat. Ca^piani, 6. et Confuta, Duraei Iesuitae lib 6
Professors of Divinity in our Universities, and M Braford, Lambert and others
M: Fox Acts etc D Fulke against Bristow, motive. 40 and Answer to the Remists
Tit: 1. 5.
other learned men do consent therein: so in foreign Nations all who^ I have
read treating of this matter, and many more, (no doubt) whom I have not read.

The sifting and examyning of the Trent Counsel has been udertaken by only
two, which I have seen, the one a divine, the other a lawier, v part 2: x)
lib, 4
Kemnisius, and Gentilletus; they both condemn the contrary doctrine
thereunto, as a Trent error; the one by scriptures, and Fathers; the other by
the Canon law. But what do I further speak of several persons? It it the
common judgment of the Reformed Churches of Helveti a, Savoy, France, Scotland,
Germany, Hungary, Polony, the Low Countries, and our own, witness the Harmony
sect, 11 in Helvet, post Galia Belgia Anglia etc,
Harmony of Confessions.

Wherefore since D. Bancroft (I assure my self) will not say that all these
have approved that as sound and Christian doctrine, which by the general
consent of the whole Church, in a most flourishing time, was condemned for
heresy: I hope he will acknowledge, that he was overseene, in that he avou
ched, the Superiority which Bishops have among us over the Clergy to be of
Gods own ordinance. And thus far of the former point of D. Bancroft Sermon.

The latter is, concerning that he af: firmeth, that S. Ierom pa. 14 and 69
says, and M. Calvin seems on his report, to confess that Bishops have had
the said superi: ority ever since the time of S. Mark the Evangelist. Of the
which point I think as of the former; since neither Ie: rom says it, neither
does Calvin seem to confess it on his report. For Bishops among us, besides
ordeyning, and laying on of hands, may do sundry other things, which
inferior Ministers, or Priests (as D. Ba^croft terms the^) may not; But
Epist. ad Evagrum,
Ierom, after mention of the superiority allotted to Bishops since S. Marks
time, what does a Bishop (says he) except ordination, which a Priest does not?
Meaning, and in forcing by this kind of speech, as a thing most evident, and
such as no man could deny, that Bishops had, that only power above Priests
then, which Hom, 11 in 1 Timothy
Chrysostom also witnesses.

Though neither had they it alone in all places, as it is apparent by a Council.
4 Ca^, 3
Counsel of Carthage, showing their Churches order; that the Priests laid
their hands together with the Bishop on those who were ordained. Yet Ierom
having proved by testimony of scripture, that in the Apostles times Bishops,
and Priests were all one, even in the right In 1 Timothy, 4: 14:
of this too, gra^teth that afterward Bishops had that peculier unto
themselves some where, but nothing else save it. S. Ierom therefore says not of
that superiority whereof the question is, that Bishops have had it ever since
S. Marks time.

No more does M. Calvin seem to confess it upon his report. For Calvin (in
the same In I nstit, lib. 4: cap, 4. sect, 2
place that D. Bancroft quoteth) showing how in old time the Ministers that had
charge to teach chose of their company one in every City, to whom they did
especially give the title of Bishop; least equality should breed dissension,
yet (says he) the Bishop was not above them in ho nor and dignity, that he had
rule over them, but look what is the Consuls duty in the Senate. to propose
matters, to ask their opinions, to direct others by giving them advise, by
admonishing, by exhorting, to guide the whole action by his authority, and see
that performed which was agreed upon by their common consent, that charge had
the Bishop in the assembly of Ministers. And having declared, that S. Ierom
shows this to have been brought in by the consent of men upon the first of
Titus, he adds that the same S. Ierom other where shows, how ancient an
order of the Church it was, even from S. Marks time to Hereclas, and Dionysius
at Alexandria. In which words of Calvin, seeing that the order of the Church he
mentions, has evident relation to that before described, and that in the
describing of it, he had said, the Bishop was not so above the rest in honor,
that he had rule over them: It follows that M. Calvin does not so much as
seem to confess of Ieroms report, that ever since S. Marks time Bishops have
had a ruling superiority over the Clergy. Wherefore to use no more profes in
a thing manifest, which else might easily be proved more at large out of S.
Ierom, and M. Calvin both: It is certain, that nether of them does affirm,
that Bishops so long time have had such superiority as D. Bancroft seems to
father upon them.

Thus have I signified mine opinion of the points that your Honor specified in
D. Bancrofts Sermon. Which yet if he, or any do prove, that I have erred in,
or take him otherwise tha^ I ought, I shall be very willing by Gods grace, to
correct: remembering the Apostles lesson, that The spirits of the Prophets are
subject to the Prophets. f) 1: Cor: 14: 3^:


19. Sept: 1598.
SIR FRANCIS KNOLLIS HIS SPEECH IN PARLIAment, related by himself to the late
worthy Lo: Treasurer Sir William Cicil.
To the end I may inform your Lordship of my dealing in this Parliament time,
a gai^st the undue clai^ed superiority of the Bb. over their inferior
brethren. Thus it was:

Because I was in the Parliament, in the 25 year of King Henry the 8. In which
time, First all the Clergy, as well Bishops, as others, made an humble
submission to King Henry 8. acknowledging his Supremacy, and detesting the
usurpation of the Bishop of Romes authority: Upon which submission of the
Clergy the King gave unto the said Bishops, the same ample rule that before
they had under the Pope, over their inferior brethren; saving that the same
rule was abridged by statute by this parenthesis following, that is to say
(without offending the prerogative Royal of the Crown of England, and the
laws, and customs of the Realm) In the latter end of the statute it was
added, That whofoever offends in any one part of that statute, and their
aiders, counselors, and abettours, they did all fall into the penalty of the
Praemunire. And after I had recited the statute in the Parliament house, I
declared that in K. Henry 8. his days, after this, there was no Bishop that
did practice superiority over their inferior brethren. And in King Edwards
days, the said Bishops obtained a statute, whereby they were authorized to
keep their Courts in the Kings name. The which statute was repealed in Q.
Mary's days, and is not revived in her Majesty's time that now is: Whereupon it
was doubtful to me, by what authority the Bishops do keep their Courts now
in their own names Because it is against the prerogative of the Crown of
England, that any should keep a Court without a sufficient warrant from the
Crown. Whereupon I was answered, that the Bishops do keep their Courts now
by prescription; and it is true, that the Bishops may prescribe that K: Henry
8. gave them authority, by the Statute of the 25 of his reign, to have
authority and rule over their inferior brethren, as ample as they had in the
Popes time: But this was no special warrant for the^ to keep their courts by
and that in their own names. And yet they have no other warrant to keep their
courts (as they do now in their own names) to my knowledge. And this was the
cause that made them obtain a statute in King Edwards days, to keep their
courts by, in the Kings name.

Now it is a strange allegation, that the Bishops should claim authority at
this present, to keep Courts in their own names (as they do) by
prescription; Because the statute of 25. H. 8. does restreigne them generally
from offending of the prerogative royal of the Crown of England, and the
laws and customs of the Realm. And no man may justly keep a court without a
special warrant from the Crown of England, as is a foresaid. And the general
liberty given by King Hen. 8. to the Bishops to rule and govern, as they did
in the Popes time, is no sufficient warrant to the Bishops to keep their
Courts in their own names by prescription, as I take it. And therefore the
Bishops had done wisely, if they had sought a warrant by statute to keep their
Courts in the Queens name, as the Bishops did in king Edwardes days. In
which time Cranmer did cause Peter Martyr, and Bucer, to come over into the
Realm to be placed in the two Vniverfities, for the better instruction of the
Universities in the word of God. And B: Cranmer did humbly prefer these learned
men, without any challenge to himself of any superior rule, in this behalf
over his inferior brethren. And the time has been; that no man Could carry
away any grant from the Crown of England by general words; but he must have
special words to carry the same by. Therefore how the Bishops are warranted to
carry away the keeping of their Courts in their own names by prescription, it
passes my understanding.

Moreover, whereas your Lordship said unto me, that the Bishops have for saken
their claim of superiority over their inferior brethren (lately) to be by
Gods ordinance, and that (now) they do only claim superiority from Her
Majesty Supreme Government: if this be true, then it is requisite, and
necessary that my L: of Caunter bury that now is, do recant, and retract his
saying in his book of the great volume against M. Cartwright, where he says
in plain words (by the name of Doct. Whitgift) That the superiority of
Bishopps is Gods own institution. Which saying does impugn Her Majesty's
supreme government directly, and therefore it is to bear tracted and truly.
For Christ plainly and truly confesses, Ioh: 18. 36. That his kingdom is not
of this world. And there fore he gave no worldly rule, or pre-eminence to his
Apostles, but the heavenly rule, which was to Preach the Gospel, saying, Ite,
praedicate in omnem mundum; quicunpue crediderit, et baptizatus fuerit, falvus
erit: qui non crediderit, condemnabitur. Go, and Preach in all the world;
whosoever shall believe, and be baptized, shall be saved: But he that will not
believe, shall be condemned. Mark 16. 15. 16. But the Bishops do cry out
saying, That Cartwright, and his fell: lowes would have no Government, etc. So
(belike) the Bishops care for no government, but for worldly, and forcible
government over their brethren, the which Christ ne: ver gave to his
Disciples, nor Apostles, but made the^ subject to the rule of Princes, who
ought not to be resisted, saving that they might answer unto Princes, That they
must rather obey God, than men. Act. 5. 29. and yet in no wise to resist the
Prince, but to take up the cross and follow Christ.

To the Reader.
IF this Honorable man were now alive, he would wonder more than ever he did,
at the resolutenes of our Bishops. In holding their Courts in their own
names. For bv M. Yelvertons speech; at a committee of both houses, in the
second Session of this Parliament it was made so plain, that the Bishops were
in the Kings mercy, for having seals of jurisdiction bearing their own, and
not the Kings arms, and holding Courts in their own names, and not the
Kings, that S. John Popham then Lord chief Justice of England, and S. Edward
Cook then the Kings Attorney general, acknowledged the same to be true. The
reason was this: In the first Session of this Parliament cap. 25. that Statute
of Q. Mary, which this worthy Counsailour of State mentions, is repealed. By
which repeal the Statute of Edw. 6. likewise by him mentioned is restored to
life. But more hereof (perhaps) hereafter: In mean while, Quaere. Whether
those subjectes which have taken the oath of supremacy be not forsworn: If
being cited by a process which has the seal of a Bishop, and not of the
King, they appear to the Ordinaries Court held in the Bishops name, and not
the Kings. Seeing such a process, and Court so held be (by that Statute of Ed.
6. now in force) said to be against the Kings prerogative, and therefore both
must be by none other than foreign power. If so, Quaere 2. Whether his
Majesty's subjects being so cited to such a Court, be bound (in law) to make
their appearance.


