A Balade declaryng how neybourhed love, and true dealyng is gone.
NOw strange it is, to men of age
the which they se, before their face.
This world to be, in such outrage,
It was never seen, in so bad case,
Neibourhed nor love is none
true dealyng now is fled and gone
Where shall one find, a man to trust,
Always to stand, in time of need.
The most part now, they are unjust
Fair in words, but false in deed:
Neybourhed. nor love is none
True dealyng now is fled and gone.
who can flatter, now best shall speed,
who can deceive, is gaynes well won
Of deceytfull tongues, who can take heed
Many a man, they have undone,
Neibourhed, nor love is none, etc,
The wickedness, that does abound,
More then I can, with tongue express,
To see unfaithful men are found,
of friendship there was never less:
Neiborhed, nor love is none. etc.
On covetousness, most men desire,
Their neighbors house, some does procure.
And over his head, they will it hyre,
Or bye a leace, to make it sure,
Neiborhed, nor love is none. etc.
To pourchace and bye, for lucre and gain
Both leace and house, both wood and ground,
They double the rent, to poor men's pain
of landlordes now, few good are found
Neiborhed, nor love is none. etc.
This is used now every where,
And will be till we have redress,
with them I thought, the Lord did fere
Because his word they do profess:
neiborhed, nor love is none. etc.
what neiborhed is this you call,
That one another does backbite
And daily will both skolde and brall,
with slanderous words, in most despite:
neyborhed, nor love is none. etc.
For matters small, some suffer wrong,
Upon displeasure, in prison cast,
And there shall lie, without pity long
till that his goods are spent and wast:
neyborhed nor love is none. etc,
Thungodly rich, the poor opppresse.
On them few have compassion,
Their cause is here, remediless
without all consolacion:
neyborhed nor love is none. etc.
If any membre be hurt in man,
The whole body lamentes therefore:
the poor oppressed who cures than
Or helps him for to salve his sore:
neiborhed nor love is none, etc,
The percialnesse that now does reign
with some that have, such cause in hand
The rich men does, the poor disdain
And sekes the means, to make them band
neyborhed not love is none, etc.
Truly to deal one with another,
In these days now ar very few,
the Sister will begyle the brother,
the brother again, deceyte will show
neyborhed nor love is none. etc.
The father will deceive the child,
the child the father likewise again,
thus one another does begylde
By false deceyt, that now does reign:
neyborhed nor love is none. etc.
To speak somewhat of vsurye,
the which the Lord does daily curse
yet some do use it privily
to fill their discontented purse,
neyborhed nor love is none. etc.
To strive or speak, it is no boot,
In covetousness, there is no order
of mischief it is the very root,
All things it spoils, in every border:
neyborhed nor love is none. etc,
Our Preachers with gods word does cry
on couetousmen, that will not cesse,
their words are herd, with years so slye,
their filthy gaynes, they still encresse:
neybourhed nor love is none. etc.
How many does their rentes abate,
or now a days, their tenentes ease,
they set their rentes, at a new rate
Both fines and leasses, they daily rease.
Neybourhed nor love is none. etc.
Covetousness has now the way
wrong and briberye does not refrain,
In every cost, pride bears the sway,
Among the whole* now it does raygne
Neybourhed nor love is none. etc.
What is the cause, neibourhed is gone,
which here has reigned many a day
I hear the poor men make great moan,
And says hit is, fallen in decay:
Neibourhed nor love is none, etc,
True dealyng dare not once appear
Deceit has put him out of place,
Every where both far and nere,
He reigns now in most men's face:
Neibourhed nor love is none. etc.
Grant oh God, for thy mercyes sake
That neigbourhed, and dealyng true
May once again, our sprites awake,
That we our lives may change a new
that neybourhed and love a lone
may come again to every one.
quoth. Ihon Barker.

Imprinted at London by Richard Lant.


