DAVID'S Pastoral Poem: OR Sheepeheards Song.

SEVEN SERmons, on the 23. Psalm of David, whereof the last was preached at
Ashford in Kent, the day whereon our gracious King was there proclaimed.

By THOMAS IACKSON Preacher of Gods word at Wie in Kent.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Purfoot, and are to be sold by Edmund Weauer at his
shop at the great North door of Paul's Church. 1603.

To the right worshipful Robert Honnywood Esquire of Hoggesdon near London,
and to the virtuous and zealous Gentlewoman Elizabeth Honnywood his wife, my
Christian dear friends in the Lord, Thomas Iackson Preacher of Christ's
Gospel, wishes an happy increase of all spiritual graces, with health and
prosperity in this life, and eternal happiness in the life to come.
SIr, it has pleased God, that for some certain years, there has bin a
Lecture holden by five others of my reverend brethren, and my self, every
Saturday, being the Market day at Ashford in Kent, where we have a worshipful
and Christian auditorie, where (as my turn came about) I have handled diverse
portions of Scripture, and now lastly, in seven Sermons, gone over the 23.
Psalm of David; and by Gods providence it so came to pass, that my course was
to teach on Saturday the 26. of March, 1603. for which I had also prepared my
self; but having certain intelligence over night, both of the death of her
Majesty, and also that the high and mighty Prince, James, was proclaimed for
our king, with general applause in London, (whom God in mercy long preserve.)
The consideration of these sudden and great accidents, and also hearing what a
great auditorie there would be,, both of Knights and Gentlemen, to proclaim
the king there, and also of others, desirous to hear and see, did somewhat
astonish me. But considering first, gods merciful dealing toward this land in
this evil day, which we have so long feared, making our comfort suddenly to
appear, as a flash of lightning, which breaks out of a dark cloud, and
secondly his providence toward me, who calling me on the sudden, to so great
and weighty a duty, yet eased me of half the pains by fitting it so, as my
ordinary text and premeditations (with some small change of phrases or style)
did better agree with the present occasion, then many others which might have
been purposely and curiously chosen, I was much encouraged, and by Gods mercy
(to the comfort of my self and others) discharged that duty (his name for
ever be praised, who is always at the right hand of his unworthy servants,
to help them in time of need) since which time, I have been very earnestly
solicited by diverse worshipful and Christian good friends, to publish those
my Lectures in print, that the benefit thereof redounding unto many; by many,
thanks might be given unto God; whose request for a time, I very resolutely
gainsayd, as meeting with many and those very weighty discouragements: Solet
acceptior esse sermo viuus, quam scriptus. Ber. epi. 66.
first the great difference betwixt preaching and reading, even the same
matter, whereof one says very well, The lively voice is more acceptable, than
written words. Habet nescio quid latentis (...), viua vox.
And another says: Lively voice has a kind of secret force, and powrefull
sound: And Aschines when he had read the oration which Demosthenes had made
against him, and perceived the people to wonder at the excellency of it, he
answered: What would you have thought, if you had heard him pronounce it
himself? Quid si ipsum audissetis sua verba resonantem.
And therefore I was loath to change my tongue into a pen, and laying aside
the gesture and countenance of a living man, to bury my self in a dead
letter, of far less effectual persuasion. Secondly, the wise Preacher has
long since said, There is none end of making of books, and much reading is a
wearines of the flesh. Eccles. 12. 12. which is most true in this bookish age,
wherein as one says, It would require a man's whole life, Vix tota vita indices.
but to read over the titles or inscriptions: for now is the old Poets saying
verified, Scribimus indocti doctique Poemata passim
Learned and unlearned, every one sets pen to Paper: And hereby it comes
to pass, that the world is ouerladen, and the Presses oppressed with an
innumerable company of frivolous Pamphlets, the fruits of idle brains,
sauouring of nothing but ungodliness, and carnal vanity, and tend to none
other end but the nourishment of all manner vice and profaneness; oh that there
were amongst us, some zealous Ephesians, that books of so great vanity might
be burned up: Acts. 19, 29. Yea, there are many very excellent Books,
Treatises, Sermons, and Catechismes, but if there wanted any, there are many,
both in regard of their ability, and leisure, far fitter to employ
themselves this way then my self. Thirdly, I feared, both the grave and wise
censure of the godly learned divines, to whom my spirit is subject. And also
the curious reprehensions of those Momi, and malignant sinister spirits, who
say they would have nothing printed, (if divinity,) but that which wadeth into
the depth thereof, and contains the marrow and quintessence of learning, such
as do profoundly handle deep points, and subtle quiddities of controversies,
publishing that which was never heard or known before. And (if humanity) then
nothing, but that which is excellent, for wit; singular for learning; rare for
knowledge; and pollished with all the ornaments of eloquence; but in truth
there can be nothing so well, learnedly, or godly done in either, but these men
(as it were pining away with envy at other men's good) do either bitterly
backebite, reproachfully slander, undeservedly reprove, or maliciously defame.
What is it then to publish any thing in print, but for a man to make himself a
common byword, a But for every man to shoot his arrow at, even bitter words,
yea to offer himself to be stung and torn, with the sharp and venomous
teeth and tongue of every reproachful slaunderer.

Lastly, it is no small discouragement, to consider the vanity of Readers in
these days (which is not the least cause of so many idle and vain books) who
as if they were possessed with the Athenian humor, Poscimus indocti doctique.
to delight in nothing but either to tell, Act. 17. 21 Quid noui.
or hear some news: the first question at every Stacioners shop is, what
new thing? and if it smell of the press, and have a goodly title (be the
matter never so base and unprofitable) it is a book for the nonce; but be it
never so good, if once the Calender be changed, that it bear the date of the
former year, it is never enquired after, it may serve for couers to every
immodest Poem, girding Satyr, or ridiculous fable: and thus most men esteem
of vain books, more then of those that are profitable, but none almost esteem
of the best, but as men do of a flower, whilst it is newly gathered, but
afterward it is thrown in the window corner, M. Dearing in his Preface to his
Catechism.
and regarded no more; this vanity a learned and zealous Divine, long since
lamented; and surely it still increases, and gets ground, whereby many of
Gods servants, (most dysirous every way, that God has enabled them to do good
to his Church) are mightily discouraged from laboring in this kind: disgrace,
poverty, contempt and injury, being all the thanks, which many receive for
their pains, that if there were not other far greater consideration, whereby
these former are devoured, and darkened as the light of a Candle by the Sun
at noone day; O Lord, how many excellent books are there, which had perished
amongst the Mothes and Worms, and never seen the light of the Sun. First it
is the greatest comfort that many a poor soul has (next unto preaching, Gods
sanctified ordinance) that at leisure-times they may read or hear, some plain
exposition or Sermon, penned to their capacity, and wherein many take
ixceeding comfort, delight, and profit. There are many who for their age,
sickness, soulnesse of weather, or other urgent occasions, cannot always
hear the word, where, and when they would, who yet having some godly men's
labors, may by the reading of the Scriptures, and them, in some measure,
supply the want of better means, and increase in themselves the knowledge,
fear and love of God. Again, though there be mo books, godly and learnedly
written, then well read or used; yet shall the Church of God, so long as it
remains on earth, stand in need of new Tractates, Comments, Sermons, and
Catechismes, as new reasons, illustrations, and methodes are invented, as new
doubts, controversies, errors or heresies do arise, and as men do diversely
bend themselves, to the studying and handling of particular heads of doctrine,
and parts of the word of God. Non omnia possumus omnes.
Again, all is not expected at one man's hands, one may sleep, where another
waketh, two eyes see more then one, Plus oculi, qua^ oculus.
one may be dark and concise, where another is large and plain, yea in a word,
as in diverse speakers, so in diverse writers (handling the same doctrine in
general) we shall see the admirable variety of spiritual gifts, each one
differing from other, both in method, and manner, matter, and argument, whereby
we may be stirred up to praise the great bounty of God, and also. his
wisdom toward his Church, that whom one book sauoureth not, he may yet
like the taste of another, the doctrine of godliness being as a large field,
wherein many thousands may labor, and yet all have elbow room; and like a
great fountain or Well, whereout every man may draw his Bucket-full, and yet
never see bottom. Lastly, some men, through some respect of kindred,
friendship, acquaintance, or others, may be drawn to read some book,
whereas they would not have regarded any other (though far to be preferred)
on the same argument. The consideration whereof, having the public profit of
many, and the eternal glory of God (as the propounded scope and end of all my
labors) before mine eyes, together with the importunate persuasion of my dear
and Christian friends in the Lord, have drawn me into the violent current of
this time, to cast my mite into the Lords treasury, in publishing these my
poor trauelles, At nunc etiam cilius vereor, qua^ henc.
which long since had come abroad, if I could have been sooner thereunto
persuaded. I have not altered any thing of the matter which was delivered; or
of the method which I observed therein, only I have added the testimonies of
certain godly and reverend men, whose words and sentences in teaching I
reported (in our own natural mothers tongue) but concealed both names and
places, and the rather I now set them down, because many (either simple
deceived, or maliciously froward) condemn all such for merely ignorant and
unlearned, whose Sermons are not stuffed full with sentences of a strange and
unknown language, alas, who knows not that any man but merely qualified with
gifts, and taking any commendable pains in his study, may plentifully allege
the testimonies of me^, if they saw the same warrantable, or profitable (and
not rather hurtful) to the edification of the Church of God? But I have placed
them in the margent, as also the testimonies of Scripture, because I would not
have the simple reader any way interrupted, he may at his pleasure, having only
the matter, make a pawse for the examination of any thing auerred by the
testimonies alleged.

As for the matter, to commend it, I need not, for if it be the pure Ps. 12. 6.
Reu. 3. 18. Psa. 19. 10.
word of GOD, (as I persuade my self it is) then it is more precious, than
fined gold, sweeter than honey, and cleerer than the light, if it be as
comfortable in reading, as those who have enforced me to publish it, (as they
said) found it in preaching, I doubt not, but God thereby shall be glorified,
his Saints comforted, and my soul rejoiced, in the day of the Lord Jesus; but
as for the manner; the style may seem harsh and unpleasant, handling a
Shepherds song, after a Shepheardly and rude manner, for (as your Worships
know) my manner is not at any time, to study for words, but for matter, which
so I deliver in such words, as I may be understood of the simplest hearer, I
care for no more; mine only desire, being to instruct Gods people, with the
plain euidencie of the spirit, and of power. And therefore as in the
delivering; so also in the penning and setting down thereof, I have neither
used curiosity of words; eloquence of speech; gloousnesse of style, nor of
obscurity, and darkness of matter, to declare a deep profoundnesse, but
have endeavored in all simplicity of spirit, sincerity of heart, plainness
of phrase, and sensible manner, to deliver the only truth, to the Saints of god.

It is the first thing of mine, that ever passed the Press, and therefore
great reason, that I should dedicate it, to the first friends, that ever I had
in this Country, who first won mine affection by courtesy, and since many
ways confirmed it, by desert; it was long since planted, and being plentifully
watered, Amor verus, non nouit finem.
it still grows, and shall, till in the next life it be perfected. Under your
roof I found a happy rest, when I left your brothers house, a Gentleman
truly religious, Mr. vvoodward of Buckingham-shire.
and worshipful, by whose loving Sons means, I was first drawn into these
Southern parts: by your Christian example, and religious exercises in your
family, I was awakened forth of that spiritual slumber, into which I fell, so
soon as I left the University, Mr. Perkins.
and the ordinary hearing of a most zealous man of God, who spent himself as
the lamp, to give light to the Church, whose soul is now at rest with God,
and who first turned my feet toward Gods Kingdom. Your Worships were my first
encouragement to the study of Divinity, (and that with no small hindrance to
your childrens proceeding in learning, whom I taught:) by your means did I
first enter into this office, and was called unto this place, where I do now
exercise, and from you and yours, have I received manifold encouragements in my
ministry, the Lord register them in his Book, that they may be remembered, and
come in your good accounts, at the glorious day of his son, and be requited
seauen-fold into your bosoms; wherefore (having none other thing) that I may
not be unthankful, In gratum si dixeris, omnia dixeric.
which of all other sins (even amongst the heathen) has ever been reputed
most vile, and odious; whatsoever respects others have, only to avoid the
note of ingratitude, do I prefume to dedicate to your Worships, these first
fruits of my labors in this kind; that as you heard the first Sermon that ever
I preached, your Son, was the first child that ever I baptized, and your
daughter, the first that ever I married, so you would vouchsafe to patronize
these few Sermons, being the first that ever I published: let then this poor
Infant, which knows not whither to fly, but unto you (as you have given
comfort unto his Father) find some shadow under your roof, till the storms of
virulent tongues be ouerpast. Accept of this small testimony of my great good
will, according to your wonted courtesy; and surely, if I shall hear that it
is favorably entertained of you, and courteously accepted of the brethren, I
shall not only greatly rejoice, but also shall hereby be stirred up, and
pricked forward to the publishing hereafter of other things, with more time,
better advice, exacter diligence, mature deliberation, and sounder judgment,
Non in principiis perficta quaeruntur, sed de paruis principiis, ad ea quae
perfecta sunt perueniture. Ambros.
thorough the grace of God, increasing his gifts in me. The Lord for his
mercies sake, grant that these my first labors, may be accepted of the
Saints, and tend to the glory of God. And I heartily beseech the Lord God of
all grace, the Fountain of all goodness, and giver of all spiritual
blessings both for your selves, your sons daughters, brethren, sisters, and
kinsfolks, and your whole religious Stock, and Family, and specially for that
reverent religious Matron, your dear mother, whom God has many ways
honored, and after many great storms, sweetly refreshed, to her everlasting
consolation in Christ, to endue all your fowls, with heavenly knowledge,
faith, zeal, and love to God his truth, and Saints, and bestowed great worldly
blessings of wealth, wisdom, and reputatation: so it would please him to
preferue and keep you all, in pure Religion, perfect peace, fervent love,
unfeigned faith, reverent fear, and true holiness, all the days of your
lives, that the course of this miserable wretchedness finished, you may
receive the happy fruit, of the glorious Gospel, with all the Saints, and be
crowned with immortal glory, in his purchased Kingdom, whereunto he speedily
bring us, for his mercies sake in Christ, Amen.

From Wye, in Kent the last of September, 1603. Your Worships, in all Christian
duty to command: THOMAS IACKSON.

TO THE GODLY DISposed Reader, and specially to his Countrymen, Kinsfolks,
and friends, in Lancashire.
GRace, mercy, and peace, with increase of all godliness and piety, from God
the Father of all mercy, thorough the inualluable merits of Jesus Christ, our
only all-sufficient Redeemer, by the working of the most mighty, and lively
spirit, the elects comforter, for ever be multiplied, Amen. Although it has
pleased God, who has the stars (even all the Angels, or Ministers of the
Churches) in his right hand Reu 1. 16
, to fix me in these Southern parts, to give light unto his people Mat 5. 14
, and not suffer me (according to my hearts desire) to fasten the cords of my
remoouing Tabernacle among est you, yet no distance of place, or continuance of
time, can alienate or estrange mine affections from you; S. Paul wished
himself accursed, and separate from Christ, for the good of them that were his
kinsfolks, according to the flesh Romans 9. 3.
. And surely, my heart were harder that flint, if I should not have special
affection, to my native soil, where I have so many loving brethren, and a
sister, dear kinsfolks, and faithful friends: yea, my hearty desire, and
prayer unto God, is, that you may come to the knowledge of the truth, and be
saved To. 10. 1. 2 Timothy 3. 7 2. Pet. 3. 9
, that as nature has bound us together, we my also be tied in a straiter, and
nearer bond of Religion, being borne again, after a spiritual birth Gal. 4.
19. Iam. 1. 18. 1. Pet. 1. 28 John. 1. 13.
, speaking all the language of Canaan Esaias 19. 18
. For your sakes therefore, dear Countrymen, kinsfolks, and friends, (and
specially so many as love the Lord Jesus Christ, and his Gospel, dwelling in
Bromley, Colne, Mersden, or thereabouts) have I specially been drawn to the
penning of these few Lectures, and to you do I commend them, as all equity and
reason would, that I should return the first fruits of my labors, thither,
from whence I came, and where I had my first being and bringing up; accept
therefore at my hands this poor mite, as a token and pledge, of one, that
loves you unfeignedly in the Lord, that whereas, (by the far distance of place,
and the great charge committed unto me, to be attended upon) I am let from
coming unto you, in regard of bodily presence, that I might be comforted
together with you, thorough our mutual faith, both yours, and mine ^o. 1. 12.
: Yet by this means the same might be in some measure supplied, on my behalf,
and I hope you will acknowlede it, as a flower of your own Garden, that with
greater delight, you may smell unto it, and the fruit of your own field, and
even in that respect more willingly eat of it, and cheerfully digest it, to
the increase of that stature, and strength, whereunto you have already
attained in Christ; Oh what a joy it was, the last time that I was amongst
you, to observe even a general, and most blessed change, that whereas
heretofore, nothing, but blind and superstitious devotion reigned, men,
generally being like old vessels, which could not be seasoned, from retayning
the sent of their first liquor, whereof many dregs remained, that so they might
be fit to receive the pure liquor of the Gospel Mat. 9. 17.
. Nay alas, where were they that should have seasoned them? the word of God,
being much more precious, than in the days of Elie 1. Sa. 3. 1.
, scarce one Sermon within many miles, once a year to be heard: Now it has
pleased God to send unto you, many most godly and learned Preachers. Again, in
the people, what a love does there begin to spring toward the truth? How
cheerfully do they by great companies flock, to the hearing of the word?
with what earnestness do they thereunto attend? with what reverence do they
by the way, and at home talk and confer thereof? how beautiful are the feet
of Gods Messengers, that bring glad tidings of peace unto them, when they come
into the Country? how importunately do they require to have the word of God
preached? how diligently do they employ, and exercise their Children, and
servants in the private reading of the Scriptures? Bibles, being to be found in
most men's houses, whereas heretofore (for the most part) no other Books
regarded, but such as nusled them up in superstition, or prohanesse, (wherein I
desire the Lord to forgive the vanity of my youth) yea, in every company;
some are found, that are ready in the Scriptures, and can speak with a grace
of the word of God Ephesians. 4. 29.
. Which when I considered, me thought, in you was fulfilled, that which Christ
once said, Lift up your eyes, and look upon the Regions, for they are white
already to the Harvest Ioh. 4. 35.
: yea doubtless, the Harvest is very great, and the Laborers few Mat. 9. 37.
.

Oh then dear Contrymen, follow Christ his counsel, pray the Lord of the
Harvest to thrust forth laborers into his Harvest: Mr. John Bradford, Martyr.
Nowell, Deane of Paul's, London. Dr. VVhitakers, Reg. profess. Cantab. Angliae,
lux, Romae, mastix.
that as your soil, has yielded as many glorious lights, and worthy
instruments, in the Church, as any other Country in the Realm besides *, Yea,
furnished most places of the Land, with men quallified with exellent gifts, for
the work of the ministry. So it would please God, either to raise up amongst
you, or ( because a Prophet is not esteemed in his country Mat. 23. 57.
) to send some from elsewhere, that may be a light unto you, to direct your
feet out of darkness, and shadow of death Mat. 4. 16
, into the way of righteousness and life, by Jesus Christ, and to this end
that he would move the heart of our gracious King, and all godly Rulers under
him, with a tender commisseration, of the lamentable estate of so good a
people, who have so many years wandered like sheep, for want of a Shepherd,
and thereby made the more subject to be drawn away, by the subtle and damnable
flatteries, of roaging and vagabond Jesuits and priests. And herein I most
instantly entreat you, in the bowels of Christ, that you be not wanting to
your selves, but with all care, and conscience; zeal, and diligence; seek the
means whereby you may be edified to eternal life, whilst this happy time of
grace and mercy lasts; that so all of you may have hope; sin, may be
abolished; idolatry rooted out, Antichrist overthrown, Satan trodden down,
Hell confounded, the Gospel increase, and righteousness flourish, to the
glory of God, and joy, of our godly King. Oh my dear Contrymen, kinsfolks
and friends, walk no longer in the ignorant, superstitious, and sinful ways
of our forefathers, but turn to the Lord, and declare repentance, by the
fruits thereof, come to the Lord whilst his arms are stretched out to embrace
you, seek him whilst he may be found, call on him, whilst the time is
convenient, and forsake all evil, both in Religion, and conversation, so shall
God be glorified, your souls saved, and all that love you in the Lord,
exceedingly comforted. For the stirring of you up whereunto, I am bold to
commend this my first travel unto you: vouchsafe therefore, with a loving
mind, to accept my faithful meaning toward you, open the Book, and read it
with a desire to profit by it, it contains not any thing, to delight the
vain ear, or content the curious mind, but that which may instruct the
ignorant, comfort and strengthen the weak and feeble conscience: wherein, if I
can promise nothing else, yet this one thing may I assure thee, that thou have
this whole Psalm, more amply, and orderly handled, than (to my knowledge) by
any heretofore; I crave therefore, that if this Book shall fall into the hands
of such, as (either because they heard these Lectures, or are otherwise so full
of knowledge) can gather no sweet, from this withered flower, that yet they
would favorably let it pass, to such as it is sent, remembering S. Augustins
counsel, let those that know it already, pardon me, least I offend them,
that know it not; for it is better, to give to him that has, than to turn
away him that has not Ignoscant scientes, ne offendantur nescientes; satius
est enim offerre habenti, quam disferre non habentem. 2 de Bapt. Cont. Donat. 1.
. And if it come into the hands of such, who take a special felicity, to
carpe at other men's doings, this is mine only comfort, that no man ever
pleased all parties: and therefore, seeking the profit of many, I contemn the
carping reproof of some, and applying my self only to please God, and the
godly, I weigh not at a straw, the censure of the wicked. Farewell, courteous
Reader, and if thou find any thing comfortable herein, give God his due for
it, and as I shall pray for thee, that thy labors herein, and all other thy
godly exercises, may be blessed with a fruitful increase, of all spiritual
graces; so I entreat thee, to bear with such escapes and faults, as shall
happen in the printing, (if there be any) and especially to help me with thy
faithful prayer unto God, for the increase of his graces in me, that the
Church in Christ, may more, and more be profited by me.

From Wie in Kent, the last of September, 1603. Your most hearty Wel-willer,
and Servant to you all for Christ. Thomas Iackson.

THE FIRST SERMON upon the 23. Psalm.
The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want.
IT seems, that songs, poems, and verses were first invented, for this end,
vz. That man's nature delighting in music, matters delivered in meeter, being
without tediousness the oftener repeated, might thereby be consecrated to
perpetual memory; and for this cause the holy Ghost, condescending to our
weakness, has directed holy men of God, the penners of the sacred scriptures,
to frame many things, most excellent and memorable, into verse or meeter, so
have we the song of Moses, declaring the merciful, and miraculous deliverance
of Gods people out of Egypt, and the just and powerful destruction of their
enemies in the red sea Exo. 15.
; another, containing a particular rehearsal of Gods benefits, and their
ingratitude Deuteronomy. 32.
. Also the song of Deborah and Baracke, for the glorious conquest, and mighty
deliverance of the people from the slavery of Iabin, by so unlooked for an
overthrow of Siserah and his host Judge. 5.
. When little David so victoriously triumphed over proud Goliath of the
Philistims, the women met Saul the King, and David his servant, joyfully,
singing, and playing upon their Timbrels, viols, and other instruments, and
thankefully recording as follows, Saul has slain his thousand, and David
his ten thousands 1. Sa. 18. 7.
. Hannah, when God had taken away her reproachful barrenness, and made her
honorably fruitful, she sung, and said: 1. Sam. 2* 1.
Mine heart rejoices in the Lord, mine horn is exalted in the Lord. When God
had looked upon the humility of the blessed Virgin, and made her the glorious
vessel of Christ his conception, she gave glory unto God in a song, and
said, My soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit rejoices in God my
Savior Luke 1. 46
. So Zachary, after the birth of John Baptist his Son, when his mouth was
opened, and tongue loosed, he spoke, and praised God, prophesying, and saying:
Blessed be the lord God of Israel, because he has visited and redeemed his
people Lu. 1. 68
. Old Father Simeon embracing the babe Christ with his arms, according to the
promise of the holy ghost, thankefully breaks out into this sweet swan-like
song. Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word
Lu. 2. 28.
. And not only have these and many others, the Saints of God, in their
prosperity and flourishing estate, having received many good things; offered
in their songs a sacrifice of praise, Even the fruits of their lips, confessing
his name Heb. 13. 15.
: But also in their adversity and doleful conditions, have they poured out
their souls, in songs unto God; for though S. James seem to oppose prayer and
singing, as so diametrally contrary, that no man can pray, singing; nor sing,
praying, where he says: Is any amongst you afflicted? let him pray: is any
merry? let him sing Ia. 5. 13.
Yet surely it is most evident, that the Apostle therein requires, first that
in afflictions, when we are in distress, and extreme anguish, we fly unto
God by prayer, and of him only seek release, and comfort; and when we are in
prosperity, and enjoy the blessings of God at our wills, that then we give
thanks and praise unto God: in our afflictions, praying, and not despairing,
blaspheming, and seeking unlawful means of deliverance with the wicked; and
in our prosperity, singing songs of praise, and not vain, light, and foolish
ballads as the worldlings do, and herein consists the opposition, and not in
the former; for as in prosperity it is lawful, in fervent prayer to mourn,
sigh, sob, and lament: so also in adversity lamentably, and sorrowfully to
sing, as the Apostle councelleth, saying: My brethren count it exceeding joy,
when ye fall into diverse temptations James 1. 2
. So the Apostles being beaten and scourged, went out of the Council rejoicing
Act. 5. 41.
, and being sore beaten, cast into the inner prison, and their feet made fast
in the stocks, yet at midnight they prayed, and sung Psalms unto God Act. 16.
25.
. David sung many psalms, and played thereunto with sundry instruments, and
yet oftentimes under a sweet sound had a woeful and heavy heart; as when he
lamented the deaths of Saul and Jonathan 2. S^. 1.
. And elsewhere complains of the want of the feeling and assurance of Gods
favor, and remission of sins, and most earnestly entreats to have those
graces renewed again Psa. 4. 6. 51. 120.
. And who finds not great use of singing, both in prosperity, and
adversity? In prosperity by singing of Psalms, our zeal is quickened;
fervencie in prayer, increased; and our earnestness to perform all laudable
service unto God, notably stirred up, whereunto the example of Elisha may be
referred, who yielding to the request of Iehoshaphat, called for a minstrell,
who by his songs to Gods glory, stirred up the Prophets heart to prophecy 2.
Kin. 3. 15.
. Also in adversity by singing of some holy and godly Psalm, our heavy and
pensive hearts are refreshed, for this cause the holy Prophet David (in the
sorrow and heaviness of his heart) would rebuke his soul, saying: Why art
thou so heavy, oh my soul? and why art thou so disquieted within me Ps. 42. 5.
? And would stir up himself, and his instrument to play and sing some
joyful song, awake my tongue, awake violl, and harp, I my self will awake
right early Ps. 57. 8.
. But I will pass over these things, and come to entreat only of the Psalms of
David, whose penners, were many; Arguments, diverse: and uses, manifold.

First, Penners.
for the penners, (as I said) they were many as Asaphe Ps. 50. 73. 74. 75. 76.
78. etc.
, for so some godly learned, will rather that he was a writer, than only a
singer, to whom they were committed; and the rather because elsewhere it may
be gathered, that he made some psalms 2. Cron. 29. 30.
: Some also were penned by Moses Psa. 90.
. But most of them by David, that princely Prophet, and sweet singer of Israel,
and thereuppon called the Psalms of David: but whosoever was the penner, they
are all to be received with the like reverent estimation, they being all led by
one and the self same spirit, so that the holy Ghost may well be said, to be
Author of the whole Book, for these holy men of God did speak and write, as
they were moved by the holy Ghost 2. Pet. 1. 21.
; and specially David witnesses of himself, that the spirit of the Lord spoke
by him, and that his word was in his tongue 2. Sa. 23. 2.
. And therefore S. Peter alleging the testimony of David, uses this manner of
preface, Thus has the holy Ghost spoken (by the mouth of David) concerning
Judas, who was guide unto then that took Jesus Act. 1. 16
.

Secondly, Argument.
for the argument of this Book (as I said) it is diverse, some contain
confession of sins, and humiliation before the Lord, with earnest and hearty
prayer unto God, both for repentance, and remission of sins Ps. 25. 51
. Some are wholly spent in commendation of Gods law, with many intermixed
prayers for strength to observe the same Ps. 119.
. Some describe the wonderful power, wisdom, majesty, and providence of God,
shinning in the creation and preservation of all the world, for which all
creatures are exhorted to praise the name of the Lord Psa. 8. 18. 104. 147.
.) Some are penned for a preparation to stir up the people with fear and
reverence, to present themselves before the Lord in their holy conuocations and
assemblies, as the Psalm which begins thus: Oh come let us sing unto the
Lord Psa. 95.
. Some of them lay open the miseries of Gods people in their captituitie, and
how hardly they were used of their enemies Psa. 137.
. Some of them contain particular prayers, for supply of some particular
wants, either of body or soul Ps. 6. 86.
. Some contain prayers of the whole Church for the confusion of the enemies
thereof Psa. 83.
. In a word, many of them are historical, as briefly laying open Gods dealing
toward his people, and their enemies, both in Egypt, in the wilderness, and
in the land of Canaan Psalm. 78. 105. 106. etc.
: most of them prophetical, and all of the^ didacticall, full of instruction,
both as concerning our faith in the maine grounds, and Articles of Religion,
and concerning our obedience, whether of piety toward god, as hearing,
reading, praying and praising; or of love toward our neighbor, whether we
regard the inward affections, or outward actions.

Thirdly, Uses.
and lastly, the uses of this Book are manifold, for all the holy Scriptures
are written for our learning, that we through patience, and comfort thereof,
might have hope Romans 15 4.
: and as elsewhere he says; the whole Scripture, is given by inspiration of
God, and is profitable to teach, to convince, to correct, and instruct in
righteousness 2. Tim. 3. 16.
Yet has this Book of the Psalms, a certain singular and excellent
difference from the rest of the Scriptures, for which the Apostle requires,
and there has always been joined together, a daily exercise of the word and
Psalms, saying: Let the word of God dwell plentifully in you, in all wisdom,
teaching, and admonishing your own selves in psalms and hymns, and spiritual
songs Coloss. 3. 16
. And surely no marvel that it should be esteemed at so great price, for it is
as a Christians storehouse and treasury of all good things, it records the
memorable histories of things past, prophecieth and foretells things to come,
unfolds hidden mysteries under pleasant and familiar Allegories; herein
virtue is commended; vice condemned; and most wholesome rules and laws of a
Christian life prescribed: if any man be pressed with the burden of sins,
scorched in conscience with the flashes of hell, thorough the kindling of Gods
wrath; if possessed with fear of wars, famine, or death, if loadned with
sickness, want and penury, here is a sovereign salve for every malady;
here may the king learn what he is, and how he ought to govern his people
religiously; and here may subjects learn to obey their Rulers peaceably; the
rich man may learn the vanity of all things, and the true use of his riches;
and here may the poor man learn contentation with his estate; the heavy
hearted shall hence learn where true comfort is to be found; he that is
tempted to evil, the remedy; and he that is merry, the true joy and the
measure thereof; yea hence may the godly man reap great encouragement, being
assured that he shall find true peace at the last: and here may the wicked
ones find discoragement, and speedily turn unto God, knowing that howsoever
for a while he may flourish like the green bay tree, yet has god set him but
in a slipperie place, and he shall suddenly perish, and come to a fearful end.
Doubtless, no man will deny but the Greek and Latin poems of Homer,
Hesiode, Pindarus, and others deserve great praise, and want not their singular
use: yet for any to prefer or equal them with this Book, were intolerable
dotage, and contumely; for therein nothing is to be found concerming the good
pleasure of God toward his elect in Christ, they acknowledge not his
divinity, nor esteem of his benefits, without which we are no better than
vessels of wrath, and firebrands of hell; they entreat not of faith or
justification before God, wherein a Christians comfort chiefly consists;
indeed of the duties of the second table, and honest manners they speak much;
but for the first table, it is far above their reach, and therefore therein
they are altogether mute and silent, or grossly err and bewray their ignorance;
much time they spend, and the greatest part of their verses, in decyphering and
deploring the manifold miseries and calamities whereunto this life is subject,
but the remedy hereof they know not: howsoever therefore there are some things
profitable to be found in them, and their writings being garnished with
eloquency of words and sentences, and running in a pleasant tune, may much
delight and affect the reader; yet unto these psalms only, must we give ear
and attention, as unto the voice of God, as David himself has said: Hodie si
vocem domini audiueritis, To day if you will hear the voice of God, harden not
your hearts Ps. 95. 7. Vt memphiticos vales audiret. Ad Architum Tarentinum.


Pythagoras, that great Philosopher, he went into Egypt, to hear the poetry
at Memphis. Plato, he left Athens, where he taught with admiration, and for
wisdom, knowledge, and eloquence, exceeded all others, and went into Italy,
to hear that noble Philosopher Architas at Tarentum; Apollonius with very
great hazard, labor and cost, went to the furthest parts of India, to hear
that great Philosopher Hierarchas, Vt Hierarcham in Throno sedentem aureo.
sitting in his golden chair and discoursing of the motions of the heavens,
position, situation, and aspect of the planets and stars; if these men
spared not to bestow such great labor and cost, neither feared to expose
themselves to such great dangers, by sea and land, only to attain to a
further measure of knowledge philosophical, wherein though they placed their
Summum bonum, or chiefest felicity: yet he that knew much, Hoc vnum scio, quod
nihilscio.
confessed, this one thing I know, that of Christ I know nothing; how shall
they rise up at the day of judgment and condemn us, if having such excellent
means of knowledge of salvation, and even at our doors, we do contemn them;
Wherefore to conclude, if Alexander the great, so highly esteemed of Homers
Poems, So^raet.
that amongst the Babilonish spoils, there being offered unto him a most
precious casket, wherein the great King Darius laid his chief treasures; he
only laid Homers books therein, as his cheifest treasure: Praecipu^ (...).
How much more highly ought we to esteem of this Book, whereof the holy Ghost
himself is the Author, so full of doctrines for instruction and consolation,
and to lay it up not in any chest of Cypress, or other made with hands, and
garnished with gold and precious stones; but in the very closet of our hearts,
as the Apostle counsaileth; Be not drunken with wine, wherein is excess: but
be filled with the spirit, speakinge to your selves in psalms, and hymns, and
spiritual songs, singing and making melody to the Lord in your hearts Ephesians. 5.
18
. And thus much shall suffice to have spoken of the treasure in general, let
me now proceed to open and unfold this invaluable pearl, which I have chosen
forth of the same, and more particularly to handle this psalm, which I purpose
by gods gracious assistance, and your Christian patience to speak of.

It seems by the title or inscription, Title.
that this Psalm was penned by King David himself. Argument.
Which Psalm (because it is not mixed either with fearful imprecations, or
sorrowful complaints unto God, but altogether joyful and mild, as proceeding
from a quiet and peaceable spirit, relying with great confidence and assurance
on gods providence) seems to have been penned, when as after many and great
troubles, he had obtained the peaceable fruition of his Crown and Kingdom:
wherein he does thankefully acknowledge Gods great goodness toward him, and
upon the great experience of former mercies, gathers this full assurance,
that God by his providence will still preserve him, to the end, that by his
authority, he may maintain and exercise himself in the pure service and
worship of God, and so handles the same Argument, that in many other psalms
he does Ps. 18. 118.


For the Psalm it self, Division.
if we view it well, we shall find it to be very methodicall, and therefore
that we may the more orderly and profitably go over it: we are to note, that
it chiefly divides it self into these two parts. The first contains a
notable description of Gods great care and providence, and of his manifold
sweet mercies bestowed on David and all his elect, in the five first verses: In
the second part, the Prophet shows what use he made thereof, and in his
person teaches all Gods people, what use to make of former received mercies,
viz, Fully to be persuaded, that God will continue the course of his favor,
and loving kindness toward them, unto the end in the last verse in these
words: Doubtless, kindness and mercy shall follow me.

For the first, Subdiuision.
he makes no large Catalogue or rehearsal, neither uses any long and
particular ennumeration or reckoning up of Gods benefits bestowed upon him, as
elsewhere Ps. 18, and 66.
: but by a few short familiar and pleasant parables, he does most elegantly
point out, and significantly express the same, the very Metaphors them selves
(as folded up) offering much more to our consideration, than by a long
discourse or oration, could possibly have been declared.

The Allegories here used for this purpose, are twain: The first is taken from
a faithful Shepherd, carefully attending upon his straying sheep, and
plentifully providing al good things for their necessity, and security; and
this contains the four first verses of the Psalm. The second is taken from
an host, or courteous friend, most liberally entertaining his invited guests
with all delicats, both for necessity and delight, and that is laid down in
the 5. verse: (Thou do prepare a table before me in the sight of mine
Adversaries* For the first Allegory or pastoral Idyllion, it consists of two
parts: First the Allegory it self, in the first, second, and third verses:
Secondly the use thereof, in the fourth verse, (Though I should walk through
the valley, etc.) for the Allegory it self, it is first briefly and
summarily laid down in the first verse, and then continued and illustrated by
the parts thereof, in the second and third verses. The first verse containing
the sum of the Allegory, consists of two parts, viz: A proposition in
these words, ( The Lord is my Shepherd.) Secondly, the inference thereon, (
therefore I shall not want.) And thus you have the logical resolution and
Analysis of this methodicall Psalm, into his parts and members; by observation
whereof, our memories may be greatly helped in the handling of it: it now
follows, that having laid the foundation, we begin to build, and more
narrowly to view the parts of this holy scripture, for our further instruction
and comfort, and first to begin with the proposition in these words
expressed:

The Lord is my Shepherd. Sum, of the proposition.
Although David had now passed through the stormy waves, and was safely
arrived upon the shore, and maugre the beards of all his mighty and subtle
enemies, obtained the kingdom, that now he might triumph in the Lord, and say
as elsewhere he does, The stone which the builders refused, is made the chief
stone in the corner, this is the Lords doing etc. Psa. 118. 22.
. Yet being not ignorant with what manifold cares a crown is beset, and seeing
many dangers imminent, he had some co^bat or conflict within himself, but
having had such great experience of Gods favor, in former deliverances, and
protections, his faith gets victory over natural distrustfulnesse, and he
bursteth out into these words of Christian resolution and assurance, ( The Lord
is my Shepherd, I shall not want.) q. d. Oh my soul be not discouraged nor
cast down within me, dangers object themselves to thy view, but let not
troublesome thoughts dismay thee, cast thy care upon the Lord, he that so
promoted thee from following the Ewes great with young, to be governor of his
people, will also preserve thee, the almighty, wise, and everliving God is thy
Shepherd, and therefore contemn whatsoever may astonish thee, and sing thy
former song; I trust in God, how say ye then to my soul; fly to your
mountain, as a bird Ps. 11. 1.
And again, I will not be afraid, for ten thousands of mine enemies, that
should beset me round about etc Ps. 3. 6.
.

Q. But what? was God David's sheapherd only?

A. No surely, though it be the property of faith to make application, and in
general promises to use the first person, as we are taught by diverse examples
Heb. 13. 7.
: Yet Christ Jesus the great sheapheard himself has said, 1. Ti. 1. 15.
They that hear his voice and believe, are his sheep Ioh. 10 26.
: So that David pronounces this in the person of the whole church, and all the
members thereof, wherefore if we hear Gods voice and believe, we are
fold-mates with David, and I, and you, have as great interest in the Lord, as
he had, and may boldly, and as freely, say as he did, The Lord is my Shepherd,
The Lord is our Shepherd, etc.

1 No man, Sense of the words.
but meanly exercised in the scriptures, can be ignorant, that the metaphor of
a Shepherd, is not more plain and familiar, than frequent, and commonly used,
sometimes the great care and providence of God, over his humble sheep, and
lowly lambs, is hereby shadowed out, as in this place, and elsewhere. Say unto
the Cities of Judah behold your God, he shall feed his flock like a
Shepherd, he shall gather the lambs with his arm, and carry them in his
bosom, and shall guide them with young etc. Esaias 40. 11.
Again, thus says the Lord God: Behold, I will search my sheep, and seek
them out, and I will deliver them out of all places, where they have been
scattered, in the cloudie, and dark day, etc. Ezec. 34. 11, 12. etc.
.

And Christ himself has plainly said, I am that good Shepherd Ioh. 10. 11,
14.
. And S. Peter speaking of the faithful, says: ye were as sheep going
astray, but are now returned to the Shepherd, and Bishop of your souls, etc.
1. Pet. 2. 25.
: and elsewhere calls Christ the chief Shepherd 1. Pet. 54


2 Sometimes also Kings, and Princes, are compared to Sheapheards, whereby
their care and vigilance, for the good of their people and subjects are
expressed, so Asaph speaking of David, says: He chose David his servant, and
took him from the Sheepfold, even from behind the Evves great with young,
brought he him, to feed his people in Jacob, and his inheritance in Israel
Ps. 78. 70.
. So the Prophet Esaias, prophesying of that notable deliverance of Gods people
out of captivity, to assure them thereof, he names the person, by whom it
should be, more than an hundred years before he was borne, in this manner, he
says to Cyrus, Thou art my Shepherd Esaias 44. 28.
. By which title the Lord gives all Kings and Princes of the earth to
understand, that it is their duty, discharge it as well as they will, to provide
faithfully, for the good of the souls, and bodies of their people, to guide
them by counsel, and to defend them by power.

3 Thirdly, and most commonly, good ministers of the word, are compared to good
Shepherds, and thereby the great diligence and care that they ought to have, to
feed the flock committed to their charge, with the green and wholesome pasture
of Gods word, and to go before them in all holy example of life: are shadowed
out; so the Lord promises, I will bring you pastors according to mine heart,
which shall feed you with knowledge, and understanding Iere. 3. 15
. And again, I will bring them to their folds. and they shall grow and
increase, and I will set up Shepherds over them, which shall feed them,
neither shall any of them be lacking Iere. 23. 4
. Under this metaphor Christ gave Simon Peter his charge, Peter love thou me?
feed my lambs etc. Ioh. 21. 15.
. And S. Peter accordingly, all ministers, feed the flock of God, which
depends upon you, etc. 1. Pet. 5. 2
.

4 Fourthly and lastly, the ignorance, idleness, covetousness, and dissolute
prophanes of bad ministers, or (as the Church calls them) companions Can. 1. 6
, are notably shadowed out, by comparing them to idle, greedy, and careless
Shepherds; and these Sheapheards cannot understand, for they all look to
their own ways, every one for his advantage, and for his own purpose Esaias
56. 11.
. Again, the Shepherds are become beasts, and have not sought the Lord,
therefore have they none understanding, and all the flocks of their pastures
are scattered Ie. 10. 21
: but most notably and largely is their idleness and severity taxed, by the
Prophet Exechiel in these words: vvoe be to the Shepherds of Israel, that
feed themselves, yea eating the fat, killing them that are fed, and clothing
themselves with the wool, but ye feed not the sheep, the weak have ye not
strengthened, the sick have ye not healed, neither have ye bound up the
broken, nor brought again, that which was driven away, neither have ye sought
that which was lost, but with cruelty and rigor have ye ruled them, and they
were scattered without a Shepherd, and when they were dispersed, they were
devoured of all the beasts of the field Ezech. 34 2, 3, 4, 5.
. But because in this place it is most plain, that by Shepherd the Prophet
understands the Lord, of that we will only speak, and pass by the rest:
which metaphor will be much the more sweet and profitable, if we break it
open, by considering the duties of a good Shepherd (whereby the mercies of God
toward his people are notably resembled) and also the nature and duties of
sheep, Illustration
(whereby are shadowed out those good things, which either are or ought to be
in all Gods people again.)

First, The qualities of a good Shepherd.
a good Shepherd does know his sheep, and to that end will give them his
mark, that if any of them go astray, he may seek them again, and bring them
home to the Sheepfold. So Christ Jesus the good Shepherd knovveth his sheep,
and calls them by their names Ioh. 10. 3. 14.
: and as the Apostle says, the foundation of God remains sure, and is sealed
with this seal, the Lord knows who are his 2. Tim. 2. 19.
. Yea, this great Shepherd, has a Book wherein all the names of his elect
sheep are written, called the Book of life Exodus 32. 32. Phil. 4. 3. Reu. 3.
5. 20. 12. 21. 27.
: yea the Lord marketh his in their foreheads with the seal of the living God
Reu. 7. 3.
: which, as the Apostle says, is the holy spirit of promise Ephesians. 1. 13.
, which does show it self by the fruits thereof, in the outward behavior,
profession, and conversation, etc.

2 Secondly, a good Shepherd will have care to feed his sheep, not in rotten
soil, and wasting grass, but in good, wholesome and green pastures, for
thereon is he called Pastor, a Pascendo; So Christ is that good Sheapheard, who
feeds every living thing Ps. 145. 16.
. He fed his people in the wilderness 40. years, with mannah and feathered
fowls from heaven Exo. 16. 13.
, and with waters out of the stony rock Exo. 17. 6
. And Moses miraculously for 40. days, during which time, he neither did eat
bread, nor drink water Exo. 34. 28.
. All men with natural food, causing the rain to fall, and Sun to shine
both on just and iniust Mat. 5. 45
, but specially, he feeds the souls of his chosen sheep, in the green
pastures that grow on the mountains of Israel Ezec. 34. 14.
, with the bread of life Christ Jesus himself, in his word and Sacraments, his
glorious Gospel, being our heavenly food, his spirit and life, our celestial
drink, for we may not marvel, that in diverse senses Christ Jesus should be
the Shepherd that feeds Ioh. 10. 14
, the door whereby we enter Ioh. 10. 9
, and the food, wherewith our souls are fed, and fatted up unto eternal
life Ioh. 6. 35.
.

3 A good Shepherd, knowing both the straying nature of his sheep, and also
their timerousnesse, weakness, and simplicity, either to fly from, resist,
or defend themselves from their manifold, cruel, and subtle enemies, will
have great care to keep them together, and defend them, as Jacob declaring his
fidelity to Laban, in keeping his flock, said thus: This twenty years I
have been with thee, thine Ewes and Goats have not cast their young, and the
Rams of thy flock have I not eaten, whatsoever was torn of beasts, I brought
it not unto thee, but made it good my self, of mine hand did thou require
it, were it stolen by day, or stolen by night, I was in the day consumed with
heat, and with frost in the night, and my sleep departed from mine eyes, etc.
Ge. 31. 38. 39, 40.
. So Christ Jesus being a most faithful Shepherd has great care over his
sheep, both by the ministry of his word and spirit, to keep them from going
astray, that they can no sooner turn aside to the right hand, or the left, but
they shall hear a voice behind them, saying: This is the way, walk ye in it
Esaias 30. 21.
, and also to defend them from the tooth of the Lion, woolfe, and dog, that
they do not catch or scatter them, being a wall of fire round about them, as
speaks the Prophet Zac. 2. 5.
.

4 Fourthly, and lastly, (that I may not be tedious, by insisting upon every
particular) a loving and careful Shepherd, if any of his flock be gone astray
into the wilderness, he will take pains to seek it, and exceedingly rejoice
in the finding thereof, as Christ noted in the parable of the lost sheep Mat.
18. 12.
, if any be diseased, to set to his hand and dress the^, if their disease be
contagious, to remove them from the fold and flock, til they be cured, least
others be infected: if any be weak and feeble, to carry them in his arms.
Even so our Lord that loving and careful Shepherd, is come into the
wilderness of this world, to seek and to save that which was lost Luke 19. 10.
. If he find any faulty, he will lance them with the sword of his spirit, and
address himself to their amendment, anointing their soars with the
sovereign salve of his mercy, but if their lives be lascivious, and the
disease grow infectious, then by discipline and excommunication, he will
separate them from the flock, remove them from the fold, and deliver them
unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh 1. Cor. 5. 5
. Lastly, his young and weak ones, his tender lambs, he will nourish and
cherish in his bosom Esaias 40. 11
, as speaks the Prophet, not breaking the bruised reed, nor quenching the
smoking flax Mat. 12. 20.
; nor suffering them to be tempted above that they are able, but will even
give the issue with the temptation, as says the Apostle 1. Cor. 10 13.
And thus under the duties of a good Shepherd, we have noted the great care
and merciful providence of God, toward his Church and Saints: now on the
other side, let us briefly look into the nature, properties and condition of
the sheep, that thence we may also learn to know our selves, and our duties
toward Christ again.

1 For the nature of the sheep, The sheep nature.
it is first recorded by all those that have written thereof, and by experience
we find it true, she is foolish and simple, proane to go astray, even when
there is plenty of pasture at home, yea, being once gone aside, she has not
the wit to return, but the further she goes, the further from her fold: and
whereas other beasts can shelter themselves in dens, caves, and calm places,
against stormy and tempestuous weather, yet will she expose her self to
dangers remediless, unless she be prevented by the care, and provident
foresight of her Shepherd: And surely, so we are naturally foolish, and
unwise, not perceiving the things of the spirit, but running with greediness,
in the wandering paths of death, as the Prophet confesses, all we like sheep
have gone astray, we have turned every one to his own way Esaias. 53. 6.
. So Christ witnesses of the prodigal Son, that as long as he followed his
ryotous and sinful course, he was as besides himself, not knowing what he
did, nor whether he went Luke 15. 17.
. And the Apostle also has said of the Gentiles, that they walked in their
own ways Act. 14. 16
.

2 Though she have many enemies, yet has she neither courage to resist,
swiftnes to fly, or wisdom to hide her self, but rather will wander into
desolate places, where she does the more dangerously expose her self to her
devouring foes, the subtle Fox, greedy dog, ravenous wolf, and devouring
Lion; so that of all creatures she stands in greatest need of a guide and
defender. Eue^ so, man of himself is utterly unable to give check-mate unto
sin, and temptations thereunto, which like a subtle fox, lies lurking and
fawning at every corner, to pray upon a Christian soul: or to withstand
Satan, which like a ravenous wolf, or roaring Lion goes about seeking whom
he may devour, as speaks the Apostle 1. Pet. 5. 8
. So that most miserable we were, if it were not for the continual, watchful,
and provident care of our loving shepherd Christ Jesus.

But now as her nature is such, The sheep properties.
so (as if she were privy to her own foolishness and weakness) has she
special good properties, whereby natures infirmities are well reformed, and
our duties shadowed Shepherds voice or whistle; even so the faithful do
know, hear, and obey the voice of Christ, wherein they find such comfort and
full contentation, that they desire to hear his voice, yea, his name is as
svveete as an ointment powered out Cant. 1. 2.
. Yea, the voice of a stranger they will not hear Ioh. 10. 5
, but hold him accursed that preaches another doctrine, though an Angel from
heaven, or his charm never so sweet Gal. 1. 8.
. If then we will approve our selves the true sheep of Christ's fold, we must
first labor for knowledge, and the spirit of discretion, that we be not
carried away with every puff of doctrine Ephesians. 4. 14
, but that we try the spirits whether they be of God or no 1. Io. 4. 1.
, and discern the voice of Christ from the voice of strangers; secondly, that
knowing his voice, we cheerfully and speedily run with David whether we are
called, in the ways of Gods command Psa. 119. 32.
: for otherwise if we hear, and do not, we do but deceive our own souls
Iam. 1. 22
: and Christ Jesus will renounce us, as he did the Jews, he that is of God,
hears Gods words, ye therefore hear them not, because ye are not of God
Ioh. 8. 47
.

2 Secondly, the sheep is profitable, yea to her very enemies, with her
skin and wool she clothed them; so says Job, the loins of the poor
blessed him, which had been vvarmed with the fleeces of his sheep Job. 31.
20.
; with her flesh and milk she feeds us; so says God, reckoning up the
blessings of his people, butter of Kyne, and milk of Sheep, with fat of the
lambs, and Rams fed in Bashan Deu. 32. 14.
so the sheep of Gods pasture, do good to all, but specially to them of the
household of faith Gal. 6. 10.
; with their riches they help the needy, feed the hungry, cloth the naked,
relieve the destitute; and their gifts of grace, they communicate unto others,
instructing the ignorant, strengthening the weak, comforting the feeble
minded, admonishing the unruly, yea thus beneficial they are, not only to
their friends, but also to their enemies, loving those that hate them, blessing
those that curse them, praying for those that persecute them, striving to be
perfect in love, as their heavenly father is Mat. 5. 48
.

3 She is patient, and contented quietly to receive many and great wrongs,
even to be laid upon the stall, to the loss of fleece and life, (so that by a
more excellent simile, the holy ghost could not possibly express, the
admirable patience of Christ than this, he was led as a sheep to the
slaughter, and as a lamb dumb before his shearer, so opened he not his
mouth) Esaias 53. 7
even so Gods sheep are taught, being smitten on one cheek, to turn the
other Mat. 5. 39
not to avenge themselves, by rendering evil for evil; but rather to give
place unto wrath, and overcome evil with goodness Romans 12. 17, 21. etc.
: yea for the Gospels sake cheerfully to suffer reproaches, spoil of goods,
and loss of life. Wherefore (to stand no longer on this point) by these
properties, and duties, we may try and examime our selves, whether we be any
of Gods sheep, entered into the sheepe-fold, and received into the society of
Gods saints or no, and if we find them in us, in any true measure, we may
boldly proclaim with David, The Lord is my Shepherd, and then mark what
condition we must look for.

The sheep, The sheep condition.
though she be a creature so simple, harmless, profitable, and patient, yet
has she many enemies, (as we have heard) which do continually seek, to
bite, kill, devour, and pray upon her, as David witnessed, who keeping his
Fathers sheep, there came a Lion, and a bear, and caught a sheep, but he
rescued her, and slew them both 1. Sa. 17. 34.
. Even so the sheep of the Lords fold, though they be never so innocent and
harmless, yet must look to have many enemies, even Satan and all his
Angels, with all the children of this wicked world, of whom they must look to be
continually reproched, persecuted, slandered, and killed. And thus we have
unfolded the mystery of this most sweet and comfortable Metaphor, wherein on
the one side, we have viewed, the singular care, and providence of God, toward
his people; and on the other side, what duties he requires of them again. Let
us now consider the doctrine for instruction.

That David being so great and mighty a king, Doctrine.
and one that was placed as a Shepherd to feed Gods people, as it is said in
the Psalms, Ps. 78. 71
yet not trusting in the multitude of his riches, nor strength and prowes of
his worthies, but especially glories in this, that the Lord is his Shepherd:
it teaches us, that the only safety, happiness, and felicity of man,
(though otherwise never so noble, wealthy or honorable) consists in this,
that they are the Lords sheep, shrouded under the wings of Gods divine
providence, etc. For all flesh is grass, and the glory thereof as the flovver
of the field Esa 40. 6
. Kings and Princes, though they be Gods on the earth, yet they die like men,
and see corruption, and so all their thoughts perish. Psalm. 82. 7
. Wherefore David gives most religious counsel, Trust not in Princes, nor in
the son of man, for there is none help in him, his breath departs, and he
returns to his earth Psa. 146. 3
: Yea, the Lord has pronounced the man accursed, that trusts in man, making
flesh his arm, and withdrawing his heart from the Lord Iere. 17. 5
. As for riches and pomp, they are uncertain, and therefore we may not trust
in them 1. Tim. 6 17
: for when death comes they will take their leave Psalm. 49
; yea, as the wise man says, they bebetake themselves to their wings as an
Eagle, and fly into heaven Pro. 23. 5
; but blessed is the man that has the God of Jacob for his refuge, and whose
hope is in the Lord his God Psa. 146. 5
, for though Princes die, and riches fly away, yet he will be with us for
ever, though we pass through floudes of water, and flames of fire Esa. 43. 2
, yea, though we go through the valley of the shadow of death, we need to
fear none evil, for he will bewith us, his rod and staff shall comfort us.

Oh then let not our eyes be dazzled with the vain glittering show of the
world, Use.
or any thing therein, but seek in assurance of faith, to pronounce with David
(The Lord is my shepherd) and therein let us glory, as in man's only
felicity.

Q. But unto whom is the Lord a Shepherd?

A. Surely, unto none but such, who in the true acknowledgement of their own
weakness and straying nature, do submit themselves to his tuition, he is a
shepherd, but only for such sheep as are lost Ma. 15. 24
, and more reioyseth in the conversion of one sinner, then in ninety and nine
just men, that need no amendment of life Luke 15. 7
, he is a Savior, but only of sinners: this is a true saying, Christ Jesus
came into the world to save sinners 1. Tim. 1. 15
. He is a Physician, but only to them that are sick, as he has said, The
whole need not a Physician, but they that are sick Mat. 9. 12
. He is a Surgeon, but only to make them see that are blind, for so he has
said in the Gospel, Mat. 9. 37
. I am come unto judgment into this world, that they which see not, might
see; and that they which see, might be made blind Ioh. 1. 7. 8
: He is the light of the world, as John Baptist has witnessed, but only to
them that sit in darkness and shadow of death Mat. 4. 16
: yea lastly, he is the bread and water of life, but only to the hungry and
thristie, as Marie says in her song: He fills the hungry with good things,
and the rich he sends away empty, Luke 1. 53. And therefore to conclude this
point, when once God gives us the true sight of our vanity, and unfeigned
repentance, humbly to confess, and heartily to pray with David, I have gone
astray like a lost sheep, oh seek thy servant Psalm. 119. 176
, then let us be assured he will seek and find us, we shall become
fold-mates with David, and sing as he did, ( The Lord is my shepeheard.) So
much for the Proposition, let us now see what he infers thereon in these
words.

I shall not want. The sheep of her self is subject to many wants, and of
herself not able in any measure to supply them: even so every Christian is
compassed about and pressed down, with innumerable wants, both in regard of
the soul and body, neither is he able to minister to his necessities. Only
this is his comfort, The All-sufficient God being his shepherd, he shall not
want Habenti^ dominum nil deerit, quod Dei, sint omniae Cyprian. de orat. dom.
.

But it may seem that David uttered these words, Sense.
rather upon vain confidence, and presumption, then any faithful assurance, or
experience of former mercies how greatly was he an hungered, when he was glad to
beg the Shewbread 1. Sam. 21 6
, and what great thirst did he sustain, when he so earnestly longed for a cup
of water of the Well of Bethlehem 2. Sam. 23 15
? But what do I speak of David, when Christ Jesus himself the dear son of
God, had not so much as the Foxes, and fowls of the air, for they have holes
and nests, but he had not whereon to rest his head. Mat. 8. 20
, being borne in a Stable (in stead of a Parlour) and laid in a Manger (in
stead of a Cradle) there being no room in the Inn Luke 2. 7
, and being dead, was buried in another man's sepulcher Mat. 27. 60
; how great was the need of his Disciples, who on a Sabbath day, were glad to
satisfy their hunger, by plucking and eating ears of corn, as they went
through the same Mat. 12. 1
. Does not saint Paul also make mention of his hunger and thirst, cold and
nakedness 2. Cor. 11. 27
? And the Author to the Hebrews, speaking of the condition of Gods saints,
says, They were tried by mockings and scourgings, bonds and imprisonment,
they were stoned, hewn asunder, tempted, slain with the Svvorde, wandered up
and down in Sheep skins, and Goats skins, being (destitute) afflicted,
and tormented Heb. 11. 36
. How then does David say, that none of Gods sheep shall want?

The Answer hereunto is twofold; Sol.
first there is a want of things superfluous, and another of things needful,
without which (so great is the weakness of flesh and blood) we can hardly serve
God so cheerfully as we ought for the first, as we have no warrant to lust
after the^: Christ having taught us to pray for daily bread Mat. 6. 11
: and the Apostle bid us be content with food and raiment 1. Ti. 6. 8
so also is it great mercy in God, (knowing how proane we are to abuse
prosperity, to pride and security) to cross those our sinful desires; as
Saint James teaches: Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye
might lay the same out in your pleasures Iam. 4. 3.
. And therefore as concerning this sort of wantes, neither had David or any
other the Lords sheep, any warrant to say the Lord being their shepherd, they
should not want them; but as concerning the other, viz. things needful, the
promise is made by him that is heir of all things Heb. 1. 2.
. First seek the Kingdom of GOD, and the righteousness thereof, and all
these things shall be cast upon you Mat. 6. 33
. The Lions lack, and are hungerbit (says David) but they that fear the
Lord shall want nothing that is good Psa. 34. 10
. They shall not want health, wealth, peace, etc. if God see them to be good
for them, if they do want them, they may boldly say, they are not good for
them, etc. Seeing then godliness has a promise even of the things of this
life, all needful wants shall seasonably be supplied, so that Gods people
(casting their care upon the Lord, and doing their honest endeavors) may boldly
say, The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want. And surely, it is both
marvelous and comfortable, to consider and observe, Gods great providence
toward his poor saints in this respect, wherein David's experience is
verfied, Nunquam vidi iustum derelictum, I have been young and now am old,
yet never savve I the righteous forsaken, or his seed begging bread Psa. 37.
25
. The second answer is this, there are two other sorts of wantes. The first is
in regard of outward condition, and the second, in regard of inward
affection. There is many a rich man poor, swimming in wealth, and yet pining
away with continual wants like Tantalus, whom the Poets faigne to die for
thirst, standing in waters to the chinn: such a one the wise man speaks of,
Who is alone and has neither son nor brother, yet there is none end of all
his travel, neither can his eye be satisfied with riches Eccles. 4 8
. And there is many a poor man, exceeding rich, because though he sustain some
want in regard of his outward condition, yet God has enlarged his affections,
and given him true contentation therewith, more cheerfully to praise God for a
dinner of green herbs, then the wicked do for the feast of a stalled Ox,
having learned with the Apostle, to be full, and to be hungry, to abound,
and to have want, in whatsoever estate they are, there with to be content
Phil. 4. 21
. So then the sense is, The Lord will not suffer his people to want any good
thing, but will either give them abundance, or cheerful contentation, with a
little, that every one may boldly say, The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not
want.

Hence first we learn, Doctrine. 1.
what an excellent stay a steadfast faith in the providence of God is, Abraham
being demanded of his son Isaac, father behold the fire, and the wood, but
where is the Lamb for the burnt offering? returned this faithful answer, My
son, God will provide Genesis 22. 7.
. David being compassed with many wants, yet through the power hereof, gets
victory over al natural fear and distrustfulnesse, and says, The Lord is my
shepherd, (I shall not want,) whereas then such as want this gift, are fraught
with innumerable cares: and because they desire to be rich, do fall into many
temptations and snares 1. Tim. 6 9
, and in every need, do turn stones into bread, seek to provide for
themselves, by evil, indirect, and unlawful means: he that believes (says
the Prophet Esaias) will not make haste Esa. 28. 16
, but chearefully rely upon the providence of God, knowing, that though all
hope of worldly means fail, yet the Lord being shepherd, who is the
All-sufficient God, the birds of the air shall bring us good, as the Ravens
brought bread and flesh every Morning and Evening to Eliah the Lords Prophet
1. Kin. 17 6
: the dry iaw bone of an Ass, shall become a fountain of water unto us, as
it was to thirsty Sampson Iud. 15. 19
: The heavens shall rain down Mannah and feathered fowls, as they did to the
people of Israel in the wilderness Exodus 16
, yea the fishes of the sea shall lend us money, as they did to Peter Mat. 17 27
, if the Lord see it good for us.

Yea, and the more to strength our faith, Power.
let us consider, first, that where as many parents are willing to do their
children good, yet cannot; our God is omnipotent, and able to do whatsoever he
will Psa. 115. 3
. Secondly, many are able to do others good, Will.
but will not: But our God is nigh to all such as call upon him faithfully Ps.
145. 18
: Whose bowels do earne at the miseries of his saints, and his repentings
roll together Ose. 11. 8
, and has promised, that he will fulfill the desires of them that fear him.
Lastly, whereas many have both power and will, VVisdome.
but want wisdom, whereby their doing good to others, is many times
unseasonable: With our God is vvisdome, says Job Job. 12. 13
, yea his wisdom (as all other his essential attributes are) is infinite,
says David Ps. 147. 5
, he knows best when, where, and how to help.

Oh the^ let us commit our ways unto the Lord, Use.
and though he satisfy not our hasty affections, according to our rash
prescribed times, yet let us follow the counsel of the Prophet Habacuck With
patience wait his leisure Haba. 2. 3
, in the mean time playing Jacobs part, let us wrestle with God, by the power
of faith, and feruencie of prayer Genesis 32. 26
, being assured, that he is able and willing, and when in wisdom he sees
it best for us, he will not fail to set to his hand and help us.

2 The second lesson which from hence we learn, Doctrine. 2
is, that the condition of Gods Saints in this life is most glorious, howsoever
the natural man perceive it not, for of them (as one very well observes)
these contraries (in diverse senses) may truly be affirmed.

1 They are the richest and the poorest: the richest, because as our Prophet
says, they want nothing: and as the Apostle says, they possess all things 2.
Cor. 6 10
, for being Christ's through him, all is theirs 1. Cor. 3. 21. 22
. And they are the poorest, using this world as though they used it not 1. Cor.
7 31
, being ready to suffer the spoil of their goods, and loss of lives for
Christ his sake.

2 They are the wisest, and the foolishest: The wisest, because they build
upon the rock Mat. 7. 24
, and lay up treasure in heaven, where neither the moth, nor canker corrupt,
nor thieves can dig through and steal Mat. 6. 20
. And because in some measure, they conceive those mysteries, which are hid
from the wise and prudent of the world Mat. 11. 25
.

And they are accounted the foolishest, because with Moses, they rather choose
to suffer afflictions with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of
sin for a season, esteeming the rebuke of Christ greater treasures, then the
riches of the world Heb. 11. 25
.

3 They are the highest and the lowest, the highest, for their conversation is
in heaven Phil. 3. 20
, and they are the lowest, as being trodden under foot of all men like clay in
the streets, accounted as the of-scouring of the world, a gazing stock to
Angels and men 1. Cor. 4. 9, 13
, yea, as a But, where against every man shoteth out his arrows, even bitter
words, of reproach, slanders and disgrace, etc.

4 They are the fairest and the fowlest. The fairest, because they are members
of the Church, the spouse of Christ, for which he gave himself, that he might
sanctify it and cleanse it, by the washing of water through the word, that he
might make it a glorious Church unto himself, not having spotte or wrinckle,
or any such thing Ephesians. 5. 26 27
, whereof Christ has pronounced, that she is the fairest amongst women Cant.
1. 7
, yea, in beauty comparable to the Sun and Moon Cant. 6. 9
: and they are the foulest, both in their own eyes, and the eyes of the world,
being as black as the tents of Kedar, the Sun having looked upon them Cant.
1. 4
.

5 They are the merriest and the saddest; The merriest, because they have the
assurance of the remission of sins, and of Gods favor in Christ, which makes
them always to rejoice in the Lord Phil. 4. 4
: and for that they have the peace of a good conscience, which is as a
continual feast Prou. 25. 15
, and do know that all things work together for the best unto them Romans 8. 28
. And they are the saddest, as having continual occasion to weep, both for
the sins of others, as did David Psalm. 119 136
, and for their own sins, as did Josiah, whose heart did melt, and he wept
before the Lord 2. Chr. 34 27
. And surely the consideration of their often offending of the Majesty of
their most merciful and loving Father, makes them many times to faint in
their mourning, yea their beds to swim, and to water their Couches with
tears Psalm. 6. 6
. And whereas others spend their days in brutish delights, they sow in tears
Ps. 126. 5
. But this is their comfort, that God reserueth their tears in a bottle Psalm.
56. 8
, and will one day wipe them away from their eyes, with everlasting comfort
Esaias. 25. 8
, whereas the other shall have their portion in the lake burning with fire and
brimstone, where shall be weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth Mat. 8. 12
. In regard whereof our Savior has pronounced, Blessed are they that weep,
for they shall laugh, but woe be to you that now laugh, for you shall vvaile
and weep Luke 6. 21
.

6 Lastly, they are the strongest, and the weakest. The strongest, for that
they are able to prevail with God, as did Jacob, who wrestled with God, and
obtained the blessing Genesis 32 28
, as Lot did, even hinder him from pouring out his indignation upon the heads
of the wicked Genesis 19 22
, and as Moses did, stand in the gap to turn away his fierce wrath Psalm. 106.
23
, yea, they are able to do all things by the power of Jesus Christ,
strengthening them, as speaks the Apostle Phil. 4. 13
. And they are the weakest, as not able of themselves to think a good thought
2. Co. 3. 5
. For which, and many other respects, the members of the Church are not unfitly
compared to the branches of the Vine, which of themselves are the weakest and
tenderest of al plants, not able of them selves to grow upright, unless they
be underpropped, and fastened up.

The use whereof is, Use.
that we be not discouraged with the contempt of Gods children, in this wicked
world, but rather look unto their spiritual beauty, and hidden comeliness,
wherein, they are as fair as the Curtains of Solomon Cant. 1. 4
: And though they have lien amongst pottes, yet shall be as the wings of a
Dove, which are covered with silver, and their feathers like yellow gold Ps.
68. 13.
.

Lastly, Doctrine. 3
from hence we may learn, that Gods dearest servants, in this life, are
subject to many alterations and changes: look upon Job, who sometimes
fearfully cursed himself, and the day of his birth, and complained of gods
rigorous dealing toward him, as though he had set him as a But to shoot at,
and would not suffer him to take his breath, nor swallow his spittle, sometimes
again so comfortable, that though the Lord should kill him, yet would he trust
in him Job 13. 25
. But what need we other example the^ this of David, who was sometimes so
greatly cast down, that the earth rang again with his woeful complaints and
mourning, Oh my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me Psalm. 22. 1
? what, are thy mercies clean gone, and will thou shut up thy loving
kindness in displeasure for evermore? Have thou forgotten to be merciful? and
vvilt thou no more be entreated? etc. Sometimes again so comfortable, in the
assurance of Gods favor, and so strong in faith, That the Lord being his
shepherd, he shall not want, and he will not fear to go through the valley
of the shadovv of death, and he would not fear though compassed about with
thousands of his enemies Psalm. 3. 6
. Yea, though mountanes did remove, and hills were hurled into the midst of the
sea, for the Lord is my strong rock, castle, and defense, he has made my
feet like Hindes, I shall break a bovv of steel, and by the power of God I
shall leap over the wall, etc. Yea, I appeal to your own consciences,
whether you have not experience of the like in your selves, sometimes such joy
and delight in the worship of God, and such comfort in divine Meditations, as
will make us awake at midnight (with David,) to sing Psalms unto God.
Sometimes again, such dulnes and drowsinesse, unaptness and untowardness to
every good duty, that there is nothing but mourning like the Dove, and
chattering like the Crane, or Swalow. Well, the Lord, he knows what is best
for us, not ever a full Sea, nor ever a low ebb, not ever Summer, nor ever
Winter: The Son is sometimes covered with a cloud, yet still in the
Firmament; the fire covered with Ashes, yet still on the hearth, the tree
sometimes without bud, blossom, leaf, and fruit, yet alive in the root
Spiritus tentatoris folia deiiciit viuit tame^ radix.
, and surely this is our comfort, that God is no changeling, whom he loves
he loves to the end Ioh. 13. 1
, he may for a moment in his anger leave his elect, but with everlasting
compassion he has embraced the^ Esaias. 54. 8
, neither shall any thing be able to separate them from his love.

The use whereof is, Use.
that we must not be too much cast down, although it please the Lord, with
northren blasts to wither, and shake off our blossoms, and for a time to
deprive us of our comfortable meditations, seeing this is the portion of his
dearest Saints: only this, let us not please our selves, in the dullness and
hardness of our hearts, but with all diligence use the good means which he
has appointed, for the quickening of his graces in us, and doubtless he vvil
comfort and stablish our hearts Ps. 27. 14 and 30. 5.
, and by experience we shall find though heaviness endure for a night, yet joy
shall come in the morning.

THE SECOND SERMON upon the 23. Psalm.
He makes me to rest in green Pastures, and leads me to the still waters.
etc. verse. 2.
IN these words of the second and third verses, the holy Prophet proceeds in
way of a thankful narration, of Gods great mercies toward him, for to
illustrate the former general proposition, by a distribution of the special
duties of a good and faithful Shepherd; whereby he declares, the happy
estate and condition, (and how free they are from want) of those, over whom the
Lord has taken care and charge, to provide for them as a faithful Shepherd,
does for his sheep. And herein two things are to be considered: The
subdiuision of the 2. and 3. verses.
first a rehearsal of the duties; secondly the reason of perfourmance: the
particular duties here mentioned, (whereunto the rest may be reduced, and under
which great mysteries are comprehended) into all godly actions, and every way
to bless them, viz. Not for their beauty for that is but grass Esaias 40. 6
, nor for their righteousness, for that is to his eyes, but as a filthy
menstruous cloth Esaias 64. 6.
, but it is for the same cause, wherewith he has ever been provoked, even for
his own name and glory sake: these are the particulers, for our comfort, and
instruction further to be considered of.

The first and cheifest care of a good Shepherd, The first duty of a good
Shepherd, is to provide good and wholesome pasture for his sheep.
is to provide fresh and wholesome pasture for his sheep, for though they have
all other things never so abundantly, yet if they want this, they perish; and
so it is with Gods sheep, which made our Savior Christ, that great Shepherd
and Bishop of our souls, as the Apostle calls him 1. Pet. 2. 25
, so earnestly to require Peter, and in him all the Apostles, and their lawful
Successors: Feed, feed, feed, my sheep Io. 21. 17
, and and Peter with no less earnestnes, requires the same of every Pastor,
Feed the flock of God which depends upon you 1. Pe. 5. 2
. 1. Pet. 5. 2. Yea, how great care the Lord has, that his sheep do want no
food, appears most notably from the prophecy of Ezechiel, because the
Shepherds of Israel, feed themselves, and feed not my flock, I will my
self feed my sheep in good and fat pasture, upon the mountains of Israel
Ezec. 34. 14.
. And Christ that good Shepherd has said; I am that door, by me if any man
enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture Io.
10. 9.
But that I may not confusedly handle this point, let us briefly consider these
few things: first, what is this pasture or food; 2. What manner of pasture it
is. 3. where it grows, and is to be found. 4. lastly, how Gods Sheep ought
to feed thereon.

1 For the first, What is the pasture of Gods sheep.
This good Shepherd, feeds the bodies of his sheep, with earthly and
corporal food, for it is he that gives all good things abundantly to enjoy
1. Tim. 6 17.
. Yea there is not a morsel of bread, that we eat, but it is the gift of God,
begged at his hands, Give us this day, our daily bread, etc Mat. 6. 11.
. And is sanctified to our comfort, by the word and prayer 1. Ti. 4. 5
. Secondly, he feeds the souls of his sheep, with spiritual and heavenly
food, even the hidden mannah, and bread of life, which is come down from
heaven, Jesus Christ himself, of which bread whosoever eats by a true faith,
shall live for ever Ioh. 6. 33.
: and this is called hidden Mannah Reu. 2. 17.
. That mannah which the fathers did eat in the wilderness, was seen, tasted,
and eaten of all; but this bread of life the Lord Jesus, whereof that was a
Sacrament or figure, is a hidden mannah, none can come nigh it, none can see
it, none can taste of it, but such as have a true and lively faith; they all
indeed which believe, shall receive somewhat of it, even as it were some
morsels thereof in this present life, (which shall be sufficient to make them
live, yea to make them fat and well liking) and in the life come, they shall
be most plentiously filled, and feed thereof with continual delight; for it
is not as our dainty meats wherewith we fill the belly, which (though they be
never so sweet and delicate) when we are full, we loath, but the sweet taste
hereof continues still, without any sacietie for evermore: blessed are they
which hunger for this heavenly mannah, as they cannot but long for it, which
once do truly taste it, nay the more we feed, the more we shall hunger, for
all the sweet dainties of the world, are but as draffe unto it.

2 Secondly, What manner of pasture, Gods sheep feed upon.
if you would know what manner of pasture this is, it is not barren, rotten,
or soyled grass: but the Prophet says, it is green or flourishing pasture,
and that principally in these two respects: First, because though all Gods
sheep, who ever lived heretofore, though thousand thousands have fed therein;
yet it wastes not, but is still as green, and sufficient to feed every
believer, as ever it was, for Jesus Christ yesterday, and to day, the same is
for ever Heb. 13. 8
, the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world Reu. 13. 8
, and that Lamb of God which for ever takes away the sins of the world Ioh.
1. 29
. Secondly, because the longer we feed, the fatter we shall be, we need no
change, as David says: Such as be planted in the house of the Lord, shall
flourish in the Courts of our God, they shall bring forth more fruit in their
age, and shall be fat and well liking Ps. 92. 13
, and as it is green, and flourishing, so also sweet and nourishable, compared
to wine and milk Esa. 55. 1.
. Yea, by the same Prophet Esaias, in another place, compared to wines fined and
purified, and to fat things full of marrow Esa. 25. 9.
.

3 Thirdly, where does this green and flourishing pasture grow? Where this
good pasture grows.


A. Surely, not on every mountain, nor in wast wildernesses, and untilled
forests, but as God himself says, thrice in one Chapter, already cyted, it
only grows upon the high mountains of Israel Ezec. 34. 13, 14.
. And what are these high mountains of Israel, but the high and holy Oracles
of God committed unto Israel Romans 3. 2
. The word of God is that sweet and sincere milk wherewith he feeds his
lambs 1. Pet. 2. 2.
, and the sacred Scriptures, are those pleasant pasture fields, wherein grow
those living herbs, whereof whosoever eats by faith, shall be fed up to
eternal life: in comparison whereof, all other writings of men, are but as
barrein and dry mountains, which thing Gods sheep do well know, and
therefore will not follow, but rather fly from those strangers, that would
lead them into other pasture, and feed them with other food Ioh. 10. 5
. Here then is a good Caveat for all such as are deputed Pastors, by the great
Shepherd, that (if they desire to be found faithful unto the flock, and to
render an account with joy) they make conscience to feed Gods sheep with the
right pasture, according to the council of S. Peter: If any man speak, let him
speak as the words of God 1. Pet. 4. 11
, and not follow the example of those treacherous Pastors in the Church of
Rome, who suffer the souls of Gods people to famish and pine away, having
nothing to lay before them, but Schoole-mens toys, men's traditions, and
unwritten verities, as they call them, tying their consciences to a strickt
observation of days, whereof some are blasphemous, many fabulous, and all of
them idolatrous; and also enioyning them a precise difference of meats, as taste
not, touch not, handle not Coloss. 2. 21.
, and that for very piety and religion sake, wherein they come no whit short
of the old heretics, the Tatianes, and Manichies, in maintenance of this
doctrine of Devils, as the holy Apostle calls it 1. Ti. 4. 1.
.

4 Now that we have seen what it is, How Gods sheep must come to feed in his
pasture.
the manner of it, and where this pasture grows, let us in the last place,
consider how Gods sheep must come to feed thereon, and that does Marie tell us
in her song, he fills the hungry with good things, and sends away the rich
empty Luke 1. 53.
. Proclamation was made by the Prophet Esaias, for all them that thirsted, to
come to the waters of life Esaias 55. 1
. yea, and by Christ himself, who in the last and great day of the feast,
stood and cried, He that thirsts, let him come and drink Ioh. 7. 37.
, and pronounces them blessed that hunger and thirst Mat. 5. 6
: whereby we are given to understand, that they are no merchants for Gods
market, to buy wine and milk, that do not thirst; nor sheep to feed in his
green pastures, that have full stomachs, for such is the quality of this
grass, so sweet, pleasant, and wholesome, that the more we taste, and feed on
it, the more shall we hunger after it: the more we read, hear, meditate, and
exercise our selves in the holy Scriptures, the greater will be our desire,
and delight therein.

Here then comes to be bewailed, The fearful contempt of the word in every
place very lamentable.
the lamentable estate of many thousands, contemners of the word of God, who
make no conscience to repair to those places of Gods worship, where the bread
of life is broken, but spend the best hours of the best days, in carding and
dicing, piping and dancing, chambering and wantonness, riot and drunkenness,
speaking evil of them, that will not run with them, in their damnable ways;
Oh, what will not men do to satisfy their hunger? and what cares he for
delicates that is full gorged? Even this one thing does witness to the faces of
many thousands in this land, that they have never yet truly tasted of this
heavenly food. When Mannah first fell, the people of Israel were so exceeding
greedy and desirous of it, that notwithstanding God was merciful to prevent
sin, by taking away the occasion, not suffering any to fall upon the Saboath
day, yet notwithstanding some of them, contrary to express commandment,
went out even on the Saboath to gather, as if they could never be satisfied,
nor have enough of it Ex. 16. 25.
. But they had not long eaten of it their bellies full, but they began to
loath it, saying: Our souls are dried up, we can see nothing but this Mannah
Number. 11 6.
Even so, when it pleased God, that by the means of our gracious Queen, the
Gospel began first to be preached in this land, oh how forward and zealous men
were, sparing for no labor or cost, so they might enjoy and be made partakers
of the ministry thereof, being full of burning love to the glory of Christ,
and even striving who should be forwardest to perform any good work, that
might advance the same; but now that the Gospel has been so long continued
amongst us: alas, whither can we cast our eyes, upon any place, where the
Gospel has been preached, but even a few years, and not see, with the church
of Ephesus, a fearful falling from their first love Reu. 2. 4.
? Oh Lord what great cause have we, all of us, and especially we Ministers of
the word to be instant with God, to quicken his graces in us, and to keep us
upright, that with a true zeal to Gods glory, and a fervent love to Christ,
and his Church, we may perform all holy days, that so the graces of God, may
spring afresh in our people, and their appetites be provoked to hunger after
this heavenly food, least otherwise God in justice, shut up his pasture gates,
and remove his Candle-sticke from us, as he threatened the Church of Ephesus
Reu. 2. 5.
. It would make a man's heart to bleed, that has in it any spark of remorse,
and is not harder then Flint, or Adamant, to pass by the prisons and grates in
London and elsewhere, to see their ghastly countenances, and hear their rewful
complaints, for want of food: but surely if every soul had but a grate to
look through, and cry for her self, a thousand times more woeful and
lamentable, would their cry be in all places and companies, and yet is this
the miserable difference, the hunger of the body is felt and perceived,
whereby all good means are used for comfort, but the want of the soul is not
discerned: but as God said to the Church of Laodicia: Thou say I am rich,
and increased with goods, and have need of nothing, and know not that thou
art vvretched, miserable, poor, blind, and naked Reu: 3. 17
. So may it be said of the hungerstarued soul, Thou think thou art in good
plight, fat, and well liking, and know not that thou art poor, lean,
miserable, and ready to starve, and hereby it comes to pass, that Gods
pasture, is contemned, and trodden under foot Eze. 34. 18
, of none more, then of them that are ready to perish, and know it not. The
Lord give all such a true knowledge, and feeling of their estates, that they
may in a holy manner, more and more hunger after this heavenly food, wherewith
their souls, may be fed up, to everlasting life, etc. And so much for the
first duty of a good shepherd, which is, to provide wholesome food for his
sheep, which thing our heauely shepherd, does most abundantly for us his
poor sheep, that we may say with David, The Lord being our shepherd, we
shall not want any pasture.

And leads me by the still waters. 2. Duty*
The 2. duty of a good shepherd is to provide, wholesome and convenient water
for his sheep, and specially in those hot and dry Countries and Regions, and
therefore we read of their great care this way. Jacob in his journey to
Padan-Aram, looked, and behold there was a Well in the field, and lo, three
flocks of sheep lay thereby, for at that Well were the flocks watered, and
there was a great stone upon the Wels mouth, and thither were all the flocks
gathered Genesis 29. 2. 3
: so likewise we read of the Priest of Midians daughters, who came and drevv
water, and filled the troughes, for to water their fathers sheep, and the
shepherds came and drove them away: but Moses rose up and defended them, and
watered their steep Exo. 2. 16
. But every water is not fit for sheep, it must either be in troughes, or as
the Prophet says, Leniter fluentes (still waters) Leniter fluentes, rapidi
torrentes ad potu^ ouium incommodi, atque etiam vt plurim. noxii sunt Moll. in
ps.
For as writers affirm, violent streams are inconvenient, and for the most
part hurtful Leniter fluentes, rapidi torrentes ad potu^ ouium incommodi,
atque etiam vt plurim. noxii sunt Moll. in ps.
Now how careful this great shepherd is to water, as well as to feed his
sheep! David in the person of them all thus witnesses ( He leads me to the
still waters) where, by still waters, the Prophet signifies, the sweet and
comfortable graces of Gods spirit, conveyed by the conduit pypes of his word
and Sacraments, for the refreshing of the dry and thirsty souls of his
people, which Metaphor is very common in the Scriptures, so the Lord tells
his Church, that he washed her with water Eze. 16. 9
, and promises that he vvillpowre clean water upon her, and cleanse her from
al her filthiness Eze. 36. 25
. Yea, Christ has said, Except a man be borne of this water, and the spirit,
he cannot enter into the Kigdome of heaven John. 3. 5
. And unto the woman of Samariah, Whosoever drinks of this water shall
thirst again, but whosoever shall drink of the water that I shall give him,
shall never thirst any more, but the water that I shall give him, shall be in
him a Well of water, springing up into everlasting life Ioh. 4. 13 14
. And yet most plainly elsewhere in the same Gospel. If any man thirst, let
him come unto me and drink, he that believes in me, as says the Scripture,
out of is belly shall flow rivers of water of life, (this spoke he of the
spirit, which they that believed in him, should receive. Ioh. 7. 37 38
) And surely this Metaphor is not so frequent and common, as fit and
significant: for as there is nothing more acceptable to a weary, thirsty
traveler, then a cup of cold water (so that wise Solomon could not more
excellently declare the ioyfulnesse of good news, from a far Country, then
by this simile, that as cold waters are to a vvearie soul, so are good nevves
from a far Country Pro. 25. 23
.) So is there nothing so welcome and comfortable to a thirsting soul, as the
graces of Gods spirit, without which it pyneth, faints and languisheth away,
as David in many places of his Psalms complains Psa. 42. 2 and 143. 6
. David as one of Gods sheep, had often been led to these still waters, as he
himself has witnessed, saying: In the multitudes of the sorrovves of my
heart, thy comforts have rejoiced my soul Ps. 94. 16
And the Apostle also, who witnessed, as the sufferings of Christ abound in us,
so our co^solations abound much more 2. Cor. 1 5
. Yea, which of Gods sheep but must confess with Esaias, We have joyfully
drawn waters out of the Wels of salvation Esaias. 12. 3
. And with Jeremy, Thy compassions fail not, but are renewed every morning
Lam. 3. 22
.

If we would know the excellency of these graces, the Church by two worthy
Metaphors, declares the same: first says she: Thy name is like the savor of
a good ointment powered out Cant. 1. 2
. What does more delight the sense of smelling, then the savor of some
precious ointment, and specially, the same powered out. We read in the Gospel,
of a woman, which had a box of very costly ointment of Spiknard, and she
brake the box, and povvred the ointment upon the head of Jesus as he sat at
the table, and the house was filled with the swet savor thereof Mar. 14. 3.
John. 12. 3
. But these graces which do run from Christ as the head, into all the parts
of his mystical body, are far, sweeter, then any spikenard, or that most
precious ointment, which was povvred upon the head of Aaron, and ran down
to the skirts of his clothing Psa. 133. 2
Secondly, thy love is better then wine Cant. 1. 1
. Wine is a most comfortable blessing, given to make glad the heart Psalm. 104 15
. And therefore the wise man would have wine given to him that has grief of
heart, that he may forget his poverty, and remember his his misery no more
Pro. 31. 6
yea, what more pleasant to the taste then wine, in so much that many make it
their greatest felicity, to fill and stuff themselves therewith: but yet in
comparison hereof, the sweetest wines are as bitter as gall and wormwood. For
what can wine, or any worldly delights, give comfort to him that is vexed with
Gods storms, affrighted with terrors of an evil conscience, or on whose soul
the horrors of hell have seized. No, no, it is only the assurance of Gods love,
and comfortable graces of his spirit, that makes such an ones heart rejoice
with joy unspeakable and glorious; witness the Apostles, who having tasted
hereof, they forgot their present misery and trouble, and out of the Dungeon,
sung Psalms of praise unto God at midnight Acts. 16. 25
The Saints also, who in the days of Traian did sing Psalms unto God before
day Hymnos ante lucanos.
, as Plinius secundus did write unto the Emperor in their behalf Eusebius.
Pamphilus. lib. 3. ca. 30
. And the holy Martyrs of God, in our forefathers days, who have rejoiced, and
kissed the stake, yea and clapped their hands in the midst of the flaming fire,
as the hystories of our Church beaare witness Acts and Mon. page 1447. 10. 2
.

Oh that our souls were througly athirst for these waters, that we could
truly say with David, As the heart braieth for the rivers of waters, so pants
my soul after thee O God, my soul thirsts for God, yea even for the living
God Ps. 24. 1. ^
. And again, My soul thirsts after God, eue^ as the dry ground Psa. 143. 6
, That we might make it our most earnest desire and request with the woman of
Samariah, Lord give us of this water Ioh. 4. 15
, For then surely he would satisfy our desire, he would bring us into his
wine-celler, and say to us, as he did to his Church, and the members thereof,
Eat oh friends, drink and make you merry Cant. 5. 1
. Yea, we should (as we heard the Prophet Esaias say) with joy, Draw waters out
of the wells of salvation, and have in us a Welspringing up into everlasting
life.

But alas, It is lamentable to consider how these still waters are not regarded.
it is lamentable to consider, that though most men thirst after riches,
honor, and preferment, and therein are never satisfied, but like the grave
that never says ho, yet care they not for those sweet waters of Shiloah,
flowing from the sanctuary of God, and running softly. Once to touch them with
their lips, which indeed is a fearful argument, that most have never yet
truly tasted of them, for (as we heard before) the nature of Gods pasture is
such, that the more his sheep do feed therein, the more they hunger after it:
so the nature of his waters is such, that the more his sheep do drink
thereof, the more they may, yea, the more insaciably do they thirst after
them, whereby it comes to pass, that none are more importunate suitors unto
God, to have his graces increased in the^, nor more diligent and zealous in the
use of the sanctified means, then such as by his mercy have obtained the
greatest measure thereof, an example herein we have the Church herself, who
being brought into Christ's wine-celler, and having tasted how sweet it was
unto her mouth, she cried out to be stayed with flagons of wine, being very
sick of love Can. 2. 4, 5
. The meaning is this, that Christ giving to his Saints the earnest and first
fruits of the spirit, and as it were through little creuises distilling into
their souls, a drop or twain of his mercies and love, they are so ravished
with the sweetness thereof, that they become not only loue-sicke, but even
ready to faint, and to swound with the desire of having more, yea her fill
thereof, having flagons of that pure and precious liquor.

Oh then, Use.
I beseech you, yea I humbly beseech the Lord, both for me and you, that it
may every day more and more appear, that we are true members of this Church,
and sheep of Gods pasture, by ardently thirsting after these heavenly waters,
that where as most men say, who will show us any good, we may with David
esteem this above all things, and say, Lord lift thou up the light of thy
countenance upon us, for this is it, which (when all the world forsakes) shall
give us true peace, and comfort at the last. So much for the second duty: The
third follows, which is;

To provide rest at noone, 3. Duty. To provide rest at noon
that in some shadow, where the sheep are freed from the scorching heat of
the Sun, they may lie down and chew the cud, and this is no less needful
and comfortable, then either of the former, and specially in those hot Regions
and Countries, where the shepherds themselves, could not tend their flocks,
without their te^ts or booths: whereunto Ezechiah alluding, says: Mine
habitation is removed like a Shepherds Tent Esa. 38. 12
. But let us consider what is that comfortable rest, which Jesus Christ the
great shepherd provides for his sheep? And that is twofold; for as he
feeds the body and soul, so also he provides rest for both.

First, Christ provides a bodily rest for his sheep and what it is.
he provides rest for the body, in time of hot persecution, whereunto the
Church alluding, says: Show me, oh thou whom my soul loves, where thou
feedest, and where thou causest thy flock to lie down at noone Cant. 1. 6
At the noonetide the Sun is hottest, neither can any thing hide it self
from the heat thereof as David says Psalm. 19. 6
. And how comfortable a shadow is at that time, experience (even in these cold
countries) declares, and the example of Jonah bears witness, who sitting on
the east side of the City Naniuie, to see what should be done in the city,
and the Sun beating upon his head that he fainted, the Lord God prepared a
Gourd, and made it to come up our Jonah, that it might be a shadow over his
head, and deliver him from his grief: so Jonah was exceeding glad of the Gourd
Jonah. 4. 5, 6, 7.
: for what is more intolerable then heat? It is one of the curses threatened
Deu. 28. 22 Ardor and aestus.
. And when the fourth Angel powered out his Violl upon the Sun, and it was
given him to torment men with heat of fire, then men boiled in great heat,
and blasphemed the name of God, as is mentioned in the book of the Revelation
Reu. 16. 8
, what a singular comfort then is it unto Gods people, that when the Sun of
persecution is hottest Mat. 13. 21
, yet their shepherd will one way or other provide a shadow of refreshing Ahab
and Iesabel, when not only Elizah, and an hundred Prophets of the Lord were
saved, being hid by fifty in a Cave, and fed with bread and water, by good
Obadiah 1. Kin. 18 13
, but also seven thousand in Israel which never bowed their knees unto Baal 1.
Kin. 19 18
. Or secondly by sending them gracious kings and princes, as rivers of water in
a dry place, and as the shadow of a great rock in a weary land, as was
prophesied of Ezekiah Esaias 32. 2
. Or thirdly, the Lord gives David with his two wives, and the six hundred
men that were with him, seeking refuge against the cruel persecution of Saul,
by flying unto Achish king of Gath, he securely enterteined the^, and gave them
Ziglag to dwell in 1. Sam. 27 3
: And thus by Gods mercy, Geneua, Germany, and other places, were a shadow to
our persecuted fathers, as Englang this day, is unto many of the like condition
again.

But lastly, if the Lord for his own glory send unto them the Comforter Ioh.
16. 7
, which makes them to rejoice in afflictions Romans 5. 3
. And though they have trouble the world, yet have they sweet peace in Christ
Ioh. 16. 33
, that even the burning flames of fire, are as a most comfortable shadow unto
them, as the joyful deaths of many the holy Martyrs of God do witness.

The consideration whereof, Use.
yields Gods people a very profitable use, viz. that whereas carnal and
worldly wise men, whenever they perceive any trouble or danger to be
imminent, for the profession of the Gospel, they account it their greatest
safety to fly from Christ, and conform themselves to all times, places, and
companies, and to carry themselves so indifferently, that no man can say of
what religion they are. But if we will show our selves true members of the
Church, we must in all dangers fly unto Christ, knowing that he both can and
will provide a rest for his sheep, he has a layer at noone, and when the
Sun shines hotest, he will make us lie down in peace, in the very midst of
our enemies: oh then, let us never be ashamed of Christ, nor afraid to
profess his Gospel, for if once we be shrouded under the shadow of his wings,
though the earth remove, we need to fear none evil, and if once we enter by
him, as the door; we shall be safe, and go in and out, and find pasture
Ioh. 10. 9
.

And now to make application of those things unto our selves, The blessed rest
that Gods sheep have found in this land under the happy government of queen
Elizabeth.
we were unworthy to have our heads sheltred under the same, if we do not
continually, thankfully record, the sweet rest and comfortable shadow which
Gods people have so long enjoyed, in this land, under the happy government of
our gracious Princess Elizabeth. O bona si sua norint Angli.
During whose reign, it may as truly be said of her people, as ever of the
people in Salomons days, that we have lived without fear, and every one
sat under the shadow of his vine and fig tree 1. King. 4. 25
. Which shadow, God as seasonably provided, as ever he did Ionahs Gourd, even
when the souls of his sheep were ready to faint, being scorched with the
fervent East wind, and noone-tide sun of cruel persecution, in the days of
Queen Mary; oh that we had rightly used this rest! It is said in the
commendation of the church of Iudeah, Galile and Samariah, that having rest
they were edified, and walked in the fear of the Lord, and were multiplied by
the comfort of the holy ghost Act. 9. 31
. Oh, if we had made such use of our long rest, even hungerly to have fed in
Gods green pastures, thirstily to have drunk of those still waters, and
cheerfully to have chewed the cudde under this shadow, the Lord had had a most
glorious church in this land by this day! but alas, we have all of us so abused
our peace, liberty, and prosperity, to carnal security, and have passed
away this happy time, as men in a dream, that now it is high time to repent,
awake from sin, and seek the Lord, least otherwise we provoke him to prepare a
worm to smite our Gourd that it wither, and it be said unto us as it was to
the rich man (...), You have had your Gourd, now it is dead, and ca^ not be
revived. So much for the bodily rest, which Christ prepares for his sheep.

The second rest, The spiritual rest which christ provides for the souls of
his people
and that which is a thousand times more precious, is the spiritual rest of
the soul, whereby it is shadowed and refreshed, against the intolerable and
consuming heat of Gods wrath, and this rest or shadow Christ Jesus himself
is, he is our peace Ephesians. 2. 14
, through whom God is well pleased, as he himself has proclaimed Mat. 3. 17
. It is he that has trodden the wine press of his father alone Esa. 63. 3
, Yea, he is a strength to the poor and needy, in their trouble, a refuge
against the tempest, and shadow against the heat, as the Prophet Esaias speaks
Esa. 25. 4
. Yea, the Church herself acknowledges him for her only shadow, saying: Like
the Appletree amongst the Trees of the Forest; so is my wel-beloued amongst
the sons of men, under his shadow had I delight, and sat down Cant. 2. 3
. The shadow of a tree is comfortable, Christ Jesus the only comfortable rest
of the soul.
and does greatly refresh them that are parched with the boiling heat of the
Sun, but there is no shadow so comfortable to the body, as Christ Jesus is
unto the soul, that is scorched with the fiery temptations of Satan Ephesians. 6. 16
, and burning heat of a guilty conscience for sin; yea, there is no other
tree able to shadow us, and therefore says Christ, Come unto me all ye that
travel and are heavy loadned, and I will refresh you, take my yoke upon you,
and you shall find rest unto your souls Mat. 11. 29
. Yea, the Saints of God, having been vexed with his storms, and once coming
under the shadow of this tree, they find such wealth, rest, and peace therein,
that they do sit down and never seek any further, nay for the world, they
would not be drawn away from the same again.

It is far otherwise with Idolaters, Idolaters can find no true peace in
their superstitious traditions.
and such as do worship false gods: for though they punish and afflict
themselves many ways; seeking by all means to make satisfactions for their
sins, and to cool the flaming heat of their guilty consciences, yet when
they have wearied themselves, and done all that ever they can, they they are so
far from being satisfied, finding ease, or taking away the sting of sin, that
rather as David says they do multiply sorrows upon their heads Psalm. 16. 4
. There is no true rest in the world but only under the shadow of this
Apple Tree Jesus Christ.

To conclude this point, seeing we have heard that this good shepherd,
prepares abounantly, both pasture, water, and shadow, let us, I beseech you,
as Gods sheep, hunger after this food, thirst after these waters, and take
our delight in this rest: then shall we no more hunger, after the draffe of
humane traditions, nor thirst after the puddle of popish poisoned cups, no more
weary our selves, seeking for rest in our own merits and satisfactions: but
having fed in these pastures, drunk of these waters, and rested under this
shadow: we shall have the heat of sin slaked, and our souls fatted with
the taste of these heavenly delicates, till in the end we be brought into the
presence of God, where the fullness of joy shall ever be present with us, Beata
vita in font.
wherewith we cannot be filled: or rather, filled, but cannot be satisfied: for
there is blessedness at the head of the spring, not in the Cesterns, or
Conduits, For with God is the Well of life, and he shall give his Saints drink
out of the river of his pleasures, as David says Psalm. 36. 8
, Which river is as clear as Crystal, proceeding out of the throne of God
Reu. 22. 1
. Yea, and there shall we find the tree of life, whose leaves are not only for
shadow, but for medicine to heal the Nations with Reu. 22. 2
, yea and bears fruit, not only to satisfy the hunger, but twelve manner of
fruits, every Month brought forth to satisfy the pleasure of his Saints Reu.
22. 2
. Oh, for it, let us sharpen our appetites, and beseech him that has planted
it, to bring us thither where we may taste how wholesome and pleasant the fruit
of it is! It follows.

THE THIRD SERMON upon the 23. Psalm.
He restores my soul, and leads me in the paths of righteousness for his
names sake.
THe fourth duty of a good Shepherd, The 4. duty of a good and loving
shepherd.
is to bear with the weak: and if any of his flock be sick or feeble, to
cherish, norish, and strengthen the^, yea, even to carry them in his bosom,
for so the Lord himself alluding to these qualities of a good shepherd,
says. He shall feed his flock like a shepherd, he shall gather the Lambs
with his arm and carry them in his bosom, and guide them that are with young
Esa. 40. 11
: even so kind is the spiritual sheheard of our souls, that his sheep being
weak, he will strengthen; feeble, he will cheerish; yea dead in sins, he
will quicken, restore and convert them, by regenerating and induing them, with
a true and lively faith whereby they live Heb. 10. 38
: and being undoubtedly persuaded of Gods favor and love, do rejoice with joy
unspeakable and glorious 1. Pet. 1. 8
. And this is the grace whreof we are now to speak, which indeed is so great,
that neither heart of man, nor tongue of Angels, are able fully to conceive or
express: for what would it profit David, now that he is dead and sees
corruption Act. 1. 29
, that he has been taken from following the Ewes great with young, to become
a king in great honor and wealth, that he has bin mighty in battle, and sung
unto in da^ces, Saul has slain his thousand and David his ten thousand 1.
Sam. 11 7
. If the Lord had not converted his soul, yea what will it profit a man to win
the whole world, and loose his own soul, this, this, therefore is more to be
rejoiced in, then the finding of, all the kingdoms of the world, happy David,
and happy that man or woman, that can truly say with David, The Lord has
converted my soul. Now that we may the more orderly and profitably handle this
strain, there are two things therein to be considered. First, the Conuerter
(the Lord:) secondly, the thing converted (the soul:) for the first,

He restores restituit animam, Doctrine.
the words are plain, our lesson for instruction is this, viz. That it is not
our action, or in our power, in part, or in all, to become the sheep of
Christ, but it is wholly the work of God in us, according to that of Christ, in
the Gospel of saint John, Postpone.
No man comes unto me except my father draw him Ioh. 6. 44.
. And again in the same Gospel, Other sheep I have also, which are not of
this fold, them also must I bring, and they shall hear my voice, and there
shall be one sheep-folde, and one shepherd Io. 10. 26
. For although in this Text there is neither any addition of necessity, as
that he ( must) convert the soul, nor yet any exception, or exclusion, as
though ( none other) could do it, but he: yet under this significant, and
affectionate word ( he) they both are included; by necessary implication, q.
d. o Lord, it is only thy work, Confirmation.
that my soul is converted, no other can do it, but thou alone. Which lesson
is confirmed by many other places of Scripture. The Prophet Jeremy thus
prays. Convert us, O Lord, and we shall be converted Ier. 31. 18
. Saint Paul says: It is neither in him that planteth, nor in him that
waters, but God that gives the increase 2. Cor. 3. 7
. And again: We are not sufficient of our selves, to think any thing 2. Co.
3. 5
. And Saint James says: Every good and perfect gift comes down from above
Iam. 1. 17
. In a word, the whole stream of the Scriptures do run this way, to prove
this doctrine, that our conversion unto God, is no work of any inferior
power, but the peculiar work, of the holy and omnipotent spirit of God,
ordinarily wrought by the ministry of the word, according to that of David, The
law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul Ps. 19. 7
. And saint Paul says, I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it is
the mighty power of God to salvation, to every one that believes To. 1. 16
, And else where, Faith comes by hearing of the word Romans 10 17*
.

The use of which doctrine serves notably to reform our judgment, as
concerning a very gross and dangerous heresy, maintained by the Church of
Rome, about the free will of man, in his pure naturals, I will not in way of a
common place enter into the handling of this large, Wherein the Papists and
we do differ about free will.
and great controversy, with objections, answers, and replies, but only by
the way, as I am occasioned by my text, briefly lay open the state of the
question, and then show wherein they do swerve both from us, and the delivered
and approved truth. for the first, we may note, that the condition 3.
and material. Lastly, we are to note, that spiritual actions, are twofold,
either such as concern the kingdom of darkness, or such as corcerne the
kingdom of God: for such actions as concern the kingdom of darkness, and are
properly sins, we join with them, and teach, that in these man has freedom
of will sinning necessarily, but not constraynedly Necessary sed non coacte.
etc. In primae gratiae receptione; homines non sese habent mere (...) sed sunt
gratiae dei (...) Bezae quaest:
, But the maine difference betwixt them and us, is about free will in man's
naturals, as it is exercised, concerning actions spiritual and good, as
repentance, faith, the conversion of a sinner, new obedience, and such like:
yet not as concerning the freedom it self; for we join with them and say,
that in the first conversion of a sinner, man's free will does concur, with
Gods grace, as a fellow-worker in some sort, for God does not work upon man as
a senseless block or stone. Non sicut lapidibus aut aliis insensatis, He that
made thee with out thee, will not save without thee. Aug.
and operatur salutem, etc. August. contra Pelag. 1. 5. Seeing he is endued
with reason, will and understanding, (which for substance do still remain,
only the qualities changed.) And unto true conversion, the will is required,
as well as the word, or spirit; for no man was ever converted against his will,
neither is will constrained, any will. But in this they and we do exceedingly
differ, as concerning the cause of this liberty of will, in these spiritual
matters concerning Gods Kingdom; for they say, man's free will is not wholly
extinguished, but attenuated and abated, as the man that fell amongst thieves,
and was left half dead: and therefore being aided and assisted of grace, it is
able to will any thing appertaining unto salvation, and of it self to work
together with grace, and so they give not all the glory of their conversion
unto God, but attribute part unto grace, and part unto free will, working by a
natural power Liberum arbitrum nos facit volentes: gratia, been volentes.
Bernard lib de lib Arbit.
. Contrary wise, we say according to the word of God, that though the natural
power of willing, and thinking be in us, and is properly ours, by the general
gift of God, yet the holiness, goodness, and freeness hereof, are merely,
and entirely, wrought in us by the spirit of God Concilium Trident. Sess. 6.
cap. 1 and 5. Canon. 4.
: and therefore though the will do concur with Gods grace, yet not as
working, by any natural power or virtue, but as framed of God, Bellarmine de
great. lib. 5. cap. 30.
he giving us a will to desire the grace, Volentes ex nolentibus August. contra
2. Epist. Pelag. lib. 1. cap. 20. at the time that he bestows the grace upon
us; and therefore we give glory unto God, for the whole work, and confess
with David to his praise, he converted my soul; as for their Arg. drawn from
the man, that was left half dead, Rhemist.
it is a feeble collection, Annot. in Luc. 10. sect 6. and Romans 9. sect. 4.
and nothing agreeable to the scope and intent of Christ, in the propounding of
that parable; yea and contrary to other scriptures, where we are plainly
said, not only to be half dead, but wholly dead To. 5. 12. Ephesians. 2. 1. 5. Col.
2. 13. not (...) vn^, but (...).
And lastly, contrary to the judgment of Augustine, who says: Man before he
can become righteous, has need of a Physician, because he is sick; yea of a
quickner, because he is dead, Vt homo redeat adiustitia^, opus habet medico,
quia sanus non est, imo opus habet viuificatore, quia mortuus est August. de
nature. great. ca. 23.
. So much for the conuerter, the thing converted, is the soul, ( he conuerteth
my soul) God works not to halfes, laying a foundation, without any further
building: but he finisheth every good work, that he takes in hand Phil. 1. 6.
he conuerteth the whole man, the body as well as the soul, the eyes, which
were full of adultery, shall become chaste, the hands that were full of bribes,
shall be seasoned with liberal gifts to the poor Esaias 32. ^.
the feet which were swifts to shed innocent blood, shall be swift to
relieve and help, the innocent oppressed, the tongue that was defiled with
blasphemy, and filthy speaking, shall speak reverently, and soberly, as may
minister grace to the hearers Ephesians. 4. 29
, the head that was fraught with covetous and carnal devices, shall be
sanctified with wholesome and divine meditations Ps. 77. 6.
. And in a word all the members of the body, which have been abused, to become
weapons of unright cousnesse unto sin, shall become weapons of righteousness
unto God To. 6. 13.
. But because the root must be good, before it can send forth sap into the
branches to the bringing forth of good fruit Mat. 7. 17 12. 32.
; And the fountain must first be purged, before the streams that issue from
the same, can be made clean and sweet: therefore must the heart, being the
root and fountain, be first purged, and converted, without which, all
holiness is but hypocrisy: and devotion, dissimulation: Religion,
superstition; and all appearing of conversion, a counterfaiting before the
Lord: wherefore the Prophet David, to declare the truth of his conversion,
does wisely, and purposely add this circumstance, He conuerteth my soul: and
thereby teaches us this lesson,

That until such time as God convert Doctrine.
our souls (howsoever we may with an outward appearance, bleare and deceive
the eyes of men,) yet can we never have any comfortable assurance, concerning
our estate with God, but rather look when God shall pluck away our maskes, and
vizards, and make us bewray our hypocrisy and dissimulation, to those who have
been most deceived by us. Judas, he obtained fellowship in the ministration
of the Apostleship Act. 1. 17 25.
: But because his soul was not converted unto God, he fell away like water
from one sin to another, till in the end, he became guide to them that took
Jesus, and so went astray to go to his own place. Herod, he feared and
reverenced John Baptist, and heard him gladly, and did many things; but because
his soul was not converted, he embraced a beloved sin: which when the man
of God reproved, he took away his head Mar. 6. 17 18, 19, 20
. Demas was a companion of the Apostles, but because his soul was never truly
converted, in time (being overcome of covetousness) he fell away, and embraced
this present world 2. Tim. 4 10
. Were there ever any, in the world, that for outward appearance had greater
show of sanctity and holiness, than the Scribes and Pharisies^ They looked
sower, and disfigured their face? when they fasted, prayed in synagogues, and
corners of the streets, gave alms with the sound of a trumpet Mat. 6. 2. 5. 16.
, made their philacteries broad, and fringes of their garments long, compassed
sea and land to make a proselyte, tythed mint, anny se, and cummine, washed the
outside of the cup and platter Mat 23. 15. 23. 25, 26
: and yet because their souls were nto converted unto God, but full of
covetousness, bryberie, rapine, and extortion, our Savior plucketh away the
painted vizards from their faces, and ratleth them up, with many a fearful
woe, laying their condition most plainly before them by a worthy comparison,
saying: You are like unto painted Sepulchers, goodly, and gorgeous toombes, and
monuments without, beautiful to look upon; but within, full of rottenness,
corruption, and dead men's bones Mat. 23. 27.
, and has told us, except our righteousness exceed the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, we shall never enter into the kingdom of heaven Mat. 5.
20.
.

Oh Lord God, Use.
how ought the consideration here of to rowse us up every one, to a thorough
trial and examination of our selves, that we be not deceived with a vain
persuasion, and opinion of our estate and condition, as if all were well, when
it is stark naught, and to think with the Church of Laodicea, That we are rich
and increased in goods, and have need of nothing, when in truth we are very
wretched, blind, poor, miserable, and naked Reu. 3. 17.
. Oh then let us (as in the sight of God) examine our selves, how we stand
affected, whether we do hate those things which we have loved, whether we
loath our former lives, and be ashamed of our old sins, casting off the
works of darkness, living by faith depending upon the providence of God,
having knowledge to render a reason of our faith, having a zeal to Gods
glory, and a sincere love to the truth, and professors thereof. If we find
these things in truth in us, though but in small, and weak measure: yet
doubtless, we may boldly pronounce with David, The Lord has converted my
soul, and happy is he, that ever he was borne, to see that hour; but if we
find not these things in us, but all that we have to cleave unto, is a naked,
bare, and verbal profession: surely then, let us not flatter our selves, we
are but in the condition of many reprobates Esaias 1. 13
: and if thus we continue, Mich. 6. 6. 7 Mat. 15. 7. 8.
we shall one day be found, filthily naked, for want of a wedding garment, and
be thrust out of doors, by head and shoulders, and have our portion with
hypocrites.

And surely, Application
if we do make application of these things to our selves, it is a miserable
thing, and would make the heart of any man bleed, (that is not harder than
flint and Adamant) to consider, the ruefull estate and condition of many
people, who if they be demanded, how they hope, or look to be saved, and in
what state they stand before God: this is their common answer, I hope well,
that God will save that which he has made, I go orderly to the Church and
receive the Sacrament, I thank God, I mean no body any harm, but do as I
would be done unto.

But oh fool, know that God is a spirit, and will be worshipped in spirit and
truth, and therefore it is not enough, not to steal, not to commit whoredom,
to bear false witness, to kill, to come orderly to the Church, to pare off
some sins, to be friendly to the professors of the Gospel, and to lead a
civil life; when as in the mean time thy heart within, is filthy, full of
infidelity, ignorance, pride, covetousness, malice. What is all this thy
Religion now? surely as much regarded of God, as the cutting off of a dogs
neck, and offering of swines blood, as the Prophet says Esa. 66. 3.
Thou art like a goodly sepulcher, full of filthiness; Oh then, strive to have
the inside of the cup and platter cleansed Mat. 23. 26
let the hidden man of the heart be decked, with a meek and quiet spirit 1.
Pe. 34
and specially with love, a good conscience, and faith unfeigned 1. Ti. 1. 5
; for the kings daughter (as her apparel is of wrought gold) so is she
glorious within Ps. 45. 13
: which spiritual beauty, is a thing much set by, without which, whatsoever we
seem to have (whether we be superstitious Papists, or ceremonious Protestants)
in the sight of God, it is nothing worth. What is then more to be feared tha^
this, that the number of true conuerts is very small, whose hearts are upright
with God, and can truly say with David, The Lord has converted my soul; and
I fear in the day of visitation, when the Lord will search us to the quick,
most men's conversion will be found but copper, not able to abide the Lords
touchstone, and when he shall way us, in the balance of his sanctuary,
Balthasars Emblem, may be written in our foreheads, Mean, Numerauit, appendit,
diuisit.
mean, Tekell, vpharsin; thou have been weighed in the balance, and art found
too light Dan. 5. 25
Oh then whilst the time of grace and mercy lasts, let us follow the
council of S. Peter, even give all diligence to make our calling and election
sure 2. Pet. 1. 10
that as the sheep of Gods pasture, we may in truth, thankefully aknowledge
with David our fold-mate, and say, He has converted my soul. It follows:

And leads me in the paths of righteousness. 5. duty of a good Shepherd.
The holy Prophet, still prosecuteth this allegory; And because the sheep is
of a straying nature, and subject to many enemies, that seek to pray upon her;
it is therefore the duty of a very good Shepherd, not only to provide
pasture, water, shadow, and to cherish the weak, but also to guide and lead
them in the plain way, from the fold to the pasture, and from pasture, to
pasture, according to that of our Savior Christ, in the Gospel of S. John, A
good Shepherd calls his sheep by name, and leads them out, and when he
has sent forth his own sheep, he goes before them, and the sheep follow
him Ioh. 10. 3. 4.
. That it might therefore appear, that God is not wanting in the perfourmance
of any good duty to his people, he thereunto alludeth, saying: and he leads
me in the paths of righteousness, q. d. The Lord not only conuerteth the
souls of his people, and quickneth them by his spirit from the grave of sin;
but also being quickened and converted, (knowing how weak and proane they are
to run in the path of destruction) he leaves them not unto themselves, but
takes charge of them, and leads them in the path of righteousness,
finishing the good work, which he has begun in them, to his own glory and
their eternal salvation.

The general doctrine from this strain, The general doctrine from this
sentence.
is this, viz: That as in God is the conversion of our souls, so from him is
the continuance of our upright walking before him; if ever he leave us to our
selves, we fearfully start aside, as we have an example in that faithful and
zealous King Ezekiah, who being left of God, to try him; in stead of
thankfulness, (both for his gracious deliverance out of the hands of his
enemies, and for his miraculous restitution to health) he bewrayed great pride
of heart, in showing to the messengers of Merodache Baladan King of Babell, all
his treasures of silver, gold, and armor 2. Cro. 32 31. Whereupon the
assurance of the perseverance of Gods Saints is grounded.


Q. If this be our weakness, what is then the ground of our assurance, that
being once converted, and brought into the state of grace, we shall continue
therein?

A. Even here it is laid down, The Lord will lead us in the paths of
righteousness this grace has Christ prayed for, who was heard in all things
Ioh. 11. 42
Holy Father, keep them in thy name, even those that thou have given me, and
sanctify them with thy truth, thy word is thy truth Ioh. 17. 11. 17.
Yea God himself has promised, (who is faithful and cannot lie) I will not
fail thee, neither forsake thee Heb. 13. 6
So that howsoever for a moment he may leave, and forsake us, for our trial,
that having experience of our weakness, we may the more earnestly cleave unto
him; yet doubtless, he will not forsake us over long, but so order our goings
and lead us forth, in the right way, that for the beginning, continuance, and
end of our salvation, his name may have all the praise.

The use whereof is, Use.
that no man glory in his own strength, which is but as a read, that will
break to shiuers, but he that glories, glory in the Lord Ierem. 9. 24
And say with David, The Lord is my strength and my salvation Ps. 18. 2.
and he is on my right hand, that I shall not greatly fall Ps. 16. 8.
yea, let us continually pray with David, Lord lead me in thy righteousness,
because of mine enemies, make thy way plain before my face Psa. 5. 8.
. And again, Cast me not off in the time of mine age, forsake me not when, my
strength fails me Ps. 71. 9.
. So much for the doctrine and use of this whole strain in general: now let us
more nearly come to scanne the words in particular, as they lie in order, for
they are very significant, and yield very profitable obseruatio^s for our
instruction, and comfort, Division of this sentence.
wherein first we are to consider what the lord does: he leads; secondly,
where in the paths: 3. what manner of paths, 1. part.
( of righteousness) of these in order.

He leads; 1. note.
he says not, he (shows) as if it were enough for Gods people to know the
way, and then they have power sufficient of themselves to walk therein, but
the Lord does lead and conduct them showing them the way and giving them power
to walk therein; This does the Church acknowledge in the Canticles, where she
desires Christ to draw her Can. 1. 3.
Alas good virgin, her only joy and desire is to run after Christ, in whom
she knows her felicity consists, and yet her legs will not serve, her
knees are so feeble, that she faints in the race, she is so fettered and
hampred with the remnants of sin, and pressed down with the relics of
corruption Heb. 12. 1 Gal. 5. 17.
, that she cannot do that which she would To. 7. 15
, She loves Christ, and yet is not able to make any faster speed after him,
then he shall draw her, if he cease to draw, she by and by cease to run.

The use whereof serves to condemn the doctrine of the Church of Rome, Use.
for heresy, and the Church her self for a bold and impudent strumpet, which
maintayneth with sharp Arguments, even fire and sword, that man's enfeebled
will (as they call it) being once prevented and helped and as it were loosed,
and set on foot by grace, it can and does perform all things Con. Trident.
ses. 6. ca. 5. can. 4 Rhem. Act. 13. sect. 2. Bellarm. potest homo absolute per
liberum arbitrium, been facere si velit etc. li. 5. cap. 29 respons. ad
testimon. 2.
. But the true Church having received grace; yea, after she had run, and does
run: yet she craves his graces, whereby she may be enabled to run faster,
and to run to the end; and David here, though he acknowledge he has
received grace, and God has converted his soul; yet stands he in need,
Certum est nos velle cum volumus, sed ille facit vt, velim us bonu^; ratum est
nos facere, cu^ facimus, sed ille facit, vt faciamus, de bono perseverat. ca.
16.
still by his grace, to be led forward in the paths of righteousness, it
being certain, that it is man that wills, whatsoever is willed, but god is
the cause that he wills that which is good, man works whatsoever is
wrought, but God is the cause that we do that which is good.

Secondly, we may note, that David, says not, he ( compels) but ( leads)
for though the Shepherd do stand in need of a rod to correct his wandering
sheep, 2. Note.
and make the slothful plodders, to pase it better, (as we shall hear from
the next verse) yet does God so inwardly frame the affections of his Saints,
that they do chearefully run in the ways, of Gods commandments, and after a
holy manner, do strive unto perfection; so says David, I will run the ways of
thy commandments, when thou have enlarged mine heart Psalm. 119. 32
And Saint Paul says, One thing I do, I forget that which is past, and
endeavor my self, to that which is before Phil. 3. 13
Yea, how great the delight of Gods Saints is herein, David declares, I have
had as great delight in thy commandments, as in all manner of riches Ps. 112.
14
They are dearer then thousands of gold and silver, sweeter also then honey and
the honey comb Ps. 19. 10
: So that here needs no compulsion, the way is so sweet and pleasant, that
the inner man is willing Math. 26 41
: and takes great delight therein To. 7. 22.
But because the flesh is weak, therefore the Church prays her spouse: Draw
me, and we will run after thee Cant. 1. 3
: thereby noting, that Gods Saints being made pertakers of the outward
ministry of the word, and inward powerful working of the spirit, are most
cheerful and ready, with all spiritual and holy affections, care and
conscience, to follow God and his calling, and in outward conversation, to show
themselves ready to tread the paths of righteousness, and strive unto
sanctification.

Thirdly, 3. Note.
this Metaphor of ( leading) does teach us, that in all gods sheep, there must
be an holy growth and increase, a growing forward unto perfection, and the
measure of the age of the fullness of Christ Ephesians. 4. 13. In via virtutis, qui
non proficit, deficit.
where there is a standing still, there is no leading, nay in this way, there
is no standing still at all: he that goes not forward, goes backward, though
he think not so: wherefore if we will approve our selves, to be sheep of the
Lords pasture, we must grow and go forward from strength to strength Psalm 84. 7
from faith to faith To. 1. 17.
, and from one measure and degree of knowledge, zeal, and virtue, to another,
that we may bring forth more fruit in our age Ps. 92. 14
: and being once delivered from the filthy Sodom of this world, we take heed
we partake not with Lots wife, in her sin, to look back again Genesis 19 26
Luke 17, 32
. Oh, I beseech you, let the knowledge of this point, make us all, both pasture
and people, enter into a deep consideration of our ways, Use.
that if we find our selves by Gods mercy, to be led forward we may give him
thanks, and hold fast, that no man take away our crown Reu. 3. 11
: but if we find a decay of Gods graces in us, we may in time repent, and
seek to recover our former estate by double diligence, least he remove our
Candlestick Reu. 2. 5
, and take from us that which we seemed to have Luke 8. 18
. If our consciences do witness against many of us Ministers, The fearful
going back, and falling away, both in ministers and people.
that whereas heretofore of a zeal to Gods glory, we have diligently preached
the word, and rejoiced in the coming of the Sabbath, when we might empty,
and unload our selves of that we have gathered in the week day: of conscience
we have abstained from this or that sin, and been grieved in our souls for
them in others, and our only desire has been to please God, and both by
doctrine and example to shine in the world. But now we can be content to take
our ease, delight in sleeping, and altogether look to our own vvayes,
purpose, and advantage Ezech. 34 Esaias. 56.
, having no care to feed Gods flock, strengthen the weak, heal the sick,
bring again that which was gone astray, and seek up that which was lost;
but so we be fed with the fat, and clothed with the wool, we care for no more,
that which perishes, Multi, doctiores, pauci meliores
let it perish, all our care is to please men, and to have the favor of the
mighty, and both by word and example we do justify, that which before we
have disallowed.

Oh good Lord, if this be our estate, how can we be persuaded, that we are
led in the paths of righteousness? When it is apparent that we fall away more
and more. And if the consciences of the people do no less witness against
you, that whereas you have been so long hearers of the word, and so many
years ago you had such a measure of knowledge, that you would according to the
word render a reason of your faith, and maintain the truth against errors, and
heresies; such a measure of zeal, that rather then you would join with
Idolaters, and offend God, and your consciences, you would forsake father,
mother, yea, and your own lives; Such a measure of love to the truth, that you
could afford to be at this or that cost to maintain the preaching of it,
Aliquid, descripturis sanctis, quotidie discere.
to take this or that pains to go to hear it, to rise or go to bed, so much
the rather or later, that you might have one hour of the day to hear or read
it; such a measure of a good conscience that you could not away with this or
that sin. But now alas, there is a fearful backsliding, you do account
them but hot spirited fellows, that take that course, or if you do
outwardly perform these things, yet it is not with that wonted feeling and
remorse: oh, if this be the estate of any of you (as it is to be feared, it is
of too many) consider from whom you are fallen, and repent, and do the first
works Reu. 2. 6
. Is this to be led forward unto perfection? Will the Lord take it in good
part at your hands, to feed in his green pastures, and yet to be every day
leaner and leaner? to drink so plentifully of the sincere milk of his word,
and yet never to grow thereby 1. Pe. 2. 2
, but to remain as wrislings, withering and pining away: no surely, even
therefore has the hand of the Lord gone out against us, and he has punished
us with pestilence, famine, unseasonableness of weather: because neither
ministers nor people, have marched so valiantly in the ways of the Lord as we
ought but have fainted, halted, and turned out of the way Heb. 12. 13
, so that it is high time for us all, to consider our ways, and to pray unto
God that our weak hands and feeble knees may be strengthened Esaias. 35. 3
, that we may be led forward, and more chearefully run in the paths of
righteousness, then heretofore we have done. Pietas, quae finem nouit no^ est
pielas
But wherein does this good shepherd lead his sheep?

( In the paths) He says not ( path) but ( paths) as speaking of many: 2.
Part.
for though the way to gods kingdom, be but that one strait and narrow way,
whereof Christ makes mention Mat. 7. 13
, yet are there in that way many paths, and Gods sheep must walk in them all.
The doctrine for our instruction from hence, is this, viz. That the obedience
of a true Christian, must extend it self to the whole course of his life, and
to all the commandments of God Secundum, istius vitae modum.
. For the first, it is not enough to serve God for a year, or twain, but we
must serve him in true righteousness and holiness all the days of our lives
Luke 1. 75
: the promise is made, he that continues to the end shall be saved Mat. 10. 22
: And, be thou faithful to the end, and I will give thee the crown of life
Reu. 2. 10
. Though then we did run in these paths of righteousness, a great while, and
then afterward stay, turn aside, or go back gain; what shall it avail us?
So, secondly, we may not take liberty in any one sin, but strive to avoid
all, nor omit any one good duty, but strive to perform all, as did Zachary
and Elizabeth, who were just before God, and walked in all the ordinances and
commandments of God, without reproof Luke 1. 6.
. Sine querela, non sine peccato. August.
There are many who may easily be drawn to avoid and cast away many sins,
saving some one or few that serve most for their pleasure and advantage: so
Herod heard John Baptist willingly, and did many things Mar. 6. 20
, He could be content to walk in some of the paths of righteousness, but not
in all, he had one pleasing sin, which by no means he could abide to be
reproved for Mat. 14. 5
, But let us be assured, that all Gods sheep truly regenerated by the spirit
of God, though there be great weaknesses and imperfections in them, whereby
they are drawn into much evil, which they should not, and leave undone many
good duties, which they should do, (and, wherein they desire God to be
merciful unto them through Christ) yet do they stand thus affected, that they
do hate and detest all sin, and do love and delight in every virtue, yea
those profitable and pleasant sins, which are as dear unto them as their
right hands, and right eyes, yet are willing to cut them off, and cast them
from them, rather then by enjoying thereof, be hindered from entering into the
Kingdom of Heaven Mat. 5. 29
, most earnestly desiring of God, to be led into all righteousness, knowing
that one Colloquintida spilleth a whole mess of pottage 2. Kin. 4. 40 Mors in
olla ista.
, and as a bird though ensnared but by one claw, in the net of the fowler,
loses her life, and the besieged City by one breach, not maintained, is
taken by the enemy, and the ship by one leake is drowned in the waters; even
so, the soul of man being as a ship, by one hole makes a shipwreck of faith
and a good conscience; as a city besieged by Satan and his Angels, may be
spoiled through one breach, and as a bird sought to be destroyed of Satan,
as well loses her life, being ensnared by one claw, as all: if we avoid his
snare, in drunkenness, we may be caught by whordom; if by neither, yet by
covetousness: yea the soul may as well be destroyed by one beloved sin, as well
as by many: and therefore such as look to have eternal life, must carefully
follow their shepherd, leading the^ in all the paths.

But what manner of paths are they? 3. Part.
of righteousness) God leads not his sheep in the paths of sin, and
wickedness, for they are for the filthy and unclean Goats to wander in, but
in the paths of holiness and righteousness. For the better understanding
whereof, we may note that there is a double righteousness, the one imputed, the
other inherent, by the righteousness of the one, we are justified before god: by
the other we are justified before me^. The righteousness imputed, What is the
righteousness of imputation and the use thereof.
is the righteousness of Jesus Christ, both in regard of the innocence of
nature, obedience to the law, and suffering of punishments for sin, are by
faith imputed unto us, and made ours, for our justification before God, both in
regard of Original and Actual sins, of omission or commission, whereof the
Apostle Saint Paul speaks. For as by the disobedience of one, many were made
sinners, so by that obedience of that one shall many also be made righteous To.
5. 19.
. Which righteousness is so excellent, that the Apostle in regard thereof,
accounted all but dross, that he might be found in Christ, not having his own
righteousness, which is of the law, but the righteousness which is of God
through faith Phil. 3. 9.
. And this may be called the righteousness of imputation: for as Christ was
made sin for us, not by infusion of sin into his person, but by imputation
of our sins unto him 2. Cor. 5. 21
: Delicta nostra sua delicta fecit; vt iustitiam suam nostra^ iustitiam faceret.
so are we made righteuos before God, not by infusion of righteousness into
our persons, (for that serves for many other uses) but by imputation of Christ
his righteousness unto us: Whatsoever he did for us, if we believe, being
made ours, August. in Psalm. 21.
as if we had performed the same in our own persons 1. Cor. 1. 30
.

Secondly, there is a righteousness of sanctification, What is the
righteousness of sanctification and the use thereof.
which follows as a fruit upon the former, when as by the sanctifying spirit
of God, the mind is enlightened, the heart mollified; the will rectified; and
the whole course of the life reformed; no more to love, and live in sin, but
to hate and abhor it, and to delight in godliness and virtue, whereof Saint
Paul speaks, saying, this is the will of God, even our sanctification 1.
These. 4. 3
. And unto Titus he says, The grace of God which brings salvation unto all
men has appeared, and teaches us that we should deny ungodliness, and
worldly lusts, and that we should live soberly, and righteously, and godly in
this present world Tit. 2. 11.
. Sobrie, quo ad nos: just quo ad proximum: pie, quo ad deu^.
And Saint John says, He that does righteousness is righteous, but he that
commits sin, is of the Devil 1. John. 3 7. 8.
. The uses whereof are manifold, but specially it serves for to justify us
before me^, and to make faith which is hidden in the heart, and seen of God, to
become visible, and apparent unto men. Whereof S. James speaks saying, Abraham
and Rahab were justified by their works Iam. 2. 21. 25
. Now the Lord leads his sheep into the paths of both those
Righteousnesses, giving us a true and lively faith, whereby we are ingraffed
into Christ, and made partakers of all his benefits Romans 6. 5 6, 7
, and also sanctifying us through out with his holy spirit 1. These 5. 23
, to become new creatures 2. Cor. 5. 17
, and to offer up our selves, a living, holy, and acceptable sacrifice unto him
To. 12. 1
. But of the latter, the Prophet in this place, most properly speaks, and
therefore our lesson is.

That all those sheep whose salvation the great shepherd has bought and
purchased with his blood* they shall in time be called To. 8. 30
, Doctrine.
from walking in the sinful paths of unclean Goats, to walk in the paths
of righteousness, and holiness they shall cease to walk as the Gentiles in
vanity of mind Ephesians. 4. 17
, and blind hypocrisy; and shall become followers of God as dear children
Ephe. 5. 1
, striving to be holy as he is holy, in all manner of conversation 1. Pet. 1.
15
In these paths, the Lord has led all the flocks of his sheep, as the
Author to the Hebrews has traced many of them out by their steps Heb. 11. 4
5. 6. 7
, which paths, are strait, narrow, rugged, and unpleasant to dainty and
tender flesh and blood Mat. 7. 13.
, as requiring so soon as ever we set foot therein, How blessed and gainful
a thing it is to follow Christ in the paths of righteousness.
a denial of our selves, and continual taking up of the cross Mat. 16. 24
, but most pleasant and joyful to the inner man, as Jeremy declares, saying.
Stand and enquire for the old way, which is the good way, and walk therein,
and you shall find rest unto your souls Iere. 6. 16
The truth whereof we and all the Saints of God, that ever walked therein have
experienced; that as agreed, David as foreman may say for us, I have had as
great delight in the way of thy testimonies, as in all manner of riches Ps. 119.
14
. And yet is not this al: for besides the inward and spiritual joy of the
soul, the Lord will also bestow all good things upon them, yea so gainful is
godliness, that it has a promise both of this life, and that which is to
come, 1. Tim. 6. 6
, they shall want nothing that is good Ps. 34. 10
, they shall eat their bread in plenteousnesse, be fed with the fat of the
grain of wheat, and pure liquor of the Grape, he will bow down the backs of
their enemies, they shall lend, and not borrow, be the head, and not the tail
Deuteronomy. 28. 12. 13.
.

Now I beseech you let us make application of these things unto our selves,
Application^* The true cause of all the miseries that have fallen upon us, or
are further threatened.
there is nothing more common then to hear men every where complain, of the
great dearth we have sustained, or the pestilence, botch of Egypt, hot burning
feauers, consumptions, and grievous diseases of the body, wet and unseasonable
weather, and so forth, and some lay the cause here, and some there, some
complain of this, and others of that, but few see, or regard the true cause
indeed, to set to hand to remove it: the very cause of all evils is, for that
we have not hearkened to the voice and whistle of our shepherd, calling us to
follow him in the paths of righteousness; but rather we have trodden the
paths of death, and our footeste^ppes have caught hold of hell, as if we were
at a league and covenant with both Esa. 28. 15
, we have added drunkenness unto thirst Deuteronomy. 29. 19
, we have not zealously, and fruitfully entertained his word. For if we had,
mark what God says, Oh that Israel had walked in my ways, I would soon
have humbled their enemies, and have fed them with the flower of weate, and
honey out of the rock Psa 81. 13 14
.

What is the reason then, I pray you, of all these evils, and far greater if
we repent not, who is so blind that sees not? We have refused to be taught
and instructed in Gods word Iere. 9. 6.
, despised his wholesome counsels and admonitions, abused his patience and long
sufferance to presumption, which should have led us to repentance Romans 2. 4
, the more he has corrected us for our amendment, the more have we fallen away
from him Esaias. 1. 5.
, hardening our faces as Brass against his fear Iere. 5. 3.
, and dealing most frowardly with him in his covenant, that never might he
more justly complain of the Jews, than of us, All the day long have I
stretched out my hand, to a stubborn, and disobedient people Esaias 65. 2.
.

Oh then I beseech you, Use.
let us awake, and strengthen the things that do remain and are ready to
die, for our works, are no whit perfect before the Lord Reu. 3. 2.
. Let us every one lay his hand upon his soul, repent and turn, for now the
Lord calls us. Oh England, if thou will return, return unto me Ier. 4. 1.
. Yea, the Prophet of God tells us, That it is time to seek the Lord, till
he come and rain righteousness upon us Osay 10. 12
. Let us stir up our selves, and the graces of God that are in us, revive our
zeal, and make our love to the Gospel spring afresh, that it may bud, and
bring forth fruit, let us make straight steps to our feet, and no longer wait
that every one go before us, for that were too great unmannerliness, but
both pastors and people, let us in our several places, in a holy emulation
strive, who shall be foremost, and run fastest after our Shepherd Christ,
Jesus in the paths of righteousness; and then the Lord will delight to do us
good, he will bless our Queen, and give her constancy to defend the truth
unto the end, not suffering our land to be sown with diverse seeds Deu. 22. 9
, nor Dagon to be where the Ark of God is 1. Sa. 5. 2.
, or abomination of desolation to be set in the holy place Mat. 24. 15.
; but in her days the Gospel shall flourish, and abundance of peace so long
as the Moon endures Ps. 72. 7.
, and as for all those that bear evil will unto Sion, and specially our
home-born enemies, the uncircumcised Philistines, and cursed Canaanites, who
begin to lift up their heads, as though their long wished day drew nigh, the
Lord will either turn their hearts, or how down their backs, cause their
loins to tremble Ps. 69. 23
, and lay the curse of Canaan upon them, and make them servants of servants
still Genesis 9. 25
, or lastly, fill their eyes with worms, and mouths with gravel, but we and
our posterities shall see Jerusalem in prosperity, all our lives long Ps. 128.
5
.

Thus we have heard by many particulars, how abundantly good, the Lord is to
his poor people, now would you know what it is, that has, does, and for ever
only shall move him, to do his people good? then mark what the Prophet says
in the next words.

(For his names sake;) Sense of the words.
concerning the sense of these words, we are to note, that the (name) of God
has diverse significations in the scriptures; as first, 1.
by name are meant those titles, whereby God is named and known, as Jehovah,
Elohim, Shaddai, (...), Deus, God. etc. As God said to Jacob, Wherefore now
do thou ask my name Genesis 32. 29.
. And answers Moses, asking the same question, I am that I am has sent me
unto you, and thus shall thou say to the children of Israel, the Lord God of
your Fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, has
sent me unto you; this is my name for ever, and this is my memorial unto all
ages Exo. 3. 14 15. etc.
. And Moses in his song gives him this title, The Lord is a man of war, his
name is Jehovah Exo. 15. 3
; And concerning Christ, it is said: This is his name, whereby he shall be
called; the Lord, our righteousness Ierem. 23 6. 33. 16. 1. Cor. 1. 30
. And this is one of those senses, according to which the command is given,
Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain Exo. 20. 7
.

2 Secondly, sometimes by the ( name) of God, is meant the person of God,
signified, by the name or title, as the name of the mighty God of Jacob defend
thee Ps. 20. 1. Nomen pro re, per nomen, significata.
. Where is not meant any title of God, Jehovah, Tetragrammaton, or such like,
either in Hebrew, or Greek, this tongue or that, (as they are of many
superstitiously abused) but God himself, by his omnipotent power defend thee.
So the people are commanded to offer their sacrifices, in the place, which the
Lord shall choose to cause his name to dwell Deu. 16. 2
: and the Psalmist prays; Let them that love thy (name) rejoice in thee Ps.
5. 11.
. Again, I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord
Ps. 116. 13.
, and the promise is made, whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord,
shall be saved Joel 2. 32
. In all which and many other places, by (name) is meant, the person of God, it
being usual in the scriptures, by name, to understand, the thing signified
thereby, as where it is said, there is no other name under heaven, whereby we
must be saved Act. 4. 12.
, and to the Church of Sardis the Lord says, Thou have a few names, which
have not defiled their garments Reu. 3. 4.
.

3 Thirdly, Quicquid de Deo, vere dici potest, Deus est.
by name are meant sometimes the essential attributes of God, because thereby
God is known, yea, God is the same, for whatsoever may truly be said of God,
that God is, as he is true, he is the truth, God is wise, he is wisdom it
self. So the Lord thus proclaimed his great and glorious name unto Moses,
Nomen Dei dicitur, omne id, quod de illo praedicatur.
The Lord, the Lord, strong, merciful, and gracious, slow to anger, and
abundant in goodness and truth, reserving mercy for thousands, forgiving
iniquity, transgression, and sin, and not making the wicked innocent,
visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, unto the third and
fourth generation Exo. 34. 6
. So it is said, that in the name of Christ the Apostle cast out Devils Mar.
16. 17.
. Not by the repetition of the name (Jesus) for the sons of Sceua, doing so,
the evil spirit answered: Jesus I acknowledge, and Paul I know, but who are
ye? and the man in whom the evil spirit was, ran upon them, and over came
them, and prevailed against them, that they fled out of the house, naked and
wounded, as S. Luke witnesses, in the Acts of the Apostles Act. 19. 15. 16.
. But by name is meant the power, strength, and virtue of Christ, as Peter
expounds in the Acts, where (declaring the means, how the Cripple was
healed) he says, It was not their power and godliness that had made the man go
Act. 3. 12 16.
. So S. Paul says: at the name of Jesus every knee shall bow Phi. 2. 10
, that is, not when the word is pronounced we shall make a courtesy, but we and
all creatures, shall be subject to his power, authority, and dominion.

4 Sometimes also by ( name) his works, Nomine (Jesus) dominatio and potestas;
(genu flectionis) vocabulo, exprimitur subiectio.
creatures, and judgments, are meant, as where David says; O Lord our God,
how excellent is thy name in all the world, which have set thy glory above the
heavens Ps. 8. 1.
. q. d. How greatly does thy glory, power, and majesty shine in thy creatures.

5 By ( name) is meant many times the doctrine of Gods word, invocation,
praise, and profession thereof; So it is said of Christ in the Psalms: I will
declare thy name unto my brethren Ps. 22. 22
. And the people of God say, We will walk in the name of the Lord our God for
ever and ever Mich. 4. 5
: so Paul is called a chosen vessel, to carry Gods name, before Gentiles,
Kings, and children of Israel Act. 9. 25
: and says of himself, That he is not only ready to be bound at Jerusalem,
but also to die for the name of the Lord Jesus Act. 21. 13
. Now I take it, by ( name) in this place the Prophet understands the truth,
mercy, and goodness of God, according to the third annotation laid down, and
then the sense is thus much in effect: q. d. This good Shepherd feeds me,
gives me drink, provides rest, and is exceeding bountiful toward me, above
all that I am able to ask or think, not for any goodness in me, but only for
his own mere mercy, and goodness sake, that for ever he may be praised,
for the same: this being the sense, let us now see the doctrine, which is this,
viz:

That, Doctrine.
what good thing soever God has done or does for his children, as in their
election, vocation, preservation: he neither was, nor is thereunto moved, by
any thing in them, or proceeding from them, as not for their righteousness:
which is but uncleanness Esaias 64. 6
: or for their beauty: which is but vanity Prou. 31 30. Esaias. 40. 6.
: or for their strength: which is but rottenness Job. 17. 14.
, or for their gold and silver: which are no merchandise with him Mic. 6. 7. 8
Psalm. 50. 10. 11. 12.
: but only what he does, he does for his own name, and mercy sake, to the
end, that for all, his name may for ever be praised, as the Saints of God do
confess, saying: Not unto us, o Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give the
glory, for thy loving mercy, and truths sake Ps. 115. 1.
. This is agreeable to many other places of Scripture: the Apostle Paul says,
Confirmation.
says, we were chosen in Christ before the foundations of the world, according
to the good pleasure of his will Ephesians. 1. 4. 5
. The Lord himself protests unto Israel: For my names sake, will I differ
my wrath, and for my praise, will I restrain it from thee, that I cut thee not
off; for mine own sake, for mine own sake, will I do it Esaias 48. 9. 11.
: and again, I will have respect unto you, for mine names sake, and not after
your wicked ways Ezec. 20. 44
: and elsewhere tells them, what it was that moved him, to deliver and
redeem his people out of captivity, I do not this for your sakes, oh house
of Israel, but for mine holy names sake, which was polluted amongst the
heathen whether ye went Ezec. 36. 22
. Yea, every where the Scriptures confirm this doctrine, viz: That in man
there is no dignity, or means whereby to deserve any thing at Gods hands, but
the whole work of our salvation, and all his blessings bestowed upon us, are
wholly to be referred unto God, and that only, for the glory of his holy
name.

And yet notwithstanding the evidence of this truth, Confutation.
they of the Church of Rome, are not ashamed to maintain the doctrine of
foreseen works, and that according to the same, God did so order the decree
of predestination Rhem. annot. on Romans 9. sect. 2.
: yea and do distinguish of the kinds of merits, that some are of congruitie,
as the works of men before justification, whereby they do prepare themselves
thereunto Rhem. annot. on Act. 10. sect. 5. Meritum de congruo and condigno, ex
debito iustitiae.
: and merits, of condignitie, or good works done in the second justification,
which (say they) are truly meritorious, and deserve at Gods hands by the due
debt of justice, to be rewarded Rhem. annot. on To. 2. sect. 3.
. Oh Lord, how far does the Prophet vary in judgment from these proud
Hypocrites, which thus glory in themselves, and their works, who
acknowledges every good thing that he has, to come from God, and that only
for his own names sake.

The use hereof is, Use.
that above all things in the world, we be careful in thought, word, Vt ore,
corpore, vitaque tota, sanctificetur, illud nomen.
and deeds, and every way that we can, to seek the advancement of the glory
of that name, whereby the Lord has been moved to do such great things for
us, and to that end that we pray unto God to have a zeal of his glory kindled
in our hearts, whereby we may be provoked, to a holy, and godly life, that our
heavenly father may be glorified Mat. 5. 16
, and whereby also we may be kept from al profaneness, least otherwise, his
name be dishonored, and blasphemed Esaias 52. 5. Romans 2. 24
. The Prophet David had a great measure of this zeal, when he said, The zeal
of thy house, has even eaten me up Ps. 69. 9.
: and that his heart should utter forth good matter Ps. 45. 1.
. Yea, the word which there the holy Ghost uses is very emphaticall. q. d.
Eructat cor
I will cast up a good matter, alluding to the manner of men, who having
something which lies heavy upon their stomachs, can have no rest till they
have cast it up. Oh that the consideration of those mercies, which we and all
Gods Sheep, do daily receive and enjoy, with David our foldmate; did
ouercharge our hearts continually, with such an holy surfeit, Crapula sancta.
Luther.
(as a godly man called it) the care and desire to gloifie GODS name, lying so
heavy upon us, that we could never be at ease nor rest, until we were
disburdened, by sounding forth Gods praise; and magnifying him, for whose name
sake only, he has been moved to do such great things for us! etc. And so
much for the first Allegory summarily laid down in the first verse, and
particularly amplyfied, and illustrated, in the second and third verses. Now
let us proceed, to consider what use David makes hereof.

THE FOVRTH SERMON upon the 23. Psalm.
Though I should walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear
no evil: for thou art with me, thy rod and staff do comfort me.
IN this verse, the holy Prophet of God, declares, what great comfort and
stay, the consideration of Gods pastor-like care and providence toward him,
did afford him in the serious meditation of death, Yea though I should walk
through the valley of the shadow of death. The sum whereof is thus much in
effect, The sum of this verse.
q. d. Seeing then, oh my God, like a most loving and faithful shepherd, thou
have taken care and charge over me, graciously to supply my wants, and mightily
to defend me in all adversities; I will not henceforth vex, or disquiet my
soul in vain, with fear of any evil, but securely repose my self under the
wings of thy providence, not fearing any danger, having thy presence, no not to
go through the valley of the shadow of death it self. Surely a most excellent
sentence, declaring the great valor and fortitude, not only of David, but of
every true Christian, and sheep of Gods pasture, in all dangers whatsoever,
whose hearts are possessed with comfortable assurance of Gods providence
toward them, as his was; from whence that we may reap the greater comfort and
benefit, I purpose first to observe something for the verse generally, A
general observation from the whole verse
and then handle the words themselves more particularly.

The thing which we are in general to observe, is this, viz. David's religious
meditation of death in his greatest prosperity of life; it seems by the
tenor of the Psalm (as we have heard) that it was not penned when he was
persecuted by Saul, and glad to fly from one hold to another 1. Sam. 23 14.
, no, nor when (after he was anointed in Hebron king, both over Judah 2. Sa.
2. 4.
, and all Israel 2. Sa. 5. 3.
) he was glad to fly being persecuted by his own son Absalom, most
treacherously practicing to aspire to the kingdom 2. Sam. 15 14
. For no marvel though then his soul was possessed with the continual
remembrance and meditation of death, when as he might most truly say, as he
did unto Jonathan, as the Lord lives, and as thy soul lives, there is but a
step betwixt me and death 2. Sa. 20. 3
. But this Psalm was penned as a thankful remembrance of Gods providence
toward him, when having safely passed through so many great perils, he had
obtained (maugre the beardes of all his enemies) the peaceable fruition of his
crown and kingdom, when as a man would have thought he should have banished al
remembrance of death, and never have troubled his thoughts with such nightly
meditations, but rather have solaced himself as that rich man in the Gospel,
who having pulled down his old barnes, and filled greater with his fruit and
goods, he never dreamed of death, but said to his soul, Be merry, live at
ease, eat, drink, and take thy pleasure, for thou have goods laid up for many
years Lu. 12. 19
. I say, a man would have thought, that David in some such manner also would
have spoken unto his soul, and have said, Now my soul be merry, take thine
ease, eat and drink, for now thou have obtained thine hearts desire, and
shall be able to avenge thy self on all thine enemies that have vexed thee.
etc. But he being better trained up, and exercised in the Lords school, and
having learned the vanity and uncertainty of this life, that he was but a
soiourner, and a pilgrim on earth as all his fathers were Ps. 39. 12
, and knowing what great cares and fears a crown brings, and ignorant
whether eue^ that night his soul should be fetched away or no Lu. 12. 26
: being advanced to the top of prosperity, he forgets not himself,
presuming of life, but looks down to the earth whither he must, and
bethinketh how he may comfortably pass through the valley of the shadow of
death, and tread the path of all flesh, and go the way of all the earth Ios.
23. 14 1. Kin. 2. 2.
.

Whose religious example teaches us this lesson for our instruction, Doctrine
general from the observation.
viz. That we ought at all times, and in all conditions, in our youth, in our
strength, and in our prosperity, to remember our end; this is the counsel of
the wise man, Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, whilst the evil
days come not, nor the years approach wherein thou shall say, I have no
pleasure in them; before the Almond tree flourish grinders grow few, strong men
bow themselves, keepers of the house do tremble, and they grow dim that
look out by the windows Eccles. 12 1. 2. 3
. Yea, this was Gods wish, Oh that my people were wise to consider their latter
end Deuteronomy. 32. 29
. The holy Patriarchs declared their wisdom, and the due consideration that
they had of their latter end, by purchasing places to bury in Genesis 23. 4.
. Abraham had it at his fingers end, I am but dust and ashes Ge. 18. 27
. And Jacob as readily confessed to Pharaoh, demanding how old he was, That
his life was but a pilgrimage, and his days few and evil Genesis 47. 9
, * few for number, Anni, pauci aerumnae; multae.
and evil for quality; Job also, he waited all his days for the appointed
time, when his changing should come Job. 14. 14
. The Prophet David, after long watching and fasting, besought God to be
instructed concerning the number of his days, and the time that he had yet to
live Psa. 39. 4
: yea, all the faithful are taught by Moses to pray, Lord teach us to number
our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom Ps. 90. 12
.

Joseph of Arimathea, a rich man, had a Sepulcher in his garden to lie in, long
before he died Ioh. 19. 41
, so that his recreation and solace in the co^templation of Gods creatures, was
joined with a serious meditation of his end, wherein both he, and the rest of
those holy Saints, have showed themselves to be truly wise men indeed: for what
would it have profited them, or any other, by Arithmeticall account, to divide
the least fractions, and never to take an account of those few days that we
have to live Psa. 90, 12*
, or with the Geometricia^, to take the height, longitude, or latitude, of most
spacious objects, and never to measure that which the Prophet says, is but a
spanne long, or a hands breadth Psalm. 39. 5
. What were it with the Astronomer to observe the motions of the heavens,
positions and aspects of the Planets and Stars, and never with David to look
down to the valley of death, through which Kings, and all must pass Ps. 82. 7.
: or with the Lawier to be skillful in laws, statutes and decrees, for the
managing and government of kingdoms, commonwealths, Statutu^ est omnibus,
semel mori.
and countries, and giving to every man his right, and to forget that common
and irreuocable law whereby it is appointed for all men once to die Heb. 9. 27
: or with the Physician, to know the cause, nature and quality of every
sickness and Symptom, whereby he may skilfully apply himself to the cure,
and never to regard the languishing soul, being mortally wounded with the
sting of sin 1. Cor. 15. 56
. In a word, what will it one day profit a man, that with the Rhetorician, by
sweet and eloquent style he could draw tears from the hardest heart: or with
the subtle Logitian, by consequence of fallacious arguments, enforce a
co^cession of greatest absurdities, yea with the temporizing Politician, gain
the whole world, and loose his own soul Mat. 16. 26.
. Surely unless chief regard be had to the salvation of the soul, all
policy is but foolishness, all knowledge gross ignorance.

Seeing then necessity is laid upon us, Esto domus cius and ^rit domus tua,
habitet in te, and tu habitabis in eo: si tu acceperis eum in cord, ille
recipiet te vulcu. Aug. in Psalm. 30.
that we must die, oh let us follow the example of this Prophet, and in the
whole course of our lives prepare our selves, not to die naturally, as men, but
religiously as Christians, first dying unto the world, by mortifying the old
man, that so Christ may come and live in us Io. 14. 23
. And then when we die in the world, we shall go and live with him Mors pos
crucem minor est.
Io. 17. 25
; yea then, whenever it shall be said unto us, as it was to Ezechiah, thou
shall die, and not live Esaias. 38. 1*
: and as it was to Ahaziah, Thou shall not come down from off the bed whereon
thou art gone up, but shall die the death 2 Ki. 1. 16
. We shall entertain the message of death with joy, and more truly say, then
Agag did unto Samuel, Truly the bitterness of death is passed already 1. Sam.
15 32
.

And surely this lesson well learned and practiced, How profitable it is for a
man always to remember his end.
would be very effectual to keep me^ within the bounds of a Christian and
co^scionable life: would the covetous wretches of the world so greedily scrape
together the dross of the earth and never be satisfied Hab. 2. 11
? Would the proud Hamans, so lift up their heads on high, and thoroughly revenge
every least disgrace Hest. 3. 5, 9.
? Would any filthy Amnon commit that in the sight of God, which he is ashamed
to commit in the sight of his basest creatures 2. Sam. 13 9
? or any cruel Ahab, oppress and wrong poor Naboth 1. Kin. 21. 13
? if they did remember that there is a God, and day of revenge Reu. 6. 17.
, when to cry unto rocks and mountains, fall upon us, fall upon us, and cover
us, will be too late Lu. 23. 30.
? No surely, will you know then the ground of much greedy sinning, and a
special sin in these evil days to be lamented? even this it is, that subtle
Satan has intoxicate a great number with that poison, wherewith he infected
our first parents, Tush you shall not die at all Genesis 3. 4
. How many young men are there, Nequaqua^ moriemini.
that cannot brook this lesson, with Faelix they say, They have no ley sure to
hear of these matters Acts. 24. 25
, it is too chilling a doctrine, for their warm and youthful blood, and too
Melancholicke thoughts, for their delightful dispositions, they have put off
their coat, washed their feet Cant. 5. 3
, and suited themselves for other business, The want of due consideration of
our end, the cause of much sin.
presuming upon repentance at leisure. Yea, how many old men who cannot hope
for any continuance of life, one foot being as it were set in this valley
already, when as old age full of sicknesses, aches, and pains, as the clouds
which do return after the rain Eccl. 12. 2
, are so many watch-wordes to make them prepare for another place, yea and
bended backs, make them to stoop and constrain them to view the earth whither
they must; yet are either (through their earthly co^stitution) insatiably
addicted to gain, or (through their lustful inclination of nature) addicted to
the lightest behavior of youth, whereby it appears, that both young and old,
have made a covenant with death, and with hell are at agreement Esa. 28. 15
, entertaining at least in their hearts, the old Epicures poesy, Death has
nothing to do with us (...).
. I pray you then let it not be grievous or tedious unto you, that I do a
little further endeavor to awaken you out of this dangerous lethargy of the
soul, and press unto you the necessary and most comfortable practice of this
doctrine, to which purpose I might use many, and those most pithie Arguments
and reasons, but I will only content my self with these four, and also handle
them briefly.

The first Argument, 1.
which may effectually stir us up with David to a religious meditation of our
end, is the certainty of death: for though it be uncertain, 1. for time,
when: 2. for place where: 3. for manner, how: yet in regard of it self, it is
most certain, no man can avoid it, death is the way of all the world, said
Iosuah Josh. 23 14
, the way of all the earth, said David 1. Kin. 2. 2
, and the end of all men, said Solomon Eccle. 7. 4.
.

The righteous must tread this path as well as any other, for their flesh is but
as grass Esaias 40. 6
. As Well died godly Abell, as murtherous Cayne Genesis 4. 8
, Abraham Ge. 25. 8.
, the Father of the faithful To. 4. 11.
, as any of the children of unbelief, Isacke the son of the free woman, as
Ishmaell the son of the bondwoman Gal. 4. 22
, Jacob, whom God loved: as Esau whom he hated To. 9. 13.
: David the man after Gods own heart 1. Sam. 13 14.
, as Saul from whom he took his spirit 2. Sam. 7. 15
: as well Solomon the wise 1. Kin. 3. 12.
, as Naball the fool 1. Sam, 25 25
: as well the rich man, as Lazarus the beggar Lu. 16. 22
: as well Simon Peter the Apostle Ioh. 21. 18. 2. Pet. 1. 13
, as Simon Magus the sorcerer Act. 8. 9.
. In a word, death knocks as well at the door of the Princes Palace, as of the
poor man's Cottage Pallida mors, aequo pede, pulsat pauperum tabernas regumque
turres. Horac.
. She is the Lady and Empress of the whole world, who never arresteth, but
she brings, Corpus cum causa, without any appeal, bail, or maine-prize,
she spares no persons for their age, quality, or condition, but be they
rich, or poor: noble, or base borne, Gods impresse is upon all flesh, he
has numbered out our days, and die we must; as we came by the womb, so we
must go by the grave; it is not the majesty of the Prince, nor holiness of
the priest, strength in the bone, or beauty in the face, or gold in the
Coffer, or any such worldly respect, that death regards, there is neither
Moat of waters so broad and deep: nor wall, so thick and high: nor doors of
iron and brass, so hard and strong: nor houses so warm fieled with Cedar or
vermillion; nor Iuorie beds so soft and sweet, or any other thing that can
plead privilege against the grave; but both Princes, and Pesants, must
acknowledge their pedigree, as Job does: Corruption, thou art my Father;
rottenness, thou art my mother; worms, ye are my brethren, and sisters;
grave, thou art my bed Job. 17. 14
. Oh then, seeing nothing is more certain than death, nor uncertain than the
time; let us not trust in any worldly thing, which is but vanity, but let us
follow the example of this kingly Prophet, and remember death, even in our
greatest hope and prosperity of life. 2 The second Argument to this purpose,
may be, the sense of our own infirmities, there being no man or woman so
strong or healthie, but at one time or other, have felt in their bosoms, the
forerunner of death, whereby they may perceive, that their life, is but as a
Jonas gourd, and Jacobs pilgrimage, we being but tenants at will, dwelling in
houses of clay Job. 4. 19
, the walls whereof, Quid caro, quam terra, in figuras suas co^uersa, Tertull. de
carne Christi in breui casura est domus tua, Bernerd. Eccles. 2.
with every little shower of sickness, are almost washed down, and though
we dawbe, or patch them up never so much, yet will they quickly fall into the
hands of the Landlord, and as we have mourned for others, so shall mourners
go about in the streets for us Eccl. 12. 5
, and shall we then live as though we should never die? Oh remember, we bring
our years to an end, as it were a tale that is told Ps. 90. 9.
, our wheel runs round a pace, and whether we sleep or wake, or whatsoever
we do, we are still under sail, hasting toward our wished haven, let us
then remember with David, the valley of the shadow of death.

3 The third Argument, may be the consideration of the daily deaths of others,
which we either see with our eyes, or hear of with our ears; how many grave
and sage Counselors, noble Peers, worthy men at arms, lusty gallants of the
world, yea near neighbors, and dear friends have we known, whose heads now
lie full low, the pit, having shut her mouth upon them; how has death come
near unto all of us one way or other, as in taking from us, our Parents, Kins
folks, acquaintance and friends, yea taking forth of our bosoms, our
husbands, or wives; and our children the fruit of our loins, and our friends
as dear as our own souls; yea, how often have we followed to the Church, and
do daily pass by the graves of many, who for age and strength might have seen
us lead the way? and what, shall we for all this never dream of death? Oh
remember, one generation passes, and another comes, our Fathers have given
place unto us, and we must give place to a succeeding posterity, the interlude
is the same, they have played their parts upon the Scaffold of this world, and
we are acting ours. This being the conclusion of every scene, The grave is
ready for me, as Job says Dies mei extinguntur,
.

4 The Fourth and last Argument, Solum mihi super est sepulchrum.
may be drawn from consideration of the vanity of all things in the world;
Job. 17. 1.
Solomon, whom God for his wisdom chose, as it were to be the foreman of a
great enquest, empanelled to make inquiry, of the state of the world, and all
things therein, having seen and experienced the same, he speaks for all,
and gives up this verdict, vanity of vanities, all is vanity. Even the young
Infant, is no sooner borne, but by his tears does prophecy the same Nondum
loquitur, tamen prophetat.
. He that is in want, lives in grief; he that has plenty, in fear; he that
is in high estate, is envied: in a word, the prosperity of worldlings, is but a
golden misery Splendida, miseria.
, affording neither perfect rest to the body; nor true content to the mind;
well then, as the poor Apprentise, remembering that the years of freedom are
at hand, more cheerfully endures a grievous servitude; and the wearied
trauailer, hearing that his Inn is nigh, more nimbly pluketh up his leaden
heels; even so, let the remembrance of our passing through the valley of the
shadow of death, and our coming to Mount Sion on the other side, where we
shall for ever be freed from all wants; be our comfort and refreshing in this
wearisome pilgrimage, and hereunto tends all which has been said, viz: That
with David we may prepare for death, in our greatest prosperity of life.

Ob. But some man may say, these pains might well have been spared, for what
man so sottish, as not to think, that he is mortal.

Sol. Indeed, nothing more common than these, and such like speeches, we see
what we are, we must all die, when our turn comes. But alas, this is more of
custom, and specially, when some president of mortality is before our eyes,
than of any true feeling Magis vsu, quam sensu.
: whereby they might be provoked, to keep a good conscience before God, and
all men Act. 24. 16
. So that as S. Paul charge some men, for professing that they know God,
when as in their works, they denied him, being abominable, disobedient, and
to every good work reprobate Tit. 1. 16
; So may most be charged in these days, because though they profess in words
the remembrance of death, yet by their works, they do deny it, and plainly
bewray, that they do not remember their last end Lam. 1. 9
, as Jeremy complained of Jerusalem: Non est recordata finis.
and therefore much more to have said, had not been sufficient, for the
pressing of so necessary a duty: but I will now proceed to handle this verse
more particularly, wherein these things are to be considered: 1. The division
of this verse.
first, a description of death, through which David and all Gods sheep must
pass, (it is a dark, and shadowye valley) of death. Secondly, David's and
every Christians courage against death, ( I will fear no evil.) Thirdly, the
ground or reason of this true courage or fortitude, viz: Gods presence ( for
thou art with me.) Lastly, the benefits of Gods presence unto his Saints, ( Thy
rod and staff do comfort me) etc. Subdiuision of the first part, of this
verse.
For the first, viz: the description of death, it affoordeth us these points to
be considered: First, what death is: Secondly, what are the kinds of death, and
of which David here speaks: Thirdly, the difference betwixt the death of a
Chiristian, and of a bruit beast: Lastly, the titles, tending to the
description of death here used. For the first:

Death is the dissolution of nature, 1. What Death is.
and deprivation of that blessed life, which he vouchsafed unto man, by his
creation, being inflicted upon him, as a punishment for his sin; thus God
threatened Adam, The day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall die the death Ge.
2. 17.
. But Adam did eat of the forbidden fruit 1 Genesis 3. 6.
. And thereupon the Apostle says, By one man sin entered into the world, and
death by sin To. 5. 12.
, which death is the punishment, and wage of sin, as elsewhere the same
Apostle affirms To. 6. 23.
.

Secondly, 2. What are the kinds of death.
as concerning the kinds of death, there is mention made of a fourfold death
in the Scripture, viz: first a death in sin: 2. A death unto sin: 3. The
death of the body: Lastly, the death both of body and soul. For the first,
the man or woman is said to be dead in sin, in whom, sin reigns Romans 6.
12.
, and who sauoureth altogether the things of the flesh To. 8. 5.
, and perceive not the things of the spirit 1. Cor. 2. 14.
: and this is the death of every natural man, and the wretched estate and
condition of every mothers child, as we come from the womb: so David
confessed; Behold I was borne in iniquity, and in sin, has my mother
conceived me Ps. 51. 5.
. And in general; the Apostle has pronounced of us all, that by nature, we
are dead in trespasses, and sin Ephesians. 2. 1.
. And in particular, says of the widow living in pleasure, that she is dead,
whilst she lives 1. Ti. 5. 6.
. And surely, The reason why all unregenerate persons living in sin, are said
to be dead.
the reason why such as are alive in the flesh, and be never so active, agill,
and nimble; yet so long as they continue in their natural corrupt estate, may
justly be said to be dead, is very great; for what is there else but death in
such as are not united unto God, the Fountain of life Ps. 36. 9.
? and therefore as the immortality of those that are damned, is called death
Reu. 20. 6
: because they are separated from God, and the glory of his power 2 Thessalonians. 1.
9.
. So the knitting together of the body and soul, is properly no life, but
rather death, in such as are not ruled by the spirit of God, which is the
Fountain of life genus mortis, sine poenitentia viuere. Aug.
.

2 Secondly, concerning death unto sin, it is this, What it is to be dead unto
sin.
when by the power and virtue of Christ his resurrection Phi. 3. 10
, conuayed from Christ as the head, to all the faithful, as members of his
mystical body; the power of sin is destroyed, and all his Saints quickened
unto newness of life, whereof the Apostle thus speaks: How shall we that
are dead to sin, live yet therein Romans 6. 2
. And again in the same Chapter, he says likewise: Think ye also, that ye
are dead to sin, but are alive to God in Jesus Christ our Lord To. 6. 11.
. And this is called by S. John, in the Revelation, the first Resurrection Re.
20. 6.
, and is indeed the very first degree of everlasting life.

3 Thirdly, What bodily death is.
concerning the death of the body, this it is: when the soul (whose presence,
is cause of bodily life) returns unto God, that gave it Eccl. 12. 7.
, and the body destitute of sense and motion, returns unto dust, from whence
it was taken Genesis 2. 7. 3. 19.
: Of which our Savior speaks unto his disciples, Our friend Lazarus is dead
Io. 11. 14.
; and this is called the first death Re. 20. 6
: because it goes before; and unto all reprobate persons, is as the door that
opens, and the entrance into eternal death.

4 Lastly, What is the death of body and soul.
concerning the death of the body and soul, it is this: when both of them
shall be separated from God, and the glory of his power 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9.
, and have their portion given them in extreme darkness Mat. 8. 12
, without all hope of mercy or favor Lu. 16. 25 26.
, and therefore called everlasting perdition 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9.
, and the second death Reu. 2. 11
.

Three of these, viz: The death in sin, 2. Death unto sin. 3. The death of
the body: are in this life; The fourth, viz: The death of the soul and body,
is in the world to come; to be dead in sin, is of nature: 2. to be dead unto
sin, is of grace: 3. the death of the body, (not changed by Christ:) and 4.
the death of body and soul, are of judgment; by being dead unto sin, we
are freed, 1. from death in sin, 2. from eternal death, and 3. have the
death of the body changed, from a punishment for sin into a blessing, to make
an end of sin; it being heavens churlish porter to let us in to the presence
of God; three of them. 1. The death in sin; 2. The death of the body. 3.
Eternal death, are most fearful: but the fourth to die unto sin, is most
comfortable and joyful.

Now, Of which kind of deaths David here speaks.
of which of these kinds of deaths David here speaks, may easily be gathered,
not of death in sin, for with such persons God is not; neither does he speak
of death unto sin, for therein no evil is to be feared; much less does he
mean the death of soul and body, which is a perpetual separation from the
presence of God, and all evil in full measure powered out: then by consequent,
he must needs mean the death of the body, which to nature is very
fearful, but wherein the Lord is graciously present with his, thorough
assurance whereof, the natural fear of death is suppressed. And so much for the
kinds of death, and of which he speaks in this place.

Concerning the third point, 3. The difference betwixt the death of man, and
beast.
viz. the difference betwixt the death of man and beast; although in some sense
it be most true, which the wise man, says, viz. that there is one condition
of the children of men, and of beasts: for as the one dies so dies the
other, for they have all one breath, and there is no excellency of man above
the beast, for all is vanity, all go to one place, and all was of the dust,
and al shall return to the dust, who knows whether the spirit of man ascend
upward, and the spirit of the beast descend downward to the earth Ecclc. 3. 19
20, 21.
. q. d. No man is able by his carnal reason and judgment, M. Perkins in his
treatise, of dying well.
to put difference betwixt man and beast, for the eye cannot judge otherwise of
a man being dead, the^ of a beast which is dead: yet by the word of God, and
eye of faith we learn and see, a wonderful difference, both in regard of the
bodies and souls The great difference betwixt the bodies of man and beast,
both being dead.
. For first in regard of the body, though it return unto dust and see
corruption, as the body of a bruit beast; yet whereas the bodies of beasts
return into their first matter, and shall never be remembered, and so perish
in this valley, and never go through it, yet the body of man, and specially of
the elect, shall go through this valley, and be raised again the same for
substance, but perfected in qualities, as Christ himself has affirmed in the
Gospel, and that with great asseueration. Verily, verily, the hour shall come
in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and they shall
come forth that have don good, unto the resurrection of life; but they that
have done evil to the resurrection of condemnation Ioh. 5. 28
. Which Article of faith, Job believed, as he has witnessed in his book,
saying: I am sure that my Redeemer lives, and though worms destroy this
body, yet shall I see God in my flesh, whom I my self shall see, and mine
eyes shall behold, and none other for me Job 19. 25. 26. 27
: which Article of faith is every where taught us in the holy Scriptures, both
of the old and new Testament Exo. 3. 15 Esa. 26. 19 1. Cor. 15 1. These. 4. 16
Reu. 20. 21
, and in all ages confirmed, both by the taking up of Henoch before the law
Genesis 5. 24
, by the raising up of the widows son of Zareptha, by Eliah 1. Kin. 17 22
, and of the Shunamites son, by Elisha 2. King. 4 34. 35
, in the time of the law; and the raising of the Rulers daughter, being newly
dead Mat. 9. 18
, and of the widow of Naims son, being longer dead, and carrying toward the
grave Luke 7. 11
, and of Lazarus being both dead and buried, and having lien 4. days in the
grave Ioh. 11. 39
, were raised by Christ: also of Dorcas raised by Saint Peter Act. 9. 40
, and of Eutichus, by Saint Paul Act. 20. 10
, in the time of the Gospel.

Yea, here is wrapped up a most comfortable mystery to be unfolded, viz. that
the bodies of Gods Saints, even in their greatest corruption, rotting in the
grave, drowned in the Sea, or burned to Ashes, yet remain truly united unto
Christ, and are eue^ then no less his members then before, for the whole man
is united spiritually to whole Christ, and death cannot dissolve a spiritual
union To. 8. 38.
, but as Christ his body and soul, being severed each from other as far as
Paradise Lu. 23. 43
, and the heart of the earth, Mat. 12. 40
yet neither of them were ever severed from the Godhead of the son: so though
our bodies and souls for a time be severed by death; yet never ca^ either be
disioined from Christ unto who^ they are both of them indissolubly united, and
by virtue whereof, the body at the last day shall rise again to eternal life.

The great difference betwixt the souls or spirits of man and beast being dead.
Secondly, whereas the life (or as the Philosophers call it, the soul, and the
wise man, the spirit Eccl. 3. 19
) of the beast, being but a natural vigor or quality, arising from the
temperature of the body Sunte substantia ipsorum corporu^. Zanch. de operibus
dei 3. part-li. 2 c. 1. fol. 62^
, and having no being of it self, but wholly depends upon the body, and
therefore dies with the body, and vanishes away like smoke in the air, the
soul of man being a spiritual substance created and infused Beza in quaest.
fo. 5. 2 Zanch. de open. fol. 762 Hieronim. Theodoret.
, as well subsisting forth of it, as in it, when the body returns to the
dust, it returns to God that gave it Eccl. 12 7
.

Now let us briefly view the titles which David here uses, and whereby he
describes death; calling it (a dark or shadowie valley) not, but that death
is most lightsome and comfortable unto Gods Saints, no doubt but in the very
moment and instant of death, though the outward man perish and the bodily eye
grow dim, Gods Saints do see such glorious sights Acts. 7. 55
, as heart cannot conceive; their eyes being then lightened, as at noone day, to
see God as he is, who dwells in that light which no mortal eye can pierce
into 1. Tim. 6. 16
. But David in this place of purpose, bending himself to describe the terrors
of death (to the end that his Christian courage and fortitude in the contempt
thereof, might more lively appear) speaks of it as of a dark way, then which
there is nothing more fearful unto nature Psa. 91. 5
; oh then see the power of a lively faith, which makes men not afraid to go
through places most fearful.

Q. But did not Christ pass through this valley and taste of death for us; why
then does it yet remain?

A. It remains not, as it was threatened, and is still inflicted upon the
reprobate, viz. a punishment for sin, (for then were God iniust to punish sin
twice.) But by Christ his death (though it remain for trial and exercise of
our faith, courage, patience, etc.) the nature of it is changed to his elect,
to become a blessed freeing of them from sin, for the sting being taken away,
it cannot hurt Adest* sed non obest.
; but is rather a blessing; that whereas sin brought forth death, death will
be the bane and destruction of sin, it was said to Adam and Euah, If you
sin, you shall die Genesis 2. 17
: But now it is said to all Gods elect, You must die, that you may cease to
sin Dictum fuit homini morieris si peccaueris: a nunc dicitur morere ne
pecces. Aug. Ciuit. dei. 13. 4.
; No man then truly wearied with the burden of sin, but as the wearied
traveler desires the shadow, so will he desire to be dissolved Phi. 1. 23
, and to pass through this valley, that he may dwell at rest with Christ,
freed from all sin, upon mount Sion for ever. It follows.

THE FIFTH SERMON upon the 23. Psalm.
I will fear no evil.
I Will fear no evil. 2. Part of this verse.
In these words is contained the second part of this verse, declaring the
great valor and courage of every true Christian, not fearing to pass,
through this shadowie valley; where first we will consider the sense of the
words, The sense of the words. The kinds of fear.
and then the doctrines and uses. There is a fear which accompanies the
nature of man, and may be called a natural fear, from which Christ Jesus
himself taking our true nature upon him, was not free, as may appear from the
Gospel of Saint Matthew, where it is said, He began to wax sorrowful and
grievously troubled. Mat. 26. 37
. And in Saint Marks Gospel it is said, He began to be troubled and in great
heaviness Mar. 14. 33
: Which though some have held rather to be a propassion, then a passion, and
seem to collect the same from the words themselves, because it is said, He
began to be afraid Jerome. (...).
yet the holy Ghost in another place alluding thereunto, does put it out of
doubt, where he says, That in the days of his flesh, he did offer up prayers
and supplications, with strong crying and tears, unto him that was able to
save him from death, and was also heard in that which he feared Heb. 5 7
. Secondly, there is a fond and foolish fear, whereof the Psalmist makes
mention, saying, The wicked do fear where no fear is Psalm. 53. 5
, So the Disciples were afraid at the sight of their master after his
resurrection, supposing they had seen a spirit Lu. 24. 37 Mat. 14. 26
. This is one of the curses which God has threatened in his law, saying, Unto
them that are left of you, I will send a cowardnesse into their hearts, in the
land of their enemies, and the sound of a leaf shaken shall chase them, and
they shall fly as from a sword, and fall no man pursuing them Leu. 26. 36
. Which curse was executed upon the huge army of the Midianites, who fled
and were destroyed of Gedeon, and three hundred men not striking a blow, but
breaking their pitchers, holding their lamps in one hand, and their trumpets
to blow withal in the other, and crying the sword of the Lord and Gedeon: Iud.
7. 17
Gladius domini and Gedeonis.
. The like also we read of the Aramites, who besieging Samariah, the Lord
caused them to hear a noise of Chariots, and horses, and of a great army,
which made them to fly, for their lives, casting away their clothes, and all
that ever they had 2. Ki 7. 6
Wherein is verefied the saying of wise Solomon, The wicked flies when none
pursues him, but the righteous are bold as a Lion. Pro. 28. 1.
Thirdly, 3
there is a religious fear, whose object is God, which in some is a base,
slavish, and servile fear, full of hatred, Oderunt peccare mali formidine
poenae.
malice, and contumely, if they durst bewray it; this made that ouergrowne
sinner Felix to tremble, when he heard mention of judgment Act. 24. 25.
Oderunt peccare boni virtutis amore.
Pene est and pene non
, in others, it is filial, such as the child honors his father with,
wherein there is nothing but love, reverence, purity, ingenuitie: so near in
affinity unto love, that it can hardly be discerned from it Pene est and pene
non
, whereof David says, there is mercy with thee, O Lord, therefore shall thou
be feared Ps. 103. 11
. But leaving these other kinds of fear to their proper places, we are here to
understand the Prophet, as speaking of a natural fear, which in it self is not
evil, no more then the other humane affections Non culpat affectum, sed
excessum Bern. in Cant. ser. 26.
though it be hard (if not impossible) for man being so corrupt, to keep the
right measure in his affections, and not to sin, as Christ did not, which
point a godly learned man has well illustrated by this common and plain
simile: H. I. in his treatise of the sufferings of Christ. fol. 56.
If two glasses be filled, the one with muddie water, the other with clear
Crystal snow water, and let them stand till all the muddinesse in the one
be settled at the bottom, then shake both these Glasses, in the one the mudde
arises straight way, and defiles all the water there: in the other although
shaken never so much, yet it remains all still as clear as Crystal: even
so if any of us be shaken with any affection of joy, sorrow, fear, etc. We
are presently defiled with mudde: but Christ, (in whom was man's true nature,
but not the defilement of nature,) yet remains, still clear from any the
least sin though never so much troubled, etc: so that the Prophet, in saying (
he will not fear) does not condeme the affection it self, as evil, which we
have also heard, to have been in Christ, who together with our nature, took
these unpleasant passions upon him, yet without sin; but this is a speech of
faith, not condemning natural fear, but ordering it, that it exceed not
measure; and is as much in effect. q. d. Seeing Lord, The sum of the second
part of this verse.
thou will be with me, I will securely cast my self upon thy providence, and
not be distracted or oppressed with immoderat fear, though thou lead me
thorough the valley of the shadow of death: whose example directs us, to
strive to keep an excellent mean in all troubles and dangers, neither on the
one side to be desperate and fearelesse, nor on the other side, to be cast
down, and oppressed with fear, but to cast our selves upon God, using all
honest and lawful means, and leaving the issue and success unto God. So much
for the opening of the sense of the words: now for our instruction.

Our Lesson is this, Doctrine.
That all such as are sheep of the Lords pasture, and foldmates with David,
of whom the Lord has taken charge, as a faithful shepherd to provide al
good things for them, and to go in and out before them: all these I say, need
not to be distracted with immoderate fear of any evil, but when others are
hard bestead, and at their wits ends, they may securely rest on Gods
providence, and say with David, The Lord is my light, and my salvation, whom
shall I fear? the Lord is the strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid?
Ps. 27. 1.
This doctrine is confirmed by many other places of scriptures, Confirmation.
it is recorded in the prophecy of Esaias, that the unbelievers, hearing of
wars, and the sword threatened, for want of faith, they sought to strengthen
themselves by wicked league, and friendship with strangers, and Idolaters; but
the Lord he admonished all the faithful, by his Prophet thus: Say not ye, a
confederacy to all them, to whom this people says a confederacy, neither
fear ye their fear, nor be afraid of the^, but sanctify the Lord of hoasts,
and let him be your fear and dread, and he shall be as a sanctuary unto you
Esaias. 8. 12 13.
.

Again, when tyrants most cruelly rage and persecute, yet Christ bids us
not fear them that can but kill the body, but fear him that is able to
destroy both body and soul in hell Mat. 10. 28.
: Yea, when that great and terrible day of the Lord shall come, even the day of
wrath and vengeance, when the Lord Jesus shall show himself from heaven in
flaming fire, as the Apostle Paul says 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7, 8.
: Yea, when the elements shall melt with heat, the heavens go away with a
noise, yea, and the earth with all the works therein be burnt up, as S. Peter
says 2. Pe. 3. 10
, The waters roar, that unbelievers hearts shall fail them for fear, as
says the Evangelist Lu 21. 25, 26, 28.
: Yet even then our Savior bids his Disciples not to be afraid, but lift up
their heads with joy, knowing that their redemption draws nigh Lu 21. 25,
26, 28.
. But because nothing is more fearful to nature, tha^ death, which is the
enemy and dissoluer thereof (...). Arist. Eth. lib. 3.
, and wherein many of Gods dear Saints, bewary great weakness, I will
therefore gather a few Argumetns from the holy Scriptures; the consideration
whereof, may serve to strengthen our faith, Four Arguments for the
strengthening of faith, and suppressing the immoderat fear of death.
. and suppress in us the immoderate fear of death, that in some measure we
may triumph in Christ, and say with the Prophet, I will fear no evil. And
whereas the scriptures afford us many, yet I will content my self only with
these four.

The first Argument for this purpose, The first argument is drawn, from
consideration of those manifold and great evils, from which by death, we are
for ever delivered.
may be the consideration of those manifold and great evils, from which by
death the faithful are delivered, which that we may the better conceive, and
discern, are of two sorts, general, and special; by special evils, I do
mean those, which for some great and extraordinary causes, are to be
inflicted upon some particular persons and places, as the burning of Sodom and
Gomorha Ge. 19. 24
, the carrying of Gods people into captivity 2. Kin. 24* 15.
What are the special evils, from which by death, Gods Saints are delivered.
. This was the blessing promised to old Father Abraham, saying: Know for a
suertie that thy people shall be a stranger, in a land that is not theirs
four hundred years, and shall serve them, and they shall entreat them evil,
but thou shall go unto thy fathers in peace, and shall be buried in a good
age Gen 15. 13. 15.
. This was a blessing which God promised to wicked King Ieroboams son,
saying: I will bring evil upon the house of Jeroboam, and will cut off him
that pisseth against the wall, as well him that is shut up, as him that is left
in Israel, and will sweep away the remnant of the house of Jeroboam, as a man
sweepeth away dung, till it be all gone, the dogs shall eat him, that dies of
Ieroboams stock in the city, and the fowls of the air, shall eat him that
dies in the field; yet that child ( for whom his mother came disguised to the
Prophet) should die in his bed, and all Israel shall mourn for him, and bury
him, for he only of Ieroboams stock, shall come to the grave, because in
him, there is found some goodness toward the Lord God of Israel, in the house
of Jeroboam 1. Ki. 14. 10, 11, 12, 13.
.

Also this mercy the Lord promised unto good King Josiah, saying: The words
that thou have heard, shall surely come to pass, but because thine heart did
melt, and thou have humbled thy self before the Lord, when thou heardest what
I speak against this place, and against the Inhabitants of the same. viz: That
it should be destroyed, and accursed, and have rent thy clothes, and wept
before me: I have also heard it, says the Lord, Behold therefore I will gather
thee to thy Fathers, and thou shall be put in thy grave in peace, and thine
eyes shall not see all the evil, which I will bring upon this place 2. Ki. 22.
19. 20.
. Yea, this is a course which the Lord many times, takes with his faithful
ones, though the world do not observe it, whose taking away, is a
prognostication of some fearful evil, to befall that place, as the Prophet
Esaias notes, saying: The righteous perishes, and no man considers it in his
heart, that merciful men, are taken away from the evil to come Esaias 57. 1 2.
. And surely, in this respect, it must needs be a great blessing for Gods
Saints, to die and go to the grave in these happy days of peace, before the
Lord bring upon us, those great evils which he has many ways threatened, and
we every way deserved, in full mesure to be powered upon us, as for the wicked it
is not so with them; God is so far from taking them away, from the evil to
come, that rather he takes them away in full measure, to suffer the evil to
come, so that the day of death of all other, is most woeful unto them: and
therefore no marvel, though they fear death, so much as they do, that
skin for skin, and all that ever they have, they would give for their lives
Job. 2. 4.
, and as the Gibeonites were contented to be hewers of wood, and drawers of
water Josh. 9. 23 25
; so they had rather endure any misery, than die: and therefore must even be
pulled from home, with no less violence, tha^ Ioab was from the horns of the
altar 1. Kin. 2. 30.
. Whereas the Godly, knowing that when the earthly house of this tabernacle,
shall be destroyed, they shall have a building given of God, an house, not
made with hands, but eternal in the heavens, do therefore sigh, desiring to
be clothed with that house, which is from heaven 2. Cor 5. 1. 2.
.

By general evils (from which by death we are delivered) I mean such as
either all or most men do suffer, and they are of three sorts, either such as
concern specially the body, 2. What are the general evils, from which Gods
saints by death are freed.
or 2. such as concern the soul, or 3. such as do jointly concern both.

The general evils which chiefly concern the body, What are the general
evils of the body.
are many, as sicknesses, diseases, aches, pains, hunger, and weariness;
cold, and nakedness; toil, and labor; losses and cross; grief and sorrow;
troubles and persecution: And lastly death it self, which makes an end of
all, for John heard it proclaimed from heaven, and was commanded to write it
for the comfort of Gods Saints: Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, for
so says the spirit, they rest from their labor Re. 14. 13
, For God shall wipe away all tears from the eyes of his children, and there
shall never be any more sorrow, crying, pain, or death, for the first things
are passed Esaias 25. 8 Reu. 21. 4.
.

2 The general evils which chiefly do concern the soul, What are the
general evils which do cheefely concern the soul.
in comparison whereof, the former is but a flea-biting, are also many, and
especially that great burden of original corruption, which continually
lusts against the spirit, and hinders us from doing the good, which we would
Gal. 5. 17.
. Yea, is as a furnace, which continually breaths out many evil things, as
doubtings of Gods favor, providence, infidelity, pride, hardness of heart,
hypocrisy, covetousness, ambition, hatred, etc. And what not, which is a
misery of all miseries, and made the Apostle so vehemently cry out, Oh
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of Death To. 7. 24
? This is a hell which Gods children go thorough, Original corruption, the
hell, of Gods children.
and the greatest torment, that can possibly be devised, for a man that has
any spark of grace, and true desire to glorify God, to be continually
exercised, turmoyled, yea many times ouermatched and foiled, by the homeborne
rebellious corruptions of his own heart, whereby he is pinnioned, and led as
a poor captive, and so fettered and hampered, that though he desire to run
in the ways of Gods commandments: yet is he constrained to creep with the
snaile, and make no way.

what are those general evils, which concern both body and soul.
3 The general evils which do concern both body and soul, are also many,
and especially these three: The first is a continual temptation unto sin, for
whersoeuer they become, 1. The first general evil, concerning soul and body.
Satan that roaring Lion, which goes about continually, seeking whom he may
devour 1. Pe. 5. 8.
, always doggeth them at their heels, and whenever they intend any good
thing, he is by and by at their right hands to resist the^ Zach. 3. 1.
and watches full narrowly every occasion to tempt and draw them to evil 2.
Sa. 11. 2.
: whereupon arises the greatest strife, wrestling, and combat, betwixt Satan
and a faithful soul, that ever was: whereof S. Paul thus speaks; We
wrestle not with flesh and blood, but against principalities and powers, and
worldly governors, the Princes of the darkness of this world, against
spiritual wickednesses, which are in the high places Ephesians. 6. 12.
, and says of himself, that the messenger of Satan was sent for to buffet
him 2. Cor. 12. 7
Of which buffetting and beating, only the Saints of GOD have experience, for
worldlinges, in whom all things are at peace Lu. 11. 21
, wonder at it, and perceive it not* but by death, Gods Saints get a final
conquest: for though now he compass the earth to and fro Job. 1. 7.
, and has great wrath, because he knows his time is but short Reu. 12 12
, and being let loose of the Lord, is become the Prince of the air Ephesians. 2. 2.
that we can no way fly from him, but he will find us out; yet can he never
come within the compass and lists of heaven, for from thence this wretched
accuser of the brethren is cast Reu. 12. 10
, that though he had access to tempt Adam in the earthly Paradise, yet can he
never come to tempt his soul, or the spirits of just and perfect men Heb. 12.
23
, in the heavenly Paradise, yea after the day of judgment, when there shall be
a new heaven, and a new earth, for quality Esa 65. 17 66, 22 Reu. 2^. 1 A sua
qualibet corruptione prius contracta.
, and both of them made one habitacle for Gods Saints; then shall he have his
portion in the fiery lake Mat. 25. 41
, and chained in the blackness of darkness for ever Jude. 6. The second great
and general evil in regard of the whole man, is the continual practice of
sin.
.

The second evil general, in regard of the whole man, and which lies heavy
on Gods Saints in this life, is a continual practice of sin, by reason that
their sanctification in this life, though true, yet imperfect, whereby it
comes to pass, that as Solomon says, there is no man that lives and
sins not: and Saint James, In many things we sin all Iam. 3. 2.
: oh what a wretched thing is this, that we should continually offend the
Majesty of so good and loving a God, who daily powers his blessings upon us:
but when death comes and closes our eyes, there is to all the elect an
happy end of sinning any more, for their corruption of nature, shall be
abolished, Satan banished: and their sanctification perfected without all
sin, or the temptations thereunto to do the will of God willingly, speedily,
and perfectly.

The third and last general evil is this, The third general evil and misery,
is conversation with the wicked.
that in this life Gods Saints are constrained to converse, and live in the
company of wicked ones, as sheep mingled with unclean goats, yea, so thick
are they sown, that if we will not keep company with fornicators, covetous,
extortioners, and Idolaters; we must go out of the world 1. Cor. 5. 10
: now what a misery of all miseries is this, that being so wretched, M.
Perkins in his treatise of dying well. fo. 780. 781
and sinful in our selves, we are constrained to be in the companies of such,
whose only delight is in swearing, lying, blaspheming, filthy and foolish
talking, speaking evil of God, and all godliness, cursing the blessed of God,
and loading them with all vile reproaches, and disgraces that may be; what man
that is truly grieved for his own sins, whose soul within him is not vexed
to hear, as Lots was 2. Pet. 2. 8
, and gush out into tears, as David's did, to see men so fearfully transgress
the commandments of the Lord Psalm. 119. 136.
? yea, and complain of this misery as he did, Woe is me that I remain in
Mesech, and have mine habitation amongst the tents of Kedar Ps. 120. 5
But blessed be the hour of death, which makes a perpetual separation, and
an everlasting farewell betwixt the godly and wicked, when we shall no more
live amongst profane sinners, by whom the name of God is blasphemed, all the
day long: but shall be gathered to the glorious and innumerable company of
Angels, to the assembly and congregation of the first borne, which are written
in heaven, and to God the judge of all, and to the spirits of just and perfect
men Vbi, tot gaudia, quo^ socios faelicitatis. Aug. de spirit. and anima.
and to Jesus the Mediator of the new testament Heb. 12. 22, 23, 24.
. If then by death we be freed from these, yea, from all evils, then surely
there is great reason, that with David, we should fear no evil, to go through
it, etc. And this is the first Argument.

Now because it is not enough unto perfect felicity, The consideration of
those inestimable and incomprehensible joys, into the possessi^ whereof we
enter by death; a notable means to give us courage against it.
to be delivered from all misery and evil; therefore the second Argument which
may serve to give us great courage against death, may be the consideration of
those in estimable and inconceivable good things, into the possession and
fruition whereof, we enter by death; which is one of those great respects, in
regard whereof Solomon has pronounced, That the day of death, is better then
the day that one is borne Eccle. 7. 3
. for by our birth we enter into a world of sin and iniquity; but by death
we enter into the presence of God, where are the fullness of joys Psa. 16. 11
. Oh then consider this thing, so soon as ever death has closed our eyes, our
bodies rest from labor and toil, and go unto the grave as a bed of rest Esaias.
57. 2
, where it shall more soundly sleep, then ever in this life upon a bed of
Down, Illa, domus laetitiae, haec militiae, illa laudis, haec orationis, illa
requiaei, haec laboris.
until it be awakened by the sound of a trumpet; and the soul immediately
returns unto God that gave it, for ever to abide in the presence of the
living God, of Christ, and of all the Angels and Saints in heaven: the
greatness whereof cannot be conceived with heart, Bern.
or expressed with tongue; for if Saint Paul say of the mysteries of the
Gospel, and first fruits of the graces of Gods spirit, that they are such, as
eye has not seen, ear heard, nor heart of man can conceive 1. Co. 2. 9
signified by the white stone, wherein is written, a new name, which no man
knows but he that receives it Reu. 2. 17
. What shall then the harvest be? And if in this shadowie valley: where we see
God but darkly, as it were through spectacles, and know but in part 1. Cor. 13
12.
; yet the sweetness of the remission of our sins, justification,
sanctification, peace of conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost; do pass all
understanding, and no man knows, but he that receives them; oh how
infinitely shall they be powered upon us, when we shall come to the mountain
of Gods holiness, to see him face to face Visio dei beatifici sola; summu^
bonum est, Aug lib de Trin. ca. 13.
, and know him as he is 1. Cor. 13 12
. Surely if the Queen of the South, seeing but the glory of an earthly king,
his house, meat, order of servants, and their apparel, yet proclaimed, Oh
happy are these thy servants, because they might ever stand before him, and
hear his wisdom 1. Ki. 10. 8
. Then 1000. times more happy they, that shall ever be in the presence of the
everliving god, king of kings, where is mirth without mourning, joy without
sorrow; health without sickness; and life without end, in comparison of whose
glory, riches, and wisdom; Salomons, was but vanity, beggerlinesse, and
folly. And if so be that Moses was thought so happy, and in all ages renowned,
for that God vouchsafed him so great favor, as to see his hinder parts as he
passed by Exodus 33 23
: then how much more happy shall they be, Videbis, posteriora mea.
that are admitted into the presence of God, to see his face for ever? Now
though no man either for the ending of present miseries, or preventing of
future calamities, or for the desire to enjoy these good things, must shorten
their days, as Saul, Achitophel, Judas, or that foolish martyr of Philosophy
Cleombrotus, tales, stulta Philosophia, habet Martyrs.
, who reading Platoes book of the immortality of the soul, is reported to
cast himself headlong from a wall, that so he might have experimental
knowledge of that which he read; Hieron. ad Marcell.
yet what man or woman with spiritual understanding, duly considering what
miseries by death, we leave behind us; and with the eyes of faith beholds,
what inestimable good things by death we are put in possession of, but shall
most willingly die when God calls; yea, sing with the Swanne, when death
approaches, and say with old father Simeon, Lord now let thou thy servant
depart in peace Lu. 2. 2 9. A sanctified and holy life a notable means, to
procure a courageous and comfortable death.


The third maine ground of true Christian valor and resolution, and effectual
means, for the repressing of the immoderate fear of death, is, to lead a
Christian an and conscionable life: what a comfort was it to Ezekiah, when he
received from the Lord the message of death, 3. Argument.
by the hands of the Prophet Esaias, that he could appeal unto God, and say, Oh
Lord, remember how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect
heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight Esaias. 38. 3
. For although it be a most heretical doctrine, taught and maintained in the
Church of Rome, that God gives everlasting life and glory to men, for, and
according to their good works, as he gives damnation for the contrary Rhem.
in Romans 2. 2. Sect. and 1. Co. 3. sect. 2.
; and therefore we renounce it, and say with the Apostle, Eternal life is the
gift of God through Jesus Christ our Lord To. 6. vlt.
. And though a reward shall be given us according to our works Romans 2. 6
, yet not for our works. Rhem. in Romans 2. 2. Sect. and 1. Co. 3. sect. 2.
; Yet seeing good works, though they be no cause of reigning, yet are the way
to Gods Kingdom Secuudum opera, sed non propter Greg. in Psalm. 140.
. Therefore as it must needs be a great comfort in our lives, so much more at
our deaths to remember that we have walked in the way that leads to Gods
kingdom. Non causa regnandi, sed via ad regnum. Aug.
Wherefore, if we Ministers desire a comfortable death, let us be diligent in
season and out of season 2. Ti. 4. 2
, to feed the flock of God 1. Pet. 5. 2
, whereof the holy Ghost has made us over seers Act. 20. 28
, that we may be able to protest in some measure with the Apostle and say: I
have kept back nothing that was profitable, but have showed you all the
council of God, I am pure from the blood of all men, I have coueted no man's
silver gold, or apparel Act. 20. 20, 26, 27
. Let every ruler that would have a comfortable death, so carry himself in
this life, that he may be able to say with Samuel, Bear record of me before
the Lord whose Ox have I taken? or whose Ass have I taken? or whom have I
done wrong to? or whom have I hurt? or of whose hands, have I received any
bribe, to blind mine eyes withal 1. Sa. 12 3.
? Yea, let every one strive to keep a good conscience before God, and al men,
that on their death beds they may say with Job, Let God weigh me in the inst
balance, and he shall know mine uprightness, mine heart has not been
deceived by a woman, neither have I laid wait at the door of my neighbor, I
have not restrained the poor of their desire, nor caused the eyes of the widow
to fail, I have not eaten my morsels alone, but the fatherless have eaten
thereof, I have seen none to perish for want of clothing, but the loins of the
poor may bless me, which have been covered with the fleeces of my flock Job
31. 6 9. 16. qualis vita: finis ita.
. yea, does not daily experience confirm, Iren.
that as the life is, so is the death? What a comfortable thing is it to be
present at the deaths of the godly? What notable confessions of faith?
testimonies of repentance? patience in their pains? feruencie of the spirit?
zeal in prayer? joy in the holy Ghost? power in exhortation? and comfort in
their farewell, Is there to be seen and heard, if by violence of the disease,
they be not hindered? whereby it appears true, that David witnesses, that
towalke in the ways of gods commandments brings peace at the last: on the
other side most miserable and comfortless are the sicknesses and deaths of
the wicked, who for the most part die like sottes, as Naball, whose heart was
as dead as a stone 1. Sam. 25. 37.
: or desperate like Caine Genesis 4. 13
: their consciences awaking as a mad dog out of sleep, and tormenting them for
their sins most extremely. Well then, we must live the life of the righteous,
if ever we look to die the death of the righteous, and if with the Apostle we
will have death our advantage Phil. 1. 21
: We must first with the Apostle serve God with all good conscience Act. 24. 16
. Late repentance is seldom sound, we read but of one that became righteous
at his last end; of one, that none may despair for their long led sinful
life: and but of one, that none may presume, to continue in sin. The safest
way is to begin betime, and even this day Psa. 9^. 7. Heb. 3. 7. 13.
, to turn to the Lord. For though sometime a good death may follow an evil
life, yet an evil death can never follow a good life; and therefore correct
and reform thine evil life, and fear not an evil death, for he can not die
ill, that lives well Corrige male viuere, et n^li timere, non potest male mori
qui been vexerit. Aug. de discip. Christ. cap. 3.
, So much for the third special means, which do procure a bold and
comfortable death? the fourth and last remains, which is the greatest of all,
and must give life to all the rest, as without which they are but dead, and
nothing worth.

A true and lively faith. The fourth and most effectual means for the
procuring of a comfortable death; is a steadfast faith.
For a man may consider the evils of this present life, and the happiness of
the other, yea and lead a life for civil duties unrebukable, and yet not his
death be comfortable unto him, but rather, he has great cause to fear much
evil therein; but when to the consideration of freedom from misery, the
fruition of happiness, and an honest and upright life; there is lastly joined
a true and lively faith, whereby we are assured of Gods favor Fides ambiguum
non habet, aut si habet, fides non est, sed opinio Bern.
, and the remission of sins, and that through the obedience and passion of
Christ, we shall be received into Gods kingdom: these together do bring a
most joyful, comfortable, and blessed death. When death seazeth upon a carnal
man, wanting faith, who can see no further then by the light of blind natural
reason, and sees that he must leave al his honor, riches, pleasures, friends,
and families, and that his body, which has been so daintily fed, costly
clothed, and much made of, must now be laid in the dust, and become meat for
the worms, and see corruption; and when he sees that his soul must go to
judgment, to render account for those sins which he has ungodly committed,
oh how does this torment and massacre him? oh death how bitter is thy
remembrance to such an one? but to the spiritual man, that by the eye of
faith, looks further then to the present corruptible estate of his body,
namely, to that glorious estate, wherein it shall be raised by the power of God
at the last day, and by the eye of faith, beholds the brazen Serpent, Christ
Jesus, lifted up, upon the pole of the cross, by which one sacrifice once
offered God is well pleased; oh how little does such an one fear any evil in
death? so that by faith we live, and faith is our stay when we do die: let us
then with all diligence hear the word of God, and pray continually Imo, demus
operam, vt moreamur ^n precatione. Aug.
, for the begetting and increase hereof, that we may in some measure triumph
over death and say with David, I will fear no evil, to go through the valley
of the shadow of death. It follows.

THE SIXTH SERMON upon the 23. Psalm.
For thou Lord art with me, thy rod and staff. etc.
IN this third circumstance, The third Circumstance declaring the true cause,
and ground of a Christians courage in passing thorough the valley of death.
is laid down the ground of a Christians boldness and courage; which is not
desperate madness, and rashness, whereby many a Swash-buckler, casts himself
headlong, into the danger of death, as though he feared no evil therein; but it
is the assurance of Gods presence, and favor, that is the ground of a true
Christians boldness. A point most necessary to be considered, least otherwise
we may imagine, that David's boldness is appropriate to himself, and grounded
upon some special promise and assurance, not communicable unto any other, and
so it should be great presumption, in any other, to say as he did, I will
fear no evil in death etc. Unless he had the same warant that he had; I say
to prevent this surmise, here David lays down the ground of his speech,
that if we have promise of the same, as well as he had; we may boldly, and
with as good warrant say as he did, I will fear no evil, to go thorough the
valley of the shadow of death, (for thou Lord art with me) etc. Method.


For the orderly, The sense of the words.
and more profitable handling whereof, we will first observe the sense of the
words: How God is present, in a general manner with all his creatures.
secondly, the doctrine and reasons: thirdly, the use and practice thereof.

For the sirst, the words seem very plain, yet for the better understanding
of them, Apud homines, potest quis quaerere latebras, sed nihil latet Deum.
and the like phrase elsewhere, we are to note, that God is said to be with
men, two ways; first, generally in respect of his eternal power, wisdom,
and providence, whereby he preserves, and disposes all things, at all times,
and in all places, Moll. in ps. fol. 1560.
whereof David thus speaks: Whither shall I go from thy spirit? or whither
shall I fly from thy presence? if I ascend into heaven, thou art there, if I
lie down in hell, thou art there also, etc. If I take the wings of the
morning, and dwell in the utmost parts of the sea, yet thither shall thine hand
lead me, and thy right hand hold me Ps. 139. 7, 8, 9, 10.
Yea, the Lord himself says in the prophecy of Jeremy: Can any hide himself
in secret places that I shall not see him? do not I fill heaven and earth,
says the Lord Iere. 23. 24
? Hereof S. Paul also speaks in the Acts: Iouis omniae plena virg.
Doubtless, the Lord is not far from every one of us, for in him we live,
move, and have our being Act. 17. 27.
: And the Author to the Hebrews says, There is no creature which is not
manifest in his sight, but all things are naked to his eyes, with whom we have
to do (...) quod, omnia, intueatur.
. So the Lord saw, and was near to Pharaoh and the Egyptians, spending his
plagues, and bestowing his arrows upon them, till in the end he destroyed
them in the red sea Ex. 14. 27
; So was he near unto Jeroboam, who stretching out his hand, to lay hold on
Gods Prophet, it withered, that he could not pull it in again 1. Ki. 13. 4
. So was he near to Goliath, when he directed David's stone, to hit him in the
forehead 1. Sa. 17. 49
, near to Ahab, when he directed the arrow to smite him dead, through the
ioints of his brigandine 1. Kin. 22. 34.
. And thus is he unto all worldly men, to spy out all their wicked ways, and
many times to take them tardie in their sins, in consideration whereof, S. James
bids us beware of sin, and renders this as a reason, For behold the Judge
stands before the door Iam. 5. 9
, so was he at Abraham's doors, to behold the mocking and persecution of Ismaell
against Isaac Genesis 21. 9.
: at Isaacks doors, to hear the intended murder of Esaw, against his brother
Jacob Genesis 27. 41
: at Labans doors, to hear and see, his hard and unconscionable usage of
Jacob Genesis 31. 41.
; at Saules doors, to see his cruel persecuting of David 1. Sa. 18. 12.
: at David's doors, to see his sin with Bersheba 2. Sa. 11. 4
: Yea, he is at all our doors, beds, and boards, and at our heels wheresoever
we become, as David confesses, Thou art about my path, and my bed, and spyest
out al my ways, there is not a word in my tongue, but thou know it
altogether Ps. 139. 3
. In a word, there is neither heaven nor hell, nor utmost part of the sea,
neither day nor night, light nor darkness, that can hide us from his face;
our sitting, rising, lying down, the thoughts of our hearts, words of our
tongues, ways of our feet: yea our raines, bones, and mothers wombes, wherein
we lay in our first informitie, and imperfection, are so well known unto him:
as the Prophet in that Psalm declares, for he sits upon the circle of
the earth, and beholds the Inhabitants of the earth as Grasshoppers Esaias. 40.
22.
, whose throne is the heaven of heavens, and the earth his footstool Esaias 66. 1
, and his ways are in the great deep. Wherefore Adam and Euah were deceived,
when they thought that they could hide themselves from the presence of God,
Magns caecitas, sugere quem non possunt effuger, Paulus sagius in Genesis cap. 3.
amongst the trees of the garden Ge. 3. 8.
, and those wicked ones, who encourage themselves in their sins, saying: The
Lord sees not, neither does the God of Jacob regard it Psa. 94. 7.
. And therefore are justly reproved by the Psalmist, in the next words:
understand ye unwise amongst the people, and ye fools, when will ye be wise?
he that planted the ear, shall he not hear? or he that fourmed the eye,
shall he not see How God is after a more special manner present with his
elect, in all their troubles, to strengthen and comfort them.
? So much for Gods general presence.

Secondly, he is after a more special manner present with his elect, whom he
loves for to comfort, strengthen, protect, and defend them, this presence he
promised to Moses being afraid to go to Pharaoh: Certainly, I will be with
thee Exo. 3. 12.
. The like he renewed to Joshua, his successor: as I was with Moses, so will I
be with thee all the days of thy life, I will not fail thee nor forsake thee
Josh. 1. 5.
, and unto Jeremy he says, Speak all that I have commanded thee, and fear
not their faces, for behold I am with thee, to deliver thee, says the Lord
Iere. 1. 8. 19.
. And Christ also gives the like promise to his Apostles; Behold, I will be
with you always, to the end of the world Mat. 28. 20.
. This is the presence which Jacob, so earnestly prayed for, If God will be
with me, and will keep me in this journey which I go, and give me bread to
eat, and clothes to put on, then shall the Lord be my God Ge. 28. 20
. And of this presence David here speaks, (Thou art with me) q. d. I will
fear no evil, for thou my most loving Shepherd, wilt always be with me, to
comfort, strengthen, protect, and defend me, that I be not overcome of any
evil: And so much for the sense of the words.

Our lesson, Doctrine.
for instruction naturally, hence arising, is this, viz: That the Lord is ever
after a special manner, Confirmation of the first member, of this doctrine.
present with his Saints, both in prosperity and adversity, in life, and
death; the assurance whereof, is the ground of much comfort, patience, and
courage, in whatsoever condition, etc.

For the first branch of this doctrine, the Author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews confirms it, where he teaches us, to make application of the
promise which God made to Joshua, as made unto us: let your conversation be
without covetousness, and be content with those things, that you have, for he
has said, I will not fail thee, neither forsake thee, so that we may boldly
say, the Lord is my helper, neither will I fear, what man can do unto me Heb.
13. 5
: yea, we have the promises, as well as Joshua had, both to the Church in
general, and the faithful in particular: God has promised his Church in
general; saying, In that day sing, of the vineyard, of red wine, I the Lord
do keep it, I will water it every moment; least any assail it, I will keep
it night and day Esaias 27. 2. 3.
. Yea and Christ has most comfortably promised unto every faithful soul, in
particular, in the Gospel, saying: If any man love me, he will keep my word,
and my father will love him, and we will come unto him, and will dvvell
with him Ioh. 14. 23
. In regard whereof, David affirms, that the Lord is nere unto them, that are
of a contrite heart, and will save such as be afflicted in spirit, for many are
the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers him out of all Ps. 34:
18.
, And elsewhere also to the like purpose, he says: God is our hope and
strength, and help in troubles, ready to be found Ps. 46. 1.
.

Q. But some may hereupon object, and say: Did not Gedeon complain, in the
person of all the people (when the Angel of the Lord saluted him, in this
manner, the Lord is with thee thou valiant man) Ah my Lord, if the lord be with
us, why then is all this come upon us? and where be all his miracles which our
fathers told us off? but now the Lord has forsaken us, and delivered us into
the hands of the midianites Judge. 6. 14.
. Did not David complain: Will the Lord absent himself for ever, are his
mercies clean gone Ps. 77. 7. 8
? Did not Christ complain: Oh my God, my God, way have thou forsaken me Mat.
27. 46.
. Yea, and the Saints of God also: Oh Lord, why have thou made us to err from
thy ways? and hardened our hearts from thy fear? return, for thy servants
sake, and for the tribes of thine inheritance Esaias 63. 17.
. How then do we say, that God is thus present with his people?

A. Indeed, God many times, for their good To. 8. 28.
, does vex his Saints with his storms, and lay his hand heavy upon their
loins Ps. 32. 4.
: so that their enemies judge, as they did of David, God has forlaken him,
persecute him, and take him, for there is none to deliver him Ps. 71. 11.
, and themselves also may be so persuaded, as their complaints testify; but
the truth is, howsoever for our trial and humiliation, he may turn away his
cheerful countenance from us Esaias 54. 8.
; yet, either he takes not away the grace, but the feeling of it Fides,
quandoque sine sensu, vt causa, sine effectu. Greenh. fol. 449.
, (in which case men and women are not to be regarded what they say, because
they speak not according to the truth, but according to their judgment, and
feeling which is corrupted, as a man's taste in a fever, to whom every sweet
seems bitter) or if he take away one grace, he will give us another in stead
of it 2. Cor. 12. 9.
. Yea, it shall stand as a sealed truth for ever, the Lord is nigh to all such
as call upon him faithfully Ps. 145. 18
, in due time to deliver them out of distress, that so they may acknowledge as
Jacob did, The Lord was in this place, and I was not aware Genesis 28. 16.
, the Lord was with me, and I thought not so. Which truth is confirmed by the
manifold examples of Gods dear Saints, who having been humbled to the gulf of
despair, yet now are lifted up again and their mouths filled with a psalm. of
praise and thanksgiving, unto our God, confessing with David, and saying:
though heaviness endure for a night, Psa. 30. 8. 2
yet joy co^eth in the morning.

Q. Again, some for the infringing of this doctrine, do demand, how we can
be persuaded, that God is with them in death, whose sicknesses, and death are
so comfortles, full of idle and rauing speeches?

A. Howsoever some, and especially the sottish ignorant Papists, if a man die
quietly and patiently like a lamb, (though there was never any faith,
repentance, or remorse in his heart, at his death, or holiness and honesty in
his life) doubtless, they think he is saved; but if any that profess the
truth of Jesus Christ, do endure any violent or extreme pains, which thorough
weakness procure impatiencie; but specially if they utter any words tending
to distrust or despair, Oh then whatsoever his life was, they cry out: Oh,
see the end of these men, and will not spare to brand such an one, with the
black mark of a reprobate: yea, to condemn the whole profession of the
Gospel thereupon: Yet the truth is this, That Satan as he never cease in
our whole life, so much more is he busy at our death (taking the advantage of
sickness, and infirmity of nature) as knowing that he must then recover, or
for ever loose his Kingdom: and God may for a time (as it were) stand aloof,
and leave his children in this great combat, that so he might bring the^ to
heaven, by the gates of hell Cuncta dei opera, sunt in mediis contrariis.
. Whereupon they may utter harsh words, according to their corrupt judgment,
which are not to be regarded, as before we hard. Or else these things may
proceed from weakness of nature, and the violence of the disease, the brain
being distempered, as in hot burning feauers, etc. and then it is not the man,
but the disease, and they shall die with the disease, and never prejudice his
salvation in Christ: nay, doubtless their spiritual comfort may abound
notwithstanding these things Vera consolatio perpetuo durat in electis,
potissimum autem efficax est circ^ vitae finem, and mortis articulum.
. In a word, it is a blessed life, which gives comfortable assurance of a
blessed death, for surely many a profane unregenerate man, may have his
memory and reason, and die most meekely (as in consumptions, and such like
diseases) and yet go to hell; as those reprobates, of whom David speaks,
saying: they have no bands in their death like other men Ps. 73. 4. 5
. Whereas many a righteous man, having led a sanctified life; (by violence of
his disease) may be drawn to great torment, idle speeches, and strange
behauiours, and yet go to heaven: wherefore, let us refourme our judgment
herein, and learn Salomons lesson, not to judge of man's estate with God, by
his outward condition in life or death Eccl. 9. 2.
. And thus we have heard the first branch of this doctrine confirmed, viz:
That the Lord is al ways with his elect, after a special manner, in due time
to comfort, and relieve them.

The second branch of our doctrine was this, Confirmation of the second branch
of the doctrine.
viz: That the assurance of Gods presence, is the ground of much patience, and
comfort unto Gods Saints, passing through any evil. So that in nothing have
Gods Saints more rejoiced, than in this, and surely the Reasons hereof are many
and very great, but especially these two.

First, The first Reason, why the assurance of Gods presence, is a matter of
such great encouragement to his Saints, is, because he is able to help and
deliver them.
because he only is able to help and deliver his Saints, which the greatest
and mightiest Princes of the world, cannot do though they used all their power,
dignity, and authority thereunto, no, they are not able, in some cases, for to
help themselves, in regard whereof David bids, That we trust not in Princes,
nor in any child of man, for there is no help in him, for when his breath
departs, he returns to the earth, and all his thoughts perish Ps. 146. 3. 4.
, but if the Lord be with us, who can be against us To. 8. 31.
? Which thing the Prophet Elisha well knew, whose man being greatly discouraged,
with the sight of the Syrian horses, and chariots, and mighty host: he cried,
Alas master, what shall we do? to whom he answered, Fear not, for they be
more that be with us, than that be with them, meaning that God and all his
Angels were on their side, for he prayed, and the Lord opened his servants
eyes, that he saw the mountains full of horses, and chariots of fire 2. Ki. 6.
17.
. If therefore our enemies be never so many, mighty, or politic, yet the Lord
being with us, and on our side, we need not to fear them, as Caleb and Joshua
said to the people, whose hearts did faint, when they heard by the other spies,
that the sons of Anake dwelt in the promised land: Oh, said Caleb and Joshua,
fear them not, they shall be bread for us, their shield is departed from
them, and the Lord is with us Number. 14. 9.
. Yea, if death be before our eyes, we need not to fear Satan, nor hell, the
Lord being with us, as here the Prophet speaks, and this is the first
reason, why the Saints of God have so heartily desired, and so greatly gloried
in Gods presence, because with whom he is, to them is he a most sure defense
in all dangers, as being able to deliver them out of all adversities.

The second Reason, is this, because God is an inseparable companion; we may
have friends that love us very dearly, yea, as their souls, in prosperity;
and yet will fail or forsake us in adversity, as David complains: My
lovers, and my friends stand aside from my plague, and in kinsmen stood a far
off Ps. 38. 11
. And yet Job more lamentably complains, saying: My brethren are removed
far from me, and mine acquaintance are become strangers unto me, my
neighbors have forsaken me, and my familiars have forgotten me, they that
dwell in mine house, and my maids took me for a stranger, I called my
servant, but he would not answer, though I prayed him with my mouth, my breath
was strange unto my wife, though I prayed her, for the childrens sake of mine
own body Job. 19. 13, 14, 15. etc.
. yea, Christ himself had experience hereof, Judas betrayed him Mat. 26. 16
; his Disciples forsook him Mat. 26. 56
; and Peter for swear him Mat. 26. 72
, according as Christ fore told them, All you shall be offended with me this
night, for it is written, I will smite the Shepherd, and the sheep of the
flock, shall be scattered Zac. 13. 8
: but though our friends stick never so fast unto us, and their love continue
constant, as well in adversity as prosperity, as the love of Jonathan, whose
love passed the love of women 2. Sa. 1. 26
, toward David, that he hazarded his life for him, and that when he was
persecuted of his father 1. Sa. 20. 33.
, yet when death comes, all men forsake us: this separateth husband and wife,
parents and children, friend and friend, though never so dearly beloved; but
if God be once with us, he will be with us for ever; if afflictions come, he
will partake with us. For so he has promised; when thou passest through the
waters, I willbe with thee, and through the floudes, that they do not ouerflow
thee; when thou walk through the very fire, thou shall not be burnt,
neither shall the flame kindle upon thee Esaias 43. 2
: He will be with us to dispose of the evils, not a hair falling from our
heads, but according to his will Mat. 10. 30
. Secondly, to strengthen our weakness, he knowing whereof we be made Psalm.
103. 14
. Thirdly, to give issue to all our troubles, as shall be for his glory and our
good 1. Cor. 10 13.
: And lastly, if death come, yet then will he also be with us, to strengthen,
and comfort us, when all worldly delights fail, and vanish away, so that we
may boldly say, neither life nor death, nor any thing, can separate us from the
blessed presence, and love of God in Christ Jesus: and so much for the
doctrine, and reasons for confirmation thereof.

Now then, Use.
that we have learned, that the Lords presence is so comfortable: the use
hereof is, that above all things we should desire and seek it, wherein we
have this holy Prophet for an example, who said thus, One thing I have desired
of God, which I will require, even that I may dwell in the house of the Lord
all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to visit his
temple Ps. 27. 4.
. Again, My soul thirsts for God, even for the living God, when shall I
come and appear before the presence of God Ps. 42. 2.
? And in another place also he says, Whom have I in heaven but thee? and
there is none that I desire in comparison of thee Ps. 73. 25
. For the practice of which use, there is required a double duty.

First to seek God, 1. Duty.
seek the Lord and his strength, seek his face for evermore Ps. 105. 4
, and to encourage us herein, he has made us this promise, I love them that
love me, and he that seeks me early shall find me Pro. 8. 17
, Ask, and you shall have, seek, and you shall find, says Christ Mat. 7. 7.
, Whosoever then desires the presence of God, when as God says: seek ye my
face, his soul must answer with David's like an echo: Thy face Lord will I
seek Ps. 27. 8.
: Vox dei, in animis nostris, non secus atque echo, in co^cauis locis,
resonare debet. Calu. in Ps.
And so soon as ever God shall pronounce thou art my people, we must
presently answer, and thou Lord art our God, as the Prophet says Zac. 13. 9.
.

Q. But how are we to seek God?

A. Principally these four ways: By an outward profession, yea though it be
not always in sincerity and truth, yet the Lord has pronounced of it, that
it is a drawing near unto him, saying: This people comes near unto me with
their lips, and honors me with their mouths, but their hearts are far
from me Esaias 29. 13. Mat. 15. 8.
. How much nearer then do they come unto God, that profess him in spirit and
truth?

2 We seek and find the Lord by faith, for so it is said in the Epistle to the
Hebrews. He that comes unto God, must believe that God is, and that he is a
rewarder of them that seek him Heb. 11. 6
. And by faith ( says saint Paul in many places of his Epistles) we have
entrance unto God, and access to the throne of his grace To. 5. 2 Ephesians. 3. 12.
, without which it is impossible to come near unto God, or to please him Heb.
11. 6.
.

3 We seek and find the Lord by prayer, which is (as it were) a pair of wings
to carry us unto him, and whereby as a key, the door of the kingdom of
heaven is opened, Yea the Lord (says the Psalmist) is nigh to them than call
upon him faithfully Psa 145. 18.
. Was not the Lord nigh unto Moses, when by his prayer, and as long as he held
up his hands, the Israelites overcame the Amalekites Ex. 17. 11
? But was he not nearer unto him, when as by prayer he did (as it were) even
restrain the Lord from executing his fierce wrath upon the people, that the
Lord said, Let me alone, that my wrath may wax hot Ex. 32. 10
. Was not the Lord near unto Ioshuah, when at his prayer, the Sun stood in
the Firmament Josh. 10. 13.
, and near unto Paul and Silas, when as at their prayer, the very foundation
of the prison shook, that the doors opened, and every man's bands were loosed
Act. 16. 26
. how ought we the^ to pray continually, that so we may be continually in the
presence of God 1 Thessalonians. 5 17.
. If we begin the day, let us say with Abraham's servant, O Lord send me good
speed this day, Genesis 24. 12. that so we may walk with the staff of Gods
providence: if we be covered with the shadows of the night, let us beg with
David, Lighte^ mine eyes that they sleep not in death, Psalm. 13. 3. that so
we may couch our selves in the mercies of God: and whatsoever we attempt in
either of these two seasons, let us prevent it with the blessing of that other
Psalm, Lord prosper the work of our hands, Psalm. 99. 17.

4 Fourthly and lastly, we find God by repentance, for so the Lord says: O
Israel return unto me Ier. 4. 1.
, And in another place, Turn unto me, and I will turn unto you, says the
Lord of Hoasts Zac. 1. 3.
. So long then as we live in infidelity, and do nether earnestly pray, soundly
repent, nor sincerely profess God; we are estranged far from God, and as we
forsake him, he will forsake us, both in life and death: but whosoever by a
true faith, shall steadfastly lay hold upon, and embrace the promises of God,
soundly repent of his sins, zealously call upon the name of the Lord, and
sincerely profess his word, he shall not only come near unto God, but
assuredly he shall find God, yea God will find him, and love him, and dwell
with him, yea in him, his body shall become the Temple of the holy ghost, as the
holy Apostle S. Paul in many places calls it 1. Cor. 3. 16. and 6. 19. 2.
Cor. 6. 16.
. O happy that man, that shall entertain so honorable a guest, he comes not
empty handed, nor will leave his host unsaluted Foelix homo, qui hunc hospitem
recipit, est enim satis magnificus hospes, nec venit vacuis manibus; nec abit,
insalutato hospite. ferus. in Ioh. cap. 14. fol. 401
. Abraham entertained but Angels, and had a son bestowed upon him Genesis 18. 10.
. Lot did the like, and he was delivered from the subversion of Sodom Ge. 19. 17
. Obed-Edom the Gittite, gave but house-roome to the Ark of God, and the Lord
blessed him and all his household 2. Sam. 6. 11.
. what good thing shall he want in whom the whole Trinity dwells? But there
is no less care to be used, to retain God, then to find him Non minor est
virtus. 2. Duty.
. And therefore the second duty in the practice of this use, is, that with all
care and conscience, we so carry and behave our selves, that we may retain
the Lord, and not provoke him to depart from us: whereunto tends the counsel
of the Apostle, Let every one possess his vessel in holiness and honor 1 Thessalonians. 4. 4.
. For there is nothing that so much grieueth the spirit of God Ephesians. 4. 30.
, as sin; he can brook poverty, sickness, persecution, slander, or any
misery, there is no disgrace shall make him weary of dwelling with us, or
ashamed of us, only sin separateth him and us, as he himself has testified
in the Prophecy of Esaias, Behold the Lords hand is not shortened that it cannot
save, neither is his ear heavy that it cannot hear, but your sins have
separated betwixt you and your God, and your sins have hid his face from you,
that he will not hear Esa. 59. 1. 2.
. Which thing the Saints confess, We have sinned and rebelled, therefore have
thou covered thy self with a cloud, that our prayer should not pass through
La. 3. 44.
. Oh then if we would diligently seek him (as we have learned) then should we
find him, and if we made conscience of sin, he would dwell and abide with
us, to be our stay and comfort with his blessed presence in life, and in
death, and afterward we should dwell for ever with him in his kingdom.

But now if we make application of these things to our selves, Application.
alas we shall find there are but a few that have any desire unto God, either
to find him, or have him with them; nay how many are there that think the Lord
too nere them, and therefore say in their hearts with those cursed ones in the
book of Job, Depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways
Job. 21. 14.
. All that they desire, is, to find and retain with them, gold, and silver,
goods, houses and lands, friendship, credit, honor and promotion: if these
things be with them, they care for no evil, and therefore no marvel though so
many in the world, when afflictions and death comes, wherein these things can
stand them in small or no stead, be destitute of true comfort. Exhortation.
I beseech you then, let us above all things seek, and having found, make
conscience to enjoy Gods presence, that as the people said: Some put their
trust in horses, and some in Chariots, but we will remember the name of the
Lord our God Ps. 20. 7.
, so we may say, some put their trust and rejoice in riches, and some in honor:
but we will put our trust, and rejoice in the presence of the Lord. And so I
will conclude this point, with the worthy exhortation which Azaria made to Asa,
and all Judah and Benjamin, saying, The Lord is with you, whilst you be with
him, and if you seek him he will be found of you: but if you forsake him, he
will forsake you 2. Cro. 25 2.
, and then shall both life and death become most fearful and miserable. It
follows.

Thy rod and thy staff do comfort me. 4. Circumstance.
In this fourth and last circumstance of this verse, The sense of the words.
the Prophet David declares the wonderful, sweet and comfortable benefits
of the Lords presence, very elegantly, persisting, and dwelling in his
received Metaphor, Virga, and pedum, virga corrigit, temere diuagantes, aut
neglige^tur sequentes; pedo, inimicos confringit, and vt vas figulinum
dissipat: Mollin Psa. fol. 222.
setting forth Gods government by the shepherds rod and staff: the rod is for
correction; the staff for defense; with his rod he constrains the declining
sheep, to join with their foldmates, compels the wanderers to accompany
their fellows, and forces the slothful plodders to pace it better; and with
his staff he does drive away, and if they will not be feared, does break to
pieces, and destroy the enemies of his flock, according to that in the Psalms,
Thou shall bruise them with an iron scepter, and break them in pieces like a
potters vessel Ps. 2. 9.
. So then the sum of it is thus much in effect. q. d. O Lord, as thou art
with me, so do I conceive exceeding comfort, both from thy fatherly rods, and
corrections toward me, and all thy children, and also from thy severe and
just judgments toward thine enemies.

Our lesson for instruction hence is, Doctrine.
that Gods saints have great matter of joy and comfort, both from his sharp
correcting, and chastising of his children, and from his severe and just
punishing of his enemies, both of them included in this short strain, Thy rod
and staff do comfort me, etc. But it will be profitable further to insist
upon this point, and to illustrate and confirm, both the parts or branches of
this doctrine by the holy scriptures: for the first, it may seem very strange,
that Gods Saints should conceive such great comfort from Gods scourging rod, but
there are To consider wha^ moves the Lord, to correct his children, a
special means of ^^mfort in (...).
yea to embrace and kiss this rod. viz.

1 First, to consider what it is, that moves the Lord to correct his children;
and that not fury, and rage (whereby men are provoked rashly and unadvisedly,
to do that many times which afterward they are sorry for) but love, for so
himself has pronounced in the book of the Revelation, So many as I love, I
rebuke and chasten Reu. 3. 19
. The natural parents, that love their children dearly, (...): Prius verbum,
ad verba: posterius ad disciplinam refertur. Bull. in Apo.
and had rather feel smart themselves, then it should light upon their
children; yet will rather (though it be to their own grief) make them
thoroughly feel the smart of sharp correction, then that they should for want
of nurture cast themselves headlong into misery: and the holy Ghost
witnesses, that our heavenly father deals after the same manner with his
children, if instruction and admonition by words will not serve, but we will
run on in an evil course to the dishonor of God, slander of the Gospel,
offense of the weak, hardening of the wicked, and to our own great hazard, and
peril of eternal destruction, rather then he will suffer us to run in this
broad way to eternal destruction, (though he delight not in our miseries) yet
will he press us down with rebuke, and sorrow; and yet all in love; which the
wise man Solomon knew, when he gave this counsel, my son refuse not the
chastening of the Lord, neither be grieved with his correction, for the Lord
corrects him whom he loves, even as the father does the child in whom he
delights Pro. 3. 12
: Whereof the Author to the Hebrews making use, says: If you endure
chastening, God offers himself unto you, as unto sons: but if you be
without correction, you are bastards, and not sons Heb. 12. 6, 7, 8, etc.
. How ought we then to rejoice in the rod, which is such an infallible
pledge, and testimony of Gods love toward us?

2 The second Argument of comfort, is the consideration of the manner, To
consider the manner of Gods correcting his children, a sweet comfort.
how God corrects his children, which David lays down in another place,
saying: He deals not with us after our sins, nor rewards us according to
our wickedness, but as a father has compassion on his children, so has the
Lord compassion on them that fear him Ps. 103. 10. 13.
: as then a Father will correct his child, yea sharply, that the blood follow,
yet with wonderful compassion, yea many times with tears, and when he has
done, burns the rod; So God is constrained many times to take us in hand, and
to chasten us, least we be condemned with the world 1. Cor. 11 32
, but it is with wonderful compassion, and earning of bowels, as the Lord
himself says, How shall I give thee up Ephraim? mine heart is turned within
me, and my repentings are rolled together Hos. 11. 8
: and no sooner do his children turn unto him, and take unto them words of
repentance, and say: receive us graciously, we will do no more so Hos. 14. 3
, but the Lord presently, heals the wound Hos. 6. 1.
, and burns the rod; when I have accomplished my work upon Sion, and
Jerusalem, I will visit the fruit of the proud heart of the King of Ashur Esa.
10. 12
. Oh then shall we refuse the correction of him that deals so mildly, and
mercifully with us, nay rather let us with David, rejoice in it, and pray with
Jeremy, Correct me oh Lord, but in judgment, or in measure, according to
mercy Ier. 10. 24
.

3 The third consideration, To consider the manifold good fruits of Gods rod
sanctified; a singular means of comfort, when we be whipped therewith.
which may make us rejoice in Gods rod, is, of the wonderful benefits, and
fruit that it brings forth, being sanctified unto his children; whereof the
Apostle thus generally speaks, in the Epistle to the Romans, saying; Also we
know that all things work together, for the best unto them that love God To.
8. 38.
: and more specially in the Epistle to the Hebrews, saying: No chastising for
the present seems to be joyous, but grievous: but afterward it brings the
quiet fruit of righteousness, unto them which are thereby exercised Heb. 12.
11.
. And that we may be the better persuaded hereof, we will consider a few of the
chief of them, as the Scriptures lay them down.

First, afflictions are notable means to humble us before God, which is an
excellent grace, as the Prophet shows, saying: Oh man the Lord has showed
thee what is good, to do justly, to love mercy, and in humility to walk
with thy God Mic. 6. 8.
: and God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble, says S. James
Iam. 4. 6.
, and Marie in her song, thus confesses: He casts down the proud and
mighty from their seats, and exalts them of low degeee Lu. 1. 51.
: and our savior Christ has pronounced, Blessed are the poor in spirit, for
theirs is the Kingdom of heaven Mat. 5. 3.
. Now how proane men are in prosperity to grow proud Diuitiarum morbus,
superbia.
, both the Scriptures, and examples do teach; S. Paul bids Timothy,
Charge the rich men of the world, that they be not high minded, nor trust in
uncertain riches 1. Ti. 6. 17
, and David charge, That if riches do increase, we set not our hearts thereon
Ps. 62. 10
. What need these strait charges, if God did not foresee, a proanesse unto this
sin? Pharaoh in his prosperity, demanded who was the Lord Exo. 5. 2.
?

But in his adversity, he desired Moses and Aron to pray for him Exo. 8. 8.
: Nabuchodonozer, in his prosperity boasted of mighty Babell, which he had
built for the honor of his Majesty; but when he was driven from men, and did
eat the grass with the Oxen, and his body was wet with the deaw of heaven;
his understanding being restored, he could humble himself, and acknowledge
that such as walk in pride, the Lord is able to abase Dan. 4. 34
: And that we may not think, this is only proper to the wicked; mark what
David, (a man after Gods own heart) confesses of himself, In my prosperity,
I said, I shall never be removed; then did thou hide thy face from me, and
I was troubled, then cried I unto the lord, and prayed unto him right humbly
Ps. 30. 6, 7, 8.
. This is then one special benefit of Gods rod, to humble them before the
Lord.

Secondly, by Gods rod, men are brought I will go, and return to my place,
till they acknowledge their fault, and seek me in their affliction, they will
seek me diligently Hos. 5. 15
. Which how true it is, their own practice in the first verse of the next
Chapter, shows, where they exhort and encourage one another, saying: Come let
us return to the Lord, for he has smitten, and he will heal us; he has
wounded, and he will bind us up Hos. 6. 1.
.

Esaias, When Gods judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants thereof shall
learn righteousness Esaias 26. 9
. And this does David acknowledge to have found by his experience, Before I was
corrected, I went wrong, but now have I learned to keep thy law Ps. 119.
.

Laodicea, saying: As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten, be zealous
therefore, and amend Reu. 3. 19
. When did Jonah so fervently pray unto God? Surely, (as he confesses) when
he was in the belly of hell, when the depths closed him round about, and the
weeds were wrapped about his head Jonah. 2. 1. 5
, that is, when he was in the belly of the Whale, which descended with him
down to the deepes of the Seas, and rolled in the weeds. In the time of his
prosperity, he neglected his calling, was disobedient to the voice of the
Lord, and being called to go to Niniuie, he went post have another way, down
to Iapho, and finding a ship going to Tarshish, he paid the fare of it, and
down he went into the belly of it, and slept, but he that slept in the belly
of the ship, which floated upon the waters, is awake in the belly of the whale,
tumbling amongst the weeds, in the bottom of the sea, he that fled from Gods
presence, is now, as ready to fly to God, by prayer Res mira, vigilat in
ceto, qui stertebat in naui: orat, in mare, qui fugiebat in terra.
Manasses, when he was in prosperity in Jerusalem, with his chains of gould,
and pearl, about his neck, then he forgot God, and gave himself to do
evil, like the abominations of the heathen: But when he was bound in chains
and fetters of iron, and carried into Babylon, then he could humble himself,
and most earnestly pray unto God 2. Cro. 33 18.
. The people of Israel when they were in Sion, they lived at ease, and though
God sent his Prophets early and late, to call them to repentance, yet they
would not hear, but put off the evil day, and approached to the seat of
iniquity, stretching themselves upon their Iuorie beds, eating the lambs of
the flock, and calves of the stall, singing to the sound of the violl, and
anointing themselves with the best ointment Amos 6. 4, 5, 6.
. But when they sat by the rivers of Babylon, then they could weep full
bitterly, to remember Sion Ps. 137. 3
. In this respect S. Peter calls aflictions fiery trials 1. Pet. 4. 12.
: For as fire does purge the dross from the metal, and makes it much more
pure and shining; so by afflictions, the Lord does consume and purge the dross
of his Saints, that they may appear, more pure, bright and shining, zealous of
good works.

5 Lastly, afflictions are most excellent means for to weane our affections
from the world, and to breed in us a dislike of the same, together with an
earnest longing after those heavenly mansions, where we shall be freed from all
miseries; so the Lord exercised his people, with much hardness, both in Egypt,
and the wilderness, that so they might the more earnestly long for the
promised land: and surely, to that end, does the Lord send manifold
afflictions, in the wilderness of this world, that we may the more earnestly
long for the spiritual Canaan, flowing with better things than milk and honey;
whereas otherwise, if we had all things at our hearts desire, it is to be
feared, we should not bethink our selves of any better place. Seeing then Gods
rod being sanctified, is every way so profitable and fruitful to his Saints,
shall we not with David comfort our selves in it? God forbid that we should
not most thankfully receive, and unfeignedly rejoice, in that whatsoever, is any
means to bring us nearer unto God, and to further our salvation in Christ, be
it never so bitter and unpleasant, to flesh and blood for a time, for the end
thereof, will be full of joy and peace at the last.

In the second part of the doctrine, The second branch, of the doctrine
confirmed.
we learned, that Gods Saints have matter of great comfort from Gods staff: 1.
From the fearful plagues, and punishments, which God powers upon the heads
of his, and their enemies. So says David, The righteous shall rejoice, when
he sees vengeance to come, and shall wash his foot in the blood of the wicked
Ps. 58. 10
. Not that the godly shall cruelly insult over the calamities of the wicked,
but considering that God is glorified, by these his righteous judgments, they
do with joy (free from hatred, cruelty, impatiencie, and other such like
turbulent affections) approve of the same Nisi, vt deum ex toto cord
dilligunt, ita nihil illis maiorem ad fert voluptatem, qua^ ipsius nomen
illustrari, etiam cuiuscunque id pernicie fiat. Bucer. in Ps.
. So Moses and all Israel rejoiced, and sung Psalms unto God, for the
destruction of the Egyptians Exo. 15. 1
. Deborah, and Baracke rejoiced, for the overthrow of Siserah, and Iabins host
Judge. 5. 1.
: And in the last verse thereof, with a zeal to Gods glory, pray for the like
confusion of all his enemies, saying: So let all thine enemies perish, oh God.
So also it is said, that the souls of them who have been killed for the word
of God, and testimony which they maintained; cried with a loud voice, saying:
How long Lord, holy, and true, do thou differ, to avenge our blood, on
them that dwell on the earth Reu. 6. 9. 10
? Yea doubtless at the day of judgment, when our affections, shall be made
thoroughly comformable, to the will of God, and our souls ravished, with his
glory; it shall greatly add, to the fullness of our joy, to see GOD glorify
himself, by crushing to pieces, with his staff or iron rod, Satan, and all
the wicked, though never so near, or dear unto us, in this life Parents,
vxores, and liberos, prae Deo, si res poscat, odio habent, fideles; Buc. in Ps.
. And thus we see what great comforts, both GODS staff, and rod afford his
Children, etc. it follows.

THE SEVENTH SERMON upon the 5. and 6. verses of the 23. Psalm, preached at
Ashford in Kent, the 26. of March 1603. being the first Saturday after her
Majesty's departure, and the day that the King was proclaimed there, in the
Audience of many right Worshipful Knights, and Gentlemen.
Thou do prepare a Table before me, in the sight of mine Adversaries, etc.
SVch is the force of sorrow, (right worshipful, and beloved) as Physicians
say, that being in great measure, and suddenly conceived, it so vehemently
pearceth the heart, and causes it to call in the natural heart, from the
external parts of the body, and is not able, to dispierce or send it out
again; that it either procures sode^ death, or some mortal sickness, which
seems to be verefied, by examples in the Scriptures; we read of Eli, that
hearing how the Philistims, had put the Israelites to flight, and taken the
Ark of God; with the extremity of the soden fear, and sorrow conceived, He
lost his strength, fell backward from his seat, and brake his neck 1. Sa. 4. 18,
. Likewise, it is said of Naball, that ( so soon as his wife had acquainted
him, with David's intent, to be revenged on him, and all his family, for his
churlish answer to his servants 1. Sa. 25. 10
) his heart dyed within him, and he was like a stone 1. Sa. 25. 37.
. Also Balthazar, seeing the palm of an hand to write his doom, upon the
plaster of the wall, over against him in the midst of that royal Feast,
which he made to a thousand of his Princes: his countenance was changed, and
his thoughts so troubled him, that the joints of his loins were loosed, and
his knees smote one against another Dan. 5. 5. 6, etc.
And surely, the great sorrow which every true Christian in this land, may
justly conceive, from the great loss, of our lately deceased, (oh that I am
constrained to say deceased) gracious Princess Elizabeth, (who was the very
light of our eyes, and breath of our nose thrils, a tender nursing-mother Esaias
49. 23.
, (as the Prophet says) in whose lap we have been more than 44. years,
nursed and fed, both with the sincere milk of the word of God 1. Pet. 2. 2
: and with the good things of the land Esa. 1. 19
) may justly (at the least) astonish us; this I say, together with the view, of
so great a concourse of people, and specially of the best and learnedder sort,
(whose expectation is not easily satisfied, though upon long, mature, and
peaceable premeditation, whereas small or no time is now allotted, and my
thoughts troubled, and distracted Carmina secessum, scribentis, and otia
quaerunt: me mare me ventus, etc. Ovid.
; have much disabled me, to the perfourmance of this great and weighty duty;
and I could be content, rather to exercise mine ear in hearing, than my tongue
in speaking, being fitter and readier to learn, than to teach Absit, vt non sim
paratior discere, quam docere.
, (and specially upon so soden, and extraordinary occasion, when every man is
swift to hear, as S. James says, and their ears much more attent, and
sharper, Iam. 1. 19
than at other times.) But seeing this is a day of good tidings, as well as of
heavy news, in that the Lord has not left us in the bitterness of mourning,
but comforted our hearts by giving us a most religious, zealous, and prudent
King, (oh happy word of comfort, that I may so say) to sit upon her throne,
(as this day shall be proclaimed in your ears, as elsewhere it has been with
general applause, and consent of all) shall I hold my peace? Let the leprosy
of those men, cleave to my skin, if it be not as joyful a thing to me, to
speak of the honor of this day, as ever it was to the four Leapers of
Israel, to publish in Samariah, the happy tidings of the Aramities flight 2.
Ki. 7. 9.
. Oh then, that my tongue were as the pen of a swift writer, that I might
indite the honor of our King Ps. 45. 1.
, that it were as shrill as a trumpet Esaias 58* 1.
, to sound forth the praise of God, who has thus graciously diuerted our
deserved judgments; bringing shame upon our enemies, (that have longed for,
and by all treacherous means sought this day) and given us glory and honor,
(that feared and prayed unto god, that we might never live to see it) Oh if I
had the wings of the morning 139.
, I would take David's Ps. 148. 2. 3, 4, etc.
course, and soar up, or ascend into heaven, and call for the Angels, and
armies thereof, the Sun, moon, planets and stars Et si non cogitatione,
aut voce, aliae creaturae, preter Angelos, and homines, deum celebrant; sunt
tamen omnes, (...), in suo ordine, taciti laudatores, and canori praecones.
Greg.
, I would descend by the air, and call the fire, hayle, snow, vapors, and
stormy winds; diue into the deep, and call for the Dragons; yea end in the
earth, and call for mountains and hills; fruitful trees, and Cedars, beasts,
and all cattle, creeping things, and feathered fowls; Kings of the earth,
and all people, Princes, and Judges, young men, and maidens, old men, and
children; to lend us their harmony, with the best instruments that they have,
and to accord unto us, to praise the name of the Lord, by whom the horn of
this English people, has been so mightily exalted O bona, si sua norint, Angli.
, but I shall have more fit occasion, largely to prosecute, these things anon;
so much for the quickening of our dull spirits: now let us reverently, attend
to the word of the Lord.

Thou do prepare a table before me in the sight of mine Adversaries. The
second Allegory.
This portion of Scripture, I have not curiously selected, and chosen, The
sum of this verse and the intent or scope, of the holy Ghost therein.
(though very fit and pertinent, for this present purpose and occasion) but
God by his providence, has offered it to our consideration, by the orderly
prosecuting of this text, in this place; wherein this princely Prophet (having
in the four first verses of this Psalm, declared, the singular mercy and
providence of God toward his people, under the parable of a Shepherd,
providing all necessaries for his sheep:) does now in this 5. verse,
thankefully publish the singular mercy, kindness, and bountifulness of God,
toward his people in general, and specially toward him in particular, as by
experience he had found; under a second metaphor, taken from a most kind, and
liberal host, most franckely entertaining his invited guests, with all
comfortable dainties, and delicates, both for necessity and delight, the scope
and drift of the holy Ghost wherein, is all one with that in the former, and
therefore I may the less stand upon it, having so largely, and fully opened
the former (as you have heard) yet some things do naturally offer themselves,
from this place, to be considered of, which we have not met withal in the
former Allegory, and whereof special use and application are to be made,
according to the present occasion. For the better conceiving whereof, we are to
note, that this metaphor, has a double sense; the first is literal, wherein
David in way of thankfulness publishes to all the world, the great mercy
and goodness of God, in advancing him to the crown and Kingdom, with
wonderful peace and prosperity, in despite of all his enemies, who sought
his ruin according to that in another Psalm, The stone which the builders
refused, is become the chief stone in the corner, this was the Lords doing Ps.
118. 22.
. And by consequent also here is shadowed out, the wonderful mercy of God
toward his people, even in the things of this life, giving them all good
things, abundantly to enjoy 1. Tim. 6. 17.
, that their cups do run over.

The second is mystical, as signifying Gods wonderful care, and providence to
minister all good things, which may be for the comfort, refreshing, and
saluatition of the souls of his people in Christ. And the parts of this
metaphor, or Allegory, (being a metaphor continued Perpetua metaphora, dicta.
) are principally these three, first this metaphor is briefly and summarily
laid down in these words, Division of this verse.
( Thou do prepare a Table before me:) Secondly, it is amplified by a
special circumstance, in regard of his Adversaries, as it were gnashing with
their teeth, at that his prosperity, in these words, ( in the sight of mine
enemies.) Thirdly and lastly, he does illustrate the Metaphor, declaring the
sumptuousness and plenty of this table, both for necessity and delight, and
that by two particulers; first ( Thou do anoint mine head with oil)
Secondly, The sense and meaning of this first part, of this verse, according to
the letter.
( my cup runs over.) Of these parts in order, and first according to the
litterall sense, as David understands it, in regard of corporal or outward
things.

Thou do prepare a Table before me, by table metanimically are meant, all
such good things as for our nourishment and comfort, are set upon the table,
and by table also metaphorically, a prosperous, and flourishing estate is
represented; so David in those grievous imprecations, wherewithal, (according
to the motion of the holy ghost, with an holy zeal, and most pure affections,)
he cursed the enemies of God, thus he says: Let their table be made a snare,
and their prosperity their ruin Ps. 69. 22
Secondly, for this his prosperous and flourishing estate, signified by (
Table) he gives thanks unto God, acknowledging that the Lord ( prepared it,)
and that it was not his own bow, nor sword, neither the counsel, power, and
aid of his Nobles, and Peers, for these rejected him, but (as elsewhere he
confesses) it was the Lords own doing, and most maruailous in the eyes of
men. Thirdly, and lastly, he uses a word of continual act, he says not thou
have prepared, or wilt prepare, but ( do) prepare, thereby signifying, that
he that had advanced him, would also preserve him; So then the Sum of it,
is thus much in effect. q. d. O Lord, I acknowledge, The sum of this first
part, of the verse.
that it was not my wisdom, strength, or courage, that promoted me, but by
the power of thy right hand, and strength of thy most holy arm, have I at last
obtained the peaceable fruition of my crown and kingdom, in despite of all
mine enemies. Now let us consider the doctrines.

Our Lesson, Doctrine.
most naturally arising from this place is, that there are none advanced to
place of rule and government, but by the Lord. Confirmation.
Promotion (says David) comes neither from the East, nor yet from the West,
but God is the Judge, it is he that makes high and low Psa. 75. 6.
. And in another place, It is the Lord that raises the needy out of the dust,
that he may set him, with the Princes of his people Ps. 113. 7, 8.
. God himself says, By me Kings reign, and Princes decree justice Pro. 8. 15.
. And S. Paul affirms no less, There is no power but of God, and the powers
that be, are ordained of God To. 13. 1.
, yea though they be wicked, cruel, and idolatrous Tyrants, and seem by
fraud, ambition, and cruelty to advance themselves, as Jeroboam, concerning
whom, God reproved the people, saying: You have set up a King, but not by me;
1. not according to my revealed will Hos. 8. 4.
yet notwithstanding the Lord has prepared them, even for a rod or scourge,
whereby to punish the sins and unthankfulness of his people, as the Lord
has said, I gave thee a King in mine anger Osay 13. 11.
. Yea, and concerning Jeroboam, we know that God revealed it unto Ahiiah,
before the death of Solomon, That he would rent ten tribes from his son, and
give them him, for confirmation whereof, he took the new garment, that
Jeroboam woare, and rent it in twelve pieces, giving him ten of them 1. Kin.
11. 29. 30.
. So proud heathenish Ashur, is called the rod of Gods wrath Esaias 10. 5
, Cyrus, his shepherd Esaias 44. 28.
, and Nabuchodonezer, his servant Ier. 25. 9.
. Yet must this by the way be remembered, that though wicked ones have their
power from God, yet not their sinful malice, whereby they abuse their power,
to do hurt, and therefore Julian shall answer for his Apostasy, deriding, and
persecuting of the Saints Socrat. Scholast. lib. 3. cap. 1.
. Pharaoh, for his tyrannical oppressing of the Israelites Exo. 1. 16* 5. 7, 8.
, Ahab, for his cruel persecuting of the Prophets 1. Ki. 18. 13.
, Herod and Pilat, for their iniust condemning of Christ, Lu. 23. 12
, Neroh, for his bloody executing of the Apostles Eusebius. Pamph. lib. 2. ca. 25
: and all other, who to the dishonor of God, abuse their power, to justify the
wicked, and condemn the innocent, both which are an abomination to the Lord.

The first use of this doctrine, 1. use, that the Kings, Princes, and all
rulers are to make of this doctrine.
concerns Kings and Princes themselves, that considering they come not by
their places, and authority, by chance or fortune, but by the providence, and
appointment of God, whose the earth is, and all that therein is, the compass
of the world, and they that dwell therein Psa. 24. 1.
, that therefore they do carefully and conscionably apply themselves, to do
his will, that has promoted them, and whose Vicegerents they are, knowing,
that assuredly the Lord that placed them, will one day, require a strickt
account of them Ps. 82. 2.
: which thing Solomon well knew: and therefore when the Lord appeared to him,
and bad him ask what he should give him, he desired above all things, that
God would give him an understanding heart, to judge that great people 1. Kin. 9.
. So it is said, that the Lord chose David his Servant, and took him from the
Sheepefolds, even from behind the Ewes great with young brought he him, to feed
his people in Jacob, and his inheritance in Israel Ps. 78. 70.
Yea, the Prophet Esaias more effectually expresses the duty of a Prince, in
the person of our Savior Christ, saying: Righteousness shall be the girdle
of his loins, and faithfulness the buckle of his raynes Esaias 11. 5
. 1. His care must be to defend the fatherless and widow, relieve the
oppressed, and have no respect of persons in judgment, and every way that he
can to provide for the peace and security of his people, that they may have
ease in this wayfaring City; but his chiefest and greatest care must be for
Religion, to maintain the Gospel, that so his people may be trained up, in
the knowledge and fear of the Lord Ita, Deo prestabunt obsequium long
gratissimum, and regna mument, praesidio omnium validissimo, illius fauore, qui
dixit, honorantes me honorabo. Gualt. in Esa.
. In regard whereof, the Lord has called them nursing Fathers, and nursing
mothers Esaias 49. 23.
. The consideration whereof, made those noble Kings, David, Solomon, Asa,
Iehoshaphat, Ezekias, Josias, to make most godly, and zealous reformations in
religion, and the worship of God 1. Ki. 15. 12, 13. 1. Kin. 22. 41. 2. Kin. 8.
4.
: without which, it had now nothing profited their subjects, to have sat
peaceably under their vines and figge-trees 1. Kin. 4. 25.
, to have had silver as chippes, and gould as the stones of the street, for
what will it profit a man, to win the whole world, and loose his own soul
Luke. 9. 25
. And therefore we have great cause to pray unto God, to bless and stablish
our Religious King, and to give him a wise heart, to consider who it is that
has prepared this Table for him; that with David he may make conscience of
his duty, of whom the holy ghost has witnessed, That he fed them according
to the simplicity of his heart, and guided them by the discretion of his hands
Ps. 78. 72
.

A second use of this doctrine, 2. A second general use of the former
doctrine, concerning all subjects.
concerns all subjects, which the Apostle lays down, in these words: Let
every soul be subject to the higher powers To. 13. 1.
, both in all conscionable obedience to their just and lawful commandments,
as also by suffering of their iniust punishments, without resistance, knowing
that if he be a good, and Religious ruler, the Lord has given him for a
blessing; but if a wicked one, the Lord has given him as a curse, for the
trial of his people, and therefore the high way, is seriously to repent, that
so God, who has given such an one in his anger, may also take him away in his
wrath Osay 13. 11.
So Jeremy commanded the poor captives, to pray for the peace of Babylon
Ierem. 29* 6, 7.
: Christ commanded, to give to Caesar, the things that are Caesar's Mat. 22. 21:
, and S. Peter, that we submit our selves to all manner of ordinance, for the
Lords sake 1. Pe. 2. 13
: Yea, and S. Paul in the forecited place, urges this duty by many and
weighty reasons, as that whosoever resists, resists the ordinance of God,
and they that resist, shall receive to themselves condemnation To. 13. 2
.

In the sight of mine Adversaries: 2. part of this verse.
The Prophet having summarily laid down his prosperous estate, in the former
words. Sense, of the words.
Now in these, (which are the second part of this verse) he does amplify the
same by a special circumstance, that God had thus advanced, and done these
great things for him in the very sight of his enemies, or (as the Hebrew
phrase will bear it, and doubtless the intent of the holy Ghost is) in
despite of mine enemies; Sum of the words.
So then the Sum of it, is thus much in effect. q. d. O Lord, although I have
had many most mighty, and subtle enemies, who enuyed me, and sought my ruin;
yet thou oh Lord, have taken my part, and in despite of them all promoted me.
So that in effect, it is the very same thing, which David elsewhere, under a
most elegant metaphor expresses, saying: The stone which the builders refused,
is become the head stone in the corner Ps 118. 22
. This stone was David, whom the chief builders, that is, Saul with his
Counselors, Peers, and Nobles did contemn, reject and persecute, as unworthy
to have the basest place in the common wealth, and yet by the maruailous
providence, and disposition of God, was advanced to become the head of the
corner, even the King and chief of the people Lapis hi, David est,
aedificantes, Saul, and proceres, westmer. in Ps. Non dicti sunt aedificatores,
art, sed aedificantes, actu, non artifices, officio, sed exercitio; vbi ergo
sunt, qui dicunt, praelatos posse non residere? Paulus de Palatio, in Mat. ca.
21* fol, 683.
, which is also agreeable to his own speech unto Saul, saying: If the Lord
have stirred thee up against me, let him smell the savor of a sacrifice; but
if the children of men have done it, cursed be they before the Lord, for they
have cast me out this this day, from abiding in the inheritance of the Lord,
saying: go serve other Gods 1. Sa. 26. 19.
.

Our Doctrine from this place is, Doctrine.
that what thing soever the Lord will have, either for the good or evil, of
any people or person, it shall come to pass, and all the world shall not be
able to withhold a blessing, or prevent a curse. Confirmation.
So the Lord himself has said: my counsel shall stand and I will do
whatsoever I will Esaias 46. 10.
. Yea, it shall stand more durable, than the firmament of heaven, as the King
of Babylon has testified, saying: according to his will, he works in the
army of heaven, and in the Inhabitants of the earth, and none can stay his
hand, nor say unto him, what do thou Dan. 4. 32.
? David also witnesses no less, saying, Our God is in heaven; and does
whatsoever he will, in heaven, in earth, in the sea, and in all deepes Ps.
135. 6
. And Solomon also has said, There is no wisdom, counsel, or strength
against the Lord Prou. 21. 30
? If the Lord will bring a blessing, who then can withold it? who would have
thought, that David being so mortally hated, and cruelly persecuted, that he
was glad to fly from hold to hold, yea, to very heathen Kings for succor 1.
Sa. 27. 1
, that ever he should have enjoyed the Crown, yet you see, David finds a
time when to give God thanks, for preparing his table, in despite of all his
enemies. And if the Lord be angry, and will bring a plague or punishment,
upon any people or person for their sins; who can prevent it? If his anger be
once kindled, and his wrath thoroughly fired, all the Rivers of the south
cannot quench it, it increases by going Incandescit, eundo.
, and gathers strength, most fearful is it for sinners, to consider that
which God himself, by solemn protestation has delivered, saying: I lift up
mine hand to heaven, and say, if I whet my glittering sword, and mine hand take
hold of judgment, I will execute vengeance upon mine enemies, and will reward
them that hate me, I will make mine arrows drunk with blood, and my sword
shall eat flesh Deuteronomy. 32. 41, 42
. There is a time, when his sword is dull, and (as it were) rusteth in the
scabberd of his long patience, and his hands are so filled with mercy, that
judgment is laid aside, and has no room to be spanned in them; but if he
once whet his glittering sword, and his hand take hold of judgment, he will
strike home, and recompense the slacknes of his judgment, with the heaviness
thereof Tarditatem supplicii: grauitate compensat:
. The use of this doctrine is double.

First, that we do submit our selves, to Gods revealed will, The first use.
not struggling against it, be it for our weal or woe; for what says the
Apostle, do we provoke the Lord to anger? are we stronger than he 1. Cor. 10
22
? No surely, we are but as clay in the hands of the Potter Ier. 18. 6.
, it is but the labor of Sisyphus, if we build, he will pull down Malach. 1.
4.
; as the Prophet says, A league with all the elements of the world, with the
beasts of the field, stones in the streets, yea with death and hell themselves,
cannot secure us Esaias 28. 18
. And therefore whatsoever befall us in our bodies, children, goods; away with
impatiencie which is one of Satan's brood Impatientiae, natales, in ipso
diabolo, deprehendo. Tertul.
; and let us hang fast on that golden chain, and veresie the truth of the
Apostles words, where he says: Tribulation, brings forth patience;
patience, experience; experience, hope; and hope, will never suffer us to be
ashamed or dismayed To. 5. 3, 4, 5.
.

A second, (and that more proper, and natural) use, is, that seeing the Lord
does what he will, and none can withold, yea and though means be never so
small, yet it is easy with him, to save by many or few 1. Sa. 14. 6.
; that then, we depend not altogether upon secundarie means, but in all
things cast our selves upon his providence, knowing that if the Lord be with
us, and delight to do us good (which he will, so long as we walk in the ways
of his commandments) we need not to be afraid of any enemies.

Now, Application.
if we make application of these things to our selves, we shall find, that they
do very nearly concern us, The miraculous providence of God, in protecting
and preserving Queen Elizabeth, before her reign, in her reign, and at her
death.
both in regard of our late Queen, and of our own persons, in regard of our
present King. For the first, how wonderful was the mercy and providence of
God toward the person of our late sacred Queen, both before her reign, in
the time of her reign, and at her death, who so ignorant or blind that sees
not, or knows not? In the days of Queen Marie, (when as Gods Saints were as
the stubble before the fire, and the Land almost consumed with the flames of
hot persecution,) how was her soul hunted by Gardener and others, like a
Partridge upon the mountains, as David said 1. Sa. 26. 20
. What extreme misery, sickness, fear and peril was she often in? into
what great care, trouble of mind, and fear of death was she brought, being
tossed from house to house, from prison to prison, and from post to pillar: in
what danger of wolves or butchers was she, when her righteous soul cried
Tanquam ouis.
, she was led as a sheep to the slaughter Psa. 44. 22
: and that she had no friend but God, fearing that the Scaffold of the Lady
Jane, stood for another tragedy, wherein her self should have played the
wofullest part Acts, and Momuments, the second vol. page 1895.
. But oh see the goodness of God, who never slumbreth nor sleeps when his are
in distress, who as still he raised one friend or another, even in her
persecution and misery, to be some means of comfort unto her: so in due time,
all her greatest enemies by opportune deaths, dropped away, whereby, by little
and little her ieopardie decreased, fear diminished, hope of comfort, began to
appear as out of a dark cloud; till in the end by the death of her sister,
the Lord prevented her with liberal blessings, and set a Crown of pure gould
upon her head Ps. 21. 3.
exalting her from thrall, to liberty; from danger, to peace and security;
from dread, to dignity; from misery, to majesty; briefly, of a Prisoner,
made a Princess; of a mourner, a Ruler; to the glory of God and endless
comfort of his Saints. Yea, and since, how many great and fearful dangers
has she escaped? The Pope, and his cursed instruments, never ceasing by all
devilish means to work our woe, and quench our light; and yet how miraculously
has the Lord from time to time delivered, and preserved her through-out her
long, and happy reign: and now also (a matter of singular comfort to all that
loved her) taken her soul to himself, to live in perfect rest, and never
suffered the Son of violence to do her hurt, or shorten her days; that
never might any King or Queen, more truly apply the words of my Text, than
she, and say; O Lord, thou have prepared my Table, and in despite of all mine
enemies, maintained it to the end. Secondly, for our selves, How wonderful
both Papists, and Atheists, were deceived, and their mischeeuous purposes
frustrate, by the soden and joyful Proclamation of our King.
this is the day, which we justly feared, to be the day of our bane and ruin,
the periode and end of our prosperity, for on the one side, the Papists,
(whose number God decrease, either by conversion or confusion, as he sees
best) they have long wished and sought for it, hoping that then Christ should
die with her, and the Gospel be buried in her Sepulcher. On the other-side, a
great number of inordinate walkers, very idle Rogues, who live by stealing,
robbing, and unlawful shifts, (who foolishly supposing, that betwixt changing
of Kings, there is no Law in force, but all things common, and men may do
what they list) have long expected this day, when as like Vultures, they might
devour the fruits of honest men's labors, and commit what mischief and
villainy they would, without any controlement. But behold, and wonder at the
providence of God, who has prepared for us, so religious, godly, and wise a
King (this day to be proclaimed unto us, as elsewhere he has been) whose
very name proclaimed, has so daunted, both the enemies of our Religion and
peace, that they stand amazed, in the beholding of our peace and happiness,
and rather bethink whither to fly and hide their heads, than to commit any
outrage. So that never was there any people, might more truly apply this Text
of Scripture, to themselves, and say with David, than we: The Lord has
prepared a Table before us, in despite of all our enemies; O Lord for thy
mercy, and Sions sake, finish the good work that thou have begun, that our
Table may be maintained still.

Thou do anoint my head with oil, 3. part of the verse.
and my cup runs over. In these words, the Prophet does illustrate, this
general metaphor, by two special things, both of them tending to one and the
same purpose, viz: To show the great plenty of precious and comfortable good
things, which God had provided, as well for his delight as necessity, for
though the Lord condemn all prodigality and superfluity, whereunto Satan
specially tempts us, as one very well observes from the manner of Satan
his tempting of Christ, who would not have a stone, but ( stores) turned into
bread Mat. 4. 3.
Non dixit, vt lapis hic, panis fiat, sed lapides, volens Christum ad superflua
instigare, esurienti enim vnus panis sufficit, etc. Theophilact. in Mat. 4.
. Yet does not God disallow a plentiful, and delightful use of his good
creatures. For the first, oil is reckoned up, by the Psalmist, as one of those
comfortable blessings which God has given unto man in this life, saying: the
Lord gives bread to strengthen the heart, and wine to make it glad, and oil to
make a cheerful countenance Psa. 104. 15.
: and whereof there was great use in those hot Countries Creauit oleum, ad
nitorem and alacritate^, atque agilitatem corporis, ideoque magnus in
calidioribus regionibus, eius fuit vsus. Moll. in Ps.
, and specially in their great, honorable, and solemn Feasts, insomuch that
they were thought, not lovingly and freely to entertain their guests, unless
they did anoint them with precious and fragrant ointments, as may be gathered
from our Saviors speech unto Simon the Pharisie, concerning the sinful woman's
fact, Simon, mine head with oil, thou did not anoint, but she has
anointed my feet with ointment Lu. 7. 46.
. Yea, and to avoid all appearance of hypocrisy, rather than we should look
sower, as the Pharisees, to the end that we may seem unto men to fast; he
bids us anoint our selves with oil, which may give us a cheereful
countenance Mat. 6. 17
. So Ioab he gave counsel to the subtle woman of Tekoah, (whom he sent to the
King in the behalf of Absalom) to put on mourning apparel, and not to anoint
her self, that she might seem to the King, that she had mourned a long time
for the dead 2. Sa. 14.
. So that oil, and sweet ointments were used in times of great feastings and
joy: and therefore David, to show how royally the Lord had prepared for him, and
entertained him; alludeth to the custom of those days, and says unto God:
Thou do anoint mine head with oil. Hereunto also tends the other
circumstance: in these words ( My cup does ouerflow, or run over) a thing
also ordinary, in great feasts or banquets, to have plenty of wine: so at the
marriage feast in Canah of Galilie, our Savior, when the wine failed (by
example, to approve the liberal use of Gods blessings) turned six pots of
water (containing two or three firkins a piece) into wine Ioh. 2. 6, 7
vnde intelligimus, quam largum fuerit, domini beneficium. Iansen. Concord.
fol. 144.
. And at that great Feast of Ahashuerosh, which he made for all his Princes and
servants, there was such great plenty of wine, according to the power of the
King, that thereupon it was called a banquet of wine Hest. 5. 6.
: though with this edict, that none should be compelled, but every man drink
according to his own pleasure Hest. 1. 8.
. A heathenish edict, to condemn innumerable professed Christians, yea, and
such as are in authority, who should reform it in others, but specially with
David Ps. 101. 7
, and Joshua have regard to their own families Josh. 24. 15.
, and yet they are no better than Schools of Bacchus and drunkenness, their
servants straining themselves, and compelling others, so long to drink of
cups, filled to the brimme and running over, with wine, and strong drink, till
all be filled with wantonness, vomitie, blasphemy, fightings, and other such
like brutish effects of intemperancie. Well, you see David's purpose and
meaning, in effect as much, q. d. O Lord, thou have not only advanced me to
the Crown and dignity royal, but have so plentifully enriched me, with all
good things, The sum of this third part, of this verse.
that no man can testify his kindness, toward his guests, (by annoynting
them with precious ointments, or filling their cups, till they run over) as
thou have showed thy self every way liberal toward me.

Wherein David is a notable example unto us all, Doctrine.
but specially to rich men, and teaches us that we must consider what we have
received of the Lord, that so we may be thankful. There be many, who even
swim in worldly wealth, but few that with David acknowledge from whence they
have received those good things; yea, there are none of us all in particular,
(though the Lord deal not equally with all) but if with a single ele void of
partial affection, we do consider what we have received, and what we have
deserved, and rather look back, to see how many live in want, and come short
of us, than to them that are before us, but in some measure, and in comparison,
we shall be constrained to confess to the glory of God, that our cups are
filled so full, that they do run over. But specially, The great prosperity
of England under the happy government of Queen Elizabeth.
if we do in general apply these things unto our selves, and consider the
manifold blessings which we have enjoyed, under the late happy and peaceable
government of our Lady and Queen Elizabeth, the Temples being not shut up,
nor Prophets slain, and Altars ouerthrown, as in the days of Eliah 1. Kin. 1.
9 10
, nor the hye ways unoccupied, as in the days of Iaell Judge. 5. 6.
, nor any leading into captivity, or complaining in our streets Ps. 144. 14.
, but rather, mercy and truth having met, Righteousness and peace having
kissed each other Ps. 85. 10
; our Land has so abundantly flowne with milk and honey, that we (if ever
any people) may truly acknowledge to the glory of God, that our cups do
ouerflow.

And as for the estate of our gracious King, (for I cannot restrain mine eyes
from looking, and my tongue from speaking of this glorious Sun which is risen
unto us, my text ministering so fit occasion) this I dare say, that his Majesty
(which no doubt will be matter of greatest joy) shall find as many truly
religious, loving, and loyal hearts, in England, as any King or Prince
whatsoever, and be as joyfully, and thankefully received, The great prosperity
of our king, to be prayed for, that God would continue, and sanctify it.
as ever was any King in Europe, both in regard of his right title, and for his
zealous defense of the Gospel, the life of our souls; besides, his coffers
cannot be empty, and his subjects are no beggars, there being now more plate,
than pewter heretofore. The Lord for his mercies sake sanctify his
prosperity, and knit his heart so unto God, in the zeal of his glory, and
love of his truth, that our hearts may be more and more knit unto him, in all
love and loyalty, that it may never be laid to his charge, what God
complayneth of his people, Sed saginatus recalcitrauit: he that should have
been upright, when he waxed fat, spurned with his heel De. 32. 15
. And so much for the sense and doctrines, from this second metaphor, according
to the letter; now, because in this, as well as in the former Allegory, very
glorious, and spiritual mysteries are shadowed out unto us; it will be
necessary, to speak thereof a few words.

( Thou do prepare a Table before me, is the sight of mine Adversaries, thou
do anoint my head with oil, and my cup runs over.) The excellent sweet
mysteries, which are shadowed out under these earthly things.
It is not unknown unto any, but meanly exercised in the Scriptures, that the
holy Ghost (condescending to our shallow capacities) does shadow out both the
incomprehensible ioys of Gods kingdom; and also the unspeakable sweetness,
which a Christian soul tastes, from her spiritual union and conjunction with
Christ, and the graces that flow to her from him; by a dainty and costly
supper, or banquet: of the former, is that of Christ to his Apostles, at his
last supper, I appoint unto you a Kingdom, as my Father has appointed unto
me, that you may eat and drink at my table, in my kingdom Lu. 22. 30
; Not that we shall need either food, apparel, light of the Sun, or moon
Reu. 21. 23.
. But because we are so gross, that we cannot conceive the blessedness of
that life: but by the plentiful enjoying of such good things, as are here
specially desired; whereunto also may be referred, the parable of the
mariage-feast, A king preparing a most royal dinner, killing his Oxen and
fatlings, against the marriage of his Son Math. 22 12.
.

Of the second sort, is that to be understood in the Revelation, where Christ,
allureth the sinful soul to repent, and open unto him, with this promise;
Behold I stand at the door and knock; if any man hear my voice, and open unto
me, I will come in, and suppe with him, and he with me Reu. 3. 20
. At which Feast David being entertained as a guest, acknowledges his head to
be anointed with oil, and his cup to run over; and surely, no marvel, for
where Christ is, what good thing can there be wanting? if he dwell in the
heart by faith Ephesians. 3. 17
, and if the graces, and power of Christ be received in, all evil and misery
is driven out, and all goodness and felicity do succeed, darkness is
driven out, Satan expelled; sin destroyed; and the horror of hell, and
dreadful judgment vanishes away: There is light, there is God, there is
righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost Romans 14. 17.
. Yea, we shall be filled with all sweet joys, and of this supper, shall be
none end. If any man yet further desire to know, where this royal Feast is
kept: 2. By whom: 3. Who are the guests: and lastly, what is their cheer: let
him read and consider, what the Prophet Esaias says. And in this mountain,
shall the Lord of hoasts, make unto all people a Feast of fat things, even a
feast of fined wines, and of fat things full of m^rrow, of wines fined, and
purified Esa. 25. 6.
. The place then, is Gods holy mountain, even the Church of God here on earth
Montis nomine, Ecclesia, per totum orbem terrarum, sparsa intelligitur Moll. in
Ps. fol. 212.
, where this feast is begun, and the faithful do taste the sweetness of such
good things, as eye has not seen, nor ear heard 1. Cor. 2 9.
: but it shall be perfected on the mountain of Gods holiness, where the
faithful, shall have their souls satisfied with the fullness of joys, which
are in the presence of God for evermore Ps. 16. 11.
. Secondly, he that makes this Feast, and prepares this Table, is the Lord of
hoasts, whose is the earth, with all that is therein Ps. 24. 1.
, whose are the fowls of the air, and fishes of the sea, and cattle upon a
thousand hills Ps 50. 10. 11
. Thirdly, the guests are not only such as are invited forth of an hundred,
seven and twenty Provinces, as the guests of that mighty Monarch Ahashuerosh
Hest. 1. 1.
. but all people, even all believers, of what age, sex, quality or condition,
in what place, or what time soever they lived, the poor and afflicted shall be
as welcome guests as the rich, yea, the poor shall eat and be satisfied Ps.
22. 26.
. Lastly for cheer, there are no dainties there wanting, there are Oxen and
fatlings Mat. 22. 4
: yea, a Feast of wines fined and purified, and of fat things full of marrow,
says the Prophet, whereby are signified the sweet graces of God, conuayed
unto faithful souls, by the ministry of the word and Sacraments, as the
remission of sins, and assurance of Gods love and favor, and full conquest
over sin, Satan, death, and hell: which are far sweeter than most fined
and purified wines Cant. 1. 1
: Yea, than honey, and the honey comb, and wherein they rejoice with joy
unspeakable and glorious 1. Pe. 1. 8
. Oh, that we could truly hunger and thirst after this heavenly banquet, and
follow the counsel of our Savior Christ, not labor so earnestly, for the
meat that perishes, but for that meat which endures to eternal life Ioh. 6.
27
. It follows.

Doubtless kindness and mercy, shall follow me, all the days of my life,
and I shall remain a long season, in the house of the Lord. The Prophet David,
having (as we have heard) expressed, the singular favor, love, and providence
of God, toward him and his people, by two pleasant and familier metaphors,
now he comes in this last verse, to show the use thereof, viz: That hereby
his faith was confirmed, and settled in the providence of God, whereby to be
preserved unto the end. The Sum whereof, The sum of this verse.
is thus much in effect: q. d. Seeing I have had such great experience of Gods
favor and love, I am persuaded, that he will continue the course thereof unto
me, even unto the end, that now having passed thorough so many dangers, and
peaceably obtained the Kingdom, I may now spend all the rest of my days, in
the service and worship of God, and sound forth the Lords praise, in the house
of my God.

And this verse consists of two principal parts: The division of this verse.
first what he doubted not to receive, ( kindness and mercy shall follow me,
all the days of my life:) Secondly, what use he would make thereof, ( even
dwell a long season, The subdiuision of the first part.
in the house of the Lord.) The first part may be subdivided again into these
members or branches; first, what he looked for to receive, ( kindness and
mercy:) Secondly, how to receive it, ( it should follow him:) Thirdly how
long, in this manner, these things should be bestowed upon him, ( even all the
days of my life.) These things do afford very profitable obseruatio^s, if I
could so insist upon them, but time has prevented me, and I am desirous to
make an end of this Psalm, because it so well fitteth the present occasion:
wherefore that I may not be tedious, I will but point out the chief matter,
and leave the rest to your Christian meditations.

Doubtless kindness, 1. part.
and mercy. When David purposed to build God an house, saying unto Nathan the
Prophet of God, Behold, I dwell in an house of Cedar trees, and the Ark of God
remains within the curtains 2. Sa. 7. 2
. Nathan (before he had asked counsel of God) approved thereof, and said:
Go and do all that is in thine heart, for God is with thee. 3.
But David being a man of blood, 4.
was not fit for such a work, and therefore the same night, the word of the
Lord came to Nathan, 12.
he should tell David, he was not the man, that should build Gods house, but
his son, that should proceed out of his loins: concerning whom the Lord thus
promised.

I will be his Father, 14.
and he shall be my Son, and if he sin I will chasten him with the rod of
men, 15.
and with the plagues of the children of men, but my mercy shall never depart
away from him. Surely, never was this promise more truly fulfilled unto
Solomon, than it was to David himself, God was his Father, and therefore when
David sinned, both committing whoredom and murder 2. Sa. 11. 4. 17.
, the Lord sharply corrected, and chastised him many ways, as by the death of
the child, which was begotten in Adultery 2. Sa. 12. 18.
, by his son Amnons incest, defiling his own sister Thama^ 2. Sa. 13. 14
, by Absoloms killing of Amnon 2. Sa. 13. 29.
, by Absoloms treasonable practices, persecuting him, and seeking to get the
Kingdom from him 2. Sa. 15. 2. 14.
, by Shimeis cursing of him to his face 2. Sa. 16. 7.
, by Absoloms abusing of his Fathers Concubines 2. Sa. 16. 22.
, by the fearful death of Absalom, being hanged in an Oak 2. Sa. 18. 9
; yea in a word, the hand of God, was still stretched out against him, all the
days of his life; yet did God never take away his mercy from him, so that he
might say with the Apostles, I have been persecuted, but not forsaken 2. Cor.
4. 8, 9.
: and so to the like effect, here he says, doubtless kindness, and mercy,
etc.

He says not, (...)
Doubtless, my head shall still be anointed with oil, doubtless, my cup
shall still run over, or doubtless, my prosperity shall never decay. For that
was a speech of infirmity, (as he himself afterward confessed) I said in my
prosperity, I shall never be moved, but had miserable experience of that his
weakness, for the Lord turned away his face, and then he was sore troubled
Ps. 30. 6, 7, 8.
; yea, and (to omit all the great miseries and straits, that he sustained
before he came to the Crown, through the hot and long persecution of Saul:)
after he was anointed King, (and as it seems, penned this Psalm in
thankful remembrance of Gods mercy toward him;) Yet sometimes, his cup did
not run over, as when he was ready to faint for thirst, and so greedily
longed, but for a cup of water, of the Well of Bethlehem by the gate 2. Sa. 23.
15.
; and also when for that great sin, in causing the people to be numbered, the
Lord sent Gad unto him, and put it to his choice, whether he would have seven
years famine, to come upon him in his Land, or slye three months before his
enemies; or three days pestilence. Whereupon David himself confesses, he
was in a wonderful strait 2. Sa. 24. 13, 14, etc.
: but yet David, by the assurance of faith, cleaves fast to this hold, that
doubtless, kindness and mercy would follow him, q. d. Let what change or
alteration soever befall me, in regard of mine outward estate, and condition,
yet am I sure Gods kindness, and mercy, shall never be taken away from me.
Doctrine.
Hence then, we have a very comfortable lesson taught us, Confirmation.
viz: That howsoever it pleases God for our sins, to alter our outward
estate, to give us stormy and gloomie weather, as well as fair and Sunshine
days, sometimes to make us glad, and sometimes to give us plenty of tears to
drink Psa. 42. 3. and 80. 6.
, yet is God no changling, that he should break off the course of his favor
and love, toward his elect, but whom he loves, he loves to the end Ioh.
13. 1
Vsque ad mortem continuauit, and post mortem etiam, perseuerat. Tollet. in
Ioh. Tom. 2. fol. 20.
, and whom he embraces, it is with an everlasting compassion Esaias 54. 8.
: his mercy and love does as well appear (if God open our eyes) in Adversity,
as in prosperity, in fatherly chasticements, and corrections, as in giving us
our hearts desire. And therefore howsoever Satan is exceeding subtle to
persuade, (and thorough our weakness, we are ready enough for to apprehend
the same) that if God lay never so little sickness, trouble, or loss upon
us; by and by we think, and say; Oh, God loves me not, if he did, he would
not deal thus, and thus with me, or this and that should not befall me. Use.
Let us take heed we be not deceived, this is no other temptation, than Christ
Jesus himself was acquainted with, who no sooner was an hungered, but by and by
Satan was at his elbow, to persuade him, that he was not the Son of God Mat.
4. 3
. Let us therefore follow the example of our Captain, and draw forth the sword
of the spirit, and say: avoid Satan, for howsoever God take away my health,
wealth, peace, and liberty, yet his mercy and loving kindness he will never
take away from me: but rather by these things, does seal the assurance
thereof unto me, for it is written, as many as I love, I rebuke and chasten
Reu. 3. 19
, and God corrects every child that he receives, as the father does the
child, in whom delights Pro. 3. 11 Heb. 12. 5.
. But of this we have sufficiently heard, and spoken before. But how shall
David receive this kindness and mercy?

Shall follow me. 2. part.
This is a word of singular comfort, and teaches us, Doctrine.
that God will not only show us kindness and favor, when we do earnestly
sue and seek for it, Confirmation.
which is our duty to do, but even when through weakness, we shall (as it
were) forsake God, and fly from him, then will he follow, pursue, and overtake
us with his mercy; so the Lord has promised, not only to be nigh to them
that call upon him faithfully Psalm. 145. 18
: but before we call, he has promised to answer, here I am Esa. 65. 24
. So he followed Adam with his mercy, when he had sinned and hid himself
amongst the trees of the Garden, Adam where art thou Gene. 3. 9.
? So he followed Jonah, when he fled post-hast from the presence of the Lord,
and sent forth a great wind, and a mighty tempest, to fetch him home again
Iona. 1. 3 4.
: and so he followed David, when he made such great speed toward hell,
committing one sin, and then a greater to cover it withal, and by the
ministry of Nathan, brought him to the sight of his sin, and repentance,
that he might be saved 2. Sa. 12 13
: wherein appears, the great difference betwixt Gods dealing, and man's, for
men follow after them that they are to receive any thing off, but God follows
them, to whom he may give his mercy Homines magis persequuntur eos, a quibus
accipiant, quam quibus dent. Musc. in Ps.
. Yea, so proane is God to do good, that he does good both to the wicked Mat.
5. 45
, and to beasts Ps. 36. 6.
. Yea, the Lord delights to do his people good, as he himself has said,
in Jeremy Ier. 32. 41
. And this is the ground of our perseverance, and continuance in the state of
grace; to the end, that howsoever, we be weak and froward, ready to start
aside like a broken bow, and to turn our backs upon the Lord, and fly from
him, as he complains by his Prophet Ier. 32. 33
: yet God will not leave us, but follow and overtake us with his blessings. For
so he has promised, I will make an everlasting covenant with them, that I
will never turn away from them to do them good, but I will put my fear in
their hearts, that they shall not depart away from me Ie. 32. 40
. Secondly, Christ ( who was heard in all things John 11. 42.
) has thus prayed for his Saints; Holy Father, keep them in thy name Ioh. 17.
11
. By virtue of which prayer, and Gods promise, we are sure, we shall stand
and continue in the state of grace, to the end; and that he will prosecute us
with his mercy, notwithstanding our great weakness, and frowardness. But how
long does David assure himself, to enjoy this mercy?

( All the days of my life.) ^. part.
Such is the great inconstancy of man, in that which is good, that without any
cause, to morrow he will persecute with hatred, him, whom to day he
prosecuteth with all kindness, and be as ready to hurt, as ever to help him:
But GOD is no such changeling, he is never weary, but still delights to do
his Saints good, though for a moment in his anger, he turn away his face from
them, yet with everlasting compassion does he embrace them Esaias 54. 8
, he has said it, and will not alter the thing that is gone out of his
lips, I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee, all the days of thy life
Josh. 1. 5.
, he that is our God in our youth, strength, wealth, and life, will be our God
in old age, in our weakness, poverty, and death, to go thorough the valley
thereof with us. But what will David do for all this mercy continued?

I shall dwell a long season in the house of the Lord. 2 part of the verse.
A most notable example of one rightly using his riches and honor, to the
glory of God, by promoting the service and worship of God, both in himself
and others, he says not as that wicked rich man in the Gospel, when he had
pulled down his old barnes, and builded new, and filled them with corn, Soul
be merry, eat, drink, and take thine ease Lu. 12. 19
; But rather he says: Oh my soul, God has advanced thee, The sum of these
words.
in despite of all thine enemies, and therefore now forget not Gods benefits,
but be thankful, and deuote thy self to his service, and worship, and
advance Gods honor, in his holy Temple. Oh that men could thus use their
wealth, and honor, as helps to further, and not as pul-backes to hinder them
in the way of salvation, it was David's greatest joy, when he might freely join
with the people of God, in the public exercises of Religion, for so he has
confessed, I was glad when they said, we will go into the house of the Lord
Psa. 122. 1.
, and it was his greatest grief in his persecution and troubles, to be
deprived of this blessing, as he shows, saying: As the Heart does bray for the
rivers of water; so pants my soul after thee oh God, my soul thirsts
after God, even after the living God, when shall I come and appear before the
presence of God Ps. 42. 1, 2
? And of all other, this was his most earnest request unto God, saying, One
thing have I desired of God, which I will require, even that I may dwell in the
house of the Lord, all the days of my life Psa. 27. 4
. Many things he wanted, but because his felicity consisted in the fear and
service of God, therefore in comparison thereof he cared for no other thing.
The Lord give the like desire to Prince and Subject, pastor and people, and
then will the Lord God of Israel be the God of England, he will delight to
do us good, and in despite of all our enemies, continue a happy government
over us still.

And now to draw toward an end, Conclusion with application.
I am to publish unto you both full joyous tidings, and full heavy news (both
of them I persuade my self, news not heard of, of many of you before) it has
pleased God to take to himself from among us, our dread Sovereign Queen
Elizabeth, and these are heavy news) that we have lost her, who not only
clothed us with Purple and Scarlet, pleasures and costly jewels, and all the
delights of the children of men, as David said of Saul to the daughters of
Israel 2. Sam. 1. 24
, but as a tender nursing mother Esaias. 49. 23
, fed our souls with the hidden Mannah Reu. 2. 17
, and bread of life Ioh. 6. 35
, under whom many of us have been borne into the world, and by the ministry
of the Gospel (which she has maintained) begotten and borne unto God Gal. 4.
19.
, in whose days, nothing but peace and plenty have been seen Psalm. 147. 14.
, whereas other our neighbor Countries, have been wasted and consumed with
wars, Ephraim eating up Manasses, and Manasses Ephraim, and both of them
devouring Judah, as the Lord has threatened Esaias 9. 21
, their goodly Cities and towns being ransacked and destroyed, grass,
brambles, and nettles growing in their streets, palaces and Temples for want
of passengers (as Jeremy lamenteth Lam. 5. 1^
, their walls and windows inhabited by Owls and Battes, men's hearts failing
for fear of the continual sounding of Trumpets, thundering of Drums,
neyghing of horses, rattling of Armor, and roaring of Cannons, so near some of
our borders, that our windows and houses have trembled with the report thereof
At the loosing of Calice.
.

Yea, their streates have run with streams of blood, their houses set on
flaming fire, their wives and daughters abused, and children dashed against the
stones in their sight: whereas we have sat (for more then four and forty
years) every man under his vine and fig tree, enjoying the fruit of our
labors, and revenues of our lands, without either hostile invasion, or civil
dissension, our spears are worm-eaten, and our swords turned into mattockes
and sithes, instruments of husbandry, as the Prophet speaks Esaias. 2. 4
, or rusty in their scabberds, the noise of the Cart and Whippe are heard in
our streets, our towns full of children playing, and old men leaning upon
their staves, as the Prophet Zachary speaks Zacha. 8. 4. 5
, Man goes forth to his labor in the morning, and returns not until the
evening Psa. 104. 23
. When he goes from home, he is not feared by any ambush of enemies, and
when he lies down, he is not wakened with sound of Alarm. Oh happy we that
have lived such golden days! But behold the instrument of this our glorious
happiness is now taken away, and this is the cause of our sorrow, yea time of
mourning. come, wherein we have every one cause to go heavily as he that
mourns for his Mother, as David says Ps. 35. 14
. Yea if the Lord had not dealt more graciously with us then either we have
deserved, or could expect, this had been to us all that mournful day, whereof
the Lord by his Prophet Amos speaks, I will turn your feasts into mourning,
and your songs into lamentation, and I will bring sackcloth on all loins, and
baldness on every head, and I will make it as the mourning of an only son,
and the end thereof as a bitter day Amos. 8. 20
. Yea, when all the orders, and companies of this Realm, from the honorable
Counselor, to him that draws water; from the reverent Judge that sits
upon the Bench, to the abject beggar that sits in the ashes; from the man of
gray hairs, to the sucking child, should have mourned in every corner of the
land, complained in every street, and cried in every house, Alas for the day,
alas for the day of the Lord, it is come, it is come Zacha. 12* 12
. And though God have in great measure turned our heaviness into joy, (as anon
we will consider) yet to mourn in measure, in faith, and in the fear of God,
for the loss of the parents of our body natural, or politic, is agreeable
to the law of nature, allowed by the law of nations, consonant to the law of
God, and confirmed by infinite examples, divine and profane. We read in the
Chronicles of the Scriptures, that when king Josiah died, who put away
Idolatry, restored true Religion, kept the Passover, loved his subjects, and
served God zealously all the days of his life, so that the holy Ghost himself
has registered his praises in this sort: Like unto king Josias was there no
king before him, that turned to the Lord with all his heart, and with all his
soul, and with all his might 2. Kin. 23 25
: I say it is recorded, that when he died, the Prophet Jeremy and all Judah
and Jerusalem, so bitterly lamented 2. Chro. 35. 24.
, that whenever afterward the Scriptures did speak of any great
lamentation, they did sample it with that of Hudadrimmon in the field of
Megiddo, as you shall read in the prophecy of Zachariah Zacha. 12* 11
, and surely never had they greater cause to mourn for Josiah, then we for
Queen Elizabeth, but specially if the Lord for our sins had given us an
Eliakim to succeed. But why should I press this point, seeing every face is
so plentifully watered with tears, as though every one of you had obtained
Ieremies request, your heads being full of water, and your eyes a fountain of
tears Iere. 9. 1.
. We will therefore bend our minds to the consideration of the cause of this
evil, Propter peccata populi erunt multi Principes.
which the wise man tells us: For the sins of the people, Princes shall
often be changed Pro. 28. 2
.

Let us cease then to weep for her, that we have lost such a one, and rather
be thankful unto God that we have had such a one Non maeremus quod talem
amissimus, sed gratias agimus, quod talem habuimus. Hieron.
, for she is gone not to prepare a place for us, but to enjoy that place which
Christ has prepared for her Ioh. 14. 2.
, whose truth she professed and maintained, and may say unto us, as Christ
said to the daughters of Jerusalem, Weep not for me, but weep for your
selves, and your sins, which have cut asunder the thread of my life Luke 23.
28
. Fie upon our Atheism, carnal profession, blasphemy, covetousness,
whordome, drunkenness, pride, profanation of the Sabbath, contempt of the
word, and great unthankfulness, which reign in Court and country, whereby we
have brought many plagues upon us, and now lastly this greatest of all, the
death of her Majesty, to the banishing of the Gospel and breakenecke of our
peace, and ship-wracke of our prosperity, if God had not for his own names
sake, dealt most mercifully with us. But let us come to consider what comfort
god has mixed our mourning with.

And herein first we may consider the merciful dealing of God toward our
Queen, that notwithstanding the Pope and Papists (who have ever been as full
of mischief to England, as ever was the Troyan horse to Troy, as a learned man
observes.) Dr. King in Jonas. fol. 401.
And many hollow hearted Achitophels, have by all pestilent practices, sought
to take away her life, yet the Lord in despite of them all has lengthened it,
to the full age of man, which is threescore years and ten, as David notes
Ps. 90. 10
, and now lastly taken her to himself in peace, and full of days, even as a
ricke of corn which comes into the barn in due time.

And if we look upon our selves, who have the chosen shaft of Gods Quiver, the
high and mighty Prince, James the king of Scotland to be proclaimed
(according to his right) the king of England, France, and Ireland, the constant
and zealous defender of the truth: O Lord, what heart can conceive, or tongue
express this wonderful mercy of God toward us; what a wonder is this to all
the world, Mira canam, sol occubuit nox nulla, secuta. qui non videt, cecus;
qui non laudet, in gratus, qui reluctatur, insanus est.
that no sooner did our Sun set, (which we feared would have brought upon us
a most doleful night) but in a moment, it passed through the other
Hemi-sphere, and has risen again, giving us comfortable hope of a more
joyful day then ever we inioyed, oh let us commend the finishing of this
glorious work to him that has begun it, let us pray for our king that he
may long enjoy the honor, Honos, and onus.
and be able to bear the burden; and wherein we have failed in our prayers
for our late Queen, let us double them for our present king, that God would
give him the wisdom of Solomon, the upright heart of David, the zeal of
Josiah, the courage of Ioshuah, and the long life of Methushelah; that if it be
Gods pleasure he may reign, so long as Sun and Moon endures, and resign
his Scepter when he resigneth himself into the hands of Christ, at his
glorious coming to judgment; and specially let us pray, that (with David) he
may make conscience of Gods house all the days of his life, that in his own
person he may be as an example, and go before us his Subjects in the zealous
profession of Religion, and also purge Gods house by refining the sons of
Levy Malac. 3. 3
, taking away the blind 2. Sa. 5. 6.
and the lame, and all such as have not gotten silver Belles Ex. 28. 33
at the skirts of their garments, the Vrim Exo. 28. 30
and Thummim in their breast plate, and holiness Ex. 28. 36
, to the Lord, engraven in letters of gold upon their forehead: that so with
greater cheerfulness we may lift up pure hearts and hands in his Sanctuary.
In the mean time, (as keeping a Christian mean betwixt these contrary
affections, of mourning for our late Queen, and rejoicing for our present
king) let us as one man, with our souls give glory unto God, and with our
tongues, in a strong united cry, say, God save King James, Amen, and let (
Amen Reu. 3. 14
) even the faithful witness of heaven, say Amen unto it, Amen, Amen.

Laus Deo.
FINIS.
To the Christian Reader.
THese Sermons being committed to my care, to be printed, in the absence of
the Author (by means of the contagious sickness in London:) I am to entreat
thee (courteous Reader) to bear with such defects or defaults, as have passed
the Press, either through my own, or the workmens oversight. Wherein, no
marvel if we might be overtaken, considering the closeness of the Copy, and
the same not re-written, but delivered unto us as he did set it down at the
first draught, (ouer-running his noates) and referring us by signs and marks
to displaced: wherein (peradventure) we have not rightly traced him, or
discried his directions in every place.

This I thought good to prefix in excuse of the form: but as for the matter of
the Book, it is able to speak for it self, and that in such sort, as I doubt
not, will prevail with such as fear God, and which can discern between
badde Books or paltrie Pamphlets, (which have of late pestered the land) and
between sound Sermons, or profitable Treatises that carry their weight with
them, and serve substantially for the building and beautifying of the Lords
house.

As this Book is thus able to vouch testimony for it self, out of God his
most holy Oracles: so I can bear this witness unto it: that being in Kent
when the most of these Sermons were preached, I have heard them commended, and
God thanked for the Author, by such, as whose hearts, I perceived, were
touched, nay, much moved at the hearing of them.

And further, touching the man; (since I am indyting this Preface without his
priuitie, and writing not to claw him, whereby naught can be gained; nor to
give Tytles to men, to whom belongs nothing but shame; but to gain glory to
God, to whom all praise is due, for raising up such instruments to the
furnishing of the ministry, and building up of his Saints:) I say, touching
the man, this I may truly, and not to no purpose report: that he coming from
Emanuell College in Cambridge, (for want of maintenance, (as I suppose) even
in his young years, before he was ripe: and afterward (as himself reports
in his Epistle Dedicatorie going before) spending some years (and those not
unprofitably:) as appears: when, after that, he addressed himself to the
Ministry, and was newly (young, as yet) entered thereinto, and placed at Wie
in Kent, where now he is: he seemed to have the thoughts of Moses, Exodus 4. 10,
13.
I am not eloquent, send whom thou will, etc: and of Jeremy, Ier. 1. 6.
I cannot speak I am a child: and of Paul: 2. Cor. 2. 16.
Who is sufficient for these things? The consideration whereof, not only
moved, but even enforced him to fall roundly to his study, and having gotten
good Books about him; he so labored therein, rising early, and sitting up
late, adjoining also practice of continual preaching to his set order of
reading: as that in short time he ouer-tooke such as in those parts had been
before him in Christ, and had been accounted chief in the labors of the
Gospel: yea, he matched the proceedings of many, who stay longer, and take
further degrees of schools in the Universities.

And thus becoming a man well known for sufficiency, was called upon to make
one in the combination at Ashford, where for the space of certain years he
has kept his course, as his turn came about, with credit, and like a good
steward brought forth those things both new and old, where with he had before
furnished himself in his private studies, and by his public and painful
preaching in his more private Congregation: so much of the man.

Concerning his manner of preaching at the first: I have then noted, and since
heard himself acknowledge it, that it was somewhat conceipted and
fantastical, sauouring more of Wit then of Wisdom, stuffed with humane
learning, and borrowing (withal) some flowers of the Fathers, out of
Hibernicus, pleasing also himself many times with witty Alligories. And (to
be short) taking a course more painful then profitable. Now, these his Sermons
show what he has read, and that he contemns not either the Schoolmen, or
the old or new Writers, no, nor the Humanitans themselves, as he has been
challenged: yet this I can say withal; that he shows himself more
plentiful (by making show hereof) in this his penned Treatise, then he was in
the Pulpit, in preaching of the Sermons. The which no doubt he has done with
advised judgment, considering that a man may (by reading) at leisure, ponder
the sentence and sense of an Author alleged; which (in hearing) on the
sudden (especially if it be cited in a strange tongue) he can not do,
without finding his attention therewithal much troubled. Again, if a Preacher
were bound to cite authority for all that he speaks; he should never have
done; for, as the Wise man says, What is it, whereof man may say, behold this
is new: so also, we may often say, Nihil iam dictum, quod non dietum prius. Yea
further, I do not see (for my part) any such profit in the great curiosity of
some (of late much practiced) in quoting chapter and verse so thick and
threefold as they do, no not out of the holy Scriptures themselves. For it
may be observed, that our Savior himself and his Apostles are oftentimes
contented to quoate at large, not citing so much as the Psalm or Chapter
whence they allege (much less the Verse:) but pointing as it were, to the
place; they presently bend themsleues to make use of it, according to the
purpose they have in hand, as in Math. 4. 10. John 7. 38. To. 9. 25. Romans 10.
15. Romans 11. 26. Heb. 2. 6. Iam. 4. 4. In many of which places we may also
observe, the sense, rather than the words, to be alleged, yea, the sense
also, sometimes rather collected, than expressed. And so also Master Calvin (a
man pregnant in the Text) very often in his writings, does in such sort quoat
and cite the Scriptures. And touching the Author of these Sermons, as he has
changed his first kind of preaching (as I said) into a better method: so also
in his present manner of handling the word, he is not so plentiful in
alleging places, as in this his treatise he has set down. By which his
course and conscience in the labors of his ministry, (seeking his peoples
good, not his glory) what good has been don in his charge, bringing into good
compass, that people, which not many years ago were out of square: I had
rather ye should find it in M. Stoughtons Treatise, of Or the vanity of
Popery.
the Gospels prosperous success, than read it reported by my pen.

Only this in this place I will remember, that these pains in study and
careful oversight in teaching and governing the people committed to his
charge, he has employed in a place, where both Parsonage and Vicaredge being
impropriate, swallowed down into the gulf of those High places that sometimes
stood in this land, (as this was into the Abbey of Battle:) the stinted
allowance for this man's maintenance, after all defalcations (the fat offerings
for the priests who in those days lived, being now ceased) is xvii. pound by
the year, and no more, the rest is supplied by way of contribution, wherein I
cannot but commend both Preacher and people; the one for being contented with
such allowance as is made; the other for extending so far as they do. But my
hope is, that ere it be long, some good order will be taken whereby Preacher
and people, (both in this place and many others) shall be otherwise provided
for; the one secured with a certain or standing stipend, the other freed from
a chargeable contribution, which comes the more unwillingly from them, by
means they are never awhit the more eased, from yielding their impropriate,
both great and small tithes.

In which regard, here fitly comes to be had in thankful and honorable
remembrance, the Royal bounty of our late Sovereign and gracious Queen
Elizabeth, who at the instance of that most worthy, religious, and deeply
prudent Counselor, Sir Frauncis Walsingham, Chauncelour of the Duchy of
Lancaster: was pleased to impart a large portion of those her Revenues
(certain hundred pounds) to yield standing yearly stipends of Fifty pounds a
piece, to some Master Midglie. Mr. Harrison, etc.
Preachers to labor in that shire, (before as it may seem, but slenderly
provided for in that behalf) which I think also to be the cause that moved
this Author (their Countryman) to be so careful of that County, as
appears before in his Epistle to his friends and kinsfolks of Lancashire.

But to return (and so to draw to an end:) after he had preached many other
Sermons at Ashford aforesaid in his several turns: at last, having begun, and
fully finished the 23. Psalm, in these seven Sermons: he was much importuned
by many to put them in print, especially by Master H. H. who being the first
man that gave him certain and full information of our late Queens departure,
and of the Proclaming of our present most gracious King in London on the
Thursday before: he did so stir him up to fit himself to speak the next
Saturday (being his course to preach, which fell out to be the last of these
Sermons) that he in such sort spoke upon those two (the one doleful, the other
joyful) occasions; as that there was not an eye in that plentiful audience of
right worshipful and others, (met about the said Proclamation to be made also
there;) but sent out abundant testimonies of that their ioyfull-sorrow.

Thus commending this book to the kind acceptance (the which I do the more
desire, in regard of the timorous disposition wherewith I have perceived the
Author to be much oppressed, even since he committed his book to the Press:
from which his bashful fear, if he shall be by the courtesy in some measure
set free, he may be brought to impart mo of his Meditations, wherinto he has
already made some entrance:) And commending thy self to the word of grace,
which is able to build thee further to an inheritance among the Saints: I bid
thee farewell.

From London the last of September, 1603. Thine in the Lord Jesus, John Swan.


