THE CONVERTS HAPPINESS.

A COMFORTABLE SERMON Preached at S. MARY'S SPITTLE in LONDON, in Easter-weeke,
the 19. April. 1609.

By THOMAS IACKSON, Bachelour of Divinity, and Preacher of Gods word, at Wye
in KENT.

AUGUST. IN PSALM. 30.

Esto domus eius, and erit domus tua; habitet in te, and tu habitabis in eo: si
eum exceperis in hoc saeculo; ille post hoc saeculum te recipiet. LONDON
Printed by JOHN WINDET for Clement Knight, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Paul's Churchyard at the Sign of the holy Lamb. 1609.

A Logical Analysis of the Text, together with a General (...) of the chief
points handled in a Sermon, on REVELATION. 3. 20.
This verse contains two parts. viz.
1. A Proposition (Behold I stand at the door and knock) Where note. 1. A
watchword prefixed, (Behold) which has a twofold use. viz. 1. For
demonstration of a thing certain. 2. To procure Attention, to a thing of
weight, and that chiefly in two cases. viz. 1. In case of wonder. Fol. 9. 2.
In the case of joy. Fol. 10.

2. The Proposition it self (I stand at the door, and knock) which ^^th two
parts. viz. 1. The subject, (I) which, notes unto us. 1. His love, that
vouchsafes to stand and knock, amplified by three Consideration* viz. 1. His
all sufficiency. Fol. 11. 2. Our indignity. Fol. 12. 3. His importunity.
Fol. 12.

2. Our unkindness, not to open unto him, but let him stand* Fol* 13. 2. The
Predicate which is threefold. viz. 1. His gesture (stand) which signifies. 1.
His readiness to enter, he neither si^teth, lies nor walks a loo^e, but
(stands at) Fol. 15. 2. His patience, he goes not away, but (stands)
waiting our opening. Fol. 16. 3. His observance of our unkindness, in not
opening (I have stood.) Fol. 18.
2. The place where, (at the door) where is showed how by two things, v^e may
know whether we have opened unto Christ, or no. viz. 1. He comes as a strong
armed man, and does banish Satan, Sin, Death and Hell. Fol. 23: 2. As a
King of glory, with his train of spiritual graces. Fol. 23.
3. His action there (he knocks) which he does four w^^^. viz. 1. By the
ministry of his word. Fol. 25. Application hereof to England and London* Fol.
29* 2. By his Mercies. Fol. 26. Application hereof to England and London* Fol.
29* 3. By his Corrections. Fol. 27. Application hereof to England and London*
Fol. 29* 4. By his Spirit. Fol. 28. Application hereof to England and London*
Fol. 29*


2. Promises (If any man, hear my voice, and open the door; I will come in
unto him, and Supp with him, and he with me) where note* 1. The generality of
them (if any man) Fol. 37. 2. The promises, where note. 1. The Conditions,
which are two. viz. 1. To (hear his voice) whereunto bree things are
principally required. v^z. 1. Preparation, before we hear. Fol. 40. 2.
Attention in hearing. Fol. 40. 3. Meditation, when we have heard. Fol. 41.
2. To (open the door) where three ^uestions are resolved viz. 1. Propounded
by the Atheist, viz. What need I to open? Fol. 43: 2. By the Papist, viz. Is
it in man's power to open? Fol. 44. 3. By the Protestant, By what means is the
heart opened? Fol. 45.

2. The promises themselves, which are two. viz. 1. Of cohabitation (I will
come in unto him) where are noted, as effectual motives to ^pen. viz. 1. That
he is a liberal rewarder of them that open unto him. Fol. 47. 2. Being once
entered, he is a comfortable and inseparable companion. Fol. 48.
2. Of mutual Communion, signified, by a Feast, which is twofold* viz. 1. The
sinners feasting of Christ, (I will Suppe with him) who serves in these three
dishes. viz. 1. Sin. Fol. 50. 2. Sorrow for sin. Fol. 50. 3. Misery, the
effect of sin. Fol. 51.
2. Christ's feasting of a sinner (and he with me) who serves in other three
dishes. viz. 1. Righteousness 1. Active. instead of 2. Passive. sins of 1.
Omission. Fol. 52. 2. Commission.

2. Joy instead of sorrow. Fol. 52. 3. Felicity, instead of misery* Fol. 53.






THE CONVERTS HAPPINESS.
THE TEXT. REVELATION. 3. 20. Behold, I stand at the door, and knock: if any
man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in unto him, and will Sup
with him, and he with me.
IT is a true saying (Right Honorable, Right Worshipful, and dearly beloved
Men, Brethren and Fathers.) That Gods School is more of affection, then
understanding; both Lessons are very needful, and very profitable, for the
Lord Jesus is at hand, in flaming fire to render vengeance to them that know
him 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8.
not: and not far from my Text, he threatens (with detestation) to reject
his Church, because she loved him Reave. 3. 16.
not. Both these therefore as a pair of Turtle Doves ought to be sacrificed
unto God, for to know and understand much, without zeal and devotion, is but
Painted hypocrisy: and to be zealous and devout without knowledge and
understanding; is but blind singularity. But in these days the second Lesson
is more needful to be taught and urged, because as Christ prophesied, the love
of many is grown cold: yea, if there be some that have much zeal and little
knowledge; there are many that have much knowledge and little or no zeal: long
peace and tranquillity, seconded with wonderful wealth and dignity; having
lulled most men and women into a spiritual slumber, in the Cradle of carnal
security. Give me leave then in your wonted Sermon at Paul's Cross on
New-yeres day last.
Christian patience, having not long since in public and solemn place by
Doctrine, informed your minds and understandings, in the knowledge of your
duties; Now, by word of Exhortation, to put heat and life into your
affections and devotion, for the practice of your duties. For which purpose I
have chosen this excellent portion of Scripture to entreat of, wherein Saint
John (by the direction of Gods holy spirit) does Graphically describe the
heavenly Sum of the Text.
happiness of a Convert soul: First, before her conversion, in that her
Savior, vouchsafes (as it were) bare headed, at the door of her heart to
entreat her Conversion, and to stand with much patience, waiting when she
will open unto him: Secondly, in the means which he uses for her Conversion,
which are, lovingly, to call unto her, and friendly, to knock at her door:
Lastly, in the benefits of her Conversion, which are his perpetual dwelling
and feasting with her, Behold, I stand at the door and knock.

John, the Disciple whom Jesus loved, and who leaned Coherence.
on his Lords John 13. 23.
breast, being first put into a vessel of scalding Oil by Fasciculut temporum.
Abdias.
Traian; and afterward, For the word of God, and for the witnessing of Jesus
Reave. 1. 9.
Christ being banished by Domitian into Eusebius. Eccle. Hist. li. 3. ca. 18.
Patmos, one of the Islands called Cyclades, or Sporades, lying in the West part
of Asia the less, near to the Churches to whom he writ, and by the Egean Sea;
as Christ loved him when he was present with him in body, so now, no less
does he love him being absent, and therefore as he appeared to Abraham in the
Gene. 22. 12.
mount, to Jacob in the Gene. 28. 11.
field, to Moses in Exodus 3. 2.
Midian; to Jeremy in the Iere. 38. 6.
Dungeon, to Daniel in Dan. 2. 23.
Babylon, and to Peter in the Tanners Act. 10. 11.
house: So, in good time, he does appear to his beloved John in this poor
I Will, and comfort him in his exile, with sweet voices, heavenly visions, and
most glorious Revelations.

The Title of the Book declares the use of it. Titulus libri frontispicie
adscriptus. E^casm. lo. Fox page 1.
It is called (according to the Greek (...).
Apocalypse: and (according to the Latin) Revelation) that is to say, a
Discovery or Manifestation of things which before were hidden and secret, in
respect of men, for the common good of the Church. Which very (...)
Title does most notably confute the Argument which the Jesuits use, whereby
to discourage the People of God from reading and searching of this Rhem. annot.
in cap. 1. sect. 2.
Book: For what though Saint De^^iuitat. dei lib. 20. cap. 7.
Augustine and others have spoken of the darkness and obscure mysteries of
this Book, Tot Sacramenta, quot verba, etiam singulis multiplices latent
intelligentiae: One of the ancient Fathers says Irenaus lib. 4. cap 43.
truly, (writing upon a Sentence of Daniel, viz. that the book should be
sealed till the end of the time Dan. 12. 4.
determined) every Prophecy is dark before it be fulfilled, but then it is
clear; so, many things might seem very dark Aenigmaes to those godly learned
Fathers, who lived before the fulfilling of them, which now unto us are most
clear, and evident FVLKE.
Revelations.

The Book contains (and may fitly be divided into) three Visions, as it
were into three general Parts, the first is contained in the three first
Chapters: the second, from the fourth to the twelueth: the last, from the
twelueth to the end. The first Vision is of seven golden Candlesticks, and
seven Stars, representing seven famous Churches and their Bishops in Asia
minor, to which he was directed to write so many several Epistles, viz.
Ephesus, Smirnah, Pergamus, Thyatire, Sardis, Philadelphia, and Laodicea, and
he chose rather to write to these Gentile Churches in Asia, then to the
Churches in Scribit ad Asiaticas non Iudatca^ Ecclesias vt sic ostenderet,
regnum Christi^am etiam peru^^i^^e ad gente^. B^lling. Conc* 3. fol. ^. ^ag. 2.
Judea, to signify that now the kingdom of God was come to the Gentiles, and
that the partition wall being broken ^^he. 2. 14.
down, the Gentiles were admitted and adopted into the fellowship of Gods
people: yet so, as under the several estates of these 7. Churches, the state
of the whole Church militant is laid open, and the doctrine therein contained,
so nearly concerns every one, that the Conclusion of every Epistle is, Let
him that has an ear, hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches.

The seventh and last Epistle was written to the Angel or Bishop of the Church
of Laodicaa, of which name there were diverse Cities, one in Macedonia, another
in S^r^bo. lib. 1 16. fol. 365. and 510.
Syria, this was doubtless a most famous City in Vrbi erat celeberima in
Asia. Ecphras. Pet. Bulleng. Trecons. in Apoealips.
Asia, situate in the Country of Plin. lib. 5. cap. 29.
Caria; builded as Histories witness by Antiochus Theos, and honored with his
wives name Laodicaea, and sometimes called ( Vt refer^ Bulleng. in Ecph. fol
110.
Diospolis.) Some suppose that Saint Paul did Preach the Gospel unto this His
videtur Paul^s predicauisse Euangelium. Hen. Bulleng. in Apoc* fol. 27.
Church, because he makes mention of it in his Epistle to the Colossians, and
requires them to read the Epistle written from Coloss. 4. 16.
thence; and the first Epistle to Timothy is subscribed to have been written
from Laodicaea; but others more probably gather that the subscription is
erroneous, and that he was never M. Cudworth. Comment. on Gall. 6. page 657
there; because in that Epistle written to the Colossians (which was written at
Rome in his last troubles a little before his death) he says expressly they
had never seen his Coloss. 2. 1.
person. Howsoever, it was a Church that enjoyed many worthy Bishops, as
Eusebius Socrates, Eusebius, Alexandrinus, Anatolius Stephanu^, and Theodore.
Eusebius. Pamph. lib. 7. cap. 32.
reports; but was now wonderfully decayed, as this Epistle testifies, and
nothing less then their name did import or signify: viz. a righteous (...).
Populus Iustus.
people.

The Parts of this Epistle (as of all the other) are four, viz. First an
Exordium or Preface, in the foureteenth verse, and has three parts, viz.
first, a Commandment, ( Write.) Secondly, the Person from whom, described by
three things, viz. first Amen, secondly, Faithful and true witness, thirdly,
Beginning of the creatures of God. Thirdly, the persons General Division.
to whom he must write described, first, by his office, an Angel, secondly by
the place where, of Laodicaea. The second part of this Epistle contains a
general proposition, in these words; I know thy works: The third general
part is spent in a narration, in the latter part of the 15. and throughout the
16, 17, 18, 19, 20. The fourth and last part, is the conclusion, in the 21. and
22. verses, and has two parts, Viz. a promise in the 21. verse, and a command
in the 22. verse.

This Scripture is a member of the third general part of this Epistle, which
is the narration thereof; and has three parts, Viz. first a reprehension,
secondly good counsel, thirdly weighty admonitions. First, he very sharply
reproves them, and that by an elegant metaphor, saying, thou art neither cold
nor hot: that is, they knew the truth, but lived in a careless mediocrity,
and idle security; they did neither utterly deny the Gospel, nor soundly
profess it; they were neither professed enemies, nor sound Necplane hosts,
nec vere amicised neutrales.
friends, but wholly plied their trades and merchandise, not greatly caring
which end went forward in Gods matters, so they might enjoy their pleasures and
profits; yea, he tells them flatly this is their estate, and that they were
deceived, for they thought themselves rich and increased with goods, and had
need of nothing; when as in truth, they were wretched, and miserable, and
poor, and blind, and naked; and therefore this will be the end of it, if they
continue in this state: he will spue them but of his mouth. And truly as it
is a marvelous ordinary thing, for them that live in wealth, and abound with
pleasures, and have all things which the flesh desires, to grow secure: so if
we make application hereof to our selves, we shall find, that most
Congregations, men and women in this land, are fearfully growing lukewarm,
and think themselves in far better estate then they be.

Thus having laid open their dangerous estate, (that it might appear unto
them, he sought their good, and delighted not in their destruction.) In the
second place he gives them loving and good counsel, and shows them how
they may become rich, cover their nakedness, and cure their blindness:
Thirdly and lastly, he does very gravely admonish them, first to make good use
of their corrections, by becoming more zealous and amending, in the verse
immediately going before; secondly to make good use of the present means and
occasion of their good, in the words of my text: Behold, I stand at the door
and knock.

We are guilty of this Churches sin, I pray God we may make good use of this
admonion, and this day that God speaks and knocks, let us take heed we
harden not our hearts; she was reproved, let us repent; she was well
counseled, let us obey; she was threatened, let us tremble; she was admonished,
let us take heed; yea, she is now punished, Oh let us beware.

Thus with Noah's Dove, I have long houered, but now I have recovered the Arc:
yea, with the Arc I have long floted* but now am arrived on the mountain of
Armeniah, and (I hope not unprofitably) made way to the Scripture that I
purpose to insist upon: for the more orderly handling whereof, these parts are
to be considered: Viz. first a proposition Particular Division.
in these words; ( Behold, I stand as the door and knock) secondly promises,
in these words; ( If any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in
unto him, and will suppe with him and he with me.) The proposition shows the
great willingness of Christ to a sinners conversion: the promises show the
endless happiness of the sinner converted. In the proposition, Sub-diuision.
two things are to be considered: Viz. First the (...) preamble, or note of
regard wherewith (...).
it is fronted, ( Behold) Secondly, the proposition it self, and therein these
two things are remarkable, Viz. first the subject, which is Christ, expressed
by this pronoune ( I) secondly the praedicate, or what is (...).
pronounced of him; and that is threefolde, Viz. first his gesture how he
behaueth himself; I ( stand) secondly the place where he stands, ( at the
door) thirdly what he does standing at the door ( and knock) In the promises
two things are to be considered, viz. first the conditions whereon; and
secondly, the promises themselves, what they are: in the conditions, two things
are to be considered, viz. first, the generality and largeness of them, in
these (...).
words of Proclamation ( if any man) secondly, the Conditions themselves, which
are two, viz. first ( to (...).
hear his voice) secondly, ( to open the door.) The promises made upon these
conditions, are two, viz. first, perpetual abode, (( I will come in unto him)
secondly, perpetual rejoicing together, expressed by the Metaphor of feasting
or banqueting, which is twofold, viz. first, the Sinners feasting of Christ (
I will suppe with him) and secondly, Christ's feasting of the Sinner, ( and he
with me) The note of attention set at the door of my Text, does knock at the
doors of your hearts, for reverent and christian attention to the handling of
all these Parts. And first, let us salute the Porter.

( Behold) This word has principally a double use; 1. Part. 1. USE.
First, it is as a Demonstration, used for the greater certainty and assurance
of a thing, as a man is most certain of that which he sees; therefore said
the Disciples unto Thomas; We have seen the Lord; and he said, Except I see in
his hands the print of the nails, I will not John 20. 25.
believe. Thus for greater certainty and assurance of the Lords near coming
to Judgment, Saint Jude uses this phrase of speech, Behold, he comes with
thousands of his Saints, to give judgment against all Jude 14.
men. And Saint John to like purpose, has the like phrase, Behold, he comes
with Reave. 1. 7.
clouds, viz. he comes so certainly, and is so near, that if you will but
look up unto the clouds, you may see him. So to assure us, that this is no
fable, he says here, ( Behold) I stand etc. yea, if we had but the eyes of
Balaams Number. 22. 23.
Ass, we might see him: but if we had a true faith, we would make no doubt of
it, for the assurance thereof is greater then of sight or Fides anbiguum non
habet. Barn* de consid. 5. cap. 3. Mayor est fides certitudo quam sensus. Aquin.
knowledge.

The second use of this word, is to procure attention 2. USE.
to a thing spoken: and to that purpose, most familiar with the Prophets,
Christ, and his Apostles, Yea, sildome does this word go before to prepare
the way, but there follows matter of exceeding weight and importance in the
heel, and that specially in a double Case.

First in matters of wonder, the more to provoke 1. Case.
men to marvel, this word is used; So the Prophet Isay, entreating of the rare
and extraordinary, strange and wonderful manner of Christ's Conception, thus
expresses it, Behold, a Virgin shall conceive and bear a Isay 7. 14.
Son.

Secondly, in Case of gladness, the more to provoke men to rejoicing, this
word is used; as when 2. Case.
Christ, the Prince of peace and eternal glory, should come into the City of
Jerusalem, to the great joy of all such as received him, the Evangelist cyting
the words of the Prophet Zachary, says, Go tell the daughter of Sion,
Behold, thy King comes unto thee, meek and sitting on an Ass, therefore
rejoice greatly, yea, showt for Zach. 9. 9. matthew. 21. 5.
joy: So here, to assure us that the matter here delivered is no trifle, but
both cases concurring, the more to provoke us both to wonder and rejoice, he
thus delivers it, ( Behold,) I stand at the door and knock. Yea, there is
not one word in this sentence, but deserves the stamp, and impression of this
Character upon it.

( Behold,) not a Servant or Minister; not a Prophet or an Apostle; not a Saint
or an Angel; but Christ Jesus the Lord of life and glory himself: If I had
not come and spoken, they had had no Ioh. 15. 22.
sin. ( Behold,) he neither sits, nor walks, nor runs; but (
stands) as most desirous to enter, and patiently expects the sinners Psalm.
95. 10.
leisure.

Behold, he stands not in the Hall, Parlour, or Chamber, places and rooms
for friends, and of comfort, entertainment, and content, but at the ( door)
in the open air, a place for strangers and enemies, where the head is filled
with dew, and the locks defiled with the drops of the Cantic. 5. 2.
night.

Behold, he stands at the door, not mute, still, and silent; but most
friendly and lovingly calls and Prou. 1. 24.
knocks. Yea, behold all these together, (and as the Prophet says) it will
make you even showt for wonder and Zach. 9. 9.
joy: Oh, behold and consider, what a matter of certainty and importance, to
cause both wonder and joy! But I will not stand any longer at the door of my
Text.

Entering in, the first thing I meet withal, is the 1. Part in the
Proposition, VIZ* the subject.
subject of this Proposition; which in English is expressed, and in the Greek
and Latin (...). Sto.
verbs implicitly included; ( I) stand, viz. ( I) that am all one with my John
10. 30.
Father: ( I) that am full of grace and John 1. 14.
truth: ( I) that am the Lord of 1. Cor. 2. 8.
glory: ( I) that have made all Coloss. 1. 16.
things: ( I) in whom the fullness of the Godhead dwells Coloss. 2. 9.
bodily: ( I) that for thee and thy salvation came down from Ephe. 4. 9.
heaven, took upon me the form of a servant, and was obedient to the death
of the Phil. 2. 7.
Cross: ( I) that have all sufficiency in and of my Psalm. 45. 7.
self: and desire to enter, not for mine own, but thy Deuteronomy. 5. 29.
good. Oh open unto me, for ( I) do stand and knock: From whence two things
are chiefly to be considered, viz.

First, his great and incomprehensible loving kindness 1. Observation 1.
Consider Christ's alsufficiencie in himself.
toward us, who will vouchsafe to come to our door; but much more to stand
and knock there; which most fully appears from these three considerations,
viz. First his own al-sufficiency in himself, in that he stands not in need
of us, or any thing that we Psalm. 50. 10.
have, being the heir of all Heb. 1. 2.
things, equal with his Philip. 2. 6.
Father, and infinite with him in glory, from John 17. 5.
everlasting. Indeed, we are said by our praises, to Psalm. 34. 3.
magnify or make him Magnum facere.
great, which is not in regard of himself, who is already most Optimus maximus.
great, but when by our preaching and praising his glory and goodness, we make
that which is infinite in it self, to be reputed great of others. For as one
well says, to magnify, is nothing else, but to signify, that it is
Magnificare, nihil aliud est, nisimagnum significare Lexic. Theolog. verb.
magnif.
great.

The second consideration, tending to amplify his 2. Consider our indignity
kindness toward us, is our own indignity; Oh, what kindness is this,
that the Lord of glory vouchsafes to stand and knock at the door of his
Church, which he has pronounced already, to be wretched, and miserable, poor
and blind, and naked? Will you see the loathsome condition of us all by nature?
Then hearken what God says by his Prophet, In the day of thy Nativity when
thou wast borne, thy Navel was not cut, thou wast not washed with water, nor
salted with salt, nor swadled in cloutes, no eye pitied thee, but thou wast
cast out in the open field, to the contempt of thy Person, and when I passed by
thee, I saw thee polluted in thine own blood, and I said unto thee, thou shall
Ezekiel 16. 4. etc.*
live. Oh herein is love, not that we loved him, but he loved us: yea, even
when we deserved to be hated.

Thirdly and lastly, that he does not pass by her 3. Consider his
importunity.
door finding it shut, but does stand, call, and knock, and importune her to
open, (as an one we shall hear) Open unto me, my love, Sister, Dove, and
Cantic. 5. 2.
undefiled.

Secondly, let us hence (to the shame of the faces 2. Observation
of us all) observe, our great unthankfulness and unkindness toward Christ,
that will not open unto him, but let him stand at the door. If a man of any
account, but specially if an earthly King should knock at our door, Oh what a
stir we would make to let him in quickly! What a shame then is it, that the
King of heaven knocking at the doors of our hearts, we should hear him as
aloof off, stand upon terms and conditions, with if, and, and how, and give
him cold sluggish excuses (as the Church confesses she did) I have put off my
coat, and I have washed my Cantic. 5. 3.
feet, and yet this is not all, but to fill up the measure of our unkindness
and unthankfulness (as Christ checked the Jews, saying, If another come in
his own name, him ye receive, but ye receive not John 5. 43.
me.) No sooner can the Devil, World or Flesh, knock, by any temptation or
suggestion, but we presently hear and open unto them, but suffer Christ with
his graces to stand at the door; Oh, my good brethren and sisters in the Lord,
let us consider and be ashamed of this Sin.

Yea (though I am most unworthy of all) seeing Exhortation.
the Lord has vouchsafed me this hour, this day, to be his Spokesman and
Suitor, to woo and entreat you, and because I know I shall never speak to
most of you any more, give me leave in my Masters cause to entreat you again
and again, and to importune you to be reconciled unto him; Yea, happy man I,
and most happy days work, if I could but win one Soul, to open unto him.
Oh, yet, that I knew what words of exhortation to use, that not one, but many;
yea (as Saint Paul says) That all that hear me this Act. 26. 29.
day, might be won unto Christ! that this might be the day of renewing the
Covenant, and sealing it with our hearts, and of our undoubted betrothing with
Christ; yea, what madness has possessed us, that we should not do so? for
have him, and have all things: Art thou a miserable lost creature, he is a (
Matt. 1. 21.
) Savior, and brings Salvation unto Luke 19. 9.
thee: art thou hungry? he is the hidden Manna, and Bread of John 6. 51.
Life: art thou thirsty? he will give thee Water of Life; whereof, whosoever
drinks, shall never thirst any John 4. 14.
more: art thou naked? he has white Robes of righteousness to cover thee
Reave. 19. 8.
withal: art thou poor, and miserable? he is the heir of all Heb. 1. 2.
things; will make thee Reave. 3. 18.
rich, and set a Crown of glory on thine 1. Pet. 5. 4.
head: do thou weep and mourn? he will wipe all tears from thine Esaias 25.
8.
eyes, and fill thee with such occasions of gladness, that the very broken
bones shall Psalm. 51. 8.
rejoice: do thou groan, and art tired with the burden of sin? he will
ease and refresh Matthew. 11. 28.
Clamat Satan, ego decipiam, mundu^, ego deficiam* caro* ego inficiam more* ego
interficiam* at Christu^, ego re^iciam. Barn. in Cant.
thee: art thou vexed with the storms of Gods wrath? he will be as the shadow
of a great Rock unto Esaias 32. 2.
thee: art thou sick? he is a Physician to heal Matthew. 9. 12.
thee: art thou blind? he is a Surgeon to cure John 9. 39.
thee; being that Light, which lights every man that comes into the John
1. 9.
world: to conclude, art thou subject to error, falsehood and death? he is that
Way, that Truth, and that John 14. 6.
Life; the Way without Error, the Truth without Falsehood, the Life without
Via sine errore, veritas sine falsit a^e, vita sine morte. August. in loc.
Death: even all in all unto his 1. Cor. 15. 28.
people. Oh, then be no longer so unkind unto Christ and thine own Soul, but
say, Welcome sweet Savior, and open the everlasting door of thine heart unto
him, that it may be well with thee for Deuteronomy. 5. 29. 2. General part of the
Proposition.
ever, and he no longer take up this Complaint against thee, (l) stand at the
door. And so much for the Subject of this Proposition.

The Predicate is laid down in a sweet Allegorical speech, Nego^tum exponit
Sermon ^llegorico and am^no.
every man being compared to a house, his heart unto a door, and Christ unto a
guest, standing and knocking, to come in, not so much to find courtesy, as to
show favor and kindness: and the 1. Predicate his gesture, which is
(standing.) 3. Things signified by Christ's ( standing) first, his willingness
to enter.
Predicate is threefold; the first declares his gesture, which is ( standing)
whereby three things are signified: Viz. first his willingness to enter,
secondly his patience to wait our leisure, thirdly his observance of our
unkindness in not opening: For the first, in that coming to the door of our
hearts, and finding the same shut and barred against him, he sits not,
walks, nor lies not aloof off, as careless whether he enter or no Non
sede^ qu^etus, aut tacet ignauu^, sed stat operi omnino in^entus. ^mb.
but ( stands) at the door (as it were) harkening and listening, ready to
enter upon every occasion: It notes his great desire to enter, which appears
from this threefold consideration; First, wishing that they would open unto
him, Oh that there were such an heart in them to fear me, and to keep 1.
Consideration.
all my commandments always, that it might go well with them, and with their
children for Deuteronomy. 5. 29.
ever. Oh that my people had harkened unto me, and Israel had walked in my
ways, I would soon have brought down their enemies, and have fed them with
the finest wheat Psalm. 81. 13. etc.
flower: Oh that thou had hearkened to my commandment, then had thy
prosperity bin as the floods, and thy righteousness as the waves of the Esaias
58. 18*
Sea: Oh Jerusalem, that thou had known in this thy day, those things
which belong to thy Luke 19. 42.
peace: Yea, and that none shall open in vain, hearken what David says, Lord
thou hear the desire of the poor, thou 2. Consideration.
preparest their hearts, and thou bendest thine ear unto Psalm. 10. 17.
them: Yea, harken what God himself says, While they speak I will hear, yea
before they call I will answer, here am I Esaias. 58. 9. 65. 24. 3.
Consideration.
. Will you see examples of this? no sooner did David open the door of his
heart by repentance, and confessed, I have sinned against the Lord, but by and by
the Lord entered with remission of sins, and absolution, pronounced by Nathan,
the Lord has put away thy sins, thou shall not die. 2. Sam. 12. 13.
Yea, hearken what David himself confesses; I thought, I will confess
against my self, my wickedness unto the Lord, and thou forgauest the
punishment of my sin: Selah. Psalm. 32. 5.
Aremarkeable * More impatiens. Fer. defilio prodig. Sermon. 7.
sentence Signum est excitandae voc^s and animi maxim intendend^. Vatab. in ps
3. 2
indeed: The prodigal son but resolving in himself, I will rise and go to
my father, and say unto him, father, I have sinned against heaven and before
thee: he was prevented, for his father seeing him a far off, had compassion,
and being impatient of delays, ran and fell on his neck, and kissed him Luke
15. 18. etc. Nondum vno verbo audito, squalidum and deformem amplectitur. Aug.
Vide c^lerem patris misericordiam Theo.
. So willing the Lord is to entertain a Convert, that (as David says) He
never failed them that seek him Psalm. 9. 10. 2. His patience.
.

Secondly, this gesture does signify the great patience of Christ toward
poor sinners, who ( because he would not his death, Ezekiel. 18. 23.
but rather that he might come to repentance and be saved 2. Pet. 3. 9.
:) finding the door shut, gives not a call, a rappe, and away, as a Poast
that runs by; but stands and tarrieth, long waiting his leisure, when to
open unto Indefessa perseuerantia pull santis significatur. Tittlem in Cantic.
him: It was Gods law, When thou come near unto a City to fight against
it, thou shall offer it peace, and if it offer thee again peaceably, and open
unto thee, then let all the people that is found therein, be tributaries unto
thee and serve thee: but if it will make no peace with thee, but make war
against thee, then shall thou besieg it Deuteronomy. 20. 10. etc.
: which law the wise woman of Abel objected unto Ioab Mandatum dei ^oabo, mo
deste obiicit. Tremell.
They spoke in the old time, saying, they should ask of Abel, and so have they
2. Sam. 20. 18.
continued: That is, first they should call a Parle, and open their griefs,
before they used Hostility against it: the law giver is the law-keeper, for
though his sword be always drawn and burnished, his bow bent, his arrows
prepared, and the instruments of death always ready; yet seldom does he pour
down his plagues, but there goes a shovver of mercy before them: Peace be
unto this Luke 10. 5.
house Pax Domui huie. Debellaturu^ mundum, offert pacem. Stell. ibid.
was sounded to every door where the Apostles entered: it is Gods manner
first to discharge a warning Piece before he batter; and the Lion of Iudahs
tribe Reave. 5. 5.
will first roar before he Osea 11. 10.
devour: Yea, by threatening of plagues, and of hell fire, he teaches us how
to avoid both them and Nisi Gehenna intentata esset, omnes in Gehennam
laberemur. Chris. Homi. 15. in prim. Timoth.
it.

Will you see a fevv examples of this vvonderfull patience of God toward
sinners: we read that God gave the old world an hundred and twenty Gene. 6.
3. Recte expositum est apatribus, de termino patiente^ de^.
years, to repent in; and so long stood at the door of their hearts, knocking
by Noah's Preaching, 2. Pet. 2. 5.
and the Arkes building: whereof Saint Peter speaks with wonder, when once
the long suffering of God 1. Pet. 3. 20.
abode in the days of Noah: great was his patience toward his people Israel,
to whom he sent all his Prophets, rising early every Iere. 7. 25.
day; and of whom he complained, saying, All the day long have I spread out mine
hands to a rebellious Esaias. 65. 2.
people: which thing, was shadowed out by our Savior Christ, both in the
Parable of the planted Vineyard, let out unto Husbandmen, to whom the Owner
sent his Servants again, and again, and lastly his own Son and Heir, for
to receive the fruit Matthew. 21. 34. etc.
thereof: and the Fig Tree, keeping for three years the ground barren, and yet
at the intercession of the Dresser, spared also another Luke 13. 6. etc.
Synag^ga l^deorum ficus asi^^ latur, tre^ ann^, sunt tria tempora, scilicet,
Circumcisionis, legis, et gratiae. Gorra^ ^^ Euang.
year. Great was his patience toward Niniuie, that (as it were) wincking at
the loss and profusion of so many hundreds of years, yet gave them forty
days to Jonah. 3. 4.
repent in; but yet herein did his Mercy and Bounty shine much more, in that
he not only gave them forty days for repentance, but threatened them with
destruction, that so they might be preserved from destruction; for the Message
of their Overthrow, was the Overthrow of the Message; the Prophecy fell, and
the City fell not, because her Fall was prophesied: Oh new and admirable O
^^^^m and ^^randum. Chrisost. Hom. 15 ad Pop. Antioch.
thing. But what need we more examples for proof of Gods Patience, seeing the
worst Servant in the house has confessed it, My Master is gone into a far
Country, and does defer his coming, and will not return in Math. 24: 48.
haste: yea, the Atheist calls it 2. Pet. 3. 9.
Slackenesse, and abuses that to Presumption, which should lead him to Romans
2. 4.
repentance.

Thirdly, and lastly, that he says, I stand, or (as the 3. His observance of
our unkindness, to let him stand.
Greek verb bears) I have (...).
stood; it signifies, that he does well observe the time of his standing: So
he told the people of Israel, that forty years long they had contended with
him, and Psalm. 95. 10.
grieved him; and let us be assured, he that could tell them how many years
they had sinned against him; can tell us how many hours, days, months and
years we have sinned, and he has stood waiting our repentance; yea, and
knows all the means, which he has used for our good, how many Sermons,
Reproves and Exhortations, we have heard, and according to the greatness of
his Patience and Mercies toward us, so shall be our Judgments, if we repent
M. Dearing on the Heb. cap. 3. 9. Lect 15. Application.
not.

Now, if we make Application here of unto our selves, we shall find, that God
has not only opened, but even exhaust, and spent, and emptied the rich
Treasures of his Bountifulnes, Patience, and long Suffering, upon this Church
of England, wherein we live; he has given us, not only forty days, as he
did to Jonah. 3. 4.
Niniuie; or added 15. years to our lives, when we were all appointed for the
Anno terribili 1588.
slaughter, as he did to Esaias 38. 5.
Ezechiah; nor only forty years, as he did to Heb. 3. 9.
Israel. But as long as all these times being put together come unto, has the
Lord stood at our doors, knocking by his word, mercies and judgments M. Perk.
in loc. Exhortation.
every way seeking and waiting our couuersion:: Oh that we had grace at the
last, to consider the Romans 13. 11.
Season, redeem the Ephe. 5. 16.
Opportunity, and make good use of the day of our Luke 19. 44.
Visitation! And the rather let me exhort you hereunto, for that, never was
Gods Patience abused, but it was severely punished, as all the Examples
formerly mentioned, and many others do witness: When the old World would take
no warning, but gave themselves to eating and drinking, buying and selling,
building and planting, marrying and giving in marriage, even until the time,
that Noah entered into the Matthew. 24. 38.
Arc; then came the Flood, and drowned them Gene. 7. 11.
all: When Sodom and Gomorhe would not be reclaimed, but grieved righteous
Lots soul, from day to day, with their unclean 2. Pet. 2. 7.
conversation; at the last, fire and brimstone falls, and consumes them
Gene. 19. 24.
all: When Pharaoh and Egypt would not be infourmed by all the Miracles and
Wonders, to let Gods People Exodus 10. 27.
go; at the last, the red Sea devoured them Exodus 14. 27.
up: When the people of Israel would not be reformed, but Jerusalem was so
abominable, as she did justify Ezekiel. 16. 48.
Sodom; he that bare with them forty Psalm. 95. 10.
years, and sent all his servants the Prophets unto Iere. 7. 25.
them; at the last, swear they should not enter into his Heb. 3. 11.
rest, and was so obstinate against them, that if Moses and Samuel had stood
before him to crave pardon, yet would he not be Iere. 15. 1.
entreated: What shall be done (says Christ) to those Husbandmen, that abused
Gods Son and Servants sent unto them? themselves gave judgment, and
themselves endured the execution of the Sentence; He will cruelly destroy them,
and let out his Vineyard unto Matthew. 21. 41. (...) Malos male p^rdet.
others: And what shall become of the Figtree, if dug round about and
dounged, it still keep the ground barren? it must be hewn down and cast
into the Luke 13. 9. Ar^^ri infructuosae, duo debentur, securis and ignis. Barn.
fire: What became of this and the rest of these Asian Churches, who did not
grow in righteousness, as they did in riches? Though now he stood at their
door and knocked, yet in the end he left them, and gave them over to Turkish
slavery: Oh, how then shall we escape, if we neglect so great Heb. 2. 3.
Conclusion.
Salvation? To conclude therefore this point, I beseech you be not too bold
with Christ, if he have stood long at the door of thine heart, and by his word
and motions of his Spirit, showed thee thy sins, and moved thee to
repentance, and thou have made light thereof; Oh tremble and quake for fear,
that these knockings and motions should cease, and thou never any more have any
spark of remorse or godly sorrow unto repentance, but thou become hardened in
sin, and thy conscience become cauterized or seared as with an hot Iron unto
destruction: Yea, if this day thou hear the voice of Christ, and sensibly
perceiuest Christ's spirit moving thee to repentance, give ear to that Voice,
entertain those Motions, and at the last open unto Christ, and let him (
stand) no longer. And so much concerning the first Praedicate.

The second Praedicate declares the place where The second predicate, which
is, the place ( at the door.)
Christ stands, Viz. ( at the door) whereby the heart of man is Ostu nomine
cor hominis intelli git.
understood: according to that of the Psalmist, Lift up your heads O ye gates,
and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors, and the King of glory shall come Psalm.
24. 7.
in: so then to open the doors of our Cities, and to defend the Gospel: to
open the doors of our Temples, and to preach the Gospel: to open the doors of
our houses, to entertain the Bible, and read the Gospel: Yea, to open the
doors of our lips, and to confess the Gospel: the opening of all these
doors is nothing worth, unless we open the doors of our hearts unto Christ
and the Gospel, to love and believe in him, and therefore the Apostle did bow
his knees unto God, most earnestly begging of God, that the Ephesians might
have grace to open the doors of their hearts, that Christ might dwell in them
by Ephe. 3. 17.
Legitima seeds Christ^, cor est. Calu.
faith.

Here then we are all of us taught, if we will have Doctrine.
any benefit from those sweet and comfortable promises following, to open the
doors of our hearts unto Christ. But some man may say, there is no Question.
man that has not learned this lesson, who will not bid him welcome, and be
glad to entertain him, and seek for salvation only by him? Alas, alas, my
Answers.
brethren, thousands there are that in this weighty case deceive themselves,
for the heart of man is deceitful above al Iere. 17. 9.
things: there are many that think their hearts are marueilously affectioned
unto Christ: yea and persuade themselves, they have Christ sure in their
hearts, that they are even hugged in his arms, and shall be saved by him
as well as the best: who never so much as truly knew Christ, or tasted of him,
and are furthest off from being saved by him; one would not think there could
be such deceitfulness in man's heart, that when he thinks himself most
sure, he should be most deceived; but the estate of this people does
witness no less, for they had many good things in them: as they professed
Christ, had the knowledge of his will, and were partakers of the Signs and
Seals of the Covenant of Grace, and thought themselves rich, and to have need
of nothing, when as in truth, they were wretched and miserable, and blind, and
poor, and naked, and the nearest that Christ was unto them ( he stood at the
door) and truly if there were a due trial and examination, I fear most men's
Conversion would prove but Copper, not able to abide the touchstone, and if
they were weighed in the balance of of the sanctuary, Balthasars Emblem may
be written in their foreheads, Thou have been weighed in the balance, and
art found too Dan. 5. 25.
Mean, mean, Tekell, Vpharsin, numerauit, appendit, diuisit.
light: Yea, many that think they have opened unto Christ, have been as
churlish as Nabal unto 1. Sam. 25. 9. etc.
him, and as unkind as the Bethlehemites, having no room in the Innes of their
hearts for Luke 2. 7.
him. Indeed whilst the word is Preaching, and Christ calling, and knocking,
they seem to be moved, will receive the word with Matthew. 13. 20
joy, and with Agrippa be almost persuaded to Act. 26. 28.
open, and with Herod peep out at the Mark 6. 20.
wicket, but no sooner Sermon done, but their joy vanishes, and by one
predominant sin or other, they shut the door, and bolt it fast against
Christ.

It will be very necessary to search, how, or by Two means, whereby we may
know whether we have opened to Christ or no. 1
what means, we may undoubtedly know whether we have effectually opened unto
Christ or no. And by these two things we shall know. First, he comes like a
strong and mighty man, and therefore if thou have opened unto him, he has
bound Satan, spoiled his house, dispossessed sin, and abandoned death and
Matthew. 12. 29. etc.
hell: Secondly, he comes as a King of glorious estate, and brings his
train with him, even all the graces and fruits of his blessed spirit, whereof
Saint John says, Hereby we know that he abides in us, even by that spirit
which he has given 1. John 3. vlt. Examination
us. Now then by these things, try and Examine thy self as in the presence of
God; How stand thou affected? Do thou hate those evil things which thou
have loved? Do thou loathe thy former unclean conversation? And abhor
thine old sins? Do thou every day strive to be more righteous and less
sinful? Defying the garment spotted with the flesh, and avoiding all
appearance of evil? Endeavoring, and praying for strength to walk in all the
ordinances and commandments of Secundum istius vitaemodum.
God: And for all the world, would not be in thy former profane condition of
life? Does thy soul abound with spiritual joy, peace, humility, patience,
brotherly kindness, and love, is thine heart enflamed with the zeal of the
glory of God, and have thou a burning desire, that the name and glorious Gospel
of Christ may be magnified? And does it grieve and vex thee, when Gods glory
is trodden down, his holy truth despised, and his dear Church goes to ruin?
If these things be in thee in truth, though but in small and weak measure,
thou may be of good comfort that thou have opened unto Christ, and he does
reign and keep Court in thine heart, etc.

But if on the other-side, thou have nothing to stand upon, but thou have been
thus and thus long an Hearer of the word, Receiver of the Sacraments, Professor
of Religion, but thine heart is set upon the vanities, pleasures and delights
of the flesh; as occasion serves, thou abusest, thy tongue to lying,
slaundering, swearing, and blaspheming; thine heart is set upon covetousness,
whoredom; thy life stained with pride, drunkenness; thou have no true love
nor zeal of God and his truth; but make Religion so indifferent and light a
matter, as thou art neither cold nor hot, or if thou have reformed some things,
yet thou have some one beloved sin or other, which thou can not endure to
hear reproved.

If this be thine estate, (as upon due trial I fear it would be found to be
of many of us) thou may be well persuaded of thy self; but in truth, the
nearest that Christ is unto thee, is, He stands at the ( Door) etc.

The third and last Praedicate, declares the Action The third predicate, which
is, his action ( knocking.)
of Christ at the door, viz. ( he knocks) yea, the Original signifies, to
knock with great power and force, as to strike or knock with the horn, (...)
corn^bus ^erto, deriuatur, a (...) corn^^.
it being a Metaphor taken from the (...) Od. (...).
Ox, or some strong necked Beast, which give a great Blow, when they run
against any thing with the Horn.

Where (my good Brethren) as the carcass of Amasa lying in the way, caused the
people that marched after Ioah to stand 2. Sam. 20. 12.
still: so me thinks, this word calls upon us to stand still a while, and
march no further in this text, til we have thankfully wondered at and considered,
the infinite love and goodness of Christ toward his poor Church, and the
members Hin^ admirabilis and ineffabilis patet sponsi nostri dignat^o. little.
in Cant. ^. page 82
thereof, that finding the doors of their hearts barred against him, yet does
not pass by with a soft and still voice, as he came to 1. King. 19. 12*
Eliah, but does beat and bounse at the door, offering mercy when they refuse
it, that so he may be found of them, that never sought Esaias 65. 1.
him: No sooner had Adam and Euah sinned, but God comes to seek them out,
and knocks at the door, Adam, where art Gene. 3. 9. Vbies.
thou? which was rather an Increpation then an Interogation, that Adam might
consider, not in what place, but in what state he was Non tam interrogatio*
quam increpatio. Amb.
now. No sooner was Peter fallen asleep, but Christ knocked at his door, and
wakened him with the crowing of the Matthew. 26. 74. (...) Statim Gallus misit
vocem. Four ways principally Christ knocks, at the door of our he arts. 1.
By the ministry of his word.
Cock: Oh what infinite mercy is this, that he should so earnestly seek our
repentance and salvation, only for our own good.

Now I pray you let us proceed to consider what ways and means Christ uses,
whereby to knock at the doors of our hearts, and they are principally these
four: The first is, by the ministry of his word, which is a word of Romans 1.
16.
power, and a word of Heb. 4. 12.
life: mighty, through God, to cast down Holds, and to bring into Captivity,
every thought to the obedience of 2. Cor. 10. 5.
Christ: Peter preached, and he did so mightily knock at the hearts of his
Hearers, that they came running to him and the other Apostles, and cried, men
and brethren, what shall we Act. 2. 37. V^r^ fra^^^^ quid faciem^t.
do? Paul preached and disputed of righteousness, temperance, and judgment,
and did so mightily knock at the Portall of Felix his conscience, that he did
tremble to hear Act. 24. 25.
him: Yea assuredly, Demosthenes and Cicer^, with all their eloquence: Plato
and Aristotle, with all their learning: Alexander and Pompey, with all their
power, could never so shake the door and foundation of a sinners heart as the
meanest Minister of Christ (being quallified with competent Graces of God, and
preaching the word with plain evidence of the spirit, and of 1. Cor. 2. 4.
power,) can do: yea, therefore is the Ministry of the word to be reputed as
the greatest blessing of God; for that by it he knocks at the doors of our
sinful hearts, and frames us to obedience, to open unto him, that we may be
saved.

Secondly, he knocks by his mercies, blessings, 2. By his mercies.
and favors, whereof the Lord himself thus speaks, I led them with cords
of a man, even with bands of Osea 11. 4. Funiculis humanis, funibus amoris
traho cos. Trem.
Intelligit Beneficia and munera quibus d^^^iuit cos Iren.
love: what these bands of love were, Moses declares, where speaking of
Israel, he says, God found him in the land of the wilderness, in a wast and
roaring wilderness: he carried him up to the high places of the earth, that he
might eat the fruits of the field, and he caused him to suck honey out of the
stone, and oil out of the hard rock: butter of Kine, and milk of Sheep,
with fat of the Lambs and Ram^nes* fed in Bashan, with the fat of the
grains of wheat, and the liquor of the grape have thou Deuteronomy. 32. 10. etc.
drunk. And elsewhere, he tells them, they should find great and goodly
Cities, which they builded not; houses stored with all manner of goods, which
they filled not; wells which they dug not; vineyards and Olives, which they
planted Deuteronomy. 6. 10. etc.
not, etc. The consideration whereof, made David proclaim, He has not dealt
so with every Psalm. 147. 20.
Nation.

Thirdly, when neither word, nor mercies can prevail, 3. By his correction.
but the one is contemned, the other are abused; then thirdly, he knocks by
his ( corrections) as tempestuous and vnseafonable weather, strange
apparitions, unknown Comets, quaking of earth, ouerflowing of waters, famine,
pestilence, rumors of wars, Devilish conspiracies, sickness, loss of
goods, and innumerable such like miseries: which, being sanctified of God,
though unpleasant and distastefull to delicate flesh and blood, yet are most
wholesome means, and mighty knockings, to awaken the drowsy sinner; as we
have examples in David, who penned his sweetest Psalms, in his bitterest
afflictions; and in Jonah, who then prayed most heartily, when he came into the
Fishes Iona. 2. 1.
belly: Oh wondefull thing, that he should be awake in the Fish, that snorted
in the Ship: that he should pray unto God out of the deep Sea, that fled
from God upon the dry Mira res* vigilat in Ceto, qui stertebat in Naui. Zeno.
Ep. Veron. lib. 2. Sermon. 38.
land! so good and profitable a thing correction is, therefore Christ tells
his Church, in the verse immediately going before my Text, So many as I love, I
(...) arguo, ad verba refertur: (...) castigo; ^^ ferulam par^^rum* Aret* ibid.
rebuke, (which is chiefly to be referred unto words,) and chasten (which is
chiefly to bereferredvnto the rod, and sharpenes of Discipline: therefore be
zealous and amend: and our Savior Christ says, every branch in the spiritual
Vine, that bears not fruit as it ought, his Father the Husbandman, will purge
John 15. 2.
it: and what is his pruning knife, wherewith he loppeth and pareth many
superfluities, but tribulations and Falx domini, afflictiones and tribulationes
sunt Cyr. lib. 10 cap. 14.
afflictions?

The fourth and last means whereby he prepares 4. By his Spirit.
unto regeneration (regenerateth the prepared* and does help the regenerate
unto the Praeparat ad regenerationem regeneras Praeparatum and regeneratum
adiuuat tu finem. August.
end) is the sweet and powerful working, instinct, inspirations and motions
of his good Per internas inspirationes and tacitas occul^asque cordis motiones.
Fran. Tittlem. in Cantic.
spirit; without which all other knockings are ineffectuall to cause the smner
to open unto him: for though we be never so much called upon by the ministry of
the word, yet without the working of the spirit, whereby the understanding is
enlightened, the heart mollified, and our affections inflamed with the love of
Christ and heavenly things, it profits not but becomes the savor of death
unto death unto 2. Cor. 2. 16.
us: and the more he so knocks, the more excuseles shall we be at the last
day. Again, though the Lord take never so great a delight to do us Iere. 32. 41
good, and even empty (as it were) the treasure of his blessings upon us, yet
without his spirit, they do but puff us up unto wantonness and presumption;
as we have an example in Israel, for whom the Lord doing so much (as we have
heard) Yea, so much as he could do, as himself Esaias. 5. 4.
witnesses, yet complains: he that should have been upright, when he waxed
fat, spurned with his heel, and forsook God that made him, and regarded not
the strong God of his Deuteronomy. 32. 15.
salvation. Oh, the cause of this Moses elsewhere plainly lays down,
saying, Ye have seen all that the Lord did in Egypt unto Pharaoh, and al his
servants, and al his land, and the great temptations, miracles, and wonders,
yet the Lord has not given you an heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and
ears to hear unto this Deuteronomy. 29. 2. etc.
day. Lastly, though the Lord add strype unto strype, and one judgment to
follow in the neck of another, as the waves of the Sea, yet without the inward
working of his spirit, the more he so knocks, the more do we harden our
hearts against him, as Pharaoh did* Oh Lord, knock by thy word, and teach us;
knock by thy mercies, and allure us; knock by thy judgments, and fear us;
but above all other, knock by thy spirit, and persuade us, that when thou
knockest, we may open unto thee, Amen.

And now to make some general Application of Application.
these things to our selves: First, I demand with the Apostle; Has not
England heard? No doubt the sound of the Gospel has gone throughout all our
Romans 10. 18.
Land: the Lord has not sent a few, as seventy, by paires, two and Luke 10. 1.
two; but so many thousands; that as David says in another sense, Great is the
Company of Psalm. 68. 11.
Preachers: the word of the Lord is not precious amongst us, as in Elies days;
neither need we with the Sunamite saddle our Horses or Asses to ride far to
hear it, it is near unto us, and of our plenty we can supply others lack,
and herein the Lord bless the intended Voyage, and all them that adventure
Lives or Goods therein, that it may be for Gods glory, the enlarging of
Christ's Kingdom, the Honor of our Nation, and Good of Church, and
Commonwealth. Yea, England is as Gods Temple, where every man speaks of his
Psalm. 29. 9.
Praise; and a Sanctuary, to such as love the sound of the Gospel; God having
not yet so far entered into judgment with our sins, as to remove our Reave.
2. 5.
Candlestick, take away his Matthew. 21. 43.
Kingdom, and call our Ionahs to go preach unto Jonah. 1. 2.
Niniuie.

But has not London heard? Oh herein has God exalted her to Heaven with
Matthew. 11. 23.
Capernaum: who (beside her own Ordinary with store) has her solemn
Assemblies furnished with the choice of University and Country, to speak
unto her, so as (if England be the Temple) she is the very Arc of the presence
of God, above all other places of this Gloria summa hominibus ex dei verbo
obtingit. Gual. in Matt^. Hem. 1^6.
Land.

Secondly, has not God been merciful unto this Land? Oh London, London! let
me speak to thine heart, to whom I am sent with the Message of God this day;
How great are Gods mercies, that has exalted thee to become the Princess of
the thousands; the Chamber of our famous Kings and Queens; the Joy of our
Land; the Empress of Cities; the renowned Mart of Nations? of whom I may say,
as sometimes God said of Tyrus, thy Merchants are Princes, and thy Chapmen the
Nobles of the Esaias 23. 8.
world; Oh, so many and great they are, that I cannot sail in the huge Ocean
of them; I will thrust but into an Arm or Creek: Consider his mercies of
Donation, 1. Mercies of Donation.
how abundantly he has enriched thee with Peace, Plenty, Honor and
Prosperity; yea, taken such a Delight to do thee good, and even to empty the
Treasure of his Mercies upon thee, that most do think it a great Happiness,
to shrowde themselves within thy Nec conting it cuiuis.
Borders: It was once said of Rome, but may now more truly be said of thee,
that thou art an Epitome of all Gods mercies elsewhere bestowed upon all the
Churches and Commonwealths in the (...)
World. Pindarus reports, that there was an opinion of the City of Rhodes,
that Gold rained upon (...) Ode. 7
it; but if ever City received golden Showers, it is this of London: And
therefore as Athens was called Greece of (...) Athenaeus. lib. 5.
Greece, so may London be called, the England of England: The Lord grant, that
his Gospel and thine obedience may meet together; his Mercies and thy
thankfulness may kiss each other.

Consider his mercies of Preservation, that whereas 2. Mercies of preservation.
other goodly Cities have been ransacked and destroyed, by Fire, and Sword of
cruel Soldier: grass, brambles and nettles growing in their streets,
houses, and temples, for want of passengers, inhabitants, and worshippers; men's
hearts failing for fear of the continual thundering of Drums, sounding of
Trumpets, neighing of Horses; rattling of Armor, roaring of Cannons, so near
our Borders, that some of our houses have trembled with the report At the
loosing of Callis. 1. Preservation from Spaniards, Anno. 1588. Octogesimus
octauus mirabilis annus.
thereof etc. He has always watched over thee to preserve thee from the like
desolation. Yea, give me leave, to Gods glory and our own comfort, to instance
in a few particular examples: First therefore, it is not so ancient and
superannate, but rather kept in recent and fresh memory, how those, who now,
we hope, are our friends (and God make them so to us and the Nemo potest
veraciter amicus esse hominis, nisi ipsius fuerit primitus veritatis. August.
Truth) but then, we know, were our proud and cruel D. Fot^erb. Sermon. Paul's
^rosse, Nouem. 5. 1607.
Enemies, who came with an unquenchable fury, and (as they thought) with an
invincible Navy, with Ensigns of victory, and instruments of cruelty: but
the Lord strong in Battle was our refuge, the God of Jacob was our defense,
who armed out all his Creatures in the day of Battle, for our defense and
their offense, that we might be delivered and they destroyed: the Winds fought
against them and their Ships, as it did against Chro. 20. etc.
Ahazias; the Sea against them and their Host, as against Exodus 14. 27.
Pharace^; yea, the Stars in their courses, as against the horses and
chariots of Judge. 5. 20. ^militat ether, and coniura^^ ventunt in praelia
venti. Claud
Siserah; that we and our posterities may confess with the Israelites, The
Lord has triumphed gloriously over his enemies, the Horse and his Rider, [the
Ship and his Sailer] has he overthrown in the midst of the Judge. 5. 1. 4.
Sea.

Secondly, the day is now come and gone, which 2. Preservation at queen
Elizabeth's death.
our enemies so longed for, and we so feared, would have been the Bane of the
Gospel, the Shipwreck of our Peace, and Breake-necke of our Prosperity; a day
of mourning and lamentation; yea, when all the Orders and Companies of this
Realm, fom the honorable Counselor to him that draws water; from the
reverent Judge that sits upon the Bench, to the abject Beggar that sits
in the ashes; from the man of gray hairs to the sucking child, should have
cried* Alas for the day of the Lord, Alas for the day of the Lord, it is come,
it is Zach. 12. 12.
come. I mean that dismal day, when that glorious Instrument of Englands
happiness, renowned ELIZABETH (the Glory of her Sex, the Paragon of Princes,
the Miracle of the Christian, and wonder of the Infidel World) drew up her
feet unto her in her bed of peace, and slept with her fathers: But behold,
and wonder at Gods mercy, no sooner did our Sun set, but in a moment (as it
were) passing thorough the other Hemisphere, it rose Occubi^it s^l, nox nulla
secuta est.
again, giving us greater hope of the continuance of our joyful day, giving
us a Religious, prudent, and fruitful KING, insteade of a maiden QVEENE; whose
very name Proclaimed, did so daunt the crew of idle rogues, and inordinate
walkers (who thought at that time like Vultures to have devoured the fruits of
honest men's labors, and have committed what mischief and villainy they would
without controlement) that they stood amazed, and rather bethought whither to
fly and hide their heads, then to commit any outrage: Oh Lord finish the good
work thou have begun, give unto the KINGS Majesty, an increase of Salomons
wisdom; David's uprightness; Josias zeal, Ioshuahs courage, and Methushalahs
long life. AMEN.

Thirdly, and lastly, (our fathers have not told us, 3. Preservation from the
Gunpowder treason. Nouem. 5. Anno. 1605.
but we have known our selves) the years are very few that have passed over
our heads, since a bloody company of Romish Pyoners, and Antichristian
Mole-warpes, had plotted a most prodigious, and never pararelled treason, in a
subterraneous vault; with one sulphurous mornings blast, to have brought a
general destruction upon Moses and Aaron, Princes and Peers, Commanders and
Commoners; Yea, Church and Commonwealth: neither wanted there any thing to the
ripeness and perfection thereof, but the last hand to act it, but a spark
from that hellish firebrand F^ux, to make that mortal crack: but see the
goodness of God (that all the glory may be his, who neither slumbereth nor
sleeps) who at that very time made them bewray Suo iudicio, quasi Soren
perire. Terent. Eunuch. Act. 5. See 7.
themselves, notwithstanding all their vowed and deiurated secrecy; and by a
spirit of divination in the mouth of our Kingly Regius propheta. D. King. Sermon.
at Oxf. Nou^m. 5. ^607.
Prophet, (construing contrary to letter and art, their more then
Aenigmaticall and Hieroglyphicall letter) discovered, prevented, and delivered
us from the danger of so facinorous a plotte: which design, if it had taken
effect, as al England had been overwhelmed with a bottomless Sea of misery
and destruction; so honorable London, greatest had thy share been therein,
thy massy and mountaine-like buildings, and monuments of age and honor; thy
holy Temples, Basilickes, Chapels and Oratories; thy royal Palaces and
sumptuous houses, had been laid in the dust, and turned into rubbish; thine
Elisian fields had been strowed with the discerped members of the massacred;
thy Christalline river of Thames, running along thy side with her silver
stream, to make glad the City of God had bin Dyed red like the rivers of
Egypt, with the blood which had run from the streets, as from so many master
veins, thine houses set on flaming fire, thy Shoppes and Storehouses rifled,
thy wives and daughters abused, thy children dashed against the stones, and
that which is (or ought to be) greatest of all, the Gospel of Christ (which
thou so love) banished: Oh that the remembrance of these things were written
in Stone or Lead, with an Iron Pen, that we and our posterity for ever might
say, praised be the Lord, that has not given us for a prey to their 1 Psalm.
124. 6.
teeth. Amen.

But seeing his word has not been regarded, and 3. By Correction.
his mercies forgotten or abused; has not God also knocked by his corrections?
Yes, the Lord has wonderfully bowed the heavens, and come down amongst us, and
given us many tokens of his anger; the last winter so hard and extreme, that
neither man nor beast was almost able to abide his Psalm. 147. 16.
frost: he has called for a Dearth, and destroyed our provision of Psalm. 105.
16.
bread: he has caused the waters to swell, and pass over their
ful-sea-markes, where they should have stayed their proud waves, and by
fearful inundations to dispeople whole In Summ^^setshire, Gloucestershire,
Norfolk, and other places. Ianu. 20. 1606.
Valleys: he has made the Winds to blow so tempestuously, as if he would
turn the foundations of the earth vp-side down, and discover the very
channels of the Sea. Our bodies have been afflicted with consumptions, hot
burning feauers, the botch of Egypt, and many grievous and loathsome diseases:
yea, the arrows of pestilence have plentifully flowen abroad, and wounded
many thousands unto death; treasons against our King and Country, have been
many and mighty, monstrous to be imagined, from a number of Lions whelps,
lurking in their Dens, and watching their hour when to undo us; neither
have thou London gone scot-free, or sat as a Queen and seen no evil, but so
deeply tasted of the cup of Gods anger, that thy lovers and friends have
stood a far off, been afraid of thy plague, and lamented thee, Alas, alas,
that great Reave. 18. 16.
City; yea, even yet the Lords wrath is not turned away, but his hand is
stretched out against thee Esa. 9. 12. 17. 21.
still: Lord in judgment remember mercy, and be not angry for ever.

Lastly, has not the Lord knocked by his spirit? 4. By his Spirit.
I do appeal unto your own consciences, what deep sighs, what godly
motions, purposes, desires; yea, and resolutions you have had in your hearts,
from the hearing of the word, consideration of his mercies, and fight of his
judgments; how often you have said in your selves, truly I will never so
sin any more; I will ever hereafter more zealously perform and practice such
and such a duty; I will now not fail to reform such and such an infirmity;
and whence are these things, but from Gods spirit? Let us then rather accuse
and condemn our selves, for quenching the good motions of his 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19.
spirit, and for stubbornely resisting Act. 7. 51.
them, and in all things give glory unto God, for his goodness and patience
toward us; for if ever any people, then ought the inhabitants of England and
the Citizens of London confess with their tongues, and subscribe with their
souls to the truth of this proposition; Oh Lord, by thy word, by thy mercies,
by thy corrections, and by thy spirit thou stand at our doors, and
knockest. So much for the first general part of my Text.

Now although it ought to be sufficient unto us The second general part.
all, to move us to open unto him, to hear him say, that ( he stands at the
door and knocks) yet our loving Savior, knowing the dulnes of flesh and
blood, Coherence.
unto that which concerns man's eternal good; and also considering how apt
the nature of man is to be stirred up by rewards, the rather to move and
allure us unto this holy duty of opening unto him, he does in the second
place, propose promises of ample reward, ( If any man hear my voice, and open
the door, I will come in unto him, and will suppe with him, and he with me.)
wherein two things are to be considered: Viz. first the conditions, ( If any
man hear my voice, and open the door) secondly the promises, upon Division.
the performance of these conditions, which are two, Viz. ( I will come in unto
him) and I will suppe with him and he with me.) In the conditions we are to
observe, first the generality of them, ( If any man) secondly, the conditions
themselves, which are two, Viz. first, ( to Sub-diuision.
hear his voice) secondly, ( to open the door.) For the first, it is to be
noted, what a general Proclamation 1 Part.
Christ makes, including all, excluding none, but seeking to win every one,
( if any (...) Si quis.
man.)

Howsoever the Invisible Church of God (an Article and object of our Ru^^in. in
Simb.
faith) has bin, is and shall be, Catholic, that is, general, extended to
all places, all times, and all kinds of August. ^pist. 170. Chrisost. in 4 ad
Ephesians.
persons, yet the visible Church, which is discerned by the Ministry of the
word and Sic August. confess. ^rt. 7. Calvin. lib. 4. Institut. cap. 1. sect.
9. 10. and fere nostri omnes.
Sacraments, was for a long time within the Tents of Gene. 9. 27.
Shem, and amongst the posterity of Gene. 10. 21.
Heber: called Hexap. in Gene. 10. 25.
Hebrews; for in Jury was God well known, and his Name was great in Israel,
whereas he dealt not so with other nations. The Jews only his enclosure from
the Commons of the world, impaled with the Law of commandments, rites and
ceremonies, as with a partition Ephe. 2. 15.
wall, and therefore a long time God sent all his Prophets unto them: Christ
said, He was not sent, but to the lost sheep Ierem. 26. 5.
of the house of Matthew. 15. 24.
Israel, and bad his Apostles go to the lost sheep of the house of Israel,
and forbad them to go into the way of the Gentiles, or to enter into the
Cities of the Matthew. 10. 5. 6*
Samaritanes, and answered the poor woman of Canaan, It is not good to take
the childrens bread and cast it unto Matthew. 15. 26. Canibus* gentilibus Nicol.
de ^err. ibid.
dogs. But now the partition wall being broken Ephesians. 2. 15.
down, we poor Gentiles that sat in darkness and in the shadow of death
have seen a great Matthew. 4. 16.
light, we that were far off are made Ephe. 2 13.
near, we that are Iaphets Rupert. lib. 1. Com. in Genesis 39
posterity, are allured by the sweet sound of the Gospel, to come and dwell
in the tents of Gene. 9. 27.
Shem: The Apostles have their Commission enlarged, You shall be my witnesses
both in Iudeah and Jerusalem, and in Samaria and to the ends of the Act. 1. 8.
world. Yea, Go ye (says Christ) into all the world, and Preach the Gospel
to all Mark 16. 15.
creatures. I perceive (says Saint Peter) there is no respect of persons with
God, but in every nation, He that fears God and works righteousness, is
accepted with Act. 10. 34. (...)
him. The Jew may not brag because of his kindred according to the flesh: Nor
the Gentile despair, because of his Pedigree; For whosoever believes is the
child of faithful Romans 4. 11.
Abraham, and there is neither Jew nor Grecian; bond nor free, male nor female;
difference of nation, condition or sex, is not Qualitates circumstantes. Aret.
in Act. Apost.
regarded, all are one in Christ Gal. 3. 28.
Jesus; he makes his Proclamation generally, without any restriction,
limitation, or exception (if any man) whosoever is hungry may come to this
Esaias. 55. 1.
feast, Whosoever is thirsty, may come to these waters of life, and drink
John* 7. 37.
freely; Whosoever is sick may seek help of this Matthew. 9. 12.
Physician; Whosoever is blind, naked, and poor, may come to this market, and
for nothing, buy, eye-salue, clothing and gold Reave. 3. 18.
enough; Whosoever is a lost sinner may come to this seeking Luke 19. 10.
Savior, and whosoever comes unto me (says Christ himself) I cast not
John 6. 39.
away.

The conditions thus generally propounded are The Conditions are two, first, to
hear the word of Christ.
two, First, (to hear his voice) Secondly, (to open the door) for the first,
there is no one duty oftener commanded throughout the whole Book of God, then
this (of hearing his word) a place or twain shall serve for instance; Moses in
sundry places does thus admonish and exhort the people, Hear O Israel, the
ordinances, laws, and statutes, which I teach Deuteronomy. 4. 1. and 5. 1. and 6. 34.
and 23. etc.
you. The Prophet Esaias bids, Incline your ears, hear and your souls shall
Esaias 55. 3.
live, The Prophet David calls, Hear O my people, incline your ears to the
words of my Psalm. 78. 1.
mouth; God the Father once, yea twice commanded us from heaven, to hear his
Matthew. 3. vlt. 17. 5.
Son. Our Savior Christ, often in the Gospel charge them that have ears
to Matthew. 11. 15. 13. 9. 43. mark 4. 9. 23. 7. 16. luke 8. 8. 14. 35.
hear; Saint James bids us be swift to Iam. 1. 19.
hear: And the conclusion of every Epistle to those seven Churches, is this,
Let him that has an hear, hear what the spirit says to the Reave. 2. 17. 27
Churches: And surely, no marvel that we are thus often and earnestly called
upon, for seeing hearing is the appointed and sanctified means to beget wisdom,
as Solomon Prou. 1. 5.
says, yea, to beget faith (the excellentest point of heavenly wisdom) as
Saint Paul Romans 10. 17.
says, There is nothing in the world that Satan more labors to hinder then
Preaching and hearing: As Saint Paul found by experience, saying, I Paul would
at least once or twice have come unto you, but Satan hindered 1 Thessalonians. 2. 18.
me. Wherefore men and women had need to strengthen themselves to the
performance of this duty, which that they may profitably do. Three things
are principally 3. Things requisite to the profitable hearing of Gods word.
requisite, viz. First, Preparation before, Secondly, Attention during the
time; Thirdly, Meditation afterward.

For the first, He that will profitably hear, must 1. Preparation*
prepare himself thereunto, by private Prayer, reading, conference and
meditation; For the Israelites when they were summoned to appear before the
Lord in Sinai, were first commanded to sanctify themselves and wash their
Exodus 19. 10* 11.
clothes; and Moses might not come near the Lord before he had put off his
shoes, because the ground was holy whereon he Exodus 3. 5.
stood: Why did God bid him put off his shoes? (says one) Even that he might
make him thereby more religiously Quare ^ussus est ^oses cal^^amenta soluere?
Certe vt religiosiorem hac ratione: ^^um read* ^et. Theodoret.
affected: which though he was (no doubt) in great measure* yet even the best
have need to have it more and more increased in B. ^^^ing. in Exodus cap. 19.
ver 10 pa. 31^.
them; Take heed therefore (says Solomon) to thy foot, when thou enterest
into the house of Eccles
God.

Secondly, there is required Attention: often does 2. Attention.
God by his Prophets bid men, hear and hearken, hear and incline their
ears: Yea* thus to heareis rather an office of the mind then of the Opus
animi, non auris.
care, which the Grammarians do well call Animaduertere, qu^si anim^m aduer^ere
Animaduersion: such ^earers the Gospel mencioneth, who are said to lay up all
those things which they heard in their Luke 1. 66.
hearts: men then must be specially careful* when they come to hear Gods
word, that they bring their hearts with them, least the Lord complain as
sometimes he did, This people drawet^ near unto me with their lips and
ears, but their hearts are far from Esaias 29. 13.
me. God gave a charge in his law, that none should appear before him Exodus
23. 15.
empty. But when men and women so soon as they come to their Pewes, fall into
drowsinesse upon their elbowes; or chatting with their neighbors; o^ their
minds wandering afar Vbi est aul^ regis Caelesti^ vid^^, garri^, ambula^,
negotiari^. Chrisost. Hom* in Heb. 15
off: as senseless as the Pictures in the windows, these bring their bodies
without their Corpora ex cordia. 3. Meditation.
hearts, and are guilty of the sin, and seldom go away unpunished, for
appearing before the Lord empty.

The third and last is meditation afterward; it was one special mark,
whereby in time of the law, the clean beasts were known from the unclean,
Viz. that they did chew the Leuit. 11. 3.
cud; and hereby are Gods clean Sheep discerned, that having fed in the
green Pastures of his word and Sacraments, they will chew the cudde, ruminate
and meditate upon that which they have heard and received, which is both a
profitable and a sweet Meditatis dei dulcis est. August.
thing; yea, the Prophet David pronounces the man blessed, that does meditate
in the law of God night and Psalm. 1. 2.
day; thus Isaac went into the fields in the evening to Gene. 24. 63. Suach ad
meditandum in ^gro* Amb.
meditate; this is our heaven upon earth, where we do become for the time, even
strangers here, and are admitted into the fruition of invisible and
unspeakable companions and Ios. Halls art* of Medit.
comforts: and Mary did keep the sayings, and ponder them in her Luke 2. 19.
Areprehension.
heart. And here before I conclude this point, let me take up alamentable
complaint of a great crying sin in the Country; Viz. that the best hours of
the best days in the week, are of many most ungodly spent, in their houses,
shoppes, fields, streets; yea (that which is worse) in Tauernes and
Alehouses, Carding and Dicing, Piping and Dancing; yea (and that which is
worser) in whoring and drinking: and are not these the sins of the City? I
would to God they were A commendation of London for her readiness to hear the
word.
not; and yet as the holy Ghost witnesses of the Beraeans, that they were more
noble then they that dwelt at Thessalonica, which received the word with all
Acts 17. 11. (...). Erant nobiliores
readiness: Let me give this honorable and due commendation of London, that
as God has in mercy richly stored her with more worthy Preachers of the
Gospel, then any other part of the land, so is she full of most noble
Citizens, that receive the word with all readiness: Oh this is the true
Nobility Four sorts of Nobility, first natural, second fortunate, third
moral, fourth Divine, which is the excellentest. D. Meriton* Ser. of Nobility
before the King. Feb. 1606
indeed; yea, as there are many things which minister great comfort and
content unto us, when we repair hither; so is this the greatest, and makes
our hearts leap with joy, to see your goodly assemblies, which (as Solomon
says) are like a flock of Goats, which look from the top of Mount Cant.
4. 1.
Gilead; and so your beautiful Churches, filled from corner to corner; it
makes us to wonder with Balaam, how goodly are thy Numb. 24. 5.
Tents! and as the woman in the Gospel, did throng but to touch the hemme of
his Matthew. 9. 21. Exhortation.
garment, so ye throng to get within the door: Oh let me entreat you, more and
more to increase in the zealous performance of this holy duty, for it is the
eare-marke of Gods sheep: my sheep will hear my John 10. 27.
voice. Make good use of your ears, it is the excellentest member that a man
has; if a man loose his eye, arm, or leg, yet he may have some comfort in
an Hospital or Spittle, and though he be never cured, yet it hurts not the
soul, Nay, it may be good for the soul; but if God take away the use of
hearing, the soul is in danger of famishing, for the soul feeds at the
ear, as the body by the mouth: And therefore the want of hearing is called a
Amos 8. 11.
famine; yea, as I have said Sermon at Paul's Cross. Ianu. 1. 1608. Page 14.
before, so say I now again: If ever God lay this famine upon you, your glory,
wealth and dignity is gone; but I am persuaded better things of you, and such
as accompany Heb. 6. 9.
salvation; Yea, if your Preparation before, and Meditation after, be
answerable to your present attention, I assure my self God has a blessed
work in hand: you do so well perform this first condition, (to hear his
voice.)

The second condition required, is ( to open the 2. Condition (to open.)
door) our Savior elsewhere has pronounced, Bles. sed are they that hear
the word of God and keep Luke 11. 28.
it. And Saint Paul says, Not the hearers of the Law, but the dooers shall be
Romans 2. 13.
justified; And Saint James says, They that hear the word only, and do it
not, deceive James 1. 22*
themselves: That therefore we may not deceive our selves, but be justified in
present, and blessed in future, our Savior here joins these two conditions
together, and let no man put them asunder, ( if any man hear my voice, and
open the door.) For the full opening of which Scripture, I will briefly
answer three Questions which by three sorts of persons are propounded, and do
naturally arise from the Text to be considered of: The first is made by the
Atheist: The second by the Papist; The third by the godly Protestant, The
Atheists question tends to his contempt of the means of salvation; The
Papists, to his confirmation in heresy; The Protestants to his godly
conformation in the truth.

The Atheist that makes a mock of Religion, 1 Question propo^^ded by the
Atheist.
and scorneth the exercises thereof, demands wh^^ need I to open? If Christ
be God, and made the heart, he can enter if he list without any opening, but
O vain man, Know, he that made thee without thee, will not save thee without
August. Sermon. 25. de Serb. Apost.
thee; God works not upon man, as upon a senseless block or Non sicut
lapidibus* aut aliis insensatis, operatur salutem. ^ugust. cont. Pelag. 1. 5.
stone, seeing he has endued him with reason, will, and understanding, which
by man's fall, are not destroyed for substance, but only corrupted in
qualities; and has in true conversion, the will concuring with word and
spirit, for no man ever was converted against his will, neither is will
constrained, any will; and therefore cease thy godless reasoning, and if thou
have any spark of grace, whilst the time and means are affoorded thee, Work
out thy salvation with fear and Philip. 2. 12. ^. Question propounded by the
Papist.
trembling.

The second Question is propounded by the Papist, who thus demands, Is it in
the power of man's will, or of his pure naturals, to open unto Christ? Indeed
the Rhem annot. in Luc. 10. sect. 6. and Romans 9. sect 4.
Rhemistes, Bellarmine, and other learned Thom. Aquin. Scot. Hen. Capreol,
ferrartens. vt ^stat Bellar. lib. 3. de Great. cap. 10.
Papists, do exceedingly magnify, both in general, man's pure naturals, as
herein being able to do good works congruously meritorious; And in
particular, the liberty of will, as simply and absolutely Simpliciter and
absolute actiuum. Bellar.
active, in first conversion; and to that end abuse this In nostra est
potestate Christo pulsanti aperire. Tittelm. in Cant. 5. fo. 82
Text. But the holy Scriptures, godly Learned Fathers, and orthodoxe
confessions of renowned Churches, do teach us otherwise, viz. That all the
imaginations of the thoughts of man's heart, are only and continually Gene. 6.
5.
evil, and we stark dead in trespasses and Ephe. 2. 1.
sins, so as without Christ our life, we can do John 15. 5.
nothing, no not so much as think a good 2. Cor. 3. 5.
thought: We have it by Creation to will, by corruption, to will that which is
evil, but only, by Regeneration to will that which is Nisi sit dona tum, non
habet bonum velle. Amb. de vocat. Gent lib. ^. ca. 9
good; our wills do not by freedom obtain grace, but by grace obtain Non
liberate gratiam: sed gratia* libertatem. August. de corrept. and great. cap. 8.
freedom; Nature, makes man willing, but Grace makes him Natara volentes,
gratia been volentes. Barn.
wel-willing.

Howsoever then at the same moment that man is converted, he does will his
Eodem momento nobis datur recipere and velle recipere. Bez. quest. page 47.
Calu. Instit. lib. 2. cap. 5. sect. 19.
conversion, yet is man but a subject to receive this impression of M. Perk. on
Gal. 1. page ^1.
Grace, If we have a good thought, it is grace infused; if a good word, it is
grace effused; if a good work, it is grace Gratia triplex. ^nfusa* 2. effusa.
3. diffusa.
diffused: for all, God only is to have the glory: and yet there is great use
of such like precepts and commandments as these: For first, they show us our
duty what we ought to do: Secondly, by the ministry of them grace is convey
ed into our hearts, whereby we are enabled to do them; and therefore to
conclude this Question, as God commanded us to believe and Mark 1. 15.
repent, yet faith and repentance are the gifts of John 6. 29. 2. tim. 2. 25.
God: So he bids us ( open the door) yet has he the keye of Reave. 3. 7.
David, and did himself open Lidias Acts 16. 14.
heart, and therefore we must pray with that Father, Lord give what thou
requirest of Da domine, quod ^ubes. ^. Question by the godly Protestant.
us.

The third and last Question is demanded by the godly Protestant, who being
desirous to open unto Christ, is also desirous to know the means how the door
of the heart is ordinarily opened to receive Christ, for whose full
information, I give such an one to understand, that the hand that opens the
heart is the good spirit of God, the keye that this hand uses, is the
ministry of the word, the graces wrought by his hand in that heart, which is
or shall be opened, are principally these two, first, Faith, and second
Repentance: So by Paul's ministry, God had almost opened the door of King
Agrippa^s heart, when he confessed, almost thou perswadest me to become a Acts
2^. 28.
Christian; And by the ministry of John Baptist, had almost opened the door
of Herod's heart, for the Evangelist witnesses, that he reverenced John, and
did many things, and heard him Mark 6. 20.
gladly: Oh if they had not almost, but altogether (as Paul Acts 26. 29.
wished) believed and repented, they had not almost, but altogether opened unto
Christ: if then, by the ministry of his word, God have begotten a true and
lively faith in thee, which works by ^ love: If an unfeigned repentance for
thy sins, Examination Gal. 5. 6.
which brings forth fruits worthy of amendment of Matthew. 3. 5.
life, with an holy zeal, and indignation, and care, never to offend any 2.
Cor. 7. 11.
more, thou may then be of good comfort, God has opened the door of thine
heart unto him.

And that I may conclude this point with words of Exhortation, I beseech you
open unto the Lord Exhortation.
this day, he has too long waited our leisure, and our vain pleasures, or
profits, Honor, or wealth have stood in our way, that few have resigned
themselves in such resolute obedience unto Christ, as they ought; but have
differed Repentance, if not of all, yet of some sins, and neglected, if not
all, yet many good duties: Oh that the Lord would frame our hearts this day to
an holy and immooueable resolution of obedience in all things, and no longer to
trifle the time, with friuoulous excuses, of dangerous delay, that so
performing the Conditions of (hearing his voice, and opening the doors of our
hearts) we may have our parts, in these blessed promises, whereof we are now
in the next place to consider.

The promises are two, the first is of inhabitation The first promise, viz. of
inhabitation.
( I will come in unto him) meaning, that he will stay and abide with him for
ever; for so himself has promised, If any man love me, he will keep my
word, and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and will dwell
with Iohu 14. 23. (...) Mansionem facierous.
him; And Saint Paul prays for the Ephesians, that Christ may dwell in their
hearts by Ephe. 3. 17.
faith; Yea the Greek word is very (...) nam apud Graecos, (...) and (...)
differunt, sicut apud Latinos, habitare and commorari. Bez. in Matthew. 2. ^3.
emphaticall, as Learned Beza, and Zanchius have well observed. Here then the
greatest blessing that can be is promised, and wherein man's happiness
consists, viz. his union with Vniri cum Deo, summa be atitudo est. Bulling.
Christ, when a man can truly say with the Apostle, Christ lives in Gala. 2.
20.
me; for as the soul is the life of the body, and being separate, the body is
dead: So Christ is the life of the soul, and being separate from it, the soul
is dead, yea, ever dying and never dead, this is the second death.

But what will Christ come alone? No indeed, hearken what Christ himself
says, My Father will love him, and we will come unto him and dwell with John
14. 23.
him, not excluding the holy ^um pater and filius nominantur, non potest
excludi s^tritus sanctus. Nic. Hemm^ng. ibid.
Ghost, for of him he speaks expressly before, I will send you the
comforter, who shall dwell with you, and shall be in you for Ioh. 14. 16. 17.
ever: In regard whereof, Saint Paul calls our bodies the Temples of the holy
1. Cor. 6. 19.
Ghost; Yea, in many places, he calls them the Temple of 1. Cor. (...). 16.
^^. etc.
God; Oh happy he, that is vouchsafed such a dignity, what good thing shall
he want, or what evil needs he to fear, that has God in him, the
fountain of all Est haec in comparabilis dignitatis. and omnem felicit item
comprehendit. Gualt in John. Hom. 135.
good: the Lord is my Shepherd (says David) I shall not Psalm. 23. 1.
want; and if the Lord be with us, who or what can be against us? says Saint
Romans 8. 31. Two principal motives, to open unto Christ.
Paul: there are two principal motives, effectual (where is any grace) to open
the heart: First, he is a liberal rewarder of them that entertain him, he
never comes empty Faelix qui hunc Hospitem recipit, est satis magnificus
hospes non venit vacuis manibus Ierus. in John. fol. 401.
handed: Abraham entertained but Angels, and had a son bestowed upon Gene.
18. 10.
him; Lot did the like, and he was delivered from the subversion of Gene. 19.
17.
Sodom; Obed Edom the Gittite, gave but house-roome to the Ark of God, and the
Lord blessed him, and all his 2. Sam. 6. 7.
household; what good thing then shall he want, in whom the whole Trinity
Habenti dominum nil detrit, quod dei sunt omnia. Cypr.
dwells?

Secondly, he is an inseparable and most comfortable companion: we may have
friends that love us dearly in prosperity, yet will forsake us in adversity; as
David complains, my lovers and friends stand a far off, looking upon my
Psalm. 38. 11.
plague, and yet Job more lamentably complains, I became a stranger to my
neighbors, my familiars forgot me, my maids took me for a stranger, and my
servant would not answer me, my breath was strange unto my wife, though I
prayed her for the childrens sake of mine own Job. 19. 13. etc.
body: yea, CHRIST himself had experience hereof, Judas betrayed Matthew. 26.
16.
him, his Disciples forsook Matthew. 26. 56.
him, and Peter for-sware Matthew. 26. 72.
him; that the Prophecy might be fulfilled, I will smite the Shepherd, and the
Sheep of the flock shall be Zach. 13. 8.
scattered: but though our friends stick never so fast unto us, and their love
continue constant as well in adversity as prosperity, as the love of Jonathan
toward David, whose love passed the love of 2. Sam. 1. 26.
women, yet when death comes all men forsake us; this seperateth husband and
wife, parents and children, friend and friend, though never so dearly beloved:
if Sarai be once dead, Abraham is careful for a place where to bury her out
of his Gene. 23. 4.
sight.

But if Christ be entered within the doors of our hearts, he will be with us
for ever, for so he has promised; when thou passest through the waters, they
shall not ouerflow thee; when thou walk through the fire, the flame shall not
kindle upon thee, for I will be with Esaias 43. 2.
thee: so that in every peril, we may with David comfort our selves in Psalm.
23. 4.
Christ, and though we see plague, pestilence, famine or death before us, yet
we may say with him, I will fear no evil, for thou Christ art with Psalm. 23.
4.
me, who in life and death art advantage unto Philip. 1. 21. Exhortation.
me: If therefore thou have not yet entertained Christ, Oh now that he knocks
at the door, open unto him: yea, embrace and hug him in the arms of faith,
and say, welcome Christ, for there is none that I desire in comparison of Psalm.
73. 5.
thee; and when he is once entered, carry thy self so, as thou do not grieve
his Ephe. 4. 30.
spirit, and provoke him to depart, which nothing can do but sin; he can
brook poverty, sickness, persecution, slander or any misery, there is
nothing makes him weary of dwelling with us but sin, only that does
separate him and Esaias. 59. 1. 2.
us: But what benefit shall we have by his coming in unto us? that the second
promise shows, ( I will suppe with him, and he with me) where, by the The
second promise, mutual Communion and fellowship
metaphor of a Supper or feast, the sweet and heavenly Communion and
Fellowshippe, betwixt Christ and a sinful soul converted, are shaddowed out;
which holy Communion consists in a mutual or 1. Part of this Communion. What
dishes a sinful soul presents unto Christ.
reciprocal giving and receiving, and therefore shaddowed out by a double
Supper: first the soul converted, suppeth with Christ, for he says ( I will
suppe with him.) Now the dishes that she has to present and entertain him
withal, are these three: Viz. first sin, secondly sorrow for sin, thirdly
misery, the 1. Sin.
effect of sin. The first, I say, is (sin) for if this dish be wanting in
the service, Christ is not welcome; Nay, he will not tarry Supper, for he is
come to seek and to save that which was Matthew. 18. 11.
lost; the whole need not the Physician but those that are sick: he came not
to call the righteous, but sinners to Matt. 9. 12. 13.
repentance: howsoever then proud Merit-mongers and Iusticiaries, may with
Martha take care, and trouble themselves about many things, yet is this the one
needful Luke 10. 41.
thing, which our Savior Christ takes in good part, and the Angels of heaven
rejoice Luke 15. 10.
at; Viz. that we present our sins unto him, and say with the prodigal
son, Father I have sinned against heaven and before thee, and am no more
worthy to be called thy Luke 15. 21
son, and with the humble Publicane, O God be merciful unto me a Luke 18. 13.
sinner.

The second is sorrow for sin, this is a mournful 2. Sorrow for Sin.
Supper, where is not heard the sound of the Vyoll, Tabret and Job. 21. 12.
Harp, and such like Instruments of Amos 6. 5.
Music, but of grievous mourning and Amos 8. 10.
lamentation like Rachel, who wept and could not be Iere. 31. 15.
comforted, as if they had obtained ^eremies wish, even their heads to be full
of water, and their eyes a fountain of Iere. 9. 1. In fontem frontem atque in
flumina lum^^^ ^^rtam.
tears: so the Prophet Joel preparing men to this Super, bids them turn to
the Lord with all their hearts, with fasting, weeping and Joel 2. 12.
mourning: Saint James does the like, suffer afflictions, sorrow and weep, let
your laughter be turned into mourning and your joy into James 4. 9.
heaviness: so we read that King Josiah his heart melted, and he rent his
clothes and wept before the 2. Kings 22. 19
Lord: the like did King David, he caused his bed to swim, and watered his
Couch with Psalm. 6. 6.
tears: Peter went out and wept Matthew. 26. vl^.
bitterly: and the sinful woman washed Christ's feet with her Luke 7. 38.
tears; and how acceptable this was, appears from Christ's own words to
Simon: Simon see thou this woman, thou gave me no water, but she has
washed my feeee with tears: yea, blessed (says he) are they that Matthew. 5. 4.
mourn: A broken and contrite spirit is a sacrifice pleasing unto Psalm. 51. 17.
God; yea, more acceptable then a Bullock that has horns and Psalm. 69. 31.
hoofes: and for this cause Saint Paul was glad, that he had made the
Corinthians godly 2. Cor. 7. 9.
sorry: yea, I would to God I could make you so sorry for your sins, and cause
such abundance of tears to be shed for the same, that this place might be
called Judge. 2. 5. 3. Misery the effect of sin.
Bothim, we should never a one of us have cause to repent, or to be sorry for
such a sorrovv.

The third and last is misery, the effects of sin; as hunger, thirst,
vvearisomnes, sadness, poverty, anger, etc. which being presented unto Christ,
he takes them at our hands; yea, he so far submitted himself to all the M.
Per^ on the Creed, of incarnat. page 280.
general and unblameable infirmites, and passions of our (...) Naturales, and
inculpa^^les pas^^ones Damasc lib. 3. cap. 2^. Zanch. d^incarnat. lib. 2. The^.
^ag. 117. etc.
nature, that the Prophet Esaias foretold, he should neither have form nor
beauty, but men would hide (as it were) their faces from Esaias 53. 3.
him; and David confesses in his person, I am a worm and noman; yea, a shame
of men, and the contempt of the people, my strength is dried up like a
potsheard, my tongue cleaves to my jaws, and I may tell all my Psa. 22. 15.
etc.
bones. But passing from this supper, which has nothing but sin, sorrow, and
misery; let us come to the second part of this blessed Communion, and see what
a royal and happy feast Christ makes unto the converted sinner, noted in
these last words of my Text, ( and ^e with me) he comes not to be entertained
2. Part of the Communion.
only, but to entertain also: if any inuit Christ, as the Church does,
saying, Let my welbe loved come to his garden, and eat his pleasant Cant. 4.
vlt.
fruit: he is not a churlish Nabal, but will inuit them again, and that to a
royal feast indeed, even to a feast of fat things, full of marrow, and of
wines fined and Esaias 25. 6.
purified; and will say, eat friends, drink and make you merry, O Cantic. 5.
1.
ye beloved; which blessed Supper is here begun and continued in his kingdom
for ever; wherein What Christ communicates to the Convert soul. 1.
Righteousness.
these three things are principally communicated unto us: first righteousness in
stead of sinfulness: so Saint Paul says, he is made of God to be unto us
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and 1. Cor. 1. 30.
redemption: and again, he was made sin that knew no sin, that we might
be made the righteousness of God through 2. Cor. 5. vlt*
him, whose righteousness of Matthew. 3. 15.
fulfilling and Heb. 2. 9.
suffering, active and passive, being made ours by faith, the sins of
omission and commission are done away, and we stand before God, not only as
not having broken his law, but also as having absolutely kept and fulfilled it.

The second is joy and peace, in stead of sorrovv 2. Joy.
and anguish; he takes away our sackcloth, and girdeth us with P sal. 30. 11.
gladness: for having his righteousness, and being justified, we have peace with
Romans 5. 1.
God; yea, and joy in God unspeakable and glorious, which we can neither
suppress nor 1. Pet. 1. 8.
Nec reticere nec recitare.
express, which yet is but a taste, as the bunch of Grapes were to the Number.
13. 24.
Israelites: the full fruition is not granted till we come into Gods presence,
where are the fulness of Psalm. 16. vlt.
joys: where they shall drink of the Rivers of pleasure, and be satisfied
with the fatnes of Gods Psalm. 36. 8.
house, where joy shall not enter into them, for it is so great as heart cannot
conceive the taste of 1. Cor. 2. 9.
it, but they shall enter into Matthew. 25. 23.
it, and Non intrabit gaudium in gaudentes sed toti gaudentes in gaudium
domini. August. Manue. cap. 36.
bathe themselves in joy, and even swim in the bottomless stream of the
sweet pleasure of God, as a little fish takes his pastime in the huge Ocean
Psalm. 104. 26
Sea.

The third and last is, happiness and felicity in stead 3. Happiness
of our wretchedness and misery, which consists both in full redemption from
all evil, and the perpetual fruition of all good; in regard whereof, the holy
Ghost pronounced, Blessed are they that are called to the Lambs Supper, these
words of God are Reave. 19. 9. Exhortation.
true: Oh blessed then, and an hundred times blessed are ye that are now
called, if ye come to this Supper; wherefore I beseech you, let us dally and
excuse the matter no longer, but this day that he knocks, let us hear his
voice and obey, least deferring to repent, he cease to knock any longer, and
in stead of sealing us up unto the day of Ephe. 1. 13.
redemption, he sear us with an hot Iron to the day of 1. Tim. 4. 2.
destruction: Oh therefore that I knew what to say, or what to do, to obtain
this of you, or rather of God for you: Yea, if with Solomon I might hane my
wish, I would neither desire of God long life, nor riches, nor any such earthly
vanity, but this only needful grace to my self, and all that have heard me
this day, that effectually opening the doors of our hearts unto Christ, he
might come in and sup with us, and we with him for ever.

To conclude, this year is a great year of trial Conclusion.
and temptation, especially to the poor, and I beseech you that have this
worlds goods to hear and open unto them, when they call and knock at your
gates, knowing that what ye give to the poor servants of Christ in his Name,
ye give unto him, and he will reward Quod iacenti in terra porr^gitis:
sedentiin C^lo datis. Greg. Homil.
it: Oh to give liberally and chearefully to the poor, is the gainefullest
trade in the Ar^ omntum quaestuosissima Chrisost. ad pop. Antioch.
world, for that is true of this kind of piety, which Saint Paul speaks of
godliness in general, it is profitable unto all things, having the promise of
this life, and of that which is to 1. Tim. 4. 8. (...). Ad omnia vtil^^ est.
come; it is both our iourneying provision in this our wearisome Pilgrimage in
earth, and a never failing treasure reserved in heaven for Viatic^m in mundo
thesauru^ in Caelo.
us; and therefore though you have never so many children to care for, Yet let
Christ in his poor members be reputed one, and cared for, the rest shall fare
the Habes december, putes Christum esse vndecimum August.
better. For if you Suppe him, he will Suppe you: Fie then that we should
spend upon pride and bravery, loosenes and prodigality, riot and luxury,
surfeiting and gluttony, pleasure and sensuality; on parasites and flatterers,
rymers and iesters, dicers and dancers, players and pypers, roysters and
swaggerers; yea, on dogs and hawks, that which we should give to the poor,
and to detain from them, or divert to other uses, is a sin of crying
Sacrilegium est, rem pauperum non dare pauperibus. Hierom.
sacrilege.

But here, as duty binds me, let me (to the glory of God, the shame of our
enemies, our own comfort, and the good encouragement of others) give true
testimony to Londons liberality: Oh London, London, excellent things are spoken
of thee thou city of God: it is spoken of thee that thou love the truth, and
reuerencest Religion, and honor the Ministers of Christ more then any part
of the Realm besides: it is spoken of thee, that by means of worthy
magistrates, Emanuel Col. founded by Sir Gualt. Mildmay. Sidney Coll. by the
Count. of Sussex. An Hospital and Freeschole at Croy don, by Whyt. Arch.
Bishop of Canter. Another at Greenwich by M^. Lambert. Another at Westminst. by
the Lady Dakers. A Free-schole founded by Sir John Heart. Lady Ramsey fall of
good works. Sir Roger Man-wood erected an Hospital at Saint Steuens, and
founded a Free school at Sandwich.
thou art a Sanctuary to the good, a snare to the bad, the mirror of good
government; and only thy Suburbs, Skirts and out-bounds the sobbe and sink
of sin, and Cage for all unclean birds to roost in: it is spoken of thee,
that none are more true and obedient to highest powers, nor readier with body
and goods to defend the State then thou art: And lastly, whereas our
blacke-mouthed adversaries exclaim against us, that we preach nothing but sola
fides, sola fides, and whereas their Bona opera have built many goodly
Colleges and Hospitals, our Sola fides has plucked them down again: No, no,
the world does know, since it has pleased God to enlighten our Church with
the purity of the Gospel, there have bin more Colleges founded, Hospitals
erected, Schools builded, poor Scholars maintained, Orphants and Impotents
relieved, and charitable deeds exercised generally in this land, then in any,
if not in many ages under Popery and superstition: but London, London, we
make our boast of thee, as able to remove so slanderous an imputation; it is
well seen how thou employest a great part of thy wealth, to relieve a great
number of poor Scholars, poor Soldiers, and poor Orphants: I am compassed
with a cloud of vvitnesses this day, there being of poor children, soldiers
and impotent people, that this last year have been maintained, cured and
relieved in the Hospitals of Christ, Saint Bartholmew, S. Thomas, and
Bridewell, to the number of two thousand, five hundred, eighty two, besides
your liberality toward Colleges and Schools of learning, in maintaining
poor Scholars, and good exercises of Learning; and besides your liberality
toward poor prisoners and others from your purses and your doors: Oh, let
God have the glory, our enemies shame, and our selves comfort from these
things, and all together proclaim, great is the truth and prevails.

And mine humble and hearty prayer unto God is, that long and long may this
renowned City flourish and abound in peace, plenty, honor, wealth and
prosperity, that long and long she may be rich and abound in all manner of good
works, to the comfort of thousands and ten thousands of his poor Saints:
which God grant for his beloved sons sake Jesus Christ, to whom with the
father and the holy Spirit, three persons in glorious Trinity; one only
immortal, invisible and wise God in Unity, be rendered and ascribed all glory,
wisdom, majesty, praise, power, thanks and dominion, both now and for
evermore. AMEN.

FINIS.

