ANNO DOMINI M. DC^XXIII.
ARTICLES given in charge to be inquired upon and presented too, by the
Churchwardens, Sidemen, Quest-men and Inquisitors in every parish within the
Province of Ardmagh, in the course of the Metropoliticall visitation of the
same, in this present year begun, by the most reverend Father in God,
Christopher, by the mercy of God, Lo: Archbishop of Ardmagh, Primate and
Metropolitan of all Ireland. The said presentiments to be made upon their and
every their corporal Oaths; whereunto the Parson, Vicar, Curate, and
Parish-clarke in every of the said Parishes, are to be assisting, so far as
they and every of them can, respectively in their knowledge or understanding.
INprimis, whether is your Parson, Vicar or Curate resident continually in, at,
and upon his Benefice, doing his duty in reading distinctly the divine
Service, preaching the word, and duly administering the holy Sacraments,
according to the book of Common Prayer?

2 Item, whether does your Parson or Vicar (being lawfully absent from his Cure
at any time) leave in his place a sufficient and conformable Curat, to
celebrate divine Service, administer the Sacraments, and teach and preach the
Scriptures?

3 Item, whether is your Parson, Vicar, or Curate a common resorter to Tavernes
or Alchouses, giving himself to drinking, ryoting, and playing at Cards, dyce,
or other unlawful games: or is he a Striker, dueller, dancer or hunter; or so
reported?

4 Item, whether is your Parson or Vicar, or any other of or in your parish,
an Usurer, or lender of his money for unlawful gain, or whether is he, or are
they taken or reputed so to be?

5 Item, whether do the Proprietaries, Parsons, vicars and other possessors of
the Churches, Chappells and their mansions within your parish, keep the
chancels of their rectories and vicarages, and other their houses and buildings
belonging to the same, in due reparations?

6 Item, whether has your Parson, Vicar or Curate received any persons to the
holy communion, being openly known to be at debate and out of charity with
their neighbors, or defamed with any notorious crime and not reformed?

7 Item, whether has your Parson, Vicar or Curate denied or neglected to
visit the sick, or bury the dead, being brought to the Church, and having
thereof notice?

8 Item, how many Benefices or ecclesiastical promotions has your Parson or
vicar, and how far distant are they the one from the other? what chapels has
he to his Cures belonging? by what names are they called, and how and by whom
are they served?

9 Item, whether does your parson, vicar or curate minister the holy communion
any otherwise then only after such form and manner as is set forth in the
book of common prayer?

10 Item, whether does your Parson, Vicar or Curate (being no Preacher allowed)
presume to expound the Scriptures, in his own Cure, or elsewhere? or does he
procure (once in a month at the least) a Sermon to be preached in his Cure, by
Preachers lawfully licensed? and upon every Sunday, when there is no Sermon,
does he or his Curate read some one of the Homilies prescribed?

11 Item, whether does your Minister every Sunday and Holy Day, half an hour
at the least, before Evening prayer, examine and instruct the youth of your
parish in the Catechism, set forth by Authority in the book of common
prayer; and whether does he call them thereunto in course, and whether do the
Churchwardens of the parish assist him therein?

12 Item, what Schoolemasters have you in your parish, that either teach
privately or publicly, and not licensed thereunto, and by whom be they
harbored?

13 Item, whether be there in your parish any persons that contemn or abuse,
by word or deed, the Ministers of the Church?

14 Item, whether the Service of your Church be begun and ended at due and
convenient hours, and whether the same be celebrated by your Parson, Vicar or
Curate according to the book of common prayer?

15 Item, whether any person within your parish do wilfully maintain and
defend any heresy, error, or opinion contrary or repugnant to the Scriptures
and doctrine of the Church?

16 Item, whether there be any in your parish that be common drunkards,
swearers, or blasphemers of the name of God?

17 Item, whether be there any in your parish who have committed adultery,
fornication or incest, or be common baudes or receivers of such lewd and evil
persons, or that be vehemently suspected thereof, or of any of the like crimes?

18 Item, who they be (if any such there be in your parish) that be braulers,
slanderers, chiders, scholders, make-bates, and sowets of discords between one
person and another, and especially between man and wife, parents and their
children, masters and their servants?

19 Item, whether be there any in your parish that do use and exercise
charms, sorceries, inchantme^ts, invocations, circles, witchcrafts,
soothsayings, or any like arts invented by the devil, and especially in or at
the time of women's travail?

20 Item, whether is your Church sufficiently repaired, and therein your Pulpit
and Communion Table decently furnished and appointed; if not, whose default the
same is?

21 Item, whether there be in your parish any that (in contempt of their own
parish church) do resort to any other church or chapel?

22 Item, whether any In holders or Alchouse-keepers within your parish do
commonly use to sell meat and drink within the time of common prayer, preaching
or reading of the Homilies aforesaid?

23 Item, whether any in your parish under government of their parents or
others, have made privy contracts of matrimony, not calling thereunto two or
mo witnesses, nor having the consent of their parents, or such others under
whose government they are?

24 Item, whether such persons, or other in your parish, have married the banes
not first solemnly asked, or at unseasonable hours?

25 Item, whether you know in your parish any executors of dead men's goods,
which do not bestow or have not bestowed the same, especially such of the said
goods as were bequeathed or appointed to be distributed among the poor,
repayring of highways, finding of poor scholars, or marrying of poor
maidens, or such other charitable deeds accordingly?

26 Item, whether any in your parish do use to keep abrogate holy days, or
other then by order of the Churches of England and Ireland are appointed for
holy days by the book of common prayer?

CHANCELLORS.
27 Item, whether is your Chancellor, Commissarie or Official learned in the
Ecclesiastical and civil laws, and such an one as is xxvj. years old at the
least, and has taken some degree in Schools, and is reasonably well practiced
in the course of those laws, and touching whose life and conversation, no
evil report has gone?

28 Item, whether your Chancellor, Commissarie, or any other exercising
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction in this Diocese, their Registers, actuaries,
Apparitors or Sumners have at any time wincked at, and suffered adulteries,
fornications, incests, or other like offenses to pass and remain unpunished,
or have commuted any penance without the special license of the Lord Bishop
of the Diocese?

29 Item, what persons are there in your parish that have been married that
have been divorced, and have married with others, for these three years last
past? by whose sentence were they divorsed, and by whose license, and by whom
were they so married? Declare your knowledge in the premises, and what you
have credibly heard.

30 Item, whether does your Chancellor, Co^missarie or Official for his
exercising the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction of the Diocese, give any yearly
rent, sum or sums of money, or other consideration for the same, to any
person or persons whatsoever?

31 Item, is there in our parish any other matter or cause of the cognizance of
the Church above not expressed, worthy presentment in your judgment? if any
such matter or cause there be, you are charged likewise to present the same, as
you are the rest by virtue of the same Oath.

Imprinted at Dublin by the Society of Stationers. Anno 1623.


