Tudor rose

a blazon with the monogram of 'A' (Andro) superimposed on (Heart)

Scottish thistle



NEWS FROM ITALY: OR, A prodigious, and most lamentable Accident, lately
befallen: Concerning the swallowing up of the whole City of PLEVRS: Belonging
to the Signiorie of VENICE.

Which happened in the beginning of September last past: by a strange and
hideous shaking, and opening of the Earth.

Together with the loss of more than two thousand People: and a general
burning up of the Trees and Forests within the Territories of the said City.

Faythfullie translated out of the French Copy,

Printed at PARIS, 1618.

Scottish thistle

Imprinted at Edinburgh, by Andro Heart. Anno Domini 1619.

A Prodigious, and most lamentable accident, Lately befallen the City of
PLEVRS, Belonging to the Signiorie of VENICE: Which happened in the beginning
of September last past, 1618.
SUch is the prauitie of our nature, that we always rather feel the smart of
Gods Divine vengeance falling upon us, than weigh the counsels and purpose of
his heart, which he aymeth at in the midst of his wrath, punishing and
correcting us for our just deserts, by which we have coustrained him to turn
his mercy into justice, and favor and benefits, into rods and scourges.

The effects whereof falling out daily before our eyes, in this behalf, tend
to none other end, but to rowze us out of that lethargy of sin into which we
be fallen, and to let out the swelling of our pride: that at the length we
may carefully advise our selves, before our final desolation fall upon our
heads. But (alas) we are so hood-winked, and senseless, in the midst of
this our misery, that for want of a discerning eye, we are ready to
attribute all misse-happe to secondarie causes, and to extraordinary effects:
rather than wisely to bethink us, in judging, that the root from whence all
our evils spring, is from our selves.

From none other cause proceeds all the casualities which happen every day
in our sight: but especially of late years, as well by the last effects of
Fire, Air, and Water, as by other vnawonted accidents, proceeding from the
elements, which God uses as his rods to afflict man withal.

We know, that within a year, or there abouts, what has happened both in
France, and elsewhere, to the great astonishment of mortal men, who are but
dust and ashes, and whereat indeed the greatest wits have stood amazed.

Spain was at her wits end, in admiring that Deluge which befell in the
Earldom of Barcellonne, with much ruin and loss in this very month and
time of the year.

France it self has had no cause to mock at her Neighbors harms, but to
be wholy taken up with fear, having seen, the Lenton last past, 1618.
the vvonderfull burning and consumption of the Palace of her head City; the
Sanctuary of the Innocent, the terror of the guilty, where the Oracles of
Truth were every day to be heard, by vncorrupt ARISTIDES, inflexible in
the cause of Equity, and a just conseruer of Right and Reason.

But all this is but a little, in respect of that, which as we hear, happened
upon the Countries belonging to the Signiorie of VENICE, in the beginning of
this present month of September, to the ruin and utter loss of the Town, or
City, of PLEVRS: namely, that about that time, the fourth, or the fifth, of
this present month, happened upon the Territories of the said City such a
fearful and prodigious storm, mingled with thundering and lightnings, with
wind and tempest, that it seemed Heaven and Earth would have gone together,
and that the last times, fore-tolde by Daniel, were now inflicted there: and
that which is worthy of greatest wonder and astonishment, was an exceeding
vehement wind, enclosed and shut up within the bowels and hollownesse of
the earth, with certain fires burning under the ground, which with their
violent encountering each of other, with blasts, and counter-blasts, made such
an hideous noise within those holes and narrow places, wherewith the Country
was filled, that it caused a very strange shaking, or trembling, of the Earth:
yea, so fearful, that the effects ensuing thereof are incredible: Thence came
the total and deplorable loss of the said City of PLEVRS, somewhat greater,
and better peopled, than is S. Denis in France. For the Earth opening it self,
by the vehemency of these fires under the ground, and the blusteringes of
these winds enclosed within her bowels, and in seeking vent, that in this
opening and trembling of the earth, the said City was wholly sunken and
swallowed up, with all and every one of the houses and buildings, with the
loss of more than two thousand souls, craving for mercy in so great, so
sudden, and unexpected a calamity. And within the said Territory, many Trees,
Woods, and Forests, were some of them overthrown by the winds, and othersome
were consumed and burnt, as well by the fire of heaven, as by the flames issuing
forth, and vomited from out of the bowels of the earth: Which struck such an
astonishment into the neighbor Countries, that all fell to prayers, made
public and solemn processions: taking it for a certain forewarning of Gods
mercy turned into fury, and for a sure undoubted token, that his anger is
kindled against the sons of men: seeking hereby to appease him in the midst
of his just conceived displeasure.

The former Relation, More particularly set forth, in an Aviso, of the Lords
of the States of HELVETIA and the GRISONS.
Faithfully translated, according to the Copy Printed at MILLAINE, 1618.
THE effects of Nature are of so deep comprehension, as the most subtle
Philosophers have lost themselves in the admiration thereof. The flowing and
ebb of an Eurypus made him lose all his reason, who labored to settle the
principles and grounds thereof: And he who so searched into the course and
original of it, returned from thence astonished with wonder, and besotted with
ignorance. In brief, her secrets are so dark and hidden, as mortal eyes can
make no discovery thereof: God, the Author of Nature, reserving, as a
particular to himself, the knowledge of those mysteries, with a bar to all
others to enter into them. And if man can challenge to himself any little
taste thereof, he has it by purchase from that great distributer of knowledge,
and with the price of pains and travels innumerable.

Dii laboribus omnia vendunt. The accident which happened in fresh memory,
about a month since, in a certain Town called Pleurs, subject to the State
of the Grisons, a people confining with the Territory of Millaine, and with
Switzer-land, cannot but beget in us both astonishment and admiration together:
astonishment, for the strangeness: admiration, in that we are not able to
comprehend the cause and ground thereof. This is not the fable of removing
mountains, and heaping one upon the top of another by Ouids giants, to scale
Heaven withal: but a true fact, which as it made the Earth to tremble, so may
it do the hearts of the most courageous men, and make them shake, by shaking
things, to all men's thought, immooueable: so as now we can ground no firm
assurance upon Rocks, and Change reigns by course over all things. This
Town of Pleurs, above named, seated upon the land, and amongst the people of
the Grisons, is subject for the Temporalities, unto the Lords of that State:
and for the Spiritualities, in as much as it is wholly Popish, (excepting
only three or four houses,) it is under the jurisdiction of the Bishop of
Como. It is rich, well peopled, famous for Trade, the Kirkes (well recommended
for their building, rich Ornaments, and Treasure,) seem sufficiently to
witness the piety of that people. One of them was consecrate under the name
of Saint John of Silan: and the other, more renowned than that, by the name of
Saint Cassian.

The particulars as well of this Country, as of this Town, which are not
indeed of our discourse, cannot but be tedious to the Reader, who attends
with impatience the news of a case so strange as this is. This Town is in a
Valley, under the mountain Chrouena, in near neighborhood, and not above the
distance of two leagues from the confines of Millaine: and of like nearenesse
to the Port of Tuentes; standing upon the bank of the Lake of Como, where
passes the River of Mora: which River, although it carry a strong and violent
current, yet can it not, in any reason, be presumed to have been the cause of
this ruin whereof we are to speak. Nature had fortified this Town, and
immured it, as it were, betwixt two mountains: the one whereof was singularly
fertile in Winter, and other Fruits of the Earth making her appear with
another countenance, than of an hideous Rock: which could promise no pleasure
nor delight, but of such an Hill as supplied the Inhabitants with infinite
commodities, underground Caves, and Gardens, Storehouses; and other
commodious places, which they found within the bosom of this mountain, with
all sorts of pleasures, delights, and delicates. This other Hill, which is
above Silano, and beyond the River, is somewhat more distant from the Town,
which, it seems, Nature had purposely removed from the same, lest it might
(perhaps) too much shadow and obscure it, that the great multitude of trees
wherewith this Hill was replenished, being of it self higher and steeper than
the former, and yet bearing (notwithstanding the steepness) both hay and
wood, for the supply of this Town. Close to this mountain there stood
another, much higher than the same, and wholly barrend and desarted: a fatal
Hill, and destined to the ruin of this miserable Town, and all her
inhabitants.

The fourth day of this instant month of September, this great and steep Hill
was shaken, either by some winds under the ground, or by some secret tempest
which Nature raised from within her bowels: in such fort, as about six a clock
in the evening, that which seemed to be immovable, was seen in a short space
to be pulled up by the roots, and borne away by the fury of the winds. A
strange case, there never having been seen so great and fearful an
Earthquake. This mountain then being shaken with his fury, fell with such
violence upon that unhappy Town, as it buried both it, and all the inhabitants
together. It was about Supper-time, at what time the most part of the
Townsmen were set at Table, when they found themselves overwhelmed with these
so mighty ruins, under which, at an instant they gave up the ghost.
Scarcely was any man exempted, for of three thousand and six hundredth persons,
which at that time were reckoned to be in the Town, there escaped only
four, of whom we will speak more particularly hereafter. The loss of
goods was exceeding great, inasmuch as the esteemate thereof passes three
Millions of Gold. The rage and tempestuous force of the winds was so
outrageous, as they that were in the fields felt themselves thereby
transported into places wholly unknown. The Lord Laurence Scandolera
reports, that being in a Garden of his, with his Niece, he was borne by the
violence of that tempest above and beyond the River: and he was found on a
little Hill, called Ronco, having a Napkin at his Shoulder, and his Legs
broken off. In the same place were likewise found the little Belles of Saint
Mary's Kirk, borne by the like violence out of the Steeple to that place,
being half a league from the said Kirk. To conclude, this bounsing was so
terrible, and the bruit spread so far, that all the neighboring Countries
presently took the cry, and stood affrighted with the horror thereof.

The people coming a little to themselves, ran to behold this spectacle,
where in stead of finding a Town, in the Valleye before mentioned, they found
an high and fearful mountain, having within its entralls swallowed the whole
company of its poor inhabitants: no man escaping, save only four, as were
said, whom we will name in particular, to give more assurance to the truth
of the fact.

A Mother there desirous to save her Child, lost her legs, yet could not
recover him whom she held dearest in the world. A young man, called Francis
Torno, who was gone down into one of the Vaults under ground (which before we
mentioned, and described in the first Mountain) to draw wine. Another young
fellow, who a little before was gone to a Vineyarde, on the same mountain, to
gather Peaches. And the fourth was the Lord Scandolera, of whom we before
recounted that miraculous story.

The River Mora, which watered all this Valley, has thereby lost its natural
and ordinary current: and has been enforced to recover its course more than a
league from the place. This is the sum of what happened in the places before
said, being in truth a wonder unmatchable in any Age.

The Deeps below, and Fire above, hold some extraordinary power of Nature: but
to see mountains remove, and change their places, we must in truth avouch,
that this thing is so high, and the causes so hidden, as humane wit cannot
pierce into the depth of these profound mysteries. To make Nature so potent, as
to give occasion for the world to think, that this accident proceeded from
the force of the winds, which perhaps were shut up within the womb of the
Earth, and there had intermixed with some enclosed fire, which having
undermined this mountain, did in such sort ouerturne it, were to attribute
unto Nature too much force and strength. To call to remembrance another Sodom,
whereof this is the image, the colors only excepted, I mean the form of their
destruction: to ascribe this calamity to the judgment of God, were to partake
with the secrets of the Highest, and as companions to his Throne, to give
sentence against his people. Therefore, suspending our judgments, let us
humble our selves before God, lest the like thing happen unto us.

FINIS.

