The true description of a monsterous Child / Borne in the I Will of wight, in
this present year of our Lord God, M. D. LXIIII. the month of October, after
this form with a cluster of long hear about the Navel, the Fathers name is
James Iohnsun, in the paris of Freswater.
depiction of deformed infant

FOr mercy Lord, with one accord,
To the we call and cry:
That so does show, in earth below,
Thy wondrous works daily.
Within the raze, of five years space
Much monsterous sights has been:
Of sundry kind, man bare in mind,
And sone turn from thy syn.
Repent and pray, a mende I say,
Leave of thy wicked ways:
The time draws on, thou must be gone,
Behold this later days.
Of Infans young, agone not long,
With calves and pigges which were:
The tookens loo, mishappen so,
Which cries to us great fear.
Now this late sight in I Will of Wight,
Straungely it is to tell:
Two children borne, never beforne.
Such wonders there be fell.
The one I find, of Woman kind,
Having her shape all right:
The other is, transposed this,
As pleases the Lord of might.
Where natures art, does not her part.
In workyng of her skylle:
To shape a right, each lyucly wight,
Behold it is Gods will.
Loo here you see, before your eye,
A man child to behold:
A babe gylties, deformyd this.
Most wondrous to be told.
No caruer can, nor paynter then,
The shape more ugly make:
As it self does, declare the truth,
A syghte to make us quake.
Let us all fear, and in mind bear,
This form so monsterous:
That no hurt wraught, nor evil has thaught,
What shall become of us.
That does still syn, and never lyn,
As men heapyng up treasure:
Against the day, of wrath for aye,
Of Gods heavy displeasure.
Now pray we all, both great and small,
Unto the Lord of might:
To give us grace in Heaven a place,
There to attain his sight.
ALl ye that does behold and see, this monstrous sight so strange,
Let it to you a preaching be, from sinful life to change:
For in this latter days truly, the Lord strange syghts does show,
By tokens in the Heavens hye, and on the earth below.
This does demonstrate to us, the life which we live in,
A Monster oughly to behold, conceived was in syn:
In shape vnparfett here to vewe, that nature has not dressed,
A child now borne by port most true, this from the mothers breast:
For he that does this shape behold, and his own state will know,
Will make the proud Pecocke so bold, bear down his tayll full low;
Now Lord send down thy holy spryte, the Confortor of Joy,
For to direct owr ways aright, to dwell with thee for aye:
And grant we may amend our life, according to thy word,
In every age both Manne and Wife, now grant us this good Lord.
Finis
quod John Barkar.
Imprynted at London in Fletestrete: at the Sign of the Faucon, by Wylliam
Gryffith, and are to be sold at his shop in saint Donstons churchyard, in the
west of London, the.viii. day of November.


