SORROVVES LENITIVE.

Written Upon occasion of the Death of that hopeful and Noble young Gentleman,
John Lord Harrington, Barron of Exton, etc. Who died the 27. of Febr. 1613.

By ABRAHAM IACKSON.

OVID. 4. de Ponto. Temporis officium solatia dicere certiest,
Dum dolor in cursu, dum petit aeger opem.
LONDON: Printed for Roger Iackson, and are to be sold at his Shop near the
great Conduit in Fleet-streete. 1614.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND VIRTUOUS LADIES, THE Lady LVCY, Countess of
Bedford, and the Lady ANNE HARRINGTON, etc.
Right Honorable:
YOur favorable acceptance of my poor endeauours, in an Office of the like
nature, has animated me again to put Pen to paper, with a purpose to lenifie
that bitter pill of Passion (which natural affection has once more caused you
to swallow) with the sweet iulip of Consolation. And for as much as Physicians
cannot well apply their Cordialls to the sick, till they know the syntomes of
the disease; I have (in a feeling sympathy of your grief) aimed at your
Complaints, and have written them according to my conceit, not doubting, but
(if I had been Secretary to you afflicted thoughts) I should have made them
appear more like themselves.

Next (as method in that case required) I have set down such meditations of
Comfort, as I thought best suting to your visitation* Beseeching you to
vouchsafe them as gracious a censure, as an humble and devoted heart may be
thought worthy to be allowed, that rests, and ever will remain

Your Honors, ready in all humility to do you service, ABRAHAM IACKSON.

SORROVVES LENITIVE.
When awlesse Death, with poyson-pointed dart
Had pierced Fames favorite, young Harrington,
That plant of Honor, through his generous heart;
Two mournful Ladies, in affection one,
(His woeful Mother, and his Sister dear)
From troubled thoughts, shed torrents crystal clear.
And as a day-long-labouring Husbandman,
That with heart-fatting joy does feast his eyes,
To see his full-ear'd Corn (with Zephyr's Fan)
Blown on to ripeness; if a storm arise,
That with stern blasts destroys the forward grain,
Sits down and wailes the loss of his long pain.
Or as a Merchant, standing on the shore,
His long absented Ship does new behold,
Entering the Havens mouth, full fraught with store
Of Orient pearl, and purest Indian gold;
If in his sight the vessel suffer wrack,
Strains out with cries, till heart with sorrow crack.
So did the woeful Lady Harrington;
When she was reft of him, that was her joy,
Her love, her life, her dear, and only Son,
Her ease in Mourning, comfort in annoy,
Her greatest solace in her most distress,
Her curing Cordial in heaviness.
So graceful Lucy, Bedfords worthy Wife,
When brute, too true, had to her ears related
The sudden wrack of that beloved life,
Whom dismal Fate untimely so had dated,
Did cast her self into the arms of moan,
And to her self ripped up her griefs alone.
And if a Poet may be bold to write,
How he conceiues such passions were conceived;
Then thus the grieved Lady Mother might,
(With sighs) bewail her hopeful joy bereaved.
These broken accents, (Eccho's of her groans)
Might be the mournful method of her moanes.
O thou my dearest dear, and loving Child;
Best part of me, derived from my womb:
The sole Idea of thy Father mild,
My staff of age to guide me to my Tomb!
Art thou extinct? has life forsaken thee?
Have thou relinquished all the world and me?
Were thou not young, in prime of flowring life?
Were not thy passions swayed with temperance?
Were not thy humors in perfection rife?
Were thou not pious in perseverance?
How haps it then, that thou were raped in have,
When but the world began thy worth to cast?
O art thou gone, and am I left behind?
Shall never more mine eyes behold thee here?
Must grief ore-flowe the measure of my mind,
whilst hours co^pleat the days, or days the year?
What sight can please without the sight of thee,
Whose life, was life, whose death is death to me?
O had I all forgone what so is mine,
Within the compass of this massy round;
Except that part of me that is divine,
Wherein the Idea of my God is found;
So that I had sweet Son enjoyed thee,
Who being parted, parts all joy from me.
O cruel Parcae now I see it is so,
Ye are called Parcae, not because ye spare
The lives of such, as worst we may forgo:
But on the contrary, ye Parcae are:
Because ye pluck the buds with partial hand,
And let the riper fruits ungathered stand.
It Is said that Niobe was turned to stone,
For wailing too too much her childrens death.
Be It so or no; I have more cause to moan,
Whilst soul and body are conioyn'd with breath,
For her grief ended, with her ended joy:
But mine still lives, to lengthen life's annoy.
Auctolia hearing but a false report
Of her Ulysses death, that (with more Knights)
Did to the siege of tow'r-built Troy resort,
To quell the pride of Greece-abusing sprights;
Renounced all joy, turned solace into moan:
Because she did but think her Son was gone.
Oh what shall I do? how shall I contain
My self in sorrow, that too well do know
The loss of him; that was my ease in pain,
My greatest comfort, in griefs ouer-flowe?
How shall I keep from breaking to extremes,
That have my heart so fraught with sorrows theames?
Let Niobe say what she can devise
To aggrauate her selfe-confounding moan,
And let Auctolia hers apologize.
Yet Niobe became a senseless stone:
And Auctole wayl'd a misconceaued fear:
But true effects of grief my heart does wear.
As would appear could I Dole's language speak.
But Sorrow ties the tongues of grieved weights.
So that they must in mid-discourses break,
And keep the worst behind to vex their sprights.
Since this is Mourners case; then thus in brief,
I grieve because I cannot tell my grief.
Thus might a Poet shadow what she said;
Though what she said indeed her self best knows:
As saying most when she was most dismayed,
In private sort commenting on her woes.
Next then we may imagine, as before,
The noble Countess, how she did deplore.
And if you can conceive Polixen's woe,
When her dear brother Troilus was slain,
By force of fierce Achilles fatal blow:
Or how that royal PRINCES did complain,
For Britains hope, renowned HENRY'S death:
So might you think did Bedford spend her breath.
For thus, me seems, her thought-bewraying tongue
Vtters the passions of her griefe-seaz'd heart,
That do in heaps upon each other throng
As though they would her soul and body part.
O dearest brother, soule-vnited friend!
What timelesse hap wrought thy untimely end?
Time turns the Heavens in a certain course;
The Stars do keep their constant motions:
Order directs the rolling Oceans source:
Sence-wanting creatures keep their stations:
Man's fickle state gives only cause of sorrow,
That knows his eve, but does not know his morrow,
Had I a Son to lose (as I have none)
I think his loss could not more grieve my heart;
Then thus to be left brotherlesse alone.
Who has like wound, and does not feel like smart?
To loose a Son, yet might I have another:
But hopeless am I left of any Brother.
For look how th'Elm e and Vine do sympathize:
Or Wood-bind with the Haw-thorne does agree:
Look how the Ivy with the Oak does rise:
Or how the Steel and Lodestone natured be:
So did we love, so were our hearts affected:
What one did fancy, the other still respected.
But Death, the Author of Confusion,
That does undo Loves hardest tied knot,
Breaking the bonds of sacred Union,
Casting on blooming Youth, old Ages lot,
Came with his woolly feet, but iron fist,
And drew this Impe of Honor to his list.
O world! no world; but Deaths Meandry maze;
O maze! no maze: but to-end-posting life;
O life! no life: but Bauen-kindled blaze;
O blaze! no blaze: but end of humors strife.
O moment strife, blaze-flashing, maze of death,
Whose end tends to the end of humane breath.
Swift is the Shittle in the Weauers Loome;
Hasty the rayn-bred torrents rise and fall;
Fading the May Day flower, the Summers bloome;
Uncertain the rebound of Tennice ball;
Nay, name I all the moment Types I can,
Yet none so fickle as the life of man.
Divide an hour in equall-spaced quarters;
Each quarter in his Minutes; Minutes again
In Seconds: then let skilfull'st number parters
Their Arithmeticall choice Maxims strain
To part those Seconds, in their single prime;
And that is man's measure in the clock of Time.
All this is charactered in him, who was,
Who was (O fatal word!) the Character
Of Knightly Honor, Courtiers looking-glass,
Map of perfection, Virtues register:
But now is gone; yet left this name behind
For me, to treasure up in grieved mind.
Which I will do, (with true devotion)
Whilst my world-wearied soul lives in my flesh,
And in my mirth, the name of Harrington
Shall make griefs brinish fountain spring a fresh,
And if my tears do stint, or tongue do fail;
Know Sorrow wants both tears, and tongue to wail.
As I was writing this conceived moan;
Mine eyes did let fall drops into mine Ink,
Moysting again its dryness: whereupon
My sympathizing Muse began thus to think.
I must not leave these Ladies in this plight:
For Ink made liquid bids me more to write.
And as an Art-instructed Surgeon,
(That has searched all the corners of a wound)
Does not so leave his Patient but upon
The gash, lays healing Salues to make him sound:
So must I now (that have so launc't your grief)
Apply some Cataplasme for relief.
Your loss was great, great Ladies I confess;
And such as passion cannot but condole.
Nay, Piety her self could do no less:
As is recorded in Gods sacred roll.
For the believers Grandsire did bewail
His dearest Sara, when her life did fail.
So holy Joseph, that Bellerophon,
Wept when his aged Father Jacob died:
So did the kingly Prophet for his Son;
The Israelites for Moses also cried,
And that which most in mourning makes for us
Our blessed Savior wept for Lazarus.
But yet that heathen howling out of measure
Suites not with those, for who^ Christ shed his blood.
For such repining draws on Gods displeasure,
It Is but a shadow of a seeming good.
A Hell-hatched offspring of blacke-mouth'd Despair,
That does Gods image in the soul impair.
O Ladies therefore calm your Passion:
Make not your Noble hearts Griefs chair of State.
Let it be pious Comforts station,
Your heart-tormenting care to mitigate.
For Comfort is the Cataplasme alone,
That cures care, salues sores, relieueth moan.
Think but how Jacob (after weariness)
Was by the dreame-seene Angels solaced:
Or how that Proto-martyr, in distress,
Was ioyed to see Heavens windows opened.
Such will your solace be, and such your joy,
If you incline to Comfort in annoy.
Comfort, the stay of sadded Christians soul,
Comfort, the health of griefe-decayed health,
Comfort, the power of Reason to control
Stern passion, that would get the heart by stealth,
Will be to you, soul, health, and power, and case,
Your sadness, sickness, weakness to appease.
And as the precious Opall does contain
The beaming brightness of the Diamond,
The azure luster of the Saphirs vain,
The Emerauld in verdure goes beyond:
So Comfort does the effects of peace embrace,
And yields the fruits of mercy and of grace.
But this is but as twere an outward shale
To the tast-ensweetning Kernel that is within,
The touching of the foot of Jacobs scale,
Before we clime by it the heavens to win,
The gentle spreading of the healing Plaster.
To make it when it is on to stick the faster.
We therefore must apply this sovereign Balm,
This heaven on earth, this hold from Desperation,
This joy in life, this tempest-laying calm,
This hope in Death, this staff of preservation,
Home to your hearts, to make you feel again
The joy you had, before you had this pain.
Had you a Son? Had you a loving Brother?
Had you a Comfort? You what you held dear?
Had you no more? Nor had you any other?
And is he reft away, to both so near?
Yet weigh but both your happiness in his;
And tell me then if you be void of bliss?
He was your Son: but now he is a Saint.
He was your Brother: now an Angels Mate.
He was your Comfort: now no cause of plaint.
He was your dear: but now in better state.
You had no more, make that your cause of woe,
Because you had no more, so to bestow.
It Is true his body was of perfect mould,
And such as might have given his soul content,
For one whole age a Mansion there to hold,
Where every part did homage to her bent:
Reason sat Regent, and the will obayed,
All Passions by these two, were mildely swayed.
It Is true, he was a model of perfection,
Furnished with rarest gifts of Natures store,
Endowed with sanctity, the souls refection.
Was what his years could yield, and somewhat more.
For in his prime of youthly iolity,
He was repleat with grave morality.
His ancient birth might be (as often it is)
The foster-Nurse of selfe-vp-puffing pride:
But his fair thoughts soared higher far then this,
And such vainglorious humors he defied.
With thriftlesse Prodigalls he did not sort,
True Bounties measure did his state support.
So that a man might think he had been sent
As a choice Jewel from Gods treasury,
T'adorne the world, and not as though God meant
To show him us, and forthwith presently
To take him from us, in his deep displeasure,
Seeing us so unworthy such a treasure.
But Ladies, this is not your case alone.
It Was Iuda's case, when their Josiah fell:
It Was Englands case their Edward being gone.
It Was Britains case, when HENRY bid farewell.
HENRY a Masterpiece of Natures mould,
The young man's hope, the refuge of the old.
HENRY, that was your Sons, your Brothers Lord:
HENRY, whom he in virtue imitated:
HENRY, by whose example he was stored
With noble-minded thoughts, to heaven elated:
HENRY, that loved him, and well knew his merit,
His faith, his constancy, and noble spirit.
HENRY, to whom his heart was so affected,
That if he might have ransomed him from Death,
He would (with dreadlesse loyal zeal directed)
Have spent his dearest life-maintaining breath.
But Adams heirs, each one engaged stand,
To pay this forfeiture of Natures band.
Since this is that which every man can tell:
As being composed of brickle walls of mud:
And that your case does want no parallel,
As we have instanc't in the Royal blood;
Then let this meditation still your cry;
That he that now is dead, was borne to dye.
You beg of God (in daily Orizons)
That his all-guiding will be done in earth,
As well as in th'heauenly Mansions,
Where blessed souls do live in datelesse mirth.
It Is granted what you ask, his will is done:
For it was his will to take to him your Son.
Think how that Mother-virgin, holy, pure,
That blessed Phoenix of all woman-hood,
Did with faith-armed patience endure
To see the spilling of her Saviors blood;
To see his precious side stream blood and water,
That was her Son, her Brother, and Creator.
That was that Lamb of God, in whom was found
No spot of sin, whom no default could touch.
This might with dole her humane heart confound:
But that she knew Gods providence was such.
Against the which we ought not to repine.
True Christian will bends to the will divine.
How willingly did Abraham obey
That dire command, when he was ready pressed
With his own hands his only Son to stay?
His Faith taught him that all was for the best
That God appoints, though we cannot conceive,
The searchlesse depth, from whence we good receive.
What was your Son? and do but rightly scan;
Was he more dear and precious unto you
Then Abra'ms Son, or else the SON OF MAN?
Must you be priuiledg'd when Death is due
By Gods award? Let not your faith be cold
In him that can return Sons thousand fold.
The little Sparrow falls not to the ground,
Without Gods fore-decreeing providence;
And shall we think that man (in whom is found
The substance of the Creators quintessence)
Can be deprived of life if he do nill,
Whose supreme power draws goodness out of ill?
He left you and the world you say too soon.
Passion says this: nay, Reason says so too.
But how? with this forethought distinction,
Not for himself too soon, too soon for you.
For you: because your earthly ioy's bereauen.
Not for himself: who joy enioyes in heaven.
What can you tell God has for you ordained?
Or to what end your days he has designed?
Must his eterne decree be so restrained,
As that it should be fitted to your mind?
Little know we what comfort may abound,
when with Despair Satan would us confound.
When was your Patience ever tried before
By any uncouth wrack of humane chance?
God has you blessed with Honors, wealth, and store,
And on you many blessings did advance.
Because your friends first die, is this a wrong?
All sorts see that, chief those, whose lives are long.
Would you (as earth-bred mortals all desire,
That solace in this vale of misery)
Wish that you might, to what you would aspire
And not beawed by the Deity!
Then you deprive your self of that sweet boast
Whom God most loves, those he does chastise most.
This fickle life is but a swift-runne race:
A doubtfull-ending combat struggling still:
Upon the troubled Seas, a Sailers case:
A Captives lot, fettered against his will:
A toylesome labor, full of sweating pain:
A journey pestered with wind and rain.
O happy he, that first does gain the price:
Happy, that soonest does the conquest win:
Happy, that finds the Port ere storms arise:
Happy, quick shaking off the chains of sin:
Happy, the lab'rour at the close of day:
Happy, the trauailer, that ends his way.
If these be happy, happy then is he,
That has so soon run out his irksome race,
Obtained the conquest, got the Port, is free,
Ended his work, come home in happy case;
If he be happy: you are happy too,
That he was yours, although not now with you.
His life was seasoned with the thoughts of Death.
Witness his sanctimonious purity,
Witness his words spoke with his latest breath,
To you his woeful Mother sitting by.
Lord LESV come, to thee my soul I give,
Thou dy'dst for me, that I with thee might live.
(...) To him therefore, that thus had fixed his mind,
Death was the greatest Comfort that could be,
The isntrumental means that he could find,
Out of his bodies Goal to be set free:
As being the key t'vnlocke the prison door,
That was by youthful strength kept fast before.
And as some Knight, edged with the thoughts of glory,
Having with powerful Ensigns conquered
Some spacious, wast vnfertile territory,
Has yet a fairer Land discovered:
But knows not how it is fair shoares to recover,
Unless he had some means to pass him over.
So this young Lord, this worthy Christian Knight,
Armed according to Saint Paul's direction,
Having subdued that damned subtle spright,
And brought the world and flesh to his subjection;
He did, with Moses, on mount Nebo stand,
And ken'd the heavenly Canaans promised Land.
But knew not how that Eden Land to gain,
Unless Death gave him wastage to the shore,
VVilling to undergo what so ever pain,
Were it to hale the Ropes, or tugge the Oar.
Death therefore granted what he did desire,
Taking naught but his earthes part for her hire.
What shall I say? Death was to him no more,
But a griefe-ending sweet Catastrophe:
A passage from this worlds Aegiptian shore:
To Canaan above through the red Sea:
A Sun to melt his lives congealed Frost:
A landing of his Ship in tempest tossed.
As was the glorious Angel that conuay'd
The blessed Peter from the loathsome dark:
As was mount Ararat, on whose top stayed
The righteous Noah's deluge-washed Arc:
Lastly, Death was to him, but as a Page,
That lights a Taper to an upper Stage.
All which in time it will be unto us,
If we do act our parts as he did his.
For then, when Conscience shall our deeds discuss,
She will assure us of eternal bliss.
As him she did, whose faith had apprehended,
The joys of heaven, before earths date was ended.
His soul brook't no delays from heavens delight,
Loathing to be sinne-soyl'd with this gross air,
But sweetly offered up his virgin spright
To her great Maker, chaste, and spotless fair;
Where he does joy: for whom we so do mourn,
Wishing us there, and not his own return.
Thrice blessed immortal soul rest then in bliss,
Enjoy those joys, for which thou were prepared:
We know our fault, and Love leads us amiss,
To grudge that thou with Angels bliss have shared
Not that we ought, but good to thee bequeaue;
But grieved so soon, thy sweet consort to leave.
And you sad Ladies that are clad in black,
Best suting with those weights, that Sorrow feeds,
Think what this WORTHY has, and what you lack,
And you will find your owne-case wants such weeds.
For mortal you, in cares do draw your breath,
Immortal he, needs none to wail his death.
FINIS.

