AN HELP TO the best Bargain.

A Sermon on Mat. 13.46. Preached on Sunday, the 20 of October. 1623. in the
Cathedral Church of Christ, Canterbury.

By THOMAS IACKSON, Doct. of Divinity, and one of the Prebends, and Lecturer
there.

London Printed by NICH. OAKS, for Mat. Walbanke, and are to be sold in
Graies-Inne Gate. 1624.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, and most Worthy Lady, Vicountesse MAIDSTONE; grace,
mercy, and peace, from GOD the Father, through JESUS CHRIST, by the HOLYGHOST
be multiplied.
RIGHT NOBLE LADY,
GReat is their honor in the eyes of Gods Saints, whom God, and the King do
honor; and great is your honor in mine eyes, whom birth, and wealth;
education, and marriage; virtue, and piety; God, and King; have honored: it
behooued me, having received so many comforts and encouragements; protection,
and preferment; from your thrice noble husband, and your honorable self, (in
so justly occasioned common congratulation) to have gone before others in
giving of honor; Romans 12.10
but, being with the throng of important occasions, kept back, and cast
behind, yet I presume of acceptance, being assured, that I bring the best
present; for, Solomon has witnessed, there is nothing to be compared to this
Prou. 3.15.
.

Pearls, and Precious stones are of great esteem among Princes, and Nobles;
and specially among Women, who do naturally delight in ornaments, and in
curious and artificial decoration: Genus mulierum natura ornamentorum amans,
et (...). Po^n. in Job. 5.24
as the Ambassador of Christ; 2 Cor. 5.20
I commend to your honor, a goodly and precious Pearl, such a Pearl as
makes the wearers of it truly honorable: The Disciple whom Jesus loved (whose
Gospel your soul loves) has said; to as many as receive it, is this
privilege given, to become the sons of God Ioh. 1.12.
. And the Apostle witnesses of the Bereans; they were more noble then they of
Thessalonica, in that they received the word with all readiness of mind, and
searched the Scriptures daily Act. 17.11.
. Well may they be esteemed, high-borne, noble, and happy indeed, whose
father is God 2 Cor. 6.8.
; their brother, Christ Romans 8.2^.
; their garments, righteousness Reu. 19.8
; their food, the hidden mannah Reu. 2.17.
; their rings, chains, and jewels Ezech. 16.11, 12.
; the graces and gifts of the holy Ghost; their attendants, the Angels; their
inheritance, heaven Mat. 25.34.
; and reward, the crown of Glory 1 Pet. 5.4.
: Oh, this is indeed, the true restoring of blood, the best part in Noblemens
Scutchions, and highest stem in their Pedigree; for, be they nere so high,
and great, and want it, they are but wretched, poor, and miserable Reu. 3.17.
: Alas, what are stately houses; rich furniture; costly apparel; delicate
fare; delightful music; all possible reverence with tongue, cap, and knee;
multitude of followers; great offices; larger euenues; and all earthly
pleasures that heart can wish (in comparison) but very vanity, and vexation of
spirit? Numquid in honor, sine dolor. Bern. d^ quinque negot. Coll. 1718.
So as Moses in nothing showed more wisdom, then refusing to be called the
son of Pharaoh's Daughter; and choosing rather to suffer afflictions with the
people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; esteeming the
reproach for Christ, greater riches then the treasures of Egypt Heb. 11.24
.

I confess, that honor is Gods ordinance; the reward of virtue V^rtutis
premium. Arist. Ethic. 4. Aquin. 2.2. quest. 129. a^ 4
; and of external good things the best: to the pure, all things are pure Tit.
1.15.
: yet in holy tongues, the same word does signify both honor and burden* C
hubod. Heb. Honorare and onerare.
because according to the height of honor, shall be the weight of account at
the last day. I doubt not (having had so many years experience) of your
Ladyships growth in Grace, Quae hic honorant: ibi. onerant. August. Epist. 2^3.
Col. 829.
and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ 2 Pet. 3. vlt.
; yea, I am persuaded, you shall bring forth more fruit in your age: yet,
considering the times, Virtus paucorum: paucorum inquam presertim Nobilium
Barn. Epist. 113
and our own corruption, in a godly jealousy 2 Cor. 11.2.
, I thought it my duty, to put you in remembrance 2 Pet. 1.13.
, and to stir up Gods graces in you 2 Timothy 1.6
, that as you have loved Christ and his Gospel in sincerity Ephesians. 6. vlt.
so you would do so still; yea, and to do it more, not letting the Pearl lie
in the heart, as in a Casket, under lock and key; but make a frontlet of it,
letting the world see, you do every way seek his honor, who has so many
ways honored you.

It is now full twenty years ago, Aug. 28. 1623. on 1. Cor. 22.
since preaching in your honors house, and commending the saving knowledge of
Christ, your Ladyship was pleased, to testify your gracious acceptance
thereof, both by private encouragements, and by suit in my behalf, unto an
honorable person, My L. Meluin.
then present; which was the first stone in the foundation of my preferment;
for, as he friendly promised, he faithfully performed; so, as I am bound
thankfully to acknowledge, from your Ladyships first motion it came, that now
for many years, I have enjoyed my place in this Metropolitan Church, with much
comfort in my calling, and particular estate. The Lord recompense an hundred
fold, all the kindness I have received from you, and yours, for whose
prosperity, I am your daily Orator. C.C.C. Nouemb.

T. I.

AN HELP TO THE BEST Bargain.
MAT. 13.46. Who when he had found one pearl of good price, he went and sold
all that he had and bought it.


AS diverse servants in the fame Shop, intending their Masters gain, though
one, as the Foreman, may show the Commodity, and set the price, yet the rest
will further the bargain, either by commending the goodness of the ware, or
showing others that is worse, yea, naught and counterfeit, and persuading the
Customer to strain to buy it: So is it my desire, this day, Coloss. 4.7.
to be a fellow-seruant to help to strike up the best bargain, lately offered
in the eminent'st place in this Kingdom, O. Hall, to the Court at The^balds,
on ^unday, Sept. ^^. 16^3.
by a Reverend and worthy Divine, mine ancient Colleague (...) and
Contemporaneus: to whom I joyfully give the right hand of fellowship Gal. 2.9.
; we workers together; beseech you, receive not the grace of God in vain 2
Cor. 6.1.
. In Court and Country, the true Ministers of Christ sing but one Song; aim
at one Mark, to make their hearers rich in Luke 12.21.
God, and wise unto 2 Timothy 3.15*
salvation, by the purchase of truth. We are not like the Priests and Jesuits,
who are brethren in evil, though looking diverse ways, according to their
several Aduersis vultibus et coniunctis caudis. D* King, Sermon. a^ White Hall,
Nouemb. 5. 1608. p. 11.
interests, yet, like Samsons Foxes, tied by the tails, to carry Firebrands,
to set Gods Field on fire, and his vineyard in a general combustion: but, as
the Cherubims looked face to face, and both upon the Exodus 25.20.
Arc; so, one preaches out of the old Testament, another out of the New, both
look upon Christ, who is the Creator of the Creed, and circumference of all
holy Scriptures. Solomon bids us, buy the truth, but at no hand, sell Prou.
23.23.
it. A greater then Mat. 12.42.
Solomon bids us buy it, though we sell all we have for it: the one bids
us, buy and not sell; the other bids us, sell that we may buy* both of them
intend men's happiness, by purchasing one and the same truth: that was a
precept, this is the practice: that we must obey, and this imitate.

My Text is part of a Parable, without which, CHRIST spoke Mar. 4.34. (...).
nothing; most powerful, to command attention; Parabola, Heb. Mashal. a^^adice
Mashul, regere cum imperio. Buxtorf. Plus mouent figurate dicta. Aug. Epist.
119 ad lanuar.
and effectual, to move devotion. A rich Parable; rich in the history, but
richer in the mystery. Nitet in cortice dulcior in medull. I^ron. Paulin.
It proponeth, a Pearl of great price; for purchase whereof, all must be sold:
but, it supponeth, a Jewel of inestimable price, in comparison whereof, S.
Paul esteemed all goodly things to be but dross and Philip. 3.8.
dung.

Parables are truly called sacred vailes. Sacra velamina. Dion. Areopag.
Myster.
give me leave to draw away the veil, and let you look into the holiest of
all. This Pearl is, the Truth; in Hebrew, Margerah; in the Greek, (...); in
Latin, Vnio: for, there is but one truth in the world: and this Pearl is
called, a goodly Pearl, a fair Margarite: (...).
For, even the naked truth of God, without welt or guard, or any entising words
of man's wisdom, (...). Iakar. Heb.
is most lovely, and beautiful, yea, it is a Pearl of great price: David
esteems it dearer then thousands of gold and Psalm. 119.72.
silver: so did Solomon esteem it, all the things thou can desire are not to
be compared unto Pro. 3.15.
it: This goodly precious pearl is (hid) hid from the wisdom and search of
flesh and blood; CHRIST told Peter when he had found it; Flesh and blood has
not revealed this unto Mat. 16.17.
thee. And again; I thank thee Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have
hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them to Mat.
11.25.
babes. Yea, so hid, as there is no finding it without a guide: the Eunuch knew,
he was in the field where the Pearl was, and wanted not for pains taking,
yet, Philip asking him if he had found it, he answered; How can I without a
Act. 8.31.
guide? And, there is but one Field in all the world, wherein this Pearl is
hid, viz. the Word of God, which is therefore called the Word of 2 Cor. 6.7.
Truth: which precious Pearl is hid so deep in the field of the sacred
Scripture, that there is no finding of it, without much search, and diging:
therefore Christ bids us; Search the Ioh. 5.39.
Scriptures. And Solomon bids: Seek for wisdom, as for silver, and search
for her as for hidden treasure; Prou. 2.4.
but as the wise Merchant, that after great search, finds a precious Pearl,
hid in a field, will sell all he has to purchase that field, and pearl in
it: so a wise Christian, by great study and meditation, hearing, reading, and
praying, having found in the field of holy Scriptures, the hidden wisdom of
God, for the salvation of man, by JESUS CHRIST, it is a knowledge so sweet and
dear unto him, as he will easily part with all earthly things, that he may
enjoy the blessing of the Word, and thereby increase in the saving knowledge of
GOD's Truth. So much for the mystery.

The parts of this Parable are two, viz. Division.


First, the finding of this Pearl.

Secondly, the procuring of it, that it may be his own that finds it.

I purpose by GOD's grace to handle the second part, it being to no purpose to
find it, unless we make it our own, Non minor est virtus, quam quaerere.
that we may be enriched by it. The manner how to compass it, our Savior
expresses figuratively, by a bargain, in which bargain, there are two things
done;

First, Selling. Subdiuision.


And secondly, Buying; ( He sold all that he had, and bought it. The difference
betwixt heavenly and earthly purchases.
)

In this world, Kings, Princes, and great rich men, are able to buy goodly
precious Pearls, and not sell any thing, the overplus of their great revenues
will compass them; but, in the spiritual bargain for this Pearl, there is
no buying of it, but we must first sell; it is sometimes so dear, as the
richest man must in action sell all: and it is never cheaper, but he that will
have it, must in affection, sell all that he has for it: CHRIST our Master,
has himself in writing set the price, and we his Servants cannot a bate an
hair; If any man come to me, and hate not his father and his mother, and wife,
and children, and brethren, and sisters; yea, and his own life also, he cannot
be my Luke 14.2
Disciple: A great price, I confess; yet, lest any should either stick at it,
and go away shucking the shoulders, as the rich man, that went away
sorrowful, for he had great Mat. 19.22
possessions: or, repent of their bargain, Christ has assured, of all
purchases, it is the best bargain, and the only way to be rich: Every one
that has forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or
wife, or children, or lands, for my names sake, and the Gospels, he shall
receive an hundredfold now in this time, and in the world to come eternal Mat.
19. penult. Mat. 10.30.
life. Oh, suffer me then to provoke you in this dead time, Conclusion the
Preface.
wherein though truth was never cheaper, it is generally thought to be too
dear amongst many cheapners, but few buyers: GOD's servants have but cold
takings, it is much to be feared, if the market mend not, Christ will shut up
his shopwindows, and offer his Pearl to such as will more esteem of it: Oh,
buy the truth whilst you may buy it, lest it prove so scanty and dear, that
it cannot be had at any rate: And that you may buy, first sell: that is the
thing I purpose to press at this time.

First part.
In Parables, the letter has the least part: if other have any* this passage
needs none, I need not provoke men to sell that they have, too many have
done so, in these late and dear years, to buy bread for them and their
families* others, in this prodigal and luxurious age, sell more then they
have, both present and reuersion, inheritance, and offices; and run in debt to
buy wine, drink, Tobacco, and spend upon their lusts* we had need to read
lectures of good husbandry to such, and pray them to keep that which they
have, and let nothing be lost, lest they pinch with the Prodigal* in the end
to sell all is the highway to misery.

This sale, is to enable a man to buy CHRIST, yea, and heaven it self good
husbands may thus sell; yea, thus to sell is the way to be rich; this is
godliness, which has the promise of this life, and of that which is to 1 Timothy
4.8
come: all good things of this life are in God's will and Testament, entitled
to such Prodigals; He that will sell all for Christ, shall enjoy all with 1
Cor. 3. penult. (...): vendidit.
Christ. Mark then the words;

This wiseman proposed for pattern, does not lay up, or lend, or morgage,
retayning propriety, but does ( Sell) not superfluities, and such things as he
can spare, or has no present use of, but, ( All that he has (...): ^^nui^
quae habuit.
.)

The words being opened, hence we learn, Doct.
that whosoever will attain to the saving knowledge of Christ, and him
crucified, must ever part with all he has.

For the Illustration whereof, let it be noted, Illustration.
that every godly Christian must sell these three things.

First, himself. 1. himself.
Secondly, his sin. Thirdly, his substance.
He that makes this sale, sells all, and is able to buy the Pearl. For the
first:

He must sell himself; Confirmation.
What? to become a Bond-slaue? No, no, but his own natural wisdom, reason,
will affections, desires: yea, and confidence in his own righteousness.

This CHRIST expresses, saying; He that will be my Disciple, let him deny
Mat. 16.24
himself. And S. Paul; If any man seem to be wise in this world, let him
become a fool, that he may be wise, for the wisdom of this world is
foolishness with 1 Cor. 3.18.19.
God. Yea, the carnal mind is enmity against GOD, it is not subject to the Law
of GOD, neither indeed, can Romans 8.7.
be: every imagination, and high thing that exalts it self against the
knowledge of GOD, must be cast down, and every thought brought into captivity,
to the obedience of 2 Cor. 10.5.
Christ; and then appears Faith, which brings forth most excellent
obedience, though most ridiculous in the eyes of the worldly wise. Thus
Abraham; Good Examples.
being called of God out of Caldeah, having sold himself, he followed God, he
knew not whither Genesis 12.1.
: Again, when the Lord promised him a Son by Sarah his wife, it was much
against his natural reason, he being an hundred years old, and Sarah Genesis
17.17.
ninety; but Abraham had sold himself, and therefore neither considered his
own body, nor Sarah's womb, which were both as Romans 4.17.
dead, but gave glory to God being fully persuaded, that what the Lord had
promised he was also able to Romans 4 19.
perform: when also the Lord commanded him, to take his beloved and only Son
Isaac, and sacrifice him, how contrary was that to his natural reason and
affection, for a Father to lay violent hands on his son, and neither spare him
living, nor dead, till he was burned into ashes? Yea, what a shake was this to
his Faith, that he should kill him, in whom he had received the promise, that
he and his should be blessed? But, having sold himself, he rose up early to
do it; for, he knew, that GOD was able to raise him up from the Genesis 2^.3.
Heb. ^1.19.
dead; wherefore, being thus prepared, he made an happy market; he believed,
and it was imputed to him for righteousness; he became the friend of God, and
father of all the^ that Romans 4.3.
believe.

But, the Philosophers are no good Chapmen; for, Evil Examples
whereas Christ has pronounced; Blessed are they that see not, and Ioh. 20.29.
believe. And S. Paul says; We live by faith, and not by 2 Cor. 5.7.
fight. They seek after 1 Cor. 1.22
wisdom, and will believe no more the^ they can see, or comprehe^d by reason,
and therefore the mysteries of the Gospel are foolish and ridiculous unto the^:
when S. Paul offered this Pearl to the wise Philosophers at Athens, preaching
Christ, and his resurrection, they called him babbler, and mocked Act. 17.18.32.
him neither are the Philosophying Schoolmen, good Chapmen, because they have
not sold themselves, but turn Theology into witty questions, and bring the
hidden Mysteries of God within the compass of reason, by their subtle
quiddities, and distinctions.

Aggrauation.
Yea, we must not only sell our natural and unregenerate wills, and reason,
but also all confidence in our own works, and righteousness; so our Savior
has taught us, when we have done all we can, to say, We are unprofitable
Luke 17.10.
Servants: Good Example.
thus S. Paul became a blessed Merchant, who, having so much to be proud of,
and to glory in, and concerning the righteousness of the Law being
unrebukable, yet, for this Pearl's sake, even the excellency of the knowledge
of Christ Jesus, he accounted it loss, and Phil. 3.8.
dung; and therefore made a good market, saying; I live by faith in the Son of
God, who has loved me, and given himself for Gal. 2.20.
me, And again; To me to live, is Christ, and to dye is Phil. 1.21.
gain. But the Jews are no Chapmen for this market, for, Evil examples.
they going about to establish their own righteousness, have not submitted
themselves to the righteousness of Romans 10.3.
GOD; in which condition were the Pharisees, and are the Papists, who trusting
in the merit of their own Works, and going about to establish their own
inherent, home-made righteousness, cannot submit themselves to the
righteousness of God: no welcome Chapmen to God's shop, but such as are
humble, poor, and beggarly, that have sold themselves, their reason, and
righteousness, works, and wisdom; and do altogether hunger and thirst
after, rejoice and glory in Christ, and salvation by him.

2. His sins.
Secondly, he that will buy the truth, must sell; and sell all his sins:
whereas there are many poor and simple people in the world, that have but a
small share, either in the gifts of nature, or good things he might well call
such lands and inheritance his own, as he can show good evidence for, and is
come unto him by diverse descents, and he has legal writings to show for it,
made in such and such a kings reign, hundreds of years ago. But no man can
show such evidence for his lands, as a man may for his sins: The one can hardly
go so far as William the Conqueror, not much above 500. years: but the other
has his sin by inheritance from Adam, almost 5550 years since

Thirdly, there is nothing does more beset a man, or cleave more fast to a Heb.
12.5 (...).
man, or man can hardly be drawn to leave, then his sin; the leaving of some
sins, is as the pulling out of the right eye, and the cutting off of the right
Mat. 18.8.
hand: But, righteousness, and unrighteousness cannot dwell 2 Cor. 6.24
together, there is no remedy, he shall never have the Pearl does not first
sell all his sins. Alas, Objection.
who can do so? Are we not all sinners? Was there ever any so righteous on
earth, as sinned not? I answer; Solu.
It is one thing to have sin dwelling, Sense.
and another to have it reigning in us: this is meant of reigning sins:
according to which sense, I will lay down the doctrine in plain terms, and
prove it; for, in this the very life of religion, and power of godliness does
consist.

Doct.
Whosoever will enjoy the saving truth, with the comforts and benefits of the
Gospel, must have no reigning sin; but, for ever renounce and forsake both
inward delight, and outward practice of every known sin. Oh, this is a hard
task: and as it keeps a great many from market; so others that seem fair
Chapmen, either to go away offended; or deceive themselves with cunning
tricks and shifts: Very few but fail in one point or other of this lesson:
but, Confirma^
let us hearken to God's own precept; Thou shall love the Lord thy God with
all thy soul, strength, and Deuteronomy.
might: He that does so, cannot love any sin; for, the love of God, is the
fulfilling of the Romans 1
law, whereof sin is the 1 Ioh. 3
transgression. S. Paul bids all Christians to glorify God in their souls,
and in their Cor. 6. vlt.
bodies; and to cleanse themselves from all filthiness of the flesh, and of the
Cor. 7.1.
spirit. And what he commands, he elsewhere prays for; The very God of
peace sanctify you throughout: and I pray God that your soul, and spirit, and
body may be kept blameless, unto the coming of our Lord Jesus These. 5.23.
Christ. S. James also bids all Christians, Cleanse their hands, and purge
their ^^m. 4.8.
hearts. Yea, every page in holy writ is full of such precepts, though not such
full precepts. As, Let your light shine before ^at. 5.16.
men. Let not sin reign in your mortal ^om. 6.12
bodies: Let your conversation be such as becomes the ^hilip. ^.27.
Gospel. The Grace of God, which brings salvation to all men, has appeared,
and teaches us to deny all ungodliness, and worldly Lusts, and to live
righteously, godly, and soberly in this present Tit. 2.1
world. Be ye holy in all manner of 1 Pet. 1.
conversation. Yea, what is true Repentance, but the conversion of the whole
man, from all sin, unto GOD? He felleth all his sins.

Such a sale holy David made, Example
who had respect to all Psalm 119
God's commandments; restrained his feet from every evil way, and utterly
abhorred all false Psalm 119.104.
ways: And Josiah turned to the Lord, with all his heart, and all his soul
according to all the commandments of 2 King 25.
God. And Zachary and Elizabeth walked in all the commandments and ordinances
of God, without Lu. 1.6
rebuke. Zacheus, having found the Pearl, sold all his sins, he stood and
said; Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor, and if I have taken
anything from any man, by false accusation, I restore it Luke 19.8.
fourfold. Marie, who had been a notorious and infamous sinner, having found
this Pearl, she sold all her sins, both for delight and practice, utterly
forsook, and detested her former, sinful, and unchaste life; her eyes, which
had been full of adultery, became as rivers of tears to wash Christ's feet;
her hair, which doubtless had been plaited, and laid abroad, an entisement
to sin, was made a to well to wipe his feet; her face, which had been
impudent, was filled with shamefastness, and modesty, she came behind Luke 7.
Christ: The poor Thief, finding this Pearl on the Cross, how did he sell
all? What a change was there wrought? that little time he had to live, how well
and godly did he spend it, in rebukes, confessions, and prayers Luke 23.
? The Iaylor, who doubtless had been the instrument of cruelty in punishing
the Apostles, having found this Pearl, he sold all his sins, brought them
forth of prison, washed their stripes, set meat before them, and rejoiced, that
he and his household believed in Act. 16
God. Yea, such as had used curious arts, finding this pearl, sold all their
sins, and in detestation thereof burnt their books, though worth fifty
thousand pieces of ^ct. 19.19
silver.

Oh, these were Merchants, and made an happy market indeed! Yea, true
repentance works such shame and Dan. 9 7.
confusion; such zeal, indignation, and Cor. 7.11.
revenge; such beating on the breast, with the Luk 18.13.
Publican; such smiting on the thigh, with ^erom, 1.19
the Prophet; such a change, that their old companions take notice thereof,
that they will no longer run into the same excess of riot with Pet. 4.4
them. But no marvel; for they have sold all their sins, and are become new
Cor. 5.17
Creatures. So must all do that will buy the Pearl.

^^plication.
But now, alas, how fearful will the condition of many be found, if we make
application? Many seek for this goodly Pearl seem very desirous to have it,
commend it, and the sellers of it; but, will not sell all they have. They come
to the Church, hear the word diligently, respect the Ministers of the Gospel
reverently, cheapen fair, and stand at offer, and proffer; but they would have
the Pearl, and their sins too; they will by no means be drawn to sell all
them. If you do remember, there were four things laid down in the Doctrine.
First, they do sell. Secondly, all sins. Thirdly, in regard of inward
delight, and outward practice. Fourthly, for ever.

Against which, Examination
four sorts of Chapmen do offend, who (if they reform not) shall never enjoy
the Pearl.

Sort.
First, are such as leave one sin, and take up another; and commonly, that they
take, is worse then that they left; so, some leave prodigality, and become
covetous: lukewarm Protestants, become Idolatrous Papists: some
superstitious, become prophain: and many Atheists, turn Heretics* In a word;
a great many think, they have made a fair market, when they consider what
they have been, but never consider, what they are: what they have lost, but
not what they have taken up; whereas in truth, they have only made an exchang,
and that for the worse; whereas my Text says; They must sell and deliver
seison.

Another sort there is, ^ Sort.
that would sell, some, yea, many, but not all their sins: such a Chapman was
Herod, he did many things, but not Mar. 6. 2 (...).
all, his heart was still on Herodias; he had not gone so far as David, to have
respect to all Psalm. 119.^
Gods commandments; Thou shall not commit adultery, was cast behind his Psalm.
50.^
back, he could not abide to hear of Luke 3.15
that: the young man such another, he offered fair, left but one Mat. 19.
thing, but would not part with that, but fell off, and mist the happy
bargain. Applicatio


Alas, this is the woeful condition of many, they will part with some sins,
yea, not stick to part with many, but retain some one singular and beloved
sin, they will pare fingers and toes to the quick; yea, lance some part
till the blood gush out; but the right eye will not out, the right hand will
not Mat. 5.29.
off. Such Customers the Devil likes well enough, he cares not how many sins
we part with, so he hold us fast but by one; he knows well, that one
reigning sin overthrows all religion. One would think it but a small sin,
the sin of the tongue; yet S. James says, If any man seem religious, and
refrain not his tongue, this man's religion is Iam. 1. penul.
vain.

Use. ^xhortation.
Oh, remember this Text, he that will have this Pearl, must make a full sale
of all. To retain a part, is not to sell, but with Ananias to Act. 5.3.
dissemble. He that keeps sin, in any part, loses Grace, in whole. To
loath some sin, and love other, is but halting. One Colloquintida spilt the
whole mess of 2 King. 4.
pottage. Is not a ship suncke by one leake; a besiedged City lost, by one
breach; a bird caught in the snare, by one foot, as well as the whole body? a
man killed by one disease? He is no good Chapman in God's shop, that does not,
with David, Utterly abhor all false ways; yea, those especially, wherein he
has sometime walked with greatest delight.

Oh, let us remember the Preface which Moses sets before the Law; God spoke
(All) these words and said; He spoke not the first and second, no, nor all
the commandments of the first Table only, and there left, but he spoke All;
gave as great a charge to keep every one, as any one: And S. James says; He
that breaks one, is guilty of James 2.10.
all. He, that wittingly, and willingly transgresses any one, will (if
occasion serve) break every one: we see that in Herod, though he did many
things, yet he made no conscience to break the seventh command; he, having
occasion, made no conscience of the third, but swear to a wanton Dancer to give
what she should ask, though to the half of his kingdom: yea, made no
conscience of the sixth command, but most cruelly, for his faithful dealing,
persecuted to the death John the Baptist, A greater then whom was not borne of
Mat. 11.11.
women* so dangerous a thing it is, to live in any known sin; though a man
part with never so many, yet that one remaining sin will (as occasion
serves) bring all the rest again; wherefore be sure ye make a thorough sale,
sell all your sins, be faithful with Moses, and leave not an hoof behind,
Exodus 10.26.

A third sort of Chapmen there are, that sell, and all, 3 Sort.
in regard of outward and customable practice; in the mean time, there is a
secret inward pleasure and delight; oh, there is still a good will borne to such
and such a sin, if ability, time, and occasions did serve: the heart will not
seal and confirm the bargain and sale, but does rather grudge at it, and
seek to pick holes in the evidence* but such as will buy the Pearl, must be
sure the heart sell all; for, if lust and delight reign in the heart, the sale
is naught: as David says; If I regard iniquity in my heart, God will not
hear Psalm 66.18. Object.
me.

Oh Lord, will some say; Who can make such a sale? Who can say; Prou. 20.
Solution.
Mine heart is clean? I answer, That, as the sale of all sin, does not
import a not sinning at all, (for, if none but such, then none should buy the
Pearl) but not an habitual and customable sinning which the Scriptures call;
A committing of Ioh. 8.34.
sin* so neither does this cleansing of the heart imports an utter freedom
from sinful lusts, motions, and desires, but, a dislyking, resisting, and
bewailing of them with the Apostle, Oh, wretched man that I Romans 7. nult.
am! So that if thy soul and conscience can truly witness, there is nothing
more grievous, irksome and displeasing unto thee, then the corruptions of
thine heart, which, as they do appear* thou do check, snub, and suppress,
the sale is good, and thou shall have the Pearl.

A fourth and last sort there are, 4 Sort.
who sell all, both for outward practice, and inward delight, but not for ever;
like Lot's wife, they look back Genesis 19.^^
again; with Demas, they return to the world again 2. Tim. 4.10.
; and, having once escaped the filthiness of the world, yet come to be
entangled again, and are like the Dog, returning to his vomit; and the washen
Sow, to wallowing in the mire 2 Pet. 2.20.
again: the consideration whereof makes good what I said before; that, of
many Chapmen, few buy this Pearl, because few make a perfect ( All) of their
sins, for such an one sells All, both for outward practice, and inward
delight, for ever: and yet the bargain is not made, there is a further sale
yet to be made, viz.

All his sub^^^nce.
He that will buy this Pearl, must sell all his substance, and all his worldly
goods, and temporal estate he has here.

Sometimes this Pearl is so dear, as it will cost all that a man has; his
houses, lands, goods, honor, peace, liberty, and life; as in the days of the
persecuting Emperors, and Princes, when goods, liberty, and all were
confiscated, and they cried; Christianos ad Leones. So, truth was dear in this
Land, Examples
in the days of Queen Marie; there was a great famine, in her days, of
corn, and they were glad to make bread of Oak corns (says the History) but,
the word of God was dearer, and the Pearl of truth more precious, so as many
holy Martyrs sold all they had to buy it. Such good chapmen were the Christ* an
Hebrews, who suffered with joy the spoil of their Heb. 1^
goods. and those of whom the same Apostle also speaks, who for the Gospel,
and a good conscience, were tried with cruel mockings and scornings, bonds and
imprisonment, they were stoned and sawen asunder, tempted and slain with the
sword, wandered about in Sheepe-skinnes, and Goat Skins, being destitute,
afflicted, and tormented; they wandered in deserts, and mountains, and in dens
Heb. 11.37. (...) 2.45.
etc. And such chapmen were the beleuers in the primitive Church, who sold
their possessions, and goods, and pauned them to all men, as they had need.
Such a Chapman was S. Paul, who professed, he was not moved to know, that bonds
and afflictions did abide him; yea, he did not count his life dear, that he
might finish his course with Act. 20
joy. And thus rebuked such, as with tears besought him, not to go up to
Jerusalem, What mean you to weep, and to break mine heart, for, I am ready,
not to be bound only, but also to dye at Jerusalem, for the name of the Lord
Act. 21.
Jesus. Such a frank Chapman was Moses, who refused to be called the son of
Pharaoh's Daughter, and chose rather to suffer afflictions with the people of
God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a Heb (...)
season. Thus you see, the Pearl has bin, and may be so dear, that a man
must indeed sell all that he has in this world, to buy it.

But, blessed be God, in these happy days, this Pearl is cheap; Application
we may buy it at an easy rate: now, if ever we may say with the Prophet;
Come buy without ^^a. 55.1.
money: Come, take pains to fetch it, and have it; you need not sell all, nor
any thing you have for it, but keep it, and all you have: yea, many by this
Pearl, have been enriched, and made happy in the world, many a man preferred
to great dignity, honor, office, authority, wealth, in Church and
Commonwealth, for his profession of Religion and godliness. Oh happy time!
But, let me tell you; this Pearl never was, is, nor shall be cheaper, but he
that will buy it, must in his affection, sell all that ever he has. And God
accepts of affection for action, as God accepted the full purpose and
resolution of Abraham, to sacrifice his Son, as if he had Genesis 22.
done it.

Oh, examine your souls, Examination
what is it you do chiefly mind? Are your praires, and that in your beds by
night, powered out unto God with sighs and tears, when no eye sees, no ear
hears you, for the preservation of the Gospel, and truth of God to you and
yours? Do you esteem it as the greatest blessing in this world, and so, as in
comparison of it, you esteem the whole world, with all the pleasures, profits,
honor, and happiness thereof, as most vile, base, and contemptible; and those
many good things, which with it you enjoy, and they are dear unto you, yet,
for it you would ^ate and become prodigal of. Or, at least, art thou grieved
and sorry in thy soul, that thou discernest weakness, and fearfulness,
and want of such resolution; and do thou unfeignedly pray to God, to give thee
such love, zeal, and courage. Oh, then, be of good comfort, thou have made a
good market, thou have gotten the Pearl, and the Devil shall not be able to
rob thee of it. But, if thou bear a fair face, make profession of much
love to the Gospel, in times of peace, and so long as it may stand with thine
honor, and wealth; but, God knows, thou mindest earthly things, thou love
this world; if times of trial should come, thou will show thy self to be but
an Huckster, a Broker, a Mount bank, and Quack-saluer.

Oh, then, see there be truth and sincerity in the heart, Exhortation
reunite your languishing, drooping, and dying zeal to the Gospel; let your
never contenting preferments; your never satisfying pleasures; your never
filling profits; your momentany, and ever dying lives, be esteemed as dung, in
comparison of the everlasting truth of God for the salvation of your souls.

Oh, Argument^
that men knew how inualuable the truth of God is; one jot thereof more worth
then heaven and earth! Oh, that men knew how happy they are that have it! and
how rich, though never so poor in the world, Revel. 2.9. Happy is the man
that finds wisdom, and gets understanding, Prou. 3.13. And how poor, and
miserable, and wretched they are that want it, though knowing no end of their
worldly wealth? and so decked with Pearls, that they glister like the Sun,
and dazzle men's eyes to look upon them. Oh, that ye knew this acceptable time,
and that God may offer this Pearl to others: Oh, then would you become frank
Chapmen, and sell all ye have to buy it.

^rouocation.
And will you not do so before Market be done, and Shop-windowes shut up? Look
upon the Idolater, he is a frank Chapman; he will not stick to sell all he
has, to satisfy his fleshly mind (for so S. Paul says; Idolatry is a work
of the Gal. 5.20
flesh,) When the Children of Israel were so earnest with Aaron, to make them a
God; to cool their desire, and prevent it (as some of the Fathers construe it)
he bad them bring, not ordinary gold, Difficilia pre cepil: vt isto modo, ab
illa intention reuocaret. Aug quaest. 141. ^ Exodus
in wedge or coin, but Rings, yea, their golden Eare-rings, that were in the
ears of their wives and children; but, did they stick at that? No, (says the
Text) They did break them off, and bring Exodus 32.
them. An Idolater thinks nothing too dear for his Idol. Look upon the
Epicure, he will spend all he has for his belly. Look upon the proud person,
he, or she, will spend all they have for their backs; to be clothed
gorgeously, and phantastically. These are frank chapmen indeed, and never
stick at the price. What, shall the Idolater sell all he has for his Leuit.
17.7. 2 Cron. 11.15 Ezech. 22.3
Devils, and dunghill gods (as the Scriptures disgracefully call Idols.) Shall
the Epicure sell all he has, for the fat and sweat, to sacrifice to his belly,
his Philip. 3.19
god, which remains there but a while, and is purged into the Mat. 15.17.
draught. Shall the proud person sell all he has for glorious colors, lost
sometimes with shining of the Sun, or a shower of rain; or, for fine
apparel, which used, is quickly worn to rags; or, laid up, is eaten of
Moths, and shall we pinch to sell all we have to buy the truth of God, for the
eternal salvation of our souls? Shall prodigal sinners for vanity, error,
falsehood, sell themselves, their states, bodies, souls and all? and we pinch
at the least price, for the eternal verity of God? God forbid; then most
unhappy we, that ever it was offered unto us.

Oh England, Conclusion.
now this pearl is offered unto thee, take heed thou foreslowest not the
Market, it is more worth then mountains of Indian gold; if God in justice take
it away, if every shower of rain, were a shower of gold; and every stone in
the Land, as precious as the Rubie, Margarite, Topaz, or Carbuncle; or any
other, by Gods appointment, set in the high Priests Exodus 28.17.
Breast Plate, thou will be poor and beggarly; herein lies thy true wealth,
for which thou art so renowned through the Christian, and heathen world. Oh,
buy this Pearl, and wear it; wear it in thine ear, hear the Word
diligently, and reverently, wear it in thy forehead, be zealous in the
profession of the truth; wear it in thy bosom sincerely, believe and love the
truth; wear it on thy fingers, obey and practice it in life and conversation;
be thou a righteous Nation, keeping the truth, Esaias 26.2.
and the GOD of truth will keep thee. AMEN.

FINIS.

