The Plagues of Northomberland.
To the tune of Appelles.


WHen that the Moon, in Northomberland,
After the chaynge, in age well conne,
Did rise with force, then to with stand,
The light and bright beams of the Son
The sorrowful dolers soon began,
Through Percies pride to many a man.
But then a none the Westmere Bull,
Beheld the rysinge of this Moon,
Thinking that she had been at full,
He hastyd then a none full soon,
With horse, and Arms, and all his might,
From parfect day, to uncertain light.
When they in one, consent were pyght,
With them was many an ignorant man,
The Romyshe Laws, they would redyght
Through council of some blind Sir John,
Who never knew gods veryte,
But to Rebellion then did a gree.
For if they would of gods word known.
Long. xxx. years they have had time,
Rebellion then had not been sown,
To bring there country in such crime,
Their poison now, all men may see,
That under Sugar long did lie.
What myschyfe mouid the Persies heart,
This enterprise to take in hand,
This for to play a Rebels part,
In raisinge up Northomberland,
But look what seed, by him is sown,
With sharp sythes down it was soon mowen.
That country is, in full sore plyght,
That does a gaynst their Prince contend,
Seeking their own dreams to redyght,
The Popes precepts for to defend,
Like brutyshe peruerst ignorant men,
That seeks before a law to ten.
This venym long a breedinge was
Which in the Persies breast did grow,
The Bull in bellinge did not cease,
Till that the poison out did flow
So far a broad the streams did run,
That back a gain cold not return.
This hateful poison long was hyde,
Under the cloak of amytie,
The outward Treasone was not spyde,
But couerid with all courtesy,
Their close unlawful conspitacion,
Has brought them to great dysolacion.
The hope unsure was transytorye,
The which was in that clowdy Moon,
Her false eclypes with all the glory,
Her joy unstable was endid soon
Her sudden chaynge now tells us all,
That Sugar sweet was blent with Gall.
What state now may him self assure,
Long here to live in quyetnes,
What worldely toye may here in dure,
In those where is no stablenes,
Where Lords, and Yerles, in wealth does flow
From their hye state must fall down low.
Now by their fall learn to be wise,
Both hye and low in each degree,
Let no false light deceive your eyes,
As it has done of late you see.
The false beams of the glystringe Moon,
Now many a man it has undone.
For in the north the did shine long,
But now eclypsyd is her light,
The Westmere Bull that held so strong,
He is depreuyd of his might,
For many tongs of them will tell,
How these to Yerles false did Rebel.
And many a man more as I hear,
That with these Rebels did take part,
Which can not think them selves now clear
That in breast bears a doble heart,
But as you have be gonne to brewe,
So are you found Rebels untrue.
The country clean you have undone,
The Lord grant thersome better stay,
Or else will many a mothers son,
For this curse you a another day,
You leave your wives and childrene dear,
Lamentinge in most woeful cheer.
Now let us pray as we are bound,
All for our Queens high majesty,
That she her enemies may confound,
And all that to Rebels agree,
And plant true men up in their place,
The Lord from heaven now give her grace.
Finis.
quod. John Barker,

Imprinted at London in Fleetestreate beneath the Conduyt, at the sign of
saint, John Evangelist, by Thomas Colwell.


