Aspice (...) Respice

THE CELESTIAL HVSBANDRIE: Or. The Tillage of the soul.

First, Handled in a Sermon at Paul's Cross the 25. of February, 1616.

By WILLIAM IACKSON, Terme-Lecturer at Whittington College in LONDON: And
Since then much enlarged by the Author, for the profit of the Reader: With two
Tables to the same.

Beatus qui legit verba, and seruat ea.

(...) (...) Benedictus Dominus.

Imprinted at London by William Jones, and are to be sold by Edmund Weauer,
dwelling at the great North door of S. (...)

TO THE RIGHT Reverend Father in God, JOHN, by Gods providence, Lord Bishop of
London, William Iackson wishes all grace, and true comfort in this life, and
eternal happiness in the life to come.
Reverend Father in God, it may in me (so mean a person) appear no small
presumption, leaping out of the dungeon of obscurity, which had enclosed me,
now to interrupt your learned judgment, with a few unskillful lines: and to
eclipse your Lordships aspect from better things. For, I must confess, (with
Barnard) Quod animarum susceperim curam, qui meam non sufficerem custodire. And
(as Ambrose says) Factum est vt prius docere inciperem, quam discere: and
therefore not sufficiently worthy, to present your judgment with this
unlearned Treatise: Which is rawly comprised in a few scattered leaves, and as
rudely composed in a sort of scribbled and unlettered lines: and far from
that lordly gift, that Aconitus offered unto Alphonsus, King of Aragon. But
howsoever, I am not able (with ramping Lions) to run in with mighty prays:
yet give me leave (with the little Ant) to carry into the Garner, my small
wheaten grain. And though I cannot bring gold to the building of the Temple,
yet let my goats-haire be accepted; and what is wanting by my pen, I supply
with desire of better: now, animus in dono, astimandus. Pliny was wont to say,
Nullum librum tam malum esse, vt non aliqua ex part prodesses. Therefore
(Reverend Father in God) first I entreat your Lordship, to pardon my
presumption in this attempt: and then a kind acceptance of this opusculum, to
give it leave to feed at your Altar; and gather strength from your greatness,
(as the Moon does light from the Sun) that it may find the more favor among
the vulgar: David was safe under Gods protection, and this cannot miscarie,
through your Lordships patronizing the same.

Indeed I was purposed, to send it to the broad world, to shift for it self,
as fearing no man would be godfather to so strange a child: For it is like
the bitter waters of Jericho to the sinner, though it be as the deaw of Hermon
to the penitent. For as it is bonis bona, so it is malis mala; not in it self,
but through their corruption. It reproues the gallant of pride, the Lawyer of
corruption, the Courtier of ambition, the Magistrate of idleness, the Usurer
of cruelty, the Broker of theft, the Merchant of engrossing, the Tradesman of
deceit, and most of sin: Whither then should it flee, but to the Sanctuary
for refuge? For amicus certus, medicus (said Cato.) Nec quisquam melior
medicus, quam fides amicus. And here I desire but two of your Worthies, for
this naked Work, countenance to beautify it, and power to protect it. And
then I have what I desire: your Lordship to favor it, the vulgar to obey it,
and God to accept it.

This book may be compared to David's song misericordiam and iudicium; the
blessings of Gerizim, and the curses of Ebal; the oil of consolation, and the
water of compunction: and, if I may so say, like Ianus with his two faces,
comforting the good, reproving the evil: Or, if you please, like Argus with
his hundred eyes, which beholds the sins of this age in every corner, though
without thanks, yet not without profit, (if they would obey it.) I intend here
with the good gardener, to reuerberate the weeds, and exhilarate the good
herbs: The greatest good is to be embraced, and yet not the least rejected. I
doubt not but the small light that enters through my little casements, will
chase the creking Bats, and staring Owls, (I mean the wicked of this dark
age) and in time cause them to eiaculate their sins.

Which would sooner be effected, if you (to whom God has concredited both the
Word and the sword) should open the eyelids of Ecclesiastical diseipline,
that the filthiness of sin may appear to the heart of the Law: and what our
words cannot do with their affections, your swords may work upon their manners.
Pomponius says, that Censura est magistra vitae, and modestiae: For, execution
of Laws, and correction of manners, are the sinews of the Commonwealth, and
the lamp of the Church.

I could wish that our Church were purged of wicked persons, that common
drunkards, swearers, usurers, and the like, may not be admitted, as members of
the Church, till there be a better reformation of them: For it is a great
scandal to the Gospel, and no less grief to the godly. And hence it is,
that the Separatists speak evil of us, because these wicked are among us. But
is there no balm at Gilead to cure this sore? Yes, if vicious officers, are
not sick of a golden dropsy: for then it will not be healed without a silver
plaster: and I fear, the Laws heels will be tript up with tricks, the cause
vitiated, the purse wounded, but the sinner sent home as wicked as he came.
Therefore this chastening of the sinner is not to be neglected: Non enim
superbia, nisivbi negligitur disciplina, nam disciplina est magistra,
religionis vitae, and pietatis. What is then to be desired, but as there are
good laws, for the punishing of the sinner, so they may be duly executed, and
not Eclipsed by vicious officers and Proctors: and that the wheels of their
tongues, may not be set a going with a weight of bribery, nor a golden addition
make the hammer strike to the sinners pleasure: and that mercenary tongues, and
money spel'd consciences, may not spoil our Church, to enrich themselves.

Also the contempt of Religion: is grown too general among us. What a shame
is it, that professors of religion should be brought forth in Plays upon a
stage, by prodigious Players, to disgrace them? Surely we had not need to dull
the edge of profession, it is too blunt already, but rather sharpen the same,
with the wetstone of approbation. It is no marvel though religion come so
seldom to our doors, when it has such entertainment: We have beaten the
shell so long, that the kernel is come to nothing: We have reproved the
hypocrite so long, till we have chidden away all profession: and yet every
professor is not an hypocrite, though every hypocrite be a professor.

Christ taught, that our works should shine before men and for outward
profession must accompany inward grace. It is no sin to have an outward show
of purity, but a virtue; and therefore to be countenanced, and defended from
the prodigious spirits of the world: and if I said barking Dogs, I said but
as David did, which hunts outward holiness into Obadiahs cave: that it dare
not show it self, for fear it should be brought upon a stage, or put in
verse, or to some other use, to make themselves merry withal.

Shall this be suffered, then religion will be banished ere long: and I cannot
blame it, if it walk in obscurity already, and dare not be seen. But is
there never an Obadiah in the land, nor Hester in the Court, nor an Ahimelech
at Nob, to favor their profession, and protect their persons? Non est meae
humilitatis diotare vobis: yet (say as God said to the Jews) Though Israel
play the harlot, let not Judah sin: Though the Temporal Magistrate sit still
and say nothing, yet let not Ecclesiastical governors keep silence. You are
the brestplate of defense, the helmet of (...), and the sword of protection: as
Tunc iustitia dieitur gladius, ex vtraque part acutus, quia hominis defendit
corpus ab exterioribus iniuriis, and animam a spiritu alibus molestiis: For the
sword of government has two edges. Disciplina ad duo diuiditur, ad
correctionem, et instructionem, primum timore, sccunaum amore perficitur: and
happy is that Church, where they both do cut. You are the North wind, to kill
all the vermin, and the South to ripen good fruit: I mean your authority, to
punish the wicked, and cherish the good. But I forget my self: your Lordship
is wise, as an Angel of God, knowing best what to do. Yet give meleaue (not to
teach, but) to pray for you, considering your holy profession, high place, and
the weighty causes you are to manage, the manifold evils you may prevent, and
the great good you may procure. And this is all the good I am able to do,
desiring the Lord to prosper your godly proceeding, to Gods glory, and the good
of the Church. To the same purpose the Lord fill your soul with grace, your
heart with courage, your life with health, and your time with length of days:
that after a military life ended in grace, you may come to live a (...), life
in glory.

Your Lordships to command in all duty, WILLIAM IACKSON.

To the Worshipful Company of Clothworkers: William Iackson wishes grace in
this world, and glory in the world to come.
Right Worshipful:
IT is no small favor of God to be made an instrument of others good: which
is either by our own free donations, or by disposing of others gifts: In the
one is manifested our charity in giving of our own: and in the other our
faithfulness, in truly performing the will of the dead. And to use the
Apostles words, What have we that we have not received? not simply for our
own use, but for the good of others also: Therefore, that we may not be found
uncharitable, we must give of our own, nor unfaithful, we must be true in
bestowing of others gifts: and then we shall be twice blessed with Jacob, and
have a double portion with Benjamin. But to bring this home to the doors of
your consciences: Yea, Worshipful company of Cloth-workers, for whom I in
particular am bound to pray, not so much for your own donation unto me, as
your faithful paying of that which others have given for the maintenance of
religion. Of whom I may say, as David did of Jerusalem, Many excellent things
are spoken of thee, thou City of God: so many excellent things are done by
you: Yea, worthy and worship full Clothworkers, with Dorcas you make coats to
clothe the naked: with the Shunammite, you prepare houses for the harbourlesse
to dwell in: with Obadiah, you relieve the Prophets, and much more of this
nature, which to set down in order, would both spend much paper, and also a
weariness to my hand: it is sufficient, God knows them, and will one day
reward the same. I speak not this to make you proud, but as my duty to you,
and to encourage others to the same. And so I will conclude with the saying of
the: Apostle, ye have, and do well, yet I beseach you to increase more and
more: whereby your name may be more spread on earth, and your glory greater
enlarged in heaven.

Your Pensioner, WILLIAM IACKSON.

TO THE READER.
CHristian reader: I am now to salute thy understanding with a few lines of
exhortation: be thou as willing to embrace them, as they are ready to profit
thee: if understanding be thy tutour, and conscience thy lesson. And here I
desire but two things of thee, first to read with diligence, then to mark
with judgment: for thou can have no sickness, but here is physic: no sore,
but here is a plaster for it. It is like Jacobs ladder, one end standing on
the earth, the other reaching up to heaven; It begins at faith and repentance,
leading thee along in the path of obedience, and so at the length brings thee
to glory. I would not that any should object against the author, and so use the
child the worse for the fathers sakc: but rather consider that the child may be
good, though the father be evil. I will make no apology in the behalf of it:
for it is able to speak in the defense of it self. And now I must make an
apology for my self, why I have sent this book forth into the world; one
cause is, in regard I was wronged by evil tongues after I had preached the
same; wherefore I now send it forth to make answer for me. A second cause
why I send it forth, is this: because the matter therein being of great use;
(and a Sermon is but nine days wonder,) would not have the funeral so soon,
therefore I thought good to entreat that favor of the higher powers to put it
in print. And now let me entreat thy affections to embrace it, and thy
diligence to practice it. Thus I leave these few lines to thy self to be
obeyed, and thy self to the Lord to be glorified.

Thine if thou be the Lords, William Iackson.

A Table of the parts handled in this Book.
In the plow-time are handled. 1 the subject. 2 property of the work. 3
propriety of the persons.

1 In the subject.
1 Why man is called earth, 5. 6. 7 2 The heart to be looked too, and why, 8 to
11 3 Wicked sin of meditation, and why, 14 to 18 4 The several fallow
grounds, 19 to 56
2 In the property of the work.
1 The heart is cut by the law, 60 to 63 2 The inward thoughts discovered, 57
to 60 3 Sin dies in us, 63 to 73
3 In the proprety.
1 Man is to help forward his salvation and why, 73 to 78 2 The magistrates
duty from 78 to 83
In the seed-time are 1 property of the work Sow. 2 matter to work on
Righteousness. 3 the persons You.

1 In the matter.
1 The word of righteousness must rule us and why, 84 to 87 2 How the Papists
abuse the word of righteousness from 87 to 100 3 Why the word is righteous, 101
to 102 4 Of the works of righteousness, and how to do them, 103 to 107
2 In the sowing-time.
1 How obedience seems lost, 108 2 Why thereward is not yet, 109 3 Great gain
in obedience, 111 4 We are to do good to many, 112 5 We are to do the beast
good, 113 6 How the wicked sow, 114 7 World make obedience a labor, 115
3 In the persons.
1 Great men not too good to serve God, 118 to 119 2 Poor not too mean to
serve God, 120
In the harvest time are 1 property of the work. 2 the manner of it.

1 General obeydience ever rewarded, 121 to 124
1 In the property.
1 How obedience brings earthly blessings, 125 to 127 2 The harvest of
assurance of heaven, 129 to 134
2 In the manner.
1 All we have is of mercy. 135 2 Papists merits, 136 to 137
In the consequence are 1 the action, Seek. 2 the object, the Lord. 3 the
cause, it is Time.

1 In the action.
1 We must serve God in our own persons, 139 2 That it is a labor to seek,
and why, 140
2 In the object.
1 Of the name Jehovah, 143 2 To seek God in his word, 145 3 The several
seekers, 146 to 147 4 To seek the love of God, 148 to 149
In the compelling cause. 3 In the time past in it.
1 The longer in sin, more cause to turn to God, and why, 150 to 154
2 In the time to come.
1 Take time while time is, and why, 154 to 155 2 The continuance in seeking,
156 to 157 3 How and when he come, 157 4 The metaphor of the rain, 158 to 159
5 Rain for teaching, 161 6 Rain for abundance, 162
A Table of the principal words in this Book.
A
A mean in words, 69 Assurance of heaven here, 129 Apology of the world, 116
Apology for the Church, 35. 56 Adultery how committed, 29 All the laws to be
executed, 80
B
Bishops lawful, 55. 56 Brokers, 30 Blind Magistrates, 82 Best good to be
done, 114 Boldness of Ministers, 77 Blasphemy of Papists, 102
C
Covetousness, 26 Corruption of nature, 16 Continuance in obedience, 191
Ceremonies, 39. 40 Custom in sin, 155 Church of England, true Church coming
of God, how, 157 Continuance in sin, 156
D
Discipline of 3. sorts, 38. 39 Death of sin, where, 63 Dissembling
protestants, 113 Drunkenness, 19. 146 Dumb Magistrates, 82 Dead to sin 63
Devil cause of sin, 17. 18 Dead in sin, 152 Doctrnie of England pure, 36,
37
E
Exchange, 32 Error of Papists, 132. 87 Engrosers 13 Earth for man 5. 7. 8. 9
Evil actions 66. 67
F
Free will 97 Faith of our own 75 Faith, the nature of it, 130 Faith only in
this life, 131
G
Grace the power of it 72 Good to be done to many, 112 God no cause of sin,
16 Gain in obedience, 111 Great men serve God, 119 Good, how to do it 106
H
Hypocrites 12 Heart most regarded, 8. 9. 10 Heart to be rent, 61 Hurt of
euillworks, 70 Hope of the godly 110 Harvest of magistrates, 123 Ministers and
people, 124 Harvest temporal, 125 Harvest of grace 124 Heart in obedience 105
Hospitality. 123
I
Inclosers 24 Idolatry of Papists. 95 Infidelity of ingrossers 24 Instruction
81 Jehovah, what it is 143 Justified how 167
K
Knowledge of the word, 105 Knowledge of sin, 57. 58. Knowledge of good and
micked men 72 Knowledge of the heart, 75 Kill sin in the heart 63
L
Love of God to he sought. 148 Labor to seek 115 Looks wanton, 29 Long in
sin 154. 155 loeke up the word, 88 to 90 Lawyer a seeker 139 Lawyer little
truth 21
M
Mean in words, 69 Merits of Papists 93. 136 Mortify sin 70 Magistrates to
punish. sinners, 78. 79. 85 Man to work his salvation out 73 Mercy of God 133
Murmuring 52. 53 Man part with all creatures 4 Mercy of God gause of this crop
115 Mercy of God greater then sin 154 Merchants falow ground, 21
N
Nature of faith 35 Nature of the wicked 15 Nature of merits 96 Names cut off.
5
O
Obedience seems lost 108 Oppression 22. to 25 Obedience profitable 122
Ordinances of God, 141. 142 Obedience rewarded, 121.
P
Pleasure of sin 18 Profit of sin 18 Patrons 24. 25 Pride 13. 27 Profit in
words 71 Pardons 98 Purgatory 90. 91 Prayer to Saints 95. 96 Plow our selves 76
R
Reward not yet 109 Rain, the manner of it, 159 Rain, for teaching. 160
Rob-altar seeks 139 Kighteousnesse of sanctification 168 Righteousness of
justification 166.
S
Slanders of the Papists, 102 107 Seek in our own persons, 139 Seeking of
sin, 146, 148 Swearing, 27 Subject of faith in us, 74 Satan rules the
sinner, 17 Sleeping magistrates, 80 Sowing of the wicked, 114 Sorrow how
differs in the good and bad, 61, 62
T
Truth not to be found, 21, 22 Truth in words, 67, 68 Tongue to be mortified,
65 Translation of the word, 88 to 90 Time to seek, 150 Theft of engrossers, 23
Thanksgiving, 161 Time past, 150 Time to come, 154
V
Usury, 25, 100 Use means to save the sinner, 77 Unwritten verities, 97
Unmercifulness of the Pope, 99 Ulcer of sin. 152
W
Works not perfect, 135 Word righteous why, 101 Wicked no right to any thing
143 Wicked sin of purpose, 14 Works of righteonsnesse, 103 Word our rule, 84
Whoredom, 28
In commendation of the Author.
VErtere si agricolas, terra^ est nunc, laud docendo,
Virgilius dignus: laudibus esse puto,
Dignum hunc, nostrarum, quae animaru^ cura libellum,
Sit, qui, and nostra docet, vertere corda been.
Alex. Bradley.

To my worthy friend his Celestial Husbandry.
THe Husbandry, which these dead leaves do bring,
Thy lively voice did once sweetly sing,
That thy learned and judicious hearers thought
The Celestial harvest to them had brought:
Thereby their hearts so did inflame,
That they desired to hear it once again.
Io. Ga.

THe ground man's heartis, Gods word the plow;
The harrow, repentance is, to break it now;
The seed, obedience, sown in our lives;
The rain, Gods grace, whereby it also thriues:
Then use it, and it will bring
Thee to heaven, there to sing.
Then now Praise God for the gain, And the Author for his pain.
T. H.

THE CELESTIAL husbandry.
RIght Honorable, and well beloved in our best be loved. I know that many have
been the flowers that my brethren the Prophets, have gathered out of the garden
of Gods word: giving a fragrant smell in this place: so that I know not what
flowers to gather, to present you withal: that formerly ye have not seen.
Yet, in this my meditation, I considered of my worthy Auditors, and so fitted
my text, accordingly. Some of them, being Judges, and Magistrates, that fitly I
might speak to them, of Justice. An other part of them being inferior
subjects, that also I might speak to them of obedience. In a word considering
that here are usually auditors, of all sorts, I have made choice of such a
text, as does speak to all persons. I feared to speak of Judgment, least it
should make the weak hearted to tremble. Or of mercy, least the wicked should
be secure. Therefore I have joined them together.

OSEA. 10. 12.

Sow to your selves in righteousness: reap after the measure of mercy:
break up your fallow ground: for it is time to seek the Lord, till he come
and rain righteousness upon you.

QVo brevior co obscurior. The shorter this Prophecy is, the more mystical.
In the holy Scripture, these two things ever do concur: Sententia breuis, res
ampla, A finit sentence an infinite sense, as in a little mapp we see a world of
Countries, and what the foot cannot measure, in many days, the eye passes
over in a moment. This text is a little Map of the whole body of Divinity:
and turns over unto us a golden lease, whose ink is Nectar: and the pen,
the wing of Angels: for the matter expressed is wholly celestial. Quis sit
finis iustorum it iustificantium iustos.

I will, in somesort, open the euerlastiing doors, and here show you the King
of glory: and in him, your glory. Therefore let an holy reverence possess
your souls, and say with Jacob: This place is fearful: none other but the
house of God, and the gate of Heaven. where will appear the love of God in his
Judgments, to the sons of men: who in promising mercy, omits judgment, but
in threatening judgment, remembers mercy? as here in this place.

And now as you intend to travel with me, in this way, tie your considerations
unto two general heads.

The first is a precept. The second is the consequent. The precept is
affirmatiuelie set down, and is illustrated by a metaphor taken from the
husbandman. First, by the plowetime. Innouate vobis nouale. Plowe up your
fallowe. Secondly, by the seed time, Seminate vobis in iusticia, sow to your
selves in righteousness. Thirdly by the harvest time. Metite in ore
misericordiae.

Every one of these times, offer 3. branches apeece. First the subject, the
fallowe grownd. 2 The property of the work, Plowe. 3 The propriety of the
persons, your, Plowe up your fallowe grownd. Secondly, the seed time. 1 Sow,
There is the Property of the work. 2 Righteousness, there is the matter to
work upon. 3. To your selves. There is the extent of it. Sow to your selves
in Righteousness.

Thirdly, the harvest time, 1 The action or work reap. 2 The manner,
According to mercy, this is the precept, and the parts thereof, and now the
consequent follows: and is amplified thus: first by an argument, taken from
their negligence. For it is time to seek the Lord: Secondly by an argument
taken from the benefit of it, till he come and rain righteousness upon you.
In the 1 observe an action, seek, there is the property of it, 2 whom, the
Lord, there is the object of it. 3 why, for it is time. There is the compelling
cause for it is time to seek the Lord. In the second part observe how long
donec vewiat until he come, there is the continuance of it. 2 Et doceat
iustitiam vobis, and teach you rightcousnesse there is the end of it. First by
the act, to teach, 2 by the quality, righteousness, 3 the persons, you.
this is the consequent with the parts thereof. so that now if you will take a
general veiwe of these words, you, shall find every word a sentence and
every sentence, a world of matter it wants but a skillful workman. A Scripture
very necessary for these days, and I think, not unfit for this present
auditorie. Albeit to them, whose ears are always listininge after novelties,
it may seem to triuiall, yet I doubt not but to those that come with willing
minds to learn it, will prove very profitable. Therefore you Right Honorable
whom God has vouchsafed his own name unto here upon earth, with reverence
attend it. It is the ground of judgment, therefore ye most worthy Judges may
liften unto it; it is the end of controversies therefore ye skillfull Lawyers
may take notice of it; Here is matter of civil obedience, therefore ye
inferiors may fitly learn it, also it is the isntrumental cause of faith,
and repentance, therefore ye believers may earnestly embrace it. Shimgnu debar
Jehovah. Thus who so begins, and ends his days, shall dye the death of the
lighteous: and his last end shall be like unto his. The matter in the whole is
an exhortation unto holinessed: ana consequent enforcinge. The exhortation
comes now in hand, being considered I by the plowe time, secondly by the seed
time, 3 by the harvest time. The plow time by order, is first to be handeled:
And in that, I noted 1 the supiect of the work, (...) fallowe ground. 2 The
property of the work. (...) New plowe. 3 The propriety of the persons. (...)
your. And now the subject does challenge, the first place.

THE SVBIECT.
NIru, Fallow ground, In every scripture we are to con sider, Sententiam et
intentionem. The sentence and the intent. Quid dicitur et quid intenditur. What
is said, and what is intended. Every scripture being to be considered either
litterall, or metaphorical. Litterall, when sense and sentence agree. As
cursed is the earth for thy sake. Genesis 3. 17. metaphorical, when one thing is
Esa. 44. 3.
spoken, and another thing is meant. I will power waters upon the dry ground.
So here we must understand him, that has heaven for his seeling, the earth for
his pauement, the Sun Moon and stars, for his hangings, the creatures for
his diat, and the Angels, for his attendants. Man patt with all creaturs.


Man is called every creature by the mouth of our Savior Mat, 28. Because he
has a participation of the best good in all creatures: and so more excellent
then all.

Stones have a being, but not a life. Plants have a being, and life, but not
sense. Beasts have a being, life and sense, and yet none understanding. Angels
have being, life, sense and understanding. But in man, ye may behold a Map of
all these. For he has a being with stones, life with plants, sense with
beasts, and understanding, with the Angels. A most sweet abstract, or
compendium, of all creatures perfections. Yea be not proud, because of all
these, for thou art but earth. Earth is the lowe^st of all elements, and the
Center of the world. Earth must be earth, living earth to dead earth. Respice,
aspice, prospice, look back what thou wast, see what thou art, and consider
what thou shall be. Dust thou wast, earth thou art, and to dust thou shall
return as Says Phocylydes.

Ex terra corpus nobis est, rursus in illam,
Selumur: et puiuis sumes.
Our body is of earth and dying must,
Return, to earth: for man is made of dust.
So then it is earth, The difference is this: living earth walks upon dead
earth, and shall, at the last be as dead, as his pauement, that he treads upon.
I think few be proud, of their souls: and none but fools, will be proud of
their bodies. Quid superbis terra. Why art Observe.
thou proud O earth.

Man of earth is called earth: and I cannot pass this point, before I have
fixed your considerations, upon this observation. How the Lord insinuates, his
contempt of the wicked by cutting off their names, as not worthy to stand in
his book. The mention of which, would be a blur to his sacred leaves. This is
the estemation, that the wicked bear with God. How think ye then, that their
persons shall sit in his kingdom, whose names may not stand in his book?

Thus God crosses the worlds fashion: some times giving them no names at all:
As that real parrable glues the rich man, no name at all but Dives. Some times
by Luke 16. 19
cutting off their names, as the servants of David, were served by the Princes
of Hannon: Who cut off their garments by the buttocks: and shaued off half
their beards.

So God cutteth off half their names. As Aram is called Rame: leconia is
called Conia. Surely when God takes letters, from their names, he intends
also, to take blessings from their persons. Some times he gives them a by name:
as the Bulls of Basan. And here the earth or fallow ground: as unworthy of any
other name, or title of Honor.

It is not always true, that, Quanto ornatior, tanto nequtor. The more adorned
the more wicked. For surely greatness is the fairest object, to the eye of the
world, and goodness to the eye of heaven. There is a glorious splendour, in
pompous honor, if it come by the hand of God. For, They that honor me, I will
honor, (says the (...)
Lord.) And it is made as a promise of God to the righteous. Zecer fsaddik. The
memorial of the just shall be blessedness, full of honor. Good luck have such
with Pto. 10. 1.
their honor.

But there are many, to whom our bonnets veil, and our knees bow, whom the
sight of heaven scorns, as not worthy of those titles and complements given
unto them. For Deus vbinon est, ibi nihil eft. Where God is not, there is
nothing. For he that has not Christ. How can he have right unto any thing? For
the condition runs thus: (...) All is yours, and you Christ's. But first you
must be Christ's, before any thing, can be yours, Feed not your selves, then
with shadows. O iudex quisque sui. Let every man be a Judge of himself. Cum
te quis laudet, iudex tuus esse memento. When any man prayseth thee, remember
to be thine own Judge. Whether these things do belong unto thee or no. Plus
aliis de te quam tu tibi credere noli. Do not thou believe other men, more
concerning thy self, then thou do believe of thy self.

If you desire your names to be registered with the pehne of eternity in the
kingdom of glory, write them, your selves in the kingdom of grace, with the
pen of obedience: and there read them, to your comfort. They stand sure with
God before: not sure to us until now. If you would have God, to dignifie your
names, with titles of honor, then honor his name, with songs of praise, and the
fruit of odedience. Remember his great and glorious name, says Moses. And
fitly said David, that our help stands Beshem Iehouab, in the (...)
name of the Lord. Maintain the glory of it then, with your strenghts: and
sound it out with your praise, that so God may write you, not without a name:
nor with a byname: nor with a curtolled name: but that your names may stand at
the full length, in his book. That he reading the same, as Ahashuerosh did
Mordecayes, then your service shall be found out with rewards: arrayed with the
Kingds robe: titles of honor: set on the Kings Horse, and Proclamation made:
This is the man, whom the King will honor. Honor him with reputation on earth
before men, and with glory in heaven, before Angels. O blessed are they, that
stand registered, in the Chronicles of heaven, with the pen of the eternal
spirit: and read in the leaves of obedience, in the kingdom of grace.

I have not yet don with the subject. This earth is a divine, spiritual and
immortal nature, called the fallow Man a divine earth.
ground, by a metaphor. This ground is incapable of suffering terrene
fragillity, This is Gods ground, and that in an high and mystical sense yet
proper enough. The earth is the Lords. Yet he has not such respect to this
ground, as he has to man, for whom he made it: but chiefly to the soul of
man, which is this fallow ground.

There is a wonderful mixture of the elements in man First, the Heart is
placed in the midst, as the earth, or the center. 2. The Liver like the Sea,
from whence the springs of blood do flow. 3. The veins, like Rivers,
spreading themselves abroad into the utmost members. 4. The Brain which is
placed (...), like the Sun, giving light and understanding. 5. The Senses,
like Stars, set round about like ornaments. And therefore man may well be
called earth, yea Microcesmot, a little world.

The Earth is called Terra, which betokens the roundnes of the earth. Or it
is called Terra, and has that name of the over part qua (...). That is trod
upon, as being the foundation and ground work of all. And is also called
Humus, and has that name of the Sea that is moist, for without moisture, the
earth is unprofitable. They must be joined together. For if it be dry which is
either by too much cold, and then it turns to sand and gravel, or by too
much heat, and then it turns to Chauke and Oker. The earth must have
moisture, to make it fruitful. This moisture is Gods grace, that makes the
soul as profitable, as the showers from heaven, cause the earth to be
fruitful. The heart and grace must be myxed together: for it is necessary to
diverse ends. I Illuminat intellectum. It does lighten the understanding. 2.
Inflamat affectum. It inflameth the affection 3. Frangit it cordis duritiam. It
breaks the hardness of the heart.

Thus when the heart and grace are joined together they are fruitful.
Therefore the earth is called Tellus, because we take fruit thereof. And Ops
for it heapeth with fruit. Such is the heart of a good christian, that it
flows with the works of righteousness, as appears Cant 2. 12. The flowers
appear in the earth, says Solomon. Observe with me, First the place. Baarets:
in the earth. (...)
This earth is the heart and soul, that is the fountain of them. 2. Nireu:
they appear: Inward grace bringes (...)
forth outward fruit. 3. The quantity of them, Hannitsanim the slowers, set
down in the plural, to show (...)
the abundance of them, as our Lord witnesses. This Earth is fruitful, when
the air of Gods grace has given John. 15. 5.
influence, with the seasollable dewes of his spirit; and the Sun of
righteousness, has bestowed his kindly hear, then follows a plentifnll
haiuest, The blessed heart returns ten for one: yea, a hundred for one: as our
Savior Christ says. Observe that the chiefest care of a Christian, must be to
furnish his heart with grace and to Doct.
plowe it up with true repentance: which counsel is given, (...)
by the wise man. miccal-(...) nitsor libbeca; Above all things keep thy heart
with diligence. The like conucell (...)
is given by (...) thy heart O Jerusalem. This also Pro. 4. 23. (...). 4. 14.
is confirmed by the author to the Hebrews. It is Good the Heb. 13. 9.
heart be established with grace. And to confirm it with the words of Christ,
Take heed unto your selves, that Luke 21. 34.
your hearts be not oppressed.

This course or order is not amiss, for the cause goes before the effect, Can
there be a good life, which is the Re. 1.
effect, before there be a good heart? which is the cause: not Causaefficiens,
but Causamaterialis, as Chrysostom observes. In ore et cord tuo salutis
causa, In thy mouth and in thy heart, is the cause of thy salvation. In thy
mouth to confess it, and in thy heart, to believe it If thou confess with thy
mouth, and believe with thy heart, thou shall be saved. So then to have good
fruit, is to have Romans 10. 10.
a good tree. A good cause, brings forth a good effect, for Qualis causa, talis
effectus. Such as the cause is, such is the effect. And common sense and
reason, does teach us, as Aristotle observes, (...) In every action the end and
the means of the end must go together.

The Smith heats his iron, before he beats it. The Carpenter lays his
foundation, before he can erect his building. The husbandman plowes his ground,
before he reaps his harvest. And a christian must have a good heart, before he
can have a good life.

And as it is the ground work, so it is the strength of man, both in nature,
and in grace. In nature it is the first that lives, and the last that dies, And
it is called Cor, and has that name of Cura, business: for it is in
continual work. It is in man (...), The little world. Homo est coeli
simulacrum, and interpres naturae. Man is the picture of the heavens, and the
interpreter of nature: in whom is the heart, as God is in this (...), the
great world. Primus motor. The first mouer. It is no less in grace, the first
that is sanctified, and the first that lives in grace, and is the castle of
man. The consideration Psalm. 112. 8.
whereof made David to conclude, that, that man need to fear no evil, why
Samuk-libbo his heart stands (...)
firm. And surely it had need, for the Devil deals with the heart of man,
as the King of Aram dealt with the King of Israel. Which shootes neither
against small, (...). King. 22. 31.
nor great, but against the heart, the King and strength of man. Thus he dealt
with Adam, insinuating himself, first into their affections: thereby stealing
away their halts, and so drew them to sin. Thus he dealt with Judas; for he
put (...) into the heart of Judas. John 13. 2.
And thus he fitst works with the heart, and then the other parts of man.

And as it is the strength of man, so it is the salt, that seasons our
obedience, whereby it is made acceptable unto God: for obedience without the
heart, is like the sacrifice of a dog, and the hire of a whore. A good work
without the heart, is but a glorious sin. Non tamres ipsa, quam hominum
affectus spectantur. Not so much the things themselves, as the affections of
men, are here to be considered, says Faius. Potest quis and in paupertate,
magno, and in diuitys pusillo animo esse. One may have a frank mind in
poverty, and a sparing mind in riches. So it is not the work but the mind.
Vnum opus, sed non vnus affectus. It is one and the same work, but not the
same mind.

Thus the Lord regards not so much the work, as the heart and mind of the
worker, as the Prophet says, This people honors me with their lips, but
their hearts Esa. 29. 13.
are far from me. And therefore, in vain do they worship me, says Christ.
And as Augustine well observes, Matthew 13. 9.
Quia non quid faciat homo considerandum est. Because we must not so much to
consider, what it is that a man does, sed quo animo facit, but with what mind
he does it. If we do build only on the work, we have no better evidence to
show for our salvation, then the devils, and the reprobates. If we rely upon
miracles, and casting out of devils: these are the evidences that the false
prophets will bring: Lord have we not done many great works, and cast-out
devils in thy Name? yet, away from me, I know you not, will Christ say. Or
shall we build upon Matthew. 7. 17.
preaching the Gospel, supposing that to be a good evidence for our salvation?
This is the evidence of Judas: and yet he is gone to his own place. Not the
work then, but the heart, is that, that will stand and go for current. To
show this, the Lord would have a free will Leuit. 22. 19.
offering, among all the rest of his sacrificet.

Hereby showing, that the heart must be joined with obedience. Yea, so did the
Lord regard the heart, that he would not admit of any gift, for the building of
the Temple, but what came from a free will, which was Exodus 23, 2.
but a type of the spiritual Temple. To the building whereof, every man is to
bring the timber and stones of obedience, and that with a good heart. And
therefore as the author to the Hebrews says, Let us draw near unto Heb. 10.
22.
God (...) with a true heart, that so we may serve him, that we may please
him: For God is a Heb. 12. 24.
consuming fire.

And as the heart seasons our obedience, so in the heart is the evidence of our
salvation, there sealed by the Spirit of God. Our evidence lies not in any
external thing: it lies not in the ancient calling of husbandry, for Cain
miscarried in that: nor in strength, for Golias could not prevail thereby: nor
in the office of a Prophet, for that served not Saul, or Balaam: nor any kingly
dignity, that would not privilege Pharaoh: nor riches, they helped not Dives:
nor glorious apparel, for it did Herod no good: nor policy in Achitophel: nor
beauty in Absalom, could give assurance of salvation. Temporale non potest esse
causa aeterni, No temporal thing can be the cause of that which is eternal.
In all these can be no evidence of our salvation. Nihil est firmum vel stabile
in rebus humanis, There is nothing stable in humane affairs. It remains,
that the heart is the register of our salvation. Per fidem facti sumus vnum in
Christo. By says we are made one with Christ. And the subject of faith is the
heart: for with the heart man believes unto Romans 1c. 10
salvation. The other, they are extra nos, these intra nos, vero spiritu Dei
inscripta, Written by the very Spirit of God. For God has sent the Spirit of
his Son into our hearts, whereby we cry, Abba, Father. And though the sound
of salvation delights the ear, yet the joy and sweetness is in the heart.
Deus est mel in ore, God is Gal. 4. 4.
hon is in the mouth. Melos in aurc, Music in the ear. and iubilum in cord,
and joy in the heart. Veniet, veniet dies indicy, vbi plus valebunt pura corda,
quam astutia verbis, and conscientia bona quam marsupia plena, quandoquidem
index ille, nec verbis falletur, nec donis flecteur. The day will come, the day
of judgment will come, when clean hearts will more avail then crastinesse in
words, and a good conscience then a full purse, seeing that the Judge will
neither be deceived with words, nor mooned with gifts. If then a good heart
shall be of such worth at that day, it is principally to be regarded in this
lise.

Now before we passe-from this, note with me here, Use. 1.
the hypocrites, which have only the outside of greatness, like stage players,
which appear like Kings unto others, themselves being no better then beggars.
These hypocrites serve the Lord in show, not in truth; Christians only in
name, Saints only in show. These are painted boxes, wherein are hid deadly
poisons: under Iesabels painted face a whorish behavior. These cleanse the
outside, but within is a den of theeuish affections. O Matthew. 23. 33.
generation of vipers, how should ye escape the damnation of hell? Unto this
purpose serves that story wherein I read of Hercules, which begot Scithes on
a monster: whose upper parts were like a woman, and her lower parts like a
viper. Me thinks the hypocrite resembles this monster: his upper parts shall
be like a woman, (I mean his smooth and splendent words:) but his lower Reucl.
12. 1.
parts, (or if you will) his heart is like the viper. For as historians report,
the viper eats a way out of the belly of her damme, with the danger of her
life that bred her: so the hypocrite eats up the bowels of his mother, the
Church, that brought him forth, crying out against disorders abroad, whiles
there is none at home in his own heart. I speak not against professors, but
against hypocrites: to whom I say as Chrysostom said, Aut esto quod appares,
aut appare quod es, Either be as thou seem, or appear as thou art. I would
to God they would be either open enemies, that so we might beware of them, or
faithsull friends unto Christ and his Church.

These are sick of wantonness, in religion, and are so hot about the
question de modo, that it is to be feared, the enemy steals away the matter of
religion out of their hearts. It is strange to see, if that we will not show
our selves refractarie, wrangle about shadows, and speak against authority,
our sermons are hissed at, and our persons are derided. These are prosessors of
note, when they speak bitterly, their names carry it away strongly, with our
scandals.

Note here the proud persons, with their top and topgallants, that build towers
in the air, and a heaven on earth; whiles there is a hell in their
consciences. The proud person is, Deo odibilis, diabolo similis, and, sibi
damnabilis. Odious unto God, like the devil, and damnable to himself:
witnesses the saying of the Apostle, God rejects the proud, and gives grace
to the humble. Eucry 1. Pet. 3. 5.
proud man is an idolater, because he loves his pride, and makes that his God:
no marvel then if he be rejected: For, Nemo potest Dominis rocte seruire
duobus: No man can serve two masters, God, and Pride. Yet the proud man will;
and if either be unserved, God shall: he will be sure to cover his back with
external bravery, whether God line his soul with grace or no. You shall see
many of these gallants put a whole inheritance into a trunk, and metamorphise
a whole manor into a suit of apparel. And no marvel, when the best farm in
it, will do no more then pay for a pair of shooestrings: besides, a band in
the fashion, starched with the devils liquor, and in the punke color, to
beautify it. And now they flourish it out in bravery, what with their curled
hairs, painted faces, and foolish, if notfooles coats. Thus shine they like
stars; thinking themselves to be Gods among Saints; when God knows, and I
fear, they be but devils among men.

I conclude with the author to the Hebrews, It is good to have the heart
established with grace: and as Seneca says, It is better to have a soul
furnished with grace, then a body decked with glorious apparel: that so we
might be like unto Nathaniel, of whom it is said, Behold a true Israelite,
(...) in whom there is no guile, Ioh. 1. 47.

But I have not yet done with the subject, New fallow your fallow, it was
plowed before, but for the sowing of evil seed. The husbandman in the
country can better understand this then the citizen. The manner of the
husbandman is, to fit his tillage according to his seed: The ground wherein he
sowes Barley, Oats, Pease, and Tares, needs but one years plowing; whereas
the ground where Wheat and Rye is to be sown, has two years plowing. During
the time that it lies plowed, and not sown, it is called fallow ground. Such
is this fallow ground of their hearts, which was made ready for the sowing of
iniquity. As the same Prophet witnesses, Cikerbu cattannur libbam, For they
have made (...)
ready their hearts. And as another Prophet witnesses, They lie in wait for
blood. Likewise David says, That they lie secretly, as a Lion in his den.
Hos. 7. 6. Mic. 7. 1. Psalm. 10. 9. Doct.


Thus the wicked, not of infirmity, but of meditation and deliberation, run
into sin. Prauus vsus vix aboletur: A wicked use is hardly abolished. Assidua
consuetudo vitium in naturam conuertit, says Augustine, A continual custom
conuerteth vice into nature. For it is a pastime to the wicked to do evil,
whereas the godly has no delight in sin. Seneca by the light of nature could
say, that, Bonus animus nunquam erranti obsequium accommodat: A good mind
never reaches the helping hand unto error. Insomuch that the heathen said,
that, Bona cupido animi, bonus Deus est: A good desire in the mind, is a good
God. Whereas the minds of the wicked are bent to commit sin with greediness,
as Solomon says, Come (say they) let us lie in wait for blood. Of purpose,
you see, not by infirmity, notwithstanding Prou. 1. 11.
the Lord, by the Prophet, pronounces a woe against them, that imagine
wickedness upon their beds. Mic. 2. 1.


There are two things that make the wicked thus bent in their minds to sin.
The first is the corruption of nature, Reas. 1.
which is corrupt of it self, and judges those things to be good, which are
evil, and those things evil, which are good. As the Apostle witnesses, The
naturallman, knows not the things of God: Yea, so far off, that they 1. Cor.
2. 14.
are foolishness unto him: Si in ratione habitaret malum, etc. as Tollet
observes: If evil should dwell in the reason, then could it not will that
which is good. I remember Virgils verse, Igneus est ollis vigor, and caelestis
origo,
Scminibus quantum, non noxia corpora tardant,
Terrenique hebetent artus moribundaque membra.
Those seeds have fiery vigor, and heavenly spring:
So far as bodies Lnder not with fullness,
Or earthly dying members clogge with dullness.


We need not to borrow proofs from the heathen Poets, we find them in our
selves, and the infallible truth of God has spoken it; that in us there
dwells no goodness, Romans 7. And further, the same Apostle says, We are all
sold under sin. And, There is none that does good no not one. If our nature
be thus corrupt, how can Psalm. 14.
it produce any thing but that which is evil? The barren heart is the ground
of my discourse. And according to the common distinction of evil, here is a
double evil in this barren, and bad soil, Vnum quodmalus facit, One evil
which the wicked man does; and then: alterum quod malum patitur: another evil
which he suffers. The evil that he does, is here the meditation to sin;
or, as my text says, a heart prepared to sin: The evil that he suffers is
the corruption of nature: which savors nothing but vice. The Philosopher said,
that the earth was a natural mother unto weeds, but a stepmother unto herbs.
It is true, in this earth, man, by a procliuity of his own natural
inclination, is apt to produce all manner of evil, but can bring forth no
good: God must first play the husbandman with him: There is no Farmer that so
labors his ground, as God must our hearts. Wicked men are bad earth, and base
minded, and naturally sink downwards, yea, with a dull and ponderous
declination: All his actions have a low object; not out of humility, but of
base deiection.

Apollonius reports one strange thing among the rest of his reports. That
there was a people which could not see in the light, but in the dark: A
strange report; yet it is here true by experience: The wicked cannot see any
thing in the light of grace: they have their light only in the darkness of
nature; for they here see and understand through the dark clouds of nature:
No marvel then, if their hearts be set upon sin, when they can see nothing
but evil.

Neither is God in this any way causa Peccati, eitheir God not the cause of
sin.
because his whole nature is corrupted, or in with holding grace from him. For
the first, the wise man clears God, saying. This have I learned, that God
made man righteous: but he has found out many inventions. For how could a
Eccles. 7. 31.
good cause, produce an evil effect? A Deo perfecto nihil malum, nihil turpe
est, says the Heathen; From God that is perfect, comes neither evil nor
foul thing. Deus malorum causa non est, cum bonus sit. God is not the author
of evil, when he himself is most good. But as the Lord speaks by the
Prophet. Perditio tua ex te. Destruction Hosa 13. 9.
is of thy self O Israel.

As God is not the cause of this corrupted nature, and so not the cause of
sin: so God is not unjust, in withholding his grace from the wicked: as some
heretics have reasoned, in this manner. Priuatio est a Deo to be deprived is
from God. Priuatio est Peccatum. To be deprived is sin, ergo peccatum est a
Deo, sin is from God. But this is easily answered: for it does not follow,
because we can do nothing without grace: that therefore God is bound to give
it. Indeed we are bound to serve him, but he is not bound to bestow his grace
upon us; it may be illustrated thus. The King can raise a beggar to great
honor: is he therefore bound to do it? no man will conclude it. So it is
with God, if he bestow his grace upon this man, it is his mercy toward him:
if he do it not to another, it is none injustice to him. For his grace is
free. I will have mercy on him, to whom Romans 9 15.
I will show mercy: and will have compassion on him, on whom I will have
compassion. So, though man be corrupted, God in no wise is the cause of his
corruption. Then this nature being so corrupt, sees, and tastes nothing, but
that which is evil.

A second cause or reason proceeds from Satan: for he sits in the heart
of the wicked, as a Prince upon his throne commanding the same, how and when he
will: This way, and that way: as the winds do the Sedars in Libanus. As the
Apostle Paul says, They are taken prisoners by him to do his will. He is a
workman 2. Tim. 2. 26.
that is never without employment for them. The devil by the testimony of our
Lord, is the Prince of this world. Note then his Monarchy is great, and his
kingdom bigger, then the kingdom of Christ. For broad is the way that leads
to destruction, and many run that way: But Matthew. 7. 13.
narrow is the way that leads unto life, and few walk that way.

If his kingdom be so great, no marvel if his employments be so many: every
subject therein is a great Statesman, for he is of the privy counsel: and
there is never a day, but there is a consultation between the Devil, and the
heart of a wicked man: The Devil cannot be without the least of these, but
with great danger to his kingdom.

There is a twofold cable-roape, where by the Devil draws their hearts unto
sin. The first is, the profit of sinning. Come cast in thy Lot with us, we
will find riches, Profit of sin tempts us. Piou. 1. 13.
and also fill our houses with spoils. Sin never comes empty handed: for if
it dyed, we would reject it. We have all earned Judas his lesson, which is,
Quid dabis? And thus much does the Apostle intimate in the Romans, where he
says What profit had ye then in those things? Hereby showing, that the end
of sinning, was the Romans 6. 10:
game of profit.

The second, is pleasure and delight: of this speaks the Apostie in his
second Epistle to the Thessalonianst Pleasure of sin tempts us. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 12.
They took pleasure in unrighteousness: And this is that, that aggrauates a
man's sin, to sin, and then to take pleasure in it: Thus he binds two
sins together, 1. 2 finne to do it, 2. a sin to love it. So the Devil
began with Adam and Euah, to tempt them to sin, by the pleasure of sin,
saying. Ye shall be as Gods, knowing good and evil. In many arts, the
more-skilfull, the more ill-full; Armis polentior astus: Fraud goes beyond
force. Thus Satan has stolen trueths garment, and put it on errors back.
And so because the ways to hell are full of green paths and tempting
pleasures, many run apace, till they come to their own place with Judas.
Sin is a coach, the Devil is the carter: then needs must they go, whom the
Devil drives; they are drawn to hell in pomp with two coatch-horses: Profit,
and Pleasure. What makes the wicked to sell insufficient wares, to deceive by
fall waights, but desire of Profit? What makes the luxurious to follow his
lusts? the drunkard his pots, and the gallants their apish attires, but
Pleasure. If you think I speak too bitter? I would it were not worse then I
speak.

Behold the two worms that eat out a man's life, and make him fall before he
is aware into hell. See what an exchange the wicked makes: he selles himself
for profit. and his profit for pleasure: So that of all his labor, he has
nothing left, but a wounded conscience, which runs as fast into despair, as
himself does to damnation: not like Peter and John, who strove whether should
come first to the sepulcher; but like Saul, and his armor-bearer, whether of
them should first dye upon their swords. Woeful companions a wicked man, and a
wounded conscience, strive who shall be at hell first; well, seeing they be in
such have, let them go: but I will not let you go, before I have taught you to
make use of this point.

First, here let the godly take comfort: who, how soever they sin, yet they
finne not with an intent. For whosoever is borne of God, Peccatuns non facit:
works John 3. 9.
not sin: That is, as Piscator observes, Non dat operam peccato: gives not
himself to sin.

But here more secondly, that the wicked have made a covenant with hell, and an
agreement with Satan: that they may sin at their pleasure, and drink down
hearty draughts of iniquity: But woe, woe, unto them: God will one day hold
the cup of vengeance unto their lips, and bid them drink their fill, that
are now so thirsty after sin.

Let me take you by the hand, and lead you as God did the Prophet Ezechiel,
and show you this fallowe Fallow ground
ground: as the Lord did him their wickedness; O that it lay in my power to
prevail with your affections, as well as it does with your judgments: It
should not be long, before you would fall to the plowe, to turn up this fallow
ground.

First, look upon the drunkards, that intend to rise early to follow
drunkenness, and are strong to drink wine. These gallant Epicures, and
christened Athests, sit knocking on their benches, calling for more, and more:
and yet more drink; crowning this day with ryots, and blessing the morrow with
promised sursets.

Drunkenness is one of the good fellows of our time, and most welcome to our
doors, and well may he: for he vpholds the tap-house, the tap house, the
brewer: and the brewer, the maulster: and the maulster, the farmer And all
these are beholding to the drunkard. Drunkenness was once the shame of
beggars: but now it is become, the pride of gallants. Surely they are possessed
with some master Devil: for there is no small resemblance between those
possessed in the days of our Lord, and these drunkards. Read and you shall
find, some falling into the fire, some into the water: and others foming at
the mouth; and doenot our Wine-bibbers the like? as the Proverb is. They were
all drunk save I, and I fell into the fire.

Yet I have heard of many more that have fallen into the water, and there have
perished in their drunkenness: And daily we see them foming, and gorgeing out
their own shame in every street. Well might there force Barnard say, that
Ebrietas est manifestissimus demon. Drunkenness is a manifest Devil.

The devil brought drunkenness into the world, and these uphold it: for he was
the first drunkard: The difference is this; he was drunk with pride and envy,
and these with wine, and strong drink. There be many kinds of drunkenness in
the Scriptures, A drunkenness of vengeance: A drunkenness of blood: A
drunkenness of sin: A drunkenness of pride: Yet all these are nothing to
Deuteronomy. 32. Revel. 17.
this drunkenness, namely, The drunkenness of the throat. I have read of a
street called Vicus sobrius Sober street: find such a one in any of the
populous towns of England, and it shall be put into the Chronicles. This
drunkenness is that, that gives denomination to all the rest; and these
drunkards, and wine-worshippers, are at it on their knees, drinking up healths,
from the ground of their hearts, to the bottom of their cups.

We marvel to see bread so dear, yet it is no marvel, when it is
metamorphosed into drink; The Germans were accounted great drinkers, and
small eaters; Englishmen were accounted great eaters, and small drinkers: but
now the saying is changed: English men are great drinkers, if not as great
eaters: This is a very bad fallow, and must be plowed up.

Come now to see another kind of fallow ground, No truth in men.
namely, of untruth and falsehood: Truth is banished from the earth, Inque
locum subire suum vis frausque dolusque: And in the place thereof is come
falsehood, cosinage, violence, and deceit. If we should with Diogenes seek for
it at noone days with a lantern, we should hardly find it: For they have
taught their tongues to lie. Iere. 9. 3.


Where is it likely to be found? It should be in every Hardly merchants and
tradesmen.
place, but I fear, hardly any where: It is a guest that is profitable for
all, but entertained of few. It comes to the tradesman, and merchant, and
seeks there for entertainment, but, Non est hic: It must be kept out from
them, for the more ready sale of their wares: A dark light, and insufficient
wares, false weights, and no true measures, best befit our calling; Sophistry
is more profitable for our gain, then truth. It is true indeed: for seldom
or never breaks truth out of their lips.

Well, seeing truth is so hard to be found among merchants and tradesmen, see
we if it may be found among Lawyers, whether it has any entertainment among
Truth is not among Lawyers.
them, or no: for I hope they will not shuffle plainness into difficulties,
nor find out tricks to trip up the heels of the Law, where by a man's cause is
overthrown, and himself goes home robbed of his money, deceived in his cause,
and cousined of his inheritance: and feel causes in their fists, before they
will understand them in their judgments. I hope our laws shall not be
corrupted, by means of ambitious Lawyers', though they swarm as thick now,
as the Friars in Rome: but not so covetous, as they be superstitious. And
though these wilful beggars are maintained of devotion and charity, I hope
most of our Lawyers have not their maintenance by heaping up coals, upon the
fire of strife and envy; for then should our good laws be abused, as if Law
had been made, rather for the enriching of Lawyers, then for the execution of
justice: No surely, to sell justice is intolerable, but to sell injustice, is
either bribelie, or plain knavery. God grant that none of them be possessed
with some master-deuill, and so sleep in sins then it is more dangerous,
then profitable for me to plow them up: I will therefore pray to God, to
convert and amend them.

Now let us step among Statesmen, and Clergymen Is truth among Statesmen.
for truth; for there if any where, we are like to find it. They will not give
this answer with the Lawyer, Non est hic; neither do they think a dram of
policy, worth an ounce of verity: Obsequium amicos, veritas odium parit.
Flattery and dissimulation is the way to preferment: truth breeds but
hatred. Shall truth for all this fail here? Shall it not dare to show it
self, but be kept under harches? as too many use it, (the more is the pity),
that make merchandile of it, and sell it for a little preferment, or a meals
meat. And if it be so, then this is fallow ground, and must be plowed up.
Ezekiel. 13. 19.


There is a third fallow ground: namely, the field of oppression: A very bad
ground, and dangerous to the Oppression a sallow ground.
commonwealth; such is the sin of Engrossery, that hoard up commodities of
all sorts, and so make a dearth, without a scarcity. These are worse then the
devil; for he had some charity in him, laboring to make a plenty, where there
was a scarcity; when he would have had Christ, to turn stones into bread: But
these cormorants cause a scarcity in the midst of plenty, in turning bread
into stones.

They have crafty pates, reaching wits, and large purses: They compass sea and
land, as Christ says, to get all commodities into their hands: And when they
have gotten them, they sell them as they think good, not according to the
quantity of the commodity, but according to the quality of their minds.

Who makes things dear now? not God but devils incarnate, infernal brokers: I
mean, engrossing misers, that swarm about this, and other the like cities. Is
not this oppression? yea, an horrible and cutting oppression, eating up the
young and the damme, and all at a bitte.

Every such engrosser, is a murderer, not with a sword Engrosser a murderer.
of steel, but with a sword of dearth; it is not his hands, but his cruelty
that kills; not his force, but his craft that wounds unto death. Will you see
how he does it? he seeks out for corn, gets it into his garner, pitches so
high a price, that it stretches out the hearts blood of the poor to reach it:
who can but attain to the refuge Amo. 8. 6.
for his sustenance?

Is not this murder? yes, a cruel kind of murder to starve them to death. I
have read of a people that use to feed their parents when they are in age,
with fat meat to choke them: but I never heard of any that did detain
foodel, whereby they might starve the poor. It is true, that Home malus fera
pessima. An evil man is the worst wild beast. And also as the proverb is,
home homini Lupus, man is a wolf unto a man. It is true in these: many have
perished through their cruelty: whose blood they shall answer for.

The engrosser is a thief likewise: for he steals away the corn that should
make the poores-bread; not with Engrosser a thief.
the power of his arm, but by the strength of his purse. He fightes with a
long weapon, that reaches to the four corners of the land, and robbes them in
their own houses before they are aware. If need require, they can strike over
sea, and rob there, rather then their garners shall be empty. These are
dangerous thieves; They steal more in one commodity, then the highway these
in all the year; yet these sit and stare the law in the face, and no man does
anything unto them: where the highway thief that steals for necessity is
trust up: yet these are greater thieves by divine law, and ought of the twain
rather to be executed. But what care these for this? they are too rich to be
hanged; yet they are thieves for all their greatness; it is not their gold
that can buy out their fellonious dealing at the day of Judgment.

Like wise every engrosser is an infidel, not trusting God of his word, which
says, I will never fail nor forsake Engrosser an. infidel.
thee. And Christ says, First seek the kingdom of God, and then all these
things shall be given unto thee. Tush, says the engrosser, shall I depend
upon Gods word? no, one bird in the hand, is worth two in the bush. A dram of
Mammons wealth, is worth a whole once of Gods service. O wretches, condemned of
the very Heathens themselves, Estque dei seeds vbiterra, vbipontus et aer,
et calum, et virtus, superos quid quaerimus vltra?
Jove sits where earth, where air, where sea, and shore,
Where heaven, and virtue is, why seek we more?
I may join with these the inclosers, that steal away The inclosers,
the poor men's commons from them, to make broader their own territories, that
they may dwell alone. Alone indeed, for neither God nor good man, shall keep
them company by their good wills. These join house, to house: and lay field,
to field; whereby. there is almost no piace for the poor man to dwell in: and
very little or no pasture, for their cattle to feed on. And sure if it were
possible, they would leave them no air to breath in. These purchase large
Lord-ships, and goodly monuments, if they would continue: how should that be?
when the first stone of their building, is hewn out of the quarry of
oppression.

Of this company are the covetous Patrons; which are Wicked pauons.
so infected with the golden dropsy, as that their Church doorts will not
open, without a silver key. He that will have a Church living, must speak
words of gold, and also subscribe with a pen of filuer, or else he must go
back again without. Is not this ground of oppression? Yes, a hard ground, and
a hard heart: Durities est hominis peccatum, obduratio indicium (...):
Harduisse of heart is man's sin, hardening of the heart is Gods indgement. And
were not their hearts hardened, they would not deal, with the poor Ministers
as they do: much like the princes of Hanun, which cut off the garments of
David's servants, by the buttocks, and shaued off halse their 1. (...) 1. 12
beards. So do these oppressing Patrons deal with the Ministers; cutting off
halse their livings, before they can get into them, that they have not
sufficient to maintain themselves, with any thin diet, and simple clothes.
No matuell is they live in such penury, when they must pay 300. l. for an
In-come: If I did not know this by experience, I would not have spoken it. I
think these are of the mind of Dionysius, who coming into a Temple, where
images were covered with costly (...), of gold and silver, These (said he),
are too heavy for summer, and too cool for winter: and so taking them away,
clothed them with Lincy-woolcy: These (says he), are colder for Summer, and
warmer for Winter. So deal these with us, thinking a coat of Lincy-woolcy
good enough, if not too good, for us. Much like the custom. which is, as O
doricus affirms, of a people that in their sacrifice, they feed their gods
with the smoke, and eat the meat themselves: So these feed us with the
smoaky refuse of their livings, but eat the chief thereof at their own
tables; that is, they have the corno and hay, and give us the pigge and goose.

With these I set the usurers, that are much like the Usurers a fallow ground.
timber-worme, which to touch is very soft, but has teeth so hard, that it
eats the timber. Cato being asked what it was to lend upon usury, answered,
Qaid hominem occidere, What is it to kill a man. The highway these wonnds not
so deep with his sword, as the usurer does with a piece of paper: for he
strikes home, and hits all sorts of people. The Landlord rackes his rents: The
Farmer inhances his corn: The Tradesman rayseth his wares, and all to pay the
Vulurer. We do not all take use, but I am sure there is none of us all but
pays use. Chrysostom compares Usury to the sting of an Aspe, whose venomous
infection casts the party into a sweet sleep for a time, dispersing so
into every member of his body, that presently he dies: Even so the Usurer
seems sweet for a time, but in the end, the venomous infection thereof will
so run through a man's substance, that all that he has is quickly converted
into debt. Much like a Tartarian soldier, that borrowing five hundredth pieces
of Coin, and keeping the same five years, was constrained to pay seven
thousand back again. This is horrible oppression, and fallow ground that must
be plowed up.

Covetousness is another fallow ground, and must Covetousness a fallow ground.
be new plowed. The covetous wretch has his heart set on gold and silver,
and can speak none other language, but of Mammon. A thing much accounted of:
for, Pecunie obediunt omnia: All things obey to money: Paul says, that
covetousness is Idolatry. It is the Ephesians. 5.
property of Idolatry to steal away the heart of man, yet not so forcible as
gold. Dum vult esse praedo, sitpraeda: Whiles that bes came to a prey, he
becomes a prey: As Hosea says in another kind, Wine and new Hosea 4.
wine: have stolen away their hearts: So the more he drinks, the dryer he
is. Dum sorbit vinum, absorbitur a vino: He drinks up his wine, and his wine
drinks up him. Qui tenet marsupium, tenotur a marsupio: Hoe holds his purse
fast, and his purse holds him fast. O thou hunger of gold, and silver, what
is it not, that thou do compel the hearts of men to buy and sell? says
Tullie. The chariot of Avarice is carried upon four wheels of vice; which
are, Faint courage, Ungentleness, Contempt of God, and Forgetsulnesse of
death: And two horses draw it, Rauine, and Niggardship: To them both is but one
Carter, Desire to have. The Carter drives with a whip of two coards; Appetite
to get, and Care to keep. The devil us a skillful Sophister, auetting the
words of the holy Ghost, turns bread into drink: In the drunkard, no more
our daily bread, but our daily drink: He turns godliness into Avarice in
the covetous, crossing the saying of our Lord, First seek the kingdom of
heaven: but he will have us first to seek the world, and then, if there be
any time to spare, to seek for heaven: This kind of Sophistry has deceived
the world. Plures allicit auaritia, quam peritia: Covetousness inciteth more
men then knowledge does. So sings the world: Quaerenda peounia primum est,
virtus post nummos.
Haec Ianus summus ab imo perdocet:
Haec recinunt iuuenes dictata senesque.
First coin, then virtue, tLs does
Ianus sing:
And these through mouths of youth and age do ring.


This seems sweet to a covetous man, that his heart is so set on
covetousness, that with Esau he will sell his birthright, for a mess of
pottage: And when he values virtue at the highest, it is but at thirty pence,
with Judas. A covetous man is a rebel against GOD, breaking his Commandment,
Thou shall not covet: A traitor to his own soul, and a Exo. 20.
murderer of men. This fallow ground must be plowed up.

The next fallow ground, that I would have you to peruse over, is the
fashion-mongers of our time; I Pride a fallow ground.
mean the sons of pride: to day an Englishman, to morrow a Frenchman, the
third day a Spaniard, then a Turk, and last of all a Devil.

There is another kind of fallow ground: A generation Swearing a fallow ground.
so ill tempered of the four Elements, that it takes and possesses several
parts in them: their hearts all earth: their stomachs all water: their brain
all air, and their tongues all fire, being set on fire, with the fire of Hell:
these are known by their language: (...). 3. 6
There is Prouincia Caelestis: The Kingdoms of heaven: The speech whereof is
Prayer, Praising of God, and speaking of heavenly things: but in this language
they have no skill. There is Prouincia terrestis: the language whereof is
worldly pleasure, riches, honor, and the like; and in this they are good
Scholars. Lastly, there is Prouincia Infernalis: the language whereof is
cursing and blasphemy: and in this they are perfect. Men's mouths are dyed red
with oaths; it is no more news, to hear an oath, then to see the light, yet
God Erod. 20.
will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain: A sin condemned
by God: The law of nature does detestit, and the law of nations did ever
abhor it. But in England he is no man that cannot swear, and that by
wholesale: Children now can swear, before their parents can pray.

Whoredom is grown to be a Trade among us, Whoredom a fallow ground.
as if there were no Law to condemneit, nor Justice, to punish it: A sin
most damnable, forbidden in the Law, and threatued by the Lord: Whoremongers
Heb. 13, 4.
and adulterers he will judge: A sin punished by death in the Law: but now
upon the back, if not too often, by the purse: And so long as they have an
impudent face, and a large purse, well lined, they will undergo it well
enough.

Now seeing that this kind of punishment will do no good, but that still they
will go neighing after Iere. 5. 18.
their neighbors wives, and assemble themselves in harlots houses. Consider
yet Gods judgments on this kind of offense; For I will be a swift witness
against the adulterer, says the Lord. See it so performed: David for his
adultery with Bathsheba, (when she Matthew. 3.
was the wife of Vriah,) had his house punished with the sword: The child
begotten in adultery died; and his own wives ravished by his own son;
Amnon: murdered, and Absalom hanged by the hair. Look we into the
Histories, and there is the like: Rodoaldus, (sometime King of Lombardie) was
suddenly stricken dead in the act of adultery. It is recorded also of
Alrichbertus, King of France, that he died suddenly, with a whore in his
arms. With many other like examples, both in divine and humane Histories.

To that end you may know what adultery is, mark these branches following.

First, it is committed in thought, when the mind runs Adultery in thought.
after uncleanness. This, by our Lord, is called adultery, whose word we may
take for current: and from this kind of adultery there are few free: Many are
restrained from the outward act, partly by outward shame, and partly sor sear
of pumshment. This is a secret kind Matthew. 5.
of adultery, which no man (ees, but God: For the heart of man is deep, and
who kuowes it, any ithouah choker lib: yet I the Lord searches the beart;
finding out this (...)
socret adultery, which there seldom stays, but as Lis minimis verbis,
interdum maxima crescit: Of small words sometime arises great contention.
Even so of inward motion, arises carnal copulation; Ex paruo initio, res
magna oritur: From a small biginning arises a great matter.

Secondly, it is committed in the behavior, countenance, Adultery in looks.
looks, and attire, which is so reckoned, by the Lord himself. Thou have a
whorish behavior, Ne dicatis vos habere animos pudices, sihabeatis oculot
impudicos, says Augustine: Say not that you have modest and chaste affections,
if you have unchaste, and wanton eyes. Habitus mentis, in corporis statu
cernitur: The condition of the mind, is seen in the state of the bodies, as
Ambrose observes. There is a lively example of this, of Tamer, that attired her
self in some wanton attire, Genesis 38.
whereby she drew Judah to sin, whereby it appears, that wanton habit is a
lodestone to draw men to lust. Geradas of Lacedemonia being demanded of his
host, what pain adulterers suffered at Sparta: made this answer. O hospes,
nemo apud nos fit adulter, neque fieripotest. O host, there is none adulterer
among us: neither can there be any; for we never come at any Comedies, or any
other Plays: nor in company with any wanton attired persons. Hereby showing,
that this wanton gefture is a kind of adultery. Sophocles beholding the
beauty and behavior of one, was rebuked of Pericles for it, in this manner.
Praetoris est non solum manus a pecuniae lucro, sed etiam occulos a libidino so
aspectu continentes habere. Not only the bands of him that is a Praetor, ought
to refrain from lucre of money: but also the eyes to be continent from wanton
looks.

Yet this kind of adultery, is common with us of this land; Such painting the
face, laying out the breasts, frisling abroad the hair, and casting aside the
eye: All which wanton tricks, are no less then the sin of adultery. De
adulterio vultiu, meditantur adulterium castitatis. By the adulterating of the
countenance, they meditate the adulterating of chastity, says Ambrose.

Thirdly, adultery is committed by wanton words, luxurious songs, unchaste
speeches, and filthy ribaldrie: Adultery in words.
whereby the hearers are infected, and their own lust inflamed. All which are
condemned by the Apostle, and from which he much dehorteth. Let no corrupt
communication proceeds out of your mouths. And in the 3. Ephesians, Ephesians. 4.
29.
ver. 4. he says the like. Neither filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor
lesting: which are things not comely.

The last branch of this adultery, is carnal copulation, the highest step of
this sin.

There is yet another field sown with the seed of vipers: Brokers that live
by extortion, lending money upon Brokers a bad fallow ground.
pawnes; whose customs are monstrous, and such, as to find among men
improbable, and I think, among Christians impossible. Only I suppose, among
devils incarnate, the like is to be found. I have heard them called the devils
nearest kinsemen, and so, as verily I believe it. The vermin of the earth, the
corruption of nature, and bred like monsters. It is not long time since this
viperous generation sprung up: I hope authority will take an order to cut them
down before it be long. If I should report unto you their common usury, you
would hardly believe me; And yet, if I should not tell you I should offend.
What I speak is not by relation, but by mine own experience.

Their accustomed manner in their trading is, after a good pawn delivered, to
take for interest, eight pence a month for a pound: their bill of sale which
is four perce to them, must be renewed every month: so that the use of
twenty shillings, comes to thirteen shillings by the year: So after this
reckoning, an hundred pound, comes to threescore and fine pound in the year.
This is monstrous extortion: besides this, the Register has a fee which the
borrower pays: and commonly they lend but halse the worth, and gain the rest
to themselves in the forseit of the pawn. Are not these then the vipers of the
world, goawing off the flesh from the poor man's boanes, rob their estates,
grind their saces, and suck their bloods? No matuell if there be so many
poor in this land, when Salirbury-plaine is come so near.

I will not accuse them, though I shroudly misdoubt them, that they are little
better then thieves. For what difference is between them that break the
house, and those that receive the goods? the one sort robbes privately, and the
other robbes publicly; or, as I may say, the one by craft, and the other by
violence and force. God concluded, that the image-maker, and the
image-worshipper, were both as one: and I think there is no more difference
between a thief, and a Broker, then (as Seneca says) is between a liar, and
a flatterer; both speak an untruth. To use the Logitians rule: Whatsoever is
the cause of a cause, is also the cause of the thing caused.

The Broker makes sale of clothes, and the thiese seeing such good sale of
clothes, makes the more have to steal, as the proverb is: If there were none
to receive, there would be none to steal. What makes the thiese to steal so
sast? Because he can presently put them off to the Broker, and the Broker can
as quickly metamorphise them into some other fashion. And now tell me whether
the broker be not a thiese? Yes sure, though not equally palpable, yet equally
culpable thieves. Hence came that saying: A crafty knave needs no Broker: as
if a Broker were worse then a knave. Then judge you what he is.

Some of them are gone to Tyborne; a fruit of their calling: And I wish the
rest to give over, or amend, lest they follow after.

There is yet another tough piece of fallow ground, and much ado there will
beeto plow it up, because it Walking in the Exchange a fallow ground.
brings such profit as it does, being as it is. This field is sown with no
less then beaten Satin, whether merchants or no, I cannot tell, but I am sure
they are Exchange-walkers, that walk there for a booty, to exchange their
souls for a little of Mammons inheritance; that a man may almost with as much
case, go through Westminster Hall gate in the Term time, as through the
Exchange, between the hours of eleven and twelve, on the Sabbath day. Is
this a time to receive vineyards, fields, money, and garments. Is this a time
to talk of 2. King 5. 26.
your (...), to hearken after news, exchange commodities, and confer of
worldly matters? Surely if it be death to steal from man, it is damnable to
reb God: for the thest is so much the greater, by how (...) God is greater then
man, and spiritual riches, better then temporal.

Let David be brought forth for the condemnation of these, which concludes,
that it is a greater sin to rob a poor man then a rich. Where David
concludes, that he that had stolen the poor man's sheppe (...) Sam. 12.
should die, you may apply it thus. Man is rich, God is poor: for man has six
days allowed him, God but one; what a shame is it then to steal that one day
from God? and to appropriate the same to our own pleasure. O great ingratitude
that cannot be content to allow that unto God, which cost thee nothing; what
would thou do, if it should cost the somewhat? having six days, can
thou not find in thy heart to let God have that one day, that he has
reserved to himself. What would thou do? if God had taken six to
himself, and given thee but one: yet even then it had been a sin, to have
taken any part of those days from him: hen much more now.

Sin is tolerable in none, and less tolerable in some. The poor has no
law to profane the Saboath, much less the rich: These are rich, if not too
rich; and what need have velvet coats to steal the Saboath, or any part
thereof from God? These are silken thieves, and rather then they will abate any
thing, the Saboath shall go to wrack, God shall be dishonored, and his word
despised.

If I should tell you that there were man slaughter every Saboath day in the
Exchange, you would abhor it: but I say unto you there is worse, for the
Saboath day is broken, a greater sin then murder.

But these will appologise for themselves, that it is after they have been at
the Church: well, grant it be so: yet tell me whether that be not a breach of
the law to wound a man, though he kill him not: or to cousen by craft, though
he rob not by force: or to lust, though the adultery be not committed. So
then I conclude, though we profane not the whole day: yet if any part thereof
be profaned, it is a breach of the precept. And that it may appear so: turn
your considerations to that of Esaias. Wherein the Lord teaches us Esau 58. 13.
two things, 1. negatiuely, a. affirmatively. Negatiuely, he does dehort us
from two things: the one is external, that we should do no actions belonging
to this temporal life, either of profit, or of pleasure, saying: Turn away
thy foot and speak no vain word. Thus as he does prohibit the external
profanation of it, so he does the internal profanation also: Namely, that
we should not think our own thoughts. And affirmatively, he commands the
sanctifying of the Saboath: saying, if thou turn away thy foot one the
Saboath, from doing thine own will on mine holy day, and call the Saboah a
delight to consecrate it, as glorious to the Lord, and shall honor him, not
doing thine own ways, nor seeking thine own will, nor speaking a vain word.
That you may see the greatness of this sin: note how the holy Ghost makes this
the mark and period of a wicked man. Then the (...). 26. 35.
land shall enjoy her Saboaths. Hereby showing that the wicked are ripe in
their wickedness, when they begin to profane the Saboath. With this compare
the saying of Amos. Though they were wicked and cruel, and greedy after gain
in the selling of their wares: yet would (...). 8. 3.
they stay till the Saboath was past. Hereby showing that the breach of the
Saboath, is a greater sin, then the destruction of the poor. You will say
that these are strangers that have their inambulation in the Exchange. Well it
is so, and what of that? shall they have a tolleration thereby to profane the
Saboath? Remember that God made one law for the Jew and the stranger: and by
my consent, if they will not be obedient to our Leuit. 24. 22.
law, they should have no benefit by it: but I must leave them to authority.

I have almost done with the subject, there is but one To speak against
authority a fallow ground.
field more. But how is my heart oppressed with sudden passion, to transport
you into this field? sown with a show of purity, a hot profession of
religion, and I hope also with uprightness of heart: yet there are dangerous
tears of murmuration, that are ready to choke this good corn: and of
necessity must be plowed up. I speak not this to dull the edge of your
profession: but rather to sharpen your love, and to ripen your judgment in
true godliness. For non auditores sed factores legis, not the hearers of the
law shall be justified, but the doers: nec eadem profitentes, sed eidem
obedientes: not professors, but performers shall be glorified. Think not that
I am so far void of charity to condemn these as hypocritical mocke-gods, that
altogether run out of the way: but step aside with one foot; whereas they
should turn neither to the right hand, nor to the left. Give me leave to say,
as the holy Ghost says to the Church of Ephesus. I know thy works, thy
labor, and thy patience, and thy faith. I know these have the fruit of the
spirit: Revel. 2. 2.
they are diligent to hear the word, conscionable to keep the Sabbath: using
holy exercises in their samilies, and having a great measure of prayer: the
Lord increase it an hundred fould more then it is. Yet I have somewhat against
them; They are too unnatural children, speaking evil of their mother, and
those that are in authority: darting forth male volent speeches, slanders, and
imputations against the governors, and government, both of our Church, and
commonwealth: and disgorging themselves, to the great scandal of Religion,
and grief to our Clergy.

Shall the poison of aspes be found under your tongues? you that should defend
us by your speech, to offend us in your words: One blow of you Israelites,
wounds us deeper then an hundred stripes of the Edomites. If it had been our
enemines that had done us this dishonor, we could well have endured the same.
But it is you, O professors I that have lifted up your hills against us. O let
me say as God said by Hosea: Though Israel Hos. 4. 15.
play the Harlot, yet let not Judah sin. Though Papists seek to blow us up,
the Brownistes to forsake us, the Devil to tempt us, the flesh to rebel, the
world to allure, and the wicked to perfecute us: yet let not zealous professors
revile us; let not Iehosephat join with Ahab, and take part with the enemies
of the Lord, least a curse follow. 2. Chro. (...).


It seems strange unto me, to see how our endeavors are rewarded with
ungratefulness. Be we learned, eloquent, powerful, zealous, painful, and
godly in life, yet all our labors are requited with a depart from us, we know
you not: Why? Because we are conformalists; so that one herb of this kind,
shall spoil the whole pot of pottage. Our conformity to established orders,
shall dull the edge of our endeavors. I know that you will cut and slash me in
your censures, as meat to the cauldron: yet, Dicatur veritas rumpatur inuidia:
Let truth be spoken, and envy burst her gall.

We had need to do by, and with you, as the little children did with Minerua,
the goddess (so esteemed by them) that ruled the memory, the storehouse of
discipline, and of wisdom: which children, at this Mineruaes feast, used to
carry new years gifts to their masters: making play days of the same, to the
service of the Goddess; whereof came this verse of Ovid, Pallida nunc pueri
tenerique or note puella,
qui been placarit, Pallida doctus erit.
Now Pallas Temple, youth and damsels fill:
He that can please her, shall have mit at will.
Desire we your good commendations e yea; we would: but then we must show our
selves refractary to established orders: wrangle about forms and shadows, and
shoot squibbes in the ayreat those that are in authority: then we shall please
you, and our doctrine shall be embraced: Otherwise we cannot purchase your
favor; for your Motto is, We love such preaching. But let us see if there be
any just cause of your calumniations? which if there be, it will appear,
either in doctrine, discipline, or manners.

First, that it may appear that there is none in doctrine, observe these three
points following: First, that Our doctrine pure.
it must be from God: that is, The doctrine upon which we build our salvation,
must be such as God has preseribed unto his Church: For, Cursed are they that
add thereunto, as is manifest by our Lord: In vain they Matthew. 15. 9.
worship me, teaching for doctrine the precepts of men's yea, if an Angel should
preach any other doctrine then that Gal. 1. 9.
which God has delivered, let him be accursed. No doctrine goes current in
the balance of the Sanctuary, but such as comes fro the bosom of the Father.
Then judge, if the Church of England does err, or no, fro this point, namely,
retaining that doctrine, and only that doctrine which God has prescribed. We
do not like the Papists, teach you to build your faith upon unwritten verities.

Secondly, as it must be from God, so it must be complete: that is, the whole
will of God must be used in the Church: For the whole Scripture is given by
inspiration of God, and is profitable to teach, to convince, and to instruct 1.
Tim. 3. 16.
in righteousness. That the man of God may be perfect to every good work.
For, not one syllable of Gods word must be kept back. And in this, the Church
of England clears her self, as in the former, not keeping back any part of
Gods word from the Church, but freely teaching, and giving liberty unto
prosessors; wholly to enjoy it. Indeed if we should with the Church of Rome,
lock up the word in an unknown tongue, or steal part out from it, as they
do the second Commandment, we were then justly to be accused.

Thirdly and lastly, it must be rightly ordered, which the Church of England
observes: For wherein does our Church offend in this? For we teach Gods love,
the primary cause of our salvation, Christ his obedience and suffering to be
the material cause, and faith the instrumental cause. Again, we teach first
Election, then Calling, then Justification, then Glorification.

Therefore if there be the same which God commanded, and all that God
commanded, and also ordered according to his will; then the Church of England
is not to be condemned, nor refused, for any thing in the doctrine thereof.

Seeing you have no just cause to complain in regard of doctrine: let us see
if there be any in the discipline, and government thereof. To that end, that
we may perceive this point the clearer, we will observe the discipline in
three branches; first, divine, secondly, necessary, thirdly, indifferent.

First, divine government of discipline, is such an order Divine Discipline.
as is set down by God in his word, as Prayer, the Sacraments, the
excommunicating of wicked persons, gathering of alms for the poor, and
Ministers, and Elders for the government of the Congregation etc. All which
are practiced in the Church of England: yet they object, that the Sacraments
are not observed as Christ instituted them: For there is added the surplesse,
kneeling, the cross, and the like. But to these I answer thus: First, the
time when Christ commanded, or ordained these in the Church, the Church was
not then established, and confined to any place; and therefore orders could not
be ordained, before the Church was established. Secondly, they may be answered
thus; Christ did not say, as often as ye observe these orders, ye show the
Lords death, but, as often as ye eat of this bread, and drink of this cup;
setting down the subject, and leaving the ordering of it unto the Church,
touching outward ceremonies. Thirdly, it may be answered thus: The Church has
not appointed these ceremonies, as any parts of the Sacraments: For then they
could not be Sacraments, but when they should be so delivered and so
received. But now to show that these outward ceremonies are no parts of the
Sacraments: They are administered, sometimes with them, and sometimes without
them, at the discretion of the Ministers. And besides this observe, that when
any are of this opinion, that these are not lawful Sacraments without the
ceremonies, that then these are denied the ceremonies, though they hauc the
Sacrament, to the end they may know these ceremonies to be no part of divine
discipline; for if they were, they could not, nor might be omitted.

In the next place, behold that discipline which we call necessary; that is,
the use of such things as God has Necessary discipline.
not commanded, and yet they are needful, and warrantable by consequence from
the word of God: As for example; we have no commandment for the manner or for
me of consecrating the Sacraments; yet it is necessary, that they should be
consecrated. Moreover, what commandment have we for a form of prayer? yet it
is necessary, otherwise there would be a confusion in the Church. Again, what
commandment have we for the burial of the dead? yet it is necessary, that
there should be some form used, that there may be some distinction between
the burial of Christians and dogs. Of this nature are, Te Deum laudamus,
after the first Lesson; and Benedictus after the second: And likewise
Magnificat, and Nunc demittis: Also the Collects, and Churching of women, and
the like: which albeit, God has not set down by way of precept: yet they are
needful and cannot be omitted.

Lastly, behold that discipline, which we call indifferent, Indifferent,
discipline.
that is: the use of such things as may be used, or omitted, it being no virtue
to use them, nor any vice to omit them. Such are the Surplesse, the Cross in
Baptism, kneeling at the Communion; wearing a white cloth to be Churched, and
sestiuall days; which things may be done, or omitted, as occasions may serve:
The Church of England does not like the Church of Rome, tie the conscience to
the observing hereof: yet because the King, and authority has set these
down, I think it fit that they should be observed.

But all this is nothing to answer them, mine appologie is fillipped back
with contempt, and they dispute: but not by reason, yet strong, victorious, and
full of desperate valor, even as Saul reasoned with David.

Every traitor ought to be put to death,
But David is a traitor. Ergo,
David ought to be put to death.
Well, David grants the proposition, that every traltor deserves to dye: but
denies the assumption, saying, I am no traitor, and therefore not to be put to
death.

But now Saul proves it by imagination, takes his sphere, throws it at
David: an invincible argument.

Thus deal our brethren the professors with us, arguing in this same manner.

All Idolaters ought to be detested:
But the Church of England is Idolatrons, Ergo
All the members of the Church of England,
Ought to be detested.
Well, we do not much stand upon the mayor, but altogether, and truly deny
the minor: and say for our selves, that we are no idolaters, and therefore
ought not to be detested: yet they will prove it: whet their tongues open their
mouths, and shoot sharp headed arrows at us. Thus wounding deeper with
their bitter words, then the highway thiese does with his sword: an
unanswerable syllogism. This is for our persons: they have another for our
ceremonies, thus.

All the shows of idolatry, are to be avoided.
But the ceremonies of the Church of England are idelatrous. Ergo,
All the ceremonies of the Church of England, are to be avoided.
We answer to this as to the former, that we stand not upon the mayor, but
altogether deny the minor, that the ceremonies of our Church are no shows of
idolatry, therefore ought not to be avoided. But they prove it, reject them,
fly out of the Church, pick out teachers for their humors, and of their own
mind, nisi quod ip si faciunt nihil recte existimant, they think nothing well
done, but what they do themselves: And these think nothing rightly taught,
but such as these teachers teach.

But I think I speak words in value, for it is a hard matter to draw these
to a consormitle. Therefore let us come to take notice of the manners of the
Church of England. And here a question is to be answered, whether a general
disobedience, or particular, makes a Church to be no Church? And answer is;
not a particular, but a general disobedience proved by Scripture: Unto the
Angel of the Church of Thyatyra, a Church you Revel. 2.
see by the testimony of God: yet thou have them that maintains the woman lez.
ibel; yet a Church. The like is 1. Cor. 1. 1. 5. 1. and 6. 6.
seen by the Carinthians, where their sin is noted out, first in him that
had his fathers wife: and secondly, in contention, and in going to law one
with another: and yet a Church, as it appeates by the words of Paul in the
beginning of his Book. Was Thyatyra a Church; and among the Corinthians a
Church? and yet had private falues: and shall the Church of England be denied
to be a Church, because there are found winked ones among? I know that there
are many wicked ones: yet I am assured, that there are thousands that conform
themselves to the Church of England, that are right Nathaniels, In whom there
is no guile.

And with judgment make well the types of the Church from time to time; Adams
family a type, yet a Caine in it: Noyes family a type, yet a Caine in it:
Abraham's family a type, yet an Ismael in it: David's family a type, yet an
Ismael in it; And when Christ was come, in his family a Judas. Was the Church
before Christ, not without some wicked persons? was Christ his family, not
without a Devil? And shall we look now to have the Church free? no, the
tares shall grow with the good corn, to the end of the world.

But these object further, that the Church of England knowing these to be
wicked, suffers them not with standing to be in the company of the Saints. The
Mayor of this is false: for the 26. Cannon commands, That none offenders be
made pertakers of the ordinances of God. The Miner I fear is (...) that some
wicked persons are admitted to the holy ordinance of God: yet impute it not
unto the law, but rather to the corruption of such Midisters and
Churchwardens, at so suffer them: Or if such persons be presented, and yet not
reformed: then impute it to the inferior officers, and not to the Governors,
and institutions of the Church: And though it be so in some Congregations,
judge it not therefore to be in all: Search, and ye shall find to the
contrary. Time will not suffer me to dwell long here: therefore let me in a
word persuade you, to join your selves unto the Church of England, in regard
of the danger that will follow. For while we fall to striving about things
indifferent, the people fall to doubting, what they shall hold, what they shall
believe: and to whom they shall lean, Thus, that which is but matter of
circumstance, is called into question, while matter of substance, I fear is
let go. So busy we are about the question de modo, that the Devil easily
steals the matter of Religion out of our hearts.

And do not our adversaries adversaries, to see us together by the ears for
the leaves, that they in the mean time may steal away the fruit from us. and
does not this debatelye as a stumbling block, to hinder others from embracing
the truth: which are restrained by the variety of sects that are among us. It
is recorded of a Heathen man which said, I would feign be a Christian: sed
rescio cui adheream, multae sunt inter vo spugnae, singuli tamen dicunt, Ego
verum dico: but I know not whom to follow; there are so many differences; and
contentions among you; and every one of your say: I am in the right; and yet
there is but one Truth, one Father, one Faith, one Baptism, and one body.

And this proceeding, has not bin without some danger The end of murmurers.
to themselves: for I know by mine own experience, some that have been first
members of our Church, after that of the more purer sort, then Brownists, and
lastly came to be Anabaptists. It is just with God, seeing they will disobey
authority and not obey the truth, that they should be deluded by falsehoods.

Besides, I have well considered, that this proceeding Murmuring and
sanctification hardly in one man.
has been accounted of God as a sin, to murmr and to speak evil of those
that are in authority. (...) to mind what the Apostle faith. There is (...)
Agreement between Christ and Belial; sin and grace cannot reign together in
one place: for it is not the manner of Gods Spirit, to sanctify one part, and
leave another unsanctified; to work faith in one part, and to suffer the sin
of murmuration to remain in another part: Therefore I make some doubt, whether
such have any part reformed, in who^ still this murmuration remains
unreformed. And that ye may understand that God does not sanctify a part, but
the whole, consider what the Apostle faith. Now the very God of peace sanctify
you; (not in part) but thorowout, spirit, soul and body. When Christ came to
cast out the devils out of the man, of a legion, he left not one. These. 5. 23.
When God by his Spirit sanctifies a man, he does it not by parts, but wholly.
We know it is a point good in law, that if a man keep possession in one (...)
of the house, though he keep it not in all, yet is (...) possession. So is it
in this, though Satan take not up all, yet if he possess any it is current,
and will pass at the bar of Gods judgment seat.

Then with wisdom and judgment consider, that Murmuring a great sin.
this murmuring is no small sin, for it is both against the word of God, and
against the work of Gods Spirit: Jude in his Epistle sets it out in his
colors; These are murmurers, complainers, walking after their owns lusts,
whose mouths speak proud things, having (...) persons in admiration. And is
it not thus, with these? Do not these murmr against our Elders, and all
well-willers unto them: Have not these, men's persons in admiration? Do they
not receive the word more for the person that teaches, then for the word that
is taught, I have, and do still see it by experience.

(...) which are (...) and who are (...) to govern Ministers Who ought to
govern the Church.
then they that are Ministers themselves, which have experience of the same
calling, profession and vocation.

Secondly, in regard of the Doctrine which is in the Church, who can better
judge of the Truth, of Errors, of Schisms, of Sects and the like? As one
says, Quod (...) post elect us qui caeteris praeponeretur in sohismat is
factum estremedium: After one is elected, which should be (...) over the rest,
it was done to be a remedy against Schisms.

And as it is answered by consequence, so it is by Scripture that governors of
the Church ought to be of the Clergy. Therefore if you please to look into
the end of (...) Epistle to Titut, you shall find him a Bishop, and the
Epistle to be directed unto him thus, (...), To Titus the first Bishop of the
Church of Crete. Now that ye may know, that Creete is not one city, make
inquiry of trauailers, and read Histories, if you dare not believe my report.
This Creete was an Island, lying between Peloponesu and the Rhodes: It has on
the North part, the sea AEgeum, and Cretense: on the South, the sea of Egypt,
and Affricke: It is now called (...): It had in it an hundred cities, whereupon
it was called Centabolts, This Creta is now under the Purkes dominion: here
Titus was head governor and Bishop. So though Titus be not called an Elder,
yet you see he is a Bishop and governor of the Church in Creta.

Now let us see if we can make a Bishop and an Elder A Bishop and an Elder all
one.
both one, and then I hope you will be answered: which will appear by
comparing those two verses together, in the first Chapter: In the fifth verse, a
governor, or a teacher is called (...), a Presbyter: and in the seventh verse
the same is called (...), a Bishop: whereby it appears, that is Bishop and an
Elder is one and the same. Now then, join this with that of Paul to Timothy,
O and you shall see, that (...) one and the same with (...). (...). Tim. 5. 17.


So then it is manifest, that the Clergy ought to be governors in the
Church. Neither am I ignorant that Episcopus is a name given to all Ministers;
yet more usually applied unto the Elders. For, Episcopum and Presbyterum, vnum
esse, aliud nomen offecij, (...) Bishop and a Presbyter are both one; the one
is a name of office, and the other is a name of age. I will conclude with this
exhortation, Let not any sacrifice turn mercy out of doors, nor the fire of
zeal dry up the dew of charity: Let it not be said of you, as Historians
record of the dogs that ran by the river Nilus, not vouchsafing to give a
lap at the water: So live not you among us, not once submitting your selves to
order, nor speaking well of the governors.

The next thing that follows in order to be handled is the property of the
Work.
PLow up your fallow ground. The difference between the English and the
Original is this: For our fallow ground in the English, the Original has it
new fallow: For so the word niru does import: And likewise the vulgar Latin
has it, innouate, renew ye: for the (...)
mind is to be altered and changed: And this does fitly agree with the word
(...), which imports properly a change of the mind, or understanding. And
add hereunto the word (...), an alteration of the will and purpose. The sum
of it being an exhortation unto Icr. 4. 4.
repentance, as does appear by that of Jeremy, himole (...)
Lahouah: Be circumcised to the Lord, uehasiru gnareloth lebabcem, and take
away the foreskin of you hearts; that is, the corruption of them: which Paul
expounds to be true conversion unto God, saying, He is not a Jew which is one
outward, neither is that (...) Romans 2. 29.
which is outward, in the flesh, but he is a Jew which is one within, (...);
and the circumcision of the heart in the spirit, not the letter, whose praise
is not of man but of God. And Joel, uekirgnu lebabcem, Joel. 1. 13.
Rent your hearts: And our Prophet here, calls it a (...)
plowing: All which do show unto us, that the heart must be torn up by
repentance; and contrition, as the plow teareth up the ground. This was the end
that Peter aimed at in his sermon, (when he said) (...), Repent therefore: This
he said, that the consideration of Act. 3. 19.
their former act in the murdering of Christ, might rent their hearts, as the
plow does the earth. Poenitentia est verus dolor de offensa in Deum: Repentance
is a true sorrow for our offense toward God. For it is meet that those, who
rent God from their hearts by sin, should rent sin from their hearts, by
true repentance.

There is no small resemblance between the plowing up of this terrene ground,
and the heart: observe, and you shall find them agreeing in these things, 1.
The plow it cuts and tears the earth, one piece from another, 2. It lays open
the inward parts of the earth, discovering the roots within the ground, 3. The
turning up of the earth, causes the weeds to dye and perish, 4. It makes the
mould more tender, and more apt to receive the seed.

Now behold the like in the spiritual plowe. First, as Sin is to be
discovered in the heirt.
the plow lays open and discouers the roots within the ground: in like
manner, does this plowe discover the weeds of sin unto us: for there must be
Agnitio peccati, ct irae Dei; The knowledge of sin, and of the wrath of God.
This knowledge is so needful, that without it, we never flee from sin:
witness that saying of Paul: I had not known sin, but by the law: for I
had not known sin, except the law had said, Thou shall not lust. Romans 7. 7.
By which it appears, that by the judgment of Paul, concupiscence was no
sin, and therefore he in a happy, and blessed estate, as he says in the 9,
verse: judging himself to be alive; and therefore sarte from repentance for
his concupiscence, because he did not see it to be a sin: But when the
knowledge of sin came by the Commandment, then he rent his heart with
contrition, verse. 10. And as he found this in himself, so he commands it unto
others, instructing them to meekness, that are contrary minded: proouing, if
God at any (...). Tim. 2. 26.
time will give them repentance, that they may come to the knowledge of the
truth. The like course Peter took with the Jews, to make their sins
appear unto them, that so he might draw them to repentance, which he Act. 3.
3. 17.
could not have done without the sight of sin: for the whole need no.
Physician says Christ.

No man will seek to the Physician, before he feel his disease: no man will
repent, before he believes himself to be a sinner. Nemofacit Legem, nisi qui
credit Legi. No man does the Law, but he that believes the Law, says
Ambrose. Who will grieve for his sin, before he sees that he has sinned?
In this sense a man may say, as the Eunuch said (when Philip asked him, if he
knew what he read) How can I without a guide: So may we Act. 8. 3.
well say: how shall sinners repent, before they know their sin?

Therefore the counsel of Jeremy is to be followed: Let us search, and try
our ways, to find out our sins: for he that hides his sin, shall not
prosper: but he that Lamen. 3. 40.
confesses them, shall have mercy. The way to get pardon of sin: is first to
know them, 2. to repent for them. Prou. 28. 13.


This is the first effect of the plowe to discover our sins.

To have an acknowledgement of sin: these things are requisite.

First, a skill in the word of God: for there he has read a Lecture unto us,
both of good, and evil: sin, and virtue, distinguishing the one, from the
other, and painting them both out in their several colors. For that is it
that is able to make it man wise unto salvation David asking this question of
God: Wherewith shall a 2. Sam. 3. 15.
man redress his ways? Answer is made. By taking heed unto thy word; for
nothing does make sin manifest, what it is, but only Gods word. Psa. 119. 9:


The Devil can, but he will not. Sin is the law of his kingdom, whereby it
is governed: and therefore this is to be observed, that the Devil never
taughtman to practice any thing but sin: as witnesses the word of God; and
therefore far from making sin known unto us. The like proof you may have
out of History, as Augustine notes. Does Paganorum nunquam been uiuendi,
sanxisse doctrinam. Those Gods of the Pagans never established the doctrine of
living well: for they never had care of those Cities, that gave them divine
honor.

And as the Devil can and will not, so nature is blind and cannot: Therefore
if the blind, lead the blind: they both fall into the ditch. There is a kind
of Sympathy, between sin, and nature: only the word of God can do it.

The second thing that is necessary for the acknowledgement of sin, is the
illumination of Gods spirit, to work true understanding, and judgment in us.
Paul Ephesians. 1. 18.
prays, that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, that father of glory, might
give unto us the spirit of wisdom: that the eyes of our understanding might
be onlightened, that we might know what the hope is of his calling, and what
the riches of his glorious inheritance is in his Saints: and what is the
exceeding greatness of his power toward us. So that it is grace that gives us
true understanding, to judge between sin, and virtue. It is not the
Preachers voice that serves the turn. Non verbis hominis fit, vt intelligatur
verbum Dei, facit deus vt intelligatis. The words of man, cannot make man to
understand the word of God: but it is God that makes them to understand.
Hereunto tend the words of Christ. I will send the holy Ioh. 16. 9.
Ghost, and he shall reprove the world for sin: no man sees sin in
others, nor in himself that he should reprove it, but by the spirit.

The third thing necessary, whereby we may come to the acknowledgement of
sin, is a diligene searching, into our selves, and an examination of our
actions; as David says, I have considered my ways, and (...) my Psa. 119.
feet into thy testimonies: for it is not enough for us to consider sin in
others, as Horac says, Cur in amicorum vitium, tam cernis acutum?
Quamaut aquila aut sorpous Epidarlins?
Why do thou into thy friends ill cariageprie?
With a quick Eagles, or a serpent eye?
No, let the eyes of our understanding be looking into our selves, as they
said to David; See to thine own house, O David: So I say to thine own heart,
O Christian, to find out thy particular sins. Thus you see that the
knowledge of sin is needful, and you see also how to come to the knowledge
thereof.

Now having seen, how the spiritual and terrene Rent the hear.
plow do agree, in the first part; let us come unto the second, which is, how
the, terreno plow, does tear, and rent the ground: So the spiritual plow
teareth up the soul, that there is dolor propten peccatum, and offensum Deum,
A sorrow for sin and for offending God: wherein the heart is, exceedingly
grieved; insomuch that no man can express the sorrow thereof: For, awounded
spirit who can bear? (says the wiseman) and a sorrowful mind Pro. 17. 22.
dries up the boanes: And yet this wounded spirit, and sorrowful mind, we
must endure: For the godly heart is never void; Vuohospite recedoute, alius
statim subintrat: One guest being gone, another straight comes in. Thus he is
vexed, that is to say, haled, and hurried by strong and violent force.

Of which, Augustine says, Nihil est miserius misere, non miser ante seipsum:
nothing is more miserable then a miserable soul, not to comprehend her (...)
misery. O great is the sorrow of such a plowed soul: That as Barnard says,
Si msipsum (...) speico, (...) Si inspecio me ipsum fere non quaeo: If I look
not into my self, I know not my self: If I look into my self I cannot
endure my self: So that they say with David, Out of the deep I cried unto the
Lord. And this is the state of the Psa. 130. 1.
poor penitent soul.

The consideration hereof teaches us, that the dolor of heart is no true mark
of reprobation, for then God would not exhort hereunto, as here he does. Sorrow
is the door into joy and happiness: for, If sin by repentance be not
presently done away, by the weight it will draw a man to more sin: Therefore
the only way, to keep us from sinning, is to repent of our former iniquity:
for a wicked use is hardly abolished. Repent, and thou shall be free from it;
but before thou can have joy in the holy Ghost, first thou must undergo the
smart of repentance.

Qui'cupit opt atam, cur su contingere metam,
Multa tulit, facirque, miser, sudauit, and alsit.
He that desires first to touch the mark, takes much pains sweateth
abundantly, and runs exceeding swiftly.

Let us therefore be wail our sins, that ought to be bewailed: great sins
require great lamentation, sweet meat must have sower sauce: Therefore let us
be as prone to lamentation, as we have been prone to sin. Come let us water
our hearts with the salt tears of contrition, and sweep them with the broomes
of hearty sorrow.

Here give me leave, not to let this point pass in obscurity, nor the soul in
doubtfulnesse: Sorrow is common both to the good and bad: therefore I will show
the difference; so then be judges of your own estate.

First, they differ in causa impulsiua, in the impulsive The sorrow of the good
and wicked, how they differ.
cause, of this sorrow in both. The wicked are grieved, Non propter offensum
Deum, Not for offending God, as the Godly are; but, tantum propter poenam: but
for the punishment. The one greeues, because he does offend God, and dishonor
him: The other greeues for the judgments of God, that are like to come upon
him.

Secondly, they differ, in causa efficiente, In the efficient cause: which
breeds sort owin both. The wicked torment themselves, ex diffidentia, and
desperations: from distrust, and desperation; casting themselves off from God
and his promises: but the godly they mourn and grieve Ex fide, sin fiduoia,
misericordiae (...): From faith and confidence in the mercy of God: feeling
some sweetness in their hearts of the same.

Thirdly, they differ, In ipsaforma, In the form it self: The grief of the
godly is, Conuersio ad Deum a diabolo a peccatis, and anatura veteri: A
conversion vnio God, from the devil, from sin, and from the old man; They come
more and more unto God: the more they sorrow, the nearer they are unto the
Lord, and surther from Satan, sin, and the flesh. But the sorrow of the
wicked is, Auersio a Deo, adipsum diabolum: A turning from God unto the devil
himself: flying from the Lord, crying to the hills and mountains, Fall on us
and cover us from that wrathful judge.

Fourthly, they differ, Ineffectu, In the effect: In the godly, sequitur noua
obedientia, follows: new obedience: For, They crucify the flesh, with the
lusts and effections. thereof. But in the sorrow of the wicked, Non sequitur
(...). 5. 24.
noua obedientia: follows no new obedience: They still continue in their sin
and wicked ways.

Thus you see the difference of this sorrow and contrition. Be now judges of
your own estates: if any man's grief be, for fear of punishment: or because
God forsakes him, if he flee from God, and still bring: forth the fruit of
sin, there can be no comfort in this sorrow. But if it be because we cannot
please God as we would, if Gods promises constrain us hereunto, if the more
God cuts our hearts, the nearer we cleave unto him, and a good life follows
the same (...) then this is of God and great comfort may be had in this (...).
Then lauandum est cox, poenitantie lacrimis. Let us wish our hearts, in the
troubled to area of repentance. And thus you see their agreement in the second
branch.

In the third place observe, that the plowe in turning up the earth, causes
the weeds to perish: rotting the blade under the clots and withering the root
above: Sin must die in us.
Even so it is in this spiritual plowing: for the turning up our sins, causes
them to die and perish. This is called mortification: Mortificatio veteris
hominis, sieve caruis. As the Apostle speaks: They that are Christ's have: Col.
3. 5. Gal. 5. 24.
crucified the flesh, with the lusts and affections thereof: which is called,
detestatio it fuga peccati: a hatred and a flying from sin. First in the
judgment to condemn it, secondly in the affections to hate and detest it: and
thirdly in the whole man, to crucify it. Recessus amalo, a for saking, of
evil: accessus adbonum, a returning to that which is good.

This mortification of sin, is very frequent in the word, especially in the
new testament. For in the Epistle to the Romans: the Apostle speaks thus: If
you martisie Romans 8. 13.
the dcedes of the body, by the spirit, ye, shall live: Hereby to show unto
us, that the plowing up of finite, causes the death of sin: the like he
says: Mortify Col. 3. 5.
your members which are on the earth: fornication, uncleanness, the inordinate
affection, evil concupisoence: and covetousness, and the like.

This mortification of sin consists, first in the kill sin in the heart.
heart, cruoifying the motions thereof: for as we use, virriculo penitentiae:
the broom of repentance, to sweep them out: so we must gladio spirituali the
sword of the spirit; to cut and mortify them in their young and tender age,
before they get strength: for inquisption, shall be Wisdom, 1. 9.
made for every evil thought; prenent its therefore before the day. For this
purpose you must deal with the motions of your hearts, as the Egyptians did
with the Israelites: destroying their children while they were young. For as a
little draft at the first, is easily bowed: which in time grows so or at, that
will not (...) it: So evil motions at first are easily cut down: which in
time may ouermaster us. Naturalis est ordo, vt ab imperfecto, ad perfectum,
quis moueatur: It is a natural course, even in evil, by degrees to come unto
perfection. Therefore that caveat is very good, (that the author to the
Hebrews gives. ( Take heed least any of you be hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin, for as James says: Lust when it is (...) 3. 13.
conceived brings forth sin: Hereby showing that lusts are to be mortfied
in the hatching, and not a motion (...) 1. 15.
to pass vncrucified.

Happy shall they be, that take these young ones, and dash their heads against
the stones.

Follow therefore the counsel of the Apostle, in shunning the former lusts of
ignorance: and not there to stay, but also to kill the very motion that brought
forth that sin: For the man of wicked imaginations, God will condemn. Let no
man think, (with the wicked ones) all is well, when they have prevailed so
far, as to mortify some sin in the act: yet still retain the motion in
the heart; whereas the crown of a Christian, is to mortify the inward man in
the lusts thereof.

Latius regnes, audium. domando.
Spiritum, quam si libiam remotis:
Gadibus, iungas et vterque paeius,
Seruiat vni.
He that can conquer his affects rebelling,
Has larger Monarchy, then he that swayes:
the Libbians, Gaddies, and both Affricaes,
And More excelling.
He that has learned to mortify his lusts, does begin to conquer his
manners.

Secondly, as sin is to be mortified in the motion, (while it is in the
heart;) so likewise it must be crucified in the tongue: Our words must be
powdered with salt; to dry up the supersluitie of corruption, and to keep
(...). 4:
them from putrefaction. The tongue of man (...) that opens the way to the
heart: Ambrose calls it. (...) ^ mortified in the tongue.
mentis, The glass of the mind: Lingua est mentis interprices, The tongue is
the interpreter of the mind; Lingua quid melius? What is better then the
tongue? (said the Poet) if we use it to the glory of God, and the good of other
But if it be used to blasphemies, and evil speaking, then Lingua quid peius
eadem What is worse thin the tongue? It is called lingua, and has that name of
lingere, to lick up: And true it is, the evil man licketh up the poison of
Aspes; as David says: and as it is said of the beast, that had a mouth given
him to speak blasphemies: so is itthat the man of a venomous tongue, gorgeth
out nothing but execrable words, against God and man. And when their speech is
at the best, it is but mungrell like, (that it) half one, and half other: And
the most part, commonly is the worst part; and that they have (...), at their
fingers ends: But, hear O vain babbling tongue, hear O idle tongue, hear and
tremble: Then an evil tongue is to be suppressed. And if you ask me what
must be mortified in the tongue, I answer with Basil, Every word that belongs
not to an intended Omne verbum quod conducit, ad propositamvtilitatem.
profit. If you think that this will not go current in the balance of the
Sanctuary, then fasten your considerations upon the words of Paul: whose
testimouy cannot be denied. Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your
mouths: but that which is good. Ad edificationem Ephesians. 4. 29.
vsus, to the use of edification. What must nothing pass but such as serves to
edify with all? Surely then I fear that the greatest part of men, must be
silent three quarters of the year.

This government of the tongue was of great estimation, (even) among the
Heathen. He is wise and discrete The heathen had care to speak well.
that can refrain his tongue, (says Socrates and the same Socrates said.)
Speak ever of God: for the speaking of God, (...) so much all other words: as
God (...) all other creatures. With him agrees Pheta, surnamed the Divine He
is to be accounted (...) and wise, that always disposes his tongue to speak
of God, and godliness: Here by she wing, of what respect the virtue of the
tongue was among them, and should be much more with us, that excel them in
knowledge.

The like respect of good speech, is among the Persians. And to that end they
may establish the same, they do teach their children three things in the time
of their youth. First, to ride a horse, 2. to shoot, 3. to speak the truth
(which is the best of all) sea oning them with the same whiles they are young,
that they may the better keep it, when they shall come to age: for as Horace
says, Quo semel est imputa recens, seruabit odorem,
Testa diui
The liquors that new vessels first container,
Behind them leaves a taste that still remains.


But what need we to draw water out of these dry wells? when the sountaine
of living waters is full, (even up to the brimme) for David said long before.
If any man long after good days, let him refrain his tongue from evil, and
his lips that they speak no guile. (...). 34. 13:
For by thy words, thou shall be justified: and by thy words, thou shall be
condemned. Hereunto tends the saying (...). 22, 36. am 1. 26.
of James. If any man seems religious, and refraineth not his tongue, this
man's Religion is in vain. Hereby showing, that he cannot be a good Christian,
that has not prevailed so far, as to mortify his speech: to auert the
words of the wicked in Jeremy: Come let us smite (...), 18, 18.
him with the tongue. But follow my counsel, and I will teach you how to
strike the tongue: sor it is an vuruly member set on fire, with no material
fire: but with the fire of Hell.

We are very forward to imitation, in things that are carnal and terestriall,
treading in men's crooked bypathes, and walking in the worn way of their
defects. As the imitators of Alexander, who went forward in his going: would
needs imitate him in their stoopings, (even so do we:) But the good we follow
limping and lingering. If you will needs turn imitators, walk in the
footesteppes of good men: and let the Lord be a pattern of your imitation. I
will curse them, that curse thee: does the Lord scourge such as offend and
hurt Genesis 12. 3.
us? then let us cruefie that which offends God: namely our tongue. Does
human charity bind thee to reduce thy neighbors wandering beast? and shall
not Christianity double the care of thine own erring soul? How many are there,
who have almost incurable tongus, dyed in grain, and put into the color of
iniquity? which to cure, and to recover: observe these three things.

First, that the speech may be mortified: we must have Truth in words.
veritatem in verbis, truth in words. For there is no goodness in alyar
(says Plato:) lying is a monsterous, and wicked evil, that filthely defiles,
and prophaneth the tongue of man: which of God is otherwise consecrated, even
to the truth, and utterance of his praise. And if this be the way, to mortify
sin in words: namely, to speak the truth. Then Lord take from me the way of
lying, (says David:) for it is hard for him to speak the truth, that
accustometh himself to lying. He that speaks truth, will show
righteousness, (says Soloman) Prou, 12. 17.
whereas the lying tongue uses deceit. Sin is like a Nowne adjective, that
cannot stand alone: but requires another to help him. Sin is committed by
action, but supported by lying. As Acts 3. Ananias and Saphira, sinned in their
hypocrisy, and supported this sin with a lie. The way therefore, to
overthrow the whole frame of iniquity, is with Samson, to pull down the
mainepoasts, Judge. 16, 29.
whereon the house is built: namely lying. If you would have a pattern to
work by: then fasten your eyes upon Christ, of whom it is said, that there was
no guile found in his mouth: his very enemies were (...) to confess the same.
Master, we know that then art lust, and Matthew. 22. 16.
carest for (...) and (...) truth. Hete see how his foes acknowledge it, with
praise to his name; And herein we may see, how truethe the saying of Aristorle
is. He needs no to be ashamed that speaks the truth: for nothing brings
shame but finne truth beings commendations: as we see in Christ, was truth in
Christ? then let it not be wanting in us: for oninis Christia actio, nostra
debet osse instructio Every action of Christ, ought to be our instruction.
Daujd long before asking the question: Lord, who shall dwell in thine holy hill
(...) answer: He that speaks the truth, a cord sue, from his heart.

Truth is a debt that we owe unto God, upon a threefold band. First, ratione
creationis, by right creation: (...). 15.
for he that created us, is the God and Father of truth, and we should be the
children of truth, 2. Ratione redemptionis, By right of redemption: for he
that redeemed us, is the way, the life, and the truth. And therefore all that
look for salvation by him, must learn to speak the truth. But Ratione
sanctification is by reason of our sanctification, for bring sanctified by the
spirit of truth, our tongues ought to bed exercised in speaking the truth.

The second way or means to mortify our speech, is (...) in (...)
to have (...) in (...) profit in our words, So says the wise man? (...) lipd
of the right eaun there is wisdom (...). 10. 13.
found: as a well of life, and as fined silver; every word must be pondered
with salt; that it corrupt not it self, not infect others: all our speech must
tend to edification. The Heathen were wont to say, that the two masters, (...).
4. 30.
or vshers of the world were action and speech. But we are yet to speak of
words: where of O ate said, Verba attendenda, (...) loquentis. The words are
to be attended, not the mouil of the speaker. There fore thou (...) sensum ^
shall ^, if its profit; Here by (...), that we should so speak, that there
may be some profit in our words for every word that tends not to some good
use, is an idle word as Ierom defines Verbum otiosum est, quod sine vtilitate
loquentis, vel audientis ptofertar.
it. An idle word, is that, that is spoken without edification: either of the
nearer, or of the speaker, when our words do neither minister comfort unto our
consciences, nor instructions to others, in the way of piety, and godliness:
Such a kind of speech is to be mortified. Therefore let us with David, set a
watch before our Psalm. 141. 3:
mouths, and keeper be door of our lips, that with the said David, we may
utter the righteousness and praises of the Lord: and our words being gracious,
may strike some impression into the hearers hearts: For as Plato said, Word
without good effect, are like water that drowneth the people, and does itself
no good.

Lastly, if we will mortify our speech, we must have A mean in words.
Eccles. 5. 1. Prou. 10. 19.
Moderamen in verbis. (...) means in words, as the wise man says, Let thy
words be few; for in many words there cannot want iniquity. Therefore he that
restalneth his lips, it wife, says he i fon, fraistra fit per plura, quod
fierl potest pauciora: It is in vain to use many words, when fewer words will
conteins the matter: So then not to use vain tautologies in our speech, will
be a good means to mortify our tongues. A fool (says Solomon) is accounted
Prou. 17. 27.
wife when he holds his peace, and prudent when ke stops his lips: not
wise in saying nothing at all, but in using a mean in words. Hereunto tend
the words of Christ; When thou prayest use few words: showing Matthew. 6.
hereby, that multiplicitie of words is a means re draw us to offend. And if
Christ will not have us to use many words in prayer, then his mind is, that we
should use a mean in other things: As Solomon says, A wise man will guide his
words with discretion, and use knowledge aright: And to borrow the words of
Cato, Prou 15. 2.
(...) Deo, qui sort ratione dcore.
He is next unto God, who knows in redson, to keep silence.
Hereunto suits the saying of Syrach, The words of the Eccles. 21. 35.
wise are (...) in the balance both for the nature quality, and quantity of
them. Thus much for the mortifying of the tongue.

Lastly, in the third place, as sin is to be mortified (...) to be ^
in the motion and tongue, so likewise in the action: If ye live after-the
flesh ye shall die; but if ye mortify the deeds of the flesh by the spirit,
ye shall live. And as the same Apostle says, The grace of, God, that brings
salvation, has appeared, teaching us to due is all ungodliness, and
vnrighteousaesse, and that we should live godly in this present world: knowing
(as a Father faith) that we must have remotionemmali, aremouing of evil,
before we can have substitutionem boni: aplacing in of that which is good: as
God taught the Jews, cease to do evil, learn to do good.

As Paul said to the Ephesians, so I say unto you, Cast off the old man; (as
Matthew left his calling, and Zacheus his bribing, so (leave your sinful
actions; and (to conclude with Crates Thebanus, which could not follow the
study of Philosophy, because his money was an hinderance unto him, and
therefore said, Ego pordam to, ne tu perdas me: I will destroy thine, lest thou
may destroy me: So) destroy thine evil deeds lest they destroy thee.

The reasons to persuade us to abandon all evil actions are these.

First, our actions do the greatest hurt, and dishonor (...) actions (...)
hurt.
both to God and man; and therefore observe the Decalogue, and you shall find,
that in the first table, the Lord forbids but one sin in the heart; Thou
shall have no other Gods before me: and another in words, Thou shall not take
my name in vain: But he forbids two in action; first, the making and bowing
to false Gods And secondly, the profaning of the Sabbath. Look into the
second Table, and you shall find the like: first, one sin of the heart. Thou
shall not covet thy neighbors ox, etc. and another of the tongue, Thou shall
not bear false witness, etc. But there are four of works or actions
forbidden: first, Thou shall not disobey thy (...) etc. Secondly, Thou shall
not steal. Thirdly, Thou shall not commit adultery: Fourthly, Thou shall do
no murder: Hereby showing, that God is most dishonored, and man oppressed, by
outward actions: And this is manifest by that of Amos, We will make the Ephah
small, and the shekel great, and falsify the weights by deceit: we will Amos
8. 4.
buy the poor for silver, and the needy for shoes, and sell the refuse of
the wheat. These are all outward actions. The old saying is true in this;
Words be but wind, blows be unkind, Evil thoughts and words, are blown away
with the air: but actions leave an impression, behindethem. Not their words,
but their engrossing of corn does starve the poor; not their thoughts, but
their hands robbes their states, suckes their bloods, and grind their faces.

Ad as actions doethe most hurt, so do they continue Sin in actions remain
long.
longer then words: Even as the visage of him who passes by, is soon
forgotten, but if it be pictured, the memory of it continues long: So sin in
words is like the same, entering in at the one ear, and out at the other. But
sin in action is a picture daily to look upon; witness that of leroboam,
that never ceased until the kingdom 1. King. 12.
ended. Therefore it is good to withstand the beginnings: knowing that the end
will bring much evil; that so there may ensue a great happiness, according to
that true saying of the Poet Virgil: Foelix quipotuitrerum, cognoscere causas.
O blessed he and excellent, that knows the cause of each event.


Thus, for our conclusion of this branch, observe, that Doct.
such as are truly plowed by the word and Spirit of God, are dead tosinne, and
sin in them; for they that are Ghrists, have crucified the flesh, with the
affections and lusts, Likewise the same Apostle says, If Christ be Gal. 5. 24.
Romans 8. 10.
in you the body is dead, because of sin; but the spirit is life for
righteousness sake. If you will have an example of this, that further it may
be manifested, turn your eyes unto there, of the Acts, 18. 19. verses. Many
that believed came and confessed and showed their works. Many also of them
that used curious arts, brought their books, and burned them before all men,
and they counted the price of them, and found it, fifty thousand pieces of
silver.

If you ask a reason of it, it is from the power of grace, which is able to
subdue the power of Satan: Reas, 1.
For Satan, sin, the flesh, and the world, can but make a finite power; but
we are protected with an infinite power: Greater is he that is in you, then
he which is in the word. Therefore, whosoever is borne of God, does 1. John 4,
4:
not sin, neo potest peccare, neither can sin. O excellent gift, as one
affirms, being donum omnium donorum maximum: A gift excelling all gifts.
Augustine upon this has this observation; Before the law we do not fight,
under the law we fight and are overcome: under grace we fight, and overcome:
For we are more then conquerers in Jesus Christ.

It is a thing common with the Physicians, to drive and purge out a lesser
poison by a stronger; as we daily see a lesser light extinguished by the
greater: The Sun puts out the light of the Moon; and the power of Gods
grace, puts cut the power of sin. Thus when the stronger man gets into the
house, binds the master, and Luke 11, 22.
spoils him of his goods: God is the stronger man; his grace is the influence,
which comes down from heaven, to help us in the midst of our conflicts: Much
like the elements that helped (...) in his battle, so that he got the victory;
whereof Claudian sung, O nimium dilecte Deo cuimilitat ether,
Et coniurati, veninut ad classica venti.
O Gods beloved, when power aeriall,
And winds came armd, to help when thou do call.


Let not slip your consideration, without observation Use. Aow to know the good
and wicked.
where sin lives and thrive, there all goodness withers and dies. David put
sorth a question, Lord let me know mine age, and the number of my days (...) I
have to live. So many do say, Lord, let me know mine estate, whether I belong
to thee or no. And now I answer as the Frenchman did the Scots, and the Irish,
which of long time had been at controversy for a piece of ground, to which
nation it should belong? The controversy was to be ended by the said
Frenchman in this manner, Put (said he) thereinto Serpents, and Snakes; If they
die, it belongs to Ireland, but if they live, it belongs to Scotlands. Thus
the contiouersie was ended. So in like manner, if sin lives and thriues in
you, you belong to Satan, but if it wither and die, then you belong to God. So
our Lord teaches us, Matt. 7. 16. You shall know them (...), by their fruits.
Thus here is an end of this branch.

Lastly, the terrene plow makes the earth more fit for the seed; Even so does
the tearing of the heart by true repentance, makes it the more apt to embrace
the mercy of God.

The thid part.
THus we have gone through the subject, and the property of the work: now
follows the propriety of the persons lacaem: your, committing this work (...)
to every particular person.

Observe, that all men are agents in their faith, repentance, Doct. Man an
agent. Iere. 4. 14.
contrition, and salvation. Plowe up your falowe ground: your own falowe: As
God said to Jerusalem. Wash thy heart, O Jerusalem: and by the Prophet Joel
Iere. 4. 14. Joel 2. 13.
Scindite corda vestrum, Rent your hearts. So I say unto you, wash and rent
your own hearts; for if you will not lay to your helping hand, they are never
like to be clean. God in the time of the Law commanded that lie which should
offer an offering; was to put his hand upon the head of it. Heb. 3. 2. Hereby
showing, that we must have a hand with God, in every part and work of
regenetation. He that made without thee, will not instifie Qui fecit te finete,
non iusticabit te fine te, Fecit nescienrem, iustificat volentem
thee without thee: He made thee without thy knowledge, and does instifie thee
with thy consent: Therefore (said Christ) If you will find, seek; If you will
receive, then ask: For, no seeking, no finding; no asking, no receiving. God
proclaims not, Ho, every one that is athirst, I will bring him water; But, Ho,
every one that is athirst, let Matthew. 7. 7.
him come and fetch water. Supper is made ready (by our Lord) all things are
prepared at his own cost and charges; Esa. 55. 1.
and when it was ready, he said not, go carry it to these men, but go bid
them come in and eat it. Hereunto Luke 14.
tend the words of Paul, Work out your salvation Phil. 2. 12.
with fear and trembling. And Peter also says, Make your calling and election
sure. Sure it is with God, not with us until then: Worthily does that sieke
person Merito perit aegroutus, qui non medicum vocat, sed vltro venientem
respuit
perish, that calls not for the Physician, but refuses him, coming of his
own accord unto him. Man, by the ordinance of God, is appointed an agent for
his own salvation.

For the subject of faith, repentance and contrition R. 1. Subject of faith man.
are in us, not in God: Indeed God is the efficient cause; the word the
instrumental cause, but our, hearts, wills, and affections the material
cause: that is, subiectum conuersionis, the subject of conversion (as the
schoolmen define the fanie) Delor est in cord, Sorrow is in the heart: Fuga
est in voluntate, Flying is in the will; and that with purpose not to commit
sin any more: Auertio est in cord, and voluntate a malo ad bonum: The
turning is in the heart and will, from evil unto that that is good: still the
subject is in us, and so we must needs be agents. For we are not like a piece
of wax, that receives no impression, but what is put into it, being merely
pasaiue; but active, as formerly has been showed: And to add the sentence of
Aristotle, Nemo voleus malus, nec inuitus foelix: No man is evil with his
will, nor any man is happy against his will. In thy mouth In ore and cord tuo
salutis causa.
and heart is the cause of salvation, says Chrysostomes; that is, the (...)
use and subject, as has been said.

And as the subject is in us, so every man is best, acquainted Man knows his
own heart.
with his own heart: which other men is not able to know: for What man knows
the things of a man, save the spirit of a man which is in him? it is a
prerogative (...), etc.
that belongs to God to know the heart: The difference stands thus: Other men
know nothing of our heart; our selves know somewhat, and God knows all, that
may be known: There is not a word in my tongue, but thou know it, O Lord;
and there is nothing hid from thee, O God, says David: Yet every man knows
somewhat of his own heart. I know (says Paul) Romans 7 that in me there
dwelles no goodness: This made him to cry out so bitterly, not against
others, but against himself: 1. Tim. 1. 15.
This is a true saying, that Christ came into the world to save finnert (...)
us ago, (...). Whereof I am the chief, because he knew his own heart, and
not the hearts of others. And from his own experience teaches the same to
others; Prove your selves, know 2. Cor. 13. 5.
ye not your own selves? which not to know, were very strange.

And as every man is best acquainted with his own heart, and therefore the
fittest to be his own plowman: Every man saved by his own faith.
so likewise, every man is to be saved by his own faith and grace. The just
shall live (...), in his faith. Other men's faith may do us good by way of
exhortation, to build us (...) in the ways of godliness: But it Heb. 1. 3.
is our own actual faith that might save us: for as the Apostle says, If
thou believe, (...) in thy heart, Romans 10. 10.
not in my heart: for that will not save thee. Therefore as it was said to
David, To thy house, O David; so I say, to thine own heart, O man, have a
special care.

But for all this that has been spoken, does not God impose too great a work
upon us, which neither we, nor Use. Great work laid on us.
our forefathers were able to bear? It is beyond our power and art. This is
ars aritum, (...) the art of art, and the government of souls: It is open
Dei, as Christ does witness, (...). This is the works of God that ye believe.
Why then does (...) 6. 29.
God impose the same upon us? Not because we are causa efficions, but because
we are causa materialis: Therefore (as John says,) Let us look to our
selves: for (...) the Plow (...) to our (...) hearts.
surely it is a work very necessary, to bring the plowe home to our own
hearts. Many will be busy Bishops in other men's Diocese, spending their time
in other men's ground, and suffering their own to be barren.

There be many (Arguses in these days, with an hundred eyes apiece,) that can
quickly epsy the moates, that are in other men's eyes, but cannot feel the
beams that are in their own. Peter will be meddling in John's affairs, yet
without thanks: for, Quidest hoc tibi? What is that to thee? The Pharisees
would wash the hands of Christ, and yet their own hearts were foul, filthy
and odious. A preposterous kind of zeal, to begin where we should make an end.

I deny not, but this is to be done: yet not to leave the other undone. As in
David we see a worthy example hereof. Before he purged the land, he cleansed
his house: and before his house, he purified himself; Observe his proceeding
at the second verse, he says. I will walk betham Psalm. 110. 1.
lebabi, in the perfection of my heart. And then at: (...)
the 7. verse he saish. No wicked person shall abide in mine bouse. And then in
the 8. verse-he begins to purge the land. Thus you may behold, the three
steps to perfection. First his heart, then his family, lastly the realm;
Excellent proceeding, to keep Sessions at home within the heart, and to be
executers of our own sins.

Niru lachem (...), now fallowe your fallowe. It is a good lesson for us, that
are to plowe up your fallowe: first, to turn up our own, we must not be like
the sons of Eli, 1. Sam. Least we cause the Gospel to be evil spoken of:
our name and office must agree; we are called, lux (...), by our vocation: and
we must be lumen in (...), by life and conversation. Then may we, (as we
must,) the better plowe up your fallowe ground: Cry aloude, spare not, lift up
thy voyee like a trumpet; show my people their transgressions, and to the
house of Jacob their sins. There is nothing so necessary, and more
commendable, Esa. 58. 8.
then reprehension if it be seasonable, and reasonable. I think none ought to
be more wisely bold, then us Ministers: for sin is bold, saucy, and
presumptuous. O miserable, when hoot sinners and cool Ministers meet: when
the one sort is infected with burning fevers, and the other with shakinge
agues: And when they that should lift up their voices like a trumpet, do but
whisper through a trunk. Nihil interest scoleri, an faueas Use all means to
save the finnet.
an perpetras. There is no difference, whether thou favor a wicked action, or
commit it. David has a song of two parts (like Ianns with his two faces.) I
will sing mercy and judgment: we must use Leuitiues preseruatines, and
restoratiues (with Paul.) We beseech you to be reconciled to God, 2. Cor. 5.
19. But if this will not serve to rowse these sleepers out of the dead sleep
of sin, but that they 2. Cor. 5. (...)
will be still as worldly as Demas, envious as Caine, covetous as Judas,
treacherous as Absolon: and as stonyhearted as Pharaoh; the text of mercy
befits not these, but the sword of judgment.

The learned have compared the sour Evangelists, to the four beasts in
Ezekiel 10. 14. comparing Mark unto a Lion, because he begins with the
thundering voice of the Law, crying in the wilderness, repent: Ministers must
be bold.
When sins be crying sins, we must become crying preachers. Esaias cries,
and Jeremy weeps, and we must not be sparing in reprehension: Where men are
bold in sinning, preachers must be bold in reproving: We must put on iron
foreheads, to reprove such as have whorish faces and cut them to the quick.
This is the way that they may be cured with the good Surgeon, to cut out the
dead flesh; It is a smarting corasiue, yet a healing plaster; (as Jerome
says,) Dum pungit, (...) Whiles that it (...), it (...), (...) not if ever
there were a time for this, now is the age; where shamefastnosse has left the
stage, and presumption now actech her part desperation attending ready to shut
up all, with a dreadful catastrophe, Sin wounding, the conscience accusing,
hell gaping, and God striking: the land being ouerspread with sins; Caines
murder, Pharaohs hardness, Naboths churlishness, and Amnons incest.

We have spent much time in plowing up this fallowe ground: yet the profit I
hope, will more then equalize Magistrates must strike with the sword.
our pains; the sins have been cited, a jury pannelled: they sound
guilty, and are condemned by the great Judge of heaven and earth. What
remains then, but that you the magistrates see them executed? we can but
plowe them by the word; it is you that must plow with the sword: you are put in
trust to see the king of heaven, his laws observed, the righteous defended,
the oppressed relieved, and the offenders punished.

Solan being asked, what best preserved a commonwealth, answered: when subjects
obey their magistrates, and the magistrates the law. Ye are Gods Liuetennants
here upon earth: he has given you his own name. Psalm. 82.
Any amarti elohim atem. I said ye are Gods, that ye (...)
might do Gods work. We are to cry contrapeccatum, but ye are to strike
down, ipsum peccatum: for there is as great a charge laid on you, to strike
with the sword, as on us to preach the word. No preaching, no believing: Rom
13. 4. 1. Cor. 9. 16.
no sword striking, none obedience yielding. Aron and Moses must go together;
the Ministers mouth, and the Magistrates hand, must hold the plowe.

Non meae humilitatis dictareuobis. It suits not with my humility to direct
you the means: but only with my conlcience, to put you in mind of that, that
is your charge; I would I could persuade you to resolve with David, Psalm. 101.
8. Betimes to destroy the wicked of the land; You want nothing to effect it,
but a willing minds Law is on your side, and power in your hand; if courage
and zeal were in your hearts, it would be (...). If ye do cut them down, ye
do but your duty: If not, as God said unto Gain; great (...) lies at the
door of your conscience, and upon them: Illicit a non prohibere, consensus
erroris est: not to prohibit unlawful things, is an consent unto unlawful
things. So it is, Si vit ia amici fares facis tua: If thou wink at the
offenses of thy friend, Heft. 4. 14.
thou makes them thin. own. Let me say unto you; as Mordecay said unto
Hester: If thou hold thy peace, God shall send deliverance by some other
means, ueat ubeth (...)
abik tobedu: both thou and thy fathers house shall perish. So if you will hold
your peace, I mean the sword within the sheath, God shall cut them off some
other ways. But woe to you, and your houses, they shall perish: and the blood
of these souls that perish through your neglect, and conuyuency, shall be
required at your hands. If thou hold thy tongue and forwarue them Ezekiel. 3. 6.
not, they shall dye in their sin: but their blood will I require at thy
hand, says God; Surely you bear not the sword for naught. Remember that which
you read Romans 13. 4. Exodus 20. 16.
in Exodus: Thou and all within thy gutes, shall remember to obey the Lord.
These gates are the bands of your jurisdiction: so far as your authority
reaches, so far are your gates and charge; and whatsoever is amiss within the
same, is your sin: not because they do it; but because you suffer it.

It is not possible that sins could be at that height, as now they are: if
magistrates were not asleep; or pertakers of the same sins, winking at other
men's offenses, least their own should be discovered. Democrites beholding
magistrates executing malefactors, fell a laughing: and being demanded a
reason hereof, answered; sir quoth he, to see the great thieves, hang up the
little thieves. Often it salles out, that the inferiors fair the better, where
the superiors are transgressors; for rather then they will discover it in
themselves, they will suffer it to remain in others, least the saying of Cato
be propountied against them.

Que culpare soles, (...) no (...) ipse,
Turpe est doctori, cum culpa redarguit ipsum.
It is a shame for thee, to commit that offense,
Which thou do teach others not to be committed.
Give me leave to awaken your consciences, in the Magistrates asleep.
words of exhortation; (I know many excellent things are spoken of thee, thou
City of God: yet I cannot but condole thine imperfections in some things; And
who shall I accuse herein? I will not justify the doers, but condemn them
that should restrain the same;) Good laws are made: the life blood of them is
the execution; Else the law is like a wooden dagger in a fair sheath: when
they that have the charge imposed, and the sword in their hand: stand like some
great image, holding up the sword, but never strike.

I know ye magistrates of this City, ye have done worthy service herein;
and more ye might have done, if all the laws had been put in due execution.
Chrysostom well observes: To make music, it is not sufficient to play on one
string, but all must be stricken in due measure, and proportion. So to bring a
city or country into good order: is to execute every part of the law with
due execution. I would be loath to say unto you, as Christ said unto the
Pharisees: Ye tithe mint, anise and cummin: Mat. 23. 23.
looking to the markets, taking order for dust, and cleansing the streets,
with many more such like: but the weighty points of the law are executed,
halting, limping, and lingering. Have ye no law for drunkenness that ye
suffer it to go reeling, and staggering in every street? Is there never a
sober Judith left, to cut Judith, 13. 8.
off the head of this drunken Olifernus? Is there no law in the behalf of the
Sabbath, that there is such carrying of packes, ryding abroad with swaggarers,
such selling of wares, and walking into the fields: that it is hardly know
from an other day? Is there never a zealous Nebemia among you, to shut the
gates of Ierusalems Nehem. 13. 19
Is there not a piece of a statute left uncorrupted to take hold of the
swearer, that infects the clouds with oathe, that the land mournes for the
same? Is not the law for the blasphemer in use, that ye may bring him without
Leui, 24. 14.
the host, and stone him to death? Shall I say as Paul said, Is there not a
wise man among you, to foresee future events? as Virgil sings; Foelix qui
potuit rerum cognoscere causas.
He is happy that has been able to know the causes of things.
If you saw, and made conscience, that your conniuencie at these things, does
harden the actors, and encourage the spectators, then ye would be ruled by the
exhortation af Christ: If foot, hand, or eye offend thee, cut it Instruction
and correction go together.
off. Let the whole law of God be executed vpom these; who knowos whether your
punishments may save their souls or (...) For often detrimentum peounia and
sanitatis est propter bonum (...). A loss of the money. and cross to the
corpse, is for the good of the soul: As Mordecai said Hest. 4. 14:
to Hester, Who knower whether thou art come to the kingdom, for this purpose
or no? So, who knows whether you are come into the place of magistracy, to
save these souls, by keeping them from finne. You read, Exodus 17. 12.
that when the hands Moses were both held up the people prevailed, but when
his hands went down, then their enemies prevailed. So, while the two hands of
the, Church are held up, she prevails, namely, Verbum informans, and virga
reformans. The word information, and the rod reformation. And to conclude my
exhortation to you of this city, with the saying of Paul, I beseech you by the
mercies of God, that you give up your selves, soul, body, sword, strength,
riches, authority, counsel and all to the service of God; for the plowing up
of these sins before named, or as many as stand within your charge: beginning
with good King Josiah, at the last to purge (...), 34. 3.
Jerusalem. This do, and the God of peace be with you.

And now I wish mine arm were long enough to reach over (...) of this (...) to
strike those (...) dead, that daily (...) men (...) whole houses, play houses,
drinking-houses; outpuries, and the like; that men were as good go over Salis
buryeplaine, and with more safety: then to stop out into the Suburbs of
this city. It were an easy matter to have the city sweet, if these places
were not so soul and filthy.

It seems that there are no Magistrates there; If there Blind and dumb
magistrates, cause of sin.
be, they are Nonresidents, or else as bad as the people. In the days of
Christ, there were dum be, blind and lame devils; and I fear, these miserable
people have such magistrates among them; some blind that cannot see, others
dumb not able to speak, and most lame that will not strike: and it may be
they are more forward to be bribed, then the people to sin, yea, and often
deeper in iniquity, then the people in trespass. Who say be people to these
men's manners. (...) out horibus (...). It is selfe-sinning after such author
(...) these magistrates sin, the fiat of consent goes (...) and all takes
hold of the same? saying. Their hands are with us in the said dish, and for
fear themselves should be seen, will keep away the light of reproof from
us, or they are coueteus, loving bribery: and then we can with a little white
or red sand, (dug out of the bowels of the earth) quickly put out their
eyes: Then let the Preachers say what they please, we will take our fill of
vanity. Thus regis ad cuemelum, to (...) componitur orbis: greatness is a copy
after which, all men order themselves. When Leo loved Stage Plays, all Rome
swarmed with Iuglers: I would it were not seen in the skirtes of this famous
city; the magistrates loving iniquity, and the people swarming with villainy.
I can say no more to these without the walls, then I have said to them within.
If these people perish, their blood shall be required at your (...) therefore
whiles this day of salvation lasts plowe up this fallow ground.

Lastly I have a desire to ^ ^ to keep at their charge.
valleys of Judah: there (...), and the country vilages of this realm, and say
somewhat to them also; for the land is defiled even from Dan, to Bersheba: the
stream of ungodliness running very strong: which if speedy course be not
taken, it will (like the river Nilus,) ouerflowe the banks, indaungering the
whole land. Therefore you learned magistrates, (there placed by our worthy
Iehosua;) whet your swords, and cut those trees down by the roots. But let me
tell you one thing, before you will do God honor, the King service, and the
country good; you must carry your teame plowe, and all your tacklings, down
into the country, where your charge is. What a shame is it to forsake your
habitations, and to neglect the charge committed unto you? Whereby the poor
are robbed of their bread, the oppressed of their relief, the righteous of
their defense, the country of your service, Religion of her left hand: and God
of his honor. O ye magistrates, for shame be resident upon your charge: where
ye ought with the sword of justice, to plowe up this fallowe ground: least the
blood of these perishing souls, be required at your hands.

And thus I have made an end of my plowing, which is the first part of the
exhortation: plowe up your fallowe ground.

The second part of the exhortation.
WE are at the length come to the seed time. Sow to our selves in
righteousness: Which part I hane formerly viewed under three heads, 1. Sow,
there is the property of the work, 2. Righteousness, there is the matter to
work upon, 3. the Persons, You.

Righteousness is he fairest object to the eye of heaven, splenderous to the
world, profitable to the soul, and glorious to God, We will walk a while in
this light, which will bring us to a more glorious light: to a new (...), and a
new earth, wherein dwells righteousness. Righteousness of grace, feales the
righteousness 1. Pet. 1. 5.
of glory. Well might Ambrose say: non enim per se pars ost iustitia, sed quast
matter ost omnium: For righteousness is not part by it self: but as it were
the mother of all virtue, as the old verse is. Insticia in sese virtutem
continet omniem, id est.
Righteousness in it self does truly contain, all that to virtue do belong
and appertain.
Hence it is, that this righteousness is found in so many congugatios. In
Niphal, it is nitsdak; in Pihel, it is t siddek: in Hiphil, it is hitsdik: and
in bithpahel, it is hitstaddek: All which do show the largeness of this
virtue. But let us come to some particular parts of it, and to omit many, we
will speak only of the work of righteousness, and the word of
righteousness.

And first of the word of righteousness: sow to righteousness, so is my
Text, agreeing with that: To the Esa. 8. 20.
the law and the Prephets if a man walk not according to this rule, it is
because there is do light in him.

All our action must be ordered by Gods word: where Doct. Wotd of God our rule.
he has not a mouth to speak, we must not have a hand to work: for works
without direction, are like messengers that run without their warrant, and
go without their arrand. Therefore (says the Apostle:) We 2. Pet. 1. 19:
have a sure word of the Prophets, (...), which ye do well: if ye take beede
thereunto. Heaven is a mark, we are the archers, our actions the arrows, Gods
word is the bow: If we will hit the (...), we must shoot in Gods bow; Such
a seholler was David Psalm, as at a mark, so will I aim. When Joshua was to
govern the people, God told him it should be after Joshua, 1. 8. Psalm. 11. 9.
his word; David must make it a light to his feet: and we, the rule of all our
proceedings. They which do not run to the prophatie all saying, apostelie
all (...) an a magnetic all authorities, (...) but to themselves, because the
(...) propheticas voces, non ad apostolicas literas, necad euangelicas
authoritates, etc.
masters of errors; Wherefore let us do, (as Baalam said:) not go beyond the
word of the Lord, more or less.

And that propter mandatum Des, for the commandment of God. And cursed are
they that do err from they Commandments. There is nothing more dangerous,
then for a man to make himself merry with Reas. 1.
breaking Gods Commandments. Woe to them that say, Who is the Lord, that we
should obey him; Therefore Job, 25. 15. Psalm. 10. 5. 1. Sam. 15.
we will none of thy ways. But non bonum ludere cum sanctis. It is not good
ieasting with holy thiugs: let Saul's example serve for all: when God commanded
him to destroy all the Amalekites, he thought it more wisdom to preserve
some. But for all his wisdom, he proved a fool in so doing and lost the
kingdom from himself and his posterity; It may be he thought himself too good
to obey God: and God knew the kingdom too good for him: He rent his Obligiens
from God, and God the Crown from him. Is it good for the vessel of dust, to
encounter with the arm of omnipotency? The pot with the potter? Sine
percutiat, sine percutiatur, franginecesse est. whether it strike or be
strocken, it must needs be broken.

When the Centurian came to Christ for the healing of Matthew. (...).
his servant, he seemed to illustrate this point, by an argument taken from
himself: I am a man of authorine: I say to one come and he comes: to another
go, and he goes; out of which words he frames an argument thus. If men have
that prerogative, to command and ordain laws, then much more God. But men
have a prerogative to do the same. Ergo,God has prerogative and power to
command: And after this manner God himself reasons. Mali. 8.
if you fear to offend the (...) of your Prince, Then you ought to fear, to
offend against my command: But it is true, you fear to offend his command,
Ergo, You ought to fear to offend my precepts. Therefore let us do as Soloman
said: hear the ends of (...). 12. 13.
all, fear God, and keep his commandments: For he is a great and dreadful
God, clothed with majesty: the splender of whose glory, is ten thousand times
more bright then the Sun; at the sight of whose majesty, the Angels tremble,
the Heavens melt away like wax, the mountains smoke, the foundations of the
earth are moved, and the floods are dried up: and wilt not thou fear, to
disobey this great and glorious God? whose name is wonderful, his justice
infinite, his power omnipotent, his wisdom unsearchable; his knowledge from
eternity, to eternity: and his judgments intolerable, endless, and
remediless.

But if this great and glorious Jehovah, which commands the sons of men to
direct their ways by his word, will not serve to persuade you, then let the
necessity thereof persuade you hereunto; for as Peter said of the name of
Jesus, so I say of the word: there is no other thing that can direct and show
us how to walk aright: For nihil est (...), vel stabile, in rebus humanis:
nothing is firm and stable in humane things. Therefore I say with Christ to
the Rabbin, (which asked him saying: what shall I do to be saved,) in lege
quid Scriptum est, quomodo legis? what is written in the law, Luke 10. 26.
how read thou? for herein is read the righteousness of God from faith, to
faith; That is, ex fide veteris testementi, Romans 1. 17.
in fidem noui, as Origin observes: from the faith of the old Testament, to
the faith of the new; So Chrysostom, and this agrees with that of Paul. The
law was Gal. 3. 24.
our schoolmaster, to bring us to Christ. The old showed a Mosias to come:
the new shows that he is come, or as Ambrose says; Ex fide promittentis
Dei, infidem hominis Credentis: From the faith of God promising, to the faith
of man believing. That is, the Scriptures do show how God gives, and
bestows his blessings: and also how we are to embrace them; God promises,
and man believes; or as Augustine says; ex fide Praedicantium, 2. Pet. 1. 4.
in fidem andientium: from the faith of the Preachers, to the faith of the
hearers. So says the Apostle: faith is by hearing, and hearing by the word of
God preached: Romans 10. 17.
We preach, you believe: we teach and you must obey. Or ex fide praesentium,
in fidem futurerum: from the faith of things present, to the faith of things to
come: showing how to live in the kingdom of grace, that hereafter we may enjoy
the kingdom of glory. So does the Apostle teach us saying; whatsoever is
written, is written Romans 15. 4.
for our learning, that we by them might have hope and consolation of future
joys. For this is that which is able to make a man perfect unto every good
work. 2. Tim. 3. 16.
If now you shall demand of me: wherewith shall a man redress his ways? I
answer (with David,) by taking heed to the word of the Lord: for that is the
Psalm. 119. 9.
true guide to the kingdom of glory.

If Gods word, the word of righteousness, be the mark, whereat we mustayme:
then I see few hitte the Use. 1.
white, some shoot wide with the Idolaters, some over with the proud and
ambitious, some to low with the covetous, others too short with their half
turns: so that (as David said,) they are all gone out of the way: non est qui
faciat bonum, non est usquae ad vnum: there is none that does good, no not
one: They eat unclean things in Ashur, and oil is carried into Egypt: but woe
to such as go into Ashur, or down to Egypt, and have not asked counsel of
Gods word. Esa. 30. 2.


The formest of this cursed crew, is the whore of Rome: Error of the Papists.
with all her English calves, which has stolen trueths garment, to cover
errors nakedness; her several names prefigured out her manifold errors, She
is called a beast. Antichrist, (...) Prophet, a whore: and multorum (...) number,
sed non boni: many names, but never a good name. Of whom I will demand this
one thing, whether, she be able to maintain her ways by the word of God or
no? If not, then as it has been said, so is it still: Rome is a whore, and
all those pretended Catholics bastards, begotten in the bed of adultery.

First let them tell me, by what authority from the word of God, they keep
the word of salvation locked up in an unknown tongue from the people: yea they
have warrant for what they do, and mark it well.

First the word is the cause of errors and heresies, (as they say,) therefore
not fit to be known; Whereas indeed the want of it, is rather the cause of
errors; as the truth it self says: (whom we will belecue before them,) do
ye not err? (...), because ye know Mark 12. 21.
not the Scriptures. And David compares them to a lantern, to light our
paths: if the light thereof be hid, how can they profit us? for still we are
ready to stumble at every error, and fall into every heresy. Therefore (says
Peter,) We have a most sure word, to the which ye do well that ye take
heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark place. But it seems these men
will be wiser then God: but God shall make it manifest to their confusion that
they are fools.

Secondly, the people cannot understand the word of God when it is translated:
Ergo, it ought not to be translated at all; whereas the translation of them, is
the way to understand them: and understanding the way to get faith, and faith,
the way to heaven; But why does not the wise lesuite reason as well against
salvation it self, (thus) Man is not able, though he have the means, to save
himself: ergo, it is not fit he should have the means at all. And now who
will not laugh at such an argument? Augustines saying shall end this, Why are
Aug. tract. in John 21.
things spoken, but to be known? why are they pronounced, but to be heard? and
why are they heard but to be understood.

Thirdly, the Jews a long time, and in the Jews Christ had not the word in
the vulgar tongue: ergo, not fit to put it now into the vulgar: They prove it
thus. He read the law, that the people understood not: But it is manifest to
the contrary; for the text says, They read, and the people understood. And as
for that story of RobinHood, which they tell us of, inverted and brought forth
of the devils mint, that the people understood not Christ when he said, Eli,
eli, lamah gnazabthani; therefore the people (...)
ought not to have the scriptures translated. But the answer is ready; first,
this reply of the people might be more of flouting, then of ignorance: and to
the contrary they have no proof. Secondly, they were Roman officers that put
him to death, as appears by the story; and they might not understand him,
because it was Hebrew, but the Jews, they understood him. But say, they did
not understand him, what is that to prove that the Scripture should not be
turned into the vulgar? It is rather an argument to the contrary, that they
should be translated, whereby they might understand them.

Fourthly, holy things must be used in an holy tongue: ergo, they ought not to
be translated. Now what is the holy tongue? Hebrew, Greek, and Latin? then
why did not Christ teach in one of these tongues, but in the Syrian tongue? And
why did the Lord cause the Apostle Acts. 2.
to speak so many several tongues, if they were unholy? And why does the holy
Ghost, make mention of Revel, 7.
tongues, that could not be numbered? Wherefore we may conclude, that the
language is acceptable, so the persons be good.

Lastly, the Priest, in the time of the Law, went in, and the people stood
without: ergo, the people must not have the Scriptures translated. But this is
quickly answered: First, this was a type of Christ, of his entering into Heb. 9.
11.
the holy place, that is, into heaven: therefore it concerns not this point.
Secondly, it is not proved that the Priest spoke any thing before them, which
they understood not. But by this time you begin to smile (...) these poor
arguments, which are like ropes of sand, which are sooner broken then made.

It remains now, to prove the lawfulness of their Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7, 8, 2,
translation, which will appear by Gods commandment: Thou shall write them
upon the posts of thy house, and upon thy gates: And why written? for to be
read: and why read: that they may be understood. So our Lord says, Read the
Scriptures, which they could not, if John 5. 34.
they could not have them in the vulgar tongue. The like says Paul that the
Scriptures ought to be handled to the understanding of the people, and not in
a strange tongue. And that this is no new doctrine, observe the 1. Cor. 14.
tot3.
antiquity of it. Ambrose, not long after Christ, says, Non competit
fidelibus, audire linguas, quas non intelligunt
It is not meet for believers to hear those things, which they understand
not. Again, the same author says. We come together to (...) the Church,
those things must be spoken, which may be understood. So Augustine, Why are Si
ad aedificandam Ecclesi m conuenitis, ea debent dici que iutelligunt audientes.
things spoken, but to be heard? why are they ponounced, but to be heard? why
are they heard, but to be understood? Hereunto tends the saying of Jerome, Let
therefore the holy Scriptures, be always in thy hands, and let them be
vncissantly tossed in thy mind. Hear then you see, neither Ambrose ad 1. Cor.
14. Sint ergo diuinae Scripturae, semper in manibus (...), et iugiter mente
voluantur.
from the word, nor Fathers have they any warrant for it, that the worship of
God should be performed in a strange tongue, and to rob the people of knowledge.

The like warrant have they for pickpurse Purgatory, If we well consider the
places alleged for the same, and bring them to the balance of the Sanctuary,
they will be found too light.

First, they think that place of the Apostle to be understood of Purgatory;
where he says, Every man's works shall be tried by fire; which they say is the
fire of Purgatory: and by straw, wood, and stubble is meant venial sins: But
the true meaning of the Apostle is this, By straw and stubble, is meant false
doctrine, and by gold and silver is meant sound doctrine: And so does Ambrose
(...) stand it; Opus quod ordere (...) doctrina est: The work that shall
burn, is evil doctrine, not the person, but his doctrine shall be tried by
the fire. Fire Calvin in 1. Cot. 3.
therefore in this place, is the Spirit of the Lord, which by his trial,
makes proof what doctrine is like unto gold, and what is like unto stubble:
The nearer the doctrine of God is brought unto this fire, the clearir it is:
contrariwise the doctrine of man's brain; shall vanish away, even as straw is
consumed with the fire: So then this is not meant of the fire of Purgatory.

Secondly, they bring the saying of Christ to prove Mat. 5. 25.
a Purgatory; Agree with thine adversary while thou art in the way with him,
lest he cast thee into prison; verily thou shall not come out till thou have
paid the utmost farthing. Now here we must understand, that by the world to
come is meant a time, as Matthew makes it plain in the words following: for
that which he means by prison, is the same which he means by hell. Again,
here by the world to come, is meant a time ensuing this world: So Mark has
it, He shall receive an hundredth Mark 10. (...).
fold more, and life everlasting in the world to come. Now then the world to
come, being a time after this life, can not then be understood of any
Purgatory: For they say, it indureth but in this world only: But we
acknowledge not so much as a Purgarory in this worlds time. And as Augustine
observes on this place; Consenti cum aduersario etc. Consent with thiue
adversary in the way; For when we are passed out of this world, Nulla
compunctio, vel satisfactio remanebit: There remains no compunction or
satisfaction for sin; as the tree falls, so it lies: meaning by the tree,
man; by the fall, death; Ecclus. 3.
and by the place, heaven or hell. For, tertium locumpenitus ignoramus, i am
necesse in scripturis sanctis inuenimus: The third place beside heaven and
hell, we are utterly ignorant of; we find not in Scripture that there is any.
And to conclude with the saying of the Apostle, Every 2. Cor. 5. 10.
man shall receive the things which are done in his (...) body, whether it be
(...), god or evil: If according to the body, then what should a Purgatory
do? for the body comes not there, as they themselves confess: wherefore I
conclude, if there be a Purgatory, wherein the soul suffers, then the reward is
not after the body, but after the soul, and so the Apostle is found a liar:
But if after the body, then there is no Purgatory: And so the Pope is found a
liar, for so he is; for there is no middle place, Vt possit: esse nisi cum
diabolo, qui non est cum Christo: But he must needs be with the devil, which
is not with Christ.

But before we pass from this Purgatory, let us observe two things which will
overthrow all this building. The first is, the place of this Purgatory, where
The place of Purgatory not to be found.
it should be, and that they know not: Some think it to be near hell; but
then the passage (say others) to heaven, will be too long: Some say it is near
heaven; but this will not pass for current; for it is not fit that such a
place should be so near heaven: Some think it in the midway between both:
Others think it to be every where; but in the end it will prove to be no
where.

Secondly, observe their disagreement about the punishment: The pains of
Purgatory not known.
Some say, the souls are punished by good Angels: Others say no, It is not a
work fit for them, but rather for evil spirits: Some think they are
tormented by fire; and others say, by water. Now if they are ignorant of their
torments, how can they find a fit means to deliver them out? for, it is
necessary, that the Physician have knowledge of the disease, before he can
minister a fit remedy unto the patient. Thus while they disagree about the
torments, we agree in this, that there is none.

And herein I cannot forget one thing, namely, the unmercifulness of the Pope,
that knowing the souls to be so tormented in Purgatory, would not, out of his
Holiness deliver them forth sooner: But now of late days, and though the
Pope can, (as they say,) (...) the souls out of Purgatarie: yet will they not
without money; no penny no Paternoster, I may conclude the truth of
Purgatory, with the delivery of souls, to be as true, as that of Mahomet,
that the Angel of death drew Moses his soul out of his nostrilles, by the
smell of an apple of Paradise; But one thing I am sure of, that they are a
hotter Purgatory to the Saints of God, then their imaginary Purgatory, to the
souls departed.

In the third place, let us see what warrant they have for their merits, and
supererrogations: here they bring the saying of the Apostle, that every man
shall receive Romans 2.
according to his works. Also they bring the saying of Christ: (where he
says,) great is your reward: Ergo, our works do merit and deserve. But for
answer to Math. 5. (...).
this, we haue-at hand out of the words themselves; for the Spirit says not,
(...), for works, noting out a Gregory in Psalm. 145.
desert but (...), according to works, to show the measure of the reward:
Saint Gregory notes: It is one thing to render according to works, another for
works; for in that, it is said according unto works: the quality of the
work is understood, that, whose works appear to be good, his recompense
should be glorious: not because the work does merit any thing at all; but
because he has promised to reward us according to the quality of 2. These. 1.
5. Revel. 3. 4.
the same. But they produce more proofs yet, as that ye may be counted
worthy the kingdom of heaven: and they shall walk with me in white; for they
are worthy. It is true, they are worthy, in and by Christ: for he being 1. Cor.
3. 221.
ours, all things are ours, as the Apostle shows: and we are worthy because
of his promise; for God has made himself a debtor: non accipiendo, sed
promittendo: not by receiving any thing at our hands, but by promising. We do
not say, read quod accepisti: sed read quod promisisti: render that thou have
received, but render that which thou have promised.

That we are not saved for our works and merits, is manifest: first by the
word of God, let David speak for all the Prophets; and he will tell us, that
God crowns Psalm. 103. 4.
us with mercy and compassion; And let Paul speak for all the Apostles, we are
saved: (...) by the works of righteousness, but according to his mercy; for
eteruall life is the gift of God. And to conclude with the saying of (...). 3.
Christ, when ye have done what ye can, yet: say we are Romans 6. 23.
unprofitable servants; So then it is evident by the word (...). 17. 10.
of the Lord, that our works merit not.

I might also show you the judgments of the Fathers in this point; which
join with us in this, that we merit nothing by our works; but to comprise
many in one, and not to total all in just account: I say with Barnard,
sufficit ad meritum, scire quod non sufficiant merita: it is sufficient to
merit, to know that our merits are not sufficient. Besides, I could show some
of their own Doctors, which are of our opinion; as Paulus Burgenses, Thomas
Aquinus, Durandas, Dionisius, Carthusianus, Belermin and others; are
constrained to confess the truth of our doctrine: that works are not
meritorious.

I will conclude with this: in every merit, these things The nature of merits.
must concur: sit gratuitum, non dibitum a nobis illi, etc. that it be free,
not a debt that we owe; for if it be a debt, then it does not merit? Now who
dare say that he owes not himself, and all that he has, or can do unto the
Lord. And therefore we can not merit, so long Romans 11. 35.
as all we can do is due to God: and not in our own choice to do, or not to
do; 2. Sit vtile vel commodum illi, etc. That it be profitable and commodious
for him, of whom we merit.; But what profit has God by all our Psalm. 16.
good works? for how can he which is infinite, receive any more; now
whatsoever receives increase, is not infinite, but God is infinite: and
therefore our, works do him no good. And 3. there must be a preportion
between the work and the wages: but what equality between afiait labor,
and an infinite reward? I have almost lost my self among these merit-mongers,
which have altogether lost themselves among their suppoled merits. Wherefore to
end in a word, non pro merito, not for thy merit sbalt thou receive eternal
life: sed tantum pro gratia: but for grace. The prayers of Rome.


Now let me transport your meditations for a while, O Maria matter gratia, matter
misericordia, tu nos ab host protege, and hora mortis suscipe.
among their prayers: but not to pray with them; for they pray to stocks,
images, Saints, and Devils. They have a pretty distinction of prayer and
worship: namely, (...) and (...), latria belongs to God, and may not be
imparted to men or Angels: but Doulia may be given to God, men and Angels. It
seems they never observed Veni regina gentium, dele flammas reatuum, dele quod
cunque denium da vititam innoceutium.
Augustine upon this, Doulia debitur Deo, tanquam Domino: religious service is
due unto God, as he is a Lord. Latria vero non nisi Deo, tanquam Deo.
Religious worship is only due to God, as he is God. Let it be what it will
be: all is due to the Lord, and none to Saints, or Angels. Paul Apostle, te
deprecor, vt ab Angelo sathanae me eripias and a ventura ira liberes, and in
caelum introducas.


I will set before you a dishe of this fruit for your judgments to feed
upon: but not for your affections to digest. And first I will begin with
Mary; for upon the day of her conception, they have this prayer. O Mary the
mother of grace, the mother of mercy, defend thou us from our ghostly enemy,
and receive us at the hour O faelix Aposte magne matter Iacobe te colentes
adiuua, peregtinos vndeque tuos clemens protege, ducens ad caelestia.
of death. Again in the visitation of Mary they use to say; extinguish the
fiery heat of our sin: blot out what is amiss, and cause us to lead an
innocent life. I could spend a whole hour to show you such stuff as this is;
but to let you see somewhat of Paul. O blessed Apostle, Paul, I pray these that
thou will deliver me from the Angel of Satan, and defend me from wrath to
come, and bring O Crux lignu^ triumphale, mundi verasalus, vale inter ligna
nullu^ tale fronde, flore, germine medicina Christianasanes salua, aegros sana.
me into heaven; the like they have to James. O happy Apostle and mighty
Martyr James, help thy worshippers, defend courteously thy pilgrims on every
side, and bring them to heavenly joy.: and now as God said to the Prophet,
come and I will show you greater abominations. O Cross triumphant wood, all
hail, worlds true health, among all the trees in the wood, there is not thy like
for blossom, bough, and budde: Christians Physic, save the sound, and heal
the sick: And thus I have given you a taste of some of their abominations, and
presently I will show you how they are contrary to the word of Jehovah.

1. Now the warrant they have for their prayer to Saints and Angels, is none at
all; but contrariwise we are commanded to pray to God; Pray to thy Father which
is in Matthew. 6. 2.
secret: and again, At that day (says Christ) you shall John 6. 26.
ask in my Name. And James tells us whither to go for wisdom, namely to God;
but not a word of Saints Iam. 1. 6.
or Angels. A doctrine never heard of before this adulterous generation sprung
up: The Angels in heaven have refused the same, and Saints upon earth denied
Revel. 19.
it. What shall I say? is it not against the word of Acts 10. 26.
the Lord, and a counterfeit coin come forth of the Devils mint to delude the
world with all.

2. It is against the office of Christ; for he is the Mediator between God and
man, namely, the man Christ: 2. Tim. 2. 5 Gal. 3. 19. (...) 2. 1.
now then to make Angels, and Saints Mediators, is to put Christ out of place.

3. It is a robbing of God of his worship; for prayer is adoratio Dei: and to
offer that to the creature, which is proper to the Creator, is to rob him of
his honor.

4. It is Idolatry, that is a breach of the first Commandment, Thou shall have
none other gods before me. Now whom we pray unto we put confidence in, and
cursed are they which trust in any creatures.

5. It is a sin of blasphemy; for why do they go to creatures, but because
they doubt of the mercy, and love of God? and what is more injurious, then to
make God less merciful then creatures?

6. It is in vain to pray to Angels, or Saints, for they are ignorant of our
estate; neither are they capable of our prayers: for, Abraham is ignorant of
us, and lacob Efa. 63. 16. Eccles. 9. 5.
knows us not: The living know that they shall die but the dead know nothing.
To conclude, we must pray to him, Pro quo nullus interpellat, for whom no man
pryes; sed ipse pro omnibus, but he prays for all.

I might trouble your ears with their un written verities; Papists unwritten
virtues.
which they affirm to be of as great authority as the Scriptures but this I
answer briefly.

First say, that there are many things which the Prophets, Christ, and the
Apostles taught: It follows not therefore, that the Church should seek for
them, because we know them not when we have found them, and as soon we may
embrace a lie, as a truth.

Secondly, admit that we could meet with the right, yet there, is no need of
them: For these things are written, John 20. 30.
that we might believe and in believing we might have life eternal: as
Augustine notes, Many things were done which are not written, (says he)
Electa sunt autem quae scriberentur, quae saluti credentium sufficere
videbantur, But so much was chosen out to be written, as was thought to be
sufficient for the salvation of the faithful.

Thirdly, God has forbidden us to seek after any thing, save what is written,
not to add to the word of God. Deuteronomy. 4. 2. Revel. 22. 18.
It were better for a man to mourn all the days of his life, then to make
himself merry, with the breach of the word of the Lord, that is, to play with
it.

Again, what warrant have they for to take away the second commandment of
God, as not worthy to stand in the leaves of his Book? Sure I am, they ought
not so to do; for, Thou shall not take from the word of the Lord. Deuteronomy. 4. 2.
Revel. 22.
The Law was concluded with this, and so was the Gospel; Thou shall not add to
the word, nor take ought from the same.

What warrant have they for their Free will, whereof they boast? To the
contrary says the Apostle. It is the Of Free Will. Phil. 2. 15.
Lord which works in you both the will and the deed. And here we are to
consider a fourfold will which is in man: One by creation, where the will was
free, both ad malum, and ad bonum: and as Augustine says, Primum liberum
arbitrium posse non peccare: The first free will was to be able not to sin.
The second is, Post lapsum qualis libertas, fit reliqua ante regenerationem:
What freedom is remaining after the fall, before regeneration: and Genesis 6. 5.
that is a will free to sin, but not to good, a will, tantum ad malum: only
to evil. The third is, Libert as voluntatis post regeneationem: the liberty
of the will aftor regeneration: and this is partim ad been and partim ad male
operandum: partly to do good, and partly to do evil: So that if we will
well, it is of God; if evil, it is of our selves: And as Augustine says, Suis
voluntatibus, sed quas ipse operatus est: Their wills, but such as he has
wrought in them: volunt as humana liberate consequitur gratiam, sed gratia
potius libertatem: The will of man does not by the freeness thereof obtain
grace, but by grace obtaines freedom. So then., velle in nobis est: to will is
in our power: been velle a Deo: but to will well is of God. And the fourth is,
Libertas voluutatis post glorificationem: The liberty of the will after
glorification: and in this liberty, the will shall be free, tantum ad bonum,
only to good, and not ad malum, to evil. The sum is this, before the fall,
the will was free to good and evil; by nature free to evil, by grace free in
part, and by glory perfect.

I must not omit their pardons, because they enrich Of the Popes Patdons.
the Popes offer, and derogate from the death of Christ: who can forgive sin
but God? yet the Pope will; and mark well the manner: for first he pardons,
not only sins past, but also sins to come, so that he both pardons,
John 8, 11.
and pattoniseth sins; whereas Christ says to the contrary: go and sin no
more. Secondly, he pardons both a poena and culpa, from the fult and
punishment, we deny not but that the Church may pardon the punishment, but not
the fault: for that is proper only to God. Thirdly, he pardons such as he
never saw: and cannot tell whether they have repented them of their sins or
no; whereas pardon is to be granted, to such as repent them of their sins.
And to fill up the measure of his iniquity. Mandanius Angelis quarenus animas
omnium accedentium. We command the Angels to carry all the souls of them
that come to Rome this year out of Purgatory, into Paradise: Et concedimus
cruce signatis, vt ad eorum vota, duas vel tres animas, quas vellent, e
Purgatorio liberarent: And we grant to all those that have taken upon them the
holy Cross, to deliver two or three souls at their pleasure out of Purgatory.
And surely could it be proved, that the Pope could forgive sins, I would
presently turn Papist.

And here let me acquaint your understanding with the author of these pardons;
who (as I find,) was Gregory the first: for he proclaimed, that whosoever
would come to Rome, to visit the Temples, should have clean remission of
sins. Then came Boniface the 8. and made the year of Iubile or grace, every
hundred years, with the like promises. Then after him came Clement the sixth;
and brought it from an hundred years, to fifty, with the same promises:
Plaenariam indulgentiam, full remission of all their sins, apaena et culpa
toties quoties.

But the thing obseruable is this, why so great a benefit Popes vnmer
cifulnesse.
as this, (as they say); did sleep so long before it was known? either it
could not be found, or they were very unmerciful, to keep the people in
sin, and might have freed them of the same. But now pardons being found, note
the manner: not a jot without money; for no penny, no paternoster. And here
two things must be looked unto: first, that we keep the Popes favor:
secondly, that we have large purses, or we may go without pardons. For
conclusion, the true Church of God is taught, that pardons are not to be
bought with gold, and silver: but with the blood of Christ. 1. Pet. 1. 18.


What should I speak of their pilgremages, unto lying vanities, their stews
established by authority: a hell above ground? where lust, the daughter of
idleness has access to whoredom; or their Masses, Cloystered Nuns, single
life, treasons, murders, and a world of the like: whereby they are abominable
to God, odious to man, and comparable to the devil; Their Religion damnable,
their practice blood and cruelty, and themselves famous for villainy.

Thus then you see, the Papist walk not after the word of righteousness, no;
holy Scriptures are rejected, and in stead thereof is come darkness: and
darkness has begot ignorance, and ignorance has begot error, and his
brethren. See these prodigious spirits are they which are contemners of God,
despisers of his word, persecuters of his Saints, and sacrificers to the
devil; I am glad I am rid of them, let them go: but God give us grace never
to follow them.

(...) we home to our selves, and see, whether we can find any among our
selves, which walk far wide from the word of righteousness. And here first
I will begin with the Usurer, whose art is cruelty: and therefore God did
prohibit the same, as too barbarous and diabolical to be in the Church of
God. Therefore, when thou lendest money to the poor, thou shall not be as a
usurer to them. Now if you would know what usury is, the text says, it is
nashak, whereof comes neshek, (...)
which signifies, to bite or gnawe. Well says the usurer, now I see it is
lawful to take use: so that it be not to the hurt of the borrower, whereby to
bite him. But stay a little and hearken unto God, what he says more of this
by the Prophet; he shall live for ever, which has not given upon usury: where
the word tarbith is used: (...)
which is to increase; and it comes of rabah, to multiply. So that to be an
usurer, is to take more then he puts forth, and to take increase, is to bite;
there being no more difference between nashak, and rabah: but this rabah, is
to take increase, and nashak is the nature of it: namely to bite. So then you
see he which takes increase for his monty, is a biter: and so does Ambrose
observe. Such are the benefits that you rich men bestow, (...) beneficia,
minus datis, and plus exigitis talis humanitas, vt spolietis etiam subuenitis.
Deuteronomy. 23. 19. Romans 9. 3.
you give out little, and require much again, such is your kindness, that you
undo them whom ye help; This is the nature of usury.

The persons to whom they might not lend upon usury, were their brethren; And
by brethren in this place is meant brethren of nation, as Paul says. I have
great heaviness for my brethren, that is, for the nation of the Jews. And to
these it was not lawful to lend on usury: not one Jew to another Jew. Now by
the same rule it is nor lawful for one English man, to lend to another: and so
of other nations. But the chief end why God forbids to lend to their
brethren, was to show that in the Church this diabolical art should not be
used. As for idolaters, and enemies to Religion, they might lend to such on
usury, and for the rooting out of these wicked ones; but among themselves it
might not be used. And 1. These. 4. 6. Matthew. 5. 17.
this statut-law remains still unrepealed.

The like I might speak of stage plays, drunkenness, pride, adultery,
swearing, lying, murdering.

I have not yet done with this word of righteousness. Gods word is called
righteous; first, because of the author, which is God. Holy men spoke as they
were moved by the spirit of God: and from God that is perfect, there A deo
perfecto nihil malum nihil turpe est.
is no evil and filthy thing. And for this end the Prophets cried: the mouth
of the Lord, the mouth of the Lord: to show that God was the author thereof,
which may be proved thus, 1. Est antiquitas, the antiquity, which is before
all writing, as God is before all creatures, 2. Hormonia pulcherima, the most
sweet hermonie and consent, between Moses, the Prophets, and Apostles: which
though they lived many years differing, yet do they all agree in one thing,
3. the true accomplishing of those things, spoken of by them, 4. the overthrow
and downfall of those that have opposed themselves against their sayings; all
which do plainly demonstrate, that God is the author of them.

Secondly, they are righteous, because they are instruments Word instrument
that make us righteous.
to bring us unto righteousness: The whole Scripture is given us by
inspiration, and is profitable to teach, to instruct in righteousness, that
the man of God may be made perfect to every good work. Now where the effect
is holy, the cause must needs be righteous.

Thirdly, Gods word must needs be righteous, because it teaches a doctrine,
which is holy, pure, righteous etc.

Is Gods word righteous? then well note the blasphemy Apostoli quaedam
scripseiu^t, non vt scripta illa praecsse^t fidei, and religioni nostrae, sed
potius vt sabesse^t. Albertus Pigh. hieral. li. 1. c. 2. Abert. conttou. 3. de
eccles.
of the Papists against the same: The Apostles wrote certain things, not that
their writings should be above our faith and religion, but rather that they
should be under, says Albertus.

See what an imputation he lays upon the Apostles Epistles, that they are not
able to direct us in faith and true religion. Observe yet another blasphemy of
his; The Scriptures are double judges: Now we know that a double Judge is
altogether unprofitable, and not fit for Sunt scripturae mutaiudices. Andradius
in l. b. defens.
that place; Even so are the Scriptures by his argument, and of less account
then their traditions. So it appears by the saying of Andradius, Neither in
those books, Neque in ipsis libtis, quibus sacramysteria sunt, quippiam inest
diuinitatis, quae nos ad credendum, quae illis continentur, aliqu religione
constringat.
wherein the sacred mysteries are written, is there one jot of divinity,
which by any force of religion can bind us to believe what is there in
contained. By whose saying you hear, that the word is not able to bring men to
the knowledge of God, religion, and faith: Thus he does conclude them, not to
be holy, pure and perfect: Lodouicus says, The Scripture is as it were dead
ynke; fit for no use, but to be caitaway. So the Papists esteem of Scriptura
est quafi mortuum atramentum.
Gods holy word, as an unholy writing, saying, What advantage has this fable
of Christ brought unto us? So the whole Gospel, is reckoned by them as a fable.
In a word, O quantu^ nobis fabula ista de Christo?
the whole Scripture is accounted unholy. But whether it be more meet to
believe God, or man, let the world judge, David says, that the Scriptures are
pure and undefiled, And Christ says, that they are true and holy; And I say,
let Gods word be righteous, and the Papists blasphemers.

Now I come to the works of righteousness, which Works of righteousness.
we must sow; yet not as the Papists; Necessitate efficientiae: They are
necessary as efficient causes; together with faith of our salvation: but,
necessitate praesentiae, they are necessary for the present; and we cannot be
without them: For, faith does justify, and works do testify: Credis in
Christum? fac Christi opera, vt viuat' fides tua: Do thou believe in Christ?
do thou Christ's works, that thy faith may live. There is a threefold use of
the works of righteousness: first, Gods glory; secondly, the good of others;
and thirdly, our own comfort. How shall it appear that we are justified, if
the Sicut corporis huius vitam, and corporis motu dignoscimus, sic fidei vitam
ex operibus bonis.
fruit of righteousness be not seen? as Barnard says, As we discern the
life of the body by the motion of the body, so the life of faith by good works.
And that you may the better know how to do the works of righteousness,
observe first, that they be commanded of God; secondly, that they be well done;
thirdly, that they be done to a good end.

Vt sit mandatum a Deo; That it be commanded of God, that is, (...), according
to the Scriptures. Then is it not so much to be inquired, whether it be good
and equal, as whether God has commanded the same or no: for sometimes
lawful things are unlawful. Again, sometimes unlawful things are lawful:
As thus, to kill and murder a man's own child, is unlawful; yet if God
command it, then is it lawful: as for example in Abraham, which was commanded
to kill his-sonne, which, if he had refused, had sinned: and to have done it
without command, had been a sin likewise. Or thus, It is lawful to pray one
for another; yet when God forbids it, then is it a sin to pray, not in
respect of the subject of prayer, but because it is a disobedience unto Gods
command, as appears by the Prophet Jeremy. Ier. 7. 14.


Again, lawful things done by some, are virtues; which being done by others
are sin: As thus, It is lawful for a Magistrate to put a murderer to death,
but for a private man it is a sin: Therefore that is a false rule, that many
examine things, by, Whether it be good or equal, and not whether God has
commanded it or no. By this rule the usurer examines his usury; In deed, says
he, God has forbidden it, yet mark what profit comes hereof: Men that can
use no calling may live if they have money. Besides mark what good it does
unto the borrower: Many are made by borrowing; and to give over the same would
do much hurt. But this is a false rule, if God has not commanded the same, it
is altogether unlawful. By the same rule we measure our charity, saying, If I
shall give unto the poor, and relieve the needy, then I my felfe may want.
Likewise in their callings: If I shall tell the truth in selling, use good
wares, and true weights and measures, it is the way to be a Beggar, and the
like: But this is a false rule. I deny not, but that it is good for a man to
keep his estate, and not to grow into poverty; yet not by such a means, as
God has not commanded. By such a false rule, Saul examined his obedience:
Shall I kill the King, and the chief cattle? no, I may have a great ransom
for the King; and for the cattle, they will serve for sacrifice, or for
breed, or the like; and therefore it is better to preserve the King, and the
best cattle alive. But for all his wisdom, God told him that he was a fool,
and had sinned in so doing; and therefore he received a just recompense for
his desert. It is dangerous to call Gods precepts into question, touching the
purity thereof: If he has said it, or commanded it, it is righteous, and we
must obey it.

Secondly, as it must be commanded of God, so it must be well done: as it must
be bonum, so it must be been. That you may take your work along with you,
observe, there must be first, knowledge; secondly, faith; thirdly, readiness.

1. There must be knowledge: for every action is to be known before it can be
well done; either we shall do more then we ought, or less then we should. The
heathen man could say, that he that knows not what he seeks, cannot tell
when to find that which he lacks; as Cato observes: Ignotum tibi nolito
praeponere notis:
Cognita indicio constant, incognita casu.
Do not thou prefer any thing unknown, before things that are known:
Known things stand in judgment, and unknown in chance. As the common
Proverb is, A blind man may catch a Hare; and as well may an ignorant man
light upon some of the precepts of God; yet seldom seen. Pithagoras has a
pretty saying; He that knows not what he ought to know, is a brute beast
among men; He that knows no more then he has need of, is a man among bruit
beast; and He that knows all that may be known, is a God among men. And
because knowledge is the ground of all Arts, God taught his people Josh. 1. 8.
first to know, and then to do; for the way to do well, is to know the good.

2. It must be done with the heart: that is, in zeal, love, reverence, fear,
and the like: Vt sit ex vera fide, That it be of true faith: not so much the
things themselves, Non tam res ipse quam hominum affectus spectantur.
as the affections of men are to be viewed. Witnesses that of Mark, where the
widows two Mites were more regarded, then the abundance of the rich men;
because they came from the heart. Good things done with an evil mind, are but
splendida peccata: glorious sins: Wherefore God said, O that there were an
heart in this people to Deuteronomy. 5. 29.
keep my Commandments: for where there is no heart in the action, there is no
faith; if no faith, it cannot be well done.

3. It must be done with readiness: We must imitate the Angels, which are
said to have wings; to note out their readiness in executing the will of God.
God will have his work done, when he commands; not when we please: While it
is called to day, harden not your hearts. It was the saying of Christ to
Zaeheus; Come down at once: Delays must not be made in Gods service; but as
Christ said in another case unto Judas, That thou do, do it quickly.

4. And lastly must be faithfulness, to do all that that God commands, and
no more: for to do less then God does command, is disobedience; and to do
more, is mere presumption and will worship. It was David's care and resolution,
to have respect unto all his commandments.

Thirdly, that it be righteous, it must be done to a good end; for to do
good works, and not to a good end: is either vainglory, or mere
hypocrisy; as to instance it thus. It is a good work to give alms, to feed
the hungry, and cloth the naked; But if these be done to be commended of men,
or for the obtaining of credit, rather then for the good of the common wealth,
it is not commendable. So we may say, it is bonum, in respect of the act: but
not been, in respect of the end. Therefore to do good works to a good end,
take these three things along with you.

1. That they be, propter gloriam Dei, for the glory of How to do good.
God: That is, that the love and zeal to Gods glory, constrain us hereunto:
as the Apostle speaks: do all that ye do to the glory of God.

2. That they be, propter nostram salutem, for our salvation.

3. That they be done to the good and profit of others, as the Apostle
teaches, that every thing may minister grace unto the hearers: for whatsoever
is done is not right, quod non conducit ad praepositam vtilitatem, which
belongs not to an intended profit.

Thus you see the word of righteousness, that it must be the rule of all our
actions; as also you see the works of righteousness: and how to do them. Now
before I let you pass from this part, I would have you to mark how our
adversaries do slander us, (saying,) that the Church of England teaches faith
without good works, and gives liberty to sin: being a doctrine of
liscenciousnesse to all impiety: insomuch that many are kept from us by reason
of these slanders, falsely laid upon us. The consideration whereof at the
first sight, seems like a great mountain: yet after deliberation, it is less
then a moule-hill. For if they so blaspheme the holy word of God, it is no
wonder they thus slander us. Besides, it Slanders of the Papists.
has been an usual thing with them of old, thus to slander the people of
God. They accuse Wickliffe that he should say, that Luther did hold magistrates
not lawful: that Calvin said, that Christ dispaired on the Cross; that Beza
was turned to popery, and so died: (who was then alive, and by his own writing
proved them liars;) that Calvin fell into blasphemy; with many more of the
like nature. But to bring this home to their doors, to pay them with their
own coin, and to beat them with their own weapons: for do not they
themselves teach a doctrine of liscentiousnesse? yes, unspeakable villaynies,
both countenanced, and canonized for worthies: as murders, rapes, periuries
adulteries, and the like: as the sruite of such a diabolical Religion.

Thus much for the subject, Righteousness now follows the property of the
work, which is to sow.

The second part of the seede-time.
Sow to your selves in right consnesse. The property of the work is now to
be observed, (...) sow: sowing is sometimes taken for casting of seed into the
ground, as thou shall not sow the ground with mingled seed, some time for
preaching of the word; the sower went out to sow: and sometime for our
actions: and so it is here; yet we will not fall into the error of Pelagius. A
Deo habemus quod homines sumus, a nobis ipsis autem quod insti sumus we are
beholding to God that we are men, but unto our selves that we are good men. But
the contrary is, God both makes us: and makes us good men; and then being good,
we labor to do well. That is (as my text says,) to sow good works, as the
wise man exhorts: (...)
Babokar zerang eth-zargnaeca: Betimes sow thy seed. That is, betimes do
good: and he gives the reason; The sower of righteousness shall be truly
rewarded. (...) 3. 2.
Man's life is a continual sowing, either good or bad seed: the seed is the
work, the ground God and man, and the doing or acting is the sowing.

The metapher holds well, for first we know that the husbandman casts his
seed into the ground, couers it with earth: there it rots and seems to
perish, as though he should never have good of the same; and thus would a man
judge, that knows not what belongs to that art: and that he were foolish to
cast his seed into the earth, upon so hopeless a gain. Even so the sowing of
good Obedience (...) to be (...). for the (...).
and charitable works, seems to be lost, because we see not the fruit of our
labor: as John notes, (...), Yet it appears not what we are. Therefore
Solomon Eccles 11. 6.
compares this sowing, unto the casting of bread upon the waters: which at the
first seems to perish. And this is the estate of the godly: they pray, fast,
give alms, honor God, love man, observe his laws, do his commandments,
with the like; yet what is to be seen of all this: What profit has a man of
all his labors, says Solomon. Where is the destinction of good and bad, they
seem to be all one yet; Caine and Abel, in one field: Came and Iapha, in one
arc: Ismael and Isaake, in one family: Esau and Jacob, in one womb: Peter and
Judas, in one company: tears and wheat grown together in one field, good and
evil are not yet diserned. And do not then our labors seem to be lost? May
we not say with Esaias: I have labored in vain? So the world judges, and we in
some sort find: for our life is yet hid with God in Christ; Only we have
some peace of conscience that the world see a not, and the love of God, which
it knows: not. But we know, that when he shall appear, we shall be like
him, as the Apostle John says: and much like those verses which we read of
Pithagoras. Corpore deposite liberam si scandis in aethram,
Tunc them aeternus fies, mortalia linquens:
If quite from earthly dross thou soar,
Then shall thou be a God, and dye no more.


But as yet all our labors are like unto the husbandmans seed castinto the
earth, which seems to rot, and utterly to perish. It is reported of Hillary,
that from the fourteenth year of his age, to the 84. had served the Lord in
sowing this seed: yet it seemed to him lost, Egredere (...) ma egredere quid
times, quid dubitas.
while he uttered this sentence. Go forth O my soul, go forth, why art
thou afraid? why doubtest thou? Likewise Job said. What shall I do, whether
shall I turn, when the Lord shall-comc to judgment. Thus the godly are
subject to trouble of spirit, and vexation of conscience; The world sees not
the fruit, and we perceive not the fullness of our sowing as yet; only here
is our comfort, our works are with the Lord, and the crown of righteousness
shall come hereafter.

Secondly the husbandman receives not the benefit of Reward of (...) godly not
(...)
his labors as soon as he has sown his seed: it is long in growing up,
in ripening, and at the length is cut down and brought into the barn. Even so
is it with the godly, now they sow, and reap hereafter. This world is the
seed time, the next is the harvest time; and so much the wise man shows,
saying: Cast thy bread up Eccles. 12. (...)
on the waters, and after many days thou shall find it. The like says the
Apostle Paul. I have fought a good fight, 2. Tim. 4. 8.
I have kept the faith. Here is his see^de time: the harvest sollowes; Hence
forth is laid up for me, the crown of righteousness. In this world the
children of God are but in their apprentiship, to learn their art: they shall
be truly free men only in heaven; this is their time of fear and trembling:
the harvest of full-ioy and happiness is hereafter.

The Church is compared to a vineyard, that is first dug, then planted,
grows, blows, and afterward comes the liquor. Sometime also to a ship
that goes to the Sea, and is beaten with the waves, tossed with the winds: and
then at the length comes home, full fraughted with Merchandies. Also to a
building, wherein there is much hewing, squaring, and great pains taking,
before it be a fit habitation. To a field that is plowed, sown, harrowed,
grows, ripens, and then comes the harvest. The child of God is a planter, a
Merchant, a builder, and a husbandman: but the wine is not yet tasted of, the
ship is not yet returned, the house is not yet inhabited, and the seed is
not yet in the barn; Therefore I say unto you, as the Apostle said to his
hearers: ye have need of patience, (...), that after ye have done the will of
God, ye may receive the promise: yet a little, and he that shall come, will
come: Post lacramas risus, post exilium Paradisus: After weeping, comes
laughing: and after banishment, comes Paradise: After sowing comes harvest, and
after obedience comes glory.

The husbandman comforts himself with the presedence (...) hope of (...) godly.
of his labors, and feeds upon future hopes: His well dunged and manured
ground, his seasonable tillage, and his good seed, will surely bring a
plentiful harvest in the end, more then answerable to his pains. The
husbandman cannot so much hope for an ensuing crop, as the child of God has an
assurance of his future glory: His well manured soul, with the grace of God,
his seasonable and good seed of obedience, puts him in such an hope, and gives
him such assurance of a blessed harvest, that he will not sell his future
estate, for a present Monarchy. Moses had rather forgo his present dignities,
then loose his future hopes.

Thirdly, it is fitly compared to sowing, because as one corn brings forth
many, and a little increaieth Great gain is in obedience.
much: so the seed of righteousness brings forth an unspeakable weight of
glory: Eye has not seen, care has not heard, neither has it entered into the
heart of man, what God has laid up for those that love him; so Quod nequit
numerari, adeo graeciosa, quod co^patari, adeo diutina, quod nequit terminari.
great is the reward, as that it cannot be numbered; so precious, as that it
cannot be valued; so lasting, as that it ever endures.

O joy above all joys; mirth without sorrow; life without labor; light
without darkness; aglorious reward, for so small a work. Here is a blessed
increase, and yet no usury; an hundred for ten, yea, a thousand for one, yet
no extortion: our seed finite, the reward infinite. A cup of cold water given
to a pious use, shall be put in the Chronicles of heaven, and rewarded with no
lesle then a kingdom.

Fourthly observe, that out of one hand comes many grains, and corns, which
are dispersed into many parts of the field: So the good child of God, must be
as plentiful in good works, doing good unto many. The servant is not above
his Lord. If Christ so sowed, we ought to follow: For, omnis Christi actio
nostra debet esse instructio. Every action of Christ, ought to be our
instruction, who went about doing good unto all people. Among the Jews none
might be a Rabbin, till he could speak seven languages, the tree is not
accounted a good tree, till it bring forth much fruit; and who can be a good
Christian, till he be found fruitful in good works.

A Christian must be like the tree, that Clusius reports of; calling it the
Indian figgetree: and Gorobius calls A strange tree.
it the tree of Adams transgression. Let it be what it is, it grows up with
one fair body, the branches spreading themselves very large, reaching down
unto the earth, taking hold thereof, and springs up again into little trees:
that often it comes to pass, that the ground is covered, and ouerspread for
the space of a mile, with the over spreading branches. The Christian is
compared in Scripture to a fig tree: It seems that this is the cause of it,
to teach the child of God, to be as far Christians are to do good to many.
spreading with his works. We read, that when Christ fed the people, he fed
them by multitudes; to teach us to do good unto many: While we have time
(says the Apostle) let us do good unto all. When the air has given
influence, the clouds sent down the seasonable deawes of grace, and the sun
of righteousness bestowed his kindly heat, then a Christian becomes fruitful.
Man is compared to the earth, that brings forth herbs of all colors and
fashions, and of several smelles. These herbs are as dumb masters to teach us
our duty, to be plentiful in good works, of all sorts; as Peter teaches, 2.
Pet. 1, 5, 6, 7.
Join virtue with faith; and with virtue; knowledge; with knowledge,
temperance; with temperance, patience; with patience, godliness; with
godliness, brotherly kindness; and with brotherly kindness, love: See what a
golden chain of virtues are here linked together. That which was prophesied of
us, must be made true in us; Our roabes (namely our works) must be wrought
with diverse colors. It must not be with us as it was with the Athenians. For
the more good they did know, the less they did: But, Scire tuum nihil est,
nisi te scire hoc sciat alter: Thy knowledge is nothing, unless another man
know that thou have knowledge.

Fifthly, it is fitly compared unto sowing, because the best seed is to be put
into the ground: to teach man We must do the best good.
what seed of obedience to sow, (namely, the best) And to show the same, God
commanded in the Law, they should offer the best of all their cattle, and
without blemish. It is not the sowing, but the good sowing, that brings this
harvest of happiness: For, the husbandman knows, if he should cast bad seed
into the earth, that either it would not spring up; or being sprung up, it
would come to be lanke, and empty corn. So if we sow seed which is not
good, it will die, and perish; or if it doesping up, to give us any comfort, it
is vnitable, and vanishing. Therefore our seed must be such, as that it will
endure the earth, undergo the storms and boisterous weather. When the
merchant sets his ship to the sea, he looks that it be sound within and
without, and able to endure the weather; or else she is never like to return
home again; but with loss. Would a Christian send forth his seed of
obedience: let it be good, that it may endure all weathers; otherwise it will
hardly return again: and if it do, it will be with a broken conscience, and
a weather beaten spirit.

God commanded the Tabernacle to be made of the best stones, wood, gold, and
other things; and the best spices for ointments; principally to teach the
people, that their obedience must be of the best sort. Answerable hereunto, was
that of Marie, who brought ointment, and that very costly, to anoint Christ:
She knew she ought to observe the custom of the Law, in bringing the best: as
strictly should we observe, and perform this duty, in sowing the best
obedience: For, it will be more glorious unto God, and with greater profit
return again unto our selves.

Here I cannot but condole, and wish mine eyes to weep day and night, for the
seed of our dissembling Dissembling Protestants.
Protestants; who like the Grecians, speak much, and do little: They believe
as Christians, but live as Pagans; civil in speech, rude in their manners: The
name of God is in their tongues, but the fear of God is not in their hearts.
The Papists call us Solifideans, but our works do declare us rather
Nolifideans; for the more we know, the less good we do: we fry in words,
and freeze in deeds; speak by else, and work by inches; changing works
into words; and godly devotion into bare knowledge.

O remember that the Vrim, and the (...) must go together: That is light of
knowledge, and holiness of life: for there is as great danger, in not doing of
good, as there is profit in forbearing of evil, It was a question, whether it
were better to have a so that hurts not, or a friend that helps not.

The rich man is in hell; Non quod abstulerit: Not for taking away another
man's: Sed quod non donarit sua; But because he gave not of his own.

Barrenness was ever accounted a curse, a shame, and areproch. The first borne
of idlesle is to do nothing, The second, is to do some thing to no purpose.
And the third is to do that which is pernicious and hurtful. The sowing of
wicked men.
Some will take no pains in sowing; unless the devil set them a work, and
too many have we of these sowers in this land: So that I think, there was
never more filthiness in Sodom, drunkenness in Flanders, lying in Creete,
and hypocrisy in Jury, then is now practiced in England: The custom of
iniquity, has so chased away the shame of sin, that common wickedness, is
taken for no private offense. He ere is such unmercifulness, bribing,
oppressing, and grinding the faces of the poor, as if there were no God to
honor, Devil to dread, Heaven to hope for, nor hell to shun. Men are more
ready to keep their money then their consciences, and their souls are of
less credit, then their seals.

Is this the sowing of our Christians, the practice of our profession, the
seal of our faith, and the fruit of our Religion? O remember the tree that
had no fruit on it was accursed: how much more when there is evil fruit
thereon; as drunkenness, adultery, swearing, lying, stealing, killing,
brybing, etc. Some cruel as Lions, crafty as Foxes, filthy as swine, envious
as dogs, and as ravenous as wolves. Homo homini lupus est. Man it to man a
wolse.

Therefore let my counsel be unto you, as Daniel was unto the King. Break
off your sins by righteousness, Dan. 4.
and your iniquity by mercy toward the poor; let your souls be pure, your
hearts zealous, your lives religious, your actions holy, and your hands (...)
or good works: that it may be said to you, as it was to that good servant;
Well done thou good and faithful servant, enter into thy masters joy.

Give me leave to speak one word more of this terrene sowing, which is a work
very laborious: yet not like unto the spiritual sowing: a work very hard, yet
effected with ease; greatly opposed, yet not hindered: much neglected, yet most
necessary: commonly despised, yet none more amiable. A work it is, (says
Saint Paul.) Work out your salvation with fear and trembling; For the
kingdom of heaven comes not with observation: there belongs more unto it, then
have and hold it; diligence that industerous worke-master, must work it out:
it is not gotten by speculation: For the Vita breuis via longa si vis ad metam
peruenire incipe celeritet currere.
life of man is short, the way is long: if thou will come unto the work,
begin to run with speed; The more a man has to do, and little time
allowed, the greater is his labor to effect it. Qui cupit optatem cursu
contingeremetam,
Multa tulit facitque miser sudauit and alist:
He that in running does desire the wished mark to tuch,
He runs very speedily, and sweateth very much.
Nothing can be effected without labor, and shall we think heaven to be
obtained with a song.

Idleness in human affairs is accounted a sin, but in Religion a double
sin, and many are infected therewith, which rather then they will take a
little pains to walk in the paths of righteousness, that leads to heaven,
they will tumble in the green pleasures of iniquity, which lead to hell. The
common harlot the world, with her painted amorous face, has so bewitched the
fools of this age, that they are sick of love, and every one is ready to do
her the best service they can. Some are so infected with the silken dropsy,
that they cannot tread in the paths of salvation without a Coatch, and then
they go but like unto a snaile, least they should come there too soon, The
usurer would walk in this would walk in this way, but he has not yet read
over his bills, nor gotten the wax clear from his fingers: and he is very
unwilling to go and leave any thing unfinished: for he thinks to get more in
one hour by a piece of paper, (and that with less pains,) then in this way
in a whole The worlds apology against the seed of obedience.
month (with greater labor.) The drunkard sits at ease on his seat, and no
sooner calls for one pot, but he shall have two; Therefore he cares not to
come into this patly, least their should be no tap-houses in the way: for he
cannot go far without a draught, and the journey being long, he faints to
think of it. My lady lust will not come in this path, because she cannot meet
with her companions, and to leave her whorish trade, and take pains for her
living in an honest course, she will not: for she gets her maintenance with
more ease, and often, the pox with all, as an ouerplusse: So she resolves not
to go the way to heaven, and rather then she will take the pains for it, she
will go without it. The fashion mungers, with their top and top-gallants,
think this way to be both too narrow, and the seeling too low: it will spoil
the fashion of their ruffes, vnfrizle their hair, and stain their beauty:
yet if they might have a coach of ease drawn with two horses: pride and
pleasure, they are half minded to God, but deny them this, and you shall loose
their company: the path hard, the journey long, and the pains great; a work
too hard for these dainty dames: their fingers too tender to handle this
seed, and their roundabouts too broad, to enter in at that door. The Lawyer
would travel this journey, were it not a way of peace, and that is not for his
profit; here truth is to be spoken, and justice to be performed: a work too
hard for him, a seed that never came within his garner; He thinks to get more
in one Terms lying, then in a whole years truth in Religion: and so had
rather have a journey at Candlemas to Westminster, then at Midsomer to heaven;
Thus because the way seems troublesome, the pain great, ^ so long before they
shall have their wages, they resolve not to sow this seed atall.

Religion was wont to be a pleasure, now it is reckened a labor: it is too hot
in summer, they dare not come to the Church then, least it make their heads to
ache: in winter too cold, then they refuse to come, because they must not bring
a fire with them; so that Religion is never in season with these, and they can
find no time to sow this seed. In the winter the storms are too boisterous,
and in the summer, the Sun is too hot: so they keep the seed still
unsown.

Is godliness become laborious, and the practice of piety unprofitable, that the
ways of Zion lament, because few come to the solemn assemblies: that a man
may with more ease go out at a Church door, then in at a Playhouse gate. Most
men, (with Demas,) show Religion a Lamen 1. 4.
fair pair of heels, I will commend unto your considerations a story, (how
true it is I know not,) of a certain man that did still send his wife to sow
this seed, the practice of Religion: at length when they came to Mark this
story.
knock at heaven gates, Peter, (being the imagined porter,) lets in the woman,
but keeps out the man, answering him thus. Illa intrauit prose and te. She is
entered both for her self, and for thee: for as she went to the Church for
thee, so she must go into heaven for thee. We may well moralize upon this:
for if we will not labor to have a personality of faith, and a propriety of
devotion and Religion, serving God in our own persons, and sowing this seed
with our own hands, we may go to the gate of desire, but be turned back
again with confusion: Then will the old verse be renewed.

Scilicet immemores supera vt conuexa reuisant,
Rursus and (...) in corpora velle reuerti.
Therefore let us with Ioshuah, serve the Lord in our own person, that we may
be blessed in our selves. For the just shall live (...), in his faith; not by
another man's faith: And therefore see thou keep Gods commandments, Non
memoria, sedvita: Not in thy memory, but in thy life: Non vt reddas ea, sed vt
facias ea: Not to say them by roat, but to do them: That so we may say with
the Apostle. We have kept the faith, and henceforth is laid up for us a crown
of righteousness.

The Propriety of the persons, You.
LAcem, You: These are the persons, and the last part of the seed time. Gods
commandments are all The propriety of the persons.
set down in the second person; Thou, You, and Ye: Hereby to show, that none
must deny his service to God, nor to have any cuasion or staringhole from this
duty. Non dicamus, We may not say, Quid nobis and tibi est? What have we to
do with thee? But rather to say with the Apostle, These things are written for
our learning. For the propriety of faith, is when things are generally spoken,
to apply them in particular; as the Apostle like a good Logician, fiames an
argument out of the generality of Gods promises thus: Christ came to save
sinners: (there is his proposition) But I am a sinner: (there is his
assumption) Ergo, He came to save me. (here is the conclusion)


Thus every man, when he hears Gods commandments, is to frame his argument
to himself in this Every man to apply Gods commandment to himself.
manner Gods commandments are given to men: But I am a man: Ergo. Gods
commandments are given to me.
And so from this argument we should come to another, of practicing, in this
sort. Whosoever is exhorted must obey: But I am exhorted: Therefore, I must
obey,


And hereunto serneth the saying of Christ, (...) which I say unto you; I say
unto all men: even so when God says, Thou shall, Ye shall, and You shall; is
spoken, not to one, but to all. And so much does the Prophet intimate in this
place, Quod autem vobis dico, omnibus dico: What I say unto you, I say unto
all: sow to your selves in righteousness.

But is there none (for all that has be said) that do apologize for
themselves, saying, We are great men, and therefore to be freed in this thing
(as the manner is) O thou man of God, go into the land of Judah, and prophe
sie Amost. 3.
there, but prophecy no more at Bethel; (why?) for it is the kings Court. Thus
they fight against the Lord, with his own weapons: and prove so much the
worse, as they might have been the better: and divert the means of their well
doing, into an occasion of their confusion. That which this Prophet spoke, was
true in them, and is as evident in us: As they increased, so they Hos. 4. 7.
sinned; not the more they increased in people, but in their greatness. There
is such an antipathie betwixt the good blessings of God, and the hearts of the
wicked, that the more they induce them to the service of God, (for their
salvation) the more they wrestle against the same (for their own confusion.) I
have read of the Thracian Mark this story.
flint that burns with water, but is quenched with oil. A true emblem of
these wicked persons, that are the worse by Gods blessings. Tullies history is
made good in this, of a country, that the more it rained, the more dust did
arise: And contrariwise, want of rain caused dirt and mire.

How comes it to pass, that the good blessings of God, should exasperate such
persons to evil? shall their greatness draw them from the service of God,
which ought to be a spur to prick them forward: For the bountifulness of
God stould lead us to repentance. And Romans 2. 4.
were you greater then the greatest among men; yet there is one greater then
you: For God is melek nodang gnal-cal Elohim, A great King above all Gods. The
Psalm. 95. 3.
highest round of our greatness, comes far short of the lowest step of
Gods meannesse. And so long as there 1. Cor. 1. 25.
is a super our, the inferior is to obey the same, as Augustine nots, cum enim
se volunt as relicto superiore ad inferiora conuertit, officitur mala: For when
the will turns it self from the superior to the inferior, it is evil:
Therefore let the words of exhortation be embraced, and tender down your
greatness at the footestoole of Gods Majesty, the original of all
greatness; and this shall Fraerogatiuam genetis similitudo morum magis sibi
vendicat, quam ordo maiorum.
make you greater. For, the congruitie of manners, not the pedigree of
anncestors, has the prerogative of noble birth. He that is not borne of God,
had been better he had never been borne. Therefore maintain the Gospel by
your greatness, and he shall maintain your honors by his power.

Again, the inferior sort are not without their Apologies: The superior has
not drunk the water of Nilus alone, these must needs have a lap: For though
they break not their heads against the upper sieling of greatness, yet they
stumble at the threshold of baseness. Either they think it a duty not
imposed on them, or that it will not be accepted. But, to take away these
objections Mal. 1.
the Lord commanded (when the Tabernacle was to be built) the people to bring
from gold, to goats Exo. 25.
hair, to show that the chiefest obedience must be offered, and that the
poorest is not rejected. God regards not man for his greatness, nor reiects
any for his meannesse: Greatness raises not to heaven, not poverty casts
down to hell.

Inferiority must not hinder us from Gods service and obedience, but rather a
spur to prick us forward: seeing godliness has the promise of this life,
and that to come. Therefore let us do as loel says, to walk in obedience:
Iocl 2. 14.
for who knows whether God will leave a blessing for us or no? God has said,
they that honor me. I will honor them, and a poor man that fears the Prou.
19: Lord, is better then a rich man, which peruerteth his ways. And thus much
shall serve for the seed time.

The third part of the precept, the harvest time.
WE are come at the length (by Gods assistance and your patience) to the
harvest, the last part of the percept. Great pains is taken in the service of
God: yet in the end comes a harvest and pays for all; first, niru, then zergnu
and now kitsru plowe, sow, and now reap: Thus is that true of Solomon. Cast
thy bread upon the waters, and after many days thou shall find it. It was the
counsel of Socrates: Sow good works, and thou shall reap the flowers of joy
and and gladness: qualis vita finis it a: such a life, such an end.

Observe in general, that obedience never goes unrewarded: Doct. Obedience not
vntewatded.
Christ proclaims it. They that follow me in the regeneration, shall follow
me in the glorification. And Solomon (a type of Christ,) said long before, the
sower of righteousness shall be truly rewarded. The Matthew. 19 28. Prou. 11.
10.
truth whereof we may see performed in the godly before us. Abraham believed
God, and was justified: Henoch walked with God, and was taken up into heaven.
What should I speak of Noah, of Moses, of David, of Job of Peter, and all the
godly which first sowed the seed of obedience, and now enjoy their harvest:
for godliness has the promise of this life, and that to come. Hoc est non in
nostris recte factis.


Yet let us take heed we fall not into a popish conceit, that we are
rewarded for our works; no, This is Sed in tua bonitate situmest. Vt tantam
effugiamus damnationem.
not in our well done deeds, but in thy goodness O God, that we escape
damnation, says Chrysostom. Not of works can we obtain salvation, but of
Gods election and grace; yet still it is true, obedience is ever rewarded. Non
ex operitibus salutem attingereposlumus, sed Dei electione and gratia.


And there are two reasons hereof. The first, Proptcr veritatem Dei, for the
truth of God, which is most sure and firm, and stands like mount Sion, that
cannot be removed: which proceeds from the eternity, and immutabilitie of
his will: with whom there is no change, Mal. 3.
nor shadow of changing; He that commanded truth in others, will surely keep
it himself, or else he should not be omnipotent but impotent. Therefore the
Apostle does thus style him: God that cannot lie. And as the Tit. 1. 2.
author to the he brewes says, non enim in iustus est Deus, for God is not
unrighteousness, that he should forget your Heb. 6. 10.
work in the Lord.

2 The second reason is, propter iustitiam Dei: for the righteousness of God:
for to punish those that sin, and not to reward the righteous, might seem
unrighteous; But verily there is a reward for the righteous: for as those that
do evil shall have tribulation and anguish, etc. So they that do well, shall
have peace, glory, and immortality, Romans 2. 10.
Otherwise he should seem to be more just to the wicked, then merciful to
the righteous. I conclude, that they which serve the Lord in the day time of
their life, shall be rewarded in the euen-tide of their deaths.

We which are the sweet singers of Israel, (and have Use 1.
sung out the songs of salvation,) shall reap a harvest according to our place
and work: for if we convert many, we shall shine as the Stars; Glorious
shall their reward Dan. 12. 3.
be in heaven, whose titles are so great on earth, as luminae stellae angellae,
and the like. Surely there is a double document in the same: namely, that the
greatness of the titles do put us in mind of the work: therefore not to
suffer our hearts to be adulterated with popular applause, but to hunt souls
into heaven: and not our selves into fame. And as it puts us in mind of the
work, so of the greatness of the reward, which will be glorious.

Mark well the comparisons, that we are compared unto: to the Sun, Stars,
Salt, and Angels; Observe it well, though these are the glory of the world: yet
have they been shaken. The Angels fell, the Stars short, Ministers to teach
good doctrine, and keep good hospitality.
the Salt corrupted, and the light obscured. A good caveat for us to be the
more vigilant, that our reward may be the greater. Peter was three times willed
to feed the flock; that is as Barnard observes, with sound doctrine, honest
life, and good hospitality; It is both commondable, and commodious for
Ministers to preach in the plural number with good doctrine, and charitable
hospitality: words without deeds avail little. It is recorded of Alexander
Seuerus, which said, that he was more moved to believe in Christ by the
Christians hospitality, then by all Origines learned and eloquent persuasions.
Doctrine and charity are the two hands which build up the walls of Sion: and
who so thus buildes, shall receive a double portion with Benjamin.

You which are in authority, both in Church and 2. Magistrates croppe.
commonwealth, are worthy of double honor in this life, and shall reap a two
fould croppe in the world to come. It may be said of Magistrates, as it was
said of Christ: they are set for the rising and falling of many in the land;
you are the high Ceders of Lebanon, whose fall is the hurt of many. The Church
is compared to a building: we are the builders, you are the side stones, and
the inferior people the filling stones. So long as you stand the people are
safe, but if you give way, they fall out by whole heaps. Twice happy
(therefore) shall you be if you stand faithful to the Lord: and look how much
you are above others in the kingdom of grace, by so much shall you shine more
then others in the kingdom of glory. Thus shall you reap a double blessing
with Jacob: twice blessed in this world, and double crowned in the world to
come.

And you my brethren of the lower sort, shall reap a harvest according to your
seed; for God will make an inquisition after all that you have done: and not a
good The inferiourcoples crop.
thought shall go unrewarded. Then your feeding the hungry, clothing the
naked, pity to the fatherless and widow, ministering to the Saints, and your
upholding of religion shalappeare. Then shall every man have, Secundum opera
(...), peace of conscience, joy in the holy Ghost. Blessed then shall you be in
your persons, blessed in your actions, blessed in your estate, and blessed in
your posterity. And (as Christ said in another kind,) all these are but the
beginnings: the full croppe is yet to come: Eye has not seen, ear has not
heard, what those things are, which God has laid up for those that sow
this seed. And thus much briefly for the harvest in general.

I come now to the more particular parts of this harvest, which are; first, the
property of the work, Reap: Secondly, the manner of it, According to mercy.

First, the property of the work is to reap: Harvest is called Autumnus, and
has that name of Augende, increasing: Harvest of grace of race.
For then comes in store of fruit, that the earth brings forth, which fruit
is gathered, when the Sun enters into Libra; which is, when the Sun is in
the right line, that is called, Linea Equinoctialis: And so from that time it
comes into Libra, till it come into the sign that is called Sagittarius Now it
is no small comfort to the husbandman (after he has taken great pains, and
been at great cost) to see the harvest approach, and the regions to grow
white. It is no less (but much more) joy to the child of God (which has sowed
the seed of obedience, all his lifetime) to have the harvest of promise
brought home to the door of his conscience, and ready to enter the barn of
his soul. But let us consider this reaping. First, as it is in grace, and then
as it will be in glory.

First, we are to consider (a little) the harvest in grace: For they that reap
not in grace, shall not enjoy an harvest in glory: Post mercatum solutum nullus
negociatur: After the market is ended, there is neither buying nor selling. He
that prepares not things necessary while he is here, is like to want
hereafter: Wherefore follow the counsel of Christ: Lay up treasure for your
selves in heaven, Matthew. 6.
that when these earthly Tabernacles shall fail, they may receive you, into
everlasting habitations. And here for your better understanding, how to reap
in the kingdom of grace, consider it, first, Temporal, and secondly,
Spiritual.

First, there is an earthly harvest, which God has promised, Terrene harvest.
Leuit. 26.
the threshing shall reach unto the vintage, and the vintage shall reach unto
the sowing time, and you shall eat your bread in plenteousnesse, etc. It is no
small blessing to dwell in the green pastures, and to have our cups to
ouerflow Psalm. 23.
with abunance?

Observe the seed of righteousness brings the harvest of earthly blessings.
Would a man reap abundance Doct. Godliness brings gain. Deuteronomy. 28.
and ascend to pompous honor? Let him travel this way, and it will bring him
thither: For godliness has the promise of this life, as well as of that to
come. And this did God teach them, by setting before them a catalogue of these
things; upon condition that they would obey him. The like he says in another
place; that, they which honor me, I will honor them: And we see it as truly
performed in Abraham, Jacob, Job, and many more.

Obedience brings us within the covenant of the promise, Reas. 1.
which ever runs upon conditions. If ye do, if ye believe, if ye obey: The
condition being kept the promise is ours, as the Apostle notes. Ye have need
of patience, that after ye have done the will of God, ye might receive the
promise. If you ask who shall ascend to the hill of the Lord? David tells
you, The man that walks uprightly, and works righteousness, and speaks the
truth from his heart. If you ask who shall enter into glory? Christ tells
you. Non auditores, sed factores: Not hearers, but doers. If you ask me the
way to get earthly blessings, I answer with Christ, Keep the Commandments.
Christ calls Love the greatest commandment, but Solomon calls obedience
the end of all, saying, Hear the end of all, fear God, and keep his
Commandments. For this is that which makes us coheires with Christ, by everue
whereof all things are ours. So says the Apostle, All things are yours, and you
Christ's. Soli habent omnia qui habent habentem omnia. They alone 1. Cor. 3. 22.
possess all things that possess the Possessour of all things.

Does not this minister matter of comfort, to those which have walked in this
path of righteousness. To Use. 1.
whom I may say as Christ did, to the good servant, Well done you good and
faithful servants, enter into your masters joy, and take possession of these
earthly blessings. Every one that believes and does well, confirms the Law
by his life. And you know (and hardly to be Omnis qui credets Chtisto, been
agit, and viuendo legem confirmat.
known) what the reward of that is, which no demension in art, no effection in
nature, no proportion in the creature, can express. Such is the love of God to
them, and their right unto all things. Therefore, as the Epicures said to
themselves, so may I say to these, Ede, bibe, lude, Eat, drink, and be merry.

But now some object against the truth of this point, saying, If, after
obedience, we have right to reap this harvest, why are the children of God in
such contempt and poverty, and the off scouring of all things to this day, as
we see? Eliiah was persecured, and the false prophets favored: Michaiah
sinitten, and the lying prophets honored: Dives rich, and Lazarus poor.
Whereunto answer is made, that it is no safe concluding; because they possess
them not, they have no right unto them: For by the same argument we may
conclude, they have no right to the kingdom of glory. The argument is thus
framed: Whosoever are not in possession of glory, have no right to it. But men
living upon earth, possess it not. Ergo, Those that possess not glory, have
no right unto it.
Want of possession does not argue no right.
The like argument may be framed concerning earthly blessings. Those that
possess not riches, have no right thereto. The righteous possess them not.
Ergo, Obedience has no right thereunto.


The mayor of both these syllogismes is false: For possession of a thing does
not argue aright thereunto; no more does not possession argue no right. But as
a man which has bought land, paid his money, writings being made, delivered
unto him, has right to the land, though he possess it not. So the godly have
right to them though they possess them not.

Besides this, it may be the time is not yet come, when God will give us these
things. Joseph was in prison before he came to honor. Jacob served many
years, before he had his riches. David was persecuted, before he came to the
kingdom. Daniel in the den, before he was one of the governors. Mordecai
sat at the gate, before he came to preferment, And all these, in the state of
grace, long before they came to taste of this harvest.

Again there may be some cause known to God, why he does not give these
things generally to his children. Why Abraham was rich, and Lazarus poor,
David a king, and Mordecai at the gate. Surely there is great difference in the
natural qualities of men, and such an antipathie there is between the same and
riches, that often they steal away our hearts from obedience: and therefore
God, as a wise father, gives not what is our right, but what is good for us.

I must not forget the wicked; which never sowed the 2. Use. The wicked reap
that the have no right to.
seed of righteousness: yet reap they this earthly harvest as fast as the
godly: and with carrying this crop into their barnes, the devil is often
conuayed into their hearts. There is no more difference between Judas and
them, then this: Judas had the bag; and the devil in it: These have riches and
the devil with them: For unto the impure, all things are impure: Their meat,
apparel, riches, and honor, are cursed unto them. For he that said, What
have thou to do to take my name in thy month, and hate to be reformed? says
also, What have thou to Psalm. 13.
do, to take this crop into thy possession? And yet who prospers so as these?
who so beautiful as Absalom? so rich as Nabal? so honorable as Haman? who
flourish so well as the sons of Belial? And yet with Judas they do but bag up
to their own confusion. He that is much honored in the way, at the end of his
journey is damned: Qui honoratur in via, in peruentione damnabitur, and quasi
per amaena prata in carcere^ venit: qui per prospetitarem praesentis vitae ad
interitum tendit.
and, as it were, through a fair pasture, he passes to a prison, who by the
prosperity of this life present, goes to destruction and confusion. This is
the end of these men: and how can it otherwise be, seeing they live by robbing
the Saints of God? Zeuxis was a true emblem of these, that looking on a
picture, brake out into a laughter, which brought him to the grave in mirth,
and so died: These men have a day of mirth; their life is in the noone of
pride: but their Sun shall set in darkness, and Greg. moral.
their seeming joys shall be turned into true eternal woes.

Therefore seeing they have got the houses of God in possession, and the
inheritance of the holy ones into their hands: let them be as sparing as may
be to themselves, and very liberal to others: that seeing they must be
arraigned for thieves, and go to their own place with Judas their judgments
may be more easy.

This is for the temporal and terrene harvest, now follows a spiritual and
more comfortable to the soul: namely, the assurance of salvation, with the
fruits thereof: as peace of conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost. It was
Zacheus his honor, that Christ came to his house: and it is our comfort, to
get his promises into our hearts. This harvest is so needful that we cannot be
without it: for while we are without this we want true joy, the conscience
still crying out, what shall I do to be saved.

But now the good Christian falls hard to work, comes closse to the corn of
Gods promises, lays hold thereon with the hand of faith, and cuts it down
with the sickle of confidence, brings it home into the Garner of his soul,
thrasheth it out by meditation, and feeds upon it by application to his
consolation. And thus far does the word of my text lead me: for kitsru
which (...)
comes of katsar signifies to lick up.

Observe that the children of God, are assured of the Doct. Assurance of glory
while we are in this world.
kingdom of glory, while they live in the kingdom of grace: holy Job had made
such a seed time, that in the end he came to reap this harvest to his
comfort: I know (says he,) that my redeemer lives. And thus all the godly
can say to the full assurance of glory, (...) Job 19. 25. John 3. 2. Gal. 2. 20.
(says John) now are we the sons of God: and can say with Paul, Christ Jesus
lives in us: and therefore if this earthly tabernacle were destroyed, we have
a house eternal in the heavens. Thus the child of God can 2. Cor. 5. 1.
speak with confidence of assurance of glory, while he lives in the kingdom
of grace. The Apostle says, God has sealed us to the day of redemption: not
so much that he might know us, as that we might know our Ephesians. 4. 30.
selves to be his; for here we either receive, or loose Hic vel accipimus,
vel amittimus vitam aeternam.
life eternal; Which thing being so needful, made Solomon to say in the
person of the Church. Bring me O King into thy chambers: and that this is the
true reading, observe the words in the original, habiani hammaelaek (...)
chadarau which words are in the Imperative mood in the original, let the
King bring me: but fitly put into the Indicative mood in the English, the King
has brought me, yet howsoever, it shows the truth of this doctrine: for if in
the Indicative mood, it shows that it is, if in the Imperative mood, then it
shows that it must be: For no man shall follow the Lamb in glory, which has
not followed him first in grace.

Will you now know the reason thereof hearken then to the truth of God, which
tells us that we are justified by says, now the nature of faith is, to
assure our hearts of the certainty of his promises.

First in regard of the nature of faith, which is not only historical, to
believe the story of the Gospel to be Reas. 1.
true, but for to assure a man of that which he believes to be true, that they
are his. And this will appear to be so, by the Etymology of this Theological
faith, considered either in the Hebrew, Greek, or Latin; in the Hebrew it is
called amunah, which comes of aman, which is firm and sure. And therefore
the Apostle Nature of faith.
does use this word to confirm the promises of God, saying, All the promises
of God are in him (...), and so in the Syriack, amin. And hereupon it is, that
the Church has appointed this word, to be said at the end of all prayers: nay
God himself appointed the same, when the people were to be blessed, they were
to answer and say, Amen. Also this word Amen, signifies a nourcery where trees
are planted. Faith is the nourcery where the trees of Gods promises grow: And
so to go from aman to omen and then to omeneth which is in the feminine
gender: so that faith is both the nource and the nourcery.

And as the Etymology of faith in the Hebrew confirms the truth of this
doctrine: so we shall see the same in the Greek. For faith in the Greek is
called (...), from the third Praeterperfect tense Passive (...): from whence
comes (...), that is, I am persuaded: the active verb is (...), and the
Praeterperfect tense mean is (...), I persuade my self. And so you read of
the Apostle, (...). For I am persuaded, that neither life nor death, shall
separate me from the love of God in Christ. So that according to this
Etymology of faith, it is then a certain persuading of a man's self of the
promises of God.

The Etymology thereof according to Latin is the same with the former. Fides
comes of fio, or (as Cicero Ideo sideles (...) vocati sums vt his quae di
cuntur sine (...) la haesitation credamus. Qui dubitat side, infidelis est.
says) of fiendo, which signifies doing: For the thing we believe, is done and
made firm unto us. And hereupon, says Chrysostom, Therefore we are called
faithful, that we should, without doubting, believe these things that are
said. And to add the saying of Augustine, He which doubts in faith, is an
Insidell. Faith then is the evidence of things hoped for, and he that has it,
must needs have assurance of glory. Heb. 11. 1:


Secondly, if salvation be of faith, then it must be while faith is in use,
that we may attain to this salvation. Now it is manifest that Iustus ex fide
viuet, the just shall live by faith. Which saying is taken out of the Prophet
Habakkuk: the just must live in his faith. The meaning is, that our salvation
is by believing, as the isntrumental cause thereof. But now faith indures but
this life, as the Apostle notes the difference between faith, hope, and love.
The chief is love, for that remains with us for ever in glory. Hope goes to
the grave, yet leaves us not there: but like Peter follows us into the high
Priests hall: (I mean into heaven,) and there remains till the day of
judgment. Now faith is of shorter continuance, and attends us as a good
servant to the grave, and there leaves us: so that after death there is no
faith. Therefore seeing salvation is of faith, and Sinune (...) est fidei,
(...) autem (...) rum (...) fidei, quis (...) bitet, etc.
faith but only in this life: it follows, that while we are in the kingdom
of grace, we are assured of glory. If now be the time of faith, and the
salvation of the soul be the reward of faith: who doubts then of the
assurance of salvation while he is here in this world?

There are yet other good arguments to prove that this assurance of glory is
in this life, viz: (...) we lost salvation, and here we must find it again.
Me thinks Vnde (...) est ortum, (...) dut and (...) but (...) euenit.
that place of the Apostle may be applied to this, and it shall be said in the
place, where it was said: ye are not the sons of God, ye are the sons of
God. Where the wound began the cure was made: where death emred, there life
proceeded.

Again in this world we were redeemed; now it is fit that where redemption is
wrought, there assurance should be sealed. And here note how answerable the
work of redemption, was to the fall of Adam, viz: Adam sinned in eating,
Christ suffered in fasting: Adam sinned in the spring, Christ suffered in the
spring: Adam sinned in a garden, Christ suffered in a garden: here Adam lost
all, and here Christ has recovered all; where we are redeemed, there we are
sealed: and where we are sealed, there we are assured.

There is good use to be made of this doctrine, first against Use 1.
the Papist: who say that men cannot be assured of this harvest, and call the
remission of sins vain; and of Certitudine^ remissionis pectaroru^ vanam,
and ab omni pie. (...) remotam (...).
all confidence the hardest and remote: and fides daemoniorum, non Apostolornm:
the faith of Devils, not Apostles. And this confidence in the promises of God
belongs rather, ad presumptionem non ad fidem, to presumption and not to faith.

And here let us see the Scriptures, they confirm this their deuillish
doctrine by: and the first is this, Who can say my heart is clean: not that
there is none clean, Pse. 20. 9.
but no man knows when his heart is clean: Ergo, no man can be assured of
salvation. But to this it may be answered, 1. the wise man speaks against
such, as thought themselves to be meritorious and free from sin, 2. Be it
granted that no man has a clean heart free from it: yet he does not infer
hereupon; therefore he cannot be assured of salvation, 3. If none but such as
are pure from sin, can be assured of salvation, then their Priests are not
assured, as they say.

Again, no man knows whether he be worthy love or hatred: therefore a man
cannot be assured of salvation. Eccl. 9. 1.
But this place speaks not of any inward comfort and assurance of glory, but
of outward estate, and by the outward estate of man: it is not to be known,
who is loved or hated of God: because the assurance of salvation, is not in
outward worldly prosperity, but in the inward grace of the spirit: so this
place is nothing to prove, no assurance of salvation.

Again they bring the saying of the Apostle, work out your salvation, with
fear and trembling. Ergo, where Phil. 2. 12.
there is fear, there can be no assurance, but doubtfulnesse; But mark what
fear this is, 1. Fear your carnal presumption by which you think to be in
the state of grace, and are not: fear this, 2. Fear to fall into error, and
to be deceived by the craftiness of men, whereby they lay in wait to deceive,
fear these, 3. Fear in regard of the reverence to God: but no fear in
doubtfulnesse of salvation.

To conclude, if this be the best proof that they can bring to confirm their
doctrine, the foundation is weak, their arguments like ropes made of sand, and
the building cannot long stand.

To turn my self from them to you, and reproof into matter of exhortation,
whether you are in the state of grace or no. Know ye not that Christ is in
you, except 2. Cor. 13
ye be reprobates. Me thinks the same wisdom should be observed with the
soul, as is with the body. A man proves his horse, that he be not deceived: a
man casts up his estate, that he prove not a beggar; and shall we not
prove the state of our souls, that we be not damned? A man be he never so
poor, will not out of one house, till he be sure of another: and shall we
depart this life, and not be sure of heaven? O no. The Mandarins hold it a
thing unfortunate to die before they have made ready their sepulchers; I hope a
Christian Quousq ^ Neq ^ post ^
then should be more wise for his soul, to work out his salvation with fear:
fearing to depart before he has finished the same. Therefore let us live well
(as long as we have time.) for neither the Pilot when the ship is drowned,
nor the Physician when the sick man is dead, profits any thing at all: and
therefore make your calling and election sure, that you may live in comfort,
die in peace, and rise in glory.

And thus you have heard and seen the harvest of grace. The next circumstance
objects to our meditation, the harvest of glory: and here I must confess, I
The harvest (...) glory not (...).
want a head to invent, a heart to conceive, knowledge to understand, judgment
to determine, memory to retain, and a tongue to express. What a croppe the
harvest of glory is: for as it is written, Eye has not seen, care has not
heard, what God has prepared for those that love him, Situ altissimum, it is
high in situation: quantitate maximum, great in quantity: natura purissimum,
pure in nature: luce plenissimum, full of light: capacitate amplissimum, and
exceeding large, for continuance eternal, and for quantity infinite. I may
with more peace of conscience to my self, and greater profit to you, show you
how to come to so great a glory, then to tell you what it is.

The manner.
THe last branch, of this harvest is the manner, which is according to merey:
so says my text, lephi chesed, and we may read, and turn it thus to the face
of mercy, or to the favor of grace, or to the mouth of benevolence, or the
favor of hope: all meeting, as so many lines in one center: showing that all
things temporal and spiritual, are of the mercy of God. For neither our
plowing, nor sowing, deserves this harvest: but Gods mercy giving it. It is
not in him that wills, or in him that runs, (...), but in God which
shows mercy. This is that (...), grace for Romans 9. 16.
grace. First God gives grace to serve him, and then he Rom 1. 16.
gives a second grace as the reward. So Augustine on this observes, Ipsa fides
gratia est, faith it self is grace: Et vita aterna gratia est, progratia, And
life eternal is grace for grace. But is it come to this, to be (for all our
plowing of repentance, and sowing the seed of obedience,) still of mercy?

Observe then, that man has nothing of deserving, and by virtue of merit: so
does Christ tell us, that Dott. All we have is of mercy. Luke 17. 10.
when we have done all that we can, yet are we still (...), unprofitable. And
if it please you to take another witness you may from the Syriach word
battila, unprofitable. And thus by the mouth of two witnesses this sentence is
firm: when all is done we are unprofitable. Siinutilis est qui fecit omnia
etc. If he be unprofitable which did all, what reward is due to us then?
Surely none of the blessed promises of God, but a fearful looking for of
judgment. And therefore the Apostle desired not to be found in the purity of
his own Phil. 3. 9.
works, (because thereby he could not be saved,) but in the righteousness of
Christ. It is manifest therefore, that there is no saftie in our works,
because the spirit teaches us to flee from them, as not a sure refuge to trust
unto. And to this tends that saying of Judah, where he says, we should look,
(not for the reward of works,) but the mercy of God: which as it did initiat us
into grace, so it must consummate us to glory.

The truth whereof will yet more plainly appear by Reas. 1.
this proposition.

Those works which are not perfect, deserve nothing.
But the works of the Saints, are not perfect.
Ergo,
Our works deserve nothing,
For how can an evil cause produce a good effect? Our works not perfect.
We know, that, Qualis causa, talis effectus; Such a cause, such effect. Man is
not so justified, not so sanctified, Vt non sit in nob is peccatum, That there
should be no sin in us, and while it is in us, it is a stayne to our works,
as a little milk changes the fountain of water, and a cloud obscureth the
light of the Sun. And so what patience without murmuring? what faith without
doubting? what zeal without coldness? what love without hatred? what charity
without covetousness? what knowledge without ignorance? what chastity without
concupiscence? and what obedience without defect? So says Esai, that our
righteousness is as a stained cloth. And as Augustine says. Multum boni
facit, Esa. 64. 6.
sed non perfectum bonum facit. He does much good, but not that which is
perfectly good. So that we have need, to go to God, and ask pardon rather
for the sin in the work, then a reward for the good. Then to conclude, the
Saints reap this harvest, Non pro merito, not for merit, sed pro gratia, but
for grace.

I must not let pass now the doctrine of Popery, which teaches a doctrine
contrary to this, namely, that we Use 1.
are not simply beholding to God, but in some sort to our selves, as to works.
And they make two kinds of works or merits, the one is Meritum de congruo,
merit of congruity, which are preparatiue works, that go before
justification, Such were the works of Cornelius (as they say) which, though
they be not meritorious, ex debito institiae, by due debt of justice, yet do
deserve, at Gods hands of congruity. The other they call Meritum de condigno,
merits of condignity, when the reward is justly due by debt, and such are the
works of the Saints. But this distinction of works, we approve not of; For
these works done before justification, though they seem to have a show of
goodness in themselves, yet are they not pleasing to God, because the persons
are not justified; and his work that is not justified, is abominable in the
sight of God. Secondly they are not done in Pro. 15. 6. and 21. 27: Romans 14. 23.
faith; and, Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin: so that these cannot be
preparatiue works. Again for those works done after sanctification, we deny
not but that they are pleasing and acceptable to God: yet do they Quantum ad
caeterorum compatationce^ pertinet, hi digni sunt, quantum ad rem ipsum omnes
indigni sunt.
deserve nothing by virtue of their worth, as Ambrose says, In respect of
others, (that is, other men) they are worthy, but in respect of the thing,
(that is, heaven) they are all unworthy. For, Quid Junt merita omnia, ad tantam
gloriam? What are all our merits to so great glory: To conclude, neither our
works before or after justification, are any cause (that is efficient) of this
harvest, but the mercy of God; which as it had the initiating in grace, so it
has the consummating in glory. Non in nostris recte factis, sed in tua
bonitate situm est, It lies not in our well done deeds, but in thy goodness,
O God.

Return we home to our selves, where we shall find Use 2.
great cause of thankfulness: while the work is so small, and the reward so
great. Do we deserve nothing, and yet enjoy so much? Then learn with David, to
say, Non nobis Domine, sed nomini tuo da gloriam. Not unto us, Lord, but unto
thy Name give the glory. And this is one principal end, why salvation is not
of works, but of mercy; that God might have all the praise: for, He has
chosen us in Christ, to the praise of the glory of his grace. We may all use
the saying of Bernard, When I was Quando ignorabam, me instruxit, quando
errabam me reduxit, quando steti, me tenuit, qvando cecidt, me crexit, quando
veni, me (...).
ignorant, he instructed me; when I erred, he reclaimed me; when I stood, he
held me up; when I fell, he raised me; when I came to him, he received me. O
quid retribuam, etc? O what shall I give unto the Lord for all his favors?
What? Even with David, take the cup of thanksgiving, and drink hearty
draughts to the Lord.

This thanksgiving consists in three things. First, In cordibus nostris, in
our hearts; for to love him, as says Moses, And now what does the Lord thy God
require of thee, but to love him? 2. In operibus nostris in our works to honor
and glorify him by obedience. 3. In verbis nostris, in our words, to give
praise and thanks unto him.

There is another use to be made of this, (seeing our Use. 3.
works are not perfect) not to sit down in the chair of content: but to add
somewhat to the building (as Peter says) To increase in grace and knowledge.
The Apostles case must be ours: We are not yet perfect, and therefore 2. Pet. 3.
18.
must endeavor our selves unto that which is before. And as the man said to
Christ, Increase my faith: So Lord, increase our faith.

Lastly, this undeserved love of God to man, should be a copy to our hands, and
a sputre to our feet, to teach us to show the like love to our brethren,
though they deserve not the same at our hands? Which duty was taught by that
parable of the servant, which had so much forgiven him: ought, from the
consideration thereof, to forgive his fellow servant. God is gone before Matthew.
18.
us: Happy are we if we follow after, and yet cursed if we stay behind.

And thus at the last, I have passed from the precept, to the consequent.

The second part of the Text, is the Consequent.
FOr it is time to seek the Lord, till he come and teach you righteousness.
God never gives an exhortation, but adds a reason to move us to embrace the
same, as sometime of judgment. Thou shall not take the Name of God in vain,
for the Lord will not hold him guiltless, etc. Sometime of mercy, as, Honor
thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long, etc. And here you see
this precept not to want his reason. Which part I have formerly viewed under
two general heads; First, by an argument drawn from their negligence: for it
is time to seek the Lord. Secondly, by an argument drawn from the benefit
thereof; till he come and rain righteousness to you.

Observe in the first branch: first, the action, Seek; there is the property
of the work. Secondly, whom, the Lord, there is the object of our labor.
Thirdly, why For it time; there is the compelling cause.

The Action.
Seek, this comes first to our hands according to our former division. The
perambulation of a Christian, is from East to West, from North to South, to
seek the Lord, in the streets of contemplation and meditation: Not with
Diogenes, with a candle and a lantern, searching the streets of Athens; but
with our whole hearts, with David, to seek the Lord. We must not think that
God will follow us with his blessings, if we flee from him, as Jonas did: For
as God seeks us, so he puts into our hearts a preventing grace to seek him.
The rich man goes not with his alms to the poor man's house: rather the poor
man comes to the rich man's gate. The Lord is rich enough, and needs none of
our labor; yet we cannot have his blessings without pains: for if we will
find, we must seek. Heaven is not gotten with ease, neither is salvation
brought and laid at our doors. No, the kingdom of heaven comes not by
observation, and a contemplative speculation. Diligence, that industrious
workemaster, must make our calling and election sure: For, Nemo volens malus,
nec inuitus foelix: No man is evil with his will, neither is any happy against
his will.

Let not this observation slip without your use: we We must perform
obedience in our own person
cannot have the parts of salvation performed for us by an Attorney: God
requires every man to perform these things in and by himself; other men's
faith will do us no good: neither is there any thing that does more hurt then
doing these things: Non perse, sed per alium: Not by himself, but by another;
as many great men think to go to heaven by their Chapleins, by whom they are
religious in this life; by them also they think to be glorious in the life to
come: And often we see, when the Chaplein is out of doors, grace is not to
be seen in the Parler, and godliness may not stay within doors. Surely a
man may as well see to walk by another man's eyes, as to go to heaven by
another man's works. The question shall not be, What have they done? but, What
have thou done? Therefore you (that intend to seek the Lord, and wear the
livery of Christ) must lay aside all your niceness, and bid idleness (the
mother of mischief) adue, and, put on the armor of God, and fight the Lords
battles in your own persons.

Seek. This duty is set out in Scripture by many epithets: Paul calls it
(...), a race; to show what 1. Cor. 9. 14.
speed is to be made in the way of salvation. Again, he tells the
Philippians, that it is (...), a work, to show Phil. 2. 12.
what pains we are to take in the means of salvation: And Christ calls it a
seeking, and says, (...), seek; which agrees with the word in my Text,
Lidrosh. to seek and is the same in the Septuagint, (...), to show (...)
the difficulty in finding.

Observe, that heaven is not gotten, but with great labor Doct.
and pains taking; Qui cupit optatam cursu contingere metam, multa tulit,
fecitque miser sudauit and alsit. He that desires first to touch the mark,
takes much pains, sweateth abundantly, and runs exceeding swistly: For
heaven is not promised upon small terms. When Christ told his followers of
the bread of heaven, he commanded them to work for it; if they would John 6.
have the same; when he told them of the Pearl, he said they must seek for
the same, before they could have it. Math. 13. 45.
When Paul told the Corinthians of a Crown, he said they must run for it,
or go without it: For no 1. Cor. 9. 24.
man is crowned before he strive. We read in Scripture, 2. Tim. 2. 51.
that the children of God, were watching, not sleeping; working, not idleing;
running, not sitting. The husbandman is a copy to our hands in this point:
which first plowes, then sowes, then harrowes, then weeds, then reapes, and
lastly it is fit for bread for his table: but nothing you see without labor.
If this terrene harvest requires such pain how much more the celestial? yea,
it is Ars artium, the Art of arts, truly to seek the Lord and requires the
more diligence.

First because the way and the marks are observed by the vapors of errors,
and the fogges of darkness, by that infernal spirit which has opened the
bottomless pit, so that the smoke surgeth up: whereby the Sun and Aayre of
knowledge are darkened, that the way is become very difficulte and hard to
find, therefore requires the more vigilance. It is known that the less the
object is to the sight of the eye, the more steadily is the sight fastened upon
the same, that it may aspect it the better, and perceive it the clearer. The
like must you do in seeking the Lord; seeing the way is so obscure (not in it
self, but by Satan's malice, and our corruption,) to be the more careful in
seeking the same. For Arta est via vere quae ducit adguadia vitae. The way is
straight and quickly mist, that leads us up to glorious bliss. Therefore
diligence must seek it, and vigilance keep it.

Secondly when we have, (with the spouse,) found out the way to the Lord: then
does Satan begin to lay stratagems for us: whereby to stay us in our
ambulation, if Gods assisting spirit and diligence should not prevent him. The
devil never suffers man to be at ease: for before regeneration, he sets us to
make brick, (as Pharaoh did the Jews,) that is to commit sin; so that man
before grace, is but the devils slave. And when we are going out of Egypt,
(that is out of sin,) he follows with an host of persecutions till we come
at heavens gate. Therefore our life, and the time of grace, is like the state
of the Jews in building the walls of Jerusalem: which wrought with one hand,
and fought with another. Such Neh. 4. 17.
is our military life while we are in this world: that while we labor to
seek the Lord by faith and repentance, we must fight against the devil by
prayer and patience. Is it not then a work of great labor and diligence?

Let there be a double use made of this: first, to seek the Lord more
carefully: Secondly, when we have him, to keep him with greater vigilance.

I have not yet done with this ( seek,) the word it self Doct.
will teach you how to seek: for derosh comes of darash, (...)
signifies to enquire: and using this word the Lord intimates his own
ordinance, of which men ought to enquire: namely, at the mouth of his word and
Prophts: witnesses another Prophet, which lived in the times of this Prophet,
saying, To the Law and the Prophets: If (...). 8. 20. and (...). 12. (...). 2.
7.
ye ask, enquire and turn; should not the Priests lips preserve
knowledge, and the people seek the Law at his mouth? You see then a verbal
enquire is to be made, an auricular attention observed of us toward the
ordinances of God. Man is the Lords aduerbe; the devil verb: the Lord says
enquire at my ordinances, and walk according to that rule; the devil says
enquire not, for he can save thee without this seeking; But believe him not,
for (by the testimony of Christ,) he is a liar: and we have all found it true
in our first parents, to our woe and misery, had not God disolued his works in
the Elect.

Good reason to seek him in his ordinances, for he has made a promise to
meet us there, and not elsewhere. Was not Cornelius sanctified by Peter's
ministry, Act. 10. Act. 8.
and the Eunuch by Philips. God could do it by other means, but he will not:
thou must be saved by the ministry of man: or thou shall be damned.

Let this teach you to make reverent account of the ordinance of God, and to
use the means that God has appointed for your salvation; let not the means
of the man hinder thee, but look thou to God which works by them: therefore
despise not prophesying. 1. These. 5. 20.


Note here then the folly of those persons, which contemn the ministry of
men. He that contemned Moses Law dyed: how much more he that despises so
great salvation as this; And therefore as the Apostle says. He that despises
these things, despises God, who has appointed them. 1. These. 4. 8.


The object.
FTh Jehovah: this is the object, and afairer mark we (...)
cannot aim at, then the Lord. For as anima vita est corporis, the soul is
the life of the body, so Deuteronomy vita ese animae, God is the life of the soul:
Take away the soul, the body dies: take away God, and the soul dispaireth.
Whereof Augustine says, There is nothing missed more dangerously, and nothing
sought more laboriously, and nothing found more profitably. The Rivers of
Paradise, the springs of Lebenon, the Streams of Sion, the Fountains of
Hermon proceed from this Ocian; For in him we live move and have our being:
from whom proceeds the springs of grace, the streams of redemption, and the
arm of protection. There are three things which my soul loves, (says
Solomon.) So there are three things, we have need of: Power, for Protection,
Mercy for Redemption, and Grace for Sanctification: all which are to be found
in this name Jehovah; which consists of three consonants, which are the three
laeues of Gods Book: in the first you may read Power, in the second you may
read Mercy, and in the third Grace,

This name Jehovah, is a compendium of the whole Trinity: Father Son and
holy Ghost, with all their attributes, and as in the Godhead there are three
persons, so in this Jehovah there are three consonants, and three vowels, the
Greeks call this name, Tetragrammaton: that is of four letters, which are but
three, save that one is twice sounded. The first is Iod, which signifies
principium, a beginning which comes of none, but the other (...)
flows from him: and this is Elohim, Cod the Father, which is called
principium sine principio, a beginning without beginning. The second is he and
signifies ens, a being, or to be, or to give being: and this betokens, Ben
Elohim, God the Son: for by him were all things made. and because Christ has
two natures, God and Man: therefore John 1. 3. (...)
he has two he is. The third is vau, which is a conjunction copulative, joining
of things together: and (...)
this is ruach Elohim, God the Spirit.

In a word, the Father has but one respect: that is, he is produceus and non
productus, producing and not produced. The Spirit has one respect likewise:
he is productus, produced: not producens, producing. But the the Son has
two respects, (that is,) he is productus a Patre, and vna cum Patre producens
spiritum sanctum, produced from the Father, and is one with the Father,
producing the holy Spirit. This is the Trinity in unity, and the unity in
Trinity: three Persons, yet but one God.

And now, what is it that you would have? Is it Power to protect you, Mercy to
forgive you, and Grace to sanctify you? Then seek eth Jehovah: for as Solomon
said?, get wisdom, get understanding, so get Jehovah, and get all things.
For they alone possess all things, Soli habe^t omnia, qui habent habentem
omnia.
which possess the possesser of all things. Well might David say, our help
stands, besham Jehovah: for there we have power and protection, mercy and
redemption, grace and sanctification.

But this is a Sun so glorious, that we are not able to behold it: a Sea so
deep we cannot sound it; and a majesty so great, we cannot comprehend it. I
must say with Barnard: To enquire of the Trinity, is a perverse curiosity,
Inquirere de Trinitate peruersa curiositas est, and credere and tenere, sicut
sancta Ecclesia tenet, fides and securitas est, videre ante came sicuti est,
perfecta and summae soelicitas est.
to believe and to hold as the holy Church holds, is faith and security: to
see it as it is, is most perfect and chief felicity. And now I say unto you,
as Alanus said to his auditors, (who told them that he would open the
mystery of the Trinity, and when he was to speak hereof at the time
appointed said.) Sufficit vobis vidisse Alanus. It is sufficient that you have
seen Alanus. So it is sufficient that you have heard thus much of the
incomprehensible Trinity, and this great glorious name Jehovah.

Eth Jehovah, we will not so let him go, but as Jacob (...)
would not let the Angel go before he had got a Seek God in his word.
blessing: so we will not give over, till we have found the Lord: for though we
cannot come near him because of his glory, yet let us tread in his footsteps,
and that will bring us to him at length. For as the only way to come to the
sea, is to follow the stream; to the nearest way to follow the Lord, is to
follow him in his word: and this will bring a man peace at the last, says
David. And this is that which the Lord commanded, saying, Seek me, and you
shall live; but seek not Beth. el. His (...) 5. 4.
meaning is, that they should obey his word, and follow the same, and not
Ieroboams calves at Beth el. This was commended in Iofiah, which sought the
Lord; that is, 1. King. 12. 12
the will and word of the Lord, to do accordingly. Which thing beingsoneedful
that the apostle says, Prove 2. Chro. 34.
that good and acceptable will of the Lord; that is, to do Romans 12. 2.
it: for this is truly to seek the Lord. When Christ said, Seek the kingdom
of God, and his righteousness, he means that we should do that
righteousness. And whosoever thus seeks the Lord, shall find him to his
comfort.

But here take heed you seek him not in Poetry, Philosophy, Men love not the
word of God.
or in Historiographie; for, non est hic; He is not here: The wisdom of the
world knew not God, in the wisdom thereof. Therefore well might the Apostle
say, Take heed that no man spoil you through Philosophy. A disease whereof
many are sick, having more delight, and being better experienced in humane
stories, then in godly Divinity. In the one they are cunning in the other they
are ignorant. When they come to the word, they must do as men that want their
sight; which put on their spectacles before they can read: so these must turn
to the Table before they can find the Book. Surely it is not like there can
be a strong faith, when the knowledge is so weak.

The men of this age are taken with a kind of giddiness in the brain, and
are sick of curiosity in Religion, more ready to enquire after Melchi sedecs
father, then the way to find God. Much like Adrian, who would needs know who
was Euandars nurse; and great grandfathers granfather to Priamus. Maximus
reports, that Eucledes, (who being asked wherewith the gods were delighted)
answered for other things I know not, but this I am sure of, they hate all
curious persons.

It was strange that the Jews should forsake the Manna, and love the Garlike
and Onions of Egypt. But more strange it is, to see the men of this time, to
forsake the word of God, and to love the foame of men's inventions. How are our
Sermons now despised, if they be not garnished over with history or
Philosophy? How many come hither rather for affected words, then to learn
how to practice obedience? and to fill their ears with curiosity, rather then
their hearts with grace? There is no great difference between the food of the
body, and the food of the soul; for good meat must be set out with flowers;
good clothes with toys; and so sound Divinity with history: These are
seekers; but for devils diuintie.

Look on the drunkard, and you shall find him a The drunkard seeks.
diligent searcher; not for the Lord, but for strong drink: He begins with
the Sunne-rising, and continues till it set: and often he calls for a candle,
because the whole day is too short; and there he and others search, till
neither wit in their heads, grace in their souls, nor money in their purses,
is to be found.

The adulterer is a searcher, not after the Lord, but The Adulterer seeks.
harlots, He seeks all in the dark by owle-light; lest the chaste birds of
honesty should see him, and wonder at him; and at length finds a body going
to the grave, full of sores and a soul going to hell, miserably sinful.

The Incloser is a great seeker, but to the poor man's cost, and his beasts
destruction: he hedges in the poor The Incloser seeks.
man's Common, and keeps pasture from his beast; and so he is a murderer both
of man an beast. Not long since (by God) such an Incloser was stricken dead
suddenly from heaven in the very act of his sin. I could name him; I will
not.

The Ingrosser is a great seeker, even to the four The Ingrosser seeks.
corners of the Land; but in all this inambulation, he cannot, or will not
find the Lord; not so much as set a foot in the path of obedience; like those
dogs running by the river Nilus, not once giving a lap at Jacobs Well. These
seek not for grace, but grain and commodities; like the Pharisees that
compass sea and land to fill their warehouses with commodities. Surely we
need not complain for want of bread, were it not for these Inclosers.

The ambitious man is a diligent seeker; he looks high, and seeks in the
air; yet not for the Lord, but for the honor of promotion, like Haman, that
seek to ride on the Kings horse, and think the highest step of promotion too
low for them.

The robbe-Altar, that seeks to drink in the goblets Rob-Altar, seeker.
of the Temple, and take away the Ministers sheafe, that should make him bread;
and his fleece that should make him clothes. Some of the rob-Altars find whole
Churches at once, and yet not so much as the sweepings, will they give to the
minister. But let them take heed, for the stones will go near to choke them
one day, and the belles ring them a peale to hell; and keep such a shaking in
their consciences; that they will wish they had never swallowed them; and then,
when it is too late, begin to evacuate themselves of the same.

The Usurer is a seeker, not other men's good, but his The Usurer seeker.
own profit: He seeks to lend, not to enrich others, but himself. Many a
young gallant is found by the Usurer to his cost; that they could never find
their inheritance, since the Usurer found them.

What say you to the Lawyer; is he not a diligent seeker? The Law seeker.
but not of the Lord: rather to pervert the Law, and to make a poor man's case
intricate: For, it is not for his profit, quickly to finish a Cause. And often
we see, after some good Gamaliel has brought a cause to a period, and day of
sentence, that one Achithophel or other ouerturnes all. And before the poor
man can bring his cause to an other day of sentence, either his days or his
estate is ended; I would some good body would pray to God, that he would
either convert the bad of them: or to send them to the devil for a
new-yeeres-gift: that we may be rid of them. And to add this petition into the
latanie: from wicked Lawyers, good Lord deliver us: for the seek not the Lord,
but our estates.

What should I speak of the swearer, who seeks for new oaths, the proud
person for new fashions, the tradesman for to deceive, the officer for bribes,
and the like: so that as the Apostle says, all seek their own, but not the
Lord.

Yet there are a few, which seek the ways of the Lord with Iosia, pure in
heart with Nathanel, upright in life with Zacharias, and shall be blessed with
Abraham. These are they which say with Samuel: speak Lord, for thy servant
hears; and with Esaiah: here am I, send me. Whom this verse concerns.

Duc me sum Pater, altique dominator olympi,
Quocunque placuerat, nulla parenda mora est:
Assum impiger fac nolle, comitabor gemens,
Lead me great Lord, King of eternity,
Even where thou will, i will not resist thee:
Change thou my will, yet still I vow subjection.
Thus the children of God are resolved to seek the Lord, howsoever the wicked
are bent to seek their own.

Eth Ichouah, a word more: The Lord: that is, the (...)
love and favor of the Lord; such a seeking David Psalm. 21. 8.
speaks of: Seek ye my face, thy face will we seek O Lord. This is that the
Church prays for, saying, Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth:
that is, show me the signs of his love: for it is not the least favor Cant.
1. 1.
of God to love us: and therefore says Christ. If any man keep my word, my
father and I will love him. As if the love of God were the summum bonum, chief
good, and so it is.

For it is causa causarum, the cause of causes: and causa cansati, the cause of
the thing ^ saying of Christ, God so loved the world, that he gave his (...)
Revel. 1. 6.
son to redeem it. So that Gods love is the cause of our redemption: so the
Church sings. First, (...), to him, that loved us, and then, (...), he washed
us.

And as it is the cause of all good: so it is the life and ground of faith and
repentance; for we believe and repent, not because of the justice of God, but
the mercy of God. So says David, there is mercy with the Lord: therefore we
fear him; for that faith without the feeling of Gods love, is carnal
security: and that repentance Psalm. 130.
without the feeling of mercy, is desperation.

And as it is the life and ground of faith and repentance: so it is that which
makes the conscience at peace with God, as says the Apostle. Then being
justified by faith, we have peace with God. If a man had Achithophels Romans 5. 1
policy, Samsons strength, Absoloms beauty, Felix his honor, Salomens
wisdom, and Belshazzars kingdom: yet all would not make peace in the
conscience, if Gods love be wanting.

Make the use of it thus: is it so that we should seek the love and favor of
God? then miserable is the condition Use (...)
of those that provoke the Lord to anger. God is said to be a consuming fire;
fire is a denouring and merciless element: if it be before us, nothing more
comfortable: if upon us, nothing more devouring: nothing more cold then lead;
if it be melted nothing more scalding. Nothing more merciful then God: but if
he be moved, nothing more fearful and consuming; for as the love of God is
the cause of all happiness, so his wrath is the cause of all confusion.

Secondly let this work upon you as an exhortation to make you seek this love
and favor of the Lord. O Seek (...) law.
that you were sick of love, that prayer might be your physic, and faith
your hand-maide: this would bring long life to your days, and happiness to
your souls: if you could once say with the spouse, any te dodi vedodi li,
(...) my well beloved, and my well beloved is mine. Foelix illa Conscientia in
cuius cord, etc. Happy is the conscience of that man, in whose heart this love
of God is: for st Deus pro nobis quis contra nos, if God be for us who shall
be against us.

And thus much briefly for the object, whom we are to seek: namely the Lord.

The compelling cause.
THere is an appointed time for all things (says the wise man,) which being
done in their time, are like apples of gold, with pictures of silver. A thing
so pleasing to God, that he commends it in the dumb creatures; the Storke
knows her appointed time, and the swallowe observes the season. How much more
then does God look for it at our hands? as my text says, ve-gneth, and time
(...)
it is: first in regard of the time past, and secondly in regard of the time to
come.

First of the time past, which is lost and not to be recovered Time past is to
(...) redeemed.
again; Art cannot produce it where it is to come, nor reduce it when it is
gone. It was painted like an old man with long hair before, and all bare
behind: to show that we are to make use of it, when it is before us. For all
the time that God has given thee, shall be Omne tempus (...) impensum (...) a
te. Qualiter fuerit expensum.
required at thy hands, how thou have spent it. Time is not our own, but the
Lords, and given to us for his use: therefore does God call upon us for the
spending of this time in his service, as here in my text; for it is time,
because many ages had been spent in sin: even from the days of Jeroboam,
till the days of Hosea: notwithstanding all the Prophets exhortations: Esaiah
cried, Jeremy wept, Amos roared: and yet are they still in sin, which for
quality were great, and for countenance long, and therefore time it is to
seek the Lord.

Therefore the longer we have continued in sin, the more cause have we ^
himself. Wash thy heart Jerusalem, and this is drawn from the continuance in
sin; How long shall wicked Ierem. 4. 14. and 31. 22.
thoughts remain within thy heart, and how long will thou go astray? The like
argument is used by Peter, (for he 1. Pet. 4. 4.
says,) it is sufficient that we have spent the former time in sin. Thus
long continuance in sin must be an argument unto us, to cause us the more
willingly to turn to the Lord.

First, propter gloriam Dei, for the glory of God: For by how much the more we
are wicked and sinful, by so much the more is Gods mercy seen in the pardon
thereof. As ( Moses said,) if thou pardon this sin, then shall thy mercy
appear. And there is nothing wherein Gods mercy does more manifest it self,
then in this: and the greater the sin is, the greater is his mercy which
forgiues it.

Secondly, propter nostram consolationem: for our consolation: for the more
sinful, the more judgments are prepared. What is to be done now, to fly
(with Jonas) from the Lord? that is not the way, (with the fish to leap out of
the pan into the fire:) but with the prodigal son, to return to the Lord:
that we may not come into that place of torment. The Lord has two heralds of
conversion and obedience: namely, mercy and judgment; promises and threats:
aut sequeris, aut traheris: either drawing us, or following us; and use is made
of both: wherein it will not be amiss to borrow Horace his verse Oderunt
peccare boni, vertutis amore:
Oderunt peccare mali, formidime penae.
The good from offense, virtues love do detaines
The evil to offend, fear of pain does restrain.
These are two good schoolmasters, the one serves a free horse, the other a
dull jade. Where Gods mercy will not alure, there his judgments must compel:
and therefore the greatness of our sin should cause us the sooner to seek
the Lord, that so we may escape the greatness of his judgments.

Here give me leave to cut the ulcer of this sin in Use 1.
the wicked, which have not drunk their fill of iniquity; and yet you may see
the vlceration of these men. The saying of David is revived again, Forty
years long have I been grieved, and yet still do they continue Romans 2. 6.
in sin, to heap wrath upon wrath. Sin is said to be darkness: and
tenebrae, comes of tenendo, to hold: for the wicked are held with the chain
of sin, that they think creation, a fable; incarnation, infallible;
redemption, improbable; election, unprofitable; resurrection impossible: And
then it follows, that there is neither heaven nor hell: so that, Ede, bibe,
lude, post mortem nulla volupt as: Eat, drink and be merry for after death
there is no pleasure: Thus do they diuulge their Satanicall suggestions. These
speak stoatly, walk proudly, and live wickedly: therefore high time to leave
it. O that there should be any souls so traduced, by any infernal spirits;
their reason so blinded, their understanding so darkened, and their salvation
so endangered, as still to remain in sin,

Surely these sinners are in a dead sleep of finne, that neither Aarons
belles, Solomon's songs, nor Isaiahs trumpet can awaken them, Thou have smitten
them yet have Quod non dolet, non pro sano, sed pro mortuo cum putandum.
they not felt it. If the wound be such, that it never causes smart, if it
never ache nor grieve, it is but dead flesh, and to be cut off. Therefore it is
to be feared, that these are gone too far down, to the chambers of death.
There are but seven steps to the bottom; and they are on the last: The first,
Importabile, cumbersome; then grave, heavy; then leave light, then insensibile,
past feeling; after this comes delectabile, delight and joy; then follows
defiderabile, desire to finne; and the last step is defensibile, defense of
sin. And here are the men of this age making an apology for sin; as
drunkards, with a weakness in the head; gluttony, with good fellowship;
adultery, with a trick of youth; covetousness, with good husbandry; and
murder, with manhood. Such are the prodigious sinners of our time, that they
have Iere. 2. 25. Zsch. 7. 11. Pro. 18. 3. Peccatum porta moitis defensio est
lune inferni.
some cloak to put on sins back, and are themselves become a fit dish for
the Devils table: For Sin is the gate to death, but to defend sin is the
next step to bell.

And seeing these are going with Judas to their own place, let me speak one
word for their farewell: which is, that seeing they could find no end of
sinning, while they were here, they shall have no end of torments, when they
are there: their curse shall be proportioned there, answerable to their sins
here. For, for every ounce of vanity, they wall have a pound weight of
torment. Cursed of God, whose curse is, Poenarum inflictio the punishment of
affliction; cursed in themselves, which is, conscientia cruciamen, the torment
of conscience; cursed of the devils, which is, Poenarum executio, the execution
of punishment; and cursed of the damned, which is, Poenarum aggrauatio, the
augmentation of punishment. Thus they shall turn from Snakes to Addars, from
both to Scorpions, and from all to the unquenchable flames: Then will they cry
when it is too late. And here I cannot but tell you what Herodotus tells me, of
one that came to the water, and played with his pipe; but the fishes would not
dance; then he castin a net, and took them out, and laid them on the ground,
and then they could dance: but the man made this answer, when I played, you
would not dance; but now you dance I will not play. There is a good moral to
be made of it; for God has piped, and mad a melodious sound, in the preaching
of his word, offering his mercies unto us, but we would never dance after this
pipe: Wherefore when we would dance God will not play: but answer Luke 7. 32.
us thus, when I pro ered mercy, you refused the same, now you seek mercy I
will deny it: And therefore seek the Lord, for it is time; in regard of your
continuance in sin.

And here let neither the greatness of sin, nor the long continuance in the
same, hinder our turning to God; for were our sins as crimson, yet shall they
be as snow, says the Lord. And how can it go ill Esa. 1. 18. Gods mercy is
greater then our sin.
with us, when there are infinite mercies to finite sins? His mercies are
deeper then Hell, broader then the Earth, and higher then Heaven. Therefore
observe for your comfort, your persons are not so wicked, nor your sins so
great, but you may see the like entered the gates of heaven. Art thou a
drunkard? look upon Lot: Art thou a murderer? look upon David: Art thou a
swearer? look upon Peter: Art thou a thief? look upon the Cross: Art thou a
persecuter? look upon Paul. These are all gone before, and then may thou
follow after: only be not thou more unwilling to go to God, then he is to
come to thee. And so much for the time past.

Time to come.
ANd as it is time to seek the Lord, in regard of the Doct. Nihil certius
more, hora mortis nihil incertius.
time past, so it is in regard of the time to come, which is altogether
uncertain: For, Nothing is so certain as death, and nothing so uncertain as
the hour of death. This is our April and May, wherein we flourish; the next
is our July and August, wherein we shall be cut down. We had but one way to
come into the world, but many ways to go out again. Therefore while we have
time, let us seek the Lord: For now is the acceptable Gal. 5. 10.
time, and while it is called to day. For this is the time 2. Cor. 6. 2. Heb.
3. 13.
wherein God is to be sought, dum dies est, while it is day: dum prope est,
while it is near: dum nobis prodest, while it may pofit us, let us seek the
Lord.

First, the longer we stay, the harder our hearts grow Custom in sin brings
hardness.
with sin. Judas may be an example in this unto us; for he was a cunning
dissembler, then a secret these, then a bold liar, after that a traitor, and
last of all a desperate murderer: For as the Sun, the longer it shines upon
the clay, the harder it is; even so, the longer sin remains in us, the more
obdurate is our hearts. Will you see how this monster works upon us? the
Apostle tells you; first, (...), the mind is darkened that they cannot discern
what to do; secondly, then (...), they become ignorant; thirdly, (...), a
hardness of Epues. 4. 18.
heart; lastly, they become (...), past feeling, or a heart that cannot repent.
Therefore let us follow the Romans 2. 6.
counsel of the Apostle, while it is called to day, let us obey, lest we be
hardened before to morrow, (...), by the deceit of sin.

Secondly, seek now, because it is not known, whether God will offer his grace
again or no, when we have once refused the same; you know that Esau sought the
blessing with tears, but could not have it. Forget not the story of Herodotus
of the fish: God which has promi Qui promittse poenitentiveniam, non promittit
peccanti poenitentiam.
sed forgiveness, to him that repents; does not promise to him that sins,
repentance. And does not Christ tell you thus much, when as those, that refused
to come to the feast, had this return from Christ, they shall not taste of my
meat? Was not likewise those foolish Virgins, that went without oil in their
lamps, turned back, when they would have entered in?

Let all this work upon you, for your more diligence in this, to seek the
Lord, and that while we have time, Use.
and the door of Gods mercy is open. Let not the pleasures of the world
deceive us, as the river of Jordan does the fish, which caries them swimming
and playing, till on a sudden they fall into Mare mortuum, the dead Sea. But
take we heed of the streams of vanity, lest they cast us (not into the dead
sea of Jordan, but) into the dead sea of perdition.

The second part of the reason.
NOw follows the second part of the consequence or reason: Until he come
and rain righteousness upon you; Which part I have divided into two parts, 1.
the continuance, till he come, 2. the end: and rain righteousness unto you.

Gnad iabo until he come, this is the continuance of (...)
it: for having laid our hands to the plough, we must not look back, but
continue to perfection. Faith is called We must continue in obedience to the
(...).
fides in latin, in which word, (as some observe,) is a compendium of all
Christian duty. The first letter is F. which, (as they say,) is facere to do,
for true faith, is a working faith: not the hearers, but the doers. The second
Non auditores, sed factores.
letter is I. which is integritas, fuinesse; for we must have a regard to all
the Commandments of God. The third letter is D. delectio, love: for true
faith works by love. The fourth letter is E. which is externe, outward our
good deeds must be manifest. The fifth letter is S. which is semper, always:
for we must not be weary of well doing. So that the property of faith is to
do, the quality is love, the form is outward, and the continuance is
always. The beginning of faith is facere, and Nihil prodest cursus bonae
vitae, nisi consummetur bono fine.
the end semper: do, and do to the end. The race of a godly life profits
nothing, unless it be finished with a good end.

Thus runs the condition, he that endures to the Matthew. 10.
end shall be saved We must not be like the flies bred by the river Hispanis,
which are bred in the morning, in full strength at noone, and dead at night.
Heaven is not promised to those that do well: but that continue in well-doing.
Zek. 18. 26.


Let this work upon your considerations, and draw Man is not perfect in this
life.
your endeavors this way: to seek the Lord until he come; for as yet you are
not come to perfection, neither will till he come. The Apostle said of
himself, and we may apply to our selves: we are not yet perfect, and therefore
to seek still for more perfection; for there is no man so cured of his wound,
but there remains some mark of the former wound. So the soul which received
the Ita anima, qu peccati vulnu accepit, etiam curetur, haket tamen peccat
cicauicem.
wound of sin, though it be cured has some scarres of sin still while we
are in this world, we are in the school of Christ: and must continually
learn, till we be perfectly skillful in the ways of obedience: and when we
have that, then have we found the Lord; but as yet we may say with Socratas.
Hoc solum scimus quod nibil scimus. This is one thing we know, that we know
nothing: So says the Apostle. If any man think he knows any thing, he
knows nothing as he ought: therefore seek until he come.

If you ask me when he comes, I answer, 1. he comes Praedicatione Euangeli: By
the preaching of the Gospel: So he came to his own, thus he came to Judas,
and so to many. But if he came no other ways then thus: (and yet he must come
thus:) as good never come, and better it were not to find him at all.

2 He comes, and that with more profit to his children and us. Conuersione
nostriad Deum, by converting us to God. And thus he came to Mary, Matthew,
Zacheus and others; and happy are they to whom he thus comes: therefore seek
until thou find God, to speak peace to thy soul.

3 He comes, increment is fidei and penitentiae and aliorum donorum spiritus
sancti in conuersis, by increasing of faith and repentance, and other gifts of
the spirit in those that are converted: and thus he comes daily to the godly;
and therefore seek until he come in this manner.

4 He comes, Consummations, and glorificatione Eeclesiae, in secundo Christi
aduentu, By consummation, and glorification of the Church, in the second
coming of Christ: and until then we must seek the Lord.

The last pare, the end.
WE are come now by your patience to the last branch of our text, ( And teach
you righteousness:) where in observe, 1. the property of it ( Teach,) 2. the
form of it ( Rightcousnesse,) 3. the persons ( You.)

The property of the work comes first to be handled ( Rain.) This part would
be better vnsoulded by some Philosopher, then by me. Rain is impression that
comes of much cold vapor and moist, gathered into a body of a cloud, drawn
out of the earth or waters by the heat of the Sun, into the middle region of
the air; whereby cold it is so knit together, that it hangs until either
the weight or heat cause it to break; Some think the rain and clouds are
not above nine miles in height. Albertus Magnus says, they are but three miles
in height: and some think that they be but half a mile: and some again by
Geometrical demonstrations make it above fifty miles to the place where the
clouds and rain are gathered; but not to be too curious to seek for that
whereof we have no need. To conclude, sometime they are higher, sometime they
are lower, according to the weight thereof where they break, to the great
fear and no less danger of man and beast: but to come to the true rain here
intended.

Rain: the word iorch does signify to rain, yet a supernatural shower,
which makes glad the city of God. Gods word is compared to rain, and is this
rain: fo says the Lord, my word shall drop as the rain. Likewise his
spirit is compared to rain: I will power water on the dry ground. And fitly is
his word and grace comcompared to rain.

1 Rain is called Imber, and has that name of Imbuendo: for it springs, and
tempereth the earth, and makes it bear fruit. Man is compared to earth, and
the word and grace to rain. If this rain be not showred down upon this
earth, it is unfruitful: therefore (to make this earth fruitful,) God sends
down the showers of this rain upon it: as the operative means, and working
cause, to make the hearts of men fruitful in faith, love, and the like: and
their lives full of good works. And to this belongs the saying of the wise
man. Arise Cant. 4. 16.
O North, and come O South: because in these two places are the signs which
concern the water, and the earth: as Taurus, Virgo, and Capricornus: which are
in the South, and be earthly signs. The other are Cancer, Pisces, and Scorpio
in the North, and be watery signs. Now when the earth of man's heart, and the
rain of Gods grace do meet, there follows a fruitful harvest. Heb. 6. 7.


2 Rain is called Pluuia, and has that name of pluralitate, plurality of
drops; and that drop, after drop, that the earth might receive it the better. A
drop is part of a cloud being broken: which destilleth down, drop after
drop. A fit emblem of this supernatural rain: which from one cloud, the
spirit destilleth into the hearts of men: grace after grace, and gift after
gift. Exodus 15. 21.
Man has not all the graces of God at the first: but by degrees, as the
Apostle says. We must first have milk, Heb. 5. 13.
and then strong meat: first a less grace, then a greater; and after that
full perfection. Regeneration is compared to a birth, where first the brain is
made, then the heart, after that the liver, then the sinews, arreryes, and
pipes: and lastly the hands and feet. And thus is it in the spiritual birth:
first knowledge and understanding, then faith and repentance, after peace of
conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost, and lastly: full assurance of all Gods
mercies.

3 Rain, is a maker of peace; for often we see the winds, and other
elements, in an vproare, where by the stout Cedars are bowed to the ground,
Towers and Castles trembling, and the waters roaring: But now comes a shower of
rain from the clouds, and mittigates all this fury. Even so, when since, the
conscience, Gods wrath, and the terrors of hell accuse us within; and Gog,
Magog, Moab and Ammon (I mean wicked men) persecute us without, then are we
in great fear and trembling: But now comes a shower of grace, and mittigates
all fears, and secures us from all terrors.

4. Rain is Medicus, a good Physician, having a powerful efficacy, to
cleanse the air: when (by infectious fogges, and contagious vapors) it is
corrupted; washing away with the showers thereof, all the noisome putrefaction:
even so, when the judgment and understanding are infected, with the filthy
fumes of errors and heresies, and the truth almost stifled; then comes a
shoure of grace, and cleanses the soul from all these infectious fogges.

5. Rain mollifieth the hard earth, and makes it more apt for tillage; whereby
the bowels of the earth are cut with coulters and shares: Even so, the hard and
obdurate heart of man, is made soft and apt to every good work, by the showers
of Gods grace. Happy earth whereon this rain falls, that is so operative;
and donum omnium donorum maximum: A gift far above all other gifts.

Ioreh of iarah, and signifies to teach, as well as to (...) of (...)
rain: For, while we live in this world, we are in the school of Christ, and
have need of teaching; and the chief teacher is the Spirit of God, (as Christ)
The comforter John 14. 26.
whom the Father will send in my Name, shall teach you all things: outward
means (without this) will do no good: For, Paulmay plant, Apollo may water,
yet it is God, which teaches by the Spirit; or otherwise all is 1. Cor. 3. 6.
Augustine.
in vain. For, Non verbis hominis sit, vt intelligatur verbum Dei, facit Deus
vt intelligatis: The words of man cannot make man to understand the word of
God, but it is God that makes them to understand.

The outward ministry works no grace in the hearts Faith not in preaching,
but by the Spirit.
of men; It is but a subordinate means, and causa instrumentalis, The
isntrumental cause; and not causa efficiens, The efficient cause. Therefore
says the Apostle, Have you received the holy Ghost? Intimating thereby, Acts
19. 2.
that if they wanted the Spirit, they could have no faith: for, Hoc est opus
Dei, This is the work of God: Gods assisting grace, and the ministry of man,
must go together; else thereis no power in our perishable voices, to effect
your consciences. Break away this Analogy, and vertuall association of the
spirit from the word, and you shall be like those women, ever learning, but
never able to come to the knowledge of the truth: Learn then.

First, to follow the counsel of Christ, to give God To praise God. Matthew. 22.
the things that belong to God, and to Caesar that which belongs to Caesar. If
by the ministry of man you have gotten some good measure of knowledge, faith,
love, repentance, and the like; forget not your duty to the messengers of
God: Have them in singular respect for their works sake. Yet (we must say with
Peter) Think not that we by our own power, or godliness, have 1. These. 5. 15.
done you this good; No, it is the spirit, and grace of God: And therefore we
must say (with David) Non nobis Domine, non nobis, Not unto us, Lord, not unto
us, sednomini tuo da gloriam: but to thy Name give the glory: For the
principal praise belongs to God.

Secondly, be not forgetful of that which Solomon teaches. Take heed to thy
feet, when thou entrest into Eccles. 4. 11.
the house of God. Go not to hear Gods word, without the performance of this
duty, to pray to God for his Oration orani subsidium, Deo sacrificium diabolo
flagellum.
grace: that the word may be made fruitful unto you. And hence it is, that
the Church has appointed prayer to be made before Sermons, that the word may
be blessed unto the hearers. It is not to be forgotten, how God would have the
place of Divine service upon a mountain; to teach the people, that while their
bodies went up to the Temple to hear the Law, their souls should go up to
heaven by prayer: And therefore (as Christ says) in another kind; That which
God has joined together, let no man put asunder.

Thirdly, if you would have this rain of grace to fall upon you, keep under
the clouds, the Ministers of Gods word: For by, and in the hearing of the same,
does God rain down these showers of his grace: For on as many as heard the
word, did the holy Ghost fall. Often Acts 10. 44.
his word goes without grace, but his grace never goes without the word. We are
called Stars, and they are called Stellae, of Stando, to stand: Ministers
must be like them confined to their stations, not gadding and wandering
Meteors, Comets, portending delusion to others, and confusion to themselves.
Stars are also called Sidera and have that name of Considerando, taking
heed, for of them Astronomers take heed, and also ship-men by sea. Such and
much more heed, ought you to take of us: for you must seek the Law at our
mouth, and by that the spirit, this gracious rain.

Lastly, it is said to rain, to teach us what abundance of this grace, and
mercy, he will bestow upon us; Solomon says, his name is Shemen turak, is as
oil powered out: Answerable hereunto says God, I will power out Cantic. 1. 2.
my spirit. Gods mercies are like himself, infinite: so Joel 2.
says David, I know no end thereof; they are deeper then the sea, larger then
the earth, and higher then heaven, Hoc mirum, hoc magnum.

And have not we had good experience of this love Gods love to this land.
and favor of God? yea, Here is no complaining in our streets, no leading
into captivity, our children like olive plants, about our tables. And hereunto
are added the word and Sacraments, with other spiritual blessings; the milk
of exhortation, the wine of compunction, and the oil of consolation. Thus
mercy does compass us on every side; his patience in forbearing, his mercy
in forgiving, and his constancy in continuance. He might have stricken us
with death for one lie with Ananias; stoned us for one wedge of gold, with
Achan; and cast us out of heaven for one ambition with the devil. But O the
tender mercy of God, that such sins: (for number so many, for quality so
great, and for continuance so long,) should have favor with God. In hoc
demonstratur, virtus and potentia Deinarratur. Herein is the virtue and power
of God declared.

Let this teach us that are Ministers, to rain down the words of exhortation,
and admonition: and you that are magistrates, to rain down execution of
justice between man and man, and you inferior people, to rain down mutual
duty one to another.

The second branch of righteousness.
WE are almost got to the haven of happiness, and safely arrived in our
country: we have but this Righteousness to pass over, and then we are at home.
Pareus upon this word says, that God would teach them Righteousness, that
was, to flee hypocrisy: for they were given much thereto, so says Esaias. God
will have no compassion on them, Quia omnis hypocritaest, For every Esa. 9. 17.
one is an hypocrite. And I could wish that this gilded devil had not got
shipping for England, and land likewise. But he walks invisible, and dares
not be seen: it may be sometime he is in the country among their cold
paulsies, and shaking agues: sometime in the City, with our burning fevers, and
fiery zeal, the inflammations and impostumes of hypocrisy. And were it as
odious to man, as it were abominable to God, it would quickly be banished out
of the land.

Others understand this Righteousness, Pro misericordia Dei, For the mercy of
God, as David says. Show thy loving kindness to them that know thee: Et just
itiam tuam, ad (...) cord: and thy righteousness to the upright of heart.
Then the meaning of this is, that God will rain down his mercy upon us, in
the pardon and forgiveness of sins. Huge does handle it thus, (and says,)
that Misericordia est quasi fons in affectu, Mercy is as the fountain in the
heart and affection: and miseratio quasi riuulus in effectu: Bounty is as the
river, flowing forth to the outward action. And this is that which God here
promises.

I will rain righteousness upon you. This word tsedek (...)
Righteousness, is of a great latitude. What good is there Two sorts of
righteousness.
which will not be brought within this compass? It is either creata iustitia,
or increata iustitia: Created justice, or uncreated justice: uncreated
Righteousness is Deus ipse. But we disputenot of this righteousness. Created
righteousness is the creature, and is Legal, and Evangelical: but iustitia
legalis, cannot be showred down upon us, for the vertual power of that is
gone. It is Iustitia Euangelij, that must do us good; which may be divided
thus, 1. a Iustitia Dei est sanctificatio per fidem, and remissio peccatorum.
righteousness of justification, 2. a righteousness of sanctification. So
Sedulius, The righteousness of God is sanctification by faith, and remission
of sins.

Righteousness of justification, is Remissio sieve absolutio, Righteousness of
justification.
A remission or absolution: first a veccate, secondly amorte: from sin and
death. Then follows imputatio iustitii, an imputation of righteousness: God
remooueth away the guilt, putting righteousness in place thereof: and covering
us with the righteousness of Christ. For 1. Cor. 1. 30.
he is made unto us, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption;
for which righteousness the Apostle prays, that he may be found in him,
having this righteousness Phil. 3.
on him. Thus all the faithful are truly justified from all their sins: yet
non vt non sit in nobis peecatum, sed non imputetur, not that we are cleared
from having sin in us, but that it is not imputed unto us: for there Romans 8.
1.
is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus.

This righteousness stands thus.
FIrst misericordia and gratia Dei, the meroy and grace of How we are made
righteous.
God: vt causa principali impulsina in Deo: as the principal impulsive cause
in God: for his only mercy moved him; He so loved the world, that he gave
his son to redeem it. If God had not been merciful, man had John 3. 16.
been miserable; and therefore (says Peter,) Blessed be 1. Pet. 1. 3.
God which according to his mercy, has begotten us again to a lively hope.

Secondly, we are justified, sanguine vel obedientia Christi: by the blood and
obedience of Christ. 1. Vt materia iustitae nostrae, As the matter of our
justification, 2. Vt causa formalia iustificationis nostrae, as the formal
cause of our justification, 3. Vt causa impulsiua and meritoria, as the
inpulsiue and meritorious cause. Thus the obedience of Christ is the matter,
the form, and impulsive cause of our righteousness. From the redemption of
Christ, Basile Orat de baptismo.
there is freedom from death, reconciliation with God, the gift of
righteousness, and the inheritance of the kingdom of heaven. Thus all the
virtue of our justification, depends upon the life and death of Christ:
Neither could our death be dissolved, without Christ's passion: nor Terrullian,
li. de baptismo.
our life restored, without his resurrection.

Thirdly we are justified, ex fide, of faith; vt causa instrumentali in nobis.
as the isntrumental in us; whereby we apprehend the righteousness of Christ:
and by faith apply the same unto us. To conclude it in a word, here is
misericordia Dei, the mercy of God promising, 2. satisfactionem Christi, the
satisfaction of Christ meriting, 3. fidei, faith believing: and thus stands our
righteousness.

Which distinction the Church of Rome refuses, saying, we are justified by an
inherent righteousness, wherein two false points of doctrine are maintained.
First, that there is some meritorious cause in us of this righteousness.
Secondly, that we are free from sin: for so are their own words; that we are
not reputed just, but are made just indeed.

But to the meritorious cause in man, I answer in Augustines words. God
crowns thee but in mercy for thou wast not worthy, whom God should call: or
being Ser. 2. Deverbis Apostoli.
called, to be justified: and being justified, to be glorified; If thou
plead thy merits, God says unto thee examine thy merits: and see if they be
not my gifts. Where then is the meritorious cause in man? Hoc est non in
nostris recte factis, this lies not in our well-done deeds: sed in tua
bonitate situm est: but in thy goodness O God, that we are made righteous.

And for the perfection of justice, I answer with the same Augustine. Our
justice in this life consists rather in the remission of sins, then
perfection of virtue.

Take comfort then O Christian; For if God justify, who shall condemn? who is
able to lay any thing to the Romans 8. 33.
charge of Gods chosen? Why then should we fear? For tius quod non est, non
est poena, peccatum remissum non est: Ergo peccatum remissi, non est poena.
That which is not has no punishment, forgiven sins are not: Ergo, forgiven
sins has no punishment; (as says the Apostle:) wherefore let us go boldly
to the throne of grace. If thou would be healed, he is thy Physician: if
thou Heb. 10. 18.
burnest with feauers, he is a fountain to cool thee: if thou art pressed
down with iniquity, he is thy righteousness Ambros lib. 3. de viig.
if thou fear death, he is thy life: and if thou desire heaven, he is the
way. Is God thus good, thus merciful: Romans 5. 9.
as to justify us being sinners? what will he do for us then being
justified? and this is the proper righteousness in this place.

There is a righteousness of sanctification; for as Righteousness of
sanctification. 1. Cor. 1. 30. Gal. 5. 24.
Christ is our justice, so is he our holiness. And as many as have put on
Christ, have crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts: whereby a man
is righteous in his life and conversation. So says John, whosoever is borne
John 3. 9.
of God sins not. That is (as Piscator notes,) non dat operam peccato, not
giving them to work sin; for these two go together: justification, and
regeneration, as David says. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes no
sin, there is justification: and in whose heart there is no guile, this is
sanctification. Happy men in whom two kiss one another: where the dewes of
justification are destilled down, and the sweet flowers of sanctification do
spring up. And yet such honor have all his Saints: justification, peace of
conscience, joy in the holy Ghost, and sanctification of life. Thus God raines
down his mercies upon his Saints: which be the Charter of heaven, the covenant
of grace, and the assurance of glory; music to the ears, splendour to the
eye, odor to the smell, daintaies for the taste, pleasures for the sense, and
solace for the soul. And seeing it is now high time to leave you, here will I
leave you: for I cannot leave you better then where I have you. And so I cease
to speak of that which you shall never cease to enjoy.

The persons now remain to be spoken of lacem, (...)
you, but I pass over this with silence, having spoken of them before.

And now I call heaven and earth to record, that this day I have set before you
life and death, a blessing and a curse, and have sounded out the voice of
Boanarges, and the voice of Barnabas, by the voice of Boanarges. I have
labored to plowe up your sins in the doctrine of repentance, by thundering
out Gods judgments in the voice of Barnabas. I have labored to help you to
reap the harvest of Gods promises in the voice of consolation; and in all this
I have not been partial: neither fearing the great, nor favoring the mean.

And now all I desire at your hands, is a thankful acceptance of my pains,
and a ready obedience of my exhortation; which if I find, I shall think grace
to be in your souls, zeal in your hearts, justice in your hands, and
holiness in your lives; and so looking for the harvest of my labors, I commit
my words of exhortation to your practice, and my words of consolation to your
comfort, and your selves to the blessed trinity: to God the father which loned
us so sweetly to God the Son, that bought us so dearly: and God the holy
Ghost, who sanctifies us so purely: three glorious persons: but one immortal
incomprehensible only wise God, be given and ascribed from men and Angels: in
heaven and earth, with soul and spirit: all praise, honor, glory, might,
dominion and majesty: at this present, henceforth, and world without end,
Amen.

6 JY 53


