A PERFECT LOOking Glass for all Estates: Most excellently and eloquently set
forth by the famous and learned Orator Isocrates, as contained in three
Orations of Moral instructions, written by the Author himself at the first
in the Greek tongue, of late years Translated into Lataine by that learned
Clearke Hieronimus Wolftus.

And now Englished to the behalf of the Reader, with sundry examples and
pithy sentences both of Princes and Philosophers gathered and collected out of
diverse writers, coted in the margent approbating the Authors intent, no less
delectable then profiable. ()

Jmprinted at London by Thomas Purfoote, dwelling in Newgate Market, within the
new Rents, at the Sign of the Lucrece. 1580.

To the Right Honorable, and his singular good Lord, Sir Thomas Bromley Knight,
Lord Chaunceller of England, and one of the Queens Majesty's most honorable
Privy Counsel.
WHen as (Right Honorable) a certain Citizen of Rome in presenting a Book
into the hands of that renowned and noble Emperor Augustus Caesar, being
fearful and bashful of nature, seemed oftentimes to put forth and to draw
back again his hand, as one willing and yet timorous, the good Emperor who
above all things abhorred and detested, to be thought terrible or fearful
toward his subjects, having espied the bashfulnesse of the man, courteously
receiving the present from out his hand asked him whether he had thought with
himself, that he had been about to give food to an Elephant, signifying that
Magistrates and Rulers should not only so behave themselves in the government
and ruling of such as are subject unto them, that they may rather appear
fathers then masters, but also that no man be he never so simple should at
any time be bashful or fearful to present unto the greatest Emperor, the
least or smallest gift proceeding from a faithful and willing mind, as
declared the worthy Artaxerxes in receiving so cheerfully the drops of
water offered unto him by a simple sot of his own Country, especially the
gift being so excellent as was that Book given into the hands of Caesar. For
from them only as from the faithfullest counselors, both Princes and
Magistrates without all fawning or flattering may learn those things which are
most necessariest to the knowledge of duty and direction of life. Let it not
therefore seem any thing strange unto your honor in that J have presumed so
much as to offer into your hands with this Citizen of Rome, this small and
simple pamphlet, in that not only as is manifested unto the whole world, your
courtesy and clemency is nothing inferior unto him in whom may be reputed
the greatest affability and gentleness, but also in respect of that fervent
seal and affection, which you have always borne unto all those that are
studious in good literatures, being as it were of one and the self same mind
with that good Emperor Gordianus esteeming more a godly Book the^ the
precioust Gold: whereby I have been persuaded to think that though this present,
may seem (as it is in deed) to to base to be presented unto so learned a
Judge, that you would rather reprove me if J should have showed my self
bashefull in proffering then at all to blame me so boldly presuming, and that
so much the rather if withdrawing your eyes from me as pardoning my slendernes
and imbisilitie of skill, you refer your self wholly to the worthiness of
the Author, as one more regarding the profitable and grave aduertisementes
specified by him, then the rudeness and plainness of so simple a
Translatour: Wherefore as distrusting nothing through so great an
incourragement given, and yet as one not arrogantly presuming, but hoping the
best in humble and duetifull wise J offer unto your Lordship these few leaves
containing in them, three Orations appertaining to the Moral instruction and
direction, both of Princes and Magistrates as well touching the government of
themselves as of their Cities and Countries, as also of all other meaner and
inferior persons, being a parsell of the works of that learned and famous
Orator Jsocrates, the fountain of Eloquence, and the only original of all
those renowned Orators of Greece written at the first, by the Author himself
in the Greek tongue, the one as a friendly exhortation sent unto a private
person called Demonicus, the other two as dedicated unto Nicocles the Prince
and governor of Salamis a part of Cypres, heretofore also interpreted by
diverse and sundry writers, and last of all in this our age Translated into
Latin by that grave and learned Clearke Hieronimus Wolfius, and by him
presented into the hands of that Noble and mighty Emperor Maximilian the
second, and now unto your honor, turned out of Latin into this our vulgar
and natural tongue by him, who standing as it were upon thorns, fearing the
pursuit of many adversaries and carping Momusses, desirous of refuge craves of
your Lordship, according to your accustomed goodness to be defenced and
munited under the shadow of your wings, that thereby the grauer and learned
sort may with a more fauourabler eye grant a frindly and luckie success unto
this my first enterprise, as also the shameless faces of curious find faults
be made somewhat the bashfuller through yours so honorable a protection,
although I can not hope so clearly to escape their hands by whom the wisest
and learned have been attainted, may it therefore please your honor to receive
under your tuition, your poor and humble Orator as favorably accepting this
small mite at his hands as it is willingly offered by him who even of duty is
bound to gratify your Lordship with as great treasure as ever Aemilius brought
into the Roman cofers if possible it were, that poor Telemanus mate should
hap to enjoy such wealth: for as at Welforde by the benefit of that good and
virtuous Lady your mother in law (whose life J beseech the Lord of his great
mercy long to continue) I first obtained and inioyed the taste and savor of
those sweet waters issuing from the pure fountain of learning and knowledge,
so is it requisite that her Ladyship and all hers, among whom J have chosen
your Lordship as principal, should reap and possess before all others the
fruits of their charges, not doubting though as yet they be nothing
correspondent to the lest part of their deserts, but that your honor and the
rest will in the mean time in patient wise accept the same, until the
continuance of time have brought all things to a better perfection. And thus
least J may seem by using of many words to abuse your patience in detaining
your honor from others, your most weighty and grave affairs in transgressing
the bounds of an Epistle I will at this time use silence, that so the grave
and famous Orator Isocrates himself and your Lordship having talked together,
you may have as good cause to say as much of him as did Alexander the great of
Homers Illiaddes terming them as the chiefest furniture and provision of all
his wars during the which time of which your private conference with this
Painim J as duty wills absenting my self, shall remain a daily peticioner
unto the Lord our God that mighty Jehoua for your honors perpetual
preservation and safeguard both in this world with the increase and continuance
of honor, as also in the life to come with everlasting felicity and eternal
happiness.

Your honors as most bound Thomas Forest.

The Epistle of the Translatour to the Reader.
EXperience does show thee (gentle Reader) that though in the spring time,
thou do commonly behold the fruitful trees, when stormye winter is past,
to budde and to blossom in goodly and joyful wise, whereby thou art put in
good hope to receive great plenty of fruits in Autumn, yet suddenly it often
falls out, that by Caterpillars, noisome Airs, or raging winds
vntemperately ensuing, thy foresaid hope is frustrated, the fruit blasted,
and thy looked for plenty turned into penury: And all these inconveniences
for the most part as much as in us lies do ensue either through the lack of
foresight and skill, in the first planting and setting of thy Orcharde, in a
calm and temperate air, or else because of the negligence of thy Gardner, for
want of pruning and other good ordring of thy trees, in their due seaso. The
like hereunto does also happen in se^blable wise, in these our days, who having
most goodlye and profitable Laws, established and constituted by our most
gracious Gouernesse, and her most Honorable Counsel, as also sundry and
diverse rules of well living, prescribed and set forth by many grave Orators,
and learned Philosophers, which in the prime, and at the first setting forth,
seem to be of force, and as well liked of, of all men, and yet before one
half year be fully past, the one is either rawly and coldly executed, or else
mittigated or rather extinguished by some boisterous blast or other, who being
induced by some one, to whom the statute prescribed seems prejudicial,
straight ways adds such a cooling Card, that the foresaid laws before
Autumn come, are found betwixt sleeping and waking, it also goes well with the
latter (I mean the books and writings of the learned) if of some here and
there a leaf be perused, if of others it be once read over, and if of many the
first lines be as it were spelled so that through themselves which are the
intemperate air, and unfruitful soil, wherein it happens these good
aduertisementes to be planted, (the books being thrown into corners) there
can be found scarce one at the fall of the leaf, whose manners and
conversation has been amended, and redressed thereby: And by these means it
comes to pass in the time of need, the garners are empty, the fruits are
perrished, a good man is scarce to be found, the licencious live at liberty,
the common weal indaungered, the Prince and Laws disobeyed, and God and his
word neglected. The which things considered, as also calling to my
remembrance, how that in no realm, nor in any age heretofore, in this our
Country, the word of god has never more flourished, never painfuller
preaching and teaching, more godlyer and profitabler laws never made, never
more wiser and grauer Counselors, and never more Books set forth,
especially in this our English tongue, and yet no time to have been, wherein
sin and iniquitye has more reigned, the learned less regarded, their
writings less perused, and all men more careless then they are now, though
my good will were bente to apply my self according to my small Talente, to
profit my Country in setting forth of some such thing as might be as well
commodious to many, as conducible to my self, yet by these means, I was so
greatly discomforted at this my first entrance, that had not the perswations
of my most faithful and loving friends animated and encouraged me forward. I
had been more willinger to have turned and retired back again, then to have
gone one foot forward. For where the stoutest Champions are foiled and
vanquished, what hope is there to see the timorous and fearful victorers, if
the wisest have been put to silence if the Books of the learned Clearkes have
been no more regarded, what comfort can the meaner forte have? how may they
think to speed? or wherein shall they seem to profit, when as their betters
have prevailed so little? Who knows not how greatly in times past our
ancestors reverenced and honored the learned, with what care and diligence
before the Art of Printing was found out, they endeavored to write out the
Coppies of their writings, what charges they bestowed in penning their books,
and what great sommes of money they would gladlye depart withal, if they
heard of any writer before unknown, respecting no charges, nor regarding any
travail, so that they might obtain them, but now, who sees not how all
things are turned vpside down? and the English Proverbs in all points
verified: The nearest the Church, the farthest from god: The greatest
Clearkes, not the wisest men: The greatest braggers, the veriest Cowardes: The
lowdest sound, the emptiest Vessel: and breefelye to say the truth in one
word, the greater knowledge, the less following: every man pretending himself
skillful in his duty, and yet scarce one fulfilling the least part thereof in
so much that the Lacedemonian Ambassadors may now say unto us English men, as
sometime they did to the Athenians, which is, that we know what is good, but
yet we do nothing less, or as Hanniball that Noble Captain gave his
Judgment, as touching the Lecture of a Philosopher which he had heard: his
words says he, are good, but yet I had rather have him that can do it in
deed, then those to sit and talk of that which should be done.

For as this our Author whom we have now in hand affirms, one deed
profits more then a thousand words, be they never so sweetelye spoken, the
which Lesson, I pray GOD it may be both well remembered, as also better
followed of all true Christians, and especially of us, that as we surpass
all other Nations, in the readiness and promptness of Gods Book, and have
now a long time both by hearing and Preaching, obtained the verity, so now
to the confusion of all our Adversaries, we would begin to awake, and to
look about, so framing our lives, through the assistaunce of Gods grace, that
men seeing our good works, may glorify our Father which is in Heaven, and
that our lost Brethren, now standing as it were agaste, and amazed, with
the lycenciousnesse of our lives, may through our amendment be brought home
again, the wrath of God appeased, and our Country remaining in most happy
and blessed estate, which otherwise is like through our naughtines and
wickedness to be whipped and scourged with many Rods: For as all men do
confess, the Clergy in former time to have deserved that overthrow and
confusion that happened unto them, because of their abominable lives, and
most detestable Idolatry, in seducing and blinding of men with fancies and
vanities. So surely if we look into our selves, we shall find that we have
deserved no less, not leaving one path of iniquitye untrodden, wherein they
before had walked, nay rather adding more thereunto if possible it may be.

But some man will say, what has induced you to say or to think this of our
Clergy, seeing there is no such vice in our Church. Ah my dear Brethren,
deceive not your selves, but rather calling to mind your own frailty, amend
it, for it must needs be true that all men say, and that which is so openly
manifested to the whole world, to the grief of all good men can not be hidden.
But yet to let you to understand why I have inferred thus much as touching the
licenciousnesse of this our time, because I see it is the only thing whereof
our Adversaries triumph, yea it is their daily answer: I will know them to
live better before I believe them, and as their lives do varry from that which
they preach and teach to others, so say they there is such uncertainty in
their doctrine, such discord and variaunce among them, scarce two remaining in
one opinion, without any unity or concordaunce, that we know not whom to
follow, and therefore until there be a better order taken, we answer with
Horace, Nullius addictus iurare in verba Magistri. Thus has the Devil first
by overthrowing the flesh and then secondarily sowing of diverse opinions in
unsettled heads, almost, nay I fear me altogether confounded the truth.

But the Lord of his goodness and mercy amend it and make us so to shine in
all godliness and pureness of life, that neither this old serpent, our
deadliest adversary, neither any of his hyrelinges, may have any such cause
hereafter to brag or boste of this their victory so joyfully looked for, but as
I hope, never to be obtained: And thus thinking both my labor, as also the
travail of others nothing available, to the amending of the conversation of
the outward man, except the inward man were first cured, and the abuses of
those who has the charge thereof sharply rebuked, I have presumed to
unburden my conscience, desyring first of all the perfect ground of christian
Religion, to be surely laid at the very bottom of every Christian heart,
with an uniform consent of the truth among all men, before I would seem to
infer the moral instructions of any Paynime, being nothing comparable to
the former, neither any thing profitable except the other be first rooted,
(hoping also that the godly and grave Fathers, and those whose hearts do as it
were blede with sorrow to hear these my words will not seem to take my
sayings as any thing prejudicial unto them whose godly conversation though I
lewdly would reprove, yet would the world testify the contrary, who both sees
and commendes it and earnestly also craves their helping hands to the
amending of the rest) I will return to my self again, who being as the
Proverb is, the least of the twelve, have taken upon me to offer unto your
sightes and judgments these three Orations of that noble and famous Orator
Isocrates, appertaining to the moral instructing and ordring of this our
miserable life. The which though they be written by a man altogether ignorant
of that true and only God, the Creator and maker of mankind, yet do they so
near agree, and accord with that Heavenly Doctrine of our chief master and
savior Jesus Christ, that I hope no man will think the time ill spent which
he shall bestow in the reading thereof, especially those which being bereft
from the benefit thereof through their ignorance in the knowledge of the
Greek and Latin tongues, could not heretofore come to the perfect
understanding of the same. And because the Author himself, is in most places
of these his precepts breefer then either the matter would require or that the
capacity of the meaner sort can so easilye gather the meaning thereof, I have
not spared for their furtheraunce to adiome unto diverse places certain reasons
and confirmations taken out of Aristotle and Tully, as occasion served,
comprobating and approving the Authors intent. For according to the judgment
of Wolfius who learnedly has translated the same out of the Greek into
Latin: that which Aristottle and Tully have written in large volumes the same
does Isocrates comprehend in these his short sentences.

Thou shall also find coted in the Margent, diverse worthy examples gathered
out of sundry writers, only to the intent to reprove the carelessness of this
our time, in that being Christians excusing our selves by the frailty of our
weak natures, we wilfully leave those things undone, which the very Heathen
and Painimes most perfitely fulfilled and observed. To use many words in
describing the determinated purpose of the Author in these his three Orations,
were but superfluous labor, in that unto the two latter there are prefixed two
sundry Prefaces, and as for the first to contain the whole breefelye in one
word, it comprehends the perfect direction of the life of every private
person, no less delectable then profitable.

And thus gentle Reader as one having detained thee over long from the reading
of so learned a work, as Isocrates is, I am humbly to crave thee, for my
better encouragement in time to come, to yield unto me in this my first
enterprise, thy favorable and loving countinaunce, waying my slenderness and
imperfection with the readiness and promptness of my good will, and so
excusing the one by the other to persuade thy self that if skill with will
were agreeable, thou should ear long receive a larger volume, yea, though
Zoylus should spitte his spiteful poison.

The Authors Enchomion upon the Right Honorable and his singular good Lord,
sir Thomas Bromley, the Lord Chauncelour of England.
THe proverb old says, Iuie bushe
The goodwine needs not have:
Him for to praise as vain it were,
Whom no man does deprave.
Only that man does like me best,
Whose life in virtue spent:
May praise it self as well approues
Themistocles consent,
Antagenes in like sort thought,
Himself as best esteemde:
When as of few his praise was spread,
Because to him it seemde
As vain, to be with painted speech,
His acts resyted to hear,
Renown to virtue due of right,
Of none though praisde she were,
Of my two Oxen which is best,
I know Lisander said,
Ma^e though they be and can not speak,
Which words as rightly wayde,
Learn us to know that godly life
Does always with it bring
Eternal Fame as just reward,
Which from it self does spring.
It is says B^on best for him,
Who lewdly spendes his time:
To get some one his praise to pen,
Thereby to hide his crime.
As for that man whose worthy acts,
Declare his noble mind:
Needs no such thing, for unto him
It Is due desert by kind.
Which being true if that I should,
My self to time now frame:
And write his praise whom none dispraise,
Then were I worthy blame.
No, no I will not I, least that
Antalcidas standing by,
Should me reprove as once he did
the man that would discry.
The valiant acts of Hercules high,
Wherefore for to exempt
My self from this by silence I,
Will labor to prevent:
So foul a check and shall retire,
Accounting it as vain,
To praise that wight whose virtues rare,
Ne deadliest foe can stain:
Not doubting but as now he does,
So aye he will remain.
A Solon sage Licurgus mate,
To seek his Countries gain:
And that such fruits from learned lord,
shall daily budde and spring,
As to himself eternal fame.
By due desert may bring,
Whose noble mind and worthy acts,
The Lord I crave to speed,
That as the enteraunce he has made
so still he may proceed.
To God to Prince to common weal,
Obedience due to use,
And in behalf of either three,
No labor to refuse.
That both in life and after death,
With honor to his name:
He may possess through his deserts,
Eternal praise and fame.
Finis.
J. D. in commendation of the Author.
A Tend you sages grave ye gallant youth draw nere,
What so thou be perpend and view this glass and cristall clear
Attentively see that thou mark these shadows shown thee here,
And as imprint in tender breast, in mind these precepts bear.
If regal seat thou do possess, behold thy state at large,
Learn here to know what does belong unto a Princes charge,
Or if ought office else thou bear, mark well thy duty showen:
Look on this glass for frindly she will straitways make it known
whether right or wrong thy dealings are whereby thou may amend
The thing amiss and so thy self to countries profit bend.
And thou also which do enjoy the mean and simple state:
Whom it becomes as subject true disloyalty to hate.
Come set thy foot among the rest let tuchstone true discry,
An honest life how thou may lead with endless fame to die.
Ye to this glass let each approach for here may all men see,
To God to Prince to parents eke what should their duty be:
A frind to choose, a frind to use, and flattering foe to shun,
Is here expressed, we order due, how each thing ought be done,
Our hearts our hands our gesture eke our tongues how we should frame,
In actions all how we may deal to shun perpetual shame.
Lo here ye gain which thou shall get, lo here ye frindly heart,
Which this my frind to country bears who truly for his part.
And taken pains deserves for aye eternal praise to have,
Which I his frind in his behalf most humbly of thee crave-
What so thou be yt reads his book way well his willing mind,
And pardon grant if ought amiss thou chance herein to find.
Jn praise of the Author.
AS sundry sightes and brave delights,
The Forest fresh does yield:
Unto each wight who gentle right,
Does joy to raunge the feelde.
So Forest here, my friend so dear,
Not altering natures kind:
Does sundry sorts of brave disportes,
Most meets for noble mind.
^et forth to show, which when you know,
Imprint them deep in breast:
For you will say another day,
Of sportes this is the best.
For youth once past when at the last,
The hoarie hears draws near:
Your selves no less will sure confess,
That virtue has no peer.
A godly life deuoide of striffe,
A happy end does bring:
(...) ^ndlesse shame with deep defame,
(...) vicious life does spring.
Wherefore in time do take the prime,
This friendly Glass peruse:
And thankful heart to him impart,
Which did no pains refuse.
The same to frame us to reclaim,
In what he might from sin:
That so at length through heavenly strength,
We might Gods mercy win.
S. Norreis.
Finis.
The Book to the Reader.
TO paint and pranke the outward hue,
Of fortunes flittering show:
Both he and she most willingly,
their money do bestow.
A Glass to buy wherein they may,
Each wrinckle right discry:
Which in their face or ought place else,
Shall seem to stand awry.
Whereby I am enforst to think,
Because I pass the best:
I shall not long lie on this staule,
Or as unbought to rest.
For I not only do express,
How best you may devise,
To beautify the outward shape,
In grave and comliest wise.
But in like sort I also show,
And teach you how to frame:
The inward man that so you may,
Your fancies all reclaim.
To reasons rule in virtuous wise,
To run this pilgrims race:
Whereby in end you may possess,
In heavens a happier place.
Behold the profit which I bring,
No glass that thou can buy:
As match to me, then draw thy pursse,
Let nothing let me lie.
But take me home and every day,
When leisure does thee serve:
Do look in me so shall thou know,
When thou awry do swerve.
For nothing is which ought be done,
Toward God or man likewise:
But presently it shall appear,
as plain before thy eyes.
Thy thuoghts, thy words, thy deeds, each one,
How they should ordered be:
I shall thee tell what so thou art,
Of high or low degree.
But though that I thus frankely yield,
My service for thy sake:
Yet pitch the price with Printer first,
Before thou hence me take.
His due desert for taken pains,
Good reason that he have,
My self my friend of thee naught else
But to be bought do crave.
Finis.
The first Oration of Moral instructions, written by the famous and learned
Orator Jsocrates, unto his friend Demonicus: containing a perfect description
of the duetye of every private person.
AS unto thee, The difference betwixt true and perfect friendship which is only
among good men, and the feigned familliarity of the wicked.
dear friend Demonicus, as also unto all others, it is manifestly apparent,
how greatly in most things, the deeds and thoughts of the godly and well
disposed, do differ and varry from the wicked pretenses and vain imaginations
of the dissolute and lewd livers: so truly in nothing more, can this
disagreeablenesse and contrarietye more playner appear, then if thou mark and
consider the friendship and familliarities used of either of them: For the one
only so long regards and reuerenceth his Friend, as he remains present
with him: the other, when they are farthest asonder then are they most
careful and loving, never unmindful, but always adiudging the welfare of
both to consiste in one. By this comparison, and by other circumstaunces
following, as also in showing the cause of his writing to be in respect of the
good will borne to the party to whom he writes, he purchases the good will
and atentinnes of his hearers.
Also the love which is among the wicked (if that may be counted love to favor
another follye) is soon hot, and soon cold, continuing but a small time,
but that true friendship and familliaritie of good men, no continuance of time
can ever wear out, or by any means decay or infringe. The case therefore thus
going, supposing that there is nothing more requisite and necessary for those
that desire to attain unto honor, and are willing to spend their youthful
years in the knowledge of good Literature, then to appoynte with themselves to
follow the paths and steps of the virtuous, as also with all care and
diligence, to shun and eschew the fond endeavors and foolish practices of
evil men: I have thought it good unto that use, to bestow upon thee this
brief discourse, requesting thee to accept the same as an unfeigned pleadge of
my good will borne toward thee, and also as a simple token and remembrance of
that old familliaritie and friendship, had in times past betwixt thy Father
Hipponicus and me: For as the inheritance of his worldly wealth does of right
dissend unto thee, If the love that Mice* thus did beat unto A^acilaus his
Lord had not continued unto his children, he would not have restored unto
them their Fathers Kingdom, and banished himself so willingly.
so in my judgment also ought the good will borne unto the Father, remain
unto his children, and for performaunce of the same in us, time it self, yea
and this our present estate of living, do seem as it were to yield their
consent and furtherance thereunto, in that for thy part thou art desirous to be
instructed, and paynefully give thy self to the searching out of wisdom
and knowledge, and I likewise do now bestow my time in the teaching and
instructing of others, opening the very ready way unto wisdom, unto all
those whom I shall find careful and willing to embrace her: The error and
vain: glorious intent of diverse writers which covet more to be counted
eloquent then to profit their hearers being a fault most common in these our
days.
And although I must confess that they which take in hand to write unto their
friends some exhortation, or other as touching virtue, do go about a very
good work, worthy of great commendations, yet do they commonly leave that
untouched, which is most requisite and necessary unto the study thereof in
that they have more regard to set out the same in filed and figured words,
whereby they might bring them to a flowing and eloquente phrase of speech,
then to the amending of manners, or instructing of well living, but as those
men profit most which indeuoring both, have greatest care to describe ye
perfect platform of an honest conversation, then to the painting forth of
their oratoriall skill: So surely are they most worthy of all men to be highly
praised, and their works with great diligence to be carefully perused:
Minding therefore not by the way of an exhortation, as they do, using long and
tedeous circumstaunces, but only in setting down breefely, certain rules and
precepts, to advise thee both as concerning those things which are of all
young men to be followed and embraced, as also contrarily for the avoiding and
eschewing of such things as are hurtful, and pernicious. I have in this short
Treatise taken upon me in few words to declare unto thee, what company thou
oughtste to frequent, as also how, and after what sort the whole race of thy
life is to be ordered and directed, for as the proverb is, the twigge being
green, is easily twined and twisted every way: neither has Nature made any
thing so fierce or wild, but being young, it may be brought easilye to a tame
and tractable order. This caused the romans so carefullye to bring up their
youth, and to appoint every one to such a trade of life whereto he should be
found apt a^ twelve years of age, because as witnesses Horace the earthen pot
keeps longest the savor of that licouce wherewith it is first seasoned.

1 All saving virtue is vanity,

2 Socrates being asked what he thought of the prosperous estate of a certain
king, abounding in great wealth, said: I must first before I give answer,
know of you how much he is given to the desire of virtue and knowledge,
supposing the felicity of man to consiste only in these two.

3 Bewty, riches, and strength of body, as also any other good gift, are rather
hurtful then profitable, if they be not under the government of a discreet
mind. Seneca.


And as man ought to think the time never to soon to amend that which is
amiss, (I mean to forsake folly) so surely, no season so temperate, wherein
the seeds of virtue may better be sown, to the taking of deeper root, then
are those tender years of our first age: What slothfulness is there then in
them? Nay rather what madness? which having a vessel so sweet, apt to
receive the best licour, will rather attaint it with the filthy dregs, and
mustie smelles of corruptible vices, then in time to season the same with the
pleasant sap and redolent savor of pure virtue, especially seeing that here
on earth, we can not inioye or possess any thing, either worthier or more
certain unto us. For breefely to touch those things which we make most
account of: are not age and sickness mortal enemies to bewty, soon wasting
and withering the same? As for riches, they are rather the procurers of
mischief, then the furtherers of honesty, either inflaming the heart of man
with haughtiness and pride, or causing of slothfulness and idleness, or else
procuring of youth to fond vanities, and filthy pleasures utterly seducing
them from all good order. Moreover, the strength and valiantness of body, as
it is profitable, being wisely and discreetely used, so is it most hurtful to
the possessors themselves, if it once stray aside from Dame prudencies train,
taking in her steed fond temerity and foolish hardiness: 4 Stilpo the
Philosopher being asked by Demetrius (who had subdued and spoiled his country,
what he had lost, answered that he had lost nothing that was his own,
accounting virtue as only permanent and certain, and all other things as
none of his, because they were transitory.

5 A renowned and virtuous life procures perpetual fame and makes the dead
as always living.


For, as it is an Ornament setting forth a commendable comeliness in the
Champions body, so do we daily see it does hinder the curing of the inward
sore, in that, men trusting too much to their Bilboe Blades, void of all
fear, have no respect to God, nor Godliness. 4 But in whom Virtue takes her
dwelling, where she is once thoroughly rooted, she always abides and
continues with thee, each day together with thy age increasing, chearefully
accompanying thee, even to the last gasp, yea, (and that which is stranger)
making thee being dead, as always living. Those things which by no other
means may be brought to pass, she only subdueth, willinglye undertaking the
hardiest and difficultst causes, accounting idleness as a vice most
detestable, and labor as her greatest felicity. 5 As is manifested unto us by
those singular enterprises of Hercules, together with the valiant acts of
Theseus, by which their exploites, Virtue being their guide, they have obtained
that fame and renown, that no age shall be able to deface by oblivion, the
worthiness of their names. Thus all things else decaying, as subject to the
frailty of Fortune, only virtue remains invincible, And where as diverse and
sundry examples might be alleged, Antistenes.
for confirmation of that which has been spoken, The best instruction that the
Father can give unto the son, is the well ordring of his own life, for the
child thinks it as lawful for him to do that which he shall know his
Father to have done before him.
leaving them all as not necessary in a matter so plain, I will only refer
thee to the consideration of that most perfect course which thy own father
here living observed which will be both a notable and a sufficient proof in
my behalf, as touching this thing.

This my dear friend Hipponicus thy Father, in such sort ordered and framed
his life, that he never seemed in any respect, either a contemner of virtue, or
lover of slothfulness, but continually applying his body to travail and
pain, lodged in his breast a most willing and ready mind, always pressed to
undertake any kind of danger, for the profiting of his country, or
furtheraunce of his friends, in nothing more waying or esteeming this worldly
mucke, then that it might serve for his necessary uses, We must live to day, as
if we should die to morrow.
having continually such care over his Family, as though he should have lived
ever, and yet so using each thing, as if he should die to morrow, only content
with his own, and not delighting in offering injury to any, or being as one
greedilye coveting that which was an others. Neither did he lead this kind of
life, after a base and obscure order, but it was done with great honor, and
that with the praise and commendations of all men, Tully affyrmeth true
friendship to surpass Consanguinitye, in that a man may be a kinsman, (...)
not a friend.
for he was a man both bountiful and liberal, to all his well willers, more
esteeming a faithful friend then a flattering kinsman adiudging that the
confirmation and ground of true friendship did rather consist in the
disposition of nature, then in ought law ordained and constituted by man's
reason, and that the lykelihoode and agreeableness of conditions, were of more
force therein, then any bond of consanguinity, or kindred: The ground of true
friendeship is good will born for virtues sake, and not for hope of gain, or in
respect of our own necessity. Tully.
alleging also good will as the principal cause thereof, and not the respect
of necessitye, or the hope of gain.

Truly time would fail me, if I should perticulerly prosecute the rest of his
worthiness, wherefore leaving this to a fitter place, I have here breefelye
shown unto thee a superficial protracture of thy Fathers singular disposition
and nature, the which it becomes thee to have always before thy eyes, as the
mark whereby thou may be directed, accounting his Godly conversation as a
Law, making continual wondering at his virtues, and indeuouring as much as in
thee lies to counteruaile the same. We ought studiously to labor to
counteruayle the worthiness of our ancestors.
(9) For whereas the Painter through Art, learned by daily practice, obtayneth
that skill, most lively to shadow and deliniate the perfectst shape of the
bewtifulst creature, with what infamy then are those children to be noted
with, which having nature her self as a special furtherer of the same, and so
loving a scholemayster, even their own Fathers refuse to add that little
labor and care, to frame themselves to follow their steps, lively to
present the worthiness of their virtues, as children being worthy of such
parents.

Note the great negligence and folly of youth.
But such is the folly of our time, that we do not only leave this undone,
but also work rather the contrary, every day through our lewd doings, and
licensious living, This was the destructi- of Commodus, as also Alexander the
great through flattering of such forgetting himself, was sone, brought to his
end.
stayning and infaming the honor gotten by our Auncestoures, searing our
selves with the hot iron of perpetual ignomie, to the great discreadite and
shame of all our kindered, giving rather credit to the flattering tales of
Sicophants and Ruffins, then to the sage and grave advise of our own natural
parents, in so much, that if we apply our shapes with theirs, we shall
find so monsterous and so strange a proportion, with such great difference
that we may rightlyer be accounted Bastardes, then the legitimate sons of
any such men. Isocrates having used these former words, as the preface or
introduction unto the matter, which he were about, now comes unto that which
at the first he had purposed
Now therefore to the eschewing of al these evils, and to show thy self as
worthy of such a Father, persuade thy self that it is as needful for thee,
to be as well furnished, and to have as great a care in the undertaking of
this enterprise, as has the worthiest champion when he enters the List
against all his adversaries: And seeing it were very hard that any one should
go about a thing so weighty except he were before hand well and thoroughly
instructed with diverse and sondrye good precepts appertaining thereunto, I
will therefore breefely endeavor to describe unto thee how thou shalt best
proceed herein, both to the obtaining of virtue, as also to the winning of
eternal praise and honor to thee and to thy postery for ever. The body says
Cicero, waxes weary through continual labor and travail, but the mind the
more it is occupied, the fresher and ^^di^t it is.
For as the body by daily and continual excercises, is hardened, to the
abiding and sustayning of any kind of labor and travail, so surely is the
mind of man to be practiced and induced, by good and godly Discipline, that
thereby it may be made willing and apt to be obedient to ye rule of reason,
immitating the good, and avoiding the evil.

First therefore, above all things, remember duly and reverently worship and
honor the Honor God above all things.
Gods immortal, not only in offering up sacrifices unto them for their
unspeakable benefits daily bestowed upon thee, but also in the observing and
fulfilling of all such vows iustlye and truly, which at any time thou shalt
protest and swear to fulfill, Thy duty toward god is to love and to worship
him, and to offer up the sacrifise of thanksgiving for his benefits received:
thy duty toward man is justly and truly to perform thy promise both words
and deeds agreeing in one.
for the former (which are thy Sacrifices and thankesgiuings) shall cause them
the more aboundauntly to increase thy wealth, and to further thy intents. The
other (I mean the observation of thy promises) will be a manifest proof unto
all men, of thy integritye of life and honest conversation. Pericles that
worthy Athenian, would never use any spech unto the people, or consult of any
thing appertayning to the commodity of his country, before he had besought
the heavenly aid of God. Alexander the great also did use every Morning the
like exercise, and so did many other heathen men, to the condemnation of us
counterfeit christians. According to Aristophanes, the delightful thing at
length wa^et loathsome.
And as it behooves thee always to be mindful of his divine power and
onmipotencie, of whom also thou receiuest all that thou have, so oughtst thou
most chiefelye so to do, when as common solemnities are ordained, generallye
for the performing of the same, that by this thy consent it may appear that
thou honor the same God with them, as also that thou art an obedient
Subject to the laws of thy Prince.

(8) So use thy self toward thy Parents, as thou would wish to be used
thy self of thy own children, when as thou shall happen to be made a Father.

Practice only those excercises of body which may make for the preservation
of thy health, nothing waying the vain ostentation of Follye, in desiring to
have thy self accounted strong or mighty, least that by indeuouring more then
thou art able, or attempting the thing which is above thy reach, thou should
chance to come to some mishap, and farther inconvenience, and this shall thou
easily perform, (9) if thou suffer not thy self to be wearied, or as it were
over faciated and cloyed in any kind of thing which thou go about.

Favor not a flearing looks, nor take no delight in a brazen face, for as the
one is the sign of small grace so does the other betoken a simple wit: let
thy countenance therefore be framed after a comely and grave order not
frowning nor pouting for as the former is a perfect sign of great modesty,
Traian the Emperor thought is not meet for a Prince to look angerly or
louringly upon his people.
so does the latter describe a proud and hautie mind, a froward heart and a
froward nature.

Account these four virtues, as thy chiefest furniture namely, Modesty,
Sobriety, Justice and Temperancy, for in them is contained the perfect
derection of man's life.

Remember to have always a clear conscience.
Do nothing but that which thou carest not if all the world did see thee, for
never think to keep that secret, which thou shall commit at any time, if it
be dishonest, for in that thou indeuourest to conseale it from others, thou
make it always as fresh in thy own remembrance, Nothing so secretly done
but at length it comes to light.
so that continually it tormenteth thee and at the last it will burst out:
moreover do not judge that, as seeming to be spoken which is dishonest to be
done, always having in thy remembrance these four things fear God, honor
thy parence, reverence thy friend and obey the laws of thy Prince.

In all our doings we must have a care of our credit, committing nothing
that is unseeming. Give no occasion of evil report.
For the refreshing and recreating of thy mind, use such sportes as are
agreeable to thy estate and honor, for as honest mirthe is commendable and
profitable, so surely mirth without measure breeds great inconveniences.

Beware of false accusations and slanderous reports for the common sort of
people being ignorant of ye truth, as also rash in judgment, do commonly
give their verdite either by hear say, or as affection leads.

Nothing more unseeming then reproouing another to be found faulty thy self in
the same.
Thou shall greatly increase thy credit if thou be not found faulty in those
things which thou shall seem to reprove in an other body: always so ordering
thy self that thou mightes seem to stir and to cause a certain admiration
to arise through the singulernesse of thy own virtues.

Be willing to learn, so shall thou profit much, indeuoring The worthiness
of King Augustus and Adrianus Emperors of Rome, the one suffering no day to
pass, wherein he did not read or write some exercise the other so diligent
in learning the greek tongue, that through his pains taken therein, he became
so skillful, that he was called Greculus. Scipio would omit no leisure given
unto him either at home or in War, nor Cato Vticensis, the very respite which
he had even in the senate house, but that they would be occupied in perusing
of some Book or other. Democritus travailed into Egypt, as far as the red
Sea, to hear the Caldeans, Pithagoras also went into Persia to become a
Scholar unto the wise men of that country, called Magi. Fair words and
courteous speeches are to be used to all men. Liturgus would not suffer the
youth of Lacedemonia to wear either hose or Shoes. Phocion also of Athens, and
Masinissa King of Numidia, went always barefooted, and bareheadded, both in
War and at home, even in the coldest weather, hardening themselves against all
adversity to come. Cains Fabricius did rather choose to eat his meat in an
earthen platter* then to receive the great treasure sent unto him by king
Pierchus, Phocion also in like sort refused the gifts of Alexander, because
the receiving of them was not honest.
by daily practice to keep that thou know, as also to come to the
understanding of that which as yet thou art ignorant of, for it is as great a
fault not to bear away a profitable lesson taught thee, as it is fondly to
refuse the gift of thy friend when it is offered thee.

Also what leisure so ever shall fall out, bestow the same in the study of
good literature for so it will come to pass that by daily reading, thou shall
easily and before thou art aware obtain that skill which others before thee
have scarce gotten with great labor.

And whereas to hear and to know much surpasses all worldly treasure in that
the one is permanent and sure the other uncertain and mutable, let it never
grieve thee to undertake a far and painful journey to hear the wisdom
and learning of such as are able to instruct thee therein, seeing that the
merchant to increase his brickell treasure ventereth over so many perilous and
dangerous seas leaving no place unsought where he understands any gain may
be gotten.

Be lowly in thy behavior, and courteous in thy speech, using friendly
salutations and gentle words toward all men, whereunto thou shall easily
frame thy self, if thou frequent the company of good men, for so shall thou be
sure to shun the evil will of many, and purchase in the end both love and
credit with the best, but beware of many words, neither seem to urge one
thing too often.

Enforce thy self willingly to take pains that if need should so require
thou may be able to abide it, carefully preventing before hand the mischief
that afterward may fall out.

Be sure to set thy heart free from the service of those whose servants to be
is accounted a vile and intolerable How we may easily subdue the vain motions
and perturbations of our minds, and namely these four as principal,
Covetousness, Wrath, the desire of the flesh, and Sorrow.

Athenodorus the Philosopher being to depart from the Court of Augustus,
because of his age, at his departure gave him this counsel, do nothing in
thy anger before thou have repeated over the greek Alphabet. Men (says Tully)
are taken with the allurementes of pleasure, as Fishes are with the bayte, and
hereupon it is called a golden mischief, a sugared poison, and a deceitful
Siren. Policrates the fortunatste that ever was, having never in his life felt
what adversity meant, at length was hanged on a gabbet, by one O^^^^es a
Persean. Faith more to be esteemed then money.

The renowned Regulus was content willingly to suffer the cruel torments of
his enemies, rather then to break his faithful promise made unto them for his
return.

As Socrates is reported to have had always one manner of countenance, both
or prosperity and adversity, so likewise he is said to have been so constant
in his words that he never varied in any thing.


servitude, as namely, the desire of gain, anger, pleasure and sorrow, the
which evils in this sort thou shall easily withstand: first, account that
only to be gainefull unto thee which is honestly gotten, and makes to the
increasing of thy honor and credit, and not those things which may serve for
the enriching of thy cofers or stuffing of thy pursse, as the use of men is in
this our time, then the which nothing is viler: Secondly, thy anger is soon
appeased if thou would be content to show thy self such a one toward him
that has offended or displeased thee, as thou thy self would wish to be
ordered, if thou were in his case, always having a respect to the fault
committed and that with favor, and not with extremity.

As for pleasure she is soon subdued, if thou either consider her end, which
is always bitter, bringing only sorrow and repentance when it is too late,
or else if thou thoroughly mark her vanity, which scarce showing her face,
suddenly vanishes away like a shadow leaving nothing behind her, but infamy
and shame.

And now to come to the last: in thy adversity if thou do but behold and
consider the miseries and calamities of others, remembering also that thou art a
man subject to mishappes as they are, thou must of necessity be forced
patiently to abide the same, seeing it is not thy case alone, neither has any
creature here lived but tasted of the same cup were he never so fortunate.

Have also greater care in giving thy word, then in lending thy money, for
this being lost may be gotten again, but the other once broken is
unrecoverable: wherefore it is the part of a good man so to deal, that the
integrity of his life may be such that his word may be as soon taken as his
oath: And as I would have thee to give this credit to the words of an honest
man, so trust not at all to any wicked or evil disposed person, neither do
thou commit the secrets of thy heart to any, Papirius would not disclose, no
not to his own mother the socretes of the Senate of Rome. Thou may lawfully
sweat for two causes.
but only to those to whom it shall appertain, as carefully to keep the same
secret, when they hear it, as it does unto thee who tells it.

If it shall be lawfully required at thy hands it shall be lawful for thee to
take an oath so that it be for either of these two causes as to purge and to
clear thy self from the infamy of any heinous crime falsely objected against
thee, or else to rid and to deliver thy friend from trouble being either
unjustly accused, or wrongfully oppressed, the truth whereof to thee only
known, We will in these days rather forswere our selves so that we may have
gain thereby, then it shall be lost for lack of swearing.
is not to be concealed, neither for fear or affection, but in money matters
it shall not be lawful for thee to swear by any God, although it be that thou
can do it with a clear conscience, least that thereby any one might adiudge
thee either perjured in swearing, or too to covetous in thy dealinges.

Make no league of friendship with any, Very necessary rules es touching
friendship,
before thou haste thoroughly tried his nature, and conversation, as also how
and after what sort he has dealt with others, through which thou may
conjecture and hope that he will be likewise affectioned toward thee, as he
has been unto them, but to the end that neither thou may be ignorant of thy
friends conditions, neither yet have any cause afterward to try to thy cost, as
it often faleth out thou shall pretend thy self then in most necessity, As
did that Romain of whom Plutark writes in trying the faithfulness of his
wife, in committing unto her a fained tale, in stead of the secret which the
desired to know.
when as thou haste least need, or else seem to impart that as a great
secret whereof thou haste no care, and thus if he be unfaithful, thou shall
be sure to take no harm, but having undermined his pretended amity, and
rebuking him for his folly, learn to be more circumspect in trusting him or
any other hereafter. And as I would wish thee to take leisure and good advise
in knitting of this knot, so would I also that when it is once finished, it
should never be broken, but that it should always be observed The faithfulness
of friends might be constrined by diverse histories plainly showing the
singulernesse and sundry commodities of true friendship, but the only saying of
Dionisius the Tyrant shall now suffice, who coming into his sons Closet,
and there finding diverse rich jewels which he had given him, sharply rebuking
his son, said: I gave thee not these Jewels to hoord up in a corner, but
rather to bestow them upon others to get the friendship and love of thy people
thereby, for friends are a surer defense unto the state of a Kingdom, then is
gold or silver. Hereto agreeeth the Posie that was in Catoes King.

Be thou a friend to one, and a foe to none.

The touchstone to try a friend is adversity, as proved Tarquinius the proud,
who being banished, then affirmed that he understood what friends and what
foes he had, being then not able either to pleasure his friends, or to revenge
his enemies. Titus Vaspasian would say, that that day was lost, wherein he had
not pleasured some one of his friends. Scipio Africanus also would never depart
from the market place, until he had through his liberallity and friendly
courtesye, procured the good will of one of them into whose company he happened
that day.


as long as it contains it self within the bounds of true friendship, which
is never to swerve from virtue for truly it were better to have no friend at
all, then to use any chopping or changing in friendship. And as the pureness
of the gold is tried by the Fornesse, so is the faithfulness of friends by
adversity, suppose therefore those frindes as most sure and trusty unto thee,
which are not only sorry for thy misfortunes and miseries willing to be
partakers and sustainers of the same, to the intent that the burden may seem
the more tolerable unto thee: but also such as will not pyne or be grieved at
thy prosperity, as those which are loathe to see any other to fare better then
themselves: for there are many men which as they are sorry for thy mishappes,
so will they commonly envy at thy felicity. Now therefore as thou must be
circumspect in chosing and trusting thy friend, so must thou be careful in the
ordering and keeping of so great a treasure once gotten. This love therefore, as
is before said taking her beginning from virtue through the agreeableness of
conuersations and natures, by increasing the same by daily society and mutual
amity proffered and used one toward the other, thou must remember not to
demand or request any thing of this thy friend that is unlawful or dishonest:
thou must not look to be entreated or state until thou be requested to do
this or that in his behalf, but as one having as great a care of him as of thy
self, thou must voluntarily of thy own accord only of good will, seek to
further and pleasure him as much as in thee lies, rejoicing when occasion
shall be given thee, wherein thou maiste profit him: Also thou must think it as
great infamy to be excelled and surpassed of thy friend in bou^tifulnesse and
liberality, as it would be a grief unto thee to be foiled by thy enemy.
Thou must always have that credit Licurgus was wont to say that we should
eat no more meat then to satisfy our hunger, neither use more garments, then
were requisite to withstand the cold, and to covet our bodies Claudia a
gentlewoman of Rome accounted as dishonest because of her curiositye in
Apparel.

Scipio Aemilius, contented himself only with such things as were necessary
for his affairs nothing respecting either the abundance of wealth or pri^^^ly
port but desyring rather that occasion might be given to the people to speak
of his valiant acts, then of his great treasures. The worthy Lady Cornelia
after she had showed all the commodities of her house unto a stranger of
Campania, that lodged with her as a ge^te, added last of all, as the chiefest
furniture of her house, her two sons, who for their learning and wisdom were
then as ^^nowned through out all Rome.


in thy friend as thou have in thy self, never suspecting or misdoubting any
thing, or giving care to any false report whereby dissension might arise, but
lovingly reuerencing one another, you must take in good part each others
doings and sayings, content sometimes to be rebuked or reproved as occasion
serves, whether it be either sharply or kindly: moreover thou must never be
unmindful or forgetful of thy friend, but even then when he is farthest off
or longest absent, he must continue as still in presence, and as one always
before thy sight.

Let thy Apparel be comely and decent, void of all vain superfluity and fond
bravery, for as a seming garment does set out the body in comely sort,
containing in it a token of great gravity and wisdom, so does the other show
forth a light mind and a proud heart.

Desire not the abundance of wealth, neither seek for excess gain, but so
deal, that thy goods may be both necessary and profitable unto thee,
accounting that only as necessary, which serves to a good use, and that also
as profitable which is well bestowed. As for those men which take great care
and pains to increase their substance, and then when it is gotten, are
ignorant how to use it, refrain them as those which are subject to their
own folly, being most like unto that man which bestowing great charges to
buy a goodlye and statelye Courser and when he has gotten him, neither dares
to come on his back, neither knows how to order him, but only keeps him
to suffice his eye, for the satis^^ing of his fancy.

As the chiefest furniture, and bewty of thy house does consist in the
purchasing of good will and credit by thy well doings, whereby perpetual
renown is gotten to thee, and to thy posterity, and as it is thy duty to see
thy children and family well instructed, and trained up in the Scoole of
Virtue: So likewise it shall be requisite and necessary for thee, especially
for two causes, to do thy Such is the mutabillity of Fortune that someti^^ ^he
^^al^^^ (...) at ^ea^ (...) the ^^^ne of (...) po^t^^ to be king of Sicili^.
Telephan^e of a cart (...) so be King of Lidia and Justinius of a s^^^heard to
be an Emperor of Rome, with Darius of Persea, Ptolomeus of Egypt, and Basilius
of Macedon, and diverse others, sometimes also, she brings the mightiest to
gretest poverty, as Dionisius King of Sicilia to keep a School, Pazaites King
of Turkey to eat the crummes under Tamber^^ans Table, Bellisarius after many
victories to beg, and rich Crassus to come to extreme penury.

As proved Marcus Tullius, being slain of Pompilius, whom before he had saved
from the Gallows, the like also did Publius Se^^lius to ^ucius Caesar his
dearest friend.


endeavor to augment and increase thy worldly wealth: First, to be the better
able to abide and sustain the bitterness of adversity, if it shall chance
to happen: Secondly that thou may help thy friend in his necessity: provide
for thy children, and have a competent sufficiency for time to come, so that
in the getting of these things there be no greedye desire in thee, nor ought
unjust or wrong dealing toward any, holding thy self content with that thou
haste, and yet as one seeking by all honest means to better thy estate.

Seem not to deride or to have in scorn the miserable estate of any man,
neither do thou hitte any thing opprobriously in his teeth, for though thou
see this thy present state, yet know thou not what will happen unto thee
hereafter, seeing thou have no more assurance of fortune then he had.

Forget not also to do good unto good men and as much as in thee lies, be
ready to profit and to pleasure them, for the benefits bestowed on such are
as a most precious treasure with which thou being thoroughly stored and
enriched, may account thy self to live in greater saftie then he that
possesses a kingdom abounding in greatest wealth: as for the wicked have no
acquaintance with them, for by deserving well at their hands thou shalt
gain no more then they do which give bread to another man's dog, for as the
dog does commonly bark as well at those that feed them, as at others, so is
it the use of evil disposed persons, as well to seek to displeasure them of
whom they have received greatest courtesy, as them of whom they have sustained
greatest injury, so that to be conversant with lewd and wicked company is as
it were to tread bare footed among thorns, or as it fares with him which
would suffer a snake to breed in his bosom: and among this company of
detestable creatures, remember as carefully to shun, and eschew the sugered
payson closely couched under the fawning faces and glosing words of flattering
and dissembling Sycophantes, Flatterers and Coloners al one
as thou would endeavor to fly and avoid the vilest couseners and
craftiest deceauers, for both their dealinges and meaninges are a like as sure
to trust to as is a broken staff to leap over a dike: nay to speak further
by such customers, and most vile companions, thou shalt loose the love and
friendship of all good men in so much that when thou art brought to extreme
miserye (of the which thou must make a just account: No trust nor credit to be
given to the words of a wicked man.
) thou shall be shall be sure to be left destitute of all help, as for them if
they would not forsake thee (as there property is) yet can they not pleasure
thee at all, being neither of ability able (because they live by others men's
tables) neither of any credit that there words may serve or betaken in any
respect to farther thee. Courteous speeches says Valerius Marinius appeaseth
anger, mittigateth the wrath of the greatest tiraunt and is the only means to
win the good will and love of all men.


Use courtesy and lowliness both in behavior and in speech unto all those
which shall come to common and to talk with thee, for if servants can scarce
abide the haughty and hot words of their masters, much less will they
take in good part thy arrogant and lofty speeches which owe thee no more
duty then thou shall deserve at their hands, through the good using of thy
self. As for lowliness thou shall easily retain her with thee, if thou will
observe these things: namely, be not contentious, be not froward nor fromward,
be not peruerst or overthwart in thy dealinges, avoid all quarrelling and
brawling, see also that thou add not word for word, neither stand too
stiffely in thy opinion, Pisistratus being reviled with diverse opprobrious
speeches by the friend Trasippus at a Supper did not only bear with him
forgiving the offense but also the next day friendly talking with him,
continued with no le^ good will then he did before.
no though any of thy companions or friends happen to be angry and moved with
thee without a cause, do rather bear with him until this heat be past, and
so when he is cooled friendly rebuke him, and gently show him his folly: for
anger blinds the mind and robs a man of all his understanding and
judgment.

Moreover seem not to dally or to sport in any earnest matter neither be
thou too earnest in any trifling cause, for things unorderly used, breed
farther trouble which other wise being taken heed unto in time, were soon
ended with small charges and little labor. Pickthankes and busy medlers are to
be shunned.
Seek not to currie favor with any, neither be thou an accuser or a find
fault for it is both odeous and reproachful, as also causes enmities and
debates to arise. Finally, be no intermedler in other men's matters more the^
thou art requested, dealing therein uprightly, procuring unity and peace
rather then any dissension or variance, giving good counsel and fair
language to all manner of persons, remembering that a gentle answer, is as
good cheap as a foul.

Moderate and honest banqueting tolerable.
Thou shall do nothing better then to refrain thy self from banketing and
feasting, but if it so fall out that of necessity through the intreatance of
thy friends thou must of force keep company, In his drunkenness Alexander
killed his dearest friends, Cleomines king of Sparta became mad, Armitus a
Siracusan vanished his own daughter, Caligula wasted his treasure, and Nero
became so beastly that in steed of Tiberius Nero he was called Biberius Mero
Diverse others also, through the first plague of God have died in this their
abhominablenesse.
beware of surfeting and excess quaffing of wines, least thou become drunken
then the which nothing is beastlier or abhominablier: for drunkenness
depriueth thee of all thy senses, robs thee of that principal gift of
reason, makes thee more odious then the brutest beast, and takes from thee
the knowledge of God and man, headlong carrying thee away into a thousand
evils most like unto a wagon, the which the horses having lost their guide,
do hale up and down until it be broken to fitters.

Let thy chiefest desire be to win immortal praises, and renown through the
valiauntnes and magnanimity of a noble and invincible mind, being neither
incensed by prosperity to be haughty or proud, neither so discouraged
through adversity, as to become timorous or fearful: but in such sort
ordering thy self in all things that neither money may corrupt thee, Pericles
could be induced by no intreataunce of any friend, to be present at any
Banquet.

As Scipio Africanus the elder deserved with the best immortal praise, and
commendations of all men, for his create Conquestes, valiantness of mind, and
integrity of life, so did he purchase greater fame in humbling himself so
lowly toward all men in his greatest prosperitye, in refusing so great
honors as were offered him by the Senate and people of Rome.


nor affection move thee, nor anger provoke thee, nor pleasure alure thee,
neither death her self compel thee from the executing of justice and equity,
indifferently to al men, accounting with thy self that hereunto thou have no
deadlier enemy then is ignorance, nor contrarily no greater friend nor better
help then is knowledge and understanding, Ignorance our deadliest enemy.
for as from the one comes no profit nor goodness, but rather hurt and
sundry inconveniences, so surely from the other proceeds the perfection of
all that has been before rehearsed, making thee of a painted wall a lively
creature, and of a senseless stock a witty Counselor.

If thou shall fall into any consultation with thy self as touching things to
come, How thou s^^ite best forecast (...) provide for ti^^ to come.
the best way is to make conjecture by things past what is likely to happen
hereafter: Because most men are so blinded, says Democritus, that they can
not or will not perceive their own faults and do most easily see and
understand that which is amiss in an other, it shall be best for them to mark
other men's doings, and so by thei^^ to amend their own.
First therefore having had a perfect consideration of thy own estate waying
well each thing that is incident and appertaining to the same, as well casting
the worst as constering the best, thou must then call to thy remembrance the
euentes and happes of other men, which have heretofore lived in that order, and
degree of calling wherein thou now do remain, and so from them drawing, a
perfect draft by comparing of things paste with things present, thou shall
easily deserve and judge of things to come, for nothing is or shall be hereafter
but that the like has happened in former time, so that thou can not miss of
some example or other, whereby thou may be directed, learning by other men's
harms to beware and so to shun that which might be hurtful unto thee: And
now as touching those thy deliberations and aduisementes to be used in each
matter, Thales M^^es^us being asked wh^^^ was the wisest thing, he answered
^^^e because ^^^^eth (...) the truth in every thing.
it shall be good for thee therein to take time and leisure, touching every part
as it were to the quick, before thou begin to enterprise or to take in hand
any thing, but yet see that in the executing and dispatching thereof, thou use
all kind of diligence and speed, for nothing is more dangerous then
procrastenation: And as God has bestowed upon us, nothing more excellent then
is a good fortune, that is then to preserve and to direct all our doings to the
best, so surely the singulerst thing that proceeds from man toward
himself, is good aduisement and a prudent foresight: And seeing we are often
times compelled to ask the advice of another, What things are to be observed
in asking the advice of any other.
therein also are these caueates to be observed. First, as touching the party
of whom we ask counsel, in whom we must note these three things, his
wisdom and knowledge, his report and credit, the good governing and well
ordering of his own affairs, for he can not commonly further another man
which knows not how to profit himself: secondly, as in respect of our
selves, and the thing to be demanded. If the matter that thou would ask
advise and counsel of, be such that thou would not have it openly known,
and yet because thy own wit will not serve to comprehend the same, In this
sort did Erastratus deal to understand the mind of his Lord and master
Seleucus, King of Siria, that so without danger he might utter that which he
purposed.

Though Zopirus pretended the safety of the Babilonians, yet as soon as he
had obtained his purpose, he betrayed them into the hands of Darius.


but that thou must needs show it to another, herein it shall be best for thee
to deal as it were a far off, and framing thy talk as of some other matter,
putting the case to be in some such like thing and so by the using of certain
interrogations and questions thou shall privily undermine his meaning, and come
to some light in the matter which thou did before doubt of, and yet not
describing thy self to be the party, neither the thing at all to touch thee:
Now the third Caveat is concerning the counsel given, which must be well
waighed and considered, for the Sirens sweet harmony is the poor shipmans
subversion and the strongest poison is commonly contained in a golden Goblet,
many there be which will pretend in words to be thy dearest friends, bearing
thee in hand that they seek only thy commodity, Perpenna pretended great
friendship toward Quintus Sertorius, and yet meant he nothing less, for
desirous to have the government of Spain, as only in his own hands,
courteously inuiting him to supper, he cruelly slew him.
caring for nothing more then if in ought they may pleasure thee, protesting
even death for thy sake, ye and if words will not serve to bring thee to their
bait they will not spare also to do somewhat or other for thee, wherein their
good will may seem to appear when as in very deed they minded nothing
less. Therefore to escape these their hooks, so sweetly baited: have more
respect unto their meaning then to their words unto the soundness of their
counsel, then to their painted speech, unto the truth and faithfulness of
When as Epaminundas did se^ the people of Theabes most merriest, banqueting
and feasting on the other then was he most heauiest and saddest, fearing and
misdouting least some mishap would follow thereon, for he well kn^^^ that
adversity (...) as hande^a^^ to prosperity.

As it is commendable to immitate the good condit^ons and virtues of any man,
so nothing more unseeming then either to be counte^ Dionisius Dog with
A^^^^ppus, or to uphold the folly^ of Alexander with the Parasite Gages.


the hearts together with their honest conversation o life, then to their
feigned looks or flattering tongues: always waying, and pondering with thy
self why and wherefore this friendship is showen thee.

Being then as most careful to preuente the greatest mischief when as thou
think thy self in most safety herin, immitating the use of those men,
which to continue, and to keep their bodies in perfect health, do continuallye
seek to avoid all those things which they know or can learn to be
hurtful, or unwholesome for them, for as calling to remembrance the great
griefs and intolerable pains, which we abide and suffer in our sickensse, we
will have the greater care, to preserve our selves in health, so surely, if we
would not forget the sundry inconveniences which rashenesse brings we would
soon be wiser, both in our deliberations as also in all our other affairs and
dealinges.

Have in admiration the virtue and princely majesty of the King thy governor,
conforming thy self in all things to his will and pleasure, studying most
earnestly to immitate, the sincerenesse and integrity of his life so shall the
people the better like of thy dealinges, and the King himself have greater
cause to be well affectioned toward thee, and that so much the more if thou
show thy self a faithful obeyer of his laws and commandments, as also an
earnest maintainer of the same, not seeking to conseale or to keep counsel
with any other which by word or deed shall go about to do contrary to the
Kings pleasure, or to impair the royal estate of his Crown and dignity: or
in corrupting of his laws by there lewd inventions, and subtle
interpretations, A vice most usual in these days
always finding some starting hole or other to prevent the statute or else
through fawning on some noble man to get some license or other to profit
himself, to undo many thousands.

Wherefore when thou shall be advanced to honor, The duty of those which a^e
in authority.
be mindful hereof seeking rather to care for the commodity Saleueus though
he were entreated to the contrary, would not suffer his own son to go
unpunished, whereby the law which he had made, might not be broken, but to
observe the same did pluck out one of his own eyes, and another of his sons,
the law being, that whosoever did offend in adultery, should have his eyes
plucked out.
of all men indifferently, then for the profiting of one man to hinder the
rest: give not thy counsel and advise to the making of a good law, and then
afterward to be a means to break the same again. For the avoiding whereof
take good heed that thy under officers whom thou shall admit as furtherers of
thy charge, be none of those which use to see with one eye and to wincke with
the other, having their hands open, their ears stopped, and their consciences
as wide mouthed as a Faulconers bag: for surely the infamy of their evil
dealinges, shall be imputed unto thee, use thy office as a steward does his
stewardship under his lord to the gain of his master, and not to his own
advantage: for thou ought rather to endeavor to leave thy office with
honor and good will gotten, Spurius Cassius and Titus Manlius showed
themselves such maintainers of the laws of their country that they spared
not to put to death their own sons, being found transgressors.
by the well governing of the same, then to be accounted the wealthier or ye
richer thereby: for the good report and praise made of thy just and upright
dealings, is more to be esteemed and regarded, then the increase of thy wealth,
preferring always honest poverty, before the abundance of evil gotten goods,
the one pleasuring thee but for a small time, the other causing thee to be well
spoken of, even when thou art dead. As for riches weigh them not neither have
any desire to be like unto any of those whom thou shall understand to be
enriched by any unlawful or dishonest means, Paulus Aemilius brought nothing
home unto his own house of all that treasure which he had gotten in Macedonia,
but only a perpetual memory of his worthy enterprises, and having been consul
diverse times, in the end died so pore that he was feign to be buried by the
common tresure. Themistocles had rather to marry his Daughter to an honest man
being poor, then to a ^iche man being vicious, for though says Tully thou
may be the richer through thy wealth for a time yet can they not make thee any
jot the honester.
but show thy self a friend and favorer of those which shall sustain wrong
for righteousness sake, for wealth is a thing incident as well to the wicked
as to to the godly, but righteousness is the only property of good men, who
if in nothing else, yet in this thing especially they excel the wicked in that
they have always through her a good hope and a quiet conscience, whereas the
other dispayring through their own mischiefs, remain continuallye tormented
and vexed, with the As it is infamy to uphold the cause of any lewd person,
so great praise is gotten by opening and detecting their wickedness, as
happened to Marcus Antonius for accusing of C. Norbanus and unto Julius Caesar
for defecting of M. Albutius.
guiltiness of their offenses, immitating therefore the perfect steps and
paths of the righteous show thy self no helper nor furtherer of any evil
cause least men should conceive that opinion of thee that as thou maintainest
the wrong of another, thou thy self will also practice the like in any matter
of thy own, do thou therefore so behave thy self, that though thou art in
higher authority, and can do more then another, yet thou may seem
always to live as one subject to the same laws as other are, executing
justice not for fear of offending or as fed with vain glory, but only for
the seal and love thou bear unto equity her self.

And as thou ought to be careful for the obtaining and getting of all such
things as are necessary to the maintenance of thy estate, Plato being asked
how long he would be a scholar, answered* until I repent me that I am made
wiser.
so especially use greatest labor, and endeavor in the bedecking thy mind
with those most precious pearls, namely learning and knowledge that thou
may be able to bring to perfection, thy own determinations, and as it were
a far off to foresee things to come without the help of another, for in the
body of man there is nothing contained more worthyer or more excellent then is
a wise and discrete mind the which perceiving all earthly things as
uncertain, vain and transitory, will neither be over haughty or insolent in
prosperity neither it too too cowardly or faint hearted in adversity, but
patiently abiding the pleasure of God, always hoping for the best, We must not
think our selves as worthy of the worst, and yet must we hope for the best.
and yet condemning himself as unworthy of the worst. But as I discommend an
arrogant and haughty mind, bragging and presuming upon the multitude of his
riches, or in the greatness of his power as also the base minds of those
which are either altogether discomforted with ye least blast of adversity or
else do ragingly and furiously vex and grieve thereat, so do I also account
it lawful for a man to rejoice and to be glad in his prosperity, not being
unthankful for the same, unto him of whom he has received so good hap and
fortune, yet would I that both M. Antonius so discreetely behaved himself in
all his doings, that men could not gather by any outward appearaunce, what
was the inward thought of his heart, for neither prosperity nor adversity
could cause him to change his countenance.

Cecilius Merellus being asked by one of the Tribunes of the people, what he
meant to do, Answered: if I thought this garment which I have on my back were
privy to my thought, I would throw it off, and burn it in the fire.

The first thing that Pithagoras did teach his Scholars, was to keep
silence, Agatho healde a stone in his mouth three years to hinder his speech,
that thereby he might learn to hold his peace.

Zeno having invited the Ambassadors of King Antigonus, and diverse other
Philosophers to supper, when as all the rest of the company had used speeches
in the commendacions of their knowledges, as occasion of talk was given, he
only was found to hold his peace, the which the Ambassadors perceiving and
wondering thereat, demanded of him what was the occasion that he was so mute,
nothing said he, but to let you understand that the hardest thing of all is to
hold once peace.


this joy as also that patience to be used in aduersitye, should be as it were
ouershadowed, that is moderatelye and discreetely ordered, for if with great
care we keep secret in our houses from the knowledge of others, our mucky
mass of Gold and silver, with other treasures, whereof we make any account,
then how unseeming a thing were it for us so to deal, that every one should
understand and perceive the intent and purpose of our hearts, then the
which nothing ought to be more seacrete.

But where as there are many men, whose tongues run before their wits, no
sooner thinking ought in their minds, but straight ways they babble it out to
others, I would wish thee to remember, to reuolue and consider with thy self
before hand, every thing whereof thou mindest to speak, so shall thou be sure
to avoid and escape all kind of reprehension, the ignomie and infamy whereof,
ought as greatly to be feared of all good men, as death it self is horrible and
terrible to the wicked and ungodly. And now the better to order thy self in
this thou shall understand that there are two times or seaso^s to speak in:
the one is, when as thou secretly consultest as touching those things which
remain as known only to thy self, and in these causes it shall be better for
thee to hold thy peace then to speak at all: least thou be thought to utter
a thing untrue, and so to be deemed a common tale teller or fabler, or else
seem to disclose that which ought to have been consealed, in respect of thy
own commodity which now being made common to many, may turn as well to thy
hinderaunce and hurt, as to thy furtheraunce or profit. The other time or
rather occasion of speaking, is when as thou do discourse and reason of thy
necessary affairs and businesses and of such things which are necessarily to
be imparted and A time to speak and a time to hold thy peace.
uttered unto others, and herein it shall be requisite for thee to prefer sober
and discrete talk before foolish silence, for as it is singular wisdom to
use few words or none at all, at sometimes and in some cases, so is it mere
folly to refrain the same, the place and time requiring the contrary.

And now last of all, A quiet life brings sundry commodities.

To obtain the quietness of mind, says Tully, diverse Philosophers, many
noble princes, and other grave and wise men contemning the vanity of the
world, have lived solitarilye content with a little.

Loathsome security to be shunned.

When as M. Scaurus understood that his son was run out of the field, and
had taken himself to flight with other Romans, as not daring to encounter
with the cunbriaris, against whom they were sent, willed one of his servant
to certify his son that he should come no more in his fight, seeing he had so
infamed his Ancestors, for said he, I had rather to have seen thy body dead
in the field, then once to behold thy Cowards face now living

Androc^idas being found fault withal, in that being lame he would enter
into the Battle, answered it must be the intent of those that come into the
field with weapons against their enemies, not to run away, but to fight.


and especially above all other things, endeavor to live quietly, so shall
thou not only prolong thy days in great safety, but also be the readier and
the mind fuller to observe and to follow each thing before prescribed, for
being vexed and disquieted in mind it must needs follow that thou will become
forgetful of thy duty, and so to transgress the bounds of virtue, but yet I
would have thee to avoid idle and loathsome security, and when time shall so
require willingly to yield thy self to the undertaking of any danger, or
trouble in any honest quarrel, as in defense of thy country, for the
maintenance of equity and justice, or for the furraunce of thy friend in a
just and right cause: wherein as much as thou may respecting thy honor it
behooves thee to have care for thy own preservation, and not rashly to venture
thy self further then wisdom shall direct thee, so that thereby no infamy
nor dishonor may arise, otherwise it shall be more better valiantly to die in
field then to live with shame and discredit, for as nature has pronounced
the condempnation of death, as a general judgment unto all men, so has she
allotted and assigned an honorable and honest end as peculier and only proper
to the valiant and invincible courage of a noble heart.

Thus have I briefly discoursed and described unto thee, that which at the
first I had purposed and determined, wherein (as well I know) I have touched
diverse and sundry things, neither meet nor necessary to have been spoken of,
as altogether disagreeable to these thy years and present state of living,
Isocrates concluding, shows the (...) of his writing,
whereat perhaps thou will wonder, I therefore let thee to understand that
the end of this my determination was even in an little treatise, to set forth
unto thee as well the things now or heretofore requisite and necessary to
have been used and observed on thy behalf, as also that which is hereafter to
be practiced and done either by thee, or by any other which is desirous through
his well doings and good behavior to obtain and win eternal praise and
memory: And whereas I considered with my self that it was a very hard and
difficult thing for a man to find a faithful and friendly counsayler
(although experience might have taught thee as much as I have said) to the
intent thou should not need to go any further to seek any advise herein
of any other, A faithful friend is hard to be found.
but that thou might take from hence as from a most plentiful storehouse,
all such things as might be expedient and profitable for thee in time to
come, as well as now, I have thought it my part not to omit any one thing,
wherein I might seem to counsel thee, thinking my self much bound unto the
goodness of God, if that the good hope I have conceived of thee, might not be
frustrated. For though it be the use of most men to make greater account of
those friends which do most bear with their follies, and hold up their yea
and nay in every thing, Flattery gets friendship, but truth purchases
hatred.
then they do esteem and regard them, which will friendly and plainly
without dissembling, rebuke them for their misbehauiour and evil dealinges,
immitating those men which waighe more the sweet taste, then the wholseome
operation and working of the Physician drugges, yet do I see thee to be of a
contrary nature as daily proves thy earnest endeavor and pains taken in most
godly exercises and studies, whereby I have been persuaded, to think that thou
which art so well affectioned and disposed of thy self, wilt most willingly
in thankful wise, accept and receive this simple proferre of him which
speaks only of mere good will A person^ (...) and v^^^^ble joys (...) o^t
the procures, as also of such counterfeit delights, as that sufferring and
deceitful mysteries, D^me pleasure seems to p^^ter unto us.
gladly to exhort and encouraged thee to the embracing of virtue, whereunto
thou shall easily be induced, if thou do mark and consider the true joys and
sundry commodities, which she brings with her, as for those fond delights,
that idleness and rietous excess of licentious living do seem to possess,
they are so sauced with the bitter dregs of misery and sorrow, that they do
no more but bear an outward show of pleasure, but virtue who moderately and
orderly, directs the race of man's life, does every day more and more bring
forth and procure most delightful and most perfectest delectious, The hope of
Victory makes the man of ^^venterous, the hope of gain makes the merchant
refuse no perrill, the hope of health persuades the (...) patient, not to
respect the unsavory tastes, or extreme operations of the physicians
medecines, and thus the end of every thing breeds, patience, and g^ueth
encouragement.
continuing for ever: Moreover if in most things which we take in hand, we
do more respect the end and the consequentes ensuing the same, then we use to
consider the beginning or entrance, neither do we refuse any pains, if we
once understand the profits and commodities to be gotten thereby, what reason
is there then that me^ should not most of all labor and travel to get virtue,
whose entrance though it be accounted hard, yet is there nothing more
pleasant nor gainefuller then the end thereof, whereas contrarily those
counterfeite pleasures make us as it were laughing and sporting to run
headlong into our own destruction, wilfully working our own overthrow, And
though it be supposed tolerable or at leastwise made no great account of, if
any simple man offend and transgress both in respect of the baseness of his
estate as also through his ignorance and slenderness of wit (for what
marvel is it to see a sow tumbling in the mire or an Idiot more esteeming an
Apple then a piece of Gold) yet may not those men whose nobleness of birthe
and derteritie of wit is had in admiration, A (...) man of (...) a great
(...).
adiudge it lawful for them once to swerve aside or at all to offend, no not
in the least thing, but that it will straight ways turn to their dishonor
and infamy, yea the use of men is as much to hate and abhor that man which
shows himself a dissembler in his dealinges, A^ (...).
working nothing worthy of his calling, nor agreeable to that hope which they
had conceived of him, as they do detest and defy him which impudently
tumbleth and walloweth himself in wickedness and mischief, in that he only
hurting himself so deals that every man may easily take heed and beware of
him, but the other both discrediting himself, and infaming his ancestors does
also to the great and heavy displeasure of God, misuse and mispend those
gifts bestowed upon him, as namely his wealth, honor, wisdom and knowledge,
showing himself altogether unworthy of that blessedness, and happiness of
life, whereunto he is called: Mark well gentle Reader, the heavenly Philosophy
of this Painun.
finally, if it be lawful for us by conjectures to search and to try out the
heavenly will of the immortal God, we shall find that he has required
nothing more at our hands then a pure and virtuous life, yielding a reward to
good men as also extreme and endless punishments and torments, to them that
are wicked, having no respect of persons, as plainly appears by these two
brethren Hercules and Tantalus the sons of Jupiter, the one for his
wonderful virtues crowned with the crown of eternal fame and everlasting
memory the other perpetually tormented with great and grievous punishments for
his abominable and wicked life. It becomes us therefore (having these and
such like examples, as looking Glasses before our eyes) with an earnest and
insatiable desire, An exhortation to Virtue.
to covet and to endeavor to embrace virtue, and to frame our selves, to a
sincerenesse and pureness of life, both for the worthiness of the thing it
self, and in respect of the great and sundry commodities gotten thereby, which
are these, eternal praise, perpetual memory, love and good will of all men
and endless felicity in time to come, as also for the avoiding and eschewing
of all those evils, and myseries which are incident unto us if neglecting the
former, we chance to take our delights and to spend our time in those vain
and transitory pleasures, which in the end procure nothing else but
repentance dearly bought with continual shame and infamy.

And thus minding at this time to conclude, resting in hope to see good
success of that which has been spoken, I would not wish thee so to be
adicted unto this my sceadile and slender discourse, that thou should only
satisfy thy self herewith, but that thou should also daily read over and
bear away the profitable lessons which are to be gathered out of the writings
of Poets, A good and n^cessary lesson for stude^^es.
or any other learned works, necessary for this purpose, for as the Be uses
to light upon every flower, and thense sucketh that which serves for her
store, so surely it becomes them that are desirous to attain unto learning
and knowledge, not to be ignorant in any thing, but most painefullye to
spend their youth in perusing and reading over the Books and writings of
the learned dilligentlye noting and collecting all such things as may seem
necessary and appertaining to the ordring and directing of their lives in
Godly and virtuous excercises: The corruptnes of man's nature.
For surely the stubbornness of this our vile and rebellious nature is such,
that we shall hardly or never subdue and bring under the same as subject to the
lore of reason, except it be restrained in time, with a most sharp and
straight Bitte.

Here ends the first Oration of Moral instructiions, called Parenisis, being
written by that famous and renowned Oratoure Isocrates, unto his friend
Demonicus.
The Preface of the Translator unto the second Oration of Moral instructions,
written by that famous and learned Orator Isocrates unto Nicocles the king of
Salamis, as touching the duty of Princes and Magistrates, and the well
ordering of a Common Weal.
AS the former Oration contained a general discourse as touching the
instructing of youth, and the ordering of the life of every private person, so
does this now next ensuing describe and set forth certain rules and precepts
appertaining to the government of a common weal, written unto one Nicocles
King of Salamis, a part of Cypers, the son of Euagoras: who being very young
(and his father dead was now to take upon him the rule and government of the
kingdom whereupon Isocrates wrote unto him this brief Oration, partly as
bound thereunto by the courtesy and friendship showen unto him by his father,
desiring also a continuance of the same in the sun) and partly for to
manifest to the world, (to the reproof of his adversaries) that the end of
all his study was to exhort and persuade all men to the embracing of virtue
and honesty: and to the avoiding of wickedness and vice, willing through so
lust an occasion given by writing to this king, to profit all others which
should take upon them any kind of government or office in any Common weal, as
shall plainly appear unto those which will take the pains to read it over.
And although the slenderness of my simple skill, may seem not so exactly to
have translated the same, as my poor good will could have wished, yet to the
intent that neither the worthynesse thereof should in ought respect be obscured
by me, or remain as unknown unto you, the bountiful liberality extended by
this noble Prince toward the writer, shall sufficiently declare the same. It
is left unto memory by sundry writers that this king sent unto Isocrates as a
reward for his good will, and pains taken in writing this so necessary a
lesson for him: twenty Tallentes of silver the which sum of our money
amounts unto.xx. hundred pounds reckoning Talentum minus. And where as now
beholding the magnificencie and singular liberality of this renowned king with
the great good will he showed himself to bear toward those which are
studious in the knowledge of good literature I might justly bewail the want of
such men in these our days, respecting not only the infinite number of
liuinges at the first allowed for the maintenance of students, but now
remaining in the hands of those whom we may rightly call worldlinges, but also
that horrible and most abominable selling and crafty conueying of spiritual
benefices, nothing respecting nor waighing the conversation of the man on whom
they bestow them, so that they may have either present money by him or his
friends, or the personages themselves in pawn, until the income be paid
because I know it is but labor lost, in that it is so commonly cried out
upon, by most grave and learned preachers even every day, and yet not one to be
found whose covetous heart relenteth his former wretchedness, I will rather
return to my author as one with silence signifying my grief, then sharply
in words to prosecute that, wherein I shall seem so little to prevail,
wherefore my only request is that all true Christians would not forget even in
their daily prayers, to beseech the Lord our God among a number of other
mischiefs, as especially to redress this so horrible an infection, whereby
learning the only mayntayner of a common Weal be not only already greatly
hindered, but also in danger in time to come to be utterly neglected: if this
yoke be not taken of from the necks of poor students by some such one as shall
seem as greatly to favor the same as did this worthy King.

The second Oration of Moral instructions as touching the duty of Princes and
Magistrates and the well governing of a common weal, written by that noble and
famous Orator Isocrates, unto Nicocles the King of Salamis.
The Aucthour procures the good will and affection of the King toward him, in
respect of the worthiness of the gift which he presents unto him, as also in
reproving the vanity of others. If these faining flatterers, with their
pretended courtesy, were rewarded with a Rape root wrapped in a piece of Silk,
as was that Courtier, of Fransiis, the french King, for that he had presented
unto him upon hope of gain, a stately Courser: then would they study by their
well doings to deserve praise, rather then to curry favor with any such
gifts, as men gaping after gain.
Truly in my judgment, renowned Prince, those men (whose use it is, upon
pretense of good will, to present unto you which are Kings, either costly
Garments, curiouslye wrought, or any treasure of Gold or Silver, as Vessel,
or Plate, or any such like thing, whereof they themselves have greatest need,
and you for your parts sufficient store) do seem herein, rather to make a
gaynefull Mart, then any token or show of liberallitie, or friendly courtesy,
more subteller selling their wares, then those men do who openly profess the
trade thereof, yet notwithstanding, being as one desirous with them to express
and to signify my well willing mind toward thee, and yet coveting as much
as may be, to be exempted from their number as in respect of their greedy
desire, in hunting after gain, I have thought with my self that I should be
best able to perform the same, if I did enterprise in this small Treatise,
breefely to describe unto thee, as touching the government of thy City and
kingdom, all such things as I should think necessary on thy behalf, both to
be observed and kept, as also contrarily to be eschewed and avoided, whereby
the prosperous estate of thee and thy subjects might be preserved, this being
a Gift or Present not only singular and profitable, but also most necessary
and meet, as well to be received of thee, as also to be offered and given by
me, in that the worthiness of this treasure is such, that the more it is
bestowed, the more it increases, so that neither I shall want by giving, and
yet thou the richer by receiving. There are diverse and sundry things, Of the
state of a private person.
the which may instruct and teach a private person to be wise and
circumspecte in But such is the licenciousnes of these our days, that most men
as careless, live at liberty, few show themselves as faithful obayers of the
laws, yea not one can abide to be told of his fault, and if any read over
the Godly precepts of the learned, yet are they nothing amended thereby, for
coming in at the one ear, it goes out at the other, and therefore no
marvel if we say with the Prophet, they are all gone astray, there is not one
that does good.
his dealinges, as namely the miserable estate of his own life, the daily
necessity and care which he must needs take for the supplying the want of
those things which are necessary for his mayntinaunce, also the laws and
ordinances made by the prudent and grauer sort, (by the which, he and the
whole City is directed and governed) that he must as it were perforce keep
the path prescribed unto him: Again he inioyeth that liberty through the
Privilege, whereof his friends may lawfullye rebuke him and amend him, yea
and his enemies reprove and revile him, if at any time he offend, and besides
this, he has the perfect form of well living set down unto him in the
works and writings of learned Poets, and grave Philosophers, so that thus
being as it were propped on every side if he take any heed, or have any care
at all, he must needs prove a good Citizen. But as for Princes, they are
bereft and spoiled of all these helps and commodities, for standing on the
slipperest place, they have least stay, and whereas they ought to be
instructed most, coming once to their Crown, they pass their time as likes
themselves best, When as the Romans understood that it was impossible for
their City to continue, except they were ruled and directed by laws, they
sent ten wise men to Athens, to gather out the statutes of good government,
as they thought best for them, but these ten men having done as they were
commanded, at their retourn brought also above their charge, the instruments of
the law, as namely Whippes, Gibbots, Pillories, Stocks, with other things
appertayning to the executing of the said laws, signifying, that vice is never
the more amended, be the laws never so good, except they be truly executed,
and this is the cause why England so abounds with wickedness. There is no
remembrance says Tully, of equity or Justice, among those in whom the desire
of honor and authority is once lodged. The spoil that insueth by ambitions
minds, is manifested by the doings of Lucius Silla, Caius Caesar, and Cauis
ma^ius, turning all vpside down, without the fear of God or man.
without controlement: For as it is not lawful nor requisite for many to have
access unto them, so is it the use of those that are commonly conuersaunte
about them both to do and to say only that which they perceive, and
understand to feed their humors best, not so much respecting the safety and
preservation of their Princes, or the commodity of their Country, as they
do their own proper gain. And hereby it has come to pass that through the
wealth and authority of these men so wickedly gotten as also so greatly abused,
most men stand in doubt whether the life of a private person honestlye and
orderlye behauing himself, Antigonus being to take upon him the government of
the kingdom, and to put on the crown on his head beset with Diademes and other
rich and princely Pearls, said, O Ornament more honorable then happy, for if
we did consider what great care, danger and trouble thou do bring, we would
not once take thee up from off the ground.

Anaxagoras being asked whom he supposed happy, not those, says he, which
do abunde in wealth, or are clothed in purple but even those whom thou
supposest miserable, I account happy what manner of men they are which being
content with a moderate living, had rather to appear honorable in their deeds
then in their Garments.

Caesar slain in the Senate, Alexander poisoned, Pompey bought and sold,
Dionistus killed by his dearest friend Calicrates, and diverse other miserably
betrayed and murdered.


is not to be preferred, and rather to be wished for, then that princely
majesty or high estate of government. For as in beholding their great honors,
excess wealth, and royal authority, they adiudge the^ as Gods abou^ding in
greatest felicity, so likewise considering the great dangers, and wonderful
troubles which they live in, calling to mind how most of them are murdered and
slain, even by the hands of those in whom they have put most trust,
compelled often times to use extreme cruelty toward their dearest friends,
these things with infinite other inconveniences thoroughly wayed, they suppose
it better to lead the poorest and basest life with quietness and safety, then
to possess the government of all Asia, in such terrible fears and continual
dangers.

But the error of this their opinion arises in that through their ignorance
they make no difference at all betwixt the government of a kingdom (which as
it is the greatest and chiefest charge, so does it require the more care and
providence) and the private authority of any other man, supposing always, the
one to be as easy as the other being like unto those, which according to the
proverb are continually talking of Robin hoode when as they never shot in
his bow, and thus pretending a cereaine skill, they rashly give their sensure
of judgment of that whereof in very deed they themselves are ignorant. But now
setting these men aside, and to return to my purpose. I suppose it the duetye
of them that are thy counsailers daily attending on thy person carefully to
forecast and to foreshew unto thee (as occasion serves) how and after what
sort each particular thing is to be ordered and directed, as well for the
preserving and maintaining of that which is good and godly as also for the
avoiding and subduing of each unlawful and wicked pretense and abuse. But as
concerning those things which may be spoken of in general, as appertaining
unto those excercises and endeavors by the which thou art to be conducted unto
that happy end We excuses his boldness and slenderness in writing.
whereunto the whole race of thy life is to be applied, I shall as much as in
me lies endeavor at this instaunt to declare and describe unto thee.

Wherein if the slenderness and baseness of my discourse when it is ended
shall not seem agreeable or correspondente unto the worthiness of the matter
which I have taken in hand (the which at the beginning can not so easilye
be disearned, Hope is often frustrated especially in those things as depend
upon the judgment of many, for commonly, so many men, so many oppinions.
) and that it should happen to fall out with me, as it has done with diverse
learned Poets, whose works before they were finished, and as it remained in
their own imaginations did seem to portend unto themselves great and strange
matters, likely to cause and to purchase unto the Aucthours both credit and
commendations, and yet at length when as they came to light, For there never
yet lacked a Mo^nus or Zoylus, no though their works were never so perfect.
as set forth in books unto the view and judgment of the world to be read
and perused by others, they have then gained less praise then they looked for:
Yet nevertheless my hope is that how soever the case stands I shall not be
misliked, the singulernesse of my enterprise being thorowlye wayed, and
considered, which is, even to do that, which all others have left undone, and
as it were to take upon me to prescribe laws unto kings and Princes, then
the which as nothing can be harder, Though Phillip king of Macedon took in
good part the counsel of that pore captive, that secretly told him how that
his Cloak did fit uncomely: yet did Cambises of Persia put to death the son
of Prexaspis, because he wild him to avoid his beastly drunkenness, so
dangerous a thing it is to correct the abuses of princes
so surely nothing is or may be more profitabler. For they which take pains in
the instructing and teaching of a private person do no more but profit him
only, but he who enterpriseth to stir up and to encourage the Lords of the
people to the following and embracing of virtue, this man procures and
brings sundry commodities, both unto the Princes themselves, as also to their
subjects, as in purchasing to the one a more surer estate, and causing unto
the other a most blessed and happy common weal. Now therefore first of all
before we go any further, let us consider what the duetye of a King is, as
also by him what appertains unto all other inferior Magistrates unto whom
the common weal is or shall be committed: For the chief and principal part
that wherein the whole effect of our matter consists being thorowlye known
and perfectly described, we shall by the view thereof, the easier judge of
all other things incidente unto the same. The author thus hauingended his
Preface or Propheme now comes to the matter intended, and shows first what
is the charge and duty of those which are kings or governors.
Truly I suppose that the judgment of all men generally is that it belongs
and appertains unto all princes and governors carefully to defend and
preserve their kingdoms and Cities from all kind of trouble, misery, and
calamity, to maintain the prosperous estate thereof, as also to enlarge and
to increase the liberties and dominions of the same, making them of little and
small countries, to become great and mighty nations, and as for all other
things which do daily happen, they are all to be referred and applied unto
this end: The use and order of Alexander was to lie with one of his arms out
of the bed, holding a brazen Ball in his hand that by the fall thereof, he
might be awaked to consult of those things which he had to do and that he
might not be as one overcome with sleep
And this is also as manifest and as it were already granted as a thing not
requiring further proof, that it does not become them in whom this authority
does consist, and whose charge it shall be to deliberate of these matters, to
give themselves to slothfulness or idleness, but with all diligence most
circumspectly to foresee and forecast each thing, and so to spend their time
that they may be found far wiser in all their dealinges then any other man,
for as experience shows, their realms are in such sort governed and guided,
as they themselves are disposed and inclined: Wherefore it is not so necessary
for any champion with such great care to excersise his body to the Combat, as
it is requisite for Princes and Rulers to sharpen their wits, The Athenians
punished idleness as grievously as any other offense
and to quicken their understandings, seeing that the greatest price won and
gotten in the greatest game, is nothing compareable to the least part of those
rewards, Julius Caesar having been all day in the filled, or else any otherwise
busyed, did continually divide the night into three parts, spending the first
in sleep: the second in consulting of his affairs: the third and last in
Music, for the refreshing and recreating of his wearied mind. It was not the
Consulship neither any other office or authority which Scipio Africanus
possessed among the Romans, that caused king Antiochus so to reverence his
person, or the Pirates so to be astonyed at his sight, but only the excelency
of his virtues, and the immortal praise which he purchased through the
integrity of life.
for which you that are kings do daily and continually contend.

These things therefore thus considered, it behooves Seripius obiecting
against Themistocles that his country made him honorable not his own
deserts. Themistocles answered, that though he were Seriphius, yet should he
be honorable, but if Feritheus himself were an Athenian yet would he be never
the worthier. Ajax Locrensis tamed a serpent, Pithagoras a Bear, Porus an
Elephant, Augustus the Emperor a Tiger, and Paulus Leonensis a Dragon.

This made king Darius to wish for as many Megabizes mates as there were
Curnels in a Pomgarnet, this caused Xerxes to use his friend and counsailer
Boges so familierly, this forced Alexander so to lament the death of Epheston,
for they all knew that there was nothing compareable to a faithful and trusty
counselor. Marcus Aurelius dying willed his son Commodus to be ruled by the advice of his grave counsaylers, and to place about him the wisest of his
people. To this end did Romulus at the first appoint that noble company of
grave counsailers, called Senatoures, to be Adiutors unto him in his affairs.
This was also the intent of Solon in instituting his Ariopagite that thereby
the Princes and Rulers of Athens, might not want discrete and wise Sages,
such as would be careful for the profit of their country.


thee to do thy endeavor so far to excel all others in virtue and well
doing, as thou do surpass and excede them in honor and authority. Neither
would I wish thee to think that where as care and diligence are of
sufficient force to bring the difficultst matters about, that they should not
be likewise available to the obtaining of virtue and wisdom, or as of none
importance to better our selves, neither do thou go about to condemn us men
of such great folly that we should be able to invent means and ways to
alter the course of nature, in the brute beast in making him tame and
tractable, teaching him diverse and sundry quallities, bringing him as most
obedient to our wills, and yet should not in like sort be able to frame and to
apply our selves to the obtaining and winning of her, which of her own nature
so lovingly alureth and intiseth us unto her: nay rather persuade thy self
that through Godly instructions and dilligent endeavor used in the following
and practicing of the same (I mean virtue) the mind of man is easyer to be
salued and cured, then the least scar or grievous wound. Placing therefore
about thee the wisest and discreetest men of thy country, take thy delight in
their company, using them famillierlye and friendly, that so they being
imboldened by thy clemency may not stand in doubt or in fear at any time, to
utter or to disclose their opinions unto thee, in any thing which they shall
see amiss, yea though it be not demanded.

Send also into other nations for those of whom thou shall hear any
commendable report given for their singular virtues, and dexterity of wit,
or at least wise if they be not to be gotten, endeavor to cause the like
admiration to arise from thy self, by immitating that in them for which thou
understand them to be so highlye renowned: Ptolomeus king of Alexandria did
send abroad for all such learned men of whom he heard any famous report,
and gave them great stipendes the like also did Julius Ceasar, and Vaspasianus
Emperors. King Ferdinandus as Textor reports, did yearly bestow great
sums of money out of his treasure, toward the maintenance of Retorisions,
Physicians, Philosophers, and Deuines.

I can not let pass the earnest suit made by Artaxerxes king of Persia unto
Hiscamus, the governor of Helespontus for the inioying of the company of
Hipocrates that famous and renowned Physician, the journey of Alexander to see
Diogenes, the sending of Dionisius for Plato, nor the reverence which the
Athenians gave unto Zeno seeing their doings do so manifestly condemn the
careless contempt of the learned in these days. They says Solon which
willingly govern others, must first learn to rule themselves.

Codrus King of Athens understanding that if he were slain in the Battle his
company should not have the victory, clothed himself in pore array, and
intended himself among his enemies, ended his life for the love he did bear to
his country, there are also infinite Histories both of Princes and private
persons which have done the like.


Moreover, let no learned Poet or famous Retrision escape thee, but if they be
living send for them, or else being dead, diligently peruse and read over
their works being always willing to hear, and careful to learn, showing
thy self a skillfull and prudent judge over thy inferiors as also an earnest
lover and follower of thy betters, being such as excel thee in wisdom and
knowledge, so shall thou easily and quickly become such a one, as we would
wish him to be which should take upon him rightly to govern a Realm or
orderly to direct the state of a City. And hereunto thou shall be the
earnester incensed, if thou account it as a thing most unseeming to see the
inferior to rule his superior, the foolish and witless to become governors
over the wise, or the servant commanding, and the master obeying, for how
much the more thou abhorrest and mislikest other men's madness and folly, the
carefuller thou will be to apply thy self to the obtaining of learning and
knowledge. And in this sort must they which seek the perfection of duty
endeavor as especially to adorn and to beautify their minds with virtue and
wisdom learning first how to govern themselves before they take in hand to
rule others.

Moreover Princes and Magistrates ought to have a love and a seal to their
people and to their Country, for it can not be that any man can use any thing
well, whether it be horse, hounde, or men, except he take delight in the thing
whereof he has charge. Take heed then that thou have a care over thy people,
supposing thy self then to be surest when as they are well pleased and
contented with thy government: yea each state of government, whether it be in
the ordering of a few of many or of one, it then continues longest and
prospers best when as the greatest care and regard is had of their The safety
of a Prince consists in the good will of their people. Talantia a worthy Lady
of Sparta understanding that her son Pedaretus did not use himself well in
the governing of the people of Chius, an isle in Greece, she sent him word in
that he had lost the good will of his people, except by his behavior and good
government he did win it again, he should tarrye there, and as she hoped,
receive condign punishment at their hands, for if he did come home unto her,
he should not think to live one hour.

The notes of a well ordered common Weal. Herodotus writes Miceranus King of
Egypt to have been so careful in the executing of justice, that if any man
had been injured, that the offender should be punished according to his
trespass, and the party injured by him fully satisfied, or else he himself,
the offender not being able, would recompense the plaintiff out of his own
Cofer. Because that one of Tamburlanus Souldyers had taken from a pore woman
but a mess of Milk, the king caused him to be put to death, his bowels to be
ripped, and the Milk to be taken out.

In ancient time neither the Romans, neither the Lacedaemonians had any laws
as prescribed in writing, but only as the offenses were committed, and the
offendoures known, the punishments were referred to the judgment of the
judges. The Laws which Draco had made among the Athenians were altered and
changed by Solon.


people: for there has never been, as yet any King so mighty or so strong but
at the last he has been overthrown through the envy and evil will of his
subieets so that perfect honor is both gotten, and maintained by these three
things. The love and goodwill of the people won through gentleness and
lowliness, with beneficencie and liberality annexed by credit gotten by just
and upright dealing. And through an admiration had at thy virtues as when thou
show thy self in the integrity and pureness of life to surpass others,
especially not being given to licentious and inordinate lust, neither as one
able to be moved with the desire of money, for as the suspicion of
covetousness is to be eschewed of all men, so is the least part thereof most
abominable in any prince or magistrate being the only subuertion and
overthrow of a common weal.

Thou also shall be accounted to rule well if thou neither favor the folly or
wantonness of thy people, neither suffer any other to use any Lofty or Lordly
Authority over them, whereby they should be injured in any respect, but so
ordering and foreseing each thing, that due honor may be given unto the godly
and well disposed, executing justice in such sort upon the trangressors, and
breakers of thy laws that the rest quietly inioying their own may be the
louinger and obedienter to thee, as also not sustaining wrong or injury by
any, more esteeming an honest man be he never so poor, then thou do the
vicious liver, yea though he abound in greatest wealth, for this is the first
and chiefest point of a well ordered public Weal.

Abrogate and alter all such decrees and statutes, The laws which the
Decemviri first brought to come from Athens growing to be corupted through
the abuse of time were afterward altered in some points, the like also did
Zeleucus in Sparta. A good law must have all these properties.

As it is before specifyed, the romans at twelve years of age appointed their
youth to such arts and trades of living, as they were found mete for, and
afterward, if they were ever taken in the streates idly loytering they were
deprived of their freedom, and used as bondmen.

The Athenians so far detested Idleness, that to the intent their Citizens
should apply themselves to honest merchandise, and other trades of living,
they ordained that every man should give an account how and by what Science
he maintained himself unto their Judges called Arcopagitae. In Lucania there
was a Law that who soever did lend any thing unto an idle person, should
loose the thing which he had lent, that men being tought heareby to trust to
themselves, might learn to labor and to take pains for their living, and
not to live by shifting, as many now do.

Euthimus that Valiant Captain understanding that a Citizen of his, called
Themesius, had gathered together excess wealth by unjust means, and
intolerable Usury, caused him to make restitution of all that ever he had
gotten unto those whom he had injured.


which thou shall understand to be either not necessary or in any clause
amiss or culpable, and this being done do thy endeavor to invent and
constitute some other in their places and if it be that of thy self thou can
not do it, then do thou ask the advice of others, taking a pattern of all
such ordinances which thou shalt see or learn to be observed in any other
Countries, being good and godly. Let thy laws also be indifferent and alike
profitable unto all persons, no more respecting one then another, moreover take
heed that they be not contrary or repugnant one to the other, but agreeable
in every part making no dissension nor controversies to arise among thy people,
but in all things procuring unity and peace, to the maintaining of Justice
and equity, and to the overthrowing of vice and wickedness, all which
things are necessary to be observed, if thou desire to make perfect and
substanciall laws.

Ordain such kind of marchandice and traffiques to be used among thy people,
as may be gainefull and profitable for them, and if they fall at variaunce and
strife among themselves, let them smart for the same, that so having sustained
damage by the one they may learn the more diligenter to apply themselves to
the other: but yet in such sort as men content with an honest and indifferent
gain and not either seeking excess, or studying to increase their wealth by
any unlawful or deceitefull means.

Also when thou shall come to give judgment upon any controversy, depending
betwixt party and party speak nothing upon affection or favor, neither for
hatred or envy but uprightly and indifferently as ye truth When As Phillip of
Macedon being as it is written sleepy or drowsy, taking no great heed to the
cause of Machotas then pleaded before him had rashly given judgment against
machetas, and afterward understood he had judged wrongfully, because his
sentence should be vnreuocable, and yet the party not invited, he himself
satisfied the law, and paid the money for which Machetas was condemned.

The Romans builded a Temple called Templum Concordie through the which the
Senators should pass, as they came into the Senate house, to the end that
there they should as it were put off both malice and affection, and so to come
straight to sit in judgment as men being in unity and love with all the
world, to execute justice indifferently. Acheus king of Lidia riotously
spending his treasure, was thereby compelled to exact a new kind of tribute of
his Subjects, the which the people not tollerating, used violence upon him,
and hanging him up by the heels, with his head downward, caused him miserably
to end his life. Covet rather with Paulus Emilius to lay up so much Treasure in
thy Capitole house as may discharge and exonorate thy subjects from all
exactions as also to have sufficient to withstand the invasion of thy enemies
then to spend so lauishlye then thou should be constrained to confiscate the
goods of thy people. Antonius Pius made his treasure as common to his friends:
Lucius Lucullus was also so liberal in maintaining all such learned men which
came as strangers to Rome that his house was termed the Hospital for
Travelers.


shall lead thee, neither let thy opinions be found variable or uncertain,
but according to equity, be always of one mind in all semblable causes, and
that without any discordance and not as a man to be led away hither and
thither, or to be persuaded to this or that, for it is expedient and necessary
that the words of a Prince should remain immutable and unchangeable,
always to be taken of all men as an approved law and immovable decree.

So order thy City as thou would use thy fathers house adorning and
beautifying the same, with most sumptuous and costly furnitures, making it
famous and renowned through the excellency and worthiness of thy Princely
majesty, thinking thy self then most enriched when as thou see their most
flourishing, not forgetting to take a diligent and careful accounte of thy
revenues that both the worthiness of thy name may be spread abroad, through
just desert by the well bestowing of the same, as also to prevent any other
occasion which hereafter may happen though now unknown, remembering so to
spend that thou may have always some store before hand, both for the better
maintaining of thy own estate as also for the supplying of every necessity:
otherwise thy Citizens and subjects shall be peeled and powled, thy name through
others evil dealings defamed, and yet thy treasure never the more enriched,
for it is commonly intercepted by such as stand at receite, and it fares well
with the Prince, if of the pound he receive a shilling the poor subject
exacted to the uttermost and paying not one farthing the less.

Adiudge not that to be magnificencie or liberality, In satisfying the
licentiousness of the flesh, as did Demetrius, who bestowed on his Harlots
CC.l. talents of silver. In excessive eating and riottous banqueting, as did
Heliogabalus, Vitellius, and Cleopatra in the supper she prepared for Antonius.
Or in setting forth of fond shows and Plays, as did Nero, Caligula, and
Marcus Tigellius. Or last of al in the building of superfluous monuments. The
charges bestowed in any of these, is not to be counted liberality.

When as the Senate haddenied to pay the ransom for the redeeming of those
Captives which Quintus Fabius Maximus had brought home from Haniball, promising
to see their ransom discharged, he refused not to sell a certain pecce of his
Lands, and so to discharge the payment him self, rather than the pore men
shall remain in Captivity. Alexander having subdued Poruz King of India,
being both sick and impotent, did not only cause him to be cured of his
disease, but also taking him as one of his dearest friends, gave him greater
possessions than he before had inioyed.


when as great charges are consumed in vain and transitory pleasures,
delighting only thy eye, and that but for a time, but rather suppose true
magnificence to consist in the doing of those things which I before have
named, as in providing and preparing of things necessary for the defense of
thy Country, as well in the present estate of peace, as in the time of war,
extending thy beneficence, and liberality upon thy friends, upon good men
being in myserie, in redeeming of Captives, and in sustaining the causes of the
fatherless and wydowes wrongfully oppressed. For that which thou shall bestow
in this sort, shall be permanent and sure, continuing for ever, to the eternal
praise of thy name, and bringing greater commodities unto thy posterity, than
those superfluous, and frivolous expenses.

Diligently observe that religion which thou have received of thy forefathers,
accounting that to be a most worthy, acceptable. and commendable sacrifice,
and as a service most pleaseable and thankful before the face of God, when as
thou show thy self a just and upright dealer, for there is greater hope,
that the immortal God will sooner and willinger hear, and grant the petition
of such men, than he does esteem or regard ye requests of those, whose use
it is with defiled and corrupted consciences to offer up the fattest Bullockes
or greatest offeringes, for it is not the outward ceremony, but the inward
disposition of the heart that God respects.

Yield unto thy dearest and trustiest friends, the chiefest and principallest
honors, and place thy well willers in those rooms which thou most desire to
be uncorrupted. And as for the custody of thy body, think it then most
safest, when as it remains as guarded with ye faithfulness Alexander Seuerus
the Emperor, thought them as worthiest of the chiefest preferments whom he
heard most renowned for their integrity of life.

Plato was wont to say, that every country should be the most happiest, when
as only wise men were preferred to bear authority, and the kings themselves
did also become studious to get wisdom and knowledge.

It is the part of a good Citizen, says Cicero, to have a care for the
commodity of all men generally, and not to seek to pleasure a few, or to get
the good will of men in authority only. And therefore the Romans appointed
certain officers called Censors to look unto the behauiours and doings of their
people, that no man should live either idly or dishonestly. Pomponius Atticus
did never speak an untruth, neither could suffer a lie to be told in his
presence, the like is reported of Amonius. As the Massilenses did grant free
entrance to all strangers into their City, so had they as greats care to see
them peaceably and quietly dealt withal, and that this might be the better
performed, they would suffer not one in their City to wear any weapon,
neither any stranger to enter with any, but that he should leave it with the
porter of the City gate, and so to receive it again at his return.


of friends, as defenced with the goodwill of thy Citizens, and as established
by thy own wisdom and prudence, for these are they by whom honor and
authority are soon won and obtained, as also easily and longest preserved.

Have also good awayte and diligent care, as touching the private estate of
every Citizen particularly, and persuade thy self that both he that wastes,
spends of that which is thine, and the man that is thriftie and using good
husbandry, is also an increaser and augmenter of thy wealth and substance,
for the lives and lands, and the whole goods of all them that be subjects,
inhabiting within the dominions, appertain unto the maintenance of all such
Princes as are their rulers, if so be that their government be just and
righteous: neither is there any faithful Citizen which will seem to deny the
same when it shall be demanded, or rather not voluntarily to offer it, when
need so requires.

Have always such reverence of the truth in thy mouth even through thy whole
life, that thy word may sooner be credited and taken of all men, than the oath
of him which swears deepest.

Let thy City be free unto all strangers, see also that they be honestly and
well dealt withal, and that none of thy people go about to cosen or to
deceive them in any of their contractes or bargains, but that justice be
indifferently ministered unto all men: And amongst all the rest esteem them
most which trusting to their own innocence, and to thy goodness, come boldly
to crave some courtesy and friendship at thy hands, bringing thee nothing: As
the Emperor Galienus through the great lowlines and humility which he was
endued withal, did never deny any thing that was requested of him, so
contrarily he could not abide to see any of his subjects to present him with
any gift, especially when as they came to crave any courtesy at his hands.

If mercy and clemency used by Camillus, procured the subjection of his
enemies, winning unto him more countries than ever he subdued by force of
arms, what may we think it is able to do in getting the good will of subjects
toward their princes?

Bion being asked what was the hurtfullest beast living: Answered of all cruel
beasts a tyrant, and among all gentle beasts a flatterer. King Pirrhus
understanding that certain of his subjects had spoken certain opprobrious
speeches of him, caused the offenders to be brought before him, and when he had
understood the truth, and rebuked the men for their folly, he mercifully
pardoned their offense.

Alexander the great did not win so much love among his Soldiers, in tendering
the health of that old Soldier, whom he so courteously placed in his own
Chair by the fire side, because he was cold, as he did procure their hearts
against him, when cruelly he put to death his worthy Captain Calisthenes,
Clitus, and Lysimachus. When as the people of Roommade an insurrection against
Antonius Pius through the penury of corn which they the^ sustained, Antonius
did not cruelly revenge their trespass, but showing them friendly their fault
sought to appease them, in uttering the care which he had over them. The
worthy and renowned fame of the great magnanimity which was in the Roman
Captains, did not so much amase and terrifye their enemies, as did the
cowardlye report made of Sardanapalus, and Heliogabalus give cause to their
adversaries to invade and subdue them: for as said Arbates, one of Sardanapalus
Captains, what greater shame can there be, than men to be ruled by such
effeminate persons? Antigonus understanding that his son was slain through a
rash conflict made with the enemies, Answered that he died not to soon that
would so rashlye undertake more than he could bring to pass.

Alexander Seuerus the Emperor, being reproved by his Mother, for that he had
not left his Empire so famous and renowned through Conquestes gotten by his
princely acts over other nations, as his Father had done before, Answered that
he had done more than his Father had done, for he had left it in more safety
and quietness, through which it should longer continue.


than thou do those which think with themselves to gain and to deserve a
good turn at thy hands, by bestowing upon thee some present or other: for by
this thy honor done unto ye former, in respect of their worthiness, and by
condemning of ye vanitye and folly of the latter in contemning their gifts,
thou shall win the greater praise and commendation amongst all others.

Take also away from thy Citizens all kind of tyrannical fear, neither seem
thou terrible unto them which have not offended, for look after what sort thou
would have them affectioned toward thee, thou must use thy self in like
order toward them. Thou must do nothing in thy fury, but rather dessemble thy
anger, as time and occasion serves, but yet see that thou be eager and earnest
in the trying and serching out of the truth in every thing that shall happen to
be done, showing mercy in mitigating the extremity of the punishments due to
the offenders, maintaining ye authority of thy kingdom, not by sharpness
and seuerenesse of torments, but by good advise and prudent foresight had and
used in every matter, that all men may be persuaded thereby, that thou have
greater care, and more tenderest their safety, than they themselves.

It is likewise necessary for thee to be accounted and known to be a
valiant and hardy man at arms, as well in respect of thy knowledge in
warlike affairs, as also in thy careful providing of all kind of furniture
serving thereunto, delighting more in a small company of skillful and tried
soldiers, than in a huge number and multitude of cowardes: the which to
prevent, thou must daily practice and train up the youth of thy realm in such
kind of exercises: but yet so dealing therein as one that desires peace
rather than wars, going about to challenge nothing but that which is thy
own, and does of right appertain unto thee, remembering to show thy self
such a one toward those Cities which are too weak to resist thee, as thou
would be content to be dealt withal by them which should be too mighty and
too strong for thee. Neither go thou to war for every trifle, but only for
that, ye victory whereof being gotten, shall be sufficient to satisfy thy
charges, as also to recompense thy pains, not blaming them which are
vanquished to their own commodity, but rather accounting them as fools,
which do vanquish others to their own detriment, showing thy self also
merciful unto all those which humbly shall yield themselves to thy mercy, and
dealing with extremity with those which desperately shall be bent to abide the
uttermost blow.

Account not magnanimity or valiantness of mind to be in them, which
wilfully and rashely do undertake greater things than they are able to bring
to pass, but rather adiudge it in them, which enterprising that only which is
within their reach, do speedilye bring their purposed intentes to good effect.

Be thou not too too earnest a follower of those men, whose delight is only to
get authority, and to enlarge ye bounds of their kingdoms, nothing waying or
regarding how or after what sort they obtain it, so that their greedy desire
be satisfied: but do thou rather imitate them which seek well and quietly to
preserve and keep Philip of Macedon falling by chance flat upon the ground,
and rising again, beholding the length of his body in the dust, said, how
strange a thing is it to see, that nature has allotted so small a piece of
ground unto every one and yet the whole world will not suffice many.

I marvel says Antisthenes that men are so circumspect in the bining of any
worldly things and yet are so careless in the choosing of a faithful friend.
Pisistratus a tyrant of Athens did find the faythfulnes of friends to be such
a stay to a kingdom, that when he was forsaken by his friends, they flying
for fear of him, and he had understood where they did remain, he took up a
fardell of such things as were needful for him, and carrying it on his back,
came unto them, and proffered rather to die with them, than to reign as a
King, they being gone. Marius Maximus supposed it better for a common weal to
have an evil Prince with good councelloures about him, than to have a good
King with evil counselors for as it is easy and lykely that many good may
make one bad good, also like unto themselves, than for a good man to continue
in his goodness, keeping the company of evil men. When as Orontes had more
sharply reproved Demaratus the King, than did well become him, in so much that
Demaratus servants standing by and misliking the same, seemed to move the
king ^^t asking him whether he would take in so good part Orontes speeches, the
king answered: that he had more cause to thank Orontes, than to reprove him for
they rather (said he) do us hurt, which flatteringly speak to curry favor
with us that are Princes, tha^ they which friendly seem to rebuke us. Telecrus
brother complaining unto him that he had not the good will of the Citizens as
much as he had: it is (said he) because thou do not use thy self courteously
toward them: and therefore Phillip above all things, willed his son
Alexander to use himself lowly and friendly toward his people, but yet so,
that there be always a regard had that a mediocrities be observed in every
thing. Traian being reproved for his humility and lowliness used toward his
subjects, answered: it becomes me so to use my self toward them, as I
being in their case would look to be dealt withal.

Antisthenes opinion was, that it were better to be in company with Crows,
then with Flatterers, for Crows will but devour the body when it is dead, but
the other will eat up a man alive. We must (said Diogenes) not only give our
hands infriendly wise to our friends, but also we must remember to have our
fingers closed and clinched: that is, not only to give them fair words, but
also to deal friendly and liberally by them. Thearidas being a whetting his
sword with a whetstone, was asked by one that passed by, whether it were
sharp, whereto he made answer, that it was as sharp as a slander or false
accusation, for as witnesses Cleantes, there is nothing more hurtful.

If says Solon, false accusers should escape unpunished, then would the state
of the common weal be soon subverted.

Alphonsus king of Arago^, would say, that there was nothing so unseeming, than
for him to rule others, which is subject to his own affections. A gesilaus
rejoiced most, in that ruling others he also remained a King over himself.
Hereupon Tullie wills that when youth are permitted to take their recreation,
the grave and elder sort should be present. The ancient Romans knowing that
Virtue was the only means to attain to true honor, as also to signify the
same to the world by an express testimony, they builded the Temples of
Virtue and Honor adjoined the one to the other, and that in such sort, that
you could not enter into the Temple of Honor, except you first came through
the Temple of Virtue. As we do not says Socrates, judge the Corn to be good
because it did grow upon a fruitful ground, so neither are we to suppose them
as worthy of honor, which were borre of honorable Parents: because both the
Corn growing on the good ground may prove evil, and the child also that
issues from an honest father, may prove wicked and dissolute, and therefore
they are only worthy of honor, whose Virtues are such that they deserve the
same. It is a wise man's part, says Munatius so to behave himself, that though
he offend, his fault may not appear to every one, also understanding his
error, presently to amend it, and to learn to be wiser afterward.

When as acertaine man had said to king Antigonus, that all things were
lawful for Princes, it is so says he, to those that are of a barbarous
nation, but unto us only, things honest are lawful.

As in a heard of beasts, if the for most stand still, or if he run forward
the rest will do the like, so says Plutarche, it goes with the people, who in
every thing conform themselves to the manners of their governors. The
Effenians a certain people inhabiting in India, do govern their country by
these three rules: with a fervent love toward God, in having an earnest
desire to live virtuously, and in bearing a charitable affection and love one
toward another. Textor. Antigonus King of Macedon being persuaded by his
friends strongly to fortifye the City of Athens, if he did mean to keep it,
least it should revolt away from him again, answered, that he was always of
this opinyon, that there was no such sure defense for the preservation of his
kingdom, than was the good will of his subjects. When Demetrius Phalerius
understood that the Athenians had plucked down the pictures which they had set
up in remembrance of his worthy enterprises, made answer that though the
pictures were thrown down, yet could not his virtues be defaced, which first
deserved the same.


that which they have already gotten, ruling thy people not with cruelty or
fear, but showing thy self such a one as becomes thee to be: diligently
dispatching things present, as also wisely and circumspectly undertaking of
things indifferent, being neither too great for thee to compass, neither too
base for one of thy degree to meddle or to deal with all, so shall thou live a
most happy life, abounding in great felicity, and as one wanting nothing.

Knit the knot of friendship not with every one that seems to seek it at thy
hands, but only with those, whom thou understand and know through the
excellency of their virtues, to be men worthy of thy favor: for they must
be as helpers, furtherers, and counselors to the well governing of thy City,
and not as companions merrily to pass the time with all: wherefore see that
thou do try and thoroughly consider the natures, and conuersations of those
with whom thou shall use this familiarity and friendship, for thou shall be
adjudged of all men, to be in like sort disposed and bent, as are the
conditions and lives of those with whom thou use daily to be conversant: be
not therefore rash in companying with any, neither let it be done at any time,
without great cause, and take thou heed that thou commit the charge of those
matters, wherewith thou will not meddle thy self, unto such men, as will truly
and justly execute the same, for wherein so ever they offend, it shall be
ascribed unto thee whose authority they bear.

Take not them for thy faithful and loyal servants, which do most commend
and praise thy doings or speeches, but rather think well of them which in
duetifull wise, and after a discrete order, will as occasion serves secretly
reprove and reprehende thy abuses and vanities. And to the end that such as
bear this true love and affection toward thee, may not be affraide to utter
the same unto thee, thou must grant free liberty unto such faithful friends
and grave Counselors to speak their minds boldly and freely, so shall thou
come to the knowledge of thy self: and if thou chance to doubt in any matter,
they presently will be ready to yield their helping hands to the dispatching
thereof, presently trying out the certainty in every thing.

And above all things be most careful to show thy self able to discern, and
to know those which artificially and craftily shall seem to fawn and flatter
thee, from them which with a true heart, and zealous affection reverence and
obey thee: least that being fed and seduced by their glosing and dissembling,
thou shoudst rashly advance the wicked and evil man to greater honor, than
thou do the godly and well disposed: or else to suffer the lewd person to
receive more profit by thee, than they that be honest and virtuous.

If any one do come to inform thee as touching the behavior and dealinges of
another that is absent, speaking evil of him, give no hasty credit unto his
words, but staying thy judgment, do thy endeavor to learn and to
understand, not only the disposition and conversation of him that has told
thee the tale, but also the behavior and dealinges of that man, of whom the
complaint was made, and so the truth being tried and sifted out, the party
being falsely accused, let the slaunderer receive as sharp punishment as the
offenders should have sustained being found guilty in such a case: for there
can be no greater offense than to seek to condemn the innocent.

Thou must also have no less care to the government of thy self, than thou
take in the well ruling of others: suppose it therefore as the chiefest and
worthiest thing appertaining or incident unto thee, to be able to subdue and to
conquer all unlawful appetites and licentious lusts, showing thy self to
have greater stay, and more rule over all the affections and motions of thy
mind, than thou have over thy Citizens.

Admit no recreation without good aduisement, and that in ye company of those,
through whose presence thou may prove the wiser, as also be thought the
better of by others for their sake.

Desire not to be singular in any of those things which are as common to the
wicked also, but let virtue be thy chiefest delight, for in her the evil man
has no part, and as for that honor and reverence which is done unto thy
person, either for fear or otherwise in respect of thy authority, esteem it
not, neither account it as true honor, but let them rather have cause to
wonder at thy great wisdom and prudence, than at thy good fortune, for herein
consists true nobility.

Also if it should happen that thou should be delighted in any vain or
unseemly thing, let it not be apparent but secretly dissemble the same,
showing always an outward desire of the best, and amend thy folly with
speed, for think it not lawful for Princes and governors to live at
liberty, whereas all others are bound to spend their times honestly and
orderly: nay rather let thy temperaunce and modesty of life be such, that it
may be a good example to others, seeing as thou know the nature of the
people is to conform and to fashion themselves like in all points to the
conditions and dispositions of their Magistrates and Rulers.

Account the principal token and perfect proof of good government, to be, to
see thy people enriched, as also godly and well instructed, obeying thy laws,
and living in unity and concord together.

It shall be better to join unto thy children eternal praise purchased by thy
well doing, whereby thou have won the hearts and good will of thy people,
than the abundaunce of wealth or store of treasure, or great possessions: for
the one is uncertain and soon decays, and is the cause of much mischief:
the other certain, and sure continuing for ever, and is not to be taken from
them by the falsehood or treason of any. Also riches are soon recovered again
by him that is beloved, and has a commendable report and honest fame, for all
men pitying his want, will be ready to pleasure him, but a good name is not to
be bought with any money.

Moreover to abound in wealth, is the only desire of wicked men, and they are
commonly the richest, because unto their net no fish comes amiss, but
true honor As the sumptuous furniture does not make the Horse the better, so
neither do riches make a man the worthier, but it is the good report of his
honest conversation. Seneca.

Augustus Caesar was wont to term brave or curious Garments the banner or
badges of pride.

When as Alexander Senerus was reproved by his Courteors for his plainness in
apparel, he answered: that the majesty of a king did consist in Princely
virtues, and magnanimity of mind, and not in costly apparel. When as in like
sort the Counselors of Alphonsus king of Aragon, seemed to mislike to see him
go apparelled in baser sort then other of his Nobillitie, and therefore
courteously admonishing the king thereof willed him to put on such Ornaments
as were meet for his estate, the Kings answer was, that he had rather to
excel others in conversation, and authority being to them an Example of well
living, then to excel them in Princely robes, or to be the author of pride,
in wearing of Purples and Silks. Demona^ being asked of a certain friend of
his, how he should best govern the Province which was committed unto his
charge, answered: that to speak little, and to hear much, was the best thing
that was appertaining to a Governor. I have found (said Artabanus) that to
take good aduisement is no small profit. Mischief says Cicero at the first
creeps, but when it has once taken hold, it runs on hedlong and therefore
the counsel of Horace is not to be refused, it is best healing the wound
while it is green.


a good estimation and perpetual renown is only incident and proper unto
them which have excelled in the integrity and pureness of life.

It shall be lawful for thee to adorn and to set forth thy person, with most
comely and costly ornaments meet and agreeable for thy princely estate, but
yet in such sort that thou be not effeminated thereby, but always remaining
as one both willing and able to abide and sustain any labor or travel in
any matter, wherein it shall be requisite for princes to be employed, for so
shall thou be esteemed and reverenced of all those that behold thee for thine
honorable person, as a man most worthy to enjoy that seat, wherein thou
sit, and thy nobles and familiar friends shall be also incensed through the
valiantness and magnaminitie, which they see in thee to immitate the like,
gladly yielding themselves as copartners and companions in the same.

Have good consideration of such words as shall pass thy mouth working also
in all thy doings with good advise, so shall thou be sure most seldom to
offend. And truly there can be nothing more commendabler then in all things
to observe and to keep a mean, but because this can not be so easily
discerned, it shall be better to prevent an evil motion at the first, then to
suffer it to take any further root, for the force of mediocritie is sooner
perceived in the smallest then in the greatest things, for as use prevails
much to the bringing to pass of any good exercises, so does practice in
mischief make us so hold, nay rather so blind that we can scarce ever or
hardly perceive or discern the thing that is comely, but yet if we look about
us at the first before it has taken such sure hold upon us, we may easily
shake it of and return The counsel of Chilon is that unto authority there
be adioined lenity and courtesy, for as the one makes thee to be reuerensed,
so does the other cause thee to be loved and not seated.

It was a common saying of Fronto A consul of Rome in the time of Nerua the
Emperor: that as it was evil to have such a prince whose nature should be so
Hoggish, that severity or extremity should be used toward all men, so is it
far worse to have so merciful a governor, under whom all men should seem
to live at liberty: wherefore when as one said unto Cleomines, that a good
king ought to be merciful and gentle toward al men: thou say truth, (said
he) so that a mediocritie be observed, that no contempt do grow thereby.
Antonius Pius had rather to be counted too too pitiful, then through
seuerenesse to purchase envy. Phillip of Macedon willed his son Alexander to
use himself familier and lowly toward the people of Macedonia, and yet so
dealing, as one having a respect to his Princely majesty, and not sparing to
use offenders extremely, that as gentleness should be an encouragement to
good men, so severity might bridle the presumption and boldness of the
wicked. Alexander was so studious and desirous of lerning, that he always
carried about him Homers Iliads. Gordianus the Emperor is reported to have
esteemed books more then any treasure, and he had (as says Textor) in his
library, 62 thousand books.


again.

Thou must also use both in speech and in gesture, toward all men, courtesy
and lowliness, adjoining also thereunto gravity and sobriety of
countinaunce, the one being most beseeming for all those which bear rule and
authority, the other as necessary for all companies. Albeit to use them both,
may seem a thing most difficile: in that by experience we see them which
desire to bear a certain majesty in their doings, in looking big and
sowerly on the matter, become at length so stately or rather so stiff, that
they grow to a certain surlinesse void of all humanity: others also which
covet to be accounted courteous, do often times so abase, and abject
themselves, that through over much familliaritie they breed and procure in the
end contempt and disdain, or else do yield a presumption to others to be the
bolder to offend, through their too too great lenity and gentleness used:
wherefore a measure is to be observed in them both, the inconveniences of the
extremities being eschewed.

Be desirous to learn all such things as appertain and are requisite for the
majesty of a king to understand, now also unto this willing mind desirous of
knowledge, there must be anexed and adjoined good instructions to read and to
be occupied in, as namely the study of Philosophy, whereunto in like manner
must be applied continual exercises and practice to bring the same to
perfection, for as the one teaches thee how, and after what sort each thing
is to be done, so the other makes thee ready and skillful in the due ordring
and executing of the same.

Diligently mark and consider the acts and deeds both of Princes and
governors, as also of other private persons either none or heretofore done,
and this not without As Zensius going about to draw the picture of Juno did
choose among the goodliest and fairest of all the Virgins of Agrigentine five
of the cheifest, so must we collecte and gather out the lives of the best and
perfecest men which we can find mentioned in any Historiographer, and by them
learn to direct the course of our lives, only following them in that which is
excellent and good. The counsel that Solon gave Cressus was to consider the
end of every thing, and carefully to forecast whereto it tends.

A prince (says Agesilaus) must be inferior to none in undertaking of any
danger being profitable for his country. I had rather (said Cato) that men
should ask why I had not a monument made of me, seeing I deserved the same,
then that men should ask wherefore was this monument erected here, as though the
Picture should call to remembrance my acts, and not the worthiness of my
doings to be such, that they should be of themselves remembered.

Otho the Emperor perceiving that either he must resign his Empire, or else
be the cause of the slaughter of his pleople, if he did keep it, determined to
kill himself, whereupon his friends and Souldyers perceiving that he
dispaired of the victory, willing him not to fear, he made them this
answer, that he esteemed not his life so much that for maintenance thereof,
he could abide to see any Civil war to arise. To win this eternal
memory. Calteratides would not stay from the Battle, although the Southsayer
had told him that he should be slain in the same, for said he, to fly were
infamy, but either to die or to be victorer, shall be for the praise of my
country, in the same mind was Hippodamus, who being.lxxx. years of age, and
therefore willed to depart home, as one unfit for the wars, did not only
stay, but valiauntly incountring with his enemies, was slain even before the
face of his Prince and master Ages, king of Lacedemonia. When as Demosthenes
had boldly spoken before Phillip of Macedon, in the behalf of his country,
and Phillip had asked him whether he did not fear that he would command his
head to be cut of: though thou do so, said Demostenes, my country will restore
it again, meaning he should win eternal praise.

The renowned Agosilaus of Lacedemonia being to leave this life, gave straight
charge that no picture or Monument should be made of him, for said he, if I have
done any worthy act it will be a sufficient Monument for me, otherwise all the
pictures in the world are not able to make me honorable.

Solon termed the speech of man to be the image of his works, Democ^itus
called it the shadow of the life, for as Socrates says, look what the
conversation of the man is, such is his talk. Alexander beholding the Tomb of
Achilles, began to weep through the desire he had to immitate his virtues and
renown. Julius Caesar in like sort, beholding the picture of Alexander, lamented
that he had spent his time so idly, being so old, before he had equaled the
princely acts, and victorious conquests of so young a man. Theseus also became
an earnest follower of the virtues of Hercules: and so did Themistocles the
worthiness of Melciades. Erasmus makes mention of a certain man which being
accused for beating his father, affirmed his deed as lawful, because his
Father had in like sort beaten his graundfather: this do Children account it
as lawful to do that which their fathers have done before, be it good or
evil.


good consideration had of the effects and euentes of every of them, and in
what order they were accomplished, as also what ensued and followed thereon:
for by calling to mind things past and comparing the same to things present,
thou shall easily give judgment of things to come.

Think it not decent for Princes to leave that undone whereby honor and
renown is to be purchased and gotten, or not to travel and to apply
themselves unto those studies and labors, whereby in their life time they may
be worthily praised, whereas private persons have not spared, willingly to die
to ye intent after their deaths they might be commended. Do thou therefore
desire and covet to leave unto thy children, the lively protractures and goodly
images of thy Princely virtues and noble acts, rather than any stately picture
or curious monument to be erected in remembrance of thy person.

And now above all things endeavor to preserve and to maintain thy self and
thy city in safety and tranquillity: but if of necessity it so fall out that
trouble and danger is to be undertaken, wish rather a happy death than a
shameful life, always mindful of the commodity of thy Country carefully
providing, that nothing be committed to the blemishe of thy estate, neither
that thou should so order thy self that thou should seem as one quite
forgotten, or as a man that never had been borne, for whereas thou consistest
of body and soul, the one being mortal and corruptable, the other immortal
and perpetual, it shall be conducible as also commendable for thee to leave an
everlasting memory of thy praise and good report, which thou have obtained by
thy well doing while thou here did abide, being as it were an immortal
remembrance of thy soul which is immortal: for as thou will think it a
sign of great good will, and as a thing most honorable for thy friends to
keep in memorial of thee, the visnomie and picture of thy body depainted in
some table or other, the which they may either lay up in their Closets or hang
up in their houses, how far more excellent or rather more princely, shall it
be for thee to leave thy renowned acts and worthy enterprises not only
divulged and published by the mouths of all thy Citizens, but also registered
and spreed abroad into all Countries both far and near, by the writings
and sceadiles of such as be learned.

Remember to accustom thy self to talk and to speak always of such things
as are accounted good and honest, that by so doing thy inward and secret
thoughts, may also be induced and practiced to the meditating of the like,
and so likewise to perform and to accomplish that in deed which thou have
before so well and godly conceived and imagined in thy mind, continually
laboring and applying thy self to immitate and to follow that for which thou
shall see other men commended or praised having as it were envy at him which
shall seem to surpass thee in well doing, and never to cease until thou have
counteruailed or overtaken him, giving also a lively example in thy self, as
touching those things which thou shall will or command thy children or
servants to observe, whether it be as appertaining unto such precepts A wise
man says Thales Milest, as will not speak but when it is needful, and when
he is asked, he uses but few words, so discretely dealing in all things, that
he repentes him of nothing. Aristotle did always counsel his Scholars
neither to praise, neither to dispraise themselves.

Bragging and bosting persons are likened of Plutarche to the Cipres tree,
which being great and mighty, does never bear any fruit. When as Lisimacus
had threatened to put Theodorus the Philosopher to a sharp and and cruel death
he made him this answer, O Lisimacus threaten this unto those that wear
st^ke gowns, as for me I pass not whether I rotte upon the ground or hang on
a gibbet.


as are here prescribed by me, or else by inuenting and perscrutating of some
other worthier or profitabler of thy self.

Moreover, suppose those men as unworthy of the name of a wise man, which can
either curiously and subtly cavil and reason of the smalest trifles or least
causes, or protesting and promising strange wonders, or as it were mountains
of gold to others when as they them selves do live and abide in greatest
misery, but rather accept and take those men, as wise which using seemliest
words, are able to give best counsel even in ye waightiest matters: so wittily
ordering whatsoever they take in hand, and so discretly behauing themselves
toward all men, as is to be required, or looked for at the hands of them
whom we account most perfectest, ye though they seem not in any respect to
brag or to boast of their industry or singulernesse of knowledge: always
remaining, as those which being not able to be shaken or moved with any
change or alteration of fortune, have learned to take in good part, and
patiently to bear either prosperity or adversity.

And thus to conclude, least I might be supposed too to tedious, I am humbly to
request thee (most mighty and renowned Prince) not at all to marvel or wonder
in yt I have touched, even those things which (as well I know) are both known
to thy self, as also to the most sort of men, because the multitude both of
Princes, and other private persons is so great and so infinite, that it must
follow that some of them have heretofore spoken the self same words, which I
here have used, many also have hard the like, or else have seen the same
practiced in others, and diverse there be which have experienced ye fame in
themselves: wherefore it must needs fall out that in this my discourse as
touching duty, being a thing neither strange, incredible nor vnusiall, no
kind of novelties are to be looked for, yet nevertheless his labor is to be
thankefully accepted, which shall take the We ought rather to respect the
profit then pleasure, in the reading of any Author.
pains to collect and gather together, yea and to set down in a small
compass, to the sight of all the world, a number of things lying as it were
scattered here and there, in the hearts and minds of diverse men. But I know
the use of most men is such, that though they adiudge the works and inventions
of Poets, How careless and negligent men be to peruse any Godly Book.
and of all other writers containing grave and good perswations unto virtue to
be commendable, and most profitable, yet can they not find in their hearts to
bestow so much time as to read and to peruse the same, but remain in such
sort affectioned toward them, as most men are to those which shall go about
to give them good counsel: that is, they will give them thanks for their good
will and pains taken, thinking themselves as bound unto them in that they
seem to have a care of their well doing, yet nevertheless they love their
company, as the bear loves to come to the stake, which is as all men know
against his will, nay they will rather of the twain, keep them company which
are the vpholders of their folly, then once to come within the sight of them
which endeavor to persuade them from their wickedness and mischief: As
examples for proof hereof may be inferred the works of Hesiodus, Such is the
force of virtue, that is commended and well liked of, even among the wicked,
though they love nothing worse then to follow it.
Theognes, and Phocillides, for every man affirms that in these their
writings, are contained excellent and singular precepts, appertaining to the
perfect direction of well living. But although they say thus much to the praise
and commendations of the writers, yet had they rather to spend their time in
the reading of that whereto their own madness and fondness induces them,
then to be exercised in any of the works before specified, What great profit
they bring both unto students, as also to all others which take the pains to
collect in breuiaries the pithy and principal sentences of other men's writings.
be they never so profitable: ye and besides this they remain in like sort
affectioned and disposed toward them, which for their help and furtherance
shall take the pains, briefly to gather together the pithie sentences of such
writers, to the intent that either the lack of leisure, or tediousness or
rather stouthfulnesse, might hinder them from so great a benefit: because of
the largeness and hugeness of the volumes, which would require long and
continual study: but yet had they rather (though by this means they may see
even in one mouth: as much as the writer painefully has noted with many years
travel: Add therefore Diogines when he had a grave matter to utter to the
people, would (to the end to make them to come to hear him) sing and
counterfeit the fool in the market place.
) to read over the vilest Commodie or tragidie be they mere fables and
fantasies than any such grave and learned discourses, yea though they be most
artificially penned: but why do I stay so long upon every trifling matter:
for if we thoroughly consider and mark the natures and conditions of al men
generally, we shall find many of them to delight neither in meats that be not
wholesome, nor in studies which be altogether honest, nor in deeds that be most
convenient, neither in doctrine that is most commodious, but only embracing and
following their own foolish appetites to make most account of those things
which are not only unseeming and hurtful, but also most repugnant to their
own commodity, esteeming them as active, Such as were Commodus, Caligula, and
Heliogabilus, and such others which rewarded them most which were aptst to
invent the lewdest devises.
witty and painful persons, which show themselves ye greatest neglectours
of their duty, or as I might say the rediest to folly, and pronest to work
their own confusion: wherefore how may a man deal to please and content such
kind of people, how is it possible to give them good counsel, or to let them
to understand any thing that is available and profitable for their
preservation and safeguard, especially in that they are not only so disposed
and bent as is aforesaid, but do also bear a deadly hatred and envy toward
the wisest, having indignation at them which speak truly, and accounting the
plainly and true meaning man, a witless idiot and senseless delte being so
far wide from understanding the truth in every thing, that they can never
come to the knowledge of their own estate. And hereupon it comes to pass,
The wicked have always a desperate and troubled mind.
that if at any time they fall into any cogitation or consultation with
themselves, as concerning their own affairs, they presently become both
heavy and pensive, in that seeing their own folly when it is too late, they
know not how to remedy the same: but yet in talking, and reasoning of other
men's matters, they will laugh and rejoice desiring rather to abide, and suffer
any misery or mishap, incident to the body, then to exercise their wits or
to beat their brains in forecasting with themselves any thing that might be
either necessary or expedient to the maintenance and succouring of this their
miserable life: yea thou shall find them when they are in company together,
This caused Appius Claudius to say that trouble was better for the people of
Rome, then quietness and peace because security breeds idleness and riotous
living.
either backbyting, and reproouing other men's doings, or else falling out and
reuiling each other, being continually at daggers drawing, and likewise when
they are alone then do they also use to spend their time in wishing for this
or for that, but never consulting or deliberating, how or after what sort they
might frame themselves to get their living honestly and orderly. But I do not
speak this generally as of all men, but only against such as are infected
with any of those vices, which I before have mentioned: yet truly this is most
manifestly apparent that they which are minded to write any thing either in
verse or proze, the which they would have commended and well liked of among the
people, As is seen by many in these days which do rather buy ri^ning Sonets,
and Palaces of pleasure, then any book containing wise Sentences, and godly
instructions.
they must not go about to set forth any grave or profitable matter, but
rather some foolish toy or vain imaginations, for in the reading of such
trifles is their chiefest felicity, as for witty sayings, and grave sentences
they weigh them not, except they be as it were again revived, as lively and
exactly set out before their sightes: Wherefore the works of Homer and of
those men also which at the first invented Tragedies and Comodies, are greatly
to be commended and praised, But not such Commodies as are plaide in these
days, containing only ^oyes and bables as are the lives of rogues and Idiots,
with Poetical inventions appertai- you may come to a play now, and neither
understand the beginning nor ending, for it contains not any example of well
living, but only a fardell of gibes cobled together by an ignorant Idiot.
in that perceiving the fond and vain disposition of man's nature, they
directed their pens to satisfy their humors, by both those means, the one
by imitating and counterfeiting, the combattes and incounters of those men,
whom for their virtues they termed by the name of half gods, the other
discribing by gestures on stages, the doings of our ancestors bringing them
again into actual appearance, to the intent that we might not only hear, but
also behold the same, with our outward eyes the more to stir us to bear it
in memory. And thus by these and such like proofs, it is plainly confirmed
and approved that they which desire to please there hearers and to seek their
good wills, must endeavor to write and to speak that thing only which they
perceive the people to be best delighted withal, as for grave admonitions and
godly exhortations they must not meddle nor deal withal.

And this have I spoken to signify unto thee, that as thou art not one of that
many, that is a member of that rude multitude, but a King and governor over
many, so surely it is unseeming for thee, to be of their disposition or
nature, as one more esteeming thy pleasure, and such things as may cause or
procure fond and foolish delights rather then the sage advise and grave
admonitions of the prudente and discrete counselors, Justice to be ministered
indifferently to all men.
giving judgment in all causes and of all persons, not according to thy
sensual appetites, but as the verity of the thing shall lead thee, and as
their dealings by just trial shall rightly discern of thee. And whereas they
whom we term the masters of wisdom, seem to be at variaunce, and greatly
to disagree among themselves, as concerning the exercises of the mind, being
as it were of diverse opinions therein, some persuading their hearers that they
shall attain to the perfection of wisdom and knowledge, Though there are
several precepts appertaining to every art, yet al tend to one end, and they
are all as keys to one Cofer.
by daily practicing and exercising themselves in the subtle and wily points
of Sophistry: others affirming the like skill to be attained unto, if they
perfectly bear in memory the precepts and rules of Rethorike: and another
sort saying as much unto them, which shall diligently apply themselves to the
searching out of the hidden natures and strange properties of every thing
exsisting and being within the reach of man's capacity, and so every one in
his art, promising a certain singularity and yet all as agreeing in this,
that they think it necessary for a man that desires and coueteth thoroughly
to be instructed, to collect and to gather from every one of these there said
studies, matter sufficient whereby he may come to the full perfection of
wisdom, as also to the perfect knowledge of good counsel, The difference
betwixt a counselor and a Philosopher.
letting pass therefore those things, whereof any doubt may arise, let us
endeavor to apply our selves unto that which is certain, whereof there can
grow no kind of controversy, and by whose help we may easily judge of all
the rest: Wherefore, as touching those things which may seem to require
present consultation, take thy advise of thy counselors about thee, not
respecting either them which shooting as it were at rouers, speak generally of
all things neither those which through their ignorance show themselves to
perceive and to understand nothing which is as then expedient and necessary to
be done, for it can not be that he which is unskillful, as appertayning to the
furtheraunce of his own affairs, should be able to give good counsel to
another. See therefore that thou highly esteem and make great account of those
men which having in them, He often repeteth the great and unspeakable treasure
that ye Prince has which inioyeth a faithful counselor.
a valiant and noble mind, are able through their wisdom and prudencie, to
foresee and forecast the euentes and happes of every thing which is or may be
incident unto thee, persuading thy self that thou possessest and enioyest no
treasure more royal, nor any thing else more worthier then is a faithful and
grave counselor: moreover adiudge them as most trusty unto thee, as most
careful for thy safety, and as the only inrichers, and vpholders of thy
kingdom which diligently shall seek to adorn and beautify thy mind with
virtue and knowledge. He yields his obeisaunce, requesting an acceptable
accepting of this his gift.
And as for my part I am and shall be ready to yield thee that honor which
possible I may, having at this time thus briefly presumed to admonish thee
according to my simple understanding in all such things as I thought requisite
and expedient for thee, hoping that thou will as courteously accept the same as
it has been friendly and willingly offered, wishing also that they likewise
whose use it is (as I said in the beginning) Having relation to his first
entrance, he ends his Oration with a brief admonition partly commending the
worthiness of his works.
to bestow those gifts upon thee, which thou do dearer buy at the giuers
hands, then they themselves did of the first sellers, would now also by this
my example accustom themselves to present thee, hereafter with those presents
which being daily occupied and worn, will at no time impair, but rather
augment and increase, and become the more precious by often handling: and thou
also for thy part contemning the former as things both vain and frivolous, to
show thy self as one only delighted with the latter, so shall not only the
folly of the giver be reproved, and he constrained thereby to frame himself to
find out some such gift wherewith he shall understand thee to be best
pleased, but also thou thy self: the receiver both bettered and profited
thereby.

The end of the second Oration of that famous and learned Orator Isocrates,
concerning the Moral instructing of Princes and Magistrates, as touching the
government of themselves and their Countries.

The preface of the Translatour unto the third Oration of Moral instructions,
written by that famous and learned Orator Isocrates, containing the discourse
made by Nicocles king of Salamis unto his people, and therefore termed by the
Author Nicocles.
YOu have hard how and after what sort Isocrates in his former treatise has
instructed, and taught Nicocles the king of Salamis in all those things which
he thought necessary and requisite for the Majesty of a Prince, as also for
every other Magistrate, to whom the charge of the common weal should happen to
be committed, the whole effect thereof, almost consisting in this one only
point, that is, that they should endeavor, as far to excel and surpass all
other their inferiors in virtue and knowledge, as they do exceed them in
degree and authority, seeking immortal praise through their well doings and
godly governments. Now in the third Oration is declared and expressed, in like
sort the duty of all true subjects and faithful Citizens to be used, and
observed toward their Princes and governors: and this is expressed, as it
were by Nicocles himself speaking unto his Nobles and courteours, and to the
rest of his people, worthy to be read, perused and followed, of all those
which are desirous to show themselves faithful, and obedient subjects unto
their most gracious gouernesse, not forgetting daily and hourly to yield most
hearty thanks unto the unspeakable goodness and mercy of God, in sending us
so careful and so loving a mother in Israel: whose most gracious reign the
Lord of his goodness both prosper and continue, in most happy and blessed
wise over us, to the confirmation and establishing of his truth, to her
Majesty's endless praise, and to the perpetual comfort and commodity of us
all. The order observed by the Author in this Oration, consists in three
parts, the first his entrance or beginning, containing the defense of
Eloquence, with the reproof of those lewd, and evil disposed persons, partly
expressed in the conclusion of the former Oration. The second part is as
touching the state of a monarchy or government of a kingdom under one man
alone, as is the rule and dignity of an Emperor or king: herein confirming
the right and title which Nicocles had unto the kingdom which he then
possessed and enjoyed. The third and last, comprehends and contains the
duty of subjects toward their princes, with a brief conclusion annexed
thereunto. But chiefly and principally I would wish all true Christians,
living in these dangerous days (wherein sin and iniquity seem to have the
upper hand, the devil seeking by all means possible to overthrow the truth
of gods word by intising of them to lewdness and licentiousness of life, to
whom the charge thereof is committed) to mark and consider the first part of
this discourse, applying the same as a salve to their troubled consciences, not
misliking or condemning the true and sincere preaching of Gods word, agreeable
to his Gospel, because of the evil lives, and lewd dealinges of them who are
the preachers and ministers of the same: for as our Author proves, that the
study of Eloquence is not to be misliked or condemned, because diverse abuse
the same, neither yet any other good gift to be dispraised, in that some have
applied it to an evil purpose: so surely we are not to mislike or to judge of
the verity of Gods Book by the outward dealinges and works of men, as
condemning the Sermons and preachinges of them whose words are not repugnant
unto the verity, because having preached to others they themselves become
reprobates, but we ought rather to pray to the Lord for their amendment, and to
fly unto his deputy our most gracious Queen, together with her most
honorable Counsel that sincere discipline might be admitted, used and ordered
without respect of persons, that all other inferior Magistrates to whom any
charge is committed, would be more careful of their charge, more circumspect
in their dealinges, as men more respecting the performaunce of their duties
the profiting of their Country, the rooting out of sin and iniquity with a
fervent desire, to the aduauncing of virtue and planting of a godly
conversation in all men then either for fear of displeasure to become
fearful through favor or affection, to be men partial or for the sparing of
their pursses, avoiding of trouble, or taking of pains to be found in any
thing seduced, contrary to the nature of a good man, and that every one of us
perticulerly might have that grace as to look into our own consciences to
redress our own faults, and speedily to amend that which we shall find as
amiss in our selves and so shall we be sure that according to the promise of
him which is the only truth, and never suffers any one to be denied in so
just a petition, that these cobwebs which so trouble us, shall at length be
swept away that all such mystes as seem to darken the brightness of his glory
shall to our great comfort vanishe and be exhausted as vapors, and that all
tares and darnells shall be so cleanly selected and sifted from the pure corn,
that I doubt not but every English man shall as boldly say of this our
Country, as did Leonidas of Sparta, namely, that every man does so carefully
apply himself to the fulfilling of his duty that there is not one that
lives licentiously, the which the Lord of his infinite goodness and mercy
grant us. And thus gentle Reader, as one not appointing the Lord a time, but
patiently abiding his pleasure, framing thy will to his, using this medicine as
the only salve to cure all thy diseases, wishing thee by the approved reasons
and pithie arguments of this Panim to be persuaded from so fond an error,
adjoining my self as a copartner with thee in the same, I will give leave to
the Author himself to utter his opinion unto thee, the which I pray God thou
may both diligently mark and always remember.

The third Oration of Moral instructions, written by that famous and learned
Orator Isocrates, containing the discourse made by Nicocles King of Salamis,
unto his people, and therefore termed by the Author Nicocles.
The makes his hearers attentive in commending unto them the excelent gift of
Eloquence.
WHereas there are certain men of whom the study of Eloquence seems to be
misliked laying also unto their charge which spend their time in the
perscrutating and searching forth of wisdom and knowledge that they prescribe
and set forth rules and precepts appertaining unto their arts more in respect
of their own commodity and gain, then for any zeal or affection that they
bear unto virtue her self, This was the cursed opinion of Licinius, and
Valentianus Emperors who accounted learning as a poison and common pestilence
in a common woale. Honor says Socrates, is only proper unto those that are
endued with virtue and therefore Agesilaus understanding that the king of
Persia was called by the name of a great and mighty Prince, wherein said he, is
he greater or better then I, except he excel men in Justice or temperancye.
I would gladly know of these me^ which are of this opinion, why they should
find so great fault with them, whose desire is to attain unto the perfection
of speech, seeing they do so highly praise and commend those that so earnestly
practice and endeavor to purchase themselves credit by their well doings: for
if the commodity and profit arising thereby be, that wherewith they are
grieved, then truly have they greater cause to mislike the other then this.
For who sees not greater gain gotten by one good deed, then by an hundred
words be they uttered and spoken never so sweetly. But what may better
declare their folly herein, then if they should confess themselves so
senseless as not to understand and perceive that the cause and end wherefore
we do so much esteem the pureness of life, so greatly regard justice, and
temperancie and so earnestly apply our selves to all other virtuous exercises
is that we may enjoy and possess the greater commodities thereby, and not that
we should be of baser and meaner estate then others are. There is therefore
no reason to condemn those things as evil through the which virtue being
adjoined, we may be able to excel and surpass Archidamus being commended by a
friend of his, in that he had valiantly ouerthrown the Arcadians in battle,
answered, it had been more honorable if we had overcame them in virtue, for
brute bests are able to convince us by strength.

Pantholidas having heard the Philosophers of Athens learnedly disputing of
virtue, did not vntlike their words, because they lived dissolutely, but being
asked how he liked their disputation, I must said he needs affirm their
words to be good, but yet altogether unprofitable to them which in nothing do
follow the same.

As did Aeschius and C^esi^hon in Athens, who, though they for their abusing of
that good gift which was in them were banished, yet was their art nothing
infamed thereby. These men says Cleantes, are like unto an instrument, which
yielding a pleasant sound to others, it nothing profits it self. When as the
Romans having put down their kings because of the licenciousnesse of Tarqont,
which was the last, and now had deserved to live at liberty, rising up in
arms against the sacred Senate, in so much that the state of their common
weal was now most miserable, only Publius Valerius through his eloquent
Oration so persuaded them from this their madness, and preserved the city
from ruin.


others our inferiors, but rather those men are to be adjudged culpable, and
the fault to be imputed unto them which do seem so lewdlye to abuse those
good gifts through their evil applying of the same, as they do which convert
and turn Eloquence, the maintainer of truth, to be an vpholder and procurer
of deceit and wrong. And now also if this abuse be the cause why some men do
so greatly mislike her, I marvel wherefore they do not in like sort account
riches, strength of body and valiantness of heart as the things which are
evil, because sometimes they are wickedly bestowed and applied, for they may as
rightly allege the same in the reproach of all other good gifts, as to say,
Eloquence is to be hated, in that some that profess that art, are lying and
deceitful persons: Are there not diverse men which being endued with the
singulerst qualities and most excellentst knowledge, have not only offended
themselves, but also procured the harms of many others, yet nevertheless
those good gifts in them were not to be misliked no more then the strength of
the body is to be accused, because the owner thereof rashly beats, and
vyolently oppresses every one that meets him, or the magnanimity of mind to
be supposed as evil, in that murderers and thieves do abuse the same, for
the wickedness of the man is not to be imputed as infamous unto any good
gift, wherewith he is endued, but rather to his own vile and corrupt nature
which does so dissolutely mispend those good qualities, turning that to the
spoil, and destruction of their Citizens, which was given them for their
preservation and mayntenaunce, and in this sort having no regard to the
distinguishing of each particular thing because of the perverse dealinges of
some, they fondly blame even generally M. Antonius by his eloque^t and sugared
speech, so appeased the wrath of them that were sent to kill him, that they
put up their swords, and departed from him, as men amazed. Phillip of Macedon
did know that the force of Eloquence was the only and chiefest vpholder of the
estate of a common weal, in that he so instantly sued unto the Athenians for
their ten Orators, at that time remaining among them.

In whom, says Demosthenes, the study of Eloquence is, that man is one that
seeks to please all men, but he that shows himself a contemner and
dispiser of the same, is such a one as coueteth by force and violence to bring
all men to his beck, nothing waying or respecting any gentle perswations.

Demetrius Phalerius affirmed that eloquence was of as great force at home in
the common weal, as is the sword in the field, the one seeking to subdue our
enemies by force, the other to persuade and to induce by reasons the people to
the obeying of ye laws, and imbrasing of virtue. King Pyrthus was wont to say
that he wanne more Cities by the Eloquence and Oratoriall skill, of his
Embassedor Crimeas, then ever he did by force of arms. Alphonsus being asked
who^ he thought the best and faithfulst counselor answered: his books, for
of them says he, I shall be sure to hear that which is necessary for me to
know, plainly told me, without fear or affection.

Demetrius Phalerius exhorted Ptolome the King of Egypt, carefully to provide
such books, as appertained to the government of a Kingdom, as also
dilligently to read them over, for that said he that thy counselors fearing
to displease thee, dare not utter, thou shall there find it written.


without any exception, the whole study of Eloquence, being so deeply drowned
in this their error that they perceive not themselves to become deadly enemies
even unto that, then the which nothing has been granted unto mankind more
profitabler or more necessary, for there is no difference betwixt us and all
other living creatures in any other quality: but only in this, nay, we are
surpassed of every of them, either in quickness or in strength or in any other
gift, which nature has bestowed upon us, but only in that through this
singular benefit, we take aduisementes and consultations of each thing as well
present as past, as also to utter and to express to each other our minds and
opinions, by the which particular privilege, we do not only vary and differ
from that brutishe life, but also learn by good forecast to build Cities, to
make laws, and to invent al Arts and trades of well living, doing nothing
which may be accounted singular and exquisite, but that Eloquence is the
chiefest furtherer of the same, in so much that nothing is brought to pass
without her help, for it is she only that ordains and appoints a
convenient and decent order to be observed, both in things lawful or
unlawful, honest or dishonest, and in all causes whatsoever they be, for
otherwise the society of mankind could not be maintained: It is she which
reprooueth and corrects the wicked, incourageth and imboldneth the godly,
instructs the foolish, craves the counsel and judgment of the wise:
dissolueth and dispatcheth all quarrels and controversies, and procures the
knowledge and understanding of things unknown. Those reasons which we use in
our pleadinges to ye persuading of others, are also as common to us in our
private deliberations and conferences, in so much that we judge those men to
be eloquent, which can discretly and orderly frame their declamations before
the people, as also wittily behave themselves in the consulting and
deliberating of each particular matter. For we think it an especial token of
a good judgment and perfect brain, to utter our words in decente and comelye
order, and that fair and honest talk is a sure sign of a plain and true
meaning heart: but to speak effectually of the full force of this science, we
shall find nothing done with reason which has not been brought about by the
help of Eloquence, so that she remains the chiefest guide of all our
thoughts and deeds, being the only instrument of the wise and learned. Now
therefore as touching those men whose use it is to speak so reprochefully of
the masters of this art, and of all such as show themselves studious in the
knowledge of good literature, truly in my opinion they are as greatly to be
hated and misliked, as are they which cursedly violate and spoil the temples
of the gods immortal. As I therefore thus commend the Orations and writings
of all men what so ever they be, out of the which the least commodity is to
be gotten, so surely I must needs account those Authors as most singular and
worthiest for the hands of all Princes and kings (and especially for me)
which seem so lively to set down before our eyes, all honest exercises of well
living, as also the right and perfect order of the true and good governance of
every Common weal: but yet especially above the rest I am enforced through
their own deserts highly to praise and extol the works and sceadilles of
those men which have taken the pains directly to discribe, not only how and
after what sort Princes ought to behave themselves, in the ruling and ordering
of their people, but also in what manner it becomes subjects to be
affectioned toward their Princes and Governors: for by these means the
prosperous estate of each City and Country is both augmented and preserved.
And as touching the first of these twain, concerning the duty of Kings and
Princes, Having divided the estate of every well ordered common weal, into two
parts, the one consisting in good and just government, the other in true
obeying, taking occasion as in that the one part hereof had been let pass by
Isocrates, with due reverence had unto the man, the king himself purposes to
show unto his subjects what duetifull obedience is.

Marcus Curuis being Consul, when he understood that a certain young men had
contemptuously disobeied his commandment he presentlye spoiled him of all his
goods, and possessions selling them unto other, by the mouth of the public
Crier, and afterward delivered his body into the tribunes of the people, to be
sold as a bond man, affirming that he had no need of that Citizen, which
knew not how to obey the commandment of his gouernoure. When as Manlius
Torquatus had given commandment that no man should encounter with the
enemies, or move out of the camp, before then heard farther from him, and it
so fell out that contrary to his commandment, his own son did set upon
them, and overthrew them, because he knew that there was nothing more
dangerous then to suffer so contemptious disobedience to escape unpunished, he
put to death his own son, yea though he were victorer.


you have hard it at large discoursed by Isocrates, that grave and learned
Orator, now as appertaining to the second part, which is of the loyalty and
fidelity of Citizens, toward their Magistrates and rulers, I my self do
mind to declare unto you, not in that I desire or seek to excel or in the
least thing to equal the excellency of the man, but because I think it my
part and duty, rather then any other in this case especially, lovingly and
friendly to use a few words unto you. For there is no reason why I should be
offended, if you do transgress in any thing that is displeasing unto me,
whereas I never expressed nor uttered unto you heretofore, neither what I would
have observed and followed, neither that which I would have wished to have been
eschewed and avoided, but if now after you understand my mind and from my
own mouth have hard, what things I shall will and command you (being as
well profitable unto your selves as unto me) if ye then offend if ye endeavor
not to fulfill such things as I shall give you in charge, then truly I shall
have just cause to be angry and moved at that your so contemptuous
disobedience. And now to the end that you may be the better incensed and
stirred as well to mark and to bear away that which shall be spoken, as also
willingly hereafter to practice, and to follow the same. I mind not only
briefly to declare unto you that which is to be said, as concerning those
things which are requisite on your behalf, but also to signify unto you,
how greatly you ought to esteem and regard this estate of government which
you now are under, not only in respect of your own necessity, because of
duty you ought to do so or in that you It cannot continue long, said
Theopompus that sodainlye springs up aloft, as is seen in the beete, but
that which increases by daily continuance, by little, and little, and so
comes to be great, continues and abides long, as does the Oak, approving
with Socrates that kingdoms unlawfully and wrongfully possessed, cannot long
time prosper, according to that true and common saying: the goods evil gotten,
are soon spente. It is an honorable thing, says Antisthenes, to be born a
King, but it is more honorable through thy virtues and Princelye qualities to
deserve the same of thy self. That is true nobillitie said Iphicrates, which is
gotten by our own worthiness, and not that which proceeds to us from our
Ancesters. Antisthenes being asked what thing did most portend the dissolution
of a common weal, answered, when as there is no difference made betwixt the
good and the bad. We do not said Cato the elder, advance them to honor and
authority, which wear Purple gowns, but those which show forth the greatest
proof of their virtuous behavior, and integrity of life, that by this means
the youth of our City might be incensed the greedier to embrace virtue, whom
only they do see to be honored The society of mankind is then best
maintained, as answered Theophrastus, when as the wicked are restrained by
punishment and the godly encouraged with the reward of honor, every one
being ordered according to his deserts. How can men have any zeal or desire to
do good, when as there is no reward to be hoped for, said Anaximenes, and
therefore Alexander at all such times as any difficult adventure was to be
undertaken, did presently proclaim certain rewards and prizes to them that
should enterprise the same.

Maximinus being asked why he took so great pains seeing he was in that
authority that he might live quietly, answered: that it behooved him, the
higher in authority he was the more to be careful, and to take the greater
pains. Vaspasianus being greeuouslie afflicted with sickness, would not be
absente from hearing of causes, but commanded all such suitors as had to do
with him, to come to his bed side, for which when he was reproved by his
nobillitie and willed to spare himself, no said he, an Emperor must die
studying, as one ever careful for the estate of his kingdom.


have always used the self same order in former time: but also because the
worthiness and excellency of this kind of government, is such that it
surpasses and excels all others, having me to your King, not possessing
this authority as gotten either contrary to your laws, or by force and
violence used unto any or as an usurper, but as receiving the same rightly and
lawfully, as well in the behalf of all my auncestanrs, as of my father, and
also as I hope in respect of my self. For these things being foreshowne unto
you, and on your parts as thoroughly waighed and considered as they ought to
be, I doubt not but that every one of you will confess and acknowledge
himself worthy of extreme punishment, if he should stubbornely and
disloyally disobey this my counsel and friendly exhortation given unto you.
First therefore according to my promise, as concerning the estates of Commonweals, I suppose every man to be agreeable with me in this: that it is not
meet, that the good and evil men should be as all one, or that the foolish
and wisest should seem as hail fellows, but that it is necessary that an
order should be observed, and a difference should be made betwixt them, that
every one might be esteemed, and preferred according to his worthiness: but in
those realms where the government, and authority consists in the hands of
a few, or in the whole multitude there is desired, and observed an equality
of persons, supposing the estates of their kingdoms as then most safest and in
best ease, when as one man bears no greater authority than another, a kind
of life no doubt most acceptable to wicked and dissolute livers. Now
contrarily in a Monarchy where one only possesses the superiority, there is
due honor done to every one according to his calling, the best and chiefest as
placed in the principallest rooms, the next unto him in like order in the
nearest place, the third and fourth in their degrees, and so every one in
comely and decent manner as he is found in virtue and wisdom, the which
though it be not the use in every Country, yet notwithstanding such is the
happy estate of this our City. And if we do mark the diversity of wits,
the sundry practices and enterprises among men one far exceeding and
excelling another we must needs confess no kind of Regiment comparable in
any respect to the worthiness of a Monarchy. For where no reward is to be
looked for, what encouragement can men have to do good, nay rather who is so
senseless which would not wish himself a Citizen or subject in that common
weal, in which his virtues and valiantness shall be renowned and rewarded,
then to lead his life in such sort that though he do never so well, yet shall
he always remain in base and mean estate. Moreover, we must needs confess
the government Monarchable, so much the tollerabler and the indifferenter, how
much more easier it is to please and satisfy the mind and commandment of
one man, then the sundry and diverse dispositions of many. Thus as you see it
is proved most euidentlye (though diverse other allegations might be inferred)
that the rule and authority of one man is of all other estates the
delectablest, the mercifulst, and the most tollerablest and surest: but yet to
go a little further by comparing each estate one with the other, we shall
find none more speedier in the dispatching and bringing to pass of any thing,
none more readier in consulting and forecasting of any danger or peril to
come, or else more careful or watchful for the commodity and preservation of
all men indifferentlye, then are kings and Princes enjoying that sole
authority: for they which every year choose new Magistrates, do first lead
a private and mean life before they come to the knowledge how or after what
sort to take upon them that general charge so that their skill must needs be
small whose practice continues so short a time, When as Hanniball had hard the
arguments of a certain Stoic affirming that a learned man was only meet to
be an Emperor or governor, he presentlye laughed thereat, supposing it
impossible that any man should be skillful in that which he had not learned by
experience and practice.

Augustus Caesar was wont to counsel the Romans to commit the charge of the
common weal to such as had greatest experience.


whereas they who continually possess this their princely estate, must needs
be singular through so long experience had therein, yea though their knowledge
at the first enteraunce thereunto were small: moreover where there are many
rulers and every one having equal authority, they commonly stand strayning of
curtsie, staring one upon another, and as it were shifting the matter one to
the other, whereby they either leave many things undone, or else suffer much
to perish for lack of heed taking, but the other knowing that on the^ only
depends the whole charge, do not cease continually to be careful and
diligent to look to the ordering of every thing. Again, the other fall often
times at deadly variaunce and civil dissension amongst themselves to the
utter ruin and subversion of their Cities and towns, but kings and Princes
(having no man as their better at whom they should envy) seek and study by
all means possible, to bring that to pass which may be most profitable for
their subjects and most agreeable unto their honors. The other also spend
most part of their time about their own affairs, having always an inward
desire to profit themselves, whereby they are often found slack and
negligent in discharging their duties, ye and when they meet together as to
consult as concerning the estate of their Country, As did Caesar and Pompey,
Scaurus also, and Rutilius, with diverse others. When as Cressus had adjoined
unto his Brother as Copartner with him in government of the kingdom of Lidia,
one of his counselors came unto him and told him that as there was nothing
better for the increase of the earth then one son, who being taken away, all
things would perrish, so is there nothing hurtfuller, then to have two sons
to shine, for by their heat, it must needs follow that all things should
perrish. Although in the Roman government there are diverse to be repeated
which esteemed more the profit of their country then their own gain, yet is
it known unto all those that have read their I estes as also the acts of
other commonweals, where such kind of government has been used, that there
were continually seditions and factions amongst them, one envying at the
prosperity of the other, bringing at length through Civil discords, the
overthrow of the whole common weal.

As did Metellus who because that Quintus Po^peius should succeed him in the
government of spain, spoiled al such provision as he then being consul had,
to the end the other should not be able to do any worthy exploit after him.

Antonius Pius would never enterprise any thing with out the advice of his
counsel affirming that it was meeter that he should be ruled by the grave
advise of his faithful and wise Counselors, then that they all should be
compelled to follow his only opinion. The worthy saying of king Pyrrus
remains as renowned for ever. Give me said he, neither Gold nor Silver, nor
any other reward, neither yet such as may feed me with delicate dishes but
let me have hardy and valiant Souldyers, such as are able in time of need to
defend their country from spoil. Licurgus being asked why he would not suffer
his city to be walled about, because said he, that city needs no such
Munition, whose Citizens are valiant.

As did Crassus, Quintus Cassius, Valeruis, and Aulus Posthumus.

I had rather (said Phillip of Macedon) to have a company of hearts, a Lion
being their guide then a company of Lions, having a hare to their leader.

Albertus the fifth of that name, Duke of Austrea, being asked whom he would
appoint as conducter of the Army into the field, whom said he, should do it
but my self, if I be Duke of Austrea for except I be the foremost, and as
becomes me, the leader of the army, giving you encouragement by my own
doings, boldly and valiauntly ^come after me, I am not to be called a Duke.

Cirus being to encounter with his enemies at a certain place caled Cunar, one
of his counselors called Clearchus willed him to withdraw himself, from out
the danger of the battle: what (said he) Clearchus would thou have me to
show my self as one unworthy of a Kingdom, whereas I go about to win a
kingdom. Supposing him as unworthy to be governor over others, which should
be inferior to any in valiantness and Magnanimity of mind. Alexander,
Scipio, Caesar, and Hanniball, with diverse other most valiant Princes, were
nothing inferior to the meanest Souldyer in warlike travel. As the
Carthagians under the only conduct of Hanniball, the Lacedaemonians under
Cleomenes, the Athenians also under the government of Epaminundas. Pausanias
being asked how the Thracians might be best subdued made answer, if there be
an Army of active and hardy Soldiers sent against them, some one valiant and
wothy man being appointed the conducter and guider for a politic and skillful
captain, is as the head is to the body.

The Lacedaemonians under the conducting of Milciades, overthrew the Persians in
the field of Marathon, in like sort they obtained victory against the same
nation at Salamis, under Themistocles, against the Lacedaemonians by Pericles,
but when they went into Sicilia, Nicias, Alimbiades and Lamacus being their
Generalles, all as led under the hands of Demosthenes and Eurimidon, they wear
miserably convicted, as also at all other times, both under the government of
their thirty Tyrauntes, as under their ten Pretors, until Conon did restore
them again. By the Aemulation betwixt Cleombrates and Agesilaus, as also
betwixt Agesilaus and Lisander, the Lacedaemonians received great damages, and
miserable overthrows. Such was the reverence that the Painims had unto their
Gods, that their Emperors and Rulers in time of peace, as also their Captains
in the Wars, have diverse times used the testimony of their Gods in the
comprobating or persuading of any weighty matter, as did Numa Pompilius in
setting forth his laws among the Romans, as approved by the counsel of
Egeria the Goddess, Minas king of Crece, by affirming that by sitting in a
certain Cave, he there received those laws he then prescribed as from Jupiter
Licurgus also saying that the laws he made were done by the advice of Apollo,
Selencus by the hand of Minerua, Lucius Silla encouraging his Souldyers in
holding up the picture of Apollo Quintus Se^torius in talking with a white
heart, with Alexander, Scipio, and Caesar, and diverse other who used the like
practices.

Mecenas being asked of Octauian the Emperor, as touching the estate of his
government, answered, there is nothing (O Prince) more honorable then
lawfully to possess and inherit a kingdom. Licurgus going about to persuade
the people of Lacedemonia to a better kind of life, did put them in
remembrance of their original, which was from Hercules, saying, wherein does
this nobleness of our Progenitors profit us, except we according to their
example, do lead our lives in like sort, in doing of those things through
which Hercules became so honorable, When as one had used many words in the
praise of Alphonsus king of Aragon, in respecting the worthiness of his
ancestors, said he was son to a King, Brother to a king, and nephew to a
king: Alphonsus understanding the same, answered that of all things which was
to be repeated, he had spoken the least, for in that his auncestoures through
their princely virtues had deserved a kingdom, and had left him heir thereof,
yet was their honor not his, except he did show himself to inherit the same
by equallitie of virtue rather then by Testament.

Phillip of Madon understanding that his son Alexander seemed to be grieved in
that his father had so many sons by diverse women doubting to whom the
kingdom should be given: said unto him, seeing thou have so many copartners,
which may by right of birth challenge my seat as well as thy self, endeavor
therefore that by excelling them, thou may by thy own worthiness rather
deserve the same then to have it come unto thee by inheritance. When as there
were certain that went about to persuade Friderticus the Emperor of Rome,
that he should privily cause to be murdered Ladislaus the king of Hungari and
Bohemia, remaining then a child in his custody, signifiing the great wealth
and kingdom which might be gained by his death, the Emperors answer was, I
perceive that you had rather have me rich then just, but know ye that I esteem
justice, and an honest fame more then I do the great wealth or largest
kingdom. Theodorus the younger being asked why he did not put to death those
which had injured him, nay said he, I had rather if I could, make them alive
which are dead already, signifiing that it became a Prince rather to forgive
then to revenge, as did Agesilaus who preferred to honor and in all causes
most earnestly defended and maintained his adversaries, making them his
friends through his just dealings, rather then by cruelty to seek to be
revenged. Epaminundas being greatly injured by his citizens would never
revenge any one thing, for said he, it is a great offense to bear anger
toward ones Country, for where envy is there Justice sleeps.

Agasicles being asked how one might rule his people in most safetye,
answered if thou use them as a Father does his Children, giving them cause for
thy virtues to reverence thee, rather then to fear thee for thy crueltye. I
had rather said Antonius Pius to save a Citizen then to kill a thousand
enemies, signifiing that quietness is to be preferred before the greatest
commodity to be gotten by war.

Probus the Emperor did so painefully labor to conclude peace with all
Princes, that he doubted not to say, I hope ere it be long we shall accounte
Souldyers as men not necessary. O happy world if Christen Princes would so
agree among themselves, that in respect of their own causes, they could say
the same, and so adioyne themselves with one consent against that deadly enemy
of the church of christ the Turk and his adherentes. Agesilaus being asked
which of these two Virtues Justice or Fortitude were worthiest, answered that
Fortitude was nothing available, except justice were adjoined.


thou shall sooner find them taunting and reuiling one another, then friendly
agereing to lay their heads together for the welfare of their people: but the
Princely Monarchies without respect of time having no let nor stay to the
contrary are busyed both day and night, omitting no occasion given unto them,
but speedily dispatching each thing in due season: Furthermore, those yearly
governors envying the prosperous success of their fellows (being either
companions with them in their office, or else as having been their predicessors
in the same charge before,) will do their endeavors (as much as they may) to
cause them to be seduced by others whereby they may be found faulty in
their dealings, to the intent that they themselves might gain the more credit
and commendations for that which they shall do, whereas they which enjoy this
principality for term of their lives, without check or control have always
one desire, one heart, one and the self same good will unto their subjects at
all times and in all causes, accounting the whole Common weal as their own
inheritance, ordering the same with no less care then they would do their
own household or family, seeking also for the better directing therefore, to
adioyne unto them the wisest and learned among their people, always
carefully choosing and electing them to be as executours of their will and
commandments, whom they shall find most meetest and skilfullest in such
things as are at any time to be undertaken. And as kings and Princes most
esteem and regard those whom they know and understand to be valiant and
mighty men at arms, able to defend their Realms in all dangers and troubles.
So ye other, supposing the charge which they have in hand as appertaining unto
them but for a time, make most account and place about them as their chiefest
counselors, them whom they know to be the wisest and subtlest Marchantes,
being able as occasion serves, either to flatter or to deal roughly and
stoutly with their people, ruling then best when they make most for their
advantage. Finally this studious endeavor and fatherly affection of him to
whom alone belongs the soueraintie, does not only appear in the well
governing of his domestical and common affairs in time of peace, but also in
each thing which shall be requisite and necessary in time of wars, behauing
himself in all causes more circumspect and careful then those yearelinges:
either have done or can do. Whether it be as touching the knowledge of the
placing of the battle, the guiding and leading forth of one army, the
encouraging and imbolding of his soldiers, or else as appertaining to the
politic directing and conducting of his men, whether it be openly into the
field, or privily to work his enemies overthrow, not sparing to provoke the
slothful to make others the readier and forwarder through his liberality and
bountifulness used toward them, as also winning the good will of all men in
showing himself a companion in their labors, a copartner in their adventures,
a King and Captain, and yet in courtesy and lowliness a familiar friend and
fellow: neither is this so easily to be proved by words, as it is confirmed
and manifested by the proofs and testimonies of sundry Commonweals: for as
we all know the Persian estate has grown unto this mightiness and hugeness
which it now possesses not by the help and counsel of a rude multitude, or
by those yearly Magistrates, but only by the vigilent care and diligent
endeavors of their Kings and Princes: In like sort also have we seen the
wealth and power of Dionisius the tyrant to have been increased, who by his
painful labor and travel saved his country from spoil, making Sicilia
(whom at his coming he found besieged and in thraldom) the famous and
renowned City of all Greece. The Carthagians and Lacedaemonians, whose
governments are accounted amongst all the Gretians as the singulerst and the
perfectest though they were ruled at home in time of peace, by the authority
of diverse, yet in war they always obeyed the rule and commandment of one
man alone, I could also show you that the Athenians (who most of all detested
this Monarchall authority) when they sent diverse Emperors into the fields
they had continually the worst: but when they constituted and appointed one
only as chieftaine and conductour of all, they always returned with victory.
And now how were it possible to make the worthiness of this dignity and
Monarchall estate more evident unto you, then by these and such like examples
so plainly approving and confirming, not only those men which have lived under
the government of Princes and Kings to have been the most mightiest and
valiantest in all warlike affairs, and the prudentest in all other their
dealings but also those Countries whose use it is to have diverse and sundry
governors, when any weighty cause or matter of great importance, did compel
them to send forth their armies to have always used to elect and choose some
one as principal guide to the rest, calling him by the name of an Emperor or
King, yea and them also who did so much hate and abhor this kind of
government, never to have prospered when as they sent so many generalles into
the fields: for as I said before, one envying at the good success of the
other, and every one being so affectioned that they thought his own way best,
thus striving within themselves they have commonly wrought their Countries
decay: Moreover if it be lawful for to repeat that which is left unto us, as
credible by the records of antiquity, it is said that the gods themselves
have Jupiter as their King, the which report if it be true is also a probable
assertion that they likewise do prefer the worthiness of this estate before
all others, but if no man can say for certain that it is so, yet do we seem
to infer by this conjecture that our own opinion is that the principality
which one man does possess, is the chiefest and best kind of government, for
we would never say the gods did use that kind of superiority amongst them
but that our consciences do persuade us that it surpasses all others
whatsoever they be. And thus being not able either in thought to comprehend,
or in words to utter the singulernesse of this estate, it shall suffice for
our purpose to have spoken this much at this time in the behalf thereof. Now
as touching the second part of my discourse, as concerning the right and title
which I have unto this kingdom, and to the authority I do possess, I will
briefly use but a word or two, being a case as well already granted as not
craving or requiring any greater probatio^. Who knows not the renowned
Teucrus the first beginner and chief original of this our line, gathering
together the elders of his people to have sailed unto this Island, and here
building this City to have distributed and allotted unto them, these lands
and possessions which we at this day enjoy. My father Euagoras also your late
diseased King lineally dissending from him, recovering by hard and difficult
adventures, the possession of this kingdom when it had been lost and utterly
subverted by others before him, has now brought all things to that pass that
the Phenicians shall now no longer extend their cruelty on the Salaminians but
that they shall now quietly possess and enjoy it, whose right it was and has
been even from the beginning: but letting this pass, it remains also that I
speak somewhat as touching my self, to let you to understand that I your
king and governor and one which does not challenge this authority over you as
by the right of my ancestors only, but also as deserving the same of my self
through my own worthiness, for in my judgment all men will confess Justice
and Temperancie as the chiefest and principallest of all other virtues, being
profitable unto us not only because of the excellency of their own natures,
but also in that they are necessary in all causes, in so much that if we
thoroughly consider each thing, we shall find nothing well done without them,
and that all things come to good effect, where they are applied. And truly if
any one in times past has been as worthy to have been renowned through these
virtues and Princely qualities. I can but think it reason that I should have
the like attributed unto me, having deserved the same. And as for the executing
of justice it is soon seen how I have behaved my self therein, if you do
but consider with me in what case your City was when I took upon me the
government thereof. Did not I find this Palace naked and bare, the treasure
empty, great troubles and tumultes amongst you, each thing wasted and
consumed in such sort that it required both a diligent care and a present
redress and that with no small charges. Also whereas I did know diverse at that
time to have applied themselves every way to the saluing up of their own
wounds, and on every side to have labored in the remeding of their own
private detrimentes, others also as compelled through necessity to have done,
as also to have yielded their consents to many things contrary to their own
consciences, and quite disagreeable to their own desires, yet could nothing
move or provoke me so to deal with any one of them that any man might have
thereby any occasion to say that I executed not my charge both justly and
painefully, not omitting any thing which might make either for your
furtheraunce and commodity, or for the safety and prosperous estate of your
Country: yea I have used you all with such courtesy that you neither then had
or at this time have any need to fear either banishments, for private
dissentions, or the raunsacking of your treasure, or publication of your goods
or any other kind of calamity, as long as it shall please the Gods to grant
me life to remain amongst you. Whereas also through the late wars we
waged we could not traffic, nor use any kind of marchandries into any part
of Greece, but that we were every where and in all places robbed and rifled,
you your selves know how I have appeased all quarrels, how I have ended all
matters, and how I have procured peace with all parties, partly in restoring
unto some of them the uttermost they could ask me, contenting others with an
indifferent portion, and partly in taking day with the rest, seeking also to
dispatch all controversies as yet remaining with as great speed as may be.
Moreover, when as the near borderers on this our Island were highly offended
with us as also the King of Persia being in very deed our deadly enemy though
he seemed utterly to be our friend, yet I so ordered the matter that they were
both reconciled again unto us, the one by humble submission used toward him,
the other When as one had told Agis king of Lacedemonia, that Phillip of
Macedon would stop the passage of the Lacedaemonians into Greece, it makes no
matter said Agis, for our own country is able to suffice us.
by the observing of justice and equity. And as for my own part I so far
detested and abhorred the covetous desire and thirsty greediness of other
men's possessions that I have voluntarily refused, even that which has been
offered me. And although it be the use of most men, as soon as they grow to
be of strength, and of greater power then their neighbors violently to invade
them, as also wrongfully to challenge and to take away from them all that they
can come by, Diogines coming unto the Camp of Phillip of Macedon, was taken
and brought before the King of whom the king asked whether he came as a spy I
said Diogines, I may soon spy thy folly, and vanity which voluntarily
without compulsion of any do hazard as it were at dice thy life and
kingdom, which thou already inioyest, to win that whereof thou have no
assurance.
nothing respecting whether it be right or wrong, yet had I rather to enjoy my
own rightfully and quietly be it never so little, then in such sort unjustly
to enlarge the bounds and limittes of my Country: but to what end do I use
so long a discourse as touching my self, or why do I stay in the repeating
of each thing, perticulerly, seeing I may briefly in few words comprehend
and contain as much as is to be spoken of, as concerning this matter: Is
there any one amongst you which can say that he has received any wrong at my
hands: nay, rather you may rightlyer affirm that there have been a greater
number, both of Citizens and strangers more Courteously dealt withal, and more
bountifully rewarded by me then ever they were by any of my predicessors:
neither can any one of you impute these my words as vain gloriously spoken,
for it becomes those which seek for to attain eternal praise, A Prince or
governor says Agesilaus must have with him these four properties, a valiant
and hardy courage against his enemies, a love and good will to his people,
wisdom to forecast all dangers, and reason to use time when time serves.
Alexander Seuerus kept always noted in a note book, whatsoever he had
bestowed upon any of his subjects as also who they were that had received it,
whereupon when he happened to meet with any of his Citizens or servant,
which had but little of him, or such which never had craved any thing at his
hands, he would call them to him, and ask them whether he meant to make them
indebted unto him, because they had received nothing of him.

Nerua the Emperor was so bountiful toward his people, that when as he had
bestowed all his treasure upon his subjects, he spared not to sell his own
garments, and Jewels, rather then they should lack relief, agreeing with
Agesilaus, that as it behooued Princes, to offer injury to no man, so ought
they rather to give then to take any thing from any man.


through the executing and maintaining of justice, as also by the eschewing and
avoiding of Covetousness and extortion, so to behave themselves that at all
times they may be able boldly and truly to speak thus much of their own
worthiness, having so openly manifested the same in all their doings, unto
the whole world that their deadliest enemies The alteration of the roman
government as the expelling their kings, because of the inordinate lust of
Tarquinius Superbus, toward ye good and chaste Lady Lucretia, and again in
putting down of their ten governors called Decemviri because of the fleshly
concupiscence of Appius toward the daughter of Virginius, whom her own father
slew, rather then she should be defiled.

Rodericus, king of the Goths slain, and.lxx. M. people in a battle faught
betwixt him and Iulianus the governor of the Province called Tingitana, a
part of Barbary, in that the said King had defiled the daughter of Iulianus:
with other Histories infinite, of the desolation and subuertion of sundry
monarchies, where such beastly appetites has rained. When as Araspus had
commended the bewty of Panthea the wife of Abradata before King Cirus as meet
to be a Princes mate, the kings answer was, that she was so much the more to
be refrained. The bewty of Darius daughters being highly commended unto
Alexander, as also being willed to go to see them, being then his captives, he
answered that he would not once go to them, for said he, it were shame for me
to be subject to a woman, which am now a conqueror over men.


are compelled to confess it for truth: Now also as touching the modesty and
temperancie, which has been shown by me in all my affairs and dealinges, if I
should so exactly prosecute the same, as it may seem to require it would
give me occasion to utter many things, both strange and wonderful,
especially in a man of my degree and in one of my years, for when as coming
to the years of discretion I had perfectly known, as also thoroughly considered
with my self, that al men held and esteemed as dearest unto them their wives
and children and that they are wont to be soonest incensed and moved unto ire,
if any kind of injury or villainy were used toward them and that such
wrongs offered and done in times paste, has been the occasion and original of
much mischief to the confusion and overthrow as well of kings and Princes as
of other meaner persons, I have so much detested and with such great care and
diligence, eschewed and shunned these so horrible vices that from the time I
first took in hand the government of this kingdom, I never touched or sought
to use the body of any other woman then of my own wife, although I have known
sundry and diverse persons which procuring the satisfaction of their licentious
appetites from other Countries, have nevertheless been well thought of and
highly commended of their people in that, by so doing they abstained from
offering injury unto any of their own subjects, but as I was desirous so to
frame my self that no such suspicion might arise, of any such doings of mine,
so surely I most of all coueted that I might so order my self in all my
actions that the integrity of my conversation might be a lively example to all
my Citizens to imitate and follow: for the property of the people is most
commonly so to be disposed When as Alexander coming into Illia, beholding a
woman of a most singular bewty standing before the Altar of Jupiter, did
seem unto Ephestio^ earnestly to view her, whereupon Ephestio^ taking occasion
to speak unto him, said, behold O price hear is a woman worthy to be thy
love, no not so, said the king, for it is a thing most unseeming for me to
show my self so incontinent which am wont so severely to punish and to
reprehende this vice in an other.

When as Scipio had overthrown Carthage, being then but four and twenty years
of age, at which time there was brought unto him, among other Booties, a
certain virgin of a surpassing bewtye which had remained a Captive in
Carthage before his coming, he showed himself so continent, that inquiring of
her what she was, he presently sent her home unto her Parents, giving her no
small sum toward her dowry, in that he understood her as before be
trothed to an other, whereupon being afterward asked why he did not take her,
because, said he I am an Emperor, to whom it belongs to surpass his people
in the integrity of life. Antigonus the third as soon as he had beheld a
certain Virgin in the Temple of Diana at Ephesus, and did feel himself
moved with the delight of her beauty, he presently departed the City, least he
should have bike compelled to have committed a thing so unlaw full.

A Harlot, says Diogines, is a cup of sweet wine mixed with deadlye poison,
whose taste though it be sweet, and pleasant, yet in the end, it brings
destruction.

A stranger demanded of one Gerada a man of Sparta, what punishment
adulterers had in his Country, seeing Licurgus had made no law for the same,
no said Gerada, it needed not, for there is no adulterer in Sparta, neither is
it possible that there should be any among them, that do so greatly detest
excess wealth sumptuous fare, laciuious wantonness, and fond foolish pride,
and in steed of them are content to live modestly and soberly, yielding
dutiful obedience to their Magistrates, and obeying the laws, not for fear,
but for the zeal they have to virtue herself. The counsel of Aristotle was,
that we should behold pleasure as she went away and not as she did come
toward us, for though she look upon us, with a smyling and pleasant
countenance, yet has she always hanging at her back, care, sorrow, and
lamentable repentance. Alexander did not only show himself a continent and
chaste liver, but also reproved the same very severely in others, as appeared in
the sharp rebuke he gave unto Cassander, for kissing of Pitho, being but the
Concubine of Euius. When as a young man had said unto Monedemas that he thought
it a great happiness if a man might obtain all that he desired, nay said the
Philosopher, it were more happier if we could not attain any of those things
which are dishonest and indecent to be desired or sought for.

Having spoken of the Continency which ought to be in men, I cannot let pass
those worthy dames with infinite others, whose faithfulness and integrity of
life has been most rare, or at least in these days is a thing most strange.
Zenobia Queen of Palmerie, never desired the company of her husband, but
only for procreation sake. Sophronia a Lady of Rome when as she should be
compelled to bethe Emperors Decius Concubine, killed her self with her
husbands sword, rather then so to be defiled, and to the shame of those which
being never so old having once been married are so fleshly bent that they are
never well till they be married again. The worthy Lady Rodogune, the Daughter
of King Darius shall not be omitted, who killed her Nurse because she went
about to persuade her to marry again, yea though she were young and bewtifull.
Iugurtha being the Bastard of Manastabalus killed the sons of Mitipsa his
uncle, and Atreus and Thiestes the sons of Pelops borne of Hippodamia,
murdered their brother Chrisippus borne by Danayida, because he was his
fathers darling, such is the force of Ambition, that many have neither spared
father, mother, brother nor sister, to obtain the sole principallity.


and given as they shall see their Princes to be affectioned and bent, also it
becomes kings and governors as far to excel and to surpass their
subjects in good living, as they do exceed them in honor and renown and
truly there is nothing more unseeming then to constrain others to live
soberly and honestlye and yet they themselves to have no care how fondly and
licentiously they spend their time: Moreover, I see that it is as an usual
thing unto most men to be able to bridle, and to restrain their foolish
desires and fond imaginations when soever they are moved with any perturbation
or motion of mind in any other thing, but those raging fittes and burning
flames of fleshly desire, neither the strongest nor wisest have ever been able
as yet to exstinguishe or quench if so be that they were once fastened and
kindled within them, ye though they suffered them to take never so little
hold: wherefore I desired, yea and have labored, and that with great care,
not only to excel the basest and meanest in those trifles, so easily to be
done of every one, but also to show my self a Conqueror and victorer even in
that wherein the greatest and renownedst Peers of the world have both fainted
and failed. And now to give my judgment of those men which marrying and
vowing themselves to an honest and joyful society of life at length,
forgetting all their former promises and abiding by nothing care not how or in
what sort they offend those chaste matrons, with whom they are coupled, so that
their beastly appetite may be satisfied, when as they them selves can not
abide to be contraried or displeased not in the least thing, truly I must of
necessity sharply reprove their folly as me^ most lewdly bent supposing also
those men as worthy of rebuke, which faithfully observing and fulfilling their
promises in all other couenauntes and contractes according to equity and
justice, are yet found so dissolute, as carelessely to break and violate the
vows which they have made to their wives, the which truly in my opinion ought
above all other things firmly and strictly to have been observed, in that they
are worthier and of greater importance, then all other promises are,
whatsoever they be: but if the end hereof were thoroughly considered if they
would call to mind the great and sundry discommodities which they procure to
themselves, the wonderful dissension and discord which they breed, and cause
within their own palaces, the horrible fears and continual dangers, they
wilfully bring themselves into, then would they soon be revoked and reduced
from this their error, and it is the duty of a Prince, to be a procurer of
unity and peace, not only in his towns and Cities, but also and that
especially to see love and amity fostered within his own Courts and within
the gates where he himself remains: for these are the originals and grounds
both of Temperancie and justice, which can not be maintained: where ryotous
livers and amorous wantons do inhabit, but to return to my self and to use
a few words, as touching the issue of my body as concerning my children,
which the Celestial gods have lent me, and whom I hope I shall leave behind
me, to the better preservation of your City and to the greater comfort of
you all. I let you to understand that I have not herein followed the
licentious order of other Princes whose use has been to have some by mean and
base women, others by noble and renowned Ladies, some also as bastardes, others
as true and lawfully begotten of their own bodies through which their evil
behavior, great discentions, civil broils, and bloody wars have happened
amongst their subjects after their deaths: but I have had that care herein
that my children may truly and every one of them equally, challenge and
claim a direct and perfect line of their petigrees from one father and mother,
(as amongst men) unto Euagoras my father as amongst those whom we account
the perfectes, and as it were half gods unto Aeocus that just and righteous
judge and so going forwards amongst the Gods themselves even unto the great
and mighty Jupiter, in so much that there is not no not one of mine which is
or shall be deprived of this honor duly discending unto them from so high
and renowned ancestors. And truly as their are diverse and sundry causes
whereby I might be persuaded to perseauer in this my purposed and determined
course and race of living, so surely I am as especially moved or rather
encouraged thereunto, in that I well perceive these only virtues, namely,
Justice and Temperancie to be the sole inheritance the only possessions and
the particular properties of good and godly livers. As for the valiantness of
mind, the strength of body or worldly policies or any other especial or
commendable gift of nature, we commonly see the wicked and lewd person to
enjoy as good part in them as the other, supposing therefore that man to go
about and to take upon him a thing most excellent, which painefully labors
and strives by all means possible to embrace, The only thing that is to be
counted auaueable, is Justice said Phocion, in respect of whom al other things
are triues.

Antonius Pius was wont to wish that his life might end ye day or hour wherein
he swerued from Justice, or neglected his duty.

Sigismundus the Emperor being asked whom he supposed meet to be a prince or
governor, answered, that man whom neither prosperity can make hautye,
neither adversity timorous or discomforted.

It is the part of a prince, said Agesilaus to excel his subjects and
Citizens in the integrity of life, and not in wantonness and daintiness.

Alcamenes being asked how a realm might be best preserved, answered if the
prince be not thirstye after gain. Such was the continency and te^pera^cy
which Pericles ye worthy Captain of Athens had used in all his life that he
could boldly say at his death yt he had never given occasion to any of his
Citizens to were any mourning garment. Socrates gave his scollers always this
lesson, to lodge wisdom in their hearts, shamefastnes in their countenaunces,
and silence in their tongues.

As one swallow says Socrates does not make a summer so does not one good
deed prove a man to be just and upright in his dealings.

A wise man says Anaxagoras, does not obey the laws for fear of punishment,
but for the love he bears to virtue her self. It is a hard thing said
Alphonsus King of Aragon, to be a perfect and discreet guider of an army into
the field to encounter with the enemy, but it is a thing more difficult for a
Prince to show himself unto his people, a lively example or ring leader unto
virtue.

It is not says Tully, the part of a good citizen to make any intermition of
his duty, or to use any slacknesse in executing of his office or charge.
Aristides wife would always cry unto him to remember that the public
affairs of his country were to be preferred before his own private causes.

If a man, says Socrates should come into a Theater, and calling aloude should
will all Tanuers or al Smithes to arise, you shall see only the men of those
sciences to arise, and the rest to sit still, but if he should say, let all
those that are just and wise dealers stand up, presently the whole multitude
will arise.

A certain Philosopher of Pithagoras sect, had bought a pair of shoes of a
shoemaker, not paying ready money, but a day being appointed unto the payment,
at which time the Philosopher coming according to promise and finding the
shomaker dead, not paying his money he departed joyfully home, rejoicing that
he had gained so much by the man, but being afterward greatly troubled in
conscience as one that had possessed the goods of an other, he afterward
returned to the shomakers shop and threw the money from him, saying, he is yet
living to me, that is dead unto others, so unquiet are the consciences of those
that wrgngfully posses other men's goods. Alphonsus that worthy and renowned
King of Aragon accounted Usurers and such as are greedy after other men's goods,
the rauining birds called Harpie.


and to retain in his custody these two precious pearls, being as it were
the only badges and tokens, by yt which good men are discerned and known from
others in that as is aforesaid, they are as only peculier and proper unto
them: I my self as induced by these reasons have most studiously and
carefully, above all other things applied my whole endeavor to the executing
and maintaining of justice: observing as much as might be both modesty and
Temperancie in all my dealinges taking my delights in such things only which
might make to the increase of my honor, and to your furtherance: and not in
that which being committed might both turn to my shame as also to the
corrupting of many others through my evil and lewd example. And now as these
virtues before specified are most singular, and among all others to be
accounted as the first and chiefest, so also even in their own kind one far
excels another, either in respect of the cause or time wherein they are
done, or else in respect of the person of him that is the doer thereof, so that
you are not to give judgment generally or after one sort, of all virtues no
though they be contained all under one name. The which if it be true, then
call to your remembrance the justice which I used in my greatest necessity,
the modesty of my life when I came to enjoy the chiefest authority, and the
continency which I showed even in my youthful years. These were the times
which gave unto you a perfect token and tried proof of my disposition and
nature: for though I were left very bare and poor by my father and found all
things as naked when I came to my Crown, yet ministered justice indifferently
to all men that I am sure there is not one amongst you, which can say that I
have done him one inche of wrong, as one seeking by other men's decay to inriche
my cofers or to augment my treasure, and whereas I enjoyed that power over you
that all might have been lawful whatsoever had liked me, yet did I always use
such modesty and lowliness in all my doings, that therein I have showed my
self as one equal with the meanest. And these things did I even in that age
wherein the most part of men are wont to become careless and dissolute, as
forgetting all duty, neglecting all good order, and giving themselves fondly
unto all vanities and fancies, but to have used these speeches as appertaining
to my own praise before strangers, neither durst I neither would I not, in
that they are untrue or that I do think my own doings as unworthy of this
commendation, but because I should have feared that they would not have given
credit unto my words, but as for you, you your selves are witnesses of all
that has been spoken, you your selves have seen and known to your comfortes
the truth confirmed before your eyes, now therefore as you do account those
men as a rare sort of men, and such as are worthy of great commendations and
praises, if any amongst you by the help of nature do show themselves
discrete and modest in all their doings, much more then must you of force
suppose the like of them which void of that benefit, even of their own
voluntary affection, labor to attain unto the like perfection, for it may
be that they which after this sort unadvisedly do for a time observe that
good motion of nature, leading as it were by chance, a temperate order of
living, may at length be seduced and withdrawe^ from the same, if that good
seed hap to be chooked by some stinking and noisome weed ouergrowing it.
But the other which over and beside the furtheraunce of nature, are fully
persuaded and taught, that the chiefest felicity and happiness of this life,
consists in the embrasing and following of virtue, these men no doubt will
continually unto their lives end persevere and continue in their determined
purpose. And now to come to the whole and only effect of all that which has
been spoken, know ye that the only cause why and wherefore I have made this
long discourse unto you, both as touching my self, as also of all other things
before rehearsed and specified, is that you should persuade your selves that
there is now no excuse left to be alleged, why you should not willingly and
gladly observe and obey the commandments, nay, rather the good counsel and
friendly exhortation which I shall give you, seeing I burden you with no
greater burden, nor charge you with no more then to fulfill that which I my
self both have done and willingly will do, even unto my lives end, wherefore
I require and charge you that every one of you do execute that office and
function whereunto he is called, both diligently and faithfully: for it must
needs come to pass that your dealinges must prove evil, if either of these
two points be not observed, show not your selves therefore neglectors and
contemners of my commandments, and yet not so addicting your selves as
though you should think that the weight and importance of all, should
consist in the observing and obeying of my will only, but that you would be so
careful and diligent in those things which you take in hand, as to persuade
your selves that the well doing and ordering of every particular matter, is the
only means whereby the universal estate of every Common weal does flourish
and prosper, for there must needs be a most happy Realm where every man
perticulerly has a care to perform his duty, and to amend himself in
ought that is amiss, for when we flatter our selves with our own follies and
are as it were blinded with our own vanities, we run headlong into our own
destruction: be you therefore no less careful of my affairs then of your
own, seeing the one dependes on the other, neither do ye esteem as vain the
honors which are prepared for them, which painefully and justly order It is
better said Chilon to sustain loss, then to be enriched through dishonest
means.

Bias being asked what thing that was in the life of man, which was void of
fear, answered, a clear conscience.

When as Pontius one of Cesars Centurions was taken by Scipio, Pompeyes father
in law and was promised his life, if he would forsake Caesar, disclose his
secrets, and adioin him self unto Pompey, O Scipio said he, I give you
thanks for your gentle proffer, but know ye that I way my life less then I
do my faith, and dutiful obedience toward my master, from whom though I be
abse^t, yet is he as now present with me. Anonimus being asked what was the
best means to cause men to deal justly, answered the kings eye, for said
he, the dilligent attendaunce of princes over the affairs of their countries,
shall imprint such a fear in the hearts of his subjects, that they will
always thereby think them as present, although they be absent and so be
fearful to transgress. Licurgus was wont to rejoice in that he had so lived,
that his deadliest enemies were not able to burden him that he had received
one farthing unhonestly, or committed any such folly for which they might have
cause to be sorry, or they to rejoice over him.

When as one offered Julius Drusus for five Talentes of Silver to redress the
inconueniencies of his house, in that diverse parts thereof did lie open to the
prospect of his neighbors, nay said Drusus, I will rather give thee ten
Talentes for to build my house, that not only my neighbors but the whole
City may perfectly see what is done in every part thereof, signifying that a
good man ought to do nothing whereof he should be ashamed, if it were known.
If my father, said Pericles should conspire against my country, if reason
might not diswade him from this madness, I would surely betray him. Lisander
being asked what common weal he supposed in most happy state, that country
said he, where virtue is rewarded, and vice punished.


our business committed unto them.

Refrain your hands from other men's goods, to the end that you your selves
may the safer and the quieter possess that which is your own, for it is
reason that you show your selves such manner of men toward others, as you
would wish others to be affectioned toward you.

Make no more have to get Riches then an honest report, for amongst the
Greeks, and amongst all other people be they never so barbarous, they
commonly enjoy the chiefest honors and the greatest wealth, which are found to
deserve through their virtues, the greatest commendations.

As for dishonest gain it bringes not so great store of treasure into your
Cofers, as it does danger unto your persons both in the getting and keeping:
neither would I have you to think your selves ever the richer by receiving,
or the poorer in giving, for the properties of these two are oftentimes
changed, and truly you can not do amiss herein, if ye respect either the
time or the necessity of the case, so that it be agreeable to virtue.

Go not about to hyde or to keep secret from me any one thing whatsoever it
be, that either you now are about to do as presently, or else hereafter
mind to bring to pass, no although it be that which remains as privy in
your own imaginations, being as yet only known unto your selves, for though
my body be not always in one and the same place with you, yet ought the
remembrance of me to be continually present in all your affairs and
enterprises, for this being borne in mind shall cause you as carefully and as
discretely to deal, as if I there did stand as present to behold you. Again,
as you know close and privy practices contain in them great troubles with
continual terror and fear, so order your selves therefore in that charge
which is committed unto you, that nothing may be said to have been done either
secretly or deceiptfully, but that all your doings may appear so plain and
manifest unto all the world, that your deadliest enemy though he sought it,
may not be able to find one little hole in your garment, no not one just
occasion to triumph over you, for the least act which you should commit or
do indiscreetly.

Imitate the Eagle, go get you to a sunnie bank, look upon your Talentes, if
you find them dull sharpen them again: examine your own works if they be
good go forward, as you have begun, but if they be evil amend them,
adiudging those things as unworthy and unseeming to be done, which you desire
to keep secret from me, and that only to be honest and good which I
understanding shall have just cause to commend, as also through them to conceive
the better opinion of you your selves.

Keep not the counsel of those which shall seek either to indamage my
person, or to subvert my kingdom but rebuke them and reprove them, yea though
they be your dearest friends, for no less punishment shall be given unto the
counselor then to the chiefest trespasser: neither do you judge them as
happy, which can craftily cover their wicked and naughty intentes, but rather
suppose those men as most safest which offend not at all, for as it is
requisite that the one should receive conding punishments according to the
heinousness of their offenses which in time do appear, so is it convenient
that the other should receive a meet reward for their well doings.

You shall gather together no assemblies, nor call no counsel without my
authority and consent, for as such conspiracies have been most pernicious unto
that state of Licurgus being asked why his country men did so often remove
their tents or Camps from place to place, answered that we may the easier
deceive our enemies, signifying that nothing brought sooner destruction than
often alterations and chaunges.

When as Strabard every favor with Augustus, had used words to the reproof of
the stubbornness of Cato Vticensis, in that he slew himself, rather then he
would consent to the alteration of the estate of government before used
Augustus answer was, that that man was only to be accounted a good and
honest Citizen which desires not the state of the common weal to be altetered
and changed, but holds himself content with things present. Cleon having
taken upon him the government of the common weal of Athens protested that he
would now as it were unloose the bands of all friendship, because said he
friends are oftentimes lettes unto the executing of justice. O how happy was
Scipio Africanus who conducting so great an army into Afrike, was able to say:
there is not one Souldyer in all this Camp, whom if I should command to
throw himself hedlong down this Turret, which would refuse to do it. The use
among the Romans was at their feasts and solemn meetinges to sing the acts
and doings of their auncesters in verse upon shaulmes and flutes to the end
that their youth by the heating the same, might be encouraged to immitate the
like A certain woman of the country of Ionia, a part of Greece, bragging of a
piece of curious work, which she had made, reproving the unskillfulness, or
rather idleness of a certain woman of Lacedemonia, because she could not show
the like the Lacedemonian matron for answer bringing forth her four sons
whom she had brought up in all honest and godly exercises, said unto her,
this is the work wherein a good and careful mother is to be ocupied about, to
procure unto her country honest and obedient citizens then to beautify her house
with fond bravery. To teach their youth both dutiful obedience toward their
Magestrates and elders. as also to make them the redier and skilfuller in the
understanding of their duties, the Romans had an order that their young men
should daily attend and wait on the Senators and fathers, accompanying them
unto the Senate house, and so home again, giving the like reverence both in the
streates, as also at feasts, Leontichidas being asked ^herin youth ought most
to be instructed, answered in those things which may profit them most when
they come to man's estate. When as Phocion was reproved because he would not
receive the great treasure that was sent to him from Minillus, neither yet
suffer his son to receive it, his answer was that if his son were of
honest conversation, his patrimonye left unto him would suffice him, but if he
were a riotous and wanton liver, neither that treasure, neither any other,
would be sufficient for him. When as Tissaphernes had broken promise with
Agesilaus, he sent certain Orators unto him to give him thanks in yt by
breaking his promise he had not only injured him, but also procured the
indignation of the Gods against him, in being so careless of his faith.

One going about to persuade Anazilaus to do a certain thing that was
dishonest to be done, affirming that he need not fear the doing thereof, seeing
that he could not be thought the vnhonester thereby, because he might keep it
unknown from all men, though said Anazilaus as thou say I may keep it
unknown from others, yet will it be always known to my self.

Fridericus having called al his counselors before him into his court burst
out into these speeches, would God my counselors would put of and leave behind
them in the Porters lodge at my Court gate, two things, so should I be sure to
be well counseled by them, and I my self also should easily deserve what were
best to de done for the profit of my people, at which words his counselors
amazed, because he used no more words, one of the company asked the Emperor
what were these two things, it is said he flattering and dissembling, the
murderers of truth, the vndoers of Princes, and the overthrow of every common
weal. Carneades saying was, that Princes were never perfect in any thing but
in riding, for said he, it is the use of all men that have to deal with them
to flatter and to dissemble with them but the horse not caring whom he carries
be he King or Citizen, without respect of persons, throws them of from his
back, except they be skillful in ordering and riding of him. Antigonus the King
of Macedon, being asked why he so greatly esteemed Zeno, because said he, I did
never find him to dissemble with me in any thing when as one had said unto
Theopompus, King of Lacedemonia that the people of Lacedemonia should be then
most happy, when as their Princes had learned to rule well, thou say truth
said the King, if the people have also learned in like sort to obey. If the
citizens obey their magistrates, and the Magistrates in like sort obey the
laws, that City said Solon shall prosper and continue, otherwise it is soon
overthrown.

As the stage player must not only seek to please his hearers, in showing
himself singular in playing the last act of the Commody, but also in every
scene, even from the first beginning: so must we says Socrates even from the
first entrance into this life, apply our selves unto virtue, and the
knowledge of our duties, and not defer the same from day to day, or until we
be old, the which we may rightly term the last act of this our miserable
pilgrimage. It was a common saying among the Lacedaemonians, that Fortune was to
be called upon with moving hands, signifying that if we would do our indeours
and apply our selves to a virtuous and honest life, we could not choose but
enjoy a good fortune, that is, to live happily.


government holden of many, so surely is it the dangerous thing that can
happen, unto that sole authority possessed by Princes.

Seek ye with as great care to avoid those things which may give any
suspision of evil liking as you would do, not to be thought guilty of the
offense it self.

Moreover, I would have you to account my good will and friendship so sure and
certain unto you, that I am yours to use to your profits and furtheraunces in
any honest and just case, do you therefore diligently endeavor to maintain
and uphold this my estate, and be not desirous of alterations or chaunges,
for surely by such tumultes the destruction and subuertion of your City and
Country will soon ensue.

Let mercy and severity be showen, according to the deserts and behavior of
my people, and not as wholly depending on the judgments and affections of the
Magistrates, for as they may be made favorable through the intreataunce of
friends, so also many of them are often moved and incensed, to be sometimes
too too sharp and severe through the ouerthwartnesse and frowardness of
others, do you therefore execute justice indifferently toward all men,
trusting more to your own innocence and just dealinges, then to my mercy or
favor, accounting also my saftie to be yours, and the well ordering of my
affairs to be the enriching of your own treasures.

It shall be your duties in like sort to show your duetifull obedience unto
my Crown and dignity to observe my commandments, to obey my laws and
ordinances, and to behave your selves honorable, and commendable in the
governing of my people, willing in all things to execute my will and pleasure.

Be you also the incouragers, and stirrers up of youth to the embracing of
virtue, and that not only in giving them good and grave counsel, but also in
practicing the same in your own doings, that thereby they may understand what
manner of men it behooves them to be which seek to be accounted noble and
honorable: Teach also your own children to be faithful and loyal subjects
toward their Princes, and see that they be especially trained and brought up
in the true knowledge and perfect practice of this virtue, for when they have
thoroughly learned to obey, they will rule with greater discretion those which
shall be subject unto their authority, the profit also thereof shall be their
own, for if they prove faithful and honest Citizens, they shall be pertakers
of our wealth and prosperity, but if they become riotous and dissolute livers,
then will they soon hazard even that which is their own consuming, that in a
short time yea and that with shame and infamy which you their fathers have
honorably gotten with long travel and continual pains: suppose therefore that
you then leave your children richest and in most safety when as you see them
most worthiest of my favor.

Account those men of all others as most miserable and wretched which being
careless in keeping their promises have lost their credit with those which
were wont to trust them, for without doubt such men spend the rest of their
life with an unquiet and fearful conscience, not daring to trust their
friends further then their foes, either because they suppose every man like
themselves or that the guiltiness of their own crime, breeds a distrust
within themselves. They therefore may be deemed as most happy which knowing
themselves clear from any such villainy, lead their lives in great quietness.

Let not that outward show of profit to be gotten by any dishonest means,
seem to be of more force with you then a virtuous and godly life, neither
think ye the name of a wicked liver, as only odious and that you are as
scotfree and safe, if you can by concealing and cloaking of your naughtiness
avoid or escape the report thereof, and so to be accounted as honest men,
because it is not openly known: for truly how so ever it be done either
secretly or openly, it is always one for the nature of the thing it self, and
the name given thereunto do nothing differ be it done never so closely or
privily.

Seem ye not to mislike or to envy at them, whom you shall see in chiefest
authority and favor with me, but rather contend and endeavor through your
own worthiness and virtues to become equal unto the best supposing them as
worthy to be beloved and reverenced whom you shall perceive, and know your
king to make most account of, so shall I have good cause to attribute the like
unto you your selves, when time and occasion shall so require.

Continue ye always of one mind, speaking no worse of me behind my back,
then you shall use to protest before my face, confirming your good wills
toward me in deeds, rather then in words, dealing no otherwise with other
men then you would be content to be dealte withal your selves: let your
words and deeds be agreeable, and think ye so to be used and esteemed of
me as I shall find you affectioned toward me.

Say not amongst your selves, this man or that man does well, and is worthy of
great commendations, but rather labor that other men may have cause to say the
like of you: accounting also that unto all those which willingly will show
themselves obeyers and fulfillers of my commandments shall be gaunted free
liberty, to lead their lives as shall best like themselves. And thus I mind
briefly to conclude this long and tedious discourse, which I have made as
having spoken sufficient as concerning those things which at ye first I had
purposed: having as great hope to see you as carefully and as gladly to put in
practice this which I have charged you withal, as you have seemed unto me
both joyfully and willingly to have given ear unto the same, while it has been
told you. Wherein I would have you only to bear in mind this one thing, as
the whole effect of all the rest, which is no more but that you would think it
your duty, to show your selves in such forte obedient unto me, and as
careful of my affairs as you your selves, would look to be served and
obeyed of them which are under you, and unto whom you commit the ordering and
disposing of your own business, the which thing if you do unfeignedly and
faithfully observe and keep, it were truly but lost labor for me to take
in hand at this time to discribe unto you the sundry and innumerable
commodities which will grow and arise thereby, for if I for my part do in
such sort behave my self hereafter as heretofore I have done, and you also
do your endeavors, as gladly and as willingly to show your dutiful obedience
and diligent care toward me, you soon shall see to your great joy and
comfort, your own wealth increased these my dominions enlarged, and this our
City in most happy and prosperous estate: wherefore seeing this thing is so
conducible and profitable unto you, and so worthy of your labor, it shall
behoue you to take pain herein, to be circumspect in your dealinges, to have
always a most vigilant and watchful eye to the charge committed unto you, and
for the obtaining of so great felicity, not to refuse any labor, but with
gladsome hearts joyfully to undertake the greatest perils, persuading your
selves that even presently this combat is to be attempted, for even now it
consists in your own powers, and as it were in your own hands to be
victorours without all labor to accomplish your hearts desire, and to win
that wished forte, if you would do no more but show your selves true and
faithful subjects, cheerfully accompanying him in all godly exercises which
wills you to do no more then he himself will do. ()

FINIS.
Jmprinted at London by Thomas Purfoote, dwelling in Newgate Marget, within the
new Rentes, at the sign of the Lucrece.


