ANNO DOMINI. 1629.
Articles to be inquired of by the Churchwardens and Inquisitors of every
Parish in the Lord Primates Visitation Metropoliticall.
1 INprimis, whether is your Parson, Vicar or Curate resident continually, in,
at, and upon his Benefice, doing his duty in reading distinctly the Divine
Service, Preaching the Word, and duly administering the holy Sacraments,
according to the Book of Common prayer? 2 Item, whether does your Parson or
Vicar (being lawfully absent from his Cure at any time) leave in his place a
sufficient and conformable Curate, to celebrate Divine Service, administer the
Sacraments, and teach and preach the Scriptures? 3 Item, whether is your
Parson, Vicar, or Curate a common resorter to Tauernes or Alehouses, giving
himself to drinking, ryoting, and playing at Cards, Dice, or other unlawful
games: or is he a striker, dueller, dancer, or hunter; or so reported? 4 Item,
whether is your Parson or Vicar, or any other of or in your Parish, an Usurer,
or lender of his Money for unlawful gain, or whether is he, or they taken or
reputed so to be? 5 Item, whether do the Proprietaries, Parsons, Vicars, and
other possessors of the Churches, Chapels and their mansions within your
Parish, keep the Chancels of their Rectories and Vicarages, and other their
houses and buildings belonging to the same in due reparations? 6 Item, whether
has your Parson, Vicar or Curate received any persons to the holy Communion,
being openly known to be at debate and out of charity with their neighbors,
or defamed with any notorious crime, and not reformed? 7 Item, whether has
your Parson, Vicar or Curate denied or neglected to visit the sick, or bury
the dead, being brought to the Church, and having thereof notice? 8 Item, how
many Benefices or Ecclesiastical promotions has your Parson or Vicar, and how
far distant are they the one from the other? what Chapels has he to his
Cures belonging? by what names are they called, and how and by whom are they
served? 9 Item, whether does your Parson, Vicar or Curate minister the holy
Communion any otherwise then only after such form and manner as is set forth
in the Book of Common prayer? 10 Item, whether does your Parson, Vicar or
Curate (being no Preacher allowed) presume to expound the Scriptures, in his
own Cure, or elsewhere? or does he procure (once in a Month at the least) a
Sermon to be preached in his Cure, by Preachers lawfully licensed? And upon
every Sunday, when there is no Sermon, does he or his Cure read some one of
the Homilies prescribed? 11 Item, whether does your Minister every Sunday and
Holy day, half an hour at least, before Evening prayer, examine and instruct
the youth of your Parish in the Catechism, set forth by Authority in the
Book of Common prayer; and whether does he call them thereunto in course, and
whether do the Churchwardens of the Parish assist him therein? 12 Item, what
Schoolemasters have you in your Parish, that either teach privately or
publicly, and not licensed thereunto, and by whom be they harbored? 13 Item,
whether be there in your Parish any persons that contemn or abuse, by word or
dee^e, the Ministers of the Church? 14 Item, whether the Service of your Church
be begun and ended at due and convenient hours, and whether the same be
celebrated by your Parson, Vicar or Curate according to the Book of Common
prayer? 15 Item, whether any person within your Parish do wilfully maintain
and defend any Herefie, error, or opi^ion contrary or repugnant to the
Script^res doctrine of the Church? 16 Item, whether there be any in your Parish
that be common Drunkards, swearers, or blasphemers of the name of God? 17 Item,
whether there be any in your Parish who have committed Adultery, Fornication
or Incest, or be common Bauds or receivers of such lewd and evil persons, or
that be vehemently suspected the^eof, or of any the like crimes? 18 Item, who
they be (if any such there be in your Parish) that be Brawlers, slanderers,
chiders, scolders, make-bates, and sowers of discords between one person and
another, and especially between Man and Wife, Parents and their Children,
Masters and their Servants? 19 Item, whether be there in your Parish that do
use and exercise Charms, Sorceries, Enchantments, Inuocations, Circles,
Witchcrafts, sooth-sayings, or any like Arts invented by the Devil, and
especially in or at the time of Women's travail? 20 Item, whether is your
Church sufficiently repaired, and therein your Pulpit and Communion Table
decently furnished and appointed; if not, whose default the same is? 21 Item,
whether there be in your Parish any that (in contempt of their own Parish
Church) do resort to any other Church or Chapel? 22 Item, whether any
Inne-holders or Alehouse-keepers within your Parish do commonly use to sell
meat and drink within the time of Common prayer, Preaching or reading of the
Homilies aforesaid? 23 Item, whether any in your Parish under government of
their Parents or others, have made privy contracts of Matrimony, not calling
thereunto two or more witnesses, nor having the consent of their Parents, or
such others under whose government they are? 24 Item, whether such Persons, or
other in your Parish, have married the Banes not first solemnly asked, or at
unseasonable hours? 25 Item, whether you know in your Parish any Executors of
Dead men's goods, which do not bestow or have not bestowed the same, especially
such of the said goods as were bequeathed or appointed to be distributed among
the poor, repayring of Highways, finding of poor Scholars, or marrying of
poor Maidens, or such other charitable deeds accordingly? 26 Item, whether
any in your Parish do use to keep any other holy days then by order of the
Churches of England and Ireland are appointed for holy days by the Book of
Common prayer?
CHANCELLORS.
27 Item, whether is your Chancellor, Commissarie or Official learned in the
Ecclesiastical and Civil Laws, and such an one as is twenty six years
old at the least, and is reasonably well practiced in the course of these
Laws, and touching whose life and conversation, no evil report has gone? 28
Item, whether your Chancellor, Commissarie, or any other exercising
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in this Diocese, their Registers, Actuaries,
Apparitors, or Sumners have at any time wincked at, and suffered Adulteries,
Fornications Incests, or other like offenses to pass and remain unpunished:
or have commuted any penance without special license of the Lord Bishop of the
Diocesle? 29 Item, what persons are there in your Parish that have been
married, that have been divorced, and have married with others, for these
three years last past? By whose sentence were they divorced, and by whose
license, and by whom were they so married? Declare your knowledge in the
premises, and what you have credibly heard? 30 Item, whether does your
Chancellor, Commissarie or Official for his exercising the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction of the Diocese, give any yearly Rent, sum or sums of Money,
or other consideration for the same, to any person or persons whatsoever? 31
Item, Is there in your Parish any other matter or cause of the Cognizance of
the Church above not expressed, worthy presentment in your judgment? If any
such matter or cause there be, you are charged likewise to present the same, as
you are the rest by virtue of the same Oath.
FINIS.
Imprinted at DVBLIN by the Company of Stationers, Anno 1629.


