GODS CALL, FOR Man's Heart: Jn 1 Knowledge, 2 Love, 3 Fear, 4 Confidence, 5
Singing of Psalms, 6 Prayer, 7 Hearing the Word. 8 Receiving the Sacraments.


Delivered in a SERMON, by ABRAHAM IACKSON, Master of Arts, and Preacher of
Gods word at Chelsey, near London.

MATH. 22.21. Give unto God those things which are Gods.

LONDON: Printed by T. S. for Roger Iackson, and are to be sold at his shop
near Fleet-streete Conduit, 1618.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Edward Lord Russell, Earl of Bedford, and the Lady
LVCIE Countess of Bedford; such felicity in this life, as may end with the
beginning of those joys that shall never end.
Most noble and truly religious Lord and Lady:
AS your undeserved favor to me wards, challenges my service as a debt: so
tho vnmerited mercies of God to us all, requires our hearts as a due. The
meditation of the latter moved me to pen this Treatise: and the consideration
of the former, animated me to Dedicate it to your Honors; not that there is
any thing in it which you knew not before, as having long since learned how to
consecrate your hearts unto the Lord: but to put you in mind of your
knowledge, that you do not forget to practice it. All that the Lord requires
of you, for whatsoever he has bestowed on you, is in effect but this, that
you study to know him, to love him, to fear him, to trust in him; that you
sing unto him, pray unto him, hear his Word, and receive his Sacraments with
your hearts and souls, as you shall find briefly proved in this Treatise:
which if you do (as all that observe your religious lives and conuersations)
are persuaded you do,) you may rest secure of Gods love and favor toward you
in Jesus Christ, even to the full assurance of that inheritance, which he has
prepared for those that give him their hearts in his service. And so craving
pardon for my boldness, if in this Dedication I be delinquent, I rest:

Your Honors, ready in all humility to do you service, ABRAHAM IACKSON.

GODS CALL FOR MAN'S HEART.
PROVE. 23.26. My Son, give me thy Heart.


LEast in this time of giving and receiving of gifts amongst friends, and
acquaintances, you should be unmindful of your best friend, even your God;
from whom whatsoever good and perfect gift we have is derived. James 1.17. I
have made choice of this Scripture for the subject of my speech, the better to
stir you up to present unto God (by way of grateful acknowledgement of his
love and favor) the best Jewel, or (to use David's words) the best member that
you have, even your hearts; and the rather because he requests them at your
hands, in the words of my Text; My son, give me thy heart.

If a Son would gratify his Father, or a friend his friend, that loves him
dearly, and out of his love has done much for him, he will consider with
himself what his father or his friend best likes, and accordingly endeavor to
the uttermost of his power to prepare it for him. Beloved, our gracious God and
merciful redeemer, has so dearly loved us, and done so much for us, as that
between his love and created affections, there holds no proportion. For,
suppose some great Prince should set his affection upon some poor man, so
far as to disrobe himself of his royal apparel, cast off his Crown, and
cease to be a King, only to enjoy more freely this poor man's company and
familiarity; certainly it would be a great argument of love. Nay, suppose
this Prince should yet go further in the manifestation of his love, by
offering himself willingly to die for this his poor friend; if his death
might be any way available unto him, as Damon, it may be, would have done for
Pythias, or Pylades for Orestes; a greater testification of love there cannot
be; and that by the testimony of our Savior, Ioh. 15.13. Where he says, That
greater love then this has no man, when any man bestows his life for his
friends. Yet notwithstanding, all this love comes far short of Christ's love
toward us: for he being the Prince of peace from all eternity, clad with the
royal robes of glory, attended on with myriads of blessed Angels, swaying the
scepter of the whole world, sitting on the right hand of his fathers majesty
on high, measuring the waters in his fist, and counting heaven with a spanne,
and comprehending the dust of the earth in a measure, and weighing the
mountains in a weight, and the hills in a balance, Es. 40.12. This great
Prince I say (notwithstanding all these prerogatives) was so inflamed with the
love of us poor creatures, the wretched brood of sinful Adam, lumpes of
vanity, masses of misery, banquerupts in respect of grace, and captives to
sin and Satan; that he left the brightness of his fathers glory, and took
upon him the vileness of our nature; he forbear thundering in the clouds, to
cry in the cradle; he left the spacious and starre-beautified chamber of
heaven, to be lodged in a stable, crowded in a cratch, and swadled in a few
proore cloutes here on earth: in a word, The Word was made flesh and dwelt
amongst us; and yet this is not all: he did not only take upon him our flesh,
and our nature, but our nakedness, our misery, our poverty, our shame; nay,
(that which is yet beyond the conceit and apprehension of men and Angels) he
took upon him our mortality; he made himself subject unto death for us, even
to that shameful, painful, racking, tormenting, lingering death of the
cross; he was crucified for us, he had his hands and his feet peirced and
torn with nails for us, his head was crowned with thorns for us, his side and
heart was wounded with a spear for us, his hands, his feet, his head, his
side, his heart gusht out with streams of blood for us, and that, cum adhuc
inimici essemus, when as yet we were his enemies. Romans 5.7.8. Cum non solum non
existentes, sed etiam resistentes, when we were not only not existent, but
resistent; even his professed foes, and mortal enemies: When our hearts were
as yet captives to sin and Satan, fighting under their banners against him;
he spent the precious blood of his heart to redeem us. Oh the exceeding love
of a gracious God, to an ungracious people! infinite degrees beyond the
affection of the dearest friend to his friend. Well then what remains to be
done on our part, but that (by way of grateful acknowledgement of this his
unproportionable favor) we present unto him this day for a new-yeares gift,
the best member that we have, even our hearts; and the rather, because he asks
them at our hands, as you may see in the words of my Text, My Son, give me
thy heart. It may be called, Gods, demand of his tribute due unto him, from his
children; or in fewer word, Gods call, for Man's heart. In the which (for my
better proceeding, and your better perceiving) I have thought good to observe
these four circumstances.

I. What it is that God would have, when he calls for our Hearts. II. The
Persons, whose hearts God calls for, in these words [My Son.] III. The manner
how he would have these persons Hearts, in this word [Giue,] he would have them
by gift. IIII. The Person to whom he would have them given, in this word
[Mee,] he would have them given to himself: My Son, give me thy heart.
1. That which God calls for, to be given unto him, it is our Hearts, My Son,
give me thy Heart. That you may the better understand what he means when he
calls for our hearts, consider I pray you the several acceptations of this word
Heart. This word Heart, it is taken either properly, or improperly. First,
properly, so it signifies that dissimilar part, that internal pyramidall, or
triangular fleshly substance within the body of man, which the Philosophers
call the chair of state, or throne of the soul, the seat of the affections,
the consistory of man's thoughts and meditations, conceits and imaginations,
the fountain of the vital spirits, the first member of man that lives, and
the last that dies. Secondly, improperly, and so it is taken either
Synecdochically, or Metaphorically, or Metonimically. First, in a
Synecdochicall acceptance, it signifies the whole man, as well his body as his
soul; and in this sense our Savior understood it, when in Luke 21.34. he bids
us, Take heed lest at any time our hearts be overcome with surfeiting and
drunkenness: Here the heart which is but a part of man, is by a Synecdoche taken
for the whole man, for drunkenness is hurtful both to body and soul.
Secondly, Metaphorically, so it signifies either the pith of a plant or tree,
by which vegetative life and motion is conveyed from the root to the branches,
or else the courage and valor of a man, so that a stout and valiant man is
oftentimes called a Heart. Thirdly, Metonymically, and so (if you take the
subject for the accidents) it signifies the understanding and the sincerity of
the affections of the heart. Now when the Lord calls for our hearts, he calls not
for them in a proper acceptance, nor in an improper Synecdochycall or
Metaphorical sense; but (as I conceive) chiefly, and principally, in a
Metonymicall meaning: so that when the Lord calls for our hearts, he calls for
our understanding, for our love, for our fear, for our confidence: he calls
for the sincerity of our hearts in singing of Psalms, in Prayer, in hearing
the Word, in receiving the Sacraments: My Son, give me thy heart; that is,
know me with thy heart, love me with thy heart, fear me with thy heart, trust
in me with thy heart, sing unto me with thy heart, pray unto me with thy heart,
hear my word with thy heart, receive the Sacraments with thy heart: whatsoever
thou do in my service, do it with thy heart, and it shall be acceptable
unto me. So that when the Lord requires our hearts, he requires the sincerity
of them in the performance of these eight duties, as I shall endeavor to prove
by several places of Scripture.

1. First we must study to know and understand what God is, we must set the
meditations of our hearts aworke about it. 1 Knowledge.
Hence is it that the Lord promises to give his people A heart to know him to
be the Lord. Ier. 24.7. Whence I observe, that unless our hearts be inflamed
with a special touch of grace to meditate upon God, and to study to know him,
so far forth as he is pleased to make himself known in his word, we can
never give him our hearts, as he requires. Let us then bend our hearts to that
end, for which he gave them unto us. He gave us our hearts to study to know
him: Oh let us render to him our hearts again, by employing our best endeavors
in this business. Which we shall do, if we be diligent readers, hearers, and
meditatours of his word, especially that part of his word, by which he is
pleased to make himself known unto us in his Essence, Attributes, Names and
Actions. If you meditate on these places of Scripture, you shall be well
furthered in the true knowledge of God.
When we meet then with any Scripture that describes him either in the Deuteronomy.
4.35. Deuteronomy. 6.4. Esaias 43.10. and 44.6. and 45.5. 1 Cor. 8.4. Gal. 3 20. Ephesians.
4.6. 1 Timothy 2.5. Iam. 2.19.
Unity for his Essence, or in the Esaias 6.3. Mat. 13.16.17. and 28.9. Ioh.
14.16.17 1 Job. 5.7.
Trinity for the manner of his existence; or in his Attributes, either
incommunicable, such as are Ioh 4.24. Heb. 12.9. 2 Cor. 3.17. Es. 31 3.
simpleness without mixture, Ps. 90.2. and 92.8.9. and 102.27.28.
eternity without beginning, 1 King. 8.27. Ioh. 11.8. Ps. 139.7.8. Ier. 23.24.
immensitie without limitation, Ps. 102.13.27. Mal. 3.6. Heb. 1.11.12. Iam.
1.17. Exodus 3.14.
immutabilitie without change; or communicable, such as are Ioh 1.4. Deuteronomy.
32.40. Dan 4.34.
life, 1 Timothy 6.16.
immortality, Job 12.13. Dan. 2.20. Romans 11.33. 1 Timothy 1.17.
wisdom, Romans 9.18.19.
will, Genesis 17.1. Psalm. 62.12. Ier. 33.17.19. Luke 1.37.49. Romans 4.17.
power, Psalm. 115.3.
liberty, Mar. 9.18. Psalm. 118.1.2.3.4. Psa. 108.5. and 31.20. Tit. 3.4.
goodness, Exodus 33.3.
grace, 1 Ioh. 4.8.
love, Dan. 9 9.18 Exodus 34 6. Psalm. 116.5. and 10^.8.13. and 146.8.9.
mercy, Romans 2.4. and 3.26. and 9.22. 1 Pet. 3.20. 2 Pet. 3.15.
patience, Ezekiel. 18.23. and 33.11.
clemency, Deuteronomy. 32.4. Psalm. 11.7. and 145.7 Apoc. 16.5.
justice, 1 Samuel 2.2. Es. 6.3. Hab. 1.12.13.1 Ioh. 1.5. Apoc. 4.8.
holiness, and Deuteronomy. 10.17.1 Cron. 29.11.12. Psalm. 83.19.1 Tim. 6.15. You may
see a plain description of Gods Essence, and Attributes in The Practi^e of
Piety, set forth by Docter Bailey, now Bishop of Bangor, from the 4. page, of
the eight Edition, to the 59.


glory: or in any of his Names, Titles or actions; we should meditate on it,
and consider it deeply in our hearts, we should treasure it up in our memory,
and walk as in the sight of his so awful and diume Majesty. If thus we
endeavor to know him, we give him one chief thing which he requires, when he
requires our hearts.

2. Love.
When the Lord calls for our hearts, he calls for the love of our hearts. Deuteronomy.
6.5. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul,
and with all thy might. Now he that loves God with his heart and soul, will
delight to be in his house sometimes, lauding and magnifying his name with the
congregation of his Saints, sometimes talking with him by meditation and
prayer; he will esteem Gods love and favor dearer then his life. Psa. 63.2.
He will bewail his absence in disfavor as a bitter cross. Can. 3.1. He will
hate those that hate God, and love those that love God; he will hate
wickedness, because God hates it, and hate wicked men, because they hate God:
he will love righteousness, because God loves it, and he will love righteous
men, because they love God: he will be more sensible of Gods dishonor, then
of his own disgrace: he will love the image of God in wisdom, in knowledge,
in uprightness of life, (though he find it in a poor and dejected man, in
respect of this world) more dear then any friend can love the picture of his
friend: These, and the like are the properties of that man that loves God with
all his heart, and with all his soul. But if we take no delight to be in the
house of God, if it be tedious unto us to discourse with him by Prayer, and
Meditation; if we prefer either our ease, or our profit, or our pleasure, or
our lives before his fauvour; if we can think our selves happy to be out of
his sight, if we can find a delightful recreation in the mad meriments of
wicked men, if we can hate that which he loves, and love that which he hates;
if we can be more careful to preserve our own credits, then Gods honor; nay,
if we can love the image of the devil in men, drawn to the life with the
pensill of iniquity, then are not we the men that love the Lord; we may
profess with our tongues that we love him, but our hearts will give our
tongues the lie, because we love him not with our hearts.

3. Fear.
When God would have our hearts, he would have our fear; My Son, give me thy
heart; that is, give me the fear of thy heart, or fear me with thy heart.
Hence is that Samuel exhorts the people to offer up unto God the fear of their
hearts, 1 Samuel 12.24. Fear you the Lord, and serve him in the truth, with all
your hearts, etc. And in Deuteronomy. 10.12. Moses tells the Israelites, that the Lord
requires nothing else at their hands; but to fear him, and walk in his
ways, to love him, and serve him with all their hearts, and with all their
souls. Questionless there is none of you that hear me this day, but will say
he fears God with all his heart; but it is not enough to say so, unless it
appear so by trial. Well then, if thou fear the Lord with thy heart,
certainly thy fear will be filial, it will be such as the fear of a son
in respect of his father; thou will be more fearful to offend him, then to
bear the punishment of offense: thou will be fearful to commit any sin in
private, or in the dark, because thou art certain the eye of God is upon
thee: thou will be more troubled at the threats of Gods Word, then at the
checks of a mortal Man, though he be thy Prince. Ps. 119.161. Thou will with
the Midwiues, Exodus 1.17. with the three Children, Dan. 3.16. with holy Daniel,
Dan. 6.10. with the zealous Apostles, Act. 4.19. and 5.29 and with faithful
Abraham, Genesis 22.12. fear, and worship, and obey God, though it be
prejudicial to thy ease, to thy profit, to thy preferment, to thy liberty, to
thy life, though it cross thy reason, thy affection, thy hope, thy
expectation, in future times. But if thy fear be slavish; if thou fear more
the punishment, then the offense; if thou care not what wickedness thou
commit, so that the eye of man be not upon thee; if thou be ready to do that
which a wicked Jeroboam shall command thee, though it be never so contrary to
the word of God, fearing a temporal punishment more then an eternal
condemnation: if thou refuse to obey such of Gods commandments as do any way
cross thy ease, thy profit, thy pleasure, thy reason, thy estimation with men,
or the like; certainly, thou do not as yet fear God with thy heart, and
therefore thou have not as yet any heart for God.

4. Confidence.
When God calls for our hearts, he calls for our trust and confidence: My Son,
give me thy heart, that is, rely upon me with thy heart, lay thy trust and
confidence on me with thy heart: Thus did David give God his heart, Ps. 130.5.
I have waited on the Lord (says he) My soul has waited, and I have trusted
in his word. And again, in Ps. 28.7 he says thus, The Lord is my strength and
my shield, mine heart trusted in him, and I was helped; therefore mine heart
shall rejoice, and with my song will I praise him. And as David trusted in the
Lord, so must we: We must trust in the Lord with all our hearts, and not lean
unto our own wisdom, Pro. 3.5. We must have recourse unto him, as to our
only shield and buckler to defend us against the oppositions of our spiritual
and temporal adversaries, as to our only help to save and deliver us in all
our distresses, and as to our only preserver, to give us all good and
necessary blessings, both for body and soul: We must rely upon him, wait
upon him, and repose our trust in him without respect either to reason, to
means, or likelyhoods. This if we do, we trust in the Lord with our hearts:
But if when we see no outward means of help, we fail in our hopes, as the
Israelites did, Ps. 78.20. If when we are sick, we send for the Physician
before we seek to God, as Asa did, 2 Cro. 16.12. If when some bone of sins
body does as it were stick in the throat of our guilty consciences, we hope
to wash it down with a cup of Sack, as many lewd surfetters on pleasure
do. If when we be in any strait, we make flesh our arm, Ier. 17.5. If we
repose our trust in our own or others with and policy, in our own or others
strength. If we say to the wedge of gold, thou art my confidence, Job 31.24. or
to the sword thou art my safeguard, or to Physic, thou art my health, or
Flectere sinequeo superos Acheronta mouebo. if God forsake me, if nature
forsake me, i will go to Egypt for help, Is. 31.1. nay to hell for help: i will
see what Crossing can do, what Holy water can do, what Popes pardons can do:
and if all this will not do, i will have recourse to Charms and Exorcismes, to
Spells and Incantations, etc. If with the Prince of Israel we will not believe
Elisha, I mean Gods Ministers, when out of the word they promise us
preservation and support, against the miseries and crosses of this world,
against famine and want, and say as he did, 2 Ki. 7.2. Though the Lord would
make windows in heaven, can this thing come to pass? If we will trust God no
further then we see him, either actually reaching unto us his benefits, or
laying before us the means probable in our conceit to attain them, then do
we not trust in him with our hearts, because we rely not on him without
respect to reason, means, or likelyhoods.

5. Singing of Psalms
When the Lord calls for our Hearts, he calls for our hearts in singing: when
we sing Psalms, we must sing with our hearts. To this the holy Ghost exhorts
us by the pen of the Apostle, Col. 3.16. when he bids us Sing to the Lord with
a grace in our hearts, M. Byfield super locum
that is (as a learned and judicious Divine expounds it) We must exercise the
graces of our hearts in singing; We must sing to the Lord, that is, with an
eye to his glory, with sense of his presence, with commemoration of his
blessings; and we must sing with our hearts, not with our tongues only,
outwardly for ostentation, but with understanding, Psa. 47.7 with sense and
feeling: Hence is it that our hearts are to be prepared before we sing, Psalm.
57.7. and hence is it that David bids his tongue awake, Psalm. 57.8. noting that
he observed in men a lethargy; not a hoarsenesse in voice, but a slumber in
heart, when they used the voice. We must therefore sing to the Lord with our
hearts, yea with the graces of our hearts, that is, with a holy joy, Psalm. 9.2.
with trust in Gods mercyes, Psalm. 13.5. with a holy commemoration of his
benefits, Ps. 47.6. yea, with the prayer and desires of our hearts, that our
words in singing may be acceptable, Psalm. 104.33.34. Persuading our selves that
it is not the sweet voice, but the zealous vow, not the harmonious sound, but
the hearts soundness that makes melody in the ears of God; expressed by the
Poet thus: Non vox sed votum, non musica chordula sed cor,
Non clamans sed amans clangit in aure Dei.


But if we sing Psalms as we do common Songs and Ballads, more to delight our
own and others ears, then to testify our grateful acknowledgement of Gods
mercyes: If we sing more for ordinary recreation, then for zealous devotion: If
we respect more the music then the matter: If we care not how harsh the
intention of our hearts be, so our voices be tunable; we sing not to the Lord
with such a grace in our hearts as he requires, we give him not our hearts in
singing of Psalms.

6. Prayer.
The Lord calls for our hearts in Prayer. When we pray we must pray with our
hearts. This David knew well, when in Psalm. 51.17. he says, that God will not
despise a broken and contrite heart.

Whence I observe, that (because the prayers which proceed from a broken and
contrite heart are never slighted by the Lord) when we pray, if we hope to
speed, we must pray with a broken heart, with a wounded spirit: When we offer
up any petition to the Lord (if we expect an answer) we must offer up our
hearts: For if we offer our lips insteade of our hearts, it is no marvel if
God give us stones instead of bread, that is, a shadow of comfort, instead of
real comfort. Non labia vitulorum, sed vituli labiorum: It is not the calves
lips, but the calves of our lips, Ose. 14.3. that are acceptable to God.

Ille magis gratae laetatur mentis odore,
Quam consecrato sanguine mill boum:
He is more delighted with the sweet odor of a grateful breast, then with the
sacrificed blood of a thousand Oxen. God is not like a child to be won with
fair words; nor like the people of Tyrus and Sydon, Act. 12.21.22. that were
ravished with Herod's eloquent Oration: for he esteems no more of the
quaintest oratorie, if it come not from the heart, then of the lowing of an
ox, or the houling of a dog. It is not the length, or well-coucht phrases in a
prayer, but the zealous heart of him that prays, which God regards: for he
esteemed more of the Publicanes four words, (...), O. God be merciful to me a
sinner, Luke 18.13. and of David's three sillables, Peccaui, I have sinned; nay,
of the Haimorisses touch, though without words or sillables, because they
proceeded from a broken and wounded spirit, then of the Pharisees long and
tedious gratulation, Lu. 18.9. etc. If then (when thou feel within thee a
trouble of conscience) thou go to God in private, and with Hanna, pourest
out thy soul before him, 1 Samuel 1.19. If with David thou supplicate and cry
unto him with thy whole heart, Ps. 119.58.145. If with Jeremy, thou lift up
thy heart with thy hands, and pour it out like water before his face, Lam.
2.19. and 3.41. doubt not but he will accept thy sacrifice, yea, though thou
want words to express thy suite: if thou can sobbe, and sigh (though thou be
not able to utter thy mind) thou may be persuaded that the Spirit
understands thy meaning, and that those bitter sighs and sobbes coming from
the Spirit, will prevail with God for the obtaining of thy petition; for why,
a broken and contrite heart, the Lord will not despise: when thou praiest,
therefore pray with thy heart.

7. Hearing of the Word.
The Lord requires our hearts in the hearing of his Word, and therefore in Luke
8.15. he makes the hearing of the Word with a good heart, a note of the best
hearers, comparing them to the best ground that brings forth the best fruit.
Hence it is also that David inclined his heart unto Gods Testimonies, Ps.
119.36. and hid his word in his heart, that he might not sin. Ps. 119.11.
When then we come to Church, we should settle our hearts; that is, our
^ffections, our zeales, our attentions, to hear the Word either read or
preached. When Christ puts his hand to the hole of the door, our hearts should
(with the spouse in the Canticles) be affectioned toward him. When he talks
with us by the way of this our pilgrimage, our hearts, with the two Disciples
that went to Emaus, should burn within us. When the Minister of Gods word is
delivering his message, which the Lord has put into his mouth, we should with
the noble Emperor Constantine, Eusebius. de vita Constant. lib. 3. cap. 17. and
cap. 33.
be so ravished with those things which we hear, as that we attend to nothing
else: Our thoughts should not be distracted with variety of worldly businesses:
our eyes should not be possessed with slumber; our taste (in respect of the Word)
should not be like old Barzillais, without relish; we must not think of
Sermons, as Naaman did of Jordan, 2 King. 5.11. but we must have them in a
reverend regard; we must settle our selves to hear, and hear to understand,
and understand to practice, and practice to attain an habitual obedience to
the precepts of holy life.

8. Receiving the Sacraments.
Lastly, the Lord would have us offer up our hearts unto him, when we receive
the Sacrament. It is not then but upon good ground, that the Minister (before
the administration of the Lords Supper) exhorts the people to lift up their
hearts, Ministers exhortation before the Communion.
and the people answer, we lift them up unto the Lord: or to use the words of
the Prophet, Ps. 25.1. Unto thee O Lord, lift we up our souls. Well is it then
which the Church of Scotland says, that the only way to receive the Lords
Supper worthily, is to lift up our minds by faith above all things worldly and
sensible, and thereby to enter into heaven, that we may find and receive
Christ where he dwells. We must not think (as the Papists vainly imagine)
that we hold Christ bodily in our hands, and masticate him in our mouths, when
we receive and eat the Bread; but receiving the Bread and Wine, as the symboles
of his body and blood, we should lift up our hearts to heaven, where he sits
at the right hand of his father, and where he must continue till the time that
all things are restored, Act. 3.21. And thus much be spoken of the matter of
Gods demand; namely, of that which he requires at our hands, when he calls for
our hearts, My Son, give me thy heart; that is, apply thy heart unto me in
receiving the Sacraments, in hearing the Word, in Prayer, in singing of
Psalms, settle thy heart to depend on me, to fear me, to love me, to know me:
Me I say, that have done for thee then any created understanding can conceive.

II. And so I pass from the matter what must be given, to the person that must
give, expressed in these words [My Son.] The Lord calls for the hearts of his
children: My Son, give me thy heart. Whence I observe, that a child of God
owes no less to his heavenly father, then his heart. For if a servant owe his
industry to his master, that paies him his hire; if a Son owe his obedience
to his Parents that prouides him maintenance: if a subject own his allegiance
to his Prince, that defends him from thieves, in respect of his goods, and from
murderers, in respect of his life; I see no reason, why we that stand in the
relation of Servants, of Sons, of Subjects, of things of nothing, of things
worse then nothing unto God, as our Creator, our Redeemer or Master, our
Father, our King, our Protector or defender: should not be so much indebted
unto him as our hearts comes too, as our souls comes too, as all that is
within us comes too. We owe then to God, no less then our hearts; if they were
not his due, he would never demand them.

Use, for examination.
By this Doctrine we may examine our selves whether we be the children of God or
no: for if we can be persuaded in conscience, that we owe our hearts to God,
and accordingly endeavor to pay them, we may be certain, that we stand in the
relation of sons unto God: but if we cannot find in our hearts to bestow our
hearts on God: if there be an indisposition in us to know him, to love him, to
fear him, to trust in him, with all our hearts, and with all our souls: if we
can sing with our voice pray with our lips, hear with our ears, receive the
Sacrament with our mouths, and not sing, pray, hear, and receive the blessed
Sacrament with our hearts; certainly, we cannot as yet take any comfort in
Gods election, because we cannot certainly be persuaded that we are his
sons, in that we are not willing to pay unto him that tribute which his
sons owe unto him, we present not our hearts unto him by way of gift, which
is the third circumstance of my Text; namely, the manner how we are to bestow
our hearts on God, expressed in this word [Giue.]

III. My Son, give me thy heart; that is, give it me. 1. Instantly, without
delay. 2. Wholly, with out reservation. 3. And freely, without repining.


1. First, we must give our hearts unto God instantly, without delay: for so
much the words Cedo, or Prebe import: give me thy heart presently, or out of
hand, even before thou go out of the Church. The Lord is impatient of delays,
we must therefore be as quick in answering his call, as an Echo in redoubling
our voice. This quickness was in David, when the Lord bad him seek his face,
he answers like an echo, Thy face Lord will I seek, Psalm. 27.9. Even so
beloved, now that the Lord bids us give unto him our hearts, let us instantly
answer him, O Lord we give thee our hearts. Many would take a day with the Lord
for giving up their hearts; they are loath to part with them upon the sudden.
The poor man would be borne withal till he be rich; the rich man, till he be
sick; the sick man, till he have recovered his health; the healthy and strong
man, till he be weak; the weak and feeble man, till he be strong again; the
young man, till he be old; the old man, till he feel the signs of death; the
lascivious man, till his lust be satisfied; the envious man, till he be
revenged on his enemy; the Merchant, till his trade be good; the Parent, till
his children be provided for; the child, till he have his patrimony in his
own dispose; the servant, till he be a master; and the master, till he have
servants to his own likeing, and then certainly God shall have their hearts:
But, Qui non est hodie, cras minus aptus erit. He that is not willing to part
with his heart to day, will be less willing to morrow: For the longer he
suffers his heart to be in the possession of his ease, or his profit, or his
pleasure; he shall with the more difficulty get it out of their fingers, to
bestow it on God. Indeed if it were in our own powers to take our hearts from
pleasure and vanity, and give them to God at our list, there might be some
colorable reason for delay; or if we had each of us two hearts, we might
adventure one, to see what would come of it: But seeing God has given to each
of us one only heart, and that heart not in our own power neither to be stow
on God when we will; we should be afraid to keepeit from him when he calls for
it. Oh then my dear christian Brethren, let us for ever take heed, lest if
with Argus, we listen too long to the Mercury pipe of Gods long-suffering, we
be cast into a dead sleep of security, to the utter separation of our hearts
from God. Delays (as for the most part in our civil negotiation with men, so
evermore, and especially, in our spiritual commerce with God) are very
dangerous. If God would not have us say unto our neighbor, go and come
again, and to morrow I will give thee, if we now have that which he desires,
and we can well spare, Pro. 3.28. much less when he himself asks our hearts
for himself, will he be patient of a repulse till to morrow, much less till
a week be over, much less till a month be over, much less till a year be
over, much less till old age, and dotage, and weakness, and sickness, and
death seize upon us.

Let us consider Gods case by our own. If we be delayed in our suites, if our
expectation be put off from day to day, are not our hearts in a manner
alienated from them on whom our hope depends? Are not our hearts possessed with
faintness? Pro. 13.12. How much more should we think will God be auerse from
us, if we repel his suite for our hearts with delays? Oh then let us
sacrifice our hearts unto him, whilst it is called to day, lest if we stay
till to morrow, he will not receive them, though we present them with tears.

2 Again, God requires that we give him our hearts, not only instantly
without delay, but wholly without reservation: My son, give me thy heart, that
is, thy whole heart: not one piece to day, and another to morrow, but all at
once: not half thy heart, but all thy heart; Deuteronomy. 6. Many of us I fear are
like a woman that has many suitors, who (willing to give them all content)
speaks lovingly to one, smiles upon another, winkes upon a third, and
entertaines the fourth, and the fifth, and so the rest, with some such other
glaunce or gesture of affection, and yet notwithstanding she would make her
husband believe that he has her heart: Even so beloved, although we have in
Baptism solempnely betrothed our hearts and souls unto our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, and have promised to forsake the Devil, the World, and the
Flesh, and to reserve our souls as chaste Brides for his bed; yet when the
world shall haunt our company, and present us with a map of his vanities, when
the Flesh shall assail us, when any kind of sin shall offer us either profit
or pleasure, to pollute our hearts with impure spawne; we will speak one
fair, wincke upon another, and entertain the rest with some secret smile or
glance of favor; thinking nevertheless to make our Savior believe that he
only has our hearts: Indeed if his knowledge were like man's, he might be
deceived with shows and protestations: but seeing he alone is the almighty
heart-searcher, he alone knows the deceit and hypocrisy of these
protestations; he sees that we love him scarce with half an heart, and
therefore divorces himself from us, and turns us over to our own lewdness:
he must have all our hearts, or none at all. Suppose a man should offer his
Creditor half the money which he owes him, is it likely that it would be
accepted, especially when he knows his Debtor to be of ability to pay all?
How much less then should we imagine that God will accept of half our hearts,
when we owe him all, and especially, when he gives ability to pay all? The
unnatural Mother would have the child divided, but the natural Mother,
rather then she would yield to that, offered to resign her interest to the
other, 1 Kin. 3.28. So the Devil tells us he would have but half our hearts,
and that God should have the other: but God will accept of no such conditions;
he scorns to part stakes with the Devil: if the Devil have one half, let
him take the other too: God can endure no Copesmate; he must have all, or none
at all.

3. And that f^eely too, without grudging, without repining. We must not
answer God when he calls for our hearts as Nabal answered David's messengers,
when they entreated provision of meat for their Master and themselves, 1 Samuel
25. But we must give our hearts as freely as we would give any thing to our
friend, that is in our own possession.

But soft, it were not amiss if I propounded a question: Have all of us that
are here present hearts to give or no? or rather are not some of us here
without hearts? yes certainly: If there be amongst us any Worldling, or
voluptuous person, or Epicure, or Drunkard, or Cheator, or busie-bodie, or
envious person, or the like, they are here without their hearts. The Covetous
man's heart is where his treasure is; Where your treasure is, there will your
hearts be also: The Voluptuous man's heart is where his wenches are: the
Epicures heart is where his dainties are: the Drunkards heart is where good
liquor is: the Cheaters heart is where gamesters are; the busybodies heart is
where contentions are; and the envious man's heart is where the person is whom
he hates. If there be any such here (as it may be there are,) Oh call home your
hearts while it is called to day, and to day present them as an acceptable
sacrifice to him that has long since bought them with the precious blood of
his dear Son.

IIII. And so I come to the fourth and last circumstance of my Text, which is
the Person to whom we are to give our hearts, set down in this word [Mee,] My
Son, give Me thy heart. Whence I observe, that God only is the primary, and
chief object of our hearts, and so (by a consequence) of our understandings,
wills, and affections. Of our understandings, because the chiefest truth: of
our wills and affections, because the chiefest good. Other things there are,
about which those faculties may lawfully be employed: as for example, the
Understanding may be exercised about the knowledge of the universal and
general, singular and individual natures of substances and accidents; as also
about the images, representations, and priuations of those real beings. And as
the Understanding, so the Will and Affections may (in a degree) be taken up
about other Objects, as about Virtue, lawful profit, and lawful pleasure; but
not so as to seek for perfect happiness in the one or in the other: For God
only (as being only infinite) is the only satisfactorie Object, in whom
alone, and in nothing else true felicity is to be found.

The consideration of this Doctrine should be a strong motive unto us to direct
our hearts (together with all their powers, motions, and affections) chiefly
and primarily unto God. Other things we may meditate on, and desire, so far
forth as they hold a candle unto us, and prick us forward to the primary and
only true Object: But God alone must be the white, to which we all must aim;
the Ocean whereunto the rivers of our affections must all flow; and the Center
wherein the lines of our best endeavors must all meet. That man that loves
his daughter will be careful to bestow her in marriage upon such a one as
desires her for love, and out of his love will assure her a good ioynture: But
if he hate his daughter, he will not care what becomes of her; he will give
his consent to any that shall make love unto her. Oh then my dearly beloved
Brethren, if you love your hearts bestow them on God, that asks them for love,
that asks them not for any benefit to himself but for advantage unto them;
that asks them to enrich and beautify them with the jewels and ornaments of
saving graces here in this world, and to indow them with the crown of
everlasting blessedness in the world to come.

But if you hate your hearts, let either the world have them, that they may
become stages for Folly, theaters for Vanity, beds for Security, consistories
for Deceit, and chaires for Pride: or let the flesh have them, that they may
be seats for Idleness, anvills for Lewdness, tables for Epicurisme, furnaces
for Lust; or let all manner of sin and impiety have them, that there may be
liberty given to Satan to make Schoole-houses of them, wherein to read
lectures of Atheism, of Idolatry, of Superstition, of Blasphemy, of
Profanation, of Disobedience, of Uncleanness, of Cousenage, of Oppression, of
Drunkenness, of Luxury, of Riot, and the like, till they become mere Chaoses
of confusion, and vassals of damnation, to burn for ever as neuer-perishing
Salamanders, in the red vengeance of endless tortures: from which the Lord of
his infinite mercy deliver us all, Amen.

FINIS.

