The Key of Knowledge.

which is, A little book intended to be of good use, as for all degrees of
Christians, so especially for Religious Families, and Religious Schools.

The full use and contents whereof must be enquired in the Preface or
introduction to the work which is (first) deliberately to be read of those who
desire to receive profit by the Book.

By JOHN JACKSON, Rector of Marsk near Richmond in Yorkshire.

Acts. 17. 23. As I passed by and beheld your Devotions, I found an Altar with
this Inscription, To the unknown God: Whom therefore ye ignorantly worship,
him declare I unto you. John 17. 3. This is lefe eternal, to know thee to be
that only true God, and him whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ. LONDON,
Imprinted by Felix Kingston for Robert Milbourne, and are to be sold at the
sign of the holy Lamb in little Britain, near S. Butolphs Church. 1640.



TO THE Worshipful, and his ever honored friends, the whole posterity of his
worthy Patron, Sir Timothy Hutton deceased, both to his Sons with their wives
and Children, and to his Daughters with their husbands and children: namely,
Matthew Hutton of Marsk. Esquire, Justice of peace; James Maulleverer of
Arncliffe Esquire; John Dodsworth of Thornton-watlasse, Esquire, Justice of
peace: Edmund Cleburne of Cleburne, Esquire; Mr Timothy Hutton; Mr Philip
Hutton deceased his relict and issue; Mr John Hutton; and Mr Thomas Hutton,
Peace etc.
THis little following book had been in the Printers hands diverse days ere
ever I purposed any nuncupation, or dedication of it at all. At last, it came
into my mind to address it this way, and that for these causes. first, out of
honor to your chief, Archbishop Hutton, of whom for his learning, and
gravitie, this great Encomium was publicly given, that he was worthy to sit
President in a general Council. Secondly, because I was well ascertained, my
book could receive no smut from you, being people of whole fame for native
gentleness, innocence of manners, fair deportment, and for the constant and
uniforme profession of Religion. Thirdly, for that the most of you are spread
into a goodly posterity and have fair sons and daughters, unto whom these
things may be truly useful to ground them soundly in Religion, so as neither
Abundance can choke, nor Indigence ever starve in them those due respects they
owe to divine powers. Would God parents would at last be wise, and think it
were conduceable to the hopeful settling of a child, to aim at more of
instruction and institution, though less of provision. Fourthly, in
acknowledgement of that great love, sweet familiarity, and continual
intercourses of Christian acquaintance which you were ever pleased to hold with
me, both affecting my person, and leaning to my ministry far beyond the
proportion of desert. Lastly, and especially for the pious memory of that
worthy Knight Sir Timothy Hutton, your dear Father, and my most incorrupt
Patron. Into the mention of whom being fallen, I cannot contain my pen, but to
his great praise I must relate one or two things of him in this very regard:
first that coming to settle his family at Marske, and finding the Rector there
to be no more but a bare reader, he rested not till he had compounded forth
the present incumbent, and filled the Church with a preaching Ministry. And
when it was empty again by the death of that incumbent, he most freely
presented my self with out the least request made in my behalf to him, either
by my self, or any other; yea he besought me earnestly to take it, and when
he signed the presentation he drew with his pen the form of his heart between
his name and surname. and I can well take an account of my memory, that the
Bpp of the diocese, when he gave institution, asserted vehemently that I had
the best and most upright Patron living. This I say not only for his honor,
but also for the just defamation both of such Patrons (sons of the earth
whosoever they be) as think heaven and earth would fail them for maintenance
and support, if they should present a Father and Priest without some
sprinckling either of direct or indirect symonie: and also of such Clerks as
profess they believe the resurrection of their bodies after they are calcined
to dust, and yet dare not trust God for food and raiment, without these
indirect and symoniacall contracts. But I contain.

These things therefore (my much honored, and most dearly respected friends)
I present unto you, and together with them whatsoever is worth acceptance
either in the person or function of

Your most affectionate friend, and Servant in the things of Jesus Christ. JOHN
IACKSON.

THE INTRODUCTION, OR PREface necessary to be read by the Peruser of this
Book.
THe design, and end which the Author has in publishing these few sheets of
Paper, shall be made known unto thee in a few following Paragraphs.

First, Being a man full of leisure, he thought they might Theological
tractate, or manual of Devotion, which might be truly useful to militant
Christians, either to beget, or preserve Religion in their hearts. Wherein he
had a special aim to serve the Salvation of two sorts of people: first, of
his Parcchiall charge, or the slocke whereof he is made an Over-seer;
Secondly, of such Christian friends and acquaintance (of what degree soever)
dispersed here and there, as did more peculiarly love his person, or approve
his work in the ministry thinking he might take more liberty and boldness of
speech to speak unto every of them in the language of Saint Paul to his
Scholar Timothy: Thou have fully known my doctrine: continue thou in the
things which thou have learned and have been assured of, knowing of whom thou
have learned them. 2 Timothy 3.

self-denial, in merely serving Virtue, and not fame; and not to theme his
pen with some high and applauded subject, but to apply himself to what should
be I. most plain and easy for the understanding. 2 most short and contracted
for the memory. 3 most methodicall and disposed, to take the fancy. 4. Serious
and weighty, to work on the Conscience, and lastly useful and practical in
regard of the will and affections, that thus it might have a kindly working on
all the several powers and faculties of the Soul.

Thirdly, Hereupon he resolved body of divioitie commonly called The revealed
will of God, and cast it into little moulds or forms, as Alexander did all
Homers Iliads into a nut-shell, and as Regiomontanus did his exquisite motions
into the little body of a fly, yet so as he endeavored to free it from those
two monstrosities both of Nature and Art, Defect of any thing necessary on the
one hand, and redundancie or excess of any thing superfluous on the other.

Fourthly, He acquired and Churches, and particular men, famed all over the
Christian world, and cried up to be Orthodox, methodicall and received, that at
least observing the Oeconomie and fabric of every one, and how the same
truths did concur in a diverse method and order of handling, there might out
of all of them together compared and collated result and arise what the Author
hereof does now in these ensuing Schedules present.

Jacobs, Genesis 33. 13. the ghostly guide may over-drive the Children that are
tender, and the herds that are with young, whereas to lead on softly, is safe;
and considering again that there are three sorts, or rather degrees in
Religion, First, Beginners or probationers, Secondly, Proficients, or growers,
and lastly grown and full statured Christians, Ephesians 4. 11, who may
challenge the brave title and clogy of Mnason, Act 21, 16, an old disciple: yea
that the Scripture it self allows, and bears up this distinction in two
several texts, both 1 Ioh. Epist. chap. 2. verse 13. under the titles of1
Children,2 Young men, and3 Fathers; and also Mark 4. 28. under the terms of1
the blade, 2 the Ear, 3 the ripe corn in the ear: Hereupon the Author has
endeavored to make sacred Divinity hold proportion with the several
strengths and capabilities of Christians, casting it into three several moulds
or forms: The first of 12 Queries and Responses, according to the number of
the hours of the day, or months of the Year, intended to be the Child's
Divinity. the second of 31. after the number of days in the month, which is
the young man's Divinity. The third into 52. as there are weeks in the year,
which you may call the old man's Divinity, as the several Title-pages
preceding each tractate will more fully declare.

Coronis to the rest, here is annexed an Alphabet, or Abecedary tractate
concerning the Lords supper, and our profitable coming thereunto, as the
frontispice-lease thereof does show.

And this is all the Author has to say anent this little work and his intent
in publishing of it. There yet remains something to be added touching the
right use thereof, in the behalf of the usufructuary, or whosoever hands these
treatises may fall into: in which regard the Author proposes these Counsels
and Advertisements.

First, He advises that by all means the chiefes and superintendents of
families, and schools who are both Priests and Princes within their own sept
and verge, see that those who are under their government be initiated and
instructed in the principles of Religion, whilst they are yet of very tender
years. for it is scarce to be credited, if experience did not ascertaine the
truth thereof, either how inept and indisposed unto divine knowledge such are,
as are stepped into years, and having first filled their heads, and bardened
their hearts with worldly-mindednesse have thereby prevented, and praeoccupated
the entrance of the things of God: or on the other hand how naturally and
sweetly Catechism is sucked in with the Mothers milk, rocked in with the
Nurse, As in Athanasius, and his play-fellowes, Baronius ad annum 311
sported in with play-fellowes, hired in with nuts and apples, awed in with the
twig of a rod, etc. which howsoever at first in them it may be no more often
times than the bare letter, or Romans 2. 20. (...).
form of knowledge, yet by the Spirits work ere long may be improved unto
Saving knowledge. This those worthy ancient Christians knew well, Hieron ep.
7. and 27. and Baron. ad an. 384. n. 4.
who taught their infants first to loose their tongues into the articulate, and
syllabicall pronunciation of the word Hallelujah. And surely it is as easy to
teach Children to say Hosanna to Christ, Arist. metaphys. 1.
as bald-pate to Elisha. Aristotle proves the sweetness of knowledge by this,
that the mouths of Children are so full of questions: and there is this reason
further in Divinity, that those who are yet innocent as doves, shall receive
such irradiation of divine light from God, as to be wise as Serpents, and
those whose wills do cleave unto good, their understanding shall approach unto
Truth.

2. The second Advertisement is this, that the Catechist, that is, he, or
she, who takes upon them the office to instruct, and Catechize others, stand
in some fair and near relation to the Catechumenoi, that is, those who are
taught and instructed: by which means it comes to pass that their principles
are more authentic, authoritative and magisteriall, and the doctrine which
they instill, proves both more strong, by reason of the credit of a Superior,
and more sweet, by reason of the love of a familiar. Oh then documents stick,
when we can say, I know of whom I have learned them. Then rudiments and
grounds are indeed Nails to fasten in the memory, and goads to prick on the
Affections, Eccles. 12. 11. Thus Samuel was instructed by Eli, and young
Jehoash by Jehojadah, both Priests; the great Eunuch by Philip, a Deacon; Paul
by his tutour Gamaliel; Timothy by his mother, and Grandmother, Lois and
Eunice; Origin by his father Leonides; Gorgonia by her brother Nazianzene;
Saint Basil by his nurse Macrina; and Saint Hierom commanded the Lady Paula to
set her maids to learn the Scriptures. Neither ought any one think they
lesson themselves unto any low indecencies in playing the duty of a Catechist
toward their Novices; whilst they see whole Churches, Counsels both national
and oecumenicall, particular men of signal note and fame, such as Luther, and
Calvin, calling off their pens from learned Commentaries, positive Divinity,
polemicall disputes, exquisite Sermons, and the like, even to write Catechismes
by way of question and answer. Yea how many fathers are there both of the
Greek and Latin Church which have their peculiar (...), Rom 6. 17.
form of doctrine, or (...) 2. Tim. 1. 13.
hypotyposis of wholesome words? Clemens of Alexandira his Paedagogue; Cyrill of
Jerusalem his Catechism, Origin that famous Catechist his books of
principles, Theodoret his Epitome of divine precepts, Lactantius his
institutions, Augustine his encheiridion, etc. Neither could it be credited,
if the voucher were not histories of singular esteem, how eminent persons for
learning, virtue, and honor have descended even unto the practiques herein,
one I cannot omit: Saint Hierom, for learning so great a Clerk, as S.
Augustine seriously wished to equallize him, for sanctity so rare, as it is
far more easy to counterfeit him then imitate him: he having exhorted Leta
to send her daughter to her Grandmother Paula at Bethleem, to be educated
there, adds certain words, whereby he binds himself to become master and
Catechist to the child, saying he will carry her upon his arms, and on his
shoulders, and that as old as he was, he would teach her stammeringly to
pronounce her words, and that in this regard he would not esteem himself
less glorious then Aristotle, who had Alexander the son of Philip, King of
Macedon for his Scholar, etc.

3. The third Advertisement must be this, that the disciple or scholar be
thoroughly acquainted by his Catechist and instructor with the Scheme and method
of his institution or Catechism, for as in reading of holy Scripture, who so
means to understand what he reads, must labor to get into his head the
structure and fabric, that is, the Oeconomie, and order of that book of holy
writ, that he is reading: So whosoever would be fully instructed in Christian
Religion, must first get unto himself a perfect and methodicall form of sound
doctrine, and then before he go to particulars, must possess his
understanding of the general lineaments and portraiture of that body of
Divinity, which he means to make his compass for his knowledge to sail by.
To instance in these subsequent moulds and forms of Divinity. The oeconomie
and disposition of the first stands in the unfolding of three points, 1. Man's
misery by redress from that misery. 3. His thankfulness for that redress:
which is also the manner and form both of the Heidelberge Catechism,
authorized through all the low Countries, and the Palatinate, and also of
Alstedius his Catechism which he calls the little bible, and the very same is
the oeconomie of the Epistle to the Romans, which is called the f Key of
scripture. Cla^i^ Scripturae.
The Oeconomie of the second is this, it takes the first hint and rise from
(...)
Truth, and Godliness, under the first head of truth is opened and explained
the Apostles Creed, and under Godliness the second head is handled the
Commandments, the Lords prayer, and the doctrine of the Sacraments. Faith, or
things to be believed, the second of Love, or things to be done, The third
of Prayer, or things to be asked, and the fourth of the Sacraments, or things
to be sealed: and this is the Oeconomie of Canisius, and Bellarmines
Caechismes, etc. And to add a Quadrupliciplanxit alphabeto Hieron, praefat.
Ieremies Threnes and Psalm. 25. 34. 111. 112. 119. 145.
diverse of David's Psalms are Alphabeticall, and that Vt facilius disceretur,
and memoria te^eretur. Vatablus.
to this end and purpose, to help memory both to attain and retain them with
greater ease and less industry. And beside the authority of Scripture to
warrant this way of composing; Baron. ad an. 392. number. 6.
Ecclesiastical History makes mention of an Abecedary Psalm, which Saint
Augustine so made up against the Donatists.

The 4. and last advertisement is this, that to make a brave knowing and
intellectual Christian indeed, the way is, to refer the Scripture which he
reads, and the Sermons he hears, unto those heads and points of Catechism,
whereunto they specially and most properly belong. And to do this the better,
learners and beginners are not only to make use of their own dexterity and
skill so far as they are able, but also till they be well versed in this way,
consult with their Superiors and teachers, get them to look over them while
they practice, entreat them freely to use their asteriskes of approbation where
they hit, and their spunges and obeliskes where they miss. The benefit
redounding hence will be this, First, an admirable establishment and
confirmation of the truth to see sermons, books, Scriptures, etc. all to
concur and be concentrique together. Secondly, an excellent ingeny and
quickness both in proving the principles and fundamentals of Religion by
Scripture, and in referring texts of Scripture, and Sermons to principles of
Catechism, which may be called the Genesis and Analysis of Divinity. And I
doubt not but by practice a Lay Christian may do as much as Cartwright, See
Cartwrights comment on the Proverbs.
who has referred every Proverb of Solomon to one of the ten Precepts of the
moral Law.

The Author now thinks he has prefaced sufficiently, and will remove manum
de tabula as speedily as if he heard an Angel from Heaven say, hold thy hand,
it is enough; in all which if he have judged any thing truly, or wisely he
voweth only to worship him who is the first truth, and chiefest wisdom.

Now the good will of him that dwelt in the bush be with all those who desire
to know the first truth, and enjoy the chief good; and to that end bless this
small labor in his Church, if it be but to the dispelling of ignorance and
darkness from off one Soul, of which the Author is the more hopeful, as
being conscions that he has no other aim in the Edition hereof save those two
intimated in the first Paragraph of the Preface, to wit, to be a tribute of
duty to some, and a present of affection to others.

A MOST BRIEF and contracted model of knowledge, and yet withal plain for
the understanding, and methodicall for the Memory.

Wherein whatsoever is truly fundamental in Christian religion, and
absolutely necessary to salvation, is brought down unto only 12. Questions
and Answers, so as such Children as are very pregnant, and of riper years may
come to be well catechized in one day, by proportioning one question and
answer to every hour of the day, and such as are more young for years, or
dull for capacity, in one year if their Parents or nurses (as it were
playing, or doing another thing) do but principle them with one question and
answer every Month

The Collocutours are
1 Timothy, learning the holy Scriptures from a child, 2 Timothy 3. 15. 2 Lois the
grandmother, and Eunice the mother, being the Instructors, 2 Timothy 1. 5.
1 John 2. 13. I write unto you little Children.
THE FIRST Form of Doctrine, or the Child's Catechism.
TImothy. Quest. 1
Unto what heads may Christian Religion be brought.


Lois and Eunice. Answer.
Unto 3. 1. the sense and acknowledgement of our miserable estate by nature. 2.
A sight of the means of our deliverance from such a miserable estate. 3. Due
gratitude, and thankfulness for that deliverance.


Timothy. Que. 2.
How does this miserable condition of ours appear?


Lois and Eunice. Answ.
It easily appears by considering 1. the estate from whence we are fallen,
even from the Image of God, consisting in soundness of judgment, cleerenesse
of understanding, sanctity of will, integrity of Conscience, beauty and
strength of body, majesty and empire over the creatures, immortality, and the
like: and secondly, the condition to which we are fallen, to wit,
sinnefullnesse and misery, or doing things unworthy, and suffering things
worthy of our doings


Timothy. Quest. 3.
They that are sick need the Physician, says our Savior, Math. 9. 12. who
then is this blessed Physician?


Lois and Eunice. Ans.
Even Jesus Christ, who to this end is by nature both God and man in one
person, and by office, is 1. our Prophet, 2. Priest, and 3. King.


Timothy. Que. 4.
Why is it necessary he should have both a divine and humane nature united in
one person?


Lois and Eunice. Answ.
He must needs be man, because divine equity requires that the same nature
that sinned should suffer, Ezech. 18. 4. and he must needs be God, to give an
infinite value to his satisfaction, proportionable both to the infinite majesty
offended, and the infinite sins and sinners offending. As also he must be
Man that he might die, and God, that he might overcome death.


Timothy. Que. 5.
Why is it necessary that he should also have these three offices,
prophetical, sacerdotall, and regal?


Lois and Eunice. Answ.
It is necessary he should be 1. a Prophet, to illuminate us, and lead us
into all truth; 2. a Priest to make satisfaction for our sins and to
intercede for us to the father; 3. a King, both to protect us, against our
enemies, and to govern us by his spirit and word.


Timothy. Quest. 6
Is this then sufficient to repair our miserable condition, and to reestate us
in that primitive happiness, from whence we are fallen?


Lois and Eunice. Answ.
It is indeed sufficient in it self, but not effectual to any one, who for
their part does not perform those two grand commands of the Gospel, to repent
and believe.


Timothy. Que. 7.
Where is the sum of the gospel best comprised?


Lois and Eunice. Answ.
In that ancient and Apostolical Creed, which begins, I believe in God the
Father, etc. which Creed is the Key of faith, and Epitome of all things to be
believed unto salvation, and which all Christians, as the badge of their
profession ought 1. to learn and get by heart, 2. often to repeat and profess
to their comfort and establishment, 3. to give assent and credit to every
Article one by one, and lastly to apply each Article particularly to their own
souls: for all these four several acts of Faith are implied in the word I
believe.


Timothy. Qu. 8.
I pray you, if that be so ancient, so perfect, and so excellent an
abridgement of the faith, give it me not in the lump, but break unto me that
bread of life into the several pieces thereof.


Lois and Eunice. Answ.
It consists of 12. short Articles: the 1. concerns God the Father; the 2. the
name, nature, office, and person of Christ; the 3, 4, and 5. the seven degrees
of his Humiliation for our sins; the 6, 7, and 8, the four degrees of his
Exaliation for our righteousness; the 9. concerns the holy Ghost; the 10, 11,
and 12. concern the Church of God, both in the properties and privileges of it


Timothy. Que. 9.
Being thus restored, what owe we to God for so great a benefit?


Lois and Eunice. Answ.
Thankefullnesse, which consists especially in three things, first in
conforming our life according to the ten Commandments of God; secondly, in
calling upon his name, according to the substance of the Lords prayer; lastly
in receiving and participating the Sacraments, after a prepared and devout
manner.


Timothy. Que. 10.
I pray you also break open unto me those ten holy laws, that I may better
know how to keep them.


Lois and Eunice. Answ.
God himself has divided them into two tables, subdivided them into ten
words, contracted them into one monosyllable, Love; the first enjoynes me whom
to worship; the second prescribes the inward manner of his worship; the third
the outward; the fourth the solemn time; the fifth enjoynes my duty toward my
inferiors, superiors, and equals; the sixth to my neighboursperson; the
seventh to his chastity; the eighth, to his estate; the ninth, to his good
name; the tenth and last commands me to resist the first risings, and thoughts
of sin, though even without consent of will.


Timothy. Que. 11
But because I am not able to keep these things of my self, and that prayer
is the best means to fetch grace and help from heaven, and that the Lords
prayer is a perfect pattern of prayer, therefore I pray you briefly unfold
that form of prayer unto me.


Lois and Eunice. Answ.
It consists of four distinct parts: the first is the Preface, or preparation
unto the prayer [ Our father, which art in Heaven] the second is the six
Petitions, whereof the three first concern Gods glory, and the three latter
our own bodily and ghostly necessities; the third is a thankesgiving, or
certain form of praising God [ for thine is the kingdom, power, and glory,
for ever and ever] the fourth is the close and scale [Amen]


Timothy. Que. 12
But seeing we fail in all the former, so as our Faith is weak, our
Obedience is imperfect, and our prayers cold, what seals has God given to
confirm and strengthen us?


Lois and Eunice. Answ.
The two Sacraments, of baptism and the Lords supper, which through outward
and visible signs doc both 1. signify, and 2. conveigh unto us most excellent
inward, and spiritual graces.


FINIS.
A BRIEF, METHODICALL, plain, and full form of doctrine, reduced unto xxxi
Questions and Answers: so as by learning one only Question and it is Answer
every day, the Christian Scholar shall within the space of one Month be well
principled in Religion.

The Collocutors are
Paul, the Questionist, and Gamaliel, the Resolutor, Acts. 22. 3,

1. John 2. 13. I write unto you Young men.
THE SECOND Form of Doctrine, or the young man's Catechism.
PAul. Quest. 1
What is Catechism, and whereunto may it be compared?


Gamaliel. Answ.
It cannot better be defined then out of Heb. 6. 1. The principles of the
doctrine of Christ: and it may be fitly compared to Sampsons hair, wherein was
both strength and beauty, for so ought catechism be strong in precepts,
beautiful in order and method.


Paul. Quest. 2
What is Christian doctrine usually called, and how may it be defined?


Gamaliel. Answ.
It is most usually called either Religion, or Divinity, and may be defined
to be the Art or science of believing aright, and of living well.


Paul. Quest. 3
How many parts are there then of Religion?


Gamal. Answ.
Two, which Saint Paul Titus 1. verse 1. calls TRVTH, and GODLINESS, and they
are the two pillars or supporters of Gods house, the shaking of either of which
ruins the building.


Paul. Que. 4.
Where may be found united, and gathered together those principal and
fundamental Truths, which a Christian is to believe to salvation.


Gamal. Answ.
They are abridged and contracted into the Apostles Creed, and are first,
capable of this distinction, that they either concern God, or the Church of
God.


Paul. Qu. 5.
Which is the grand truth we are to embrace concerning God?


Gamal. Ans.
That in regard of nature, essence, and being there is but one God, yet in
regard of divine relation, and real respects, in that one Godhead there are
three persons.


Paul. Qu. 6.
Describe me the nature and essence of God, so far as he may (as it were
through a glass) he seen, and comprehended of our weak capacities.


Gamal. Ans.
God is that most absolute, and first being, whose proper Attributes are, 1
Simplicity, 2 Eternity, 3 Immensitie, 4 Perfection, 5 Immutability, 6
Immortality, 7 Goodness,8 Justice, 9 Truth,10 Holiness,11 Omnipotency, 12
liberty or freedom, and lastly, glory and majesty.


Paul. Qu. 7.
What now is that you call a person of the Godhead?


Gamal. Answ.
It is a relation or respect, which takes nothing from, nor adds any thing
to the divine essence, but only distinguishes the Father, Son, and holy Ghost
among themselves, and one from another, every one of them having both his
incommunicable propriety, or nature, and every one of them having his own
incommunicable work, or Counsel.


Paul. Qu. 8.
Which is the incommunicable propriety or nature of the Father, the first of
the three persons?


Gamal. Answ.
To beget, and not be begotten.


Paul. Quest. 9
What is the Fathers proper and incommunicable work or counsel?


Gamal. Answ.
Creation, for by his Almighty power in making heaven and earth, he cast out
vacuitie and emptiness, that great enemy of nature, and by his providence,
which is a continued creation, he keeps it out still.


Paul. Que. 10
Which is the peculiar property of the son who is the second person in order,
and manner of subsistence?


Gamal. Answ.
His relative property is to be begotten.


Paul. Que. 11
Which is his peculiar work?


Gamaliel. Answ.
Redemption, which is a stisfaction made to the justice of God for the sin of
man: in which regard, he has 4. styles in the Creed, 1. Jesus to note his
office of mediatorship in general, 2. Christ, to denote his three particular
offices, sacerdotall, prophetical, and royal, 3. Son, to note his order and
manner of subsistence, fourthly and lastly, Lord, to note his purchase.


Paul. Q. 12
How is our Redemption wrought?


Gamal. Answ.
Partly by the Humiliation, and partly by the Exaltation of the son of God,
the several degrees of which twain are accurately and punctually folded up in
the very body of the said Creed, etc.


Paul. Que. 13
Which be the several degrees of his Humilation?


Gamal. Ans.
They be six in number, and are thus to be enumerated in order, 1. his
Conception [hee was conceived by the holy Ghost] 2. his nativity [borne of the
Virgin Mary] 3. his passion [suffered under Pontius Pilate] 4. his crucifixion,
which was the extremity of his passion [ was crucified] 5. his death [dead] 6.
his burial [and buried] through all which several degrees of sorrow he
passed, and was pressed with them as a cart with sheaves, that he might bear
our sins, and heal our infirmities.


Paul. Que. 14
Which be the several degrees of his Exaltation?


Gamal. Answ.
They be five in number, and are thus to be reckoned; 1. his triumph over Hell
[ he descended into hell] 2. his Resurrection [hee rose again the third day]
3. his Ascension [hee ascended into heaven] 4. his session at his Fathers right
hand [there he sits at the right hand of God] 5. his office of judicature [from
thence he shall come to judge both the quick and the dead]


Paul. Que. 15
What is the relative property of the Holy Ghost, the third person in manner of
subsisting?


Gamal. Answ.
To proceed.


Paul. Que. 16
What is his proper work?


Gamal. Answ.
Sanctification, or application, for Christ having prepared the remedy leaves
it to be applied by the sanctification of his spirit, and as he justifies us
by his merit, so he sanctifies us by his Spirit.


Paul. Que. 17
Having seen those fundamental truths which concern God, and being now come
to those which concern the Church of God, tell me what a Christian is bound
to believe concerning the Church?


Gamal. Answer.
That it is a company of believers united to Christ by faith here, and by
vision hereafter: and that the said company is invested with a double property,
to wit, first, it is holy in regard of the holiness both of the outward
means, and inward work of the Spirit: and secondly it is Catholic and
universal in regard both of time, persons, and places.


Paul. Que. 18
What are the benefits which arise to us from our being members of this holy
Catholic Church?


Gamal. Ans.
Four, two whereof accrue in this life, to wit first, Communion of Saints,
that is, that fellowship we have both with Christ, and all his members, in
grace, and glory; secondly, Remission of sins, both incovering and curing
them: and other two in the life to come, first Resnrrection of the body, when
that which is sown in corruption rises again in incorruption; secondly, Life
everlasting, when there shall be a necessary absence of all evil, and a
necessary presence of all good.


Paul. Qu. 19
Having learned the TRVTH of Religion, I desire now to go on to the second
part, the GODLINESS of it, tell me first therefore I pray you, how it may
best be divided.


Gama. Answ.
Into three heads, first, our walking with God, in holy obedience, according to
the ten precepts of the decalogue. Secondly, our Talking with him in devout
prayer, according to the seven petitions of the Lords prayer. Thirdly; our
Receiving from him in the two Sacraments of the new Testament.


Paul. Qu. 20
How is our walking with God according to the Law distributed?


Gama. Answ.
Either into Holiness, which is our immediate worship of God required in the
first table of the law, or into Righteousness, whereby God is mediately served
through the love to our neighbor, as is required in the latter table.


Paul. Que. 11.
On how many feet stands the first table of the Law, which concerns our duty
toward God?


Gamal. Answ.
On four;for it enjoyneth 1. that we place and bestow divine worship on none,
but the only true God, choosing him to be our Jehovah, and to set our heart
upon. Precept 1. 2. that we worship him with his own prescribed worship, and
not after our own Imaginations or devices, Precept 2. 3. that we show him due
external reverence also, in transacting his worship and service, Precept 3. 4.
in regard of the time, that we perform it especially, and more solemnly on
the Lords day, Precept 4.


Paul. Que. 22
On how many feet does the second table stand, which concerns our duty to man?


Gamal. Answ.
On six, for it enjoyneth, 1. that we be diligent in all offices, and duties
toward our superiors, inferiors, and equals, Precept 5. 2. that we preserve
life and health, both of our selves, and our neighbor, to Gods glory, and the
good both of Church and Commonweal, Precept 6. 3. that we preserve and keep
both inward chastity of heart, and the outward of the body, Precept 7. 4. that
we preserve the estate and livelihood both of our selves and neighbor, to our
own comfort, and the good of others, Precept 8. 5. that we bear up, and
maintain our own and others fame and credit, accompting it as a precious
ointment, Precept 9. Lastly, that we resist and suppress in the first risings
thereof, all concupiscence, and evil motions, though they be before consent
of will, Precept 10.


Paul. Qu. 23.
Tell me now what prayer, or holy talking with God is, which was proposed to be
the second part of Godliness?


Gamal. Answ.
It is a moving of God the father,in the name of his Son, by the power of his
holy Spirit, for such things as are agreeable to his will! the best president
and platform whereof is the Lords prayer.


Paul. Que. 24
How is this prayer divided?


Gamal. Answ.
Into 4. parts, 1. the preface or preparation to prayer, Our Father which art
in heaven. 2. the petitions or things asked, Hallowed be etc. 3. the doxologie,
or thanksgiving, for thine is etc. 4. the seal, or conclusion, Amen.


Paul. Que. 25
The petitions being the chief part,how many are they in number, and how are
they to be divided?


Gamal. Answ.
They be six, and are usually referred to two heads, namely those that concern
God, which are the three first, and those which concern our selves, which are
the three last.


Paul. Que. 26
How do you subdivide those 3.first which concern God?


Gamal. Answ.
They either concern his glory (1 Petition) where we pray that his name (which
is himself) may be magnified, and hallowed: or else they concern the means
of his glory ( Petition 2 and 3) where we pray for the coming of his
Kingdom, both of power, grace, and glory, and for the doing of his will, both
by us in active obedience, and upon us in passive.


Paul. Que. 27
How do you subdivide the three last petitions, which concern our selves.


Gamal. Answ.
They are either such as concern this life, ( petit. 4.) as the asking of
daily bread, under which is comprehended all things necessary for our natural
life: or else they concern the life to come, as the asking remission of
sins, in regard of what is past ( petit. 5.) and deliverance of temptation,
and the evil thereof, in regard of what is to come ( petition 6.)


Paul. Que. 28
We are now come to the third and last piece of Piety, the receiving the
Sacraments, tell me therefore what a Sacrament is, and how many there be?


Gamal. Answ.
A Sacrament cannot better be defined, then out of Romans 4. and 11. a seal
of the righteousness by Faith: of which there are only two, properly so
called, Baptism, and the Lords Supper.


Paul. Que. 29
What is Baptism?


Gamal. Answ.
A Sacrament of entering us into Christianity or of engrafting us into Christ,
consisting of the outward sign, which is dipping in, or sprinckling with
water; and of the inward grace, which is washing away of our sins, by our
sanctification in the blood of Christ.


Paul. Qu. 30
What is the Lords Supper?


Gamal. Ans.
A Sacrament of our continuance and growth in Christianity, consisting also of
the outward visible signs of bread and wine proportionate to the inward and
invisible Grace of Christ's blessed body and blood eaten, and digested by faith.


Paul. Que. 31
At the first you compared Catechism to Sampsons hair, which was strong and
fair: as therefore you have given me a sufficient taste of the strength of it,
in being the very pith and marrow of the Oracles of God, so now I pray you show
me the beauty and fairness of it, in the order and method thereof.


Gamal. Answ.
First we did begin with Faith, by which we live; secondly we did come to the
Law, by which we walk; thirdly we proceeded on to Prayer, least we should
faint in faith, or wax weary of good works; Lastly, finding faith but weak,
obedience imperfect, and prayers cold and distracted, we have the obsignation
of the Sacraments which are as Gods seals to secure our estate in him: which
also is observed to be the very method and oeconomie of the authorized
Catechism of the Church of England.


FINIS.
A Theological Circle, OR THE WHOLE BOdy of Divinity, cast into the mould of
the year, that is into 52. Questions and Answers, according to the number of
Lords Days.

Whereby the Catechumenoi, learning one only Question and Answer every Sunday,
shall in the revolution of one year be instructed after a manner more then
vulgar, and come to know all the grand and necessary truths of the Christian
Religion.

The Speakers are
1. Mnason, an old disciple, Acts 21. 16. 2. Apollos, one mighty in the
Scriptures.
1 John 2. 13. I write unto you, Fathers.
THE THIRD Form of knowledge, or the Fathers Catechism.
Winter quarter.
MNason. 1 Sund. in Adv.
Que. 1.
What is that which is the thirst of every man's soul and the chief scope of
man's life?


Apollos. Answ.
That very same thing which in one word or term is called Felicity,
happiness, or beatitude: others call it the chief good.


Mnason. 2. Sund. Adv.
Quest. 2
Wherein does man's chief good, or happiness consist?


Apollos. Answ.
Neither in 1 wisdom, or knowledge, nor in 2 glory and honor, nor 3 in
pleasure, nor 4 in dignity, nor 5 in riches, nor 6 in health and strength,
nor7 in favor and esteem, nor 8 in moral virtue, nor 9 in temporal life,
nor 10 in immortality it self. Neither any of these, nor all of these
together, nor any other created thing can quench the thirst of man's soul, nor
be said to be the chief good of the reasonable creature.


Mnason. 3 Sund. Adv.
Quest. 3
Why so, I pray you?


Apollos. Answ.
Because whatsoever may prove man's chief good, must necessarily be invested
with this double property, 1. that it be All-sufficient, that is simply, and
absolutely able of it self to fill the heart, and satisfy the soul, 2. That
it be indeficient, and perpetual, so as the Soul cannot be made sad either
with the sense or fear of loosing it. Now the very best of created, and
sublunary felicities, if they incline any thing to sufficiency or perfection,
they are commonly very short and momentany: if they be more lasting, they are
usually very dilute and imperfect.


Mnason. 4 Sunday Adv.
Quest. 4
What then is, if these be not, neither can be?


Apollos. Answ.
Only the All-sufficient Lord himself, who is All in all both in himself,
and unto us: and who is only able and willing to fill every corner of the
heart with satietie and content, and to give us full measure, pressed down,
shaken together, and running over.


Mnason. Sund. after Christm. day
Quest. 5
Whereby then may we be so knit and united unto God, as to be partakers of his
All Sufficiency, and beatitude?


Apollos. Religion is the thing which does unite and cement man unto his God,
Religio a religando, quia cultu divino animas nostras Deo religemus, cum ab eo
defeccramus Aug. lib. de vera religione, tom. 1.
whence it has its name from tying and knitting, because our souls which by
lapse and sinning were dissevered from God, by religion and divine worship are
conjoined unto him again.


Mnason. 1. Sund. aft Epiphanie.
Que. 6.
Can any Religion or kind of divine worship do this?


Apollos. Noe; only the true christian religion can do it. To which purpose
the words of the 18 Article agreed on by the whole clergy of both provinces,
Anno 1562. are worthy observing: They also are to be accursed that presume to
say, that every man shall be saved by the Law or sect which he professes, so
that he be diligent to frame his life according to that law and the light of
nature: for holy Scripture does set out unto us only the name of Jesus
Christ,whereby we must be saved.


Mnason. 2 Sund. aft. Epiphanie.
Qu. 7.
Who may truly be called a Christian?


Apollos. Whosoever is admitted, and matriculated by baptism into the church
and being there does profess the wholesome doctrine of Jesus Christ, and
withal is of such a reformed life, that his practice gives not his profession
the lie, such an one is entitled to that honorable name and style of a
Christian.


Mnason. 3 Sund. after Epiph.
Qu. 8.
How many chief and principal parts or heads are there of Christian doctrine?


Apollos. Four, 1. of Faith or things to be believed, the rule whereof are
the 12 Articles of the Creed, 2. of Love, or things to be done, the rule
whereof are the ten Commandments: 3. of Prayer, or things to be asked, the
rule whereof are the six petitions of the Lords prayer: 4. of the Sacraments,
or things to be received.


Mnason. 4 Sund. after Epiph.
Quest. 9
What was the cause, why this Creed was thus first composed?


Apollos. To be the Ambr. sermon. 38.
key of Faith, and Whitak. contr. Stapl^t. de author. S. Scripturae, l. 1. c.
14. 9. Durand. l. 3. did. 25. qu. 2.
Epitome or abridgment of whole Scripture. For the canon of holy Scripture
being large, and in many places hard to be understood, it was necessary to
abridge those truths which were of absolute necessity to salvation, to the end
that all might learn them, and take up the badge of their profession


Mnason. 5 Sund. after Epiph.
Que. 10
Are all things which belong to Faith contained herein?


Apollos. All points necessary to be known or believed to salvation, are
either expressly and directly herein set down, D. Tho. 22. q. 1. art. 6. 8. 9.
ad 1.
or else by way of reduction and reference may be brought fitly to some one of
these Articles.


Mnason. Septuages.
Que. 11
Why is it called the Apostles Creed?


Apollos. There are three Creeds famed all over the christian world: 1. this of
the Apostles, made for instruction in the faith. 2. the Nicene creed,
Vifcherus, l. 5. c. 20. ^
made for the explanation of the faith. 3. Athanasius his creed, made for the
defense of the faith. Now there are two reasons why it is called the Apostles
creed; the one is at the most but probable, because the Apostles themselves
made it, every one adding his article, and as it were casting in his shot; the
other is certain; Vrfin. Catech. q. 23.
because it contains the sum and abridgment of all the Apostles doctrine.


Mnason. Se^agefima.
Que. 12
What is the true and full importance of the word [ I beleeeve.]


Apollos. It imports and implies three things, 1. the knowledge of a divine
truth, 2. an assent unto it, 3. an affiance and trust in it.


Mnason. Quinquagesima.
Que. 13
What is propounded to our faith to believe in the first Article, I believe in
God, the father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth?


Apollos. Two grand doctrines, to wit, first the doctrine of the Creation of
the world by Gods omnipotency: and then the doctrine of divine providence, or
preservation of the same, ever since it was created. Which two differ only
thus, that Creation was a short providence, and Providence a long Creation.


Spring quarter.
Mnason. 1 Sunday in Lent.
Que. 14
What is the sum of the second Article [and in Jesus Christ, his only Son
our Lord]?


Apollos. In it 5 things are propounded to our faith to believe, 1. that he is
Jesus, that is, a Savior, 2 that he is Christ, that is, anointed and
appointed by God to be our priest, prophet, and king, 3 that he is the Son of
God, to wit, natural and begotten, 4 that he is his only son, 5 that he is
our Lord to govern us, as well as our Jesus to save us.


Mnason. 2 Sund. in Lent.
Que. 15
What contains the third article [conceaved by the holy Ghost, borne of the
virgin Mary]?


Apollos. It contains that great mystery of Godliness that a Spirit was
generative and a virgin fruitful, that is, the admirable way of the
incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ: of which Article this is the orthodoxe
sense, that the holy Ghost did by it is immediate virtue, and divine power,
without any seminall commixtion, prepare, sanctify, and secundate the womb of
the virgin Mary, so as at once, and in an instant the whole huma^e body of
Christ was formed, and then his reasonable soul was created and infused into
his body.


Mnason. 3 Sund. in Lent.
Que. 16
How much is comprised in the fourth article, he suffered under Pontius
Pilate, was crucified, dead, and buried, descended into hell.


Apollos. The five degrees of his Humiliation, each surpassing other. Namely,
first his Passion, he suffered, etc. 2 his Crucifixion, or manner of
suffering, which was the increase of his passion, was crucified, 3 his death, a
degree beyond his crucifixion, dead. 4. his inhumation, and enterment, more
then his death, and buried, 5 his descent into hell, a degree beyond the grave,
he went down into hell unless you will make his descent into hell the first
degree of his Exaltation, rather then the last of his Humiliation.


Mnason. 4 Sund. in Lent.
Que. 17
What think you is the safest to hold in that vexed question of Christ's
descent into Hell?


Apollos. I deem it the safest way to hold the doctrine in general, and
implicit terms; that he went down into hell, the place of the damned, as
being the most ancient doctrine of the Catholic Church, but not too boldly or
peremptorily to define either touching the 1 subject, or 2 manner, or 3 end, or
4 time of his descent.


Mnason. 5 Sund. in Lent.
Qu. 18
What is expressed in the fifth Article, he rose again the third day from the
dead.


Apollos. The first degree of his Exaltation, to wit, his resurrection from the
dead, together with the circumstance of time, the third day, upon which very
point did depend all the credit both of his person, doctrine, and miracles, and
even of the christian religion it self, which should be dispersed to all the
ends of the world.


Mnason. Sund. next before East.
Que. 19
What is tendered to our faith in the sixth Article, he ascended into heaven,
and sits at the right hand of God.


Apollos. The second and third degrees of his Exaltation, to wit, first, his
Ascension, that the fourth day after his resurrection, upon mount Olive^, he
did visibly, locally, and corporally according to his humane nature, and by the
virtue of his own Godhead, ascend into the third and highest heaven. Secondly,
his session at his fathers right hand, by which is meant, that he was exalted
far above all Angels and men in his very humane nature, and with his father
is coeternall and coequall.


Mnason. Que. 20
Easter day.
How expound you the seventh article, from thence shall he come to judge both
the quick and the dead?


Apollos. It contains the fourth and highest degree of his Exaltation: and the
meaning of it is, that though the decree, and authority of judgment do
belong equally alike to all the three persons, yet the external visible act,
or execution of judgment shall wholly be put into the hands of Christ, the
son: when to the greater comfort of the godly, their Savior shall be their
Judge, and to the wickeds greater terror, he whom they have crucified, shall
sit upon them.


Mnason. 1 Sund. aft. Easter.
Qu. 21
How do you sense the eighth Article, I believe in the holy Ghost?


Apollos. That there is an holy Spirit, which is a distinct person from the
father and the son, and yet equal to, co^substantiall with, and proceeding
from both: whose offices are, Spiritus e^ce 1 docet, 2 renovat, 3 copulatque, 4
regitque, and 5 ^consolatur 6 arrha salutifera.
1 Illumination, or knowledge, 2 Regeneration or sanctification, 3 to unite and
join us to Christ our head, 4 to guide, and govern us in the right way to
eternity, 5 to comfort our hearts in both inward tentations, and outward
crosses, and 6 lastly, to seal us unto the day of redemption.


Mnason. 2 Sund. aft. Easter.
Qu. 22.
How much is contained in the ninth article, I believe the holy Catholic
Church, the communion of Saints?


Apollos. Four particulars, 1. that there is a Church, to wit, a congregation
of men and women elected before time, and called in time by the word and Spirit
out of the whole mass of mankind, to be a chosen generation unto God. 2 that
this Church is holy both in regard of 1 Persons, 2 means, 3 time, and 4 place
of Gods worship. 3. that it is Catholic, that is, not circumscribed or
limited, but universal in regard of 1 doctrine 2 members, 3 time, and 4 place.
4. that in this holy Catholic Church there is a Society and communion of
Saints, which have not only union with Christ, but also Communion one (...)
another.


Mnason. 3 Sunday after Easter
Que. 23
Recite now the tenth article, and then explain it.


Apollos. I believe the remission of sins, that is, I believe that every
transgression of the law, whereof I am guilty since I had a being, is not
only pardonable, but (after faith and repentance) pardoned unto me, and
further, that though none but God can properly, and of himself forgive my
sins, yet a lawful minister, who has gifts from God, and calling from men,
may both declare it to the peace of my Conscience, and also be Gods instrument
to conveigh the same unto me.


Mnason. 4 Sunday after Easter
Que. 24
What imports the eleventh Article, wherein we profess the resurrection of
the body?


Apollos. It imports 3 things, 1 that there shall be the instauration of the
same flesh, the recollection of the same bones and dust. 2 an evocation of the
same soul either out of the place of bliss or misery. 3 the reuniting of them
together, so as there shall be the same individual compound after the
resurrection, both for kind and number, as was before death.


Mnason. 5 Sunday after Easter.
Que. 25
Tell me first the words, and then the meaning of the twelfth and last Article,
and so you shall have satisfied me in the first head of Catechism, which is
touching things to be believed.


Apollos. The words are these, I believe life everlasting the sense is this,
that there is an unconceaveable, unutterable estate of perfect bliss, and full
happiness, where there shall be a necessary absence of all evil, and a
necessary presence of all good, which ere long shall be the lot and portion of
me in particular, and in general of all those who in this life are justified
and sanctified.


Mnason. Sund. after Ascension.
Que. 26
Why do we conclude the Creed with Amen?


Apollos. It makes it of a perfect and circular form. For Amen the last word
is neither more nor less in value and importance then I believe the first,
including three things, I knowledge, 2 assent, and 3 affiance.


Summer quarter.
Mnason. Whitsunday
Que. 27
Proceed now to the second chief head of Catechism: the ten Commandments,
the rule of love, or of things to be done; and first give me the most
ancient and received division of them.


Apollos. That is the very same which was given by God, the Lawgiver himself,
who divided these ten precepts into two tables, placing four in the former, to
point us out our duty to God; and six in the latter, to set forth our duty to
man.


Mnason. Trinity. Sunday.
Que. 28
What rule is most necessary to be premised for the better understanding of
these ten holy laws?


Apollos. 1 Sunday after Trin.
Que. 29
This, that every Commandment has either expressed, or understood, both an
affirmative part to bar sins of Omission, and a negative part to bar sins
of Commission.


Mnason. Show me both those parts in the first Commandment.


Apollos. The affirmative part is this, Thou shall choose Jehovah to be thy
God, and him only shall thou know, fear, love, trust in, and serve. The
negative is expressed, Thou shall not have any other Gods, by which is
prohibited 1. Atheism, or the having of noe God to worship, 2. Polytheisme, or
the having of diverse Gods, 3. Idolatry, or the having of a false God.


Mnason. 2 Sunday after Trin.
Que. 30
Show me the affirmative, and negative parts of the second Commandment.


Apollos. This is the affirmative: thou shall worship God by such means, and
after such a manner as is agreeable to his nature, and prescribed in his word,
to wit, in spirit and in truth, John 4. 24. the negative is this: Thou shall
not worship the true God after a false manner.


Mnason. 3 Sunday after Trin.
Que. 31
Do the like in the third commandment, I pray you.


Apollos. The affirmative part of it is this, in all things give God his due
glory, or confer all due honor to God that is, both to his divine nature,
and essence, to his word, and to his works. The negative is this, thou shall
neither with unreverend thoughts, or with blasphemous words, or with profane
and irreligious actions strike through the glorious and ever blessed name of
God, or bereave him of the honor due unto him.


Mnason. 4. Sunday after Trin.
Que. 32
Proceed on to the fourth commandment, the last of the first table.


Apollos. It Is affirmative part is this, Remember to keep holy the Sabbath
day, whereby we are commanded two things, first, to keep an outward rest, or
cessation from labor: Secondly, to sanctify, or keep holy that rest. The
negative part is this: Thou shall not profane the Lords Saboth, either in the
excess by a Judaicall and superstitious observation of the outward rest, or in
the defect, by neglecting either the public or private sanctification
thereof; as namely by taking liberty to do any manner of work, which falls
not under one of these three heads, works of Piety, Charity, or necessity.


Mnason. 5 Sunday after Trin.
Que. 33
What say you to the fifth commandment, Honor thy father and mother?


Apollos. It is a commandment of relations, prescribing the mutual offices of
all inferiors and superiors. The affirmative part enjoyneth all reverence,
love, obedience, and gratitude toward our elders, betters in gifts of body,
mind, estate, patrons, and benefactors, domestical parents, scholasticall
parents, ecclesiastical parents, political parents: and back again all care,
government, protection, provision, and indulgence of them to us downward. The
negative part prohibiteth all manner of disrespects, and disregards either of
superiors toward their inferiors, or of inferiors toward their superiors.


Mnason. 6 Sunday after Trin.
Que. 34
Unfold now the sixth commandment, Thou shall not kill.


Apollos. The affirmative part is this: Thou shall by all direct and lawful
means safeguard and defend the life and person both of thy self, and of thy
neighbor. The negative is this: Thou shall neither with a violent hand, nor a
virulent tongue, nor a hanging countenance, no nor so much as an uncharitable
thought hurt limme or life, soul or body of thy self, or thy neighbor.


Mnason. 7 Sunday after Trin.
Que. 35
Expound the 7. commandment: Thou shall not commit adultery.


Apollos. The affirmative part is thus much, thou shall preserve to thy self,
and to thy neighbor both the inward purity of the soul, and the outward
chastlty of the body. The negative thus much: thou shall shun all fleshly
uncleanenesse, both of the heart in motions and passions, and of the eyes in
looks and speculations, and of the ears in listening to filthy talk, and of
the tongue in wanton speaking, and of the body in perpetrating any sort of
unclean action.


Mnason. 8 Sunday after Trin.
Que. 36
Explain the eigth commandment, Thou shall not steal.


Apollos. In it God makes an hedge about our estate; and the affirmation of it
is this: thou shall first by just getting, and then by faithful disposal and
stewardship of thy goods, bear up thine own, and thy neighbors estate, that
you may be rather helpefull then needful to others. The negation is this,
thou shall neither by idleness, nor improvidence, nor cousenage, nor
injustice, nor riot, or by any other means wast, or impoverish the livelihood
and estate of thy self, or thy neighbor, whereby you ^ought to provide for
your selves, and your families, and relieve the necessities of the Saints.


Mnason. 9 Sunday after Trin.
Qu. 37.
Give me the sense of the ninth commandment, Thou shall not bear false
witness against thy neighbor.


Apollos. In it God sets a watch before the door of our lips, and the
affirmative of it is this: thou shall not only thy self not hurt or give a
willing ear to the detractors tongue, but thou shall uphold and propugne
according to truth and justice, the credit and good name of thy self and
neighbor. The negative is this: thou shall neither by public slander, nor by
private backbiting, nor by secret whispering, nor by causlesse suspicions, nor
by wrested misconstructions, nor by listening to others accusations and
suggestions scandalize thine own, or thy neighbors fame.


Mnason. 10 Sund. after Trin.
Qu. 38.
Lastly Sir, what means the tenth and last of the commandments, thou shall
not covet, etc.


Apollos. Oh this precept is able to humble, and smite on the knees, the most
prevaricating sinner, and proud Pharisie in the world, for if there be any that
be conceited on his own righteousness, and think he has kept the 9 former,
yet must he needs confess his guilt in this last, for the affirmative part of
it enjoynes us holy thoughts, holy desires, sanctified imaginations, pure and
unpolluted fantasies; and the negative forbids not only formed concupiscences,
or those second motions which are accompanied with acts of reason, and consent
of will, but even the first stirrings, and ticklings of the mind to sin, and
even such imperfect concupiscences, as whereunto we yield no liking or consent.


Mnason. 11 Sunday after Trin.
Que. 39
Who then can be saved? can any man keep the Law?


Apollos. Yea, as it is qualified by the Gospel, for Evangelicall obedience
abateth, and takes off the rigor of the Law, and is satisfied with weak
performances, if so be they be filled up with repentance, Greg. Qui non potest
agnum offerat columbam, i. ^qui non potest innocentia^ offerat poenitentiam.
and faith in the blood of Christ. The poor who could not offer a lamb were
to offer a dove, that is, they who cannot perform innocence, must offer
penitencie.


Autumn quarter.
Mnason. 12 Sunday after Trin.
Que. 40
Proceed on to Prayer, the third Catechumenall head, and first tell me why the
preface of the Lords prayer is in these, and none other words, Our father which
art in heaven.


Apollos. To strengthen our faith before we pray, in the persuasion, and
acknowledgement first of his goodness in that he is Our father, and therefore
will help us, and secondly of his power in that he is in heaven, and
therefore can help us.


Mnason, 13 Sunday after Trin.
Que. 41
What do we implore in the first petition, hallowed be thy name.


Apollos. That Gods name that is, first himself, secondly his word, thirdly
his works may be magnified and hallowed, and honored, and praised, and
glorified, and sanctified both of himself, of Angels, of men, of bruites, of
vegetables, and of all creatures according to the power and language given them
by God.


Mnason. 14 Sunday after Trin.
Que. 42
What do you ask in the second petition, thy kingdom come?


Apollos. That whereas Gods kingdom is 3 fold, of power, of grace, and of
glory, we pray that the kingdom of his power may come upon us, the kingdom
of his grace may come into us, and for the kingdom of his glory, that we may
come into it.


Mnason. 15 Sunday after Trin.
Que. 43
What is the meaning of the third petition, thy will be done?


Apollos. We pray, first that Gods will may be done actively by us, that
nothing that we do may displease God, and passively upon us, that nothing
that God does may displease us. And we further pray that this both our active
obedience in reference to Gods commanding will, and passive obedience in
reference to Gods disposal will, may be as cheerfully, speedily, sincerely,
universally, and constantly performed by us, as it is by the Saints and Angels
in heaven.


Mnason. 16 Sunday after Trin.
Que. 44
What is contained in the fourth petition, give us this day our daily bread


Apollos. In it we beg all necessary blessings, and every word of the petition
is to have the full weight: for the word bread teaches contentation, the word
our teaches us justice and diligence: the word us teaches us charity: the
word give, Gratitude: the words to day and daily, moderation of mind, in
regard of too much and sollicitous caring for to morrow.


Mnason. 17 Sunday after Trin.
Que. 45
What beg we of God in the fifth petition, forgive us our trespasses, etc.


Apollos. As in the 3 petition God was man's pattern, so here in this man is
Gods pattern, (...)* etc. Theophil.
for we beg that God would remit unto us all our sins, whether actual or
original, whether of omission, or commission, whether of ignorance, or
knowledge, whether open or secret, whether great beams and camels, or small
moates and gnats whether reigning, or only molesting, whether of our child
hood, youth, manhood, or old age, whether lastly of thought, word, or deed, and
all this according to the rule, and stander^ of our own charity, as we
forgive them that trespass against us: so that we burden our selves, and
bind our selves with most grievous ferrers, Gravissemis vinculis nos alligamus,
nisi quod profitemur impleamus, Leo sermon. 5. de quadrages.
if we our selves perform not what we undertake, and profess.


Mnason. 18 Sunday after Trin.
Qu. 46
What beg we in the sixth petition, lead us not into temptation, but deliver
us from evil.


Apollos. That whether tentations be ascending, or injected, whether they be
tentations of probation or deception, whether they be tentations to sin, or
for sin, whether we be tempted by God, or by Satan, or by man, or by our own
lusts and concupiscences, yet we pray that God would deliver us from the evil
of tentation, which is, that he will not suffer us to be tempted above our
strength, but give a gracious issue together with the tentation.


Mnason. 19 Sunday after Trin.
Que. 47
What imports the word Amen?


Apollos. It is the seal of this prayer, and is both the voice of faith, and
the voice of desire, as much as to say, Lord I believe these things shall be
so, and I desire earnestly they may be so, both for thy glory, and the Churches
good.


Mnason. 20 Sunday after Trin.
Que. 48
Which is the fourth, and last part of Catechisticall divinity?


Apollos. Of the sacraments, which in one word cannot better be defined, then
that they are the visible word, wherein, and whereby Christ crucified is
preached and declared to our eyes.


Mnason. 21 Sunday after Trin.
Que. 49
Now whereas the most perfect and exquisite knowledge of any thing is to see it
in its causes, Scire est per causas scire.
and that there are four causes of a thing, the efficient, from which it is,
the matter of which it is, the form by which it is what it is, and the end for
which it is, first show me which be the efficient causes of a sacrament.


Apollos. Christ himself, the head of his Church is the only Author, or
principal efficient cause of a Sacrament, none but he alone having power to
institute, or ordain one in the Church, but a lawful minister is the
isntrumental, or secondary efficient cause; has power to administer and
officiate, as Christ had to institute.


Mnason. 22 Sunday after Trin.
Que. 50
Which is the matter of which a sacrament consists?


Apollos. It is threefold, 1 the outward sign representing, 2 the inward grace
represented, 3 the word sanctifying.


Mnason. 23 Sunday after Trin.
Qu. 51
wherein consists the inward form, or essence of a Sacrament?


Apollos. In the analogy and proportion betwixt the outward sign, and the
inward grace, which may be called a sacramental union, or conjunction.


Mnason. 24 Sunday after Trin.
Qu. 52.
How manifold is the end of a Sacrament.


Apollos. Twofold, 1. to signify, 2. to exhibit the graces of God therein
specified and sealed. And the 12 articles thus believed, the ten commandments
thus kept, the six petitions thus powered forth, and the two Sacraments thus
administered and received, bring a man about in a blessed circular motion unto
the first-point of all, to wit, true blessedness or happiness.


FINIS.
AN ALPHABET CONTAINING THE BRIEF OF what is to be either known, or done by
them, who unfeignedly desire to make acceptable approches to the Lords Table.

The Communicants Alphabet.
1 The definition of a Sacrament.
A Sacrament is the visible word, as the Scripture is the word audible. By it
Christ crucified is spoken and preached to our eyes, as in the scripture to our
ears.

2 The difference betwixt the two Sacraments.
Baptism is the Sacrament of our matriculation, and admission into the Church,
and the Lords supper is the Sacrament of our establishment there, and
confirmation after we are admitted.

3 The efficient causes of a Sacrament.
Christ is the principal Author, or efficient cause of a Sacrament in the
Church. A lawful minister is the secondary, or isntrumental cause. None but
Christ alone who is the head of the Church can ordain or institute one, none
but a lawful minister, that is, who has gifts from God and calling from men,
can officiate or administer one.

4 The matter.
DIstinguish wisely betwixt the three parts which concur to the constituting
of a sacrament, to wit, first, the outward signs representing: secondly the
inward and invisible graces represented; lastly the word of benediction, or
consecration meeting with both.

5 Arule or Canon of S. Aug.
EXcept the word accede, and be added unto the Elements, it is noe Sacrament,
but common water, common bread, common wine.

6 The internal form.
Form inward, or the essence of a Sacrament, stands in the proportion or
analogy between the outward sign, and inward grace, which may be called a
Sacramental union, or conjunction of the sign, and the thing signified, as
namely, the proportion which outward washing holds with inward sanctification
is the essential form of baptism, and the proportion which bread and wine
hold with the body and blood of Christ is the essence, and form of the Lords
supper.

7 The external form.
GIve diligent heed also all the while of celebration to the whole leiturgie or
office of the Church, that is, to all the words and actions of the minister,
which are said and done according to the institution of Christ, and according
to the rule and prescript of the Church, whereof thou art a member: for so much
is called the outward form of a sacrament.

8 The ends.
HAve a steadfast regard withal to the threefold end of a sacrament, which are,
first to be signs to represent; secondly, seals to confirm; thirdly
instruments to conveigh Grace, for Sacraments were but poor things to what
they are, if they had not an exhibitive virtue, as well as a significative.

9 A twofold worthiness required in a Communicant.
IN preparation to the Lords table due respect must be had,both to the
worthiness of the receiver, and to the worthiness of receiving, that is
called precedent worthiness, or the worthiness of the Person, and is to go
before; this is called concurrent Worthiness, or the worthiness of handling,
and is to go along with the act of receiving.

10 The worthiness of the person consists in Righteousness.
KNow then that as only sin does avile, and unworthy our persons, so nothing
but Righteousness does dignifie them, and reestate them in their former
worthiness and excellency.

11 This Righteousness is double, of faith, and works
Learn further that this righteousness must be twofold; the one of Christ,
which must be imputed unto us, and therefore called the Righteousness of
faith: the other our own, which must be imparted to us, and inherent in us,
and therefore called the Righteousness of works.

12 Theworthinesse of handling consists in self examination.
MOreover the worthiness of handling, or of receiving consists chiefly in
putting in practice that grand Apostolical rule, 1 Cor. 11. 28. Let a man
examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread and drink of that cup.

13 Yet self examination is not enough without self approbation.
NEither is it sufficient to prove, unless (ou^ weaknesses and infirmities
being mercifully abated us in Christ) we be able to approve our selves both to
our own hearts, and to God, who is greater then our hearts.

14 Faith and manners are the two things to be taken into examination.
OMit not then to examine diligently the present condition, first, of the
Faith, and then of thy manners and life: the touchstone of the former is the
Creed; and of the latter, the decalogue, or ten commandments.

15 The Apostles creed is the rule of Faith.
PLace first before thine eyes the 12 Articles of that most ancient and
Apostolic creed, and examine thy self as in the presence of God, first
whether thou be able to give steadfast credit, and firm assent unto each of
them one by one; and secondly, whether thou can apply each article
particularly unto thine own self, and interest thine own soul by affiance
and trust, in the benefits and comforts which result from each Article.

16 The decalogue is the rule of manners.
QUestion nextly thy life and manners, and therein place before thee the ten
precepts of the moral law, carefully searching by most diligent scrutiny
through each commandment, wherein thou have transgressed, and broken either the
affirmative part of the commandment by sins of omission, or the negative by
sins of commission.

17 Repentance is the only salve for sin.
REpent from the bottom of thine heart, where thou find ought amiss in
either, and give not thy spirit rest, till thou have brought it to a bleeding
plight, and wrought it to some measure of godly contrition. For where we
cannot offer a lamb, we must offer a dove, that is, where we cannot perform
innocence we must pay penitency.

18 Sorrow and reformation are the two parts of true repentance.
SOrrow for what has been amiss for the time past* and careful both
resolution, and endeavor to amend, and reform for the time to come, are the
two parts of true and formal repentance God will neither accept our sorrow
without reformation, nor our reformation without sorrow and contrition.

19 The communicants carriage whilst he is receaving.
TAke heed with all thy might, that whilst thou art at that holy exercise,
neither eyes nor mind wander, least thou offer the sacrifice of fools; but
strive both to confine the thoughts of thy heart, and to fix the speculation
of thine eye. For (as was said before) it is the visible word, sermoning and
preaching Christ crucified, yea Christ crucifying unto the eyes; in which
regard not only the Elements themselves, but also every action of the
minister, while he is officiating is significative and representative.

20 The communicants carriage and disposition afterward. viz.
UNto all this one thing more is to be added, which is the consequent, or
subsequent disposition and temper of soul, which is to follow the holy
Communion: for the end crowns the work. Praeexistent congruities, and
coexistent concurrences, and subsequent dispositions must all meet to make a
good work perfect and absolute. There is required first a right ingresse into,
and then a right progress in, and lastly a right egresse out of every holy and
pious performance, before it can be put upon the file of good Works. An
action may miscarry upon one circumstance, it cannot be good but upon all.

21 In thankfulness.
WHen therefore thou have received, and that the holy business is ended,
thank God heartily for so great a favor, as to vouchsafe to feast thee with
his own body and blood, and so make it as it is, an Eucharist, that is, a
sacrifice of praise and thankesgiving.

22 And in newness of life.
YIeld also unto God real thankefullnesse, that is, constant and uniforme
obedience, eschewing even the least of sins which may defile the soul, and
setting upon the most difficult of virtues, which may ingratiate thee with God.
Having washed thy feet, do not defile them again; having put off thy rags,
put them not on again.

November. 28. 1639.
Imprimatur

Johannes Hansley.


