A TREATISE OF THE CONSECRATION OF THE SON OF God to his everlasting
PRIESTHOOD.

AND THE ACCOMPLISHMENT of it by his glorious Resurrection and Ascension.

BEING THE NINTH BOOK of Commentaries upon the Apostles CREED.

CONTINVED BY THOMAS IACKSON Doctor in Divinity, Chaplain in ordinary to his
MAJESTY, and President of C. C. C. in OXFORD.

OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD printer to the Famous University. AN.
DOM. 1638.

TO THE ROYAL Matie OF OUR MOST GRACIOUS AND PIOUS SOVEREIGN CHARLES KING OF
GREAT BRITAIN, etc.
Most gracious Sovereign,
THE only ends or scopes at which my desires, in the first draught of this long
work of comments upon the Apostles Creed, did aim, were first and principally
the glory of God, which is the supreme Cause of causes, the maine End of all
other ends, intended by good men or Angels: The second, subordinate to this,
was to give satisfaction to my longing desires, of discharging my duty to the
Church my Mother, by doing her such service as I was able; in setting forth the
true worship of God, and in maintaining the faith professed by her: The third,
subordinate to the second, but principally to the first, was to give an account
unto my middle age how I had spent my youth, and to leave a Constat unto my old
age (at which by Gods good providence, beyond my hope or expectation; I am now
arrived) that I had not altogether spent my best days in a drowsy sleep, or
which is worse, in waking dreams, or wandering projects, after pleasure,
riches, ambitious hopes, or private ends. But being first called unto Your
Majesty's service, in my declining years, I took the boldness upon me, about
some five years ago, in supplement of my weak performances in my Ordinary
attendance, to dedicate these three Books, concerning the knowledge of Jesus
Christ, and of him crucified, unto Your Highness, these being, (to mine own
apprehension) the best fruits of my best and flourishing years. The matter or
subject of them will not (I take it) be denied by any, to be the fittest Theme
for the meditations of all good Christians, according to their several
capacities. And no subject under heaven can be either more profitable, or more
delightful, for contemplative or stronger wits to work upon: unto whom,
especially unto such of them, as have better means or abilities, then God
hitherto has blessed me withal, I leave to amend or finish what I have long
ago begun, and thus far prosecuted. Full time it is for me, but no time (I
hope) as yet overpast to consecrate the rest of my labors, unto
death-bed-learning, and devotions, which is the best service that can be
expected from me at these years, and which the elder I grow, the better able I
trust I shall be to perform; as having by long experience found my self to
be then the strongest in this kind of exercise of mind and spirit, when I am
in greatest weakness of body. Now of these my devotions and daily prayers
unto God, a great part must be consecrated to this end, that he would vouchsafe
to continue his gracious favors and mercies toward your Royal person, and
that the Crowns of these Kingdoms, whereof you are, next, and immediately
under him and his Christ, the supreme Lord and governor, may long flourish
upon your own head, and the heads of your Posterity; that after this life
ended he may invest you with a Crown of endless glory.

Your Maties most humbly devoted Servant and Chaplain THOMAS IACKSON.

To the Christian Reader.
IT was in my thoughts when this Copy of my meditations upon the consecration
of the Son of God to his everlasting Priesthood, was first licenced for the
Press, to have annexed unto it one or two Sermons, or short Treatises of the
like argument. But being called from my studies by urgent occasions before the
impression of this 9th Book of Commentaries upon the Creed was near finished,
I am constrained to publish it in a lesser volume, then I first intended it,
though (I take it) in as many lines, or more words then either of the two
former Books upon the same argument, to wit, the knowledge of Christ, and of
him crucified, do contain. The matter is not great, and so much the less,
because I have ready (in adversariis) diverse Sermons, or short Treatises as
appendices or appertinences to all these three Books, respectively, and to
another entitled Christ's answer to John's disciples, or an Introduction to the
knowledge of Christ etc. to be published as soon as God shall be pleased to
grant me ability, and opportunity. Other three Books I have in like readiness
for the Press, to wit, the 10th Book of Comments upon the Creed, or a
treatise of the natural man's servitude to sin, and of that poor remnant of
Free Will which is left in the Sons of Adam before* they be regenerated in
Christ by the spirit, together with directions for the right use or employment
of Free Will, after our Baptism, for the accomplishment, or rather for
performance of the conditions on our parts required, that mortification may be
accomplished in us by the spirit of God. The next of the three Books promised
is the 11th Book of these Commentaries containing a treatise upon the Articles
of Christ's coming to judgment, of the Resurrection of the dead, and of the
Life everlasting, which is the final setence which at his coming to Judgment
shall pass upon all men, as well upon them which have bin long dead, as those
that shall be found alive at his coming. The last Book of these Comments
contains the second part of a treatise heretofore begun, and in part
published, concerning the Articles of the holy Catholic Church; of the
Communion of Saints, and the Forgiveness of sins. What I here promise or may
occasion the Readers, especially young students in divinity, to expect, shall
by Gods assistance be shortly or in good time performed, either by myself or
by my Executors: unto whose disposalls, I am not likely to leave much; scarce
any thing else besides Books and Papers.

Thine ever in Christ Jesus THOMAS IACKSON.

A TABLE OF THE PRINCIPAL Arguments of the several Sections and Chapters
contained in this BOOK.
SECTION. I. OF Consecration, and of the Qualifications of those that were to
be consecrated high Priests.
CHAP. 1. Of the true value or signification of the word (...), or of being
made perfect. Page 3. 2. Of the separation of the high Priest from men, and of
the compassionate temper which was the special Qualification of every high
Priest. Heb. 5. v. 2. Page 7. 3. What were those strong cries which the Son
of God did utter in the days of his flesh, how far his prayers were heard,
and from what death and danger he was delivered. Heb. 5. v. 7. Page 11. 4. The
Consecration of the Son of God was not finished immediately after his Agony in
the Garden, nor was he then or at the time of his sufferings upon the Cross^*
an (...), or comp^^a^ high* Priest after the O(...) of Mel^^i^^ d^c^. Page 18.
5. That the Son of God by his Consecration being ^nc^ accomplished, become
the Author^ and Fountain of everlasting ^a^v^tion to all such and only such as
obey him. In what since he is said to have dyed for (...), ^^ ^^ be (...) of
all mankind* Page 23.
SECTION. 2. OF the calling of designement of the Son of God to be an high
Priest after the order of Melchisedech: of the differences and agreements in
some particulars between the Priesthood of A^on and the Priesthood of
Melchisedech.
CHAP. 6. Of the signification or importance of the word calling, used by our
Apostle Heb. 5. with the general Heads or Points to be handled and discust in
this 2. 3. 4. Sections. Page 29. 7. In what sense Melchisedech is said to be
without Father and Mother Heb. 7. 3. Whether he were a mortal man a^ Abraham
was, though more ancient* wherein the similitude between Melchisedech's
person and the person of the Son of God does specially consist. Page 32. 8.
That the omission of Melchisedech's ^^^^^logy did import a special mystery;
and what that mystery was. page 40. 9 What manner of blessing it was which
Melchisedech ^^stowed on Abraham. That the manner of the blessing argues
Melchisedech to have been Sem the great, as the Jewish Rabbis enstile him,
the eldest son of Noah, not by birth yet by prerogative of the first borne.
page 44. 10. Wherein the priesthood of Melchisedech did differ from the
priesthood of Aaron; That Melchisedech did not offer any sacrifice of bread and
wine unto God when he blessed Abraham. page 50. 11. In respect of what points
especially the priesthood of Melchisedech did fore-picture the priesthood of
the Son of God. page 56.
SECTION. 3. OF the calling or destination of the Seed of Abraham, and Son
of David, by solemn oath to the everlasting Priesthood.
CHAP. 12. The chief or main principle whereon our Apostle grounds his
Treatise or discourse to the Hebrews* Containing a Paraphrase upon the most
part of the sixth Chapter to the Hebrews page 67. 13 The use of oaths, and
their observance is from the Law of Nature Of the manner of taking solemn
oaths amongst the Ancients of several Nations. page 74. 14. Of Oaths
promissory, specially for Confirmation of leagues, and of the fearful
judgments that usually fall upon them who wittingly and willingly violate
them. page 80. 15. In what cases solemn oaths were or are to be taken and
administered. page 90. 16. Gods oath to Abraham was an oath for Confirmation of
the league betwixt them. Of the several manner of leagues. page 96. 17. The
League between God and Abraham did eminently contain the most accurate
solemnities that were used betwixt Prince and Prince, or Nation and Nation.
page 104. 18. What the Interposition of God's oath for more a* bundant
Confirmation of his promise to Abraham did import, over and above all that
which was included in the literal or assertive sense of the League betwixt God
and Abraham. page 113. 19. Of the two things wherein our Apostle says it was
impossible for God to lie. page 122. 20. The former Importance of Gods Oath to
Abraham, and the contents of it specified in the two immediately precedent
Chapters, morefully confirmed by the ^enour of Gods oath to David and to his
seed, described at large by the Author of the 98 Psalm, most concludently by
the Apostle. Heb. 7. page 127.
SECTION. 4. BY what Persons and in what manner the Consecration of Jesus
Christ the Son of God to his Priesthood was prefigured.
CHAP. 21. That Jesus or Iehoshua the son of Nun, Zerubbabel the son of
Shealtiel, and Jesus the son of Iehosadeck were special Tipes of Jesus
Christ the Son of God, (respectively) as he was to be made and now is both
King and Priest. page 145. 22. Of the harmony between the Prophet Jeremy and
the Prophet Zachary concerning the man whose name is the Branch: How his growth
or springing up was prefigured by Zerubbabel the son of David: His name and
title as our high Priest fore-pictured by the name and title of Jesus the son
of Iosedech: That he was as truly the Son of God before all time, as the
son of David in time. page 154. 23. The objection of the Jews against the
interpretation of the former Prophecy Ierem. 23. answered. In what sense Judah
is truly said to be saved, and Israel to dwell in safety by Jesus the Son of
God and son of David. page 163. 24. That our high Priest the Son of God did
not only accomplish that which was fore-shadowed by the name and title and
office of Jesus the Son of Iosedeck, but withal, the legal rites or
solemnities; none of which he did destroy or dissolve, as he did the works of
the Devil, but change or advance them into better solemnities to be observed
by us Christians. That his solemn accomplishment of the feast of Atonement at
the feast of the Passover was prefigured in the Law, and fore-signified by Gods
special command. page 167. 25. In what respects the Consecration of Aaron and
of his sons did especially prefigure the Consecration of the Son of God;
and in what respect's they specially differ. That the Consecration of Aaron did
in diverse respects serve as a foil to set forth the excellency of the
Consecration of the Son of God. page 182. 26. In what respects the Bullock
offered at the Consecration of Aaron etc. and the rites of offering it did
prefigure the bloody sacrifice of the Son of God, especially the
circumstances of the place wherein it was offered. page 190. 27. In what
respects the Ram of the Consecration and the Ram which God did provide for
a burnt offering instead of Isaac, did prefigure the sacrifice of the Son of
God. Of other special rites wherein Aaron at his Consecration and in the
function of his Priesthood, did prefigure the Consecration and Priesthood of
the Son of God. page 196. 28. A brief recapitulation of what has been said
in this parallel between the Consecration of Aaron and the Consecration of the
Son of God the conclusion of the whole Treatise concerning it. page 208.
SECTION. 5. OF the Resurrection of the Son of God. By what Prophets it was
foretold. By what persons or legal Rites it was fore-pictured or foreshadowed.
CHAP. 29. In what high esteem S. Paul did hold the Article of of our Saviors
Resurrection and Ascension etc. That the want of explicit belief to this
grand Article of the Resurrection did argue rather a dullness or slownesse to
believe the Scrip tures then any infidelity, or incredulity, even in such as
had seen his miracles, and had heard him foretell his death and rising
again, until the event did manifest unto them the truth of his former
Doctrine and predictions. page 214. 30. That the Death and Resurrection of the
Son of God was enigmatically foretold in the first promise made to our
Father Adam, and our Mother Eve. That his Resurrection was exquisitely
prefigured by Isaack's escape front death; and the Propagation of his Kingdom
after his Resurrection, by the strange increase, or multiplication of Isaack's
seed. A parallel betwixt our Savior and Joseph in their affliction and
exaltation. page 225. 31. Showing the concludency of the allegations used by
the Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul to prove the truth of Christ's Resurrection;
and in particular of the Testimony Psalm. 2. Thou art my Son this day have I
begotten thee. page 237. 32. The concludency of S. Paul's second Argument Act.
13. drawn from the 55. of Isaiah. page 255. 33. That our Savior's departure,
and passing out of this world to his Father, or his entering into his glory
through afflictions was exquisitely fore-shadowed by diverse solemnities in the
legal Passover, and by the Israelites passing through the red Sea. page 261.
34. The Resurrection of the Son of God, and the effects or issues of his
birth from the grave were concludently fore-pictured by the Redemption of the
firstlings of the flocks, and of the first borne males, and by the offerings of
the first fruits of their corn. page 269.
SECTION. 6. HE ascended into Heaven.
CHAP. 35. How the Ascension of the Son of God was prefigured by the
translation of Enoch, and by the taking up of Elias; And foretold by the
Psalmist, Psalm. 15. and Psalm. 24. page 277. 36. At what time, and upon what
occasions the 68. Psalm was composed: What reference it has (in the general)
unto our Saviors Ascension. page 286. 37. Of the concludency of the Apostles
Allegation, Ephesians. 4. 7. 8. Out of the 18. verse. of the 68. Psalm. page 292. 38.
That the manner of our Saviors Ascension was more clearly fore seen by Daniel
then by David, and most exactly fore-shadowed by matters of fact in Mosaicall
and other sacred histories: A paralle^ between Salomons Consecration of the
Temple, and our Saviors Consecration, or sanctifying of himself, and his
heavenly Sanctuary. page 301. 39. Into what place or part of heaven our Savior
did ascend, or in what manner he sits at the right hand of God, are points
not so fit to be particularly inquired after, nor so apt to be proved or
determined by Scripture, as the other Articles of our Creed. page 307. 40. How
the time of our Saviors Ascension into heaven upon the fortieth day after his
Resurrection from the grave, was prefigured by the sign of the Prophet Jonas,
with the exposition of that sign given by our Savior Mat. 12. 39. 40. page
313. 41. A Parallel between the day wherein Adam is thought to have been cast
out of Paradise, with the day wherein our Savior was Crucified: And between
the first day of the worlds Creation and our Saviors Resurrection. page 325.
42. That the sentence proclaimed against Nineveh by the Prophet Jonas, was in a
full measure executed upon the adulterous Generation of the Jews; not
believing or repenting at our Saviors preaching. page 332. 43. That place of
Zachary Chap. 14. v. 3. expounded, showing that God did fight with the Gentiles
against the Jews as formerly he had done with the Jews against the Gentiles.
How the forty days of Christ's abode upon earth after his Resurrection was
sore-told. page 341.
Errata.
Page 14. Lin. 7 proposition Cor. preposition. p. 19. l. 13. earth c. upon
earth. p. 38. l. 15. fants c. Infants. p. 39. l. 24. as c. is. p. 73. l. 27.
judaicall c. judicial. p. 75. l. 15. owe c. own. p. 76. l. 15. tagendo c.
tangendo. p. 76. l. 2. deleatur P. p. 79. l. 12. P^idias c. Cydias. p. 115. l.
26. sororom c. sororum. p. 34^. l. 9. vvath. c. wrath.

A TREATISE OF THE CONSECRATION of the Son of God to his everlasting
PRIESTHOOD. And THE ACCOMPLISHMENT OF it by his Glorious Resurrection and
Ascension:
1. WANT sometimes of skill, sometimes of industry, oftentimes of both, to
sound the mysteries, or discuss the general maxims contained in sacred
Scriptures aright, has been one special occasion, as of breeding, so of
nursing and continuing endless quarrels amongst the chief professors of
peace, Students I mean or Graduates in Theology. Now for composing the most
or greatest Controversies which for these late years have disturbed the peace
of Christ's Church militant here on earth, no maxim in the whole Book of God,
which is the only Fundamental and complete rule of faith and manners, is or
can be of greater or better use than that of our Apostle, Heb. 5. 9. And being
made perfect he became the Author of everlasting salvation to all that obey
him, being called a Priest etc. The discussion whereof in a fuller measure, and
(as I hope) in a more distinct manner, then I have found it discussed by
others, is the maine end or scope of these present undertakings. The maxim it
self though brief is the true scale or diametrall line or rule, without whose
knowledge or distinct survey first taken, neither the full distance or
disproportion, nor the parallel approaches, or symmetrall vicinities, which
many different opinions yet still in debate respectively hold or bear unto the
infallible doctrine of salvation and life, will ever be fully discovered, much
less clearly determined.

Besides this great and general use, if we could hit the punctual meaning of
this place, or take a true value of the very first word in this text (...), we
might with more facility clear that obscure and difficult place. Heb. 11. 40.
and inform our selves, First what better thing it was, which God had provided
for the faithful in later ages, in respect of former; and secondly, what the
Apostle there means by being made perfect. For in this being made perfect
consists the betterhood of the faithfulls estate in that time, in respect of
Abraham's, the Patriarchs, and the Prophets.

SECT. 1. Of Consecration, and of the Qualifications of those that were to be
consecrated high Priests.
CHAP. 1. Of the true value or signification of the word (...) or of being made
perfect.
WHatsoever good thing or perfection it was which the Apostles, or Disciples of
our Lord did obtain in this life, over and above all that which the Patriarchs
in their Pilgrimages here on earth did attain unto, this was wholly from the
perfection here mentioned in my Text. Neither the Patriarchs nor Apostles were
made perfect until the Son of God was made perfect. Their best perfection is
but an effct, or branch of his perfection, or of his being made perfect. That
the Patriarchs and Apostles should be made perfect, is not a thing strange,
because they were but men, and therefore subject to many imperfections: but
that the Son of God who is perfection it self should be made perfect, this
may seem more then strange, a thing impossible; and we were bound to admit a
solecisme in the Apostles expressio^, if we were to weigh it only according to
the grammatical signification of the Original (...), which word for word is
neither more nor less then to be made perfect.

2 But many words there are in all the learned tongues, whose prime
signification every ordinary Grammar Scholar may know whilst he reads them
only in Historians or Rhetoricians. And yet the best Grammarian living (so he
be no more then a Gra^marian) may be altogether ignorant of their true meaning
o^ importance, whilst they are used in legal or solemn Instruments, or as
terms of some special art or faculty. Every schooleboy knows the ordinary
signification of Possum whilst he reads it in his Grammar rules, or in such
Authors as he is acquainted with: and yet his master (how good a Grammarian
soever) unless he be a Philosopher withal, shall hardly be able to render
the true notion or expression of Potentia in natural Philosophy: And a
natural Philosopher may be sometimes as sarre to seek in the use of the same
word Potentia or Potestas in the faculty of the Civil Law. Lastly, he that
has his senses exercised in all these Faculties or Sciences mentioned, would
be a mere stranger to the notion of the same word in the Mathematics: as
unable to express what Posse or Aequiposse imports in the Science of Geometry,
as a mere rustic is to understand the terms of Law. Such a word or term is
this first word in my text, (...). For it is more then a word of art, verbum
Jolenne, used by the LXX. Interpreters to express the legal and formal
consecration of Aaron his sons and their successors to their Priestly
function. And in this sense it is to be taken in this place, and is so rendered
in our former English, [ And being consecrated he was made the Author of
salvation.] And so is the very same word rendered by our later English. Heb. 7.
and the last. [ The word of the oath which was since the law makes the Son
Priest,] who is (...), consecrated for evermore.] The Authors of both
Translations, (if so it had pleased them) might have given better content and
satisfaction to their readers, if they had constantly so expressed the same
word with it is allies in most places of this Epistle. That in this place the
word (...) imports as much as we have said, that is, the formal and solemn
consecration of the Son of God unto his everlasting Priesthood, needs no
farther proof or declaration, then the matter or subject of his discourse from
the 14th v. of the 4th Chap. unto the 11. v. of this 5. Now the only subject
of his discourse as well in these places now cited, as through the whole 7.
Chap. is the Consecration of the Son of God to his everlasting Priesthood:
and the super-excellency of the Priesthood, as well as of the Consecration to
it, in respect of legal Priesthoods or consecrations.

3. This is the profoundest mystery in Divinity, or rather the main foundation
of all Evangelicall mysteries treated off by our Apostle unto the end of this
Epistle. But this profound mystery it self has the same hap which other deep
foundations have, that is, to be least seen or sought into by such as are
otherwise exact surveyors of superstructures or buildings raised above ground.

The sum of my present search or survey after this great mystery is this; How
the everlasting Priesthood of the Son of God, and his consecration to it were
prefigured, foreshadowed, or foretold either in the law or before the law!

Of the eternity of this our high Priests person, (that is the person of the
Son of God) Melchizedech long before the law, was the most illustrious type
or picture. So was his order, or Sacerdotall function, the most exact shadow of
the Son of Gods everlasting Priesthood.

Of the qualification of the Son of God for this everlasting Priesthood, and
of the manner of his Consecration to it, Aaron and other legal Priests his
lawful Successors, and the legal rites or manner of their Consecration, were
the most lively pictures.

First of the parallel between Aaron and his Successors lawfully ordained, and
the high Priest of our souls, for their qualifications required by the Law of
God, and by the Law of nature.

Secondly of the parallel between Melchisedech and the Son of God, as well
for their persons, as for sacerdotall functions or exercises of them.

The parallel between Aaron and other Priests of the Law, and the Son of
God, for their qualification to their different Priesthoods, is (as was but now
intimated) the subject of our Apostles discourse from the beginning of the
fifth Chapter unto the tenth verse. We are then in the first place to search
out the true sense and meaning of our Apostle, by tracing his steps from the
first verse unto the ninth verse. Secondly, to show in what sense the Son of
God, by his Consecration became the Author of everlasting salvation to all that
obey him, and to them only. For so our Apostle says, being consecrated he
became the Author or cause (...) of everlasting salvation to all that obey him.

CHAP. 2. Of the Separation of the high Priest from men, and of the
compassionate temper which was the special Qualification of every high Priest.
Heb, 5. v. 2.
EVery high Priest is taken from among men, so that every high Priest must be a
man so separate or set apart from ordinary men for offering gifts or sacrifices
unto God, as that which we call consecrated, or hallowed ground, is from
common soil or places of secular use or commerce. But albeit the Priests of
the Law were by Consecration separated from ordinary men: yet could they not be
separated from their own sins, so long as they carried this body of death
about them. But such an high Priest (says our Apostle Chap. 7. v. 27. it
behoved us to have, as is harmless, holy, and separated from sinners. He was
so separated from sinners, that he could take no infection from them or their
sins, whilst he lived and conversed amongst them. Another special
Qualification, required in such as were appointed to the legal Priesthood, we
have verse the second of this fi^ft Chapter: And that was, to be able
sufficiently to have compassion on them that were ignorant and out of the way;
and for this reason, though God be not the Author of sin in any, yet he made
an especial use of the sins whereunto legal Priests were subject; to teach
them thereby* to be compassionate toward others: more compassionate then they
would or could have been, if they had not been conscious of their own
infirmites, and grievous offenses against God; for which they were to offer
sacrifices, as well as for the sins of the people. And the more deeply they
were touched with the consciousnesse of their own sins, or with Gods
displeasure which they had incurred by them; the more devoutly they prayed for
the people, the more diligent and careful they were in their office of
Atonement for them. Every godly or considerate high Priest did in every
respect for the people, as they desired God should do for them.

2 This compassionate temper in every high Priest or chief spiritual
Governor required by the Law of God, is so agreeable to the common notions of
the law of nature, that the consonancy betwixt them did (if not first occasion)
yet strengthen the worlds opinion of Peter's supremacy over Christ's Catholic
Church. A memorable instance to this purpose we have recorded by a late
ingenious writer of the life and facts of Matthias Corvinus King of Hungary,
into whose presence an ambitious School-man had long desired to be admitted;
who because he had learned to play fast and loose with Aquinas or Scotus
distinctions, presumed he was able to dissolve any knot in Divinity, and
desired nothing more then to play his prizes before that witty King: Being
after long importunate suite admitted into his presence, the first problem the
generous King proposed unto him was this; [Seeing S. Peter had thrice denied
his Lord and Master, whereas S. John who had never offended him, was never
tainted with any crime, but continued still the Disciple whom he loved; What
was the reason why our Savior Christ should make S. Peter head of his Church
rather then S. Iohn] Tunc Gattus iratus inquit, nol^te mihi prefinire modum
theology, quem teneo: Nemo enim est tam temerarius, qui in Theologicis semecum
confer auderet Nam nibil in hac Divina scientia mihi est (ut puto)
incognitum. Omnes enim Bibliothecas percurri, and nun qu^m huius dubitationis
occurrit declaratio. Tunc. Rex Matthias alt ad Gatt^m: Non multos in Theologia
libros legi nec etiam in aliis facultatibus; A puero enim ^d Regiam dignitatem
evectus, pauca e multis didici, and militarem quodammodo literaturam arriput
Sed tamen huius rei declaratio, ut opinor, sacile inveni^tur* Gattus impatiens,
sermonem Regium interrumpens, inquit, Deponite hanc mentem, quoniam ut dixi
nusquam est etc. Si virgo Johannes and in side firmus Pontifex fuisset, cum
ligandi solvendi^ potestate, nusquam libidinis blanditias vneque expertus, and
qui nullo tumultu a Christo potuit dimoveri, ad sum similatadinem humanum genus
confirmare per cubuisset, and Christi, fideique desertores, libidineque
corruptos summa austeritate depulisset Non enim ex fragilitate peccantes, sed
ex anuni ne ^uitia homines putasset, qui fletibus dolorem fingerent. summa
igitur ratione factum est ut Petras Iohanni in Pontificatu preferretur; quod tu
Johannes Gatte inter illa dei iudicia inscrutabili^ connumerabas Galeotus
Martius de dictis and factis Matthiae inter alios scriptor rerum Hungaricarum
elegans. Cap. 30. page 386. etc.
The Iugler perceiving that he had brought the wrong box with him, requested
the King not to meddle with Gods secrets, but to propose some other
controversed Question to him: upon the issue the King resolved him that this
was none of Gods secrets, alleging the Authority of S. Hierome as an
introduction to his own collections, and this reason withal, That if our
Savior had made S. John head of the Church, he would have been more severe
and rigorous then those, or other corrupt times would suffer; as being not
conscious to himself of any grosie enormitie. The same reason had been avouched
long before by Eulogius, but censured by (...) and he gaves a good reason for
this sentence in the (...) following. Et si enim Petro dictum est, veruntamen
in person^ Coryphaei and caeteris apostolis talis potestas data. Quandoquidem
and sequentibus illos sacerdotibus eandem da^an esse solvendi ligandique
petestatem credimus Photius ex 2. lib bibliotheca. Columno. 1599.
Photius as relishing more of plausible fancy, then of sound judgment. Yet in
this fancy there was a spice of truth and reason; * for S. Peter became more
powerful in preaching the Gospel to his Brethren the Jews, then any of
Christ's other Apostles, because he sympathized better with them, and was (no
question) more compassionate and kind unto them, then any of the other
Apostles were or could have been.

3 But in offering gifts and sacrifices out of true compassion toward his
people, in making Intercession and Atonement for them, our high Priest did and
does far exceed all legal Priests, all other inferious spiritual
Governors. In all things (says our Apostle) it became him to be made like
unto his Brethren, that he might be a merciful and a faithful high Priest in
things concerning God, that he might make reconciliation for the sins of his
people. For in that he suffered and was tempted, he is able to succor them
that are tempted. Heb. 2. 17. All his sufferings and temptations were requisite
for his Qualification Of this point see more at large in the 3 book of these
commentaries upon the creed Sect. 2. cap. 6.
to his Priestly function, which was to be merciful and compassionate toward
sinners: more compassionate toward all sorts of sinners, then any one sinner
could be either toward himself or others; Because he had more full and deeper
experience of the wages due to sin, than any sinners in this life can have.
Hence says our Apostle in the words immediately preceding to these now in
handling, Though he were the Son yet learned he obedience by the things which
he suffered. As he was the Son of God he knew all things, could learn
nothing; yet as the son of man, or as man designed for our high Priest, he
had a sensible experience of the pains and punishments due to sin, and of
the unknown terrors of the second death, which as he was God he could not
have, and which as man, unless he had been the Son of God withal, he
could not have borne. The obedience which he learned by suffering (as was
observed before) was passive not active. And his unspeakable patience (even
while he suffered these grievous and unknown pains and terrors) is
mentioned by our Apostle as a part of his Qualification. v. 7. In the days of
his flesh he offered up prayers and supplications by strong cries and tears
unto him that was able to save him from death (...)

CHAP. 3. What were those strong cries which the Sonnne of God did utter in the
days of his flesh, how far his prayers were heard, and from what death and
danger he was delivered. Heb. 5. v. 7.
MAldonate with some other good Interpreters refer these strong cries or loud
exclamations unto that strong cry upon the cross, my God my God why have thou
for saken me? But thus they teach (with due respect unto their worth and
learning I speak it,) very impertinently and inconsiderately. For first, that
ejaculation of our Savior upon the Cross, though uttered with a loud voice or
cry, bears rather the character of a complaint or expostulation, then of a
humble Prayer or supplication, (if we take it in the literal sense) as if it
had been extorted from the extremity of pain which he then suffered. The
truth is, it was neither a Prayer nor complaint, but meratessera, a signal or
watchword to his Auditors or Spectatours to rally their tumultuous disordered
thoughts. And if they had taken their former indignities done unto him on the
Cross, and his admirable patience in suffering them without murmr or
complaint, into serious consideration, they might have diseerned that this was
the man or promised Messiah, whose sufferings the Psalmist did describe, and by
his own sufferings in part represent. For our Savior uttered not these words
of the 22 Psalm until all the other passages in the same Psalm were ocularly
exemplified and fulfilled in him.

2 Secondly, we never read, nor have we any occasion to suspect, but reasons
pregnant to deny that our Savior did ever deprecate the death of the Cross;
or could be daunted with any indignities which the Jews could do unto him,
either by word or fact: either by themselves or their Associates. And for this
reason (as has been observed before,) when In the 8 book of these Comments.
Cap. 12. par. 3.
Peter had advised him to be good to himself, not to expose his person to the
malice of the Jews, he was dismissed with this severe check, Get thee behind
me Satan, for thou art an offense unto me etc. Now Peter had been the more
provident of the two, if his Master had uttered the former words either by way
of Prayer or complaint. Again if our Savior had been at any time daunted
with the death of the Cross, or had prayed for deliverance from this death, or
any pains that did accompany it, his prayers or supplications had not been
heard by him, who was able to save him from death; seeing from this death, he
did not save him, but suffered or rather required him to taste of it to the full
for all men. But it is evident that these strong cries and exclamations uttered
with tears mentioned by our Apostle Chap. 5. 7. were heard to the full. For so
it is said, He was heard in that which he feared. So both our English
translations read it: The later with this variation in the margin, He was
heard for his piety. Neither expression is altogether untrue^; yet neither of
them full; or both put together not much ad appositu^, little pertinent to our
Apostles intent or meaning. How then are they to be amended? By a more full
explication of the several acceptions of the words in the original.

3 This latter word (...) rendered by fear, or piety, imports in its prime or
proper signification as much as a wary or cautelous fear. And (if good
Interpreters do not fail us,) it is always taken in the better sense, that is
(as we say) for a filial or pious, not for a base or servile fear. Whence
seeing he only is pious or godly, who is wary or circumspect not to offend God,
nor to wound his own conscience, the same word in the secondary or
consequentiall sense does signify piety, or godliness. But whether in one or
both of these two compatible senses we take this word in this place, the
construction which either the vulgar Latin or our English makes of the whole
original clause (...) exanditus est ob reverentiam, he was heard in that he
feared, or for his piety or reverence, will be very harsh. For the Greek
proposition (...) cannot by analogy either to the Greek or Hebrew be rendered
by the Latin ob or propter; or as our English does in or for; or in that he
feared or for his piety, or reverent fear. We are therefore to consider a
twofold Hebraisme in this passage. The one in the word (...) the other in the
word (...) It is a general rule in the Hebrew Dialect, that not only
Participles but Noune Substanstives, or abstract forms are as well passive as
active. According to this analogy unto the Hebrew, the word Hope as well in the
Greek as in the Latin, and many other like, are sometimes to be construed
actively, sometimes passively. Spes qua speramus and spes quae speratur. And so
likewise promissio qua Deus promittit and promissio quae promittitur. This is
the promise which he has promised, even eternal life. And so is the word,
fear, whether we take it in the worse or better sense, as for a natural or
servile fear, or for a pious and religious fear, there is timor quo timemus a
fear by which we seek to eschew evil, and timor qui timetur which is no
other then the evil feared. Now the word (...) must in this place of
necessity be taken in the passive signification, not in the active, that is,
for the evil which our Savior so much or so piously feared. Again in as much
as God always delivered them from danger or dread, whose prayers he hears,
hence it is that to be exauditus, truly heard of God in prayers and
supplications, is as much as to be delivered from the dread or danger which we
pray against. So that (...) is in true English all one, as if he had said, And
he was delivered from that which he so piously or mightily feared.

4 The Apostles words contain a full expression of the Psalmists speech, or
rather a record of the fulfilling of his prophecy. Psalm. 22. 21. Save me from
the Lions mouth, for thou have heard, that is, thou have delivered me from the
horns of the Unicorn. God had delivered his Son (whose part in all his
sufferings this Psalmist did respectively act, or represent) from the first
temptation in the wilderness; and now he prays he would deliver him from this
far greater temptation in the Garden, (when the whole host of darkness had
environed him) with strong cries and tears, Father if it be' possible let this
Cup pass from me! And so S. Luke instructs us, He was heard and delivered from
that hour of temptation which he did so much dread. For in the second pang of
that bitter agony an Angel was sent to comfort him, and within the space of an
ordinary hour this Cup which was ten thousand times more bitter then the death
of the Cross, or any pains which he suffered upon it, was ^ttely removed from
him. And after this hour was ended we do not read, nor is there any
circumstance in holy writ to enduce so much as a conjecture that he stood in
fear of any evil that could befall him by the Jews or Roman Soldiers, but
most patiently (as our Apostle speaks) endured the Cross and despised the
shame. Of what kind soever the pains which he suffered in the Garden were (a
point in the former Book discussed at large) the suffering of them was neither
necessary, or requisite, for making satisfaction to God the Father for the
sins of the world. For such satisfaction was abundantly made by the mere
death of the Cross. Yet were these his unknown, or unexperienced sufferings
in the Garden, either necessary, or most expedient for his Qualification and
Consecration to his everlasting Priesthood, that he might be a merciful and
faithful high Priest able to compassionate and succor all such as are in any
kind tempted. Briefly, seeing one special part of his Priesthood is to make
intercession and supplication for us in all our distresses, it was in the
wisdom of God expedient that he should have just occasion to offer up prayers
and supplications with strong cries for himself. And in as much as these his
supplications were heard of his Father, we have assurance that he will not
cease to make intercession for us, until God grant us deliverance from
temptations, so we pray unto him in such fear and reverence as he in his agony
did unto his Father. He will in this case do for us as he desired his Father
to do for him.

5 It seems the Consecration of legal high Priests, so long as they
accurately observed the rites and manner prescribed by Moses, did one way or
other cost them so dear that no man which duly weighed the charge laid upon
them would be very ambitious of the office. Hence says our Apostle, Heb. 5. 4.
No man takes this honor unto himself but he that is called of God as Aaron
was: So likewise Christ took not to himself this honor to be made an high
Priest, but he that said unto him, Thou art my son, this day have I begotten
thee, put this charge or honor upon him; against his will questionless, as
man, albeit he most obediently submitted himself to his Fathers will, because
he had taken the form of a Servant upon him. His Consecration we may safely
avouch cost him dearer then the Consecration of all the legal Priests that had
been before him; or of all the Christian Bishops, or Prelates which have lived
since did or does them, whether severally or jointly. Never did any man utter
those words so truly and sincerely, Episcopari nolo, as he did, or pray so
earnestly, that the charge of his Consecration might be mitigated whilst he
was in his agony. But how dear soever his Consecration cost him, the costs and
charges of it though altogether unknown to us, were recompensed by the purchase
which he gained by it: For, as it follows, being thus consecrated, he became
the Author of everlasting salvation to all that obey him, and their salvation
was and is as pleasant to him; as his sufferings whereby he was consecrated,
were for the present distasteful.

CHAP. 4. The Consecration of the Son of God was not finished immediately
after his Agony in the Garden, nor was he then or at the time of his sufferings
upon the Cross, an actual, or complete high Priest after the Order of
Melchisedech.
But was his Consecration finished immediately after he had been anointed
with his own blood in the Garden, or as soon as his prayers and supplications
which he offered up with strong cries and tears were heard? No; whatsoever
else was required for his Qualification, there could be no true and perfect
Consecration to his Priesthood without a Sacrifice, without a bloody Sacrifice.
This was one principal part of Aarons Consecration to his legal Priesthood,
and so of his Successors. But here the Jew, who is for the most part less
learned then perverse and captious, will in this particular shrewdly object, if
not thus insult over the negligence of many Christian teachers: When your
crucified God was convented by the high Priests and Elders, when he was
arraigned before Pontius Pilate; when he was sentenced to the death of the
Cross, tell us plainly whether in any of these points of time mentioned, he
were truly a Priest, or no Priest? If no Priest at all, what had he to do to
offer any Sacrifice, especially a bloody one? For this was a service so
peculiar to the legal Priests which were the sons of Aaron, that it was
sacrilege for the sons of David, For the greatest Kings of Judah to attempt
it. If you will say then he was a Priest, you must acknowledge him either to
have been a Priest after the order of Melchisedech, or after the order of
Aaron: If you say he was a Priest after the order of Aaron, you plainly
contradict this Apostle whom you acknowledge to be the great Teacher of you
Gentiles; for he says Chap. 7. v. 14. of this Epistle, It is evident that our
Lord sprang out of Judah, concerning which Tribe Moses spoke nothing concerning
the Priesthood. And again Chap. 8. v. 4. he says* He were not a Priest if
he were earth, seeing there are Priests which according to the Law offer
gifts. Now if he could be no Priest were he now on earth, then certainly he
could be no Priest after the order of Aaron, nor did he offer any legal, or
bloody sacrifice whilst he lived (as sometimes he did) here on earth.

2 Was he then whilst he lived here on earth, a Priest after the order of
Melchisedech, and by this title authorized to offer sacrifice? This I presume
you dare not avouch. For Melchisedech was a Priest according to endless life;
his Priesthood was an immortal everlasting Priesthood. Now although every man
be not an high Priest, yet every high Priest must be a man, and a man taken
from amongst ordinary men, to offer gifts and sacrifices for sin. The
Priesthood is an accident; the humanity or manhood is the subject or substance
which supports it. Dare you then say that a mortal man whilst he was such,
could possibly be an everlasting Priest, or a Priest according to an endless
life, when he was to dye a miserable and ignominious death the very same day?
Durum esset hoc affirmare! This indeed is a hard saying, a point of Doctrine
whose intimation did cause the Jews, such as were in part our Saviors
Disciples, or very inclinable to his service, to question the truth of his
calling and of his sayings, John 12. v. 32. etc. And I, if I were lift up from
the earth will draw all men unto me. Now this he said (says S. John)
signifying what death he should dye, to wit, the death of the Cross. And so
his Auditors conceived his meaning; and for this reason the people answered
him, We have heard out of the Law, that the Christ abides for ever, and how
say thou the son of man must be lift up? Who is that son of man? v. 34.
This people at that time had a clear prenotion, or received opinion that their
promised Messiah, or the Christ should be a Priest after the order of
Melchisedech, that is, a Priest to endure for ever; for the Lord had confirmed
thus much by oath. Psalm 110. And out of this common prenotion, whether first
conceived out of that place of David, The Lord has sworn and will not repent,
thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech; or from some other
Scripture, the people in the forecited place, questioned whether it were
possible he should be the Christ, seeing by his own confession he was shortly
after to dye the death of the Cross.

3 These objections I confess could hardly be answered, if we should grant
what many modern Divines out of incogitancy have taught, or taken upon trust
without further examination, to wit, that the eternal Son of God our Lord
and Savior was an high Priest from eternity, or an high Priest from his birth
as man, or from his Baptism when he was anointed by the holy Ghost unto his
Prophetical function, or whilst he was upon the Cross. But not granting this,
(as we have no reason to admit any branch of it,) the answer to the former
objection is clear and easy: Betwixt a Priest complete, or actually
consecrated, and no Priest at all, datur medium participationis; there is a
mean or third estate or condition, to wit, a Priest in fieri, though not in
facto, or a Priest inter consecrandum, that is, in the interims of his
Consecration before he be actually and completely consecrated. Such a man, or
rather such a Priest was Aaron during the first six or seven days of his
Consecration, yet dare no Jew avouch that after the first or second day of his
separation from common men, he was no more then an ordinary man, no Priest at
all; nor that on the seventh day he was a Priest actually consecrated, but as
yet in his Consecration. He was not till the eight day qualified to offer up
Sacrifices unto God, but had peculiar Sacrifices offered for his Consecration
by Moses.

4 Briefly then, the Sacrifice of the Son of God upon the Cross, whether we
consider it as of fered by himself, or by his Father, (as it is sometimes said
in Scripture to be offered by both,) was the absolute accomplishment of all
legal Sacrifices or services Aaronicall. And yet but an intermediate (though
an especial) part of his Consecration to the Priesthood after the order of
Melchisedech, not the ultimum esse or accomplishment of it. It was not
terminated till the day of his Resurrection from the dead. But of this argument
more at large Sect. 5. in the Article of the Resurrection of the Son of God.
That this eternal Son of God was not actually consecrated or made an high
Priest, until his Resurrection from the dead, our Apostle in the fifth verse of
this Chapter before cited to another purpose, fully instructs us. Christ took
not to himself this honor to be made the high Priest, but he that said unto
him, Thou art my Son this day have I begotten thee, put it upon him. And this
day, or this Ego hodie genuite (as this our. Apostle elsewhere instructs us)
referres unto the day of his Resurrection or begetting from the dead. After
which day death has no more dominion over him, but He such an absolute power
over death and the powers of darkness, that neither can annoy, or assault him.
And from this day, and not before does his endless everlasting Priesthood
commence. And being thus actually consecrated by his Resurrection from the
dead, that is, made both Lord and Christ, he is become the Author of
everlasting salvation, which was the second Point.

CHAP. 5. That the Son of God by his Consecration being once accomplished,
became the Author and Fountain of everlasting salvation to all such and only
such as obey him. In what sense he is said to have dyed for all men, or to be
the redeemer of all mankind.
He became Author of Salvation to all that obey him.

THe signification of the single terms in this proposition is so plain that
it needs no paraphrase or explication, and the connection of them so firm as
requires no distinction. All the difficulty is about the limitation of the
entire proposition it self, as whether he be the Author or cause of
everlasting salvation only to them which obey him, or unto all, to the end that
they may obey him: or whether this proposition be equivalent, and but
equivalent unto this proposition [ whosoever believes in him shall be saved,]
or a restraint of it! Surely if in all these places of the old and new
Testament wherein salvation is ascribed to faith, or unto faith alone, the
Apostles or Prophets had substituted obedience instead of faith, there could
have been no dangerous misnomure, for as the faith is, such is the obedience,
and e contra. Both terms equally imply two (the same) things necessary to
salvation: First a submission of our wills to Gods will, or a readiness to do
his will revealed. Secondly, when we have done as well as we can, to deny our
selves and renounce all confidence in our best works, whether of faith or
obedience. But however the terms be fully equivalent, yet the word obedience
better befits this place then if he had said, He became the Author of
everlasting salvation to all that believe in him, because obedience is the very
formal effect of true faith or belief, as they are set upon this particular
truth or mystery here taught by our Apostle; the (...) or impression, or the
ingrossment of the pattern here commended to our imitation. For if we
syncerely and steadfastly believe that the Son of God became obedient to his
Father even unto the death of the Cross; that for our sakes he was consecrated
through grievous afflictions, through unknown pains and terrors, to the end
he might be our faithful and compassionate high Priest: This Doctrine it self
being laid to our hearts will bring forth the like affection or obedience
toward him, specially if our faith be seconded by hope of being consecrated
through obedience to be Kings and Priests with him, unto our God, which is the
full paraphrase of our everlasting salvation here meant; the true expression of
that perfection mentioned by our Apostle. Heb. 11. v. the last.

But if the Apostles punctual meaning be, that the Son of God is the Author
of everlasting salvation only to such as obey him, shall we not hence be
concluded to grant that he died only for such as finally shall be saved, or
that he redeemed none but the Elect, because the Author of salvation to none
but these? Thus, many in our days and (which is more to be lamented, some of
this Church of England have from the former premises collected and
peremptorily taught, that Christ dyed for none but the Elect, without
vouchsafing any mannerly answer to the Church their Mother, who expressly
maintains the contradictony, as that he dyed for all men: that he redeemed not
only every one of us in particular, but all mankind: Others have been so
courteous as to vouchsafe their Mother and Brethren some distinctions or
limitations of that universal assertion, as thus, That he died for all
sufficienter not efficienter, sufficiently not efficiently for all; that he
redeemed all mankind with this limitation, that is, singula generum, some o^
all mankind, some rich, some poor, some Jews, some Gentiles

The later distinction is very dangerous; the former impertinently unnecessary:
for if by all mankind we once come to understand some of all sorts of men, we
shall commit no new error, but only extend the same; if by the whole world
which God the Father is said to have created, we understand only some portion
of every principal part of this universe, as some portion of the heavens, some
of the stars, some part of the earth, some of the water, some part of
theayre, some of every sort of vegetable or living things, but not absolutely
all. The other distiction of sufficienter and efficienter, falls under the
common error of most modern Catechists or If they had said Christ was the
meritorious cause of salvation to all men, or had merited salvation for all,
not the efficient working cause of salvation to all, but only to such as obey
him faithfully, they had come nearer the truth.
Divines, which is, to take upon them to divide things which in their nature
are indivisible, (as the Will of God, the Death of Christ, or the Value of his
sufferings,) and to leave other terms which import matter divisible,
undistinguished. Such is the term or word Redemption passively taken, not as
it is an act of God, or as it in his prescience. For however the will of God,
or the value of Christ's sufferings be altogether indivisible because absolutely
infinite, yet of Redemption purchased for us by Christ's bloody death and
passion, there are (as you please to call them) several parts or degrees. Now
that may be absolutely true of some one, or more parts of degrees which is not
true of all: The first degree of our Redemption purchased by Christ, was the
payment of the ransom for our sins unto his Father, and our freedom from
slavery by his conquest over Satan. This part or these degrees of Redemption
are alike common to all mankind: Christ whether in his death upon the Cross,
or in his conflict with the powers of darkness in the Garden did suffer as much
for any one as for all. God was in him reconciling all men unto himself. All
were set free de iure from Satan's servitude.

The second part or degree of Redemption is our actual admission into the
Catholic Church: or (which is all one) our solemn calling to be the Sons of
God. And this part of redemption is common to all who are baptized according to
Christ's commission given to his Apostles and their Successors to this purpose.
Another part of our Redemption, whether that be altogether distinct from the
former, or but a consequent to it, is our actual exemption from the rage or
tyranny of sin within our selves whilst we live here in the flesh. And this
degree of redemption is proper only to those, who though they live in the flesh
do not live according to the flesh, or the fashions of the world; as having
their hearts purified by a lively faith in Christ's death. The last part or
final accomplishment of our Redemption is the exemption of both body and soul
from the powers of hell and death by Resurrection unto endless glory, which is
the everlasting salvation here meant: And this is proper only unto such as
finally shall be said by continuance in faith and obedience. But let us not
deceive our selves, for God will not be mocked; and we shall but mock him if
we presume to go to heaven by curious Distinctions, or nice Doctrines, without
a constant progress in sincere unpartiall obedience. Nor will external
conformity to orthodox all rites, or Religion, or eye-service, suffice to
obtain the salvation here promised to such as obey him: or if we be addicted
to eye-service or obedience, let us perform our obedience, not in our own
eyes, or as in the eyes of sinful men, but as in the eyes and view of that
(...) mentioned by our Apostle, Chap. 4. of this Epistle, ver. the 9. In whose
sight every Creature is manifest, all things are open and naked. This is that
eternal word, who is now made our high Priest, and shall hereafter come to be
our Judge. Let us then account it a principal part of our present and future
obedience, to power out our souls in prayers and supplications to this our
high Priest for the remission of all our sins past; and seeing he was
consecrated once for all, through afflictions or sufferings (for so the current
of our Apostles discourse implies,) to be a compassionate and merciful high
Priest to his Father for us, let us all publicly and privately, daily and
hou^ely beseech him by his agony and bloody sweat, by his Or^sse and bitter
passion, not only to make intercession for us, but to power out the spirit of
prayer upon us; ^o strengthen us with supplies of grace for ^ubduing the body
of sin which is within us, unto the spirit, and to quicken our spi^ies unto
newness of life, that so we may be able to stand before him in that great day
of Judgment!

SECT. 2. Of the calling or designement of the Son of God to be an high
Priest after the order of Melchisedech: Of the differences and agreements in
some particulars between the Preisthood of Aaron and the Priesthood of
Melchisedech.
CHAP. 6. Of the Signification or Importance of the word calling, used by our
Apostle Heb. 5. with the general Heads or Points to be handled and discust in
this 2. 3. 4. Sections.
THat the making of the Son of God perfect, [(...)] v. 9. implies a solemn
Calling or Consecration to his high Priesthood* is yet more apparent from the
words following, v. 10. Calledan high Priest after the order of Melchisedech.
This word Called, imports somewhat more then a name imposed upon him, though at
his Circumcision, or at his Baptism, more then a mere title of dignity. But
what more then so? A solemn Calling or Designement unto this high Office or
Prelacy? Such a calling, but more solemn, then Aaron had unto the legal high
Priesthood. Unto this Priesthood Aaron is said Chap. 5. v. 4. that he was
(...), that is by special Designement or destination advanced to the office of
the high Driest during the Law. But when the same Apostle speaks of the
calling of the Son of God unto the high Priesthood after the order of
Melchisedech v. 10. The word in the original is more significant and more
solemn then (...), as it referres to Aaron; for it is (...), solemnly declared
or pronounced by God to be an high Priest after the order of Mechisedech.

2 The method of our present inquiry or search into this grand mystery must be
this:

First, who this Melchisedech was, according to whose order the Son of God
was called to be a Priest? or how Melchisedech, whosoever he were, did
represent or shadow out the person of the Son of God?

Secondly, wherein the Priesthood of Melchisedech did consist? or wherein it
differred from the Priesthood of Aaron? and what calling he had to such a
Priesthood?

Thirdly, what divine Designement, or calling the Son of God had to his
everlasting Priesthood?

Fourthly, a parallel between the Consecration of Aaron or other of his
Successors to this legal Priesthood, and the Consecration of the Son of God
to his everlasting Priesthood prefigured or foreshadowed, not by Aaron or his
Successors, but by Melchisedech before the Law was given.

Fifthly, the peculiar acts or exercises of the Son of God's everlasting
Priesthood. This fifth or last Point must be referred as an appendix unto the
Articles of the Son of God's Ascension, and his sitting at the right hand of
God the Father. All these are Points of good use, and worthy of deeper and
better consideration then they usually are taken into, by most Interpreters of
sacred Writ, or Controversywriters.

The first Question only may seem to be too curious: And so perhaps it is
indeed, if we should take upon us to determine the individualitie of
Melchisedech's person, after whose order the Son of God was consecrated or
made a Priest. But on the other side it would be presumptuous, absolutely to
deny this Melchisedech to have been the same individual person whom the later
Jews generally, and many late learned Christian writers take him for. The
greatest difficulty in this Point arises from the Apostles description of
Melchisedech, Chap. 7. v. 3. Without father, without mother, without descent,
having neither beginning of days, nor end of life, but made like* unto the
Son of God, abides a Priest continually.

3 From this place some would peremptorily conclude that Melchisedech could be
no mortal man, no son of Adam; but either the holy Ghost or the son of God
then appearing to Abraham in the similitude or likeness of man. For of this
Melchisedech, save only in the history of Abraham, Genesis 14. and 110. Psalm
there is no mention at all in the old Testament.

To wave or rather dismiss their opinion, who think Melchisedech was the holy
Ghost the third person in Trinity, seeing it is but a conjecture of some few,
who rather wave then prosecute it; Let us see what probability there is, that
this Melchisedech should be the eternal Word or Son of God appearing to Abraham
in the likeness of man, and exercising the function and Priesthood of the most
high God.

CHAP. 7. In what sense Melchisedech is said to be without Father and Mother
Heb. 7. 3. Whether he were a mortal man a^ Abraham was, though more (...):
where in the similitude between Melchisedech's Person and the Person of the
Son of God does specially consist.
THis later opinion is broched and (...)ptorily maintained by a late learned
and P. C. lib. 3. c. de repub. Iudaeorum.
smartly elegant writer; who though he he (as I conceive as yet) no Divine or
Priest by profession, yet he takes upon him to censure the most Divines or
Interpreters of sacred Writ, whether ancient or modern, more sharply then I
dare censure him. From whom notwithstanding I dissent as freely, and (as I
hope) upon better grounds then he does from them; specially if the grounds of
his exceptions against the^, be not better then the grounds of the opinions,
which he takes upon him to refute. The main ground of his exception, against
such Divines (ancient or modern) as think that Melchisedech who blessed
Abraham, was either some petty King amongst the Cananites or other Inhabitants
of the land promised to Abraham, and actually possessed by his feed; or Sem
the Son of Noah, is this; no Inhabitant of Canaan, not Sem himself the Son
of Noah was without father or mother, without genealogy, without beginning or
end of days. These titles this good writer conceives are peculiar to the Son
of God, though more peculiar in the time of Abraham, then at this day. But was
our high Priest, or could he have been at that time the true Son of God, and
the God whose Son he was, not as truly then his Father as now he is? Again,
if that Melchisedech who apreared to Abraham at least in the likeness of man,
and in the realitie of an high Priest, were no other person beside the Son of
God, it will concludently follow, that the Son of God was then an high Priest
after the order of Melchisedech; or more then so, that Melchisedech was the
Son of God. How then says our Apostle that the Son of God was made an high
Priest by the word of the oath which was since the Law, and by virtue of this
oath consecrated for evermore, being (as the Author of this opinion supposes)
the Priest of the most high God long before the Law was given: or if
Melchisedech was then the true and only Son of God, how is it said by our
Apostle, Chapter 7. v. 3. that he was (...), made like unto the Son of God? Was the
Son of God made like unto himself by taking the likeness of man upon him?
Or rather was the manhood or likeness in which he appeared to Abraham made
like unto the Son of God? The former part or division of this dilemma is
improbable; The later altogether impossible. For that man, or that likeness of
man, who blessed Abraham, Genesis 14. had a beginning and an end of days; unless
the Author of this opinion will maintain that the manhood or likeness of man,
wherein the Son of God appeared to Abraham, was coeternall to his person; was
begotten of God, (not made) before all Worlds, and to continue united to him
world without end. Both parts of this assertion respectively contradict two
fundamental Articles of our Creed: The one, that all things numerable,
whether visible or invisible were created of God by his Son, they had no
being from eternity: The other, that the Son of God was made man of a woman
in time, having no permanent body, or likeness of man when he was so
conceived: whence it is clear that the Meichisedech who blessed Abraham was
not the eternal Son of God; nor made like unto him for his eternity by the
body of man which he assumed or appeared in.

5 But it is not all one to refell other men's opinions or interpretations of
Divine oracles, and to maintain our own assertions, or (as the present
occasion requires) to clear the forecited place. Heb. 7. He (to wit,
Melchisedech) was made like unto the Son of God, being without father,
without mother, without genealogy, without beginning or end of days. For
there is an opinion or presumed Doctrine which has gotten so long possession
of many public Chaires, as will hardly brook any opposition, either from the
Pulpit, or from private writers: The opinion is, that Melchisedech being
without father, without mother etc. was herein like unto the Son of God; or
the Son of God like to him in that he has no Father in earth, nor a mother
in heaven. But be the Authors of this opinion how great soever, their followers
how many soever, both most acute; all the strength which the wit of one can
add unto the authority of the other, is but as if they should join hands or
forces to take fast hold on the sheath or scabbard, having given the hilts of
the sword of the spirit into the hands of the Jew, who may at his pleasure
turn the points of our own weapons upon us, unless we learn to keep them
more warily, and handle them more skilfully then these men have done. For he
that has a Father in Heaven, may truly and absolutely be said to have a
Father: For God is more truly our Father, then those whom we call Fathers on
earth. Hence says our Savior, Call no man father opon earth, for there is but
one your Father which in Heaven. Math. 23. 9. Yet is this God more truly
Christ's Father, then he is ours. Again he that has a true Mother on earth,
may truly and absolutely be said to have a Mother; otherwise all of us should
be mother less children from our birth; For none of us had an heavenly Mother,
none of our Mothers were brought to bed in Heaven.

6 It being then granted that our Savior had a true Father in Heaven, and a
true Mother on earth, he must needs in both respects be more unlike unto
Melchisedech, who (as our Apostle faith) was without father or mother, then
like unto him, in that he had no Mother in Heaven, no father on earth. Whence
if we should maintain this similitude intended by our Apostle, to consist
either in whole, or part in Christ's being in this sort without father or
mother; the Jew might thus retort, argumento ad homines efficaci, That we
Christians were a brood of monsters, and not the natural offspring of men and
women, because none of us have a man for his mother, none of us a woman for his
father. Besides, one of the two Propositions whereon they labor to build our
faith by this cross device, is no sound pillar, but a broken or crased prop.
For if Christ be truly styled the Son of Abraham, the Son of David, he had
fathers on earth according to the flesh, though not begotten by a carnal
generation: nor was he the Son of Mary by carnal conception, yet truly her
Son, and she truly his Mother, and by consequence Abraham as truly his
Father. Again to be without father, without mother, are but branches of that
general negative [ without genealogy.] Now whether we consider him as God, or
as man, he cannot without wrong to the sacred character or sense of the holy
spirit, be thought or said to be (...), without genealogy, as Melchisedech is;
for one generation or descent makes a genealogy: Otherwise Cain and Abel
should have been (...), without genealogy, which titles notwithstanding
cannot in the Evangelists meaning be applied unto Adam; for he derives all
others genealogies from Adam's, and Adam's from God. Luke 3. Now look in what
sense Abel, Cain, or Adam may be said to have a genealogy, Christ may in the
same sense have two. One as he is the Son of God, another as he is the Son
of Abraham, David, and of Marie. But so it is, that even the wisest and Paragr.
7.
most judicious Writers of times swallow such fallacies in historical
narrations, or discourses (of matters spiritual especially) without any
sensible disgust, or dislike, as would be rejected no less then poison
unallayed, were they exhibited to them in the simplicity of language, or
logistick form. To instance in an notorious one much like unto this late
mentioned:

7 The most ancient Editions of Macrobius mention a jest of Augustus, broken
upon Herod for killing his Son at the same time that he butchered the Hebrew
Infants; Mallem Herodis esse percum quam filium. Some ancient Christians to
salve the truth of this narratio^, being somewhat suspicious, (because Herod at
that time had no known Son that was a child) have made the old Tyrant father
of a young son (supposed to be borne unto him by a second wife of Jewish, if
not of David's progeny) which the age wherein he lived, never laid unto his
charge. Some later critics better able to disprove this supposititious brood,
then apt to reform that error in themselves, which unreform'd in others did
beget it, have not spared to charge their Brethren (in time their fathers)
with falsification of Macrobius his Text, as if the forecited passage had been
inserted by some ancient Christians, as many verses in Sibylla's oracles have
been, unless these and the like Aristarchusses fail in their criticismes.
But for Macrobius his text, it is without question incorrupt, and the Christian
Fathers free from that falsification of it, whereof late Critics have accused
them. The zeal of the ancient Fathers, and the censorious sauciness of later
Critics did alike overreach their judgments. But this, as I said, is a fault
common to us, and to those that are far our betters. We maintain our own
posittions, as if we were waking: We peruse good Authors, as if we had never
looked upon them but in a slumber; yet what punie Logician but would scorn to
swallow this fallacy in a dream, Chaerilus fuit vir bonus, Chaerilus fuit
poeta, ergo Chaerilus fuit bonus poeta: Chaerilus was a good man, and a Poet;
therefore a good Poet. The forementioned critical collection is in regard of
its form a like false and disjointed: only the matter of it is not so vulgar
or palpable. The root of the Critics erroneous censure was this; Herod killed
the Syrian or Hebrew Infants; amongst these Infants he killed his own son,
ergo, this son of Herod when he killed him was an Infant. That Herod about
the same time wherein the fants of Judah and Bethleem were by his appointment
slain, did out of his jealous fear command Antipater his turbulent son to
be put to death, no modern Critic shall be ever able to disprove. That the
killing of his own son (being come to maturity of age) with these Infants,
does better sort with the analogy of Gods Justice usually manifested in the
infatuation of Politicians, and with the literal sense and character of
Augustus jest, (taking it as Macrobius has expressed it) then if he had
slain the same party in his Infancy, shall In a diquisitio^ (by way of Homily
or sermon upon the Epiphany) at what time and from what place the Magi or Wise
men of the East came to Jerusalem to adore our Savior Christ, whom they
rightly believed to be the King of the Jews by birth.
elsewhere (by Gods assistance) be declared.

8 The fallacy for whose discovery these two former have been produced, is in
my opinion of all three the most gross; the best form that can be put upon
it, is this; Melchisedech was without father or Part.
mother, Melchisedech is like unto the Son of God, ergo Melchisedech is
herein like unto the Son of God, in that he is without father or mother. The
premises are most true, but the conclusion (if I may so speak) more then most
false; for of all the persons that are or have been in heaven or earth, none
are so unlike as the Son of God and Melchisedech; if we state the comparison
betwixt them according to the natural tenor or importance of these terms
(...) What shall we say then? that these titles expressly given to
Melchisedech by our Apostle, are altogether superfluous, needless, or
impertinent to the conclusion intended by him? Rather most necessary, and most
apposite. As how? Briefly thus. This descrip^tion of him by these titles, is a
condition or Qualification necessarily supposed, or prerequired to the
similitude intended betwixt Christ and him. It is no proper part or formal
term of the similitude it self. That formally consists only in being without
beginning or end of days; and herein they are as like one another, as any body
and its proper shadow can be.

9 Every man that has a father, even Ada^ himself, who was without father or
mother, had a beginning of days: Every man that has a Son to succeed him as
like wise supposed to have an end of days. Whence it is that no King of Judah
or Israel, not Solomon himself in all his glory, could be any true model of
the Son of God in respect of his eternity: No Priest, or Son of Levi, not
Eleazar, Phinehas or Aaron himself, though pictured in their pontifical
ornaments could bear any color or resemblance of his everlasting Priesthood.
For all these are (...): their Parents, their Sons and Successors are exactly
registered in the sacred Volume; and the same Page, or Table which expresses
their genealogy, does represent withal their mortality, that they had a
beginning or end of days: And whosoever has a beginning or end of days can
be no true shadow of eternity, or of the Son of God as he is eternal.

CHAP. 8. That the omission of Melchisedech's Genealogy did import a special
mystery; and what that mystery was:
MAy we hence aver, that every man mentioned in Scripture, whose birth, whose
death or genealogy is not expressed, may be a true shadow or picture of the
Son God, as he is eternal? We do not, we need not say so. The day is
oftimes mentioned in the Scripture without any mention of the night. Yet to
seek after a mystical sense in all such places, were to set our wits a
wandering in a waking dream. But seeing in the Story of the worlds creation, we
find such accurate and constant mention of the evening and morning making one
day, until all the works of the six days were accomplished, and no mention
of any evening in the seventh day which God did sanctify for a day of rest;
we may with the Ancients safely admit the first six days to be as a Map, or
Calender of the six ages of this transitory world, wherein there is a
continual vicissitude of light and darkness, no joy or pleasure without
sorrow and grief, for their Successors and companions; and the Mosaicall
description of the seventh, to be an emblem or shadow of the everlasting
Sabbath in the heavens, which shall be a day of joy and gladness, without
mixture of darkness or succession of night, without any medly of pains or
grief.

2 By perfect analogy to this and the like, not more mystical then orthodoxall
interpretation of Scripture, not merely authorized by the Greek or Latin
Fathers, but presupposed by our Apostle as unquestionable among the ancient
Jews, we may infer our intended conclusion: What was that? That the omission
of every man's Genealogy, whose name or deeds are specified in the sacred
Story, is always a sign or token of some latent mystery? No, but rather thus;
Seeing no King or Priest of Abraham's lineage were he good or bad; seeing no
Patriarch from whom God's blessings did lineally descend, but has a Genealogy
upon sacred record, the omission of so great a man's Genealogy as was
Melchisedech, who was a King and Priest of the most high God; a Priest which
solemnly and really blessed him in whose seed all the Nations of the earth
were to be blessed, unto whom Abraham paid Tithes of all that he had, The
omission of such a man's genealogy doubtlesie includes some great and weighty
mystery. And if we stand not (as in many like cases we ought not) upon the
logical inference which the assertive letter affords, but follow the
emblematicall, or characteristicall sense of the story, we may behold this man
to be (as the Apostle speaks) (...) that is, one transformed or turned out of
his proper shape or likeness, that he might be like the Son of God. The
absimilation of this man (whosoever he were) from himself, that he might be
li^e the Son of God, consists especially in the abandoning or putting off all
references to father or mother, to wife or children: For these references in
man necessarily represent a beginning and end of days, and by consequency a
dissimilitude to the person of the Son of God, who is eternal, and to his
endless Priesthood.

3 It was the speech of one man but is universally true of all, Mortalis
mortalem genui, and it is as necessarily and essentially true of God,
Immortalis immortalem gignit. For seeing God is more essentially and more
immutably immortal, more truly eternal then we are mortal; Then he which is
as truly the Son of God, as we are the Sons of men or Adam, must needs be
as absolutely eternal as the Deity or divine nature, or as God the Father
himself: Otherwise the generation should be equivocall and imperfect, not
univocall; as contrary to nature it self, and as prodigious, as for a mortal
man to beget an immortal Son; as for a woman to conceive a God. And if there
were no other places of Scripture (as God be praised there are plenty) to
infer the absolute eternity or eternal generation of the Son of God
against the Arrian or other heretic, the very foundation of our Apostles
similitude between Melchisedech and Christ in the Chapter following, does
clearly represent thus much to all that look not on it with Jewish spectacles.
To conclude then, as the greatness and height of Melchisedech's calling serves
as a map to represent the high Majesty of the everlasting Priesthood: So the
omission of his genealogy is an emblem or shadow of the infinite duration, or
eternity of the Son of God. Howbeit if we should take off this borrowed
shape, or wipe out the artificial colors wherewith it has pleased the spirit
to set forth this lively picture of Christ, yet the very table it self whereon
the picture is drawn, is more apt then any other tree in all the garden of God
besides, to be made an heavenly Mercury. The fitness of it for this purpose
will more easily be apprehended, if we suppose what the ancient Jews (whose
traditions where they are no parties are in no wise to be rejected) take as
granted viz. That he, whom Moses in the fourteenth of Genesis calls
Melchisedech, was Shem the great, the son of Noah. This Shem was a man
begotten of his father before the world that then was; our high Priest our
heavenly Mercury is the Son of God begotten of his Father before all worlds,
before any period or instant of imaginary time, even from eternity it self.

CHAP. 9. What manner of blessing it was which Melchisedech bestowed on
Abraham. That the manner of the blessing argues Melchisedech to have been Sem
the great, as the Jewish Rabbis enstile him, the eldest son of Noah, not by
birth yet by prerogative of the first borne.
IDare not obtrude this tradition of the ancient Jews as a point of our
belief, yet the matter of it is as probable as any Doctrine whatsoever, that
is grounded only upon the analogy of faith, not upon express testimonies of
Scripture, or conclusions deduced from such testimonies by demonstrative
consequences. The allegations for this opinion, were they exactly calculated or
put together, amount so high as no assertion contained within the sphere of
probability can overtop them. The exceptions of Pererius and Maldonate against
them are too weak, albeit they touch not half so many as are diligently and
accurately gathered by Dr Willet; unto whose labors I refer such as desire
further satisfaction in this point neither absolutely necessary, nor altogether
needless. One or two reasons not alleged by him come now to be discussed.

The first, what manner of blessing it was which Melchisedech bestowed on
Abraham. Heb. 7.

The second, how the matter and manner of this blessing proves this
Melchisedech to be Sem.

2 But what kind of blessing did our Apostle mean? Verbal only or by way of
salutation? So the people may bless their Priests; the worst of men their
godliest Prelates, and wretched'st beggars greatest Kings; of such kind of
blessing the maxim undoubtedly affirmed by our Apostle, cannot be true. Of
what blessing then is it most undoubtedly true: Of real and solemn blessings
authentiquely imparted ex officio, as when a Bishop confirms children; or by
way of bequest, as when the father bestows an heritage with his blessing upon
the Son; As Abraham blessed Isaac, Isaac Jacob, Jacob Judah and his Brethren.

3 Whom then may we imagine this man should be, which in this sort blesled
Abraham, who was a man, than whom, there was none greater amongst the Sons of
men: none in his time ( Melchisedech only excepted) so great in the Church of
God? No analogy either of sacred rule, or of tenets jointly maintained by the
English and Romish Church (concerning the never interrupted Succession of the
true Church, or the ministers in it) will suffer us to think this Melchisedech
should be a Canaanite. For although we ought (perhaps) to be as far from
denying as from affirming that God had many chosen vessels amongst the sons
of Cham, yet is it no way probable, or to be affirmed that he had any visible
Church amongst them at that time whereof we speak; much less any such
orthodoxall authentic high Priest as was ex officio to bless him, with whom
the everlasting Covenant was to be established: within whose family and
posterity the true and visible Church was to be confined almost two thousand
years after. Nor do we in saying thus, tie the Almighty (as some happily will
accuse us) to use no means but ordinary, in bestowing his extraordinary
blessings. But this we say, that where the manner of his calling is most
extraordinary and miraculous, it is his pleasure to use the ordinary means of
lawful ministers for the ratification or declaring of his calling; at least
for the admissio^ of the parties called unto the emoluments or prerogatives of
their calling. Paul was plucked away from the Synagogue (as a sappie branch
from a dying tree) by the immediate and strong hand of God; but to be
ingrafted, or inoculated into the true Church, which is the body of Christ by
means ordinary and ministerial, by the hands of Ananias a civil and visible
member of Christ's mystical body.

4 In like manner we do not deny that the manner of Gods calling Abraham out
of Haran, and the matter of the blessings then promised to him, to have been
both extraordinary; in which blessing notwithstanding he is to be installed by
Melchisedech, appointed as Gods Deputy, or Vicegerent (so the hebrew Cohen
properly signifies) to ratify or seal the former promises unto him. The
manner of the conveyance is formal and legal, such as God ordinarily uses in
like cases. And by probable consequence this Melchisedech, whosoever he were,
was a true principal member of the visible Church, which at that time was no
where on earth, but in Sem and his posterity. Of those Sons of Sem which are
mentioned in Abraham's genealogy most were dead; others (for ought we read, or
by analogy can gather from what we have read) no way so fitly qualified for
this service as Sem himself, who was then alive. For Sem had been solemnly
blessed by his father: And although he be represented unto us in the fourth of
Genesis, under another name and shape then he received the blessing in, yet the
holy spirit seems to point him speaking in his own native language, and
solemnly bestowing that blessing upon Abraham his son which his father Noah
had bestowed on him. Blessed be the Lord God of Shem, and let Canaan be his
servant! Genesis 4. The implication or importance is, as if he had said, Shem
shall have cause to bless the Lord his God for making him Lord of Canaan. This
blessing or bequest we know was to bear date as well in Shem's posterity as
in himself, but principally in his posterity. Now we no where read of any
conveyance or bequest of this blessing made by Shem unto his Successors,
besides that solemn blessing which Melchisedech (whom for this reason we
suppose to have been Shem) bestowed on Abraham. The tenor of his bequest, or
conveyance is more express Genesis 14. 19. Blessed be Abraham of God most high
possessor of Heaven and earth! This prophetical benediction implies that
Abraham and his posterity should have cause to bless the Lord their God, for
giving them possession of that earth or land which was the type or pledge of
their heavenly inheritance and possessions. This was the gain of godliness,
that merces valde magna, to have the promise of this life, and of that which is
to come. And as the land of promise or Kingdom of Canaan once possessed, was a
true pledge or earnest of their title to the heavenly kingdom; so Abraham at
the very time when Melchisedech blessed him, received the pledges of his
posterities hopes unto that temporal kingdom.

5 For albeit we utterly deny all sacrifice of bread and wine, yet may we not
in opposition to the Papist affirm or maintain that Melchisedech entertained
Abraham and his followers, only with a vulgar or common refection. These
elements of bread and wine being confidered with the solemnity of the
blessing, have besides the literal sense, a symbolicall or mystical
importance and are thus far; at least sacramental, that they served for
earnests to secure Abraham, that his posterity should quietly enjoy and eat
the good things of that pleasant land wherein he was now a Sojourner. Briefly,
Abraham in that sacred banquet which the King of Salem exhibited unto him, did
(as we say) take levery de seisin of the promised land and (as it is probable)
in that very place which God had destinated for the Metropolis of the kingdom,
or at least in that place where John did baptize. And albeit Melchisedech did
(no doubt) derive the blessing bestowed on Shem, or on himself by Noah in more
express terms unto Abraham, by inspiration extraordinary and divine; yet
Abraham at this time had afforded him a fit text or theme to make these
extemporary expositions or declarations upon: Of all that had proceeded out of
the loins of Shem, none as yet had ever given the like proof of his likely
hood to become Lord of Canaan as Abraham now had done, whom God had enabled to
right the King of Sodom and other Cananitish Kings not being able to right
themselves against foreign usurpers.

6 For any man of ordinary understanding that had been an Actor in the late
war (so happily managed by Abraham) and a by-stander at Melchisedech's
blessing of him to have conjectured to this purpose, had been as easy and as
warrantable as it was for the Israelites to divine that Moses should be their
Deliverer by the manner of his killing the Egyptian which had contended with
an Israelite. Now the holy Spirit seems to tax their dullness for not
apprehending this mystery from the manner of Moses fact. Thus we may derive
Gods blessings upon mankind since the flood, from Noah to Shem, from Shem, whom
we take to be Melchisedech, unto Abraham, in whose seed all the Nations of the
earth were to be blessed. This argues Abraham's promised seed to be greater
then Melchisedech, for Abraham was blessed by Melchisedech, not in
Melchisedech's name, but in the name of the most high God, whose Priest he
was. Howbeit this promised seed of Abraham was not greater then Melchisedech,
in external beauty or prerogative royal, till after his Resurrection or
second birth. During the time of his humiliation he was rather destinated then
consecrated to be the Author or fountain of blessedness unto us. For as the
Apostle argues. Heb. 5. 8. Though he were the Son, yet learned he obedience
by the things which he suffered; And being consecrated (to wit) by his
sufferings, became the Author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey
him: And is called of God (from the time of his Resurrestion or exaltation) an
high Priest after the order of Melchisedech.

CHAP. 10. Wherein the Priesthood of Melchisedech did differ from the
Priesthood of Aaron; That Melchisedech did not offer any sacrifice of bread and
wine unto God when he blessed Abraham.
THe office of Aaron and of his Sons we have described Deuteron. 10. 8. At
that time the Lord separated the Tribe of Levi to bear the Arc of the
Covenant of the Lord, to stand before the Lord, to minister unto him, and to
bless in his name unto this day. And again Deuteronomy. 18. 3. This shall be the
Priests duty etc. For the Lord thy God has chosen him out of all thy Tribes to
stand and minister in the name of the Lord, him and his Sons for ever. ver.
5. Could Melchisedech's office be greater, or his patent ampler, especially for
duration? For sacrifice, prayer and blessing are the trinall dimensions of the
Priesthood howsoever taken. This difficulty perhaps did occasion a foul error
in the Romish Church or encourage her followers to maintain this error brought
forth (it may be) upon other occasions, to wit, that the office of Melchisedech
should properly consist and herein especially differ from the Priesthood of
Aaron: For that when he met Abraham, he offered up bread and wine by way of
proper sacrifice unto God, as a type or pledge of the unbloody sacrifice of the
mass, unto which the Romanists for the most part restrain the exercise of
Christ's Priesthood after the order of Melchisedech.

2 To omit their chymicall conceits, who labor in vain to extract some act of
sacrificing out of the original word hotsi; Maldonate (the most zealous and In
his Commentar. upon the 110 Psalm.
laborious pleader in this argument, because Calvin had held the monkish
allegorizars to the literal and gramaticall sense of Scriptures) holds it no
sin to put a trick of Grammar (so they would admit it) upon Calvin's followers;
upon the very text it self. For whereas the Romish Interpreters who went before
him admit the vulgar edition, Et erat Sacerdos Dei altissimi, This Critic to
despite Calvin, will correct Magnificat, and renders it thus, Et erat
sacrificans Deo altissimo. His reason for this innovation is because the hebrew
Cohen is for it is form a participle of the present tense; but surely he was
better read in his Gramar then in his Lexicon, although better read in that
then in the Hebrew Text; for although the Hebbrew Cohen be usually taken for a
Priest, yet to sacrifice is no part of the proper and formal signification of
the radical verb Cahan: That directly imports no more then ministravit, or
Sacerdotem egit. Whence though it be most true, that every Sacrificer is a
Cohe^, is a Priest, or Minister of God; yet is not this truth simply
convertible, that is, [ Every Cohen, Priest, or Minister of God is a
Sacrificer] specially if we speak of times before the Law was given, or since
it expired; much less will it follow that every act or function which the
Minister of God performs, should be a sacrifice. So that albeit we should give
the Critical Jesuit leave to degrade the Hebrew Cohen, and turn it out of a
noun, (in which form and habit it was taken by all his Predecessors) into the
nature and value of a Participle, the Grammatical sense will amount to no more
then this, Et erat Ministrans, or Sacerdotio fungens Deo altissimo; and all
this Melchisedech might do, and this he verily did in blessing Abraham, not in
bringing forth, or offering bread and wine. The letter of the Text runs thus,
And Melchisedech King of Salem brought forth bread and wine, and he was a
Priest of the most high God. Suppose a man should here interrupt the Reader, or
relater of this History thus; What if he were a Priest of the most high God?
To what purpose is this clause inserted? The holy Ghost in the next words
clears the doubt, or rather prevents the Question, [ And he blessed Abraham.]
In what form or sort? Blessed be Abraham of the most high God! So then
Melchisedech is instiled a Priest of the most high God, to show his warrant to
bless in the name of the most high God. And for this interpretation I have the
warrant, or confirmation from (...) etc. lib. 1. glaphyr. in titul. de Abraham
and Melchisedech
Cyril of Alexandria.

3 As for his bread and wine he offered these to Abraham, and not to God, as
Lib 2. sacrae legis allegoriarum. page 106.
Philo Iudaeus, a competent witness in this Controversy, has informed us:
For this good Author opposes Melchisedech's hospitality toward Abraham, unto
Amalech's niggardly and uncharitable disposition toward Israel coming out of
the house of affliction. Amalech (says he) was excluded from the congregation
of the Lord, because he met not Israel with bread and water, whereas
Melchisedech had met our father Abraham (laden with the spo^^es of his enemies)
with bread and wine. He has not (in my opinion) erred much in taking the
symboles or elements of bread and wine for emblemes of that true pabulum
animae, which consists in contemplation of heavenly things. And yet I am
persuaded he had no express knowledge of the true object of such
contemplation, to wit, the body and blood of Christ, or of the benefit conveyed
to us from them (since they were offered in sacrifice unto God) by the elements
of bread and wine, not as mere signs but as undoubted pledges of his body and
blood to be communicated to us.

4 And although Suidas in his second Paragraph on the word Melchisedech, will
have our Saviors Priesthood after the order of Melchisedech to take beginning
from the night before his passion, wherein he took bread and wine and blessed
them; yet in his third Paragraph upon the same word, he says (...),
Melchisedech brought forth bread and wine unto Abraham. But let us suppose what
the Text will not support, that Melchisedech did offer up a sacrifice of bread
and wine to the most high God; thus much being granted we may draw that net
which the Romanist sets for others upon himself; for our next interrogatory
should be this; Of what sacrifice may we by any analogy of faith imagine this
supposed sacrifice of Melchisedech to be the type? of the daily reiterated
sacrifice of the mass, or of the one only sacrifice of the Son of God?
Surely if Melchisedech be a true type of the everlasting Priest, his sacrifice
must be a type of this Priest's everlasting sacrifice. Now as we read not
(though Maldonate's reading of the former p^^^e were true) that Melchisedech
did offer any sacrifice besides this supposed sacrifice of bread and wine: so
we must undoubtedly believe that the Son of God did offer no more sacrifices
then one, and that one never to be reiterated, because the value of it being
truly infinite, the efficacy of it must needs be absolutely everlasting; If
otherwise, we should with the Romanists admit of a sacrifice by succession, or
multiplication as everlasting as this transitory world, which shall not last
for ever: Besides the inconveniences which they multiply by this vain apology
for their wicked practices, we must of necessity acknowledge Melchisedech to
have been a type of figure, not of Christ, or not of Christ only, or not so
properly of him, as of the whole generation of Mass Priests; and his sacrifice
to have been a truer type of the unbloody sacrifice which they daily offer,
then of Christ's bloody everlasting sacrifice upon the Cross. Yea the meanest,
most illiterate and lewdest mass. Priest should be as true a Successor of
Melchisedech, of Christ himself, as Phineas or Eleazar were of Aaron.

5 Mariana in his brief comment, or large notes upon the 14th of Genesis,
boldly avoucheth the unbloody sacrifice of the Mass to have been prefigured
by Melchisedech's sacrifice of bread and wine. But the point it self he
touches so gently, as if he had desired to have balked it, as indeed he does
but wave it; and questionless he would have omitted it as he does many other
tenets maintained by the Church of Rome, when he comes to interpret those
Scriptures whereon ancient Schoolmen or vulgar Commentators have labored to
ground them. But unto the forecited history of Melchisedech, because it is
held such a principal fort of the Romish Religion, he durst not but do his
wonted homage, intimating withal that he had somewhat more to say to this
point when he should come to interpret the Epistle to the Hebrews. But albeit
he lived to finish his intended work or learned Scholia upon the Bible; yet
when he came to the seventh Chapter to the Hebrews, I wonder that in this
chapter amongst so many similitudes wherein Christ is shadowed and represented
by Melchisedech, there is no mention at all of the sacrifice of bread and wine,
which Melchisedech offered (as before was in timated) Genesis 14. 18. being as a
symbol or token of our sacrifice and Eucharist; concerning which point that I
had rather hear other men speak then declare mine own opinion etc.
all he had to say was to refer us to what he had said upon the fourteenth
of Genesis: And to this reference he adds such a caveat, or an appendix, as if
he would give us to understand, that he had said more upon the fourteenth of
Genesis then he could tell how to make good out of S. Paul's parallel between
Melchisedech and our Savior Christ. Miror in hoc Capite inter tot
similitudines, quibus Melchisedech Christum representat nihil dixisse de
sacrificio Panis, and Vini quod Melchisedech obtulit (ut diximus) Genesis 14. 18.
Symbolum nostri sacrificii and Eucharistiae, de qua malo alios audire quam ipse
pronuntiare; indicasse sit satis. Mariana in 20 septimi Cap. ad Hebraeos.

6 The youngest this day living whether in the English or Romish Church, though
he dye for very age shall not live to read or hear any Jesuit or other
Advocate of the Romish Church, give any satisfactory answer to this brief
demand. The answer on our part is very easy, because the Question on their part
is foolish. Our answer is, that the Apostle was not to meddle with more
comparisons between Christ and Melchisedech then were true in themselves, and
intended by the holy Ghost, of which number this fiction of the Romish Church
concerning Melchisedech's sacrifice of bread and wine, is no part or
appurtinance, neither does the letter of the Text, or any circumstance of the
history, unpartiall Antiquity, or any orthodoxall rule of interpretation,
favor it.

CHAP. II. In respect of what points especially the Priesthood of Melchisedech
did fore-picture the Priesthood of the Son of God.
But if the Priesthood of Melchisedech did not herein specially differ from the
Priesthood of Aaron, [in that Melchisedech did offer an unbloody sacrifice,
whereas the offerings of Aaron were for the most part bloody sacrifices,] what
other difference can we with probability conceive betwixt them? or wherein did
Melchisedech's sacerdotall function more excellently forepicture our Saviors
Priesthood, then the Priesthood of Aaron did? For as Aaron and his Successors
did offer bloody sacrifices as well daily as anniversary, so the Son of God
did offer up himself in bloody sacrifice upon the Cross; and by this offering
up of himself once for all did accomplish whatsoever was fore-pictured by all
manner of bloody sacrifices which Aaron and his posterity were authorized to of
fer. To this Quare the answer Sect. 1 cap. 4.
has been premised, and it was this, That when the Son of God did offer up
himself upon the Cross, he was neither a Priest after the order of Aaron, nor
of Melchisedech but a Priest in fieri, or in his Consecration fore shadowed by
Melchisedech. And after the Consecration was accomplished, he was not to offer
any sacrifice at all, either bloody or unbloody. Though we dare not say
Melchisedech did never offer any bloody, or other sacrifice, yet we do not
read of any which he offered. This part of his function* (if at any time he
ever exercised it) is omitted of purpose by the holy Ghost as his genealogy
is, that by this representation of him he might more exactly foreshadow the
Priesthood of the Son of God, who after his Consecration was not to offer any
sacrifice at all. All the similitudes intended by the Apostle between
Melchisedech and our high Priest, consist especially in these three. First in
the identitie of their titles: In the greatness of their persons; and in the
authoritative manner of bestowing their blessings. For the identitie or
analogy of their titles is a point which has been discussed before. Some
scruple is cast by an Author before mentioned, that this title of King of Salem
should be as nominall a title, as Melchisedech or King of righteousness was.
But if this conjecture were trne, our Apostle had instiled him, when he
interprets the importance of his titles, not (...) but (...) as he did the
former title Melchisedech King of righteousness or the righteous King. Heb. 7.
1. Melchisedech was his praenomen, or a name given unto him by such as had
been sensible of his righteous dealing with his subjects or neighbourhoods.
But when the Apostle says he was (...) this denotes the place, or territory
where of he was not by name only, but by just inheritance, King.

2 For the greatness of his person or place in those times, that we must
learn from our Apostle, Heb. 7. 4. (...) etc. Now consider how great this man
(or this Priest) was, unto whom even the Patriarch Abraham gave the tenth of
the spoils. And verily they that are of the sons of Levi, who receive the
office of the Priesthood have a commandment to take ^^^^s of the people
according to the Law that is of their Brethren, though they came out of the
loins of Abraham. But he whose descent is not counted from them (for he lived
and died some centuries of years before them) received tithes of Abraham, and
blessed him that had the promises, and without contradiction the less is
blessed of the better. And here men that die receive tithes, but there he
receives them of whom it is witnessed, That he lives, and as I may so say,
Levi also who received, tithes paid tithes in Abraham, [or was tithed in
Abraham] for he was yet in the loins of his father when Melchisedech met him.

3 About the manner how Levi was tithed in Abraham some Questions have been
made by the Schoolmen, or if happily made by others, not so handsomely or happily
resolved by them: For they draw this point, How Levi should be tithed in
Abraham unto Physical or Philosophical disputes; whereas our Apostle argues
the case between the Priesthood of Aaron and of Melchisedech with such men as
were too much addicted unto the Leviticall and Mosaicall law, appealing not to
the rules of that Law, but to the rules of the Civil, Moral Law, or Law of
Nations. The extract of our Apostles meaning (if I mistake not) is this; That
if Levi, Moses, or Aaron had been in full possession of their inheritance unto
tithes from their Brethren at that time when Melchisedech met Abraham; Or if
Melchisedech had lived in Canaan unto their days they ought to have done as
their father Abraham did, that is, to have solemnly acknowledged this
Melchisedeth to have been their better, by paying the tribute of tithes unto
him. Our Apostle takes it as unquestionable that Melchisedech was Abraham's
better, and being either better or a greater man then Abraham was, then
certainly a greater or better man then Moses or Aaron were, then any Son of
Abraham, besides the promised Seed or Messiah, whom the Jewish Nation expected,
had been. And of this promised Seed alone Melchisedech for the greatness of
his person was the only type.

4 For albeit Abraham were a Prophet, and did exercise the function of a Priest
within his own family, or for some others, upon special occasions: albeit
some of Abraham's seed were both Kings and Prophets; others both Priests and
Prophets, yet none of them were both Kings and Priests; none of them anointed
to these two functions. Melchisedech (though perhaps never solemnly anointed
to either function) was the only man which was by divine providence or heavenly
calling, both a true King and a Priest of the most high God. By both these
titles the tithes of all the spoils which Abraha had got by conquest were due,
nor are any other tithes prediall or personal due to any this day, save only
to the King or supreme Majesty, or to Bishops and Priests within the regions
wherein they accrue. And for this reason (as I conjecture) the Tortius est
status Ecclesiasticus, in quo fuerunt Episcopi septem, ad quem caeteri etiam
Canonici refe runtur. Hi ha bent decimas in regno: quae tamen in provinciis
diversis diverso modo dividuntur, dimidiam partem dec^marum percipiunt
Episcopi, dimidiam Rex, aliquam Canonici pastores, pars etiam ad aedificandas
Ecclesias contribuitur. Et quantum ad pontificium ius attinet, semper in hoc
regno, quem admodum etiam in Gallia, nominationes and ordinationes
praelaturarum Episcopatuumque, regibus, ad hoc usque tempus, collatae fuerunt,
ut etiam ex responso Waldemariquar^i regis Daniae ut arbitror, quod bic
annectere libuit, constat. Cum Pontifex Romanus a Rege haec and similia
postularet, fertur rescripsisse Rex, Regnum habe^^us a subditis vitam a
parentibus, religionem a Romana Ecclesia, quam si repetis, remitto per
praesentes Mercator. page 82. in descriptione Daniae.
Danish Nation after they had embraced the Gospel, and were become of a
heathenish a Christian Commomweale or Kingdom, did allot the tithes of their
labors or increase of vegetables or profitable living creatures unto their King
and to their Bishops, excluding then the great Bishop of Rome. For when he
demanded his portion in them, he was rejected by that sharp and witty answer
of Woldmarus. We have our Kingdom from our subjects our life from our
parents, our religion from the Church of Rome, which if your holiness
redemand, we remit it by these presents.

Whether his meaning was that he would abandon Christian Religion simply, or
the Religion of the then Romish Church only, rather then forgo his portion of
rithes allotted to him as King, I leave it with all Submission to the Searcher
of all our hearts, and Judge of all our actions. I have no warrant or just
presumption out of any history to accuse this King, either of Atheism or
irreligion.

5 But Melchisedech was both King and Priest, a more Sovereign King then
Woldmarus was, and a greater high Priest then the Bishop of Rome, or any other
that have lived on earth, besides the Son of God himself, whose picture of
shadoww he was. That this Son of God or Seed of Abraham which he assumed
should be much greater then Melchisedech King of Salem, is employed in the
manner of God's promised blessing unto Abraham being compared with the manner
of Melchisedech's blessing Abraham. For Abraham was blessed by Melchisedech not
in Melchisedech's name, but in the name of the most high God whose Priest he
was; for he was blessed by him not in him; whereas in Abraham's seed all the
Nations of the earth, Melchisedech as well as Abraham were to be blessed.
Howbeit this promised seed of Abraham was no greater then Melchisedech in
external beauty, or prerogative royal till after his Resurrection or second
birth. During the time of his humiliation He was rather destinated then
consecrated to be the Author or fountain of blessedness unto us. For as the
Apostle argues Heb. 5. 8. Though he were the Son, yet learned he obedience
by the things which he suffered. And being consecrated (to wit by his
sufferings) became the Author of eternal salvation unto all that obey him. And
is called of God (from the time of his Resurrection or exalation) an high
Priest after the order of Melchisedech. For from this time and not before, his
royal Priesthood did commence. So he says to his Disciples immediately after
his Resurrection, All power is given to me in heaven and earth; power to
bless with the blessings of this life, and of the life to come. And being now
after his Consecration to be enthroniz'd in his Kingdom and royal Priesthood,
he lift up his hands and blessed his Disciples, And it came to pass that as he
blessed them be departed from them and was carried up into heaven, Lu. 24. 50.
51. Yet being there in body he continues with his Church here on earth by
continuatio^ of his blessings unto the worlds end. That this part of his
Priestly function to wit, his Authoritative, or Authentic blessing does
follow his Resurrection, our Apostle intimates Acts* 3. 26. Ye are the
children of the Prophets and of the Covenant which God has made unto our
father, saying to Abraham; Even in thy seed shall all the Nations of the earth
be blessed. First, unto you has God raised up his Son Jesus, and him he has
sent to bless you in turning every one of you from your iniquities. And
again, Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law being made a curse
for us, that the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles, Galat. 3. 14.
So that the Jews were the first, but not the only parties interessed in the
blesing wherewith God by Melchisedech blessed Abraham. For in as much as that
blessing was the same blessing (though further spread, and better branched)
wherewith God by Noah blessed Sem, we Gentiles the Sons of Iapheth were
heirs of it in reversion. For though Shem be the first, Iaphet was in the
scond place blessed with his Brother Shem. Genesis 9. 27. God persuade Iaphet,
that he may dwell in the tents of Shem, and let Canaan be his servant. So that
Melchisedech does prefigure Christ's Priesthood by his Authority to bless in
Gods name. Blessing as it was applied unto Melchisedech, is but a shadow or
surface only. Abraham indeed was blessed by him, but in the name of the most
high God. But blessing as appliable to Christ is a solid, and has its trinall
dimension. We are blessed for him; we are blessed through him, we are blessed
by him; And which is the full issue or product of all three dimensions, we
shall be everlastingly blessed in him. For the first; we may not so much as beg
any blessing or good thing at God's hand, but for his sake. Hence it is, that
all our prayers are conceived in this form, either expressly or implicitly,
propter merita Jesus Christi. Secondly of those blessings which it pleases God
to grant for his sake, we may not entreat, no not expect their conveyance
should be made unto us by any other person or means then by him, and the
virtue of his sufferings. And for this reason it is, that we usually conclude
our prayers, Per Iesum Christum Dominum nostrum, through Jesus Christ our Lord;
not propter Iesum Christum: That is always expressed or employed in the body or
beginning of the prayer. It was the intention of the Ancients to instruct us by
those two usual clauses of our solemn prayers, that whatsoever we ask for
Christ's sake, we cannot otherwise obtain then through him. And though the
Father be the first granter, yet the Son immediately bestows all blessings
upon us, as the places of Scripture late alleged, testify. God's blessings
descend to us, only by him, that they may draw us unto him in whom only we are
blessed. For that everlasting happiness of the life to come formally consists
in our union with him, and cannot be manifested or imparted to us but by the
participation of his blessed presence.

6 Will ye have a more particular map in what manner the blessing of Abraham
descends upon us by this our high Priest? Then call to mind in what terms
Melchisedech blessed Abraham. They were these, Blessed be Abraham of the most
high God Possessor of heaven and earth, Melchisedech (if the same be Shem) had
by virtue of his Father Noah's blessings, a manifest right unto the land of
Canaan, and had some part of it in possession; and this right and title he be
queaths to Abraham. The chief matter of his blessing is, that Abraham's
posterity should be Kings and Priests in that land; And albeit he were a
Priest of the most high God, yet his Kingdom was of this world and in this
world, though a type of the heavenly Kingdom. But our Savior's Kingdom was
not of this world, for since his Resurrection he has taken possession of
heaven as he is man, but in the right and title of the eternal Son of God.
God the Father made all things by God the Son, whom he has made Heir of
all things as man, which were made by him as God; not as an heir in his
nonage, but as joint Lord with his Father at whose right hand he is placed; so
that as man he has more full and more immediate authority to dispose of
heaven than Melchisedech had to dispose of Canaan, for he bestowed that upon
Abraham by way of prayer, as became a Priest of the most high God. But this our
high Priest, who is also the most high God shall dispose of heaven to his
servants by royal sentence and authority as King. Then shall the King say
unto them that sit on his right hand. Venite benedicti patris mei possidete
vobis paratum regnum a constitutione mundi, Come ye blessed of my Father
possess ye the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundations of the world!
This is the accomplishment of that blessing which Melchisedech bestowed upon
Abraham; and the second part of his benediction must be the everlasting song of
such as are blessed in Abraham's seed. Blessed be the most high God, who has
delivered our enemies into our hands: who has enabled us to overcome the
world, the Devil, and the flesh! And though Christ our high Priest were the
Son of David, and of Abraham as man according to the flesh; yet as man he is
the first begotten from the dead, and Father of the world to come. Melchisedech
himself in respect of the everlasting blessing is his Son, and must have his
portion in it at the last day. For if all Nations, if every one of any Nation
that is truly blessed, be blessed in Abraham's seed, Melchisedech himself must
be blessed in him, not only by him: And therefore he is that most high God,
Possessor of heaven and earth, in whose name Melchisedech blessed Abraham.

7 But to return to our Apostles next passage, He. 7. 11. etc. If therefore
perfection were by the Leviticall Priesthood (for under it the people received
the Law,) what further need was there that another Priest should arise after
the order of Melchisedech, and not be called after the order of Aaron? For the
Priesthood being changed there is made of necessity a change also of the Law.
The full discussion of this twelfth verse, because it contains matter of
Controversy amongst us Christians and between several professed members of
reformed Churches; as whether Christ were a Law giver, or wherein the Law which
he gave did differ from, or excel the Law of Moses, whether Leviticall or
Moral, must be referred to another Treatise. The Law (says our Apostle) made
no thing perfect, but the bringing in of a better hope did. Vide Cyri^lum lib
1. glaphyrorum intitulo de Abraham and Melchisedech.
So our later English reads the Text, yet proffers to us another reading in the
margin, which (in mine opinion) is more consonant to our Apostle's meaning, to
wit, That the Law was an introduction of a better hope by which we draw near
to God. And this drawing near to God is that perfection which the Law could
not effect. But the principal point, whereon our Apostle pitcheth forevincing
the priesthood of Christ to be far more excellent then the Leviticall
Priesthood was, was reserved to the last place, and pathetically though briefly
avouched v. 20. [And in as much as not without an oath] for those Priests to
wit, after the order of Aaron were made without an oath, but this, to wit,
Christ, with an oath, by him that said unto him, The Lord swear and will not
repent, thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech; By so much
was Jesus made the surety of a better Covenant: And they truly were many
Priests, because they were not suffered to continue by reason of death. But
this man because he continues for ever, has an unchangeable Priesthood:
Wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by
him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them. And again v. 28.
For the Law makes men high Priests which have infirmities, but the word of the
oath which was since the Law makes the Son, who is consecrated for evermore.
These two last passages require a fuller discussion of a Point often touched
upon in some printed Treatises, and diverse Sermons: A point much neglected by
many good Divines, and carped at by others through their ignorance in true
antiquity, videlicet, What the interposition of God's special oath does
import more then his largest promises without an oath.

SECT. 3. Of the calling or destination of the Seed of Abraham, and Son of
David by solemn oath to the everlasting Priesthood.
CHAP. 12. The chief or maine principle whereon our Apostle grounds his
Treatise or discourse to the Hebrews; Containing a Paraphrase upon the most
part of the sixth Chapter to the Hebr ^^
SEeing every rational writer that writes to any good end or purpose, has
always some one or more principles, on which his discourse does revolve, or
settle, as a sphere or body orbicular does upon it is Axis or Center; the advice
which Cardanus some-where gives to every one, who would take upon him to
comment upon any good Author is very useful. And his advise is this, First, to
seek out the maine principles (be they few or more) whereon the Author does
especially rely or ground his discourse or project. There is a rule given long
Grego. magnus.
ago by a better Author for interpreting sacred writ no way dissonant unto
this advise of his, Finis dicendorum optima ratio dictorum, the end or scope at
which sacred writers (in their disputes especially) do aim, is the true (...)
or standard by which their particular sentences or discourses must be measured,
the only right way for finding out the true and literal meaning of what they
say. The non observance or want of taking these rules into consideration, has
been the special occasion why S. Paul's Epistle to the Romans has been of all
other portions of Scriptures the worst interpreted by most that have undertaken
to comment upon it. But of the main principle or scope of that Epistle I have
In a treatise upon Romans 9. v. 18. lately published by another without my
consent or knowledge. My purpose was to have published another of the same
subject upon the 16 v. of the same Chapter delivered by me in a Sermon about 26
years ago, some few months before I wrote the other.
elsewhere written, and shall as God shall give opportunity write or speak a
great deal more.

2. The principal end or scope of S. Paul, (or whosoever were the Author of
this divine Epistle to the Hebrews,) was to prove that Christ Jesus, whom the
Jews did crucify, was designed or destinated by God to be a Priest not after
the order of Aaron, but of Melchisedech, and declared to be so, designed by
God's oath to Abraham, which was the first oath that God did vouchsafe to make,
that is extant upon any sacred record; though the contents of this first oath
were more fully expressed in his oath unto David. The tenor or impotance of both
oaths, especially of that unto David, are not any where mentioned or pressed upon
the Jews in any part of the New Testament besides in this Epistle; but in this
Epistle very frequently: first in the place before cited Heb. 5. 10 He was
called of God an high Priest after the order of Melchisedech. But the pressing
of it further upon these Hebrews our Apostle for the present, forbeares for
their dullness of hearing. v. 1. But though they were for the present unfit
Auditors of such an high mystery yet were they not such perpetually. The true
reason why our Apostle says the things he had to say of Melchisedech were hard
to be uttered or conceived by these hearers standing thus affected, was not (as
a late writer, before mentioned, conjectures) because this Melchisedech who met
Abraham was the Son of God, then appearing in the liknesse of man; For this
was a point easy to be uttered, and easy to be conceived, if it had been any
part of our Apostles meaning: But of what he had to say, and has spoken at
large in the 7 Chapter of this Epistle, these his Scholars were not capable, at
least (he saw) would not be attentive to his lesson, until he had given them a
sharp though moderate correction, which he does from the 12. v of the 5.
Chapter, unto the 9. v. of the 6. Ready they were, as is evident from our
Apostles admonition to revolt from the Christian faith unto Iudaisme, and to
fall into that irremissible sin which he there describes. Now to recall men
prone to vice or sin there are but two ways: The one by manifesting the
danger of the relapse; the other by ministering comfort or assurance of happy
success in that course of life which has been commended by the Physicians of
their souls unto them. The dreadful estate into which they were without his
directions ready to fall, is discovered to them in most patheticall expressions
from the 4. v. of the 6. Chapter to the 9. For it is impossible for those, who
were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made
partakers of the holy Ghost, and have tasted the good word of God, and the
powers of the world to come, if they shall fall away to renew them again unto
repentance: seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God a fresh, and put
him to an open shame. For the earth which drinks in the rain which comes
often upon it, and brings forth herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed,
receives blessing from God; But that which bears thorns and briars is
rejected, and is nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned. These passages
show the dangerousnesse of their disease to whom he wrote his Epistle, and
that they stood in need of extraordinary physic. The comfortable preparative
for the making of them capable of a most sovereign receipt follows. v. 9. But
Beloved, we are persuaded better things of you, and things that accompany
salvation, though we thus speak: For God is not unrighteous to forget your
work and labor of love which ye have showed toward his name, in that ye
have ministered to his Saints and do minister. Here were a text of excellent
use (were it warily handled) for restoring such men, as after their recovery
from Atheism, infidelity or heresy fall into a relapse as bad as these, as
into an apostasy, from the faith (sometimes syncerely professed by them) into
libertinisme or profaneness: As fit a theme as any I have observed in sacred
Writ to encourage all men of what sort or condition soever professing
Christianity, to the constant practice of good works, especially of Charity.

3 For albeit the works of charity which the Hebrews had done could not,
albeit the best works which we now living can do, can no ways merit any
degree of grace, or make us worthy of the gift of repentance: yet by good works
we become more capable of Gods mercies, of his long suffering, or forbearance
to punish us after the same manner or measure, that he does presumptuous
sinners. (...) This is as if he had said, The God whom ye Hebrews (now
converted to Christianity) serve, non est dominus adeo durus, is not so Or
inequitable for the word (...) referres to iustitia universalis which
comprehends ^lemency, or benignity asvvell as legal Justice.
rigorous a Judge, but that whilst he weighs your later or present
Transgressions in the legal scale of Justice, he will put your former deeds of
charity into the scale of mercy. But leaving the full discussion of this
passage to professed Commentators, or Controversy-writers, although we shall
prize good works, or deeds of charity at the lowest rate which our Apostle in
this place sets upon them, That will amount unto as much, as some learned
Fathers have said, Sunt via ad regnum non causa regnandi, They are the way to
heaven, or means to obtain full assurance of hope here on earth, for so our
Apostle presses his exhortation to them v. 11. 12. And we desire that every
one of you do show the same diligence to the full assurance of hope unto the
end; That ye be not slothful, but followers of them, who through faith and
patience inherit the promises. For when God made promise to Abraham, because
he could swear by no greater, he swore by himself, saying, Surely blessing
I will bless thee, and multiplying I will multiply thee, And so after he had
patiently endured, he obtained the promise. So that patience in doing good
works to our loss, or in suffering wrongs from others, are good works or
qualifications pre-required to our firm apprehension of God's most free and
gracious promises.

4 There is first an assurance given by God unto Abraham, and in him to the
heirs of promise. Secondly there is an assurance of hope in some, and ought to
be in all men* and this consists first in the right apprehension of the
assurance given by God, and in a well grounded belief or persuasion of our
interest in the promise conveyed unto us from God by Abraham. The right
apprehension of the assurance given by God must be in the understanding or
brain: The true belief or persuasion of our interest in this promise is but
the ingrossment of our former apprehension in our hearts. How this belief or
assurance of hope must be wrought, or confirmed, comes after to be discussed:
Of this only we are in this place to forewarne the Reader that he must not
begin his belief or persuasion backwards, or the wrong way, that is, not to
make that (...) (where of the Apostle speaks) the first part of his Creed. For
to arrive at this point of belief or degree of hope, is that (...) or
perfection, unto which our Apostle sought by degrees to conduct these Hebrews,
who had been truly converted to the Christian faith, and had continued till
this time true believers in their kind; men better catechized in the first
principles of belief, then any man now living is; for they had an Apostle for
their Catechist, as appears from the first v. of the 6. Chapter. The only way
to attain unto this perfection or assurance of hope, is to follow the
footsteps of such as inherit the promise, or had a firm and true apprehension
of their interest in it whilst they lived here on earth. Thus much is employed
in the forementioned exhortation of our Apostle, v. 11. and 12.

5 The assurance given to Abraham, and in him to all that follow his footsteps,
is on Gods part as full and absolute as almighty power could make it; for it is
a promise confirmed by oath, and by the most solemn oath that could be
administered or made: for God swear by himself, who is the greatest of all that
either God or man can swear by. There could not be either a greater power, or
any other so great besides; yet even amongst men who always swear by some
divine power or revenger of false oaths greater then themselves, an oath puts
an end to all strife or Controversy in Law, as our Apostle teaches us v. 16.
But in what times, or in what cases this maxim is, or was most true (for most
true it is with the allowances of the circumstances for time and place or in
matters determinable by oath,) are Questions proper to interpreters of Law,
whether Judicial in the Jewish Nation, or of Laws established in other
Nations at of before the time wherein the Author of this Epistle did write; who
as I should presume from this very allegation besides many other reasons, was
S. Paul: For I know no other of our Savior's Apostles or Disciples (though
most potent in Scriptures) which had so much skill, either in the Laws of the
Jewish or other Nations as S. Paul had, being brought up at the feet of
Gamaliel. For the better understanding of this our Apostle in the last fore*
cited verses, or at least for occasioning others to search deeper into his
meaning then many Interpreters or plausible Preachers usually do, it will not
be amiss to premise somewhat concerning the nature of oaths, or their ancient
use amongst men before we come to explicate the tenor of God's oath, and the
Covenant made by it unto Abraham.

CHAP. 13. The use of oaths, and their observance is from the Law of Nature. Of
the manner of taking solemn oaths amongst the Ancients of several Nations.
THough all men in former ages were not acquainted with the true God by whom
all ought to have swo^^e; though some transformed the Deity into the similitude
of beasts; though some directly acknowledhed no God at all, no divine power;
yet even in the very worst of these, the smothered seeds of Religion did give
some crisis of their inherence in matter of oath or imprecation. The ingraffed
notion of the Deity upon provocation or occasion of swearing, found always
some, though often a preposterious or sinister vent. Even such stupid Tyrants
as thought no power so great as their own; such as did pick deadly quarrels
with their vassailes for not swearing by their Genius, did use to swear not (as
God here does) by themselves, or by their own power, but by such creatures as
did command their desires or affections; for their consciences secretly
suggested to them that these were greater then themselves. And it is no
marveile if this honor of Invocation, which is due only to the true God, were
by godless persons oftimes tendered to those things, which they loved or
admited most, because these were in truth and deed to them as Gods. Caligula
used to swear by Drusilla; sometimes by that horse, which he caused to be fed
in as Lordly a plate as any that came unto his owe table, and which he had
destinated to be his fellow Consul. It seems this was a bonny beast, whereas
he himself was an ugly Monster amongst men. The Emperor Claudius (as
Suetonius tells us) conversus in officia pietatis ius jurandum neque sanctius
neque crebrius instituit quam per Augustum, did not swear so often, nor hold
anyoath so strict as to swear by his Predecessor Augustus. And Iunius Brutus
as a good Author tells me, did use to swear solemnly by the blood of
Lucretia. The most solemn oath among the Pythagoreans, a devout and religious
Sect of Philosophers, was per ternarium, ^he number of three. The reason I take
it was, because this number was to them as the mystery of the blessed Trinity
is to us. Some heathens (as the Egyptians) did swear by herbs, by beasts or
livelesse elements, because they misconceived some divine power to have
peculiar residence in them or about them. And some no evil Princes did swear
or authorize others to swear by their scepters, because they took these as
emblemes of divine power. Others swear by the parts of their own bodies, as by
their hearts etc. Yet these were directly and formally rather imprecations then
oaths, yet oblique or implicit e iuramenta, (as the Lawyers speak) collateral
or connotative imprecations of divine power to whom the execution of vengeance
upon themselves, or upon the parts of their bodies) if they swore falsely did in
their opinion properly belong. But whatsoever was the direct and formal object
of Judicial oaths, their outward form of solemnity was always, or for the
most part accomplished tagendo altaria or elevatis manibus, or both ways:

Praesentitibi maturos largimur honores,
Iurandasque tuum per nomen ponimus ar as,
says the Poet of Augustus. And the Grecian which gave first occasion to the
Pproverbe Amicus usque ad ar as, employed his readiness to tell some such
smooth tale or officious lie for his friend's good as he durst not avouch, if
he were called to touch the Altar. This was the custom (it seems) in those
ancient times wherein Moses lived. Moses built an Altar, and called the name of
it Iehova Nissi, for he said because the Lord has sworn; or (as some read
it) because he has lift up his hand he will have war with Amalech from
generation to generation. To lift up the hand or touch the Altar (one or both
of them at least) was as much as the kissing of the Book is to us; the
principal formalitie, or external character of a solemn oath; Ergo is, qui
si aram tenens juraret crederet nemo, per Epistolam, quod volet, iniuratus
^icero in orat pro Flacco.
probabit? Shall we then take his testimony by a letter without an oath for a
just proof, whose oath though he laid hold upon the Altar no man would trust?
To swear by the name or power of God, as a profound Civilian instructs us, is
de essentia iuramenti, Duarenut.
the essence or form of an oath, but to kiss the Book etc. is de
consuetudine a matter of custom. See the fifth Book of these Comments upon the
Cree^d. Sect. 1
Intrepidos altaria tangere, in Iuvenal's construction is, all one as to make
no conscience of an oath; the essential property of Epicurean Atheism.

2 We must not think our Apostles rule [ that an oath is to make an end of
all strife] to be defective or less universal, then it makes show of,
although it comprehend not Epicures, nor take fast hold of Atheists, because
these are but equivocally men, or at the best they can be no better parts of
any civil body, or humane society, then a broken link is of a chain. He that
makes no conscience of an oath may make better assurance of his lands and
estate then of his internal thoughts or affections, without which assurance
there can be no true society amongst the sons of men. Nullum vinculum ad
astringendum fidem Maiores nostri iureiurando arctius esse voluerunt, says
Tully. But an oath assertory, not by Roman constitutions only, but by divine
Law is a kind of civil rack to constrain men to confess the truth concerning
matters present or past in cases expedient for the maintenance of humane
society. And an oath promissory, or de futuro is God's wrest to fasten our
souls unto the truth professed by us for the performance of good duties. With
this later use the usual etymology of the word oath in Greek, has some
affinity: For they would have the word (...) to be of the same progeny with
(...), because he that swears is tied or bound to those points which he
acknowledges or confesses. Yet many of the ancient Etymologers would have the
word (...) (in the Grecian language) derived from (...) terminus, unto which
derivation our Apostle (as some Divines conjecture) does allude, when he says
that an oath is (...) an end or term of all Controversies. This as I dare not
deny, so I would not, nor perhaps would the Authors or Abettors of this
opinion, ground the strength of our Apostles argument so much upon the the
grammatical signification, or etymology of the word (...), as upon the real
exposition or civil use of it in legal customs and constitutions of most
Nations concerning like cases to that mentioned by him; as in matters of trust
or contract betwixt man and man, without any other witness then themselves.
For so the Lord (by whom we ought to swear) had enacted it, Exodus 22. 10. If a
man deliver unto his neighbor an ass, or an ox, or a sheep, or any beast to
keep, and it die or be hurt or driven away no man seeing it, then shall an oath
of the Lord be between them both, that he has not put his hands unto his
Neighbors goods: and the owner of it shall accept thereof, and he shall not
make it * (...) etc. Primum ideo, ut iurisjurandi religionem magnifacientes,
Deum revereantur. Cum enim manifestum sit, quod saepius deierans fidei iact^ram
faciat, ne emolument^ illo privetur, maximopere cave^it ^nusquisque ne ad
iuramentum deveniatur. Deinde and hoc cogitavit legislator fi fidem in vitae
integritate constituat totam, cunctos ad morum probitatem iavitatum iri, ne
tanquam fide indign^ infamentur. Iniquum praeterea iudicabat, quibus citra
iuramentum fides habita esset, his de eodem contractu iuratis fidem denegari*
biblioth lib 1. de Egypt. legibus.
good. The like Law or constitution was sometimes of like force in Egypt.
Bochoridis leges, says Diodorus mandabant ut si quis pecuniis mutuo acceptis
absque syngraphe se debere neget, interposito juramento a debito absolvatur.
That if mony's committed to trust without specialty or mutual writings should
be denied, the Controversy should be ended by the Defendant's oath, And he
gives this reason for the equity of this Law: [Why should not the Judge or Law
give as much credit to any man's oath, for as much as another commits to his
trust without any assurance at all, or without any better assurance then the
Creditors's oath?] The like esteem did the Grecians make of the pretended
debtor's oath in like Controversies. When Psidias an host of Tenedos denied
the charge of money delivered unto him by Archetimus of Erythraea his ancient
friend and guest, the matter after some altercation of words was referred to
oath: Now albeit Psidias his conscience did serve him to deal unjustly, yet it
grudged to swear directly a gross untruth; and to stay the muttering of it
with some shadow of truth, that is, with plain equivocation, he feignes
himself so sick and crazie against the day of final hearing, as if he stood
in need of a staff, into which (being made hollow on purpose) he cunningly
stuffed up the gold about which the Controversy grew: Being called to his oath
which was to be elevat is manibus with hands lifted up, he committed his
staff to the custody of Archetimus, the plantiffe, and thus proceeds; It is
true (says he) that my friend Ahchetimus delivered so much gold unto me, but
by the oath which I have taken, I have delivered the same sum unto him
again. This oath (though to Archetimus his knowledge altogether false) had by
the customs of that time and place made a full end of the Controversy to his
loss, which he perceiving threw down the staff with such indignation to the
ground that the handle bursting, the gold which he trusted unto him fell out.
And thus the providence of God (says mine Stobaeus de periurio. page 198.
Author) saved Archetimus harmless; but Psidias (as men say) came to a
fearful end.

CHAP. 14. Of Oaths promissorie specially for Confirmation of of leagues, and
of the fearful judgments that usually fall upon them, who wittingly and
willingly violate them.
THe use of oaths amongst the Romans was somewhat more ample then all these
instances imply, though how far it did extend, I leave it to the
determination of Civilians. A very good Civil Lawyer tells me, (and his
testimony is most consonant to our Apostles mind in this place) Vetus fuit
regula iuris causa^ iureiurando decisam non retractari, that a cause or case of
Controversy decided by oath, might not be traversed or recalled. Iustinian's
restraint of this ancient rule in some special and rare cases, rather
corroborates then impaires the indefinite truth, or general validity of it:
Yet were not oaths assertory more authentic, or of more validity in ancient
times for ending Controversies betwixt man and man, then oaths promissory (such
as God's oath in this place is) were for maintaining public peace or
confirming leagues betwixt Nation and Nation. The examples of heathen as well as
of sacred Princes or Generals (so we would follow them) teach us not to
retract any thing that we have sworn unto, nor to delay performance of any
thing which we have promised by oath, albeit the conditions in some cases
prove such in the issue, as we would not have subscribed unto them at any
hand, had we known them; in others, such as we ought not to have subscribed
unto. When Alexander the great, (a Prince otherwise too rash and furious in
executing his rigorous designs) perceived that the Lampsaceni (open Rebels in
his interpretation) had entertained Anaximenes his fathers old acquaintance to
plead for their pardon, fearing that this smooth-tongued Orator (if he should
permit him to speak his mind at large,) might somewhat mitigate the rigorous
sentence pronounced against them, upon the Orator's first approach into his
presence takes a solemn oath by the Gods of Greece, that he would do quite
contrary to whatsoever he would request on the behalf of the Lampsaceni. Then
said Anaximenes it will little boot me to be long in my petition which in
brief shall be this; That you would captivate their wives and children,
destroy their City, and set the Temples of their Gods on fire. Now albeit this
boistrous King had steadfastly purposed to do as much as the Orator's words
imply; and had interposed a solemn oath to confirm his purpose, yet his oath
being by the Orators cunning retorted, his former resolution did relent and
yield unto the Orator's first intended serious request. And in memory of this
great Controversy between this great Prince and his Rebellious Subjects or
revolted Confederates, thus happily ended by a retorted or inverted oath, the
Orator had an Olympic statue erected to him by his Clients. Pausanias lib 6.
hoc est Eliacor. 2.


2 Thus to save this City with it is Inhabitants could not be more prejudicial
to Alexander's former oath, or resolution, then it was to Joshua to make peace
or league with any Cananite; for God whose General he was had given him
express command to the contrary: Yet in as much as that strict commandment
given by God, was only particular to this purpose, the neglect of it,
especially upon ignorance of circumstances was evil only because forbidden,
and only so far evil as it was forbidden. But in as much as an oath is the
most sacred bond in humane society, the breach of it is not only evil because
forbidden, but therefore forbidden because in it self so evil. Whence though it
were unlawful for Joshua to make any league with the Gibeonites being by Nation
and Progeny Cananites, yet in as much as they were men, the league once made
with them being confirmed by oath might not be violated by him, or any of his
Successors. The legal maxim in this case holds most firmly, fieri non debuit
factum valet. Although Joshua had formerly sworn to have continual war with
the Cananites, yet the interposition of this oath, upon a mistake that they
were not Cananites, must be (...), an end of hostile quarrel between Israel
and the Gibeonites: or if any happily should here reply that this league did
valere de facto was made valid more through Ioshuah's courtesy or scrupulosity
of conscience, then by the Law of nature, Nations, or by any strict rule of
equity; the severitie of God's judgments upon the house of Saul for violating
this league which Joshua had made by oath more then four hundred years after
he had made it, will convince him of error. Saul sought to slay the Gibeonites
in his zeal to the children of Israel and Judah, 2. Sam. 21. 2. but as if
Israel had forfeited their estate in the promised land by breach of their
former Covenant, the earth for three years denied her increase, as it is verse
the first: Nor could this famine be satisfied otherwise then by the flesh and
blood of those men for whose sake the Gibeonites blood had been unjustly
spilt. For when David (being instructed of the Lord that the famine was sent to
revenge their wrongs) demanded of the Gibeonites (to whom the Lord now had
given power of binding and loosing Israel,) What shall I do for you, and
wherewith shall I make the atonement that ye may bless the Inheritance of
the Lord? They said unto him, We will have no silver nor gold of Saul, nor of
his house, neither for us shall thou kill any man in Israel; But the man that
consumed us, that devised evil against us, that we should be destroyed from
remaining in any of the coasts of Israel, let seven men of his Sons be
delivered unto us, and we will hang them up unto the Lord in Gibeah of Saul,
whom the Lord did choose. v. 3. 4. 5. 6. But David (as it follows) spared
Mephibosheth (at whose life the Gibeonites did specially aim) because of the
Lord's oath that was between them, between David and Jonathan the Son of Saul.

3 But here least such malevolent eyes or ears as Machiavel's or Machiavilian
Politicians, should by looking upon or hearing this story read, let in
suspicion into their unhallowed hearts, of some secret complot betwixt the
Gibeonites and David for planting the Scepter of Israel in David's stock by
rooting out the whole stock of Saul besides this impotent forlorn branch
Mephibosheth; we may parallel this prodigious calamity with others like unto
it, which in the observation of heathen writers have by the providence of God
befalne other royal families for the perjurie of their Progenitors, albeit
executed upon them by the hands of men. The difference will be only this, that
David in the execution of God's fierce wrath upon the house of Saul did
understand his Commission much better then other Executioners of Gods like
wrath did, who did nothing but what God would have done, but without just
warrant.

4 Could Kindomes be surely founded upon their present strength and greatness,
or states be made stand upright and firm by rule of secular policy, the
likelihood was greater that the Macedonian Kingdom should have continued in
Philip's race then the Kingdom of Israel in the house of Saul. Every man
(says In lib. ^. hoc est de Arcadic.
Pausanias) will easily grant that this Philip for his achievements was the
greatest King which Macedon had either before or after him: Of Princely virtues
he had so many and so well mixed, as few Princes in any ages have enjoyed the
like. What then did he want why he might not be reputed in wise-mens censure a
good Governor or Commander? Only this, that he had his own oath at too great
command. His perjury did spoil his politic projects whilst they seemed most
to prosper, and ruinated the foundations of his intended Monarchy as fast as he
laid them; and which is worst of all, his soul being infected with this foul
sin did propagate the rot unto the fruit of his body: As he had often
deluded his Gods, so the Oracle to revenge this quarrel deluded him. The
sentence of death which he expected the Oracle should at his instance award
upon the King of Persia, did seize upon himself in his best years and amidst
his triumphant jollities. Immediately upon his death his infant Son by
Cleopatra was with his mother scorched to death in a vessel of brass by the
appointment of Olympias, unto whose cruelty another of his sons by a former
wife within few years after was sacrificed. And as if their complaints and
outcries against this unjust execution of a womanish wrath had been appointed,
or authorized to bring down God's more immediate judgments upon the remnant of
Philip's seed or his grandchildren, (which had more potent guardians in humane
possibility to shield them from humane violence,) these were cut down by
fates, or (as my Author's words will bear it) by the destroying power.

5 And as for Alexander's untimely death it is remarkable amongst children. It
is an excellent Epiphonema wherewith Pausanias concludes his discourse
concerning Philip's perjury: If Philip (says he) when he laid his plots for
erecting the Macedonian Empire had said the Delphick Oracle, given to Glaucus
the Spartan, to his heart [(...), the posterity of men which make conscience
of oath shall fare the better] we should have no reason to suspect that any of
the Gods would have extinguished Alexander and the Macedonian glory, as it had
been with one and the same breath of their displeasure. Now the Oracle
pronounced the sentence of untimely death upon the posterity of Glaucus the
Spartan because he consulted it, whether he might with safety for swear the
pawn or deposition which the Milesians had committed to his fidelity: And
when knowing his doom he sought the revocation of the sencence upon promise of
full restitution, he only obtained this answer for his own and others
instruction [ to solicit or tempt God to abett, or countenance perjury, and
to be actually perjured come both to one reckoning.] If the Reader suspect the
authority of the Oracle upon presumption that all oraculous answers were
inspired by Devils, or discredit the story it self because related by
Herodotus; as I may not join with him in raising needless suspicions, or too
large imputations against one or other, so I will not request him to admit the
relation upon any other terms then as an Emblem of divine truth.

6 That which this Emblem represents as vero simile, was remarkablely
fulfilled in Iehoiakim and Zedechias: Both of them had deserved death and
deposition for their other sins; but that which moved the Lord to write these
two principal stemmes of David childlesse among the families of Judah, was
falsification of their oaths to Nehuchadnezar. Zedekiah had God's special
promise that he and his house should live, upon condition he would submit
himself (as by oath he was bound) unto the King of Babel; but sleighting his
oath till time was past, and not submitting himself to Nebuchadnezar till he
was caught, his sons were slain before his eyes. And no sooner had this
tragical spectacle found entrance into his troubled soul, but the windows by
which it entered were shut up; that so having no possibility of vent for
grief, it might reflect more vehemently upon his pensive heart, and be such a
perpetual torment to his restless fancy, as an eare-wig is to the brain
into which she has crept. I will conclude these instances concerning oaths
promissory with his verdict, who was able to make the induction good. Si quis
omnem antiquitatem and bellorum memoriam ab ultimo principio repetat, profecto
reperiet eorum qui pactas violarunt inducias, miserrimos exitus and civitatibus
ac populis calamitosissimos extitisse. Bodinus lib. 5. page 964. He that would
take pains to search records of Antiquity or memorialls of war from the
first beginning of histories extant, shall clearly find that the violation of
leagues or solemn truces has brought a miserable end upon truce breakers,
whether private persons or publeque States.

7. One part of his instance or induction he took from the league betwixt
Henry the second French King, the Lantgrave of Hassia, Maurice of Saxony, and
Albert of Brandeburg, violated first by Maurice, and afterward more shamefully
by Albert of Brandeburg. The noble historian and great Antiquary of France, who
had the Articles of the Thuanus.
league betwixt Philip of Spain and (I take it) this Henry the second King of
France, derives all the miseries and calamities which befell France in their
intestine broiles, and civil wars, from the violation of this league on the
French King's part, whereunto he was tempted by the pretented infallible Roman
Oracle upon a dispensation with his oath proffered unto him not sought by him.
So much worse was the spirit of this Roman Oracle then the spirit which guided
the Delphick Oracle in the answer to Glaucus the Spartane before mentioned. The
like dispensation of the Pope with an oath of Contract did set the rebellion in
the North on foot, and was the cause of the calamity or misery which About the
10 of Queen Elizabeth.
befell him and his family, who sought for it and others of his Associates.

8 And no marveile if God in this case be severe to visit the sins of fathers
upon the children, as well as in the case of idolatry*. For of these two sins,
perjury or wilful breach of solemn oath is the more abominable, though I know
not whether I should account them two sins, or several branches of one sin;
or whether were worse utterly to deny the truth of God's being, or his
omnipotency; or to produce him as a witness or Countenancer of that which is
untrue. The truth of God's Being and his Justice being presupposed or believed,
it stands with reason what Bodin has observed, That perjury should bring forth
destruction and calamity, whether to public states or private families in
greater plenty then any sin whatsoever. Other enormities always deserve
God's wrath and in the issue bring it upon offenders, but perjury only is
conceived and brought forth by soliciting or imploring God's wrath or
vengeance upon such as commit it. But some will here demand, What is all this
which has been said concerning the sacred use of oaths amongst men, and the
plagues executed upon such as violate those sacred oaths, to the oath which God
interposed to Abraham, or to their assurance which rely upon him? Much every
way. For; the special, if not the only reason why God's hand has light so
heavy upon all perjured persons is, because God himself, who vouchsafed to
swear to Abraham for our comfort, is so true in all his promises, and so
unpartiall in awarding lustice that he would not punish men's neglects or
contempt of solemn oaths so severely as usually he does, were he not beyond
comparison or comprehension more observant of his oath when he swears by
himself, then we are of our oaths which we take in his name. Briefly, albeit
some in this age among the most zealous Professors of Christianity escape his
visible punishments, or sometimes prosper better in worldly estate for their
perjury then many amongst the heathen did: yet by this practice they forfeit
their interest in the assurance which God made by oath unto the heirs of
promise. Every one that hopes to be blessed with faithful Abraham, or to be
partaker of the blessing promised by oath unto him must in this particular be
perfect as his heavenly Father is perfect. Every one that has been tainted
with this foul finne how great a gainer soever he be by it in worldly courses
must purge himself from it by the solemn proper acts of faith, that is, by
true Repentance, Alms deeds, and full Restitution of accursed gains to the
parties whom he has wronged: For (as our Apostle tells us) every one that has
this hope, that is, to be the Son of God with faithful Abraham, must purify
himself, as he is pure. 1. Ioh. 3. 3.

CHAP. 15. In what cases solemn oaths were or are to be taken and administered.
AMongst others truly instiled golden verses of Pythagoras, every verse
containing some one or other moral rule of good life, this was a principal
one, (...)

1 The Comment or Paraphrase of an heathenish Writer, though a professed enemy to
us Christians, at least to such as lived in his age, is very Christian, as many
other parts of his Commentations upon Pythagora's moral rules are (to use the
words of that learned French Civilian Tiraquel) most Divine.

2 Whilst I revise these and the former observations of the heathen, concerning
oaths, and consider how exactly parallel they are to the sacred rules of God's
written Laws and Cases determined by divine Justice, I cannot but resume the
Prophet Ieremiah's wish or prayer, Oh that my head were turned into a well or
fountain, that I might weep day and night for the sins of this people! And
of this age wherein a man may more safely believe a Turk swearing by Mahomet,
or a canting Beggar by his Solomon, or a rude pit-man, or coale-worker by
spitting upon a coal, then many witnesses, who bear the name of Gentlemen and
good Christians, whilst they swear in Courts of Justice by the Lord God of
their salvation, kissing the Book wherein their interest in the promises made
to Abraham, and their hopes of the life to come, are contained. Nor is this the
fault of false witnesses only, but of Lawmakers or Interpreters, or of men in
Authority, that a man may be sworn out of his inheritance, out of his lively
hood and good name by one uncatechized Clown or Atheist, who neither knows by
whom, nor unto what he swears; ready at all times to lend that which he hears
called an oath, unto his friend or brother in mischief. An oath being a
special part of Religion, it were to be wished it were never to be administered
or exacted by such as give more proof to show their authority and power in
being enabled by humane Law to give it, then either of their desire or ability
to instruct the party swearing unto what he ought, unto what he ought not to
swear, or in any other principal point of Religion. Many cases are often
determined by one man's oath which are not possible to be proved by the oaths of
any ten men living, though men of life and manners unsuspected. And yet in case
the person swearing to his neighbor's utter undoing might be convicted of
wilful perjury, the best remedy that the Law or Custom affords him will prove
much worse then the disease it self; that is, beget a tedious suit in some
costly Court. But neither did the primevall Church of God, nor the ancient
Laws of heathen Nations admit of any such Custom. Exceptions against lewd
persons or suspected witnesses were admitted before they were permitted to
swear: Or in case any were detected to swear falsely, the detection was without
any great cost; and the punishment severe and speedy. In case a man had sworn
falsely against his neighbor in matter of Vide Duarenum in tractatu de
Iuramento.
debt, he was, besides other punishments, to pay as much as his neighbor
should have been damnified by his oath. In case of infamy and slander he was
adjudged to undergo the same punishment which his oath, had it been admitted,
would have brought upon the party accused. If he had sworn against another in
a matter capital, his perjury was punished with death, and so were false
accusers, albeit they did swear or accuse on the behalf of the Prince or
Emperor. One of the best Catechismes that I dare commend unto such as have
power to minister solemn oaths, or unto such as are bound to answer upon oath,
or ready when occasions require to interpose oaths voluntary, is the Comment of
the forecited Philosopher upon that golden verse of Pythagoras.

IUSIURANDVM COLE.

Fuerit autem cultus ejus servandi optima ratio and cura, si eo nec frequenter
utaris, nec temere, nec quibuslibet in rebus (...)
nec ad sermonis amplificationem, nec ad narrationis confirmationem atque
fidem, sed quantum fieri potest, rebus tantum necessariis simul atque
honori^icis adhibeatur, ^oque tempore cum nulla salus alia quam ex sola
iurisjurandi veritate expectatur. Invenient vero fidem isthaec apud eos qui
audiunt, si congruum jurijurand^ modum adhibuerimus, sique suspicionem omnem
non ijs solum qui juramento abstinent, sed qui utuntur etiam sustulerimus,
quicquid in mortaliumrebus veritate maius nobis haberi.

Hierocles in 2um aureum carmen Pythagorae. God's oath at all time when it
pleased him to swear, was a voluntary oath; no Authority could exact it of
him. But how free or voluntary soever his oath to Abraham was, it was not
gratis dictum, but interposed to some good use or purpose. The special uses or
purposes of this first oath of God (which is upon record) comes in the next
place to be discussed.

3 It is on all Sides agreed that the Article or matter unto which God did
swear, was of great consequence and weight: For men ought not to make solemn
oaths or protestations, but in such cases; because they are commanded to be
holy as he is holy. But can there be any case or business betwixt God and man
of so great consequence, that his sole word or mere promise might not suffice
to determine it? His word in it self no doubt is more firm and sure, then all
the oaths of men and Angels. It is therefore in the second place presumed or
granted by all good Writers, that our Gracious God confirmed this promise by
oath ex abundanti, for the support of men's infirmities, which too often measure
the goodness of God and the fidelity of his promises by their own notions of
goodness, or by their experience of such fidelity as is found in promises
amongst good men. But albeit we may take surer hold of any man's word or
promise, then of his indefinite overtures or inclinations to do us good, yet a
very honest man's word is no sheateanchor for a wise man to rely upon in a
violent storm. The fest sometimes may be sure and firm when the cable is
slender and weak: Or the cable very strong, when the fest or Anchor-hold is
slippery. Hence ordinary promises or professions of real kindnesses by a
tacit or implicit consent of most men, admit diverse exceptions or
dispensations, whereof solemn oaths are incapable. In what terms soever
ordinary promises or professions of kindnesses be expressed, their tenor is to
be understood or construed with this Proviso, Rebus sic stantibus. Unexpected
disaster, or rare mischance, is in common equity a sufficient release for non
performance of that which was sincerely promised upon probable hopes of better
means or abilities; or at least of the continuances of such means as the
party had when he made promise. Many men who will hardly strain their oaths
for their life, will dispense with their honest words, or good intentions,
rather then subject themselves to any incompensable worldly mischief, or
remediless inconvenience, which may certainly follow upon the performances of
what they promised. For this reason every wise man must be more wary to what he
swears, then to what he promises. For matter of promise concerns things
temporal only, whereas he that takes a solemn oath, does sequester his
immortal soul and estate in the life to come, into the hands of the Almighty
Judge and Revenger of perjury. Hence was it that the noble Roman Regulus did
choose rather to return to the Carthaginians, resolving to endure all the
tortures and pains that they could inflict upon him, then to violate the
solemn oath which they administered unto him. And albeit the Carthaginians knew
him to be a man for his fidelity and due observances of his promises, as just
and righteous as Rome had any; a man more faithful and true (if we believe
ancient histories) then the Carthaginians ordinarily were: yet out of
discretion and politic observance, they held it more safe to trust to Regulus
upon his oath, then upon his mere promise. No wise man or prudent Statist unto
this day, will trust the best man living (over whose person or estate he has
no command or jurisdiction) in matter of greater consequence, without
Waremundus in meditamentis pro foederibus.
a solemn oath. A grave * Civilian observes absque iureiur ando alicui in
foederibus contrahendis confidere, est piscari in aere and venari in medi^
maris.

CHAP. 16. God's oath to Abraham was an oath for Confirmation of the league
betwixt them. Of the several manner of leagues.
NOw God's oath to Abraham was an oath of league; a solemn confirmation of
that Covenant which God had entered with Abraham at the Circumcision of his Son
Isaac* We may observe in the sacred story, that Abraham had first God's mere
promise, and on that he faithfully relied Genesis 12. 13. 14. etc. Afterward,
this promise grew into a solemn everlasting Covenant, signed on Abraham's part
by the Circumcision of himself, and his son Isaac; and afterward confirmed
on God's part by solemn oath; and lastly signed and sealed by the bloody death
of the only Son of God. For the Readers better conduct in the passages which
follow, it will be requisite first to entreat briefly of the nature of
Covenants and Leagues. Secondly to display the Evangelicall importances of the
oath, by which this League was first confirmed and afterward renewed. The word
Covenant in our English, is sometimes equivalent to that which the Latins call
pactum, or conventum, to wit, any contract or bargain, wherein there is quid
pro quo, somewhat given and somewhat taken. And in this sense every Covenant or
bargain is an act of commutative Justice, wherein there is ratio dati and
accepti, a mutual bond between the parties contracting upon some valuable
considerations. A Covenant of this rank there cannot any be properly said or
imagined betwixt God and mere man as Abraham was; for who can give any thing
unto God which was not his own before, by a more sovereign right and more
peculiar title then it is, or can be his that would take upon him to make God
his Debtor by deed of gift. And for this very reason the acutest Schoolmen
resolve us, that commutative Justice cannot be formally in God. But when we
read that Justice is one of God's essential Attributes, or when we say that
God is truly and formally Just; this must be meant of distributive Justice, the
balance of whose scales are poena and praemium, matter of punishment and
matter of reward. For God as a just Judge does truly and accurately render unto
every man according unto all his ways without any respect of any advantage
gain or profit that can redound unto him by man's doing good; but merely out
of his unspeakable love unto mercy it self, unto bounty it self, or unto
Justice it self. But though there cannot be such a Pactum or Covenant between
God and man, between God and Abraham himself; as is a proper act of
commutative Justice wherein there is ratio dati and accepti, (For Abraham had
nothing to give unto God from whom he had received all that he had, and from
whom he did expect to receive his son Isaac, in whom the very Covenant was
to be establed:) yet there may be between God and man, and there was between
God and Abraham a true and proper Covenant in another sense, that is, as much as
the Latins call foedus, a true or proper league of amity or association. And
thus the word in the original, especially in Genesis 17. 7. is to be taken.

2 This kind of League or Covenant may be of two sorts, foedera iniqua quae
victores victis dabant: * Inter alios commentatores in Iustinu^ vide victorinum
Strigeliu^ in annum nonum belli Peloponnefiaci. p. 134.
Such as the Conquerors would give unto the Conquered, which was always upon
unequal terms or conditions; and yet better for the conquered and weaker part
to admit of, then to be altogether without league or security for their safety
or protection. Or they were foedera aequa, leagues entered upon equal terms or
condition; such as usually are the leagues between neighbour-Kingdomes,
free-States; or Soveraignties independent each on other, especially if such
leagues be made when the one has the other at no advantage: And these leagues
were of two sorts; either mutually defensive only, or offensive as well as
defensive, as the Greeks say, (...) or as the Latins more fully express the
nature of them, Vide Balthazar. Agal lib. 1. de iure and officiis belli. cap.
7. parag. 1. etc.
ut eosdem haberent and hosts and socios, that he which was a friend to one
party should likewise be held a friend unto the other party included in the
league: that he that should declare himself an enemy to the one party,
should forthwith and for so doing be taken and reputed for an enemy unto the
other party. Besides this mutual aid or assistance in times of war, one
special end of leagues or association was, that one Country might be relieved
in their want, or pleasured in their prosperity with those blessings wherewith
others abounded. This mutual intercours or exchange of commodities between
Nation and Nation, is always cut off, or much impaired in time of hostility or
war: Neither party can with security enjoy the good things which their own
land affords; much less can they with safety be partakers of those commodities
wherewith God has blessed their enemies. And in case it so fell out, that a
people rich in money or merchandise, but destitute of corn or wine, or other
such necessaries, should fall at variance with those who were accustomed to
supply their wants; their estate in the midst of their wealth was but
miserable and would enforce them to seek peace upon terms unequal. So we read
Acts 12. 20. When Herod was highly displeased with them of Tire and Sidon (a
people for wealth inferior to none) they came to him with one accord and having
made Blastus the Kings Chamberlain their friend, they desired peace. What
reason had they to become suitors for peace with him, against whom they had
been able to have waged war, whom perhaps they were able to out-match with
number of men and weight of money? S. Luke gives the reason in the next verse;
Because their Country was nourished by Herod's Country.

3 But infinitely more miserable then the forlorn estate of any one people can
be in respect of the most potent and cruel Adversary was the estate of all
mankind, whilst heaven and earth were at enimity. For albeit God in mercy
suffered his Sun to rise as well upon the unjust sons of Adam, as upon Adam
in his integrity, yet were all utterly deprived of all commerce with the
Inhabitants of heaven: All were excluded from the tree of life without whose
fruit, this bodily life which we lead here on earth, even whilst we live in
greatest pleasure or prosperity, is but as a short walk or progress from the
womb unto the grave; as it were from a prison to a place of torment or
execution: Reason we had to desire peace of heaven, and to become humble
Supplicants for the League or Covenant whereof God here preventeth Abraham:
Reason we had to have sought this league, upon what terms or conditions
soever. In respect of the parties which enter this league or association, it
was a league of the former kind, quod victores victis dabant. God was our Lord
by a higher title then the right of conquest, and we were worse then his
meanest vassailes, not his servants, but his condemned Prisoners. It was in his
power to have cut us off from all possibility of any league or amity, save
only with hell and death, which we and our Fathers had chosen for our
confederates. And yet the conditions of this league wherewith God preventeth
Abraham (for he sought it at Abraham's hands, when Abraham did not seek it at
his,) are conditions aequi faederis. It is made upon as good terms or
conditions, as any league between free-states and Kingdoms independent was
ever proffered or performed. It is more then a league offensive and defensive:
More then (...) For this league is but a ratification of that promise which God
had made to Abraham Genesis 12. 2. 3. And I will make of thee a great Nation, and
I will bless thee and make thy name great, and thou shall be a blessing. And I
will bless them that bless thee, and curse him that curses thee: And in thee
shall all the families of the earth be blessed. And yet it is said Chap. 17.
ver. 19. that God would establish his league with Isaac, but with Isaac only as
in the type, or as he was the pledge only on Abraham's part: For it is a thing
not to be imagined that the Lord in giving sentence of blessing and cursing
would tie himself unto such strict conformity (as this promise imports) with
the parties to be judged by him, as that he would bless all whosoever blessed
Abraham, or that he would curse them that cursed Abraham or, Isaac, or their
seed in their own persons, or for their own actions. How then does God perform
this promise unto Abraham? Not in Abraham or Isaac's person, but in another
seed of Abraham of whom that is expressly avouched Chap. 22. 16. 17. 18.
which in the 12. Chap. was implicitly, or avouched of him as he was
indefinitely comprehended in Abraham's seed, or potentially contained in
Abraham's person. In thee (says God to Abraham Genesis 22. 18.) shall all the
families of the earth be blessed. By my self have I sworn says the same Lord
God Chap. 22. 16. For because thou have done this thing, and have not withheld
thy Son, thine only Son, that in blessing I will bless thee, and in
multiplying I will multiply thy Seed as the stars in heaven, and as the sand
which is upon the Sea shore, etc. Thy Seed shall possess the gates of his
enemies: And in thy Seed shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed, because
thou have obeyed my voice. By Abraham's seed in this place he meant not Isaac
with whom this Covenant was established, but another seed of Abraham, and
another son of promise in whom this Covenant was to be accomplished. So our
Apostle interprets this place. Galat. 3. 16. Now to Abraham and his seed were
the promises made: He says not and to his seeds as of many, but as of one,
and to thy seed which is Christ, that is as truly the Son of God as the
seed of Abraham, who is as truly and properly God as he is man. This
interpretation of our Apostle is grounded upon the matter or subject of the
promise. For it is impossible that all the families of the earth, even Abraham
himself, and Melchisedech who blessed Abraham should be blessed either in
Isaac, or in Abraham's seed, either indefinitely or universally taken; or in
any seed of Abraham, who was not as truly God as man; or who was not that most
high God, in whose name Melchisedech blessed Abraham. In this seed, and by
this seed, all the Nations are blessed that shall be blessed. And whatsoever
blessings any man or people receive from God in him as he is the Son of God,
or for his merits; they shall receive them by him, and through him, as he is
the seed of Abraham and son of man. And in this seed of Abraham, this
Covenant here established with Isaac shall be performed according to the strict
propriety or utmost improvement of the words or clause of the confederacy, or
league offensive and and defensive between God and Abraham. Whosoever shall
bless this seed, shall be blessed of God Whosoever shall curse this seed,
shall be accursed by God; and not so only, but whomesoever this seed shall
bless, them likewise God the Father shall bless: Whomsoever this seed shall
pronounce accursed, they shall stand accursed (without revocation or appeal,)
by God the Father: For God the Father has tied himself to conformity of
sentence with this seed of Abraham. Unto whom this seed (now made King and
Priest, and placed at the right hand of God) shall award this sentence (which
he will award as Judge to all that shall be placed on hisright hand,) Come ye
blessessed of my Father inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the
Foundation of the World, they shall be blessed by God the Father with
everlasting and immortal bliss. And unto whom he shall pronounce that other
sentence, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the
Devil and his Angels, they shall stand accursed likewise by God the Father, by
an irrevocable and everlasting curse.

CHAP. 17. The League between God and Abraham did eminently contain the most
accurate solemnities that were used betwixt Prince and Prince, or Nation and
Nation.
AS this League here mentioned betwixt God and Abraham, ^^s for its conditions
of the highest rank of League, ut eosdem haberent and hosts and socios: So it
was as solemnly concluded and subscribed unto by both parties, as any League
betwixt man and man was ever concluded and solemnized. Albeit the manner of
concluding or making Leagues of amity betwixt man and man, or people and
people, was in ancient times (specially amongst the Eastern Nations) most
formal and remarkablely solemn; and the manner or solemnity did vary or
differ according to the variety of customs usual amongst diverse Nations. The
Macedonians for confirmations of Leagues with others, did divide a quantity of
bread between the parties consociating, giving the one half to the one party,
and the other to the other. So Xenophon describes the solemn league of amity
between Alexander the great and Cohortanus. And though Xenophon expresses it
not, it is very probable that they used such solemn imprecations as were
usually made in other Leagues concluded with the like solemnity or sacrifice;
And that was, that so God would divide or smite him or them, that should break
the League, or violate the conditions agreed upon, as they did divide the
bread, or smite the sacrifice by which the League was concluded. Other Leagues
of amity or association (as the same Interrogante illo, respondent se Macrones
esse, quaere igitur inquit Xenophon, cur aciem adversus nos instruxerint, and
cur hosts nostri esse velint? respondent illi, quia vos etia^ nostrum solu^
ingressiestis. Et responderi duces iubent, id non e^ factum, ut vos ullo dam^o
afficiamus, sed posteaquam adversus rege^ bellum gessimus, redire iam in
Graeciam cupim^s, and ad mare pergere quaerunt illi number de eo fide data sibi
cavere velint* velle se Graeci and dare fidem and accipere in^uiunt: post haec
Macrones hastam barbaricam Gaecis tradant, and ipsis Graeci vic^ss^n Graecam*
quod hoc pacto fidem dari apud se dicerent. Lib. 4. de expeditione Cyr^ p. 267
Xenophon tells us) were concluded between party and party which had formerly
been at variance and hostility, by mutual delivery of the same weapons, as of
lances, pikes, or other offensive weapons now consecrated by this solemn
delivery to be instruments or pledges of peace, or not to be used save in their
mutual defense, or in offense to them who should prove enemies to their
mutual peace. But those Leagues were more solemn which were concluded with
Blood, either of the parties which entered League, or with the blood of beasts
sacrificed for making peace between men. So Qua necessitate Mithradates diem
locumque foederi accepit castelloque e^reditur. Ac primo R^damistus in amplexus
eius effusus simulare obsequium, and socerum a^ parentem appeilare, ad^icit
ius^urandu^, non ferro non veneno vim allaturum: simul in locum propinquum
trahit, provisum illic sacrificium imperatum dictitans ut diis testibus pax
firmaretur. Mos est regibus quoties in societatem coeant, implicare dextras,
pollicesque inter se vincere, ^odoque praestringere* mox ubi sanguis in
extremos artus se effuderit, levi ictu ^ruorem eliciuntatque i^ v^^em lambunt
^d foedus arcanum habetur, quasi mutuo cruore sacratum. Lib. 12. Annal.
Tacitus tells, it was the custom amongst some Eastern Kings, when they entered
a League, to clutch their hands and fingers, and to tie their thumbs so hard,
until the blood did rise in the pulp or fleshypart, and afterward to let them
both so much blood by a gentle touch, that each party might suck others blood.
Id foedus arcanum habetur quasi mutuo cruore sacratum. This kind of League
(says Tacitus) was accounted sacred, as being confirmed by mutual blood. But
how sacred or secret soever this League was, (for the word Arcanum imports
both) it was pro illa vice, for that turn, both openly and shamefully violated
by Radamistus. Quumque armatorum acies instructa esset, Graecorum imperatores,
and serierum Ductores apud Ariaeum convenient, and quu^ Graeci, Ariaeus, cum
aliis apud ipsum dignitate praestantissima viris iuramento cofirmant, non
prodituros se mutuo, sed in societate constanter permansuros, addentibus hoc
sacramentum barbaris, fine fraud se itineris duces fore. Haec sacramenta quum
praestarent, a* prum, taurum, lupum, arietem mactabant, Graecis gladium,
barbaris hastam in scutum tingentibus. Lib. 2. de expeditione Cyri p. 217.
Xenophon likewise describes another League between the Grecians and the
people of Asia concluded by the blood of sacrifices which they mutually killed.
The Grecians dipped their swords, and the Asiatickes their lances in the blood
of the Sacrifices, (which were a bull, a bear, a wolf and a ram) being
first mingled together in a shield or target; as if they had sought to have
made peace between these offensive weapons of war by making them pledge each
other in a common cup. For so the most solemn manner of plighting faith
betwixt some Nations was, for the one to take up the same cup from the others
hand, and to pledge him in it; or in case no cup or wine could be presently
had, they were to lick the dust of the earth at each others hands.

2 The manner of solemnizing this present League betwixt God and Abraham, at
the first draught of it, was much what the same with that which Tacitus reports
of the Eastern Kings. It was solemnized on Abraham's part by the effusion of
his own and his son Isaac's blood, and so continued throughout the
generations of their posterity by cutting off the foreskin of their flesh.
And inasmuch as Circumcision was the sign, or solemn ceremony of this mutual
League between God and Abraham and Abraham's seed; it is necessarily employed
by the tenor of the same mutual Covenant, that God should subscribe or seal
the League after the same manner, and receive the same sign of Circumcision in
his flesh which Abraham and his seed has done.

3 This Covenant which was first entered by Circumcision, was afterward renewed
on God's part, as on Abraham's part by mutual and solemn sacrifice. The
manner of God's treaty or process with Abraham in this Covenant is worthy of
serious observation: And Abraham's demeanor in all this business is the most
lively pattern, and most exquisite rule for all our imitation who desire the
assurance of faith or hope concerning our present or future estate in this
gracious League or Covenant. Though it be most true, (which has been often
intimated before,) that no man can deserve any thing at God's hand, because no
man can give him any thing which he has not received from him; seeing no man
can bestow upon God, or convey unto him any title, or right of propriety which
he has received from him, which God had not, before man received it from him,
or enjoyed it by him: Yet if we be content sincerely to renounce our own title
or interest in the Creatures which we have received from him, or in our
selves, (who are likewise his, whose very being is the free gift of his
goodness,) he still rewards us for every such service, or act of our bounden
duty, with a larger measure of his bounty, then any deservings of man from man
can pretend unto. And thus he rewarded Abraham always in kind; always
according to the quality or specificall nature of his work or service; but
for quantity far beyond all proportion of any gift or service which Abraham
could present unto his God; though it had been the sacrifice of himself, or
of his son. The first remarkable service which God expressed or required of
Abraham, was to forsake his kindred and his Fathers house. Genesis 12. 1. And in
lieu of that interest which Abraham renounced in these, (those being not the
ten thousand part of the Country wherein he lived) God gives him a just title
or interest to the whole land of Canaan, and promises to make a mighty Nation
of his seed; to erect more then one or two Kingdoms out of it. And yet all
this is but the pledge or earnest of a far better patrimony prefigured by it,
and bequeathed with it as an inheritance conveyed by delivery of the terrar.
The spiritual blessing envailed under this great temporal blessing, was, that
God would be a God unto Abraham and to his seed, and that they should be unto
him a people. And to be God's peculiar people was so much greater then to be
Lords and Kings over the whole earth, as the temporal inheritance which God
here promised Abraham (that was the whole Kingdom of Canaan) was greater then
the private temporal patrimony which Abraham for God's service had left in
Caldaea, or Mesopotamia.

4 The next service which God requires of Abraham and his seed that they might
become more capable of his promise, and that this promise might transire in
pactum, pass (as we say) into a League or Covenant, was that Abraham and his
seed should circumcise the foreskin of their flesh; and by this ceremony or
service, they were consecrated to be God's people, his peculiar people. The
reward which God astipulateth or promises to this service or ceremony by them
performed, was that he would consecrate himself by the same ceremony of
circumcision to be their God, their gracious Protector and Redeemer. But
Abraham and his son Isaac being by this ceremony of Circumcision once
consecrated to God's service, they might not after they had once received this
badge or cogni^ance, withdraw themselves from any service unto which their Lord
God should afterward call them, how harsh and unpleasant soever it might seem
to flesh and blood. The next remarkable service whereunto God called Abraham
was to offer up his only son Isaac whom he loved, for a burnt offering: And
this service Abraham for his part is as willing to undertake to be an Actor in
it, and Isaac as willing to undergo or be a patient in it, as they had been in
the former service of Circumcision. The reward which God appointed to this
second service of Abraham and Isaac, was the final ratification of the former
promise, or Covenant, by solemn oath. By my self have I sworn, that in thy
seed shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed. The contents of his oath
is, that God would make his only Son such a sacrifice as Abraham was willing
to have made his only Son Isaac, that in him, and by him all the Nations of
the earth, that is all of every Nation that would so rely upon God's promises
as Abraham and Isaac did, should be made heirs with them of the Kingdom which
God had promised; and that was the Kingdom of everlasting bliss. But of this
particular the Reader may see more in the eighth Chap. 30. Parag. 3. etc.
Book of these Comments

5 In this sacrifice of the Son of God and seed of Abraham, the League first
solemnized by Circumcision, was for the external rite or manner more
exquisitely solemnized than any League ever had been: The solemnity of all
other Leagues were eminently contained in it. For besides the rites before
mentioned in solemnizing Leagues concluded by sacrifice, each party had a
Priest or vates, or else made choice of some indifferent Priest for both. Each
party likewise had their proper sacrifice, or (which would give better
satisfaction to curiosity) they had one common sacrifice in which both parties
had equal interest, as being provided at their joint costs and charges; or the
one brought a Priest and the other a sacrifice. Sometimes again they had one
Isocrates in oratione de pa^e aitse spectatore^ fuisse plurimorum belloru^ in
Graecia; confecit enim annos aetatis suae paene centum; sedre atque usu
comperisse, omnium belloru^ exitus tandem ad norma^ iustitiae congruere.
Quanquam enim eventas qui antecedunt (...) tanta in varietate sunt, ut saepe
^cogant homines dubitare, utra causa sit melior, tamen finis declarat iustitia^
causae victricem esse, deum opppressos iniustis modis vindicare in veterem
libertate^. Huius regulae duo exempla evidentissima in hoc tertio libro extant,
atque eminent: un^^ de bello inter Lacedaemonios and Messenios, alteru^ de
incendio universae Graeciae, quod Peloponne siacum vocatur. Vetus consuetudo
fuit aedificare co^munia templa, atque in iis vesci rebus consecratis, quoties
foedera inter vicinos fiebant. Quare cum Lacedaemonii in Peloponneso vicine
essent, communi templo extructo pacem inter se ^oedusque exstruxerunt. Sed
quoda^ tempore adolescentes Messeni^* iura divina and humana violantes regem
Laconicum Teleclum ad communia sacra profectum interfecerunt and virgins
Laconicas nobiles ad turpitadinem rapuerunt. ^taque Lacedaemonii iuramento fese
obstrinxere, non ^^te domum se reversuros quam Messenam solo aequassent, aut
omnes certe occumbere velle morti: Et ^i autem diu anceps Mars fuit, and dubia
belli fortuna, (nam Aristomenes dux Messeniorum, qui habuit corhirsutum, sua
manu trecentes Lacedaemonios trucidavit,) tamen Messena anno 19 a Lacedaemoniis
capta and servitutis iugo tristissimo oppressa est. Victorinus Strigelius in
tertium librum historiarum Justini.
common Temple, either built of purpose at their joint costs (as some think
Ianus Temple in Rome was built by Romulus and Titus Tatius for ratifying the
peace between the Latins and the Sabines) or else made choice of some Temple
most indifferently seated for both to meet in. All these circumstances were
good emblemes of the wished-for peace; good emblemes likewise of the equal
conditions in such Leagues agreed upon; and yet imperfect emblemes, scarce good
shadows of the admirable manner how this League of peace betwixt God and man
was concluded. We cannot say that God had one Priest, and man another; but
both had one Priest more indifferent then any two Nations ever could have,
though his Father had been of the one Nation, and his Mother of the other, and
himself born upon the Sea betwixt them, or upon the bounds of their borders.
The Priest between God and man was but one, and yet truly God and truly man;
so truly one that we cannot say the seed of Abraham or son of man did provide
the sacrifice, and the Son of God did offer it, but (which is more admirable
and more indifferent) the flesh of this sacrifice was humane, or man's flesh as
truly and properly as ours is; and yet as truly and properly the flesh of God,
as ours is the flesh of man. The blood of the sacrifice likewise was sanguis
humanus, See the seventh book of Comments upon the Creed. Chap. 30. Parag. 10
man's blood as truly and properly as any blood in our veins is, and yet as
truly and properly the blood of God, as our blood is the blood of man. It was
(as has been heretofore observed) humane blood or man's blood by nature, that
is, of the same substance with our blood, and yet the blood of God by personal
Union, or Property, by a more peculiar title, then the blood in our bodies can
be said ours. For the Godhead is more nearely united to the manhood of Christ
then our souls are to our bodies. And by this personal or bodily habitation
of the Godhead in his body, he who was our sacrifice and continues a Priest
for confirming this League, is also become the Temple. His body is become that
Tabernacle wherein God promised to meet the children of Israel. And unto the
glory of the Godhead which was before inaccessible, but now dwelling in this
Tabernacle, we have daily access through the blood of Christ. We may at all
times and in all places present him in this Tabernacle with the sacrifice of
prayer, of thankesgiving, and of our selves; and he from hence (as our God and
Father) indues us with the Spirit of Christ, whereby we are made his Sons.
For the blood of Christ as it is sanguis humanus, humane blood, of the same
nature with ours, does symbolize with our nature; and as it is the blood of God
in which the Godhead dwells personally, it is of force and virtue sufficient
to purify and cleanse our sinful nature, and to make us partakers of the
divine nature.

CHAP. 18. What the Interposition of God's oath for more abundant Confirmation
of his promise to Abraham did import, over and above all that which was
included in the literal or assertive sense of the League betwixt God and
Abraham.
LEaving it to the learned Professors of Laws Canonical, Civil, or
Municipall what special obligement a solemn oath induces, more then a mere
Covenant or paction without an oath can require; our next inquiry must be, what
the Interposition of God's oath first made to Abraham, and afterward renewed
with more express exemplifications unto David, did import, according to the
Charactericall or Emblematicall sense. This is a point of Divinity often
mentioned in this long work of Commentaries upon the Creed, and diverse other
of my meditations in my younger and better days; and the oftener intimated,
because it has been so seldom handled or thought upon by most Commentators or
Controversy-writers, although in my opinion (continued ever since I began these
Commentaries) it be the very key, without which there can be no Lawful
entrance into, no safe retire out of those usual debates concerning Election,
Predestination, or other positive Points of Divinity, whereon the resolution
of these does most depend. Now the resolution of this point we are to learn,
not from any practice of humane Courts Judicial or Coercive for determining
Pleas or Controversies between party and party. For in all Processes of this
nature, the determination must be according to the literal, grammatical, and
assertive sense of Laws in this case provided, and of Testimonies produced or
exhibited according to Law. The Question now in handling with its decision
depends much upon Tradition, or received rules (whether of ancient heathen
Jews, or Christians) What oath made either by the true and only God, or by the
imaginary Gods of the heathen did import more then ameere promise or
threatening. To begin first with the ancient heathen:

2 Albeit that which the Apostle says of the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ [ that he had no greater by whom he could sweare] could have no place,
at least suitable to the estimation of the Gods, by which the heathens did
swear or call to witness; yet when Jupiter the greatest God amongst them was
either provoked or voluntarily pleased to swear by such parts of this universe
as were conceived to be his coequalls, his full peers if not his betters, it
was generally presumed or believed that the doom or sentence so pronounced
(were it bliffull or dismal) was irreversible. For this reason the oath by
Styx is called by Homer (...) the grand or greatest oath. But so called [I take
it] by a Synecdoche: For if Jupiter had sworn by Phlegeton or by the Elysian
fields it had been all one as if he had sworn by Styx or other parts of the
infernal Region; all or every one of which were in heathenish Divinity more
venerable then this middle visible region wherein we live.

(...)
(...) Hom. Olyss. l. 5.

(...) etc.
Not Jupiter only but Juno, in Homer's Divinity, did hold the oath By Styx to
be inviolable.

(...)
(...)
(...) Libro 1 (...).
Such doom or sentences as the heathens accounted fatal, even the awards of
the weyred sisters themselves (the conceived Spinsters of fates and fortune)
did derive the necessity of their execution from interposition of some oath or
other. And in case the fates or weyred sisters had sworn the destruction of
any Nation or people, Jupiter had no authority to release the parties thus
designed, from destruction; but a power only to punish ultra condignum or
beyond the measure of punishment decreed by the weyred sisters or fates. A
memorable speech to this effect a stately Roman Poet has put into Jupiter's
mouth,

-- Vos, o superi, meus ordine sanguis,
Ne pugnate odiis, neu me tentare precando
Certetis; sic sat a mihi nigraeque sororem
Iuravere colus. Manet haec aborigine mundi
Fix a dies bello populique in praelia nati:
Quod nisi me veterum poenas sancire malorum
Gentibus, and diros sinitis punire nepotes
Arcem hanc aternam, mentisque sacraria nostrae
Testor, and Elysios, etiam mihi numina, Fontes,
Ipse manu Thebas correptaque moenia fundo
Excutiam, versasque solo super Inacha tecta
Effundam turres, ac stagna in caerula vertam
Imbre superjecto; licet ipsa in turbine rerum
Juno su^s colles templumque amplexa laboret.
The last clause of this patheticall oath bears a counterfeit or adulterate
character of that solemn oath of the true and only God, As I live says the
Lord, though Coniah the son of Iehoiakim King of Judah were the signet upon
my right hand, yet would I pluck thee thence; and I will give thee into the
hand of them whose face thou fear, even into the hand of Nebuchadnezar King
of Babylon, and into the hands of the Chaldeans. And I will cast thee out, and
thy mother that bare thee, into another Country where ye were not borne, and
there shall ye die. Ierem. 22. 24. 25. 26. etc. But unto the land whereunto
they desire to return, thither shall they not return. Is this man Coniah a
despised broken I dol? Is he a vessel wherein is no pleasure? Wherefore are
they* cast out, he and his seed, and are cast into a land which they know not?
O earth, earth, earth, hear the word of the Lord! Thus says the Lord write
ye this man childlesse; a man that shall not prosper in his days; for no man
of his seed shall prosper, sitting upon the throne of David, and ruling any
more in Judah.

3 With the Hebrew Rabbis this tradition or received rule concerning the
importance of God's oath, is so authentic, as it makes them more peremptory
in their resolution for the expiration of Soloman's Line in Ieconiah, then most
Christian Interpreters upon that place have been; unless it be such as in
this point follow them. Yet can I not persuade my self, nor conceive any
suspicion that either the Jewish Rabbis should take their hints for thus
interpreting the forecited or any other place of Scripture, wherein God's oath
is interposed, from the Divinity of the heathen: Much less did the ancient
Poets or Philosophers (who were the best Divines the heathens had) borrow their
fancies or conjectures from the Jewish Rabbis who were their punies; nor were
the Fathers of the Greek and Latin Church the Fathers or first Authors of
this Catholic rule or tradition. All of them rather were beholding to the
ancient Hebrews or to Mosaicall or Prophetical writings for such prenotions
or confused apprehensions, as in this subject they had. The consent of the
ancient Christian Writers or Fathers, the diligent Reader may find in their
Comments upon those places of Scriptures, wherein God's oath is mentioned; but
especially in their Co^ments upon the 110 Psalm, from which place and the
like, not they only, but our Apostle (to my apprehension) in the sixth and
seventh Chapters to the Hebrews took his directions. The Lord (says David)
Psalm 110. v. 4. has sworn and will not repent, thou art a Priest for ever
etc. This, in the language of Canaan, and by consent of many fathers, is as
much as if he had said, The Lord will not repent or reverse his promise to me
and my seed, because he has sworn that he should be a Priest forever after
the order of Melchisedech.

4 That God does repent him, either of the evil which he denounces, or of the
good which he promises, is a phrase most usual in Scripture; the true and
punctual meaning of which phrase is, that God did change or revoke either his
sentences of calamity, or of good which he in both cases truly intended, and
irresistibly meant to put in execution. And all this he might do, and often
did without any change or alteration in his will or intention; but always upon
some change or alteration in the parties either truly interessed in his
promises, or liable to his heavy judgments: when the one party did change from
good courses to evil, he was immutably free to reverse his promise, (as he
himself somewhere speaks) to break his Covenant. And when wicked men did
turn from their wicked ways, he was as free and more willing to reverse
sentences of woe, not only threatened, but decreed against them. This freedom
in God is perpetually presumed or taken as granted by his Prophets, whenever
the promise, decree, or Covenant is not revealed unto them with the seal of an
Oath. But the sentence whether for good or evil being revealed under Oath, was
in their judgment fully declared to be irreversible. For this reason the
Prophet sometimes wished the speedy execution of plagues threatened by God unto
their own Nation or kindred; as knowing it bootlesse either to entreat God's
favor, after his wrath against them was denounced by oath, or to solicit the
fulfilling of his gracious promises toward their posterity, until his
wrathful sentences confirmed by oath were put in execution. In one and the
same Chapter, it is said oftener then once, that God did repent him of making
Saul King of Israel: What is the reason? He was made King without an oath, yet
with sincere promise of continuing the Kingdom to himself and to his seed,
with this condition, in the Prophet's construction employed though not
expressed, Si been se gereret; But when the Prophet Samuel denounces the
sentence of deposition upon him. 1. Sam. 15. 29. The strength of Israel will
not lie, nor repent, for he is not a man that he should repent: The meaning is
that the strength of Israel will not revoke his sentence Balaam had heard or
known by vision that the Lord had sworn to give the land of Canaan to the
seed of Jacob, and hence he took up his parable in the same words that Samuel
used to Saul: Rise up Baalak and hear, hearken unto me thou son of Zippor, God
is not a man that he should he, neither the son of man that he should repent,
has he said and shall he not do it, or has he spoken, and shall he not
make it good etc. Numb. 32. 18. 19.
denounced by oath against Amaleck and his Associates; and Saul by sparing
Amaleck, incidit in hanc sententiam, does fall under this sentence, though not
as principal, yet as an accessory.

5 A true parallel to the history concerning the anointing and deposition of
Saul, had been exhibited before by the same Prophet in the election and
deposition of Eli, who was possessed of the Priesthood by legal title, under
divine promise to himself and to his house. The promise we have 1. Sam. 2. 30.
and the reversing of the promise or blessing promised in the same verse and
verses following. Wherefare the Lord God of Israel says, I said indeed that
thy house, and the house of thy Father should walk before me for ever, but now
the Lord says, be it far from me: For them that honor me, I will honor,
and they that despise me shall be lightly esteemed. Behold the days come, that
I will cut off thine arm and the arm of thy Fathers house, that there shall
not be an old man in thy house, etc. This lamentable message was sent unto him
by the Man of God mentioned, v. the 27. The same sentence or curse upon him and
his house is afterward denounced by Samuel under oath, And the Lord said to
Samuel, behold I will do a thing in Israel, at which, both the ears of every
one that hear it, shall tingle. And in that day I will perform against Eli,
all things which I have spoken against his house; when I begin, I will also
make and end. For I have told him that I will judge his house for ever for the
iniquity that he knows, because his sons made themselves vile, and he
restraied them not: And therefore I have sworn unto the house of Elie, that
the iniquity of Elie's house shall not be purged with sacrifice, nor offering
for ever. verses 13. 14. 15. etc. Now when Samuel had imparted this fearful
sentence unto Eli, being thereunto adjured, he replied no more then this, It is
the Lord, let him do what seems him good. v. 18. Had this message been
delivered by that man of God which brought the former, not ratified by oath,
unto this good old man though an impotent Governor, happily he would have
slighted it, as it is probable he did the former, or have called the
messenger's Commission in question. But this later and more terrible doom
being delivered to him by a child, who for his maintenance and being, did
depend upon him as upon his foster-Father; by a child so far from secular
cunning, or sophismes of corrupt Priests or Levites, that he knew not the
voice of the Lord from the voice of his Tutor, until he was instructed by him;
his Commission was to Eli more authentic, and his message both for matter and
tenor more free from all suspicion of imposture. The ananswer of Eli is of the
same alloy with Job's reply unto the sad news which his servants brought to
him. The Lord (says Job) has given, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be
the name of the Lord Job. 1. 21. Thus he spoke after he had seen himself and
his family utterly undone for worldly substance, deprived of all earthly
contentment. Eli knew this sentence against him being denounced by oath, as
certain, and impossible to be reversed, as if it had been already put in
execution. For this reason (I take it) the old man did think upon a more
submissive answer unto Samuel, then he had vouchsafed unto the Man of God, who
was sent unto him upon the same errand. The humility and modesty of his answer
persuades me that the fearful sentence denounced against him, did extend no
further then to the irreversible deposition of him and his family from the
legal or temporary Priesthood, unto the poor and mean estate wherein his
posterity after the disaster of his two sons, were to live here on the
earth. Nor have I (nor any man for ought I know) any warrant from God's word to
say, and Christian charity forbids me to think, or from this place to
conjecture, that either Eli himself, his two lewd sons, or his posterity were
absolutely, that is, irreversibly decreed from this time to everlasting
damnation. Many decrees or sentences denounced by divine oath, may be, and are
absolutely irreversible, when as the plague or matter of the curse denounced,
is only temporary, not everlasting; But to determine with the life of the party
against whom it is denounced, or at the worst to his Successors here on earth,
it no way reaches the state of the one or of the other in the life to come.

CHAP. 19. Of the two things wherein our Apostle says it was impossible for
God to lie.
THis is our comfort; there is no curse, nor woe denounced by oath throughout
the whole Scripture, which either in the assertive or charactericall sense can
be extended so far as the blessing sealed by oath to Abraham, and to all the
heirs of promise. So God willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of
promise the stablenesse of his counsel, bound himself by an oath; So our
former English reads. The later thus; wherein God willing more abundantly to
show unto the heirs of promise the immutability of his counsel, confirmed it
by an oath; or (as the margin) interposed himself by an oath; but with
submission of my verdict in this caseto competent Judges, there is somewhat
more employed in the original, then either our English, or Latin translations
(which I have read) do express. Three or four words there are in this
passage which are (...), or solennia; words of form, or peculiar to the
faculty of Theology. First (...), is somewhat more then to show; as much as
authentiquely or solemnly to declare. Secondly, (...) imports a great deal
more, then the stablenesse or immutabilitie of his counsel. For, that God's
will or counsel is, as he is most absolutely immutable, was a point so well
known to Abraham, and to the Sages of the heathen, which lived after him, as
it needed no solemn avouchment or declaration by oath: That God most immutably
wills mutability in the works of nature, and in the government of this inferior
world, as sometimes (though seldom) in the course of stars, and often in the
erection or extirpation of greatest Kingdoms, or of royal or sacerdotal
succession, was a point not doubted of by any that acknowledged there was a
God. The mysteries in this place declared by solemn oath were these; That the
blessing before promised, and now first ratified by oath unto Abraham and his
seed, not according to the flesh but the spirit, should not be only
irreversible, but unchangeable: That the promised woman's seed should be one of
Abraham's seed: That this seed after his Consecration to the office of
blessing should not be subject to any change or chance: That his Kingdom and
Priesthood should be everlasting: This last clause may be made more clear from
the renewing and restraining of his glorious promise unto the seed of David
(...). Our former English has The one that God did interpose his oath, because
of man's wickedness which will not believe God except he swear. a The other
that the two immutable things mentioned here by our Apostle were his Word and
Oath.
two animadversions upon this place, which are rather imperfect then erroneous.
Again what those two things were (...); or what the importance of the word
(...) is in this place, is a point not so fully determined by most
Interpreters, but that it is free for every later Interpreter to conjecture or
demurre upon the point. Our English marginall note implies, that the two things
in which it was impossible for God (...) were his word and his oath. I should
rather think his promise made to Abraham* and his solemn oath made for the
ratification of his promise. But whether we understand his word or promise,
and his oath for ratification of either; they must be taken coniunctim, not
divisim, not severally but conjunctively. For God's mere promise without an
oath, though most sure in it self, is not so firm an Anchor for poor men to
rely upon in temptations, as his promise confirmed by oath, nor does the
original (...) in this place imply any possibility or impossibilite of lying,
or unsincere dealing in God himself, but referres to the stabilitie or
unstabilitie of the blessing promised. A blessing whether of this life or the
life to come, under mere promise, may be subject to contingency or change;
because the promise it self (by reason of causes best known to divine
wisdom) may be reversed, but a blessing promised by oath is exempted from all
possibility of reversion, if it concern this life; or if it refer to the
life to come, it must be, as that life is; not only irreversible, but also
unchangeable, either for quality or degree of joy.

2 By the two things our Apostle says it was impossible for God (...), that
is, to suffer his blessing promised to Abraham, and to the heirs of promise to
fail; we may understand without violence to the text or incongruity of sense,
the oath it self, and the object of the oath which was God himself. He swear
by himself, says the original, Genesis 21. v. the 1. The true meaning of
which place is most elegantly expressed by our Apostle, Hebr. 6. v. 17. (...),
he interposed himself* as our English notes, or, word by word, ^e me^^^ted by
an oath, thereby binding as well the person of the son, who is (...), the
only Mediator between God and man, as his own Almighty Person. And this merces
magna promised by God himself by oath, in the Person of the Father, and the
Son, is most suitable to the obedience, not of Abraham only, but of Isaac,
whom God (as it has been observed before) did still reward in kind. But
whatsoever the two immutable things in this place meant by our Apostle, were;
it is evident that his oath was interposed for the consolation and comfort of
Abraham and his posterity; so the Apostle tells us expressly, v. 18. and 19.
That by two immutable things in which it was impossible for God to lie, we
might have a strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the
hope set before us. The sheat Anchor of this strong hope or consolation is
first the irreversibilitie of the promise: Secondly, the immutabilitie of the
blessing promised; of which it is impossible that any such heir of promise as
Abraham was when God vouchsafed thus to swear unto him, should either fail or
come short. This I take to be the true meaning of that uncouth phrase [ wherein
it is impossible for God to lie] that is, to suffer the blessing promised to
fail or change, or them to perish who are possessed of it by virtue of this
Covenant sealed by oath. Every thing in sacred dialect is called a LIE which is
subject to mutability, hazard or change; or on which one too much relying may
be deceived or fall into danger: So says the Psalmist, (...) an horse is a lie
unto salvation. The elegancy of which word in the original, is well Psalm. 33.
v. 17.
expressed by our vulgar And by the vulgar Latin as well fallax equus ad
salutem.
English, an horse is but a vain thing to save a man. But why alie, or vanity?
Because he that relies upon it too much, or more then upon God, may come to
sudden destruction; according to the same dialect that fest or Anchor-hold
unto which the Jews in storms of war or calamity, did too much trust, to
wit, Templum Domini, Templum Domini, were (as the Prophet calls them) lying
words. And no better are many men's persuasions of the absolute certainty of
their own salvation, only because they believe in Christ alone, and seek unto
no other Meditators or Intercessors. Indeed, if they believe in Christ as
Abraham and Isaac, and Joshua did in God; that is, if they follow the footsteps
of these men, or rather the ways of God, wherein these walked with a faithful
and unfeigned heart, then their Election is sure and firm in it self,
although in many cases to them uncertain. But the principal meaning of our
Apostle is, that the blessing promised by oath unto Abraham, is immutable and
everlasting in the life to come; and this we are bound to believe certitudine
fidei, by assurance of faith without doubt. But whether we our selves in
particular shall be undoubtedly actual partakers of such salvation, we have
no better assurance from this place, then the assurance of hope and strong
consolation; for so it follows; this hope or (as Oecolampadius would have it)
this consolation we have as an anchor of the soul both firm and steadfast;
and which enters into that within the veil. The implication is, that this
hope is not of temporary blessings, but of everlasting life through Jesus
Christ our Lord, now King and Priest in our nature of the celestial Sanctuary.

CHAP. 20. The former Importance of God's Oath to Abraham, and the contents of
it specified in the two immediately precedent Chapters, more fully confirmed by
the tenor of God's oath to David and to his seed, described at large by the
author of 98 Psalm, most concludently by the Apostle. Heb. 7.
ALL that which has been observed out of the tenor of God's Oath to Abraham,
is employed in the Psalmist's paraphrase upon the same Covenant renewed by
special Oath unto David, Psalm 89. That the Author of this Psalm should be
David himself, no Interpreter which I have read does affirm besides some few,
and those of no great skill for interpreting Scriptures, who think that all
these Psalms were written by David himself. But this opinion may be clearly
convinced both from the matter and form of this Psalm, besides the
inscription. For if we should acknowledge David to be the Author of this
Psalm, there will be no affinity betwixt the matter of subject of it, and the
character or expression. Evident it is that the house and lineage of David were
in great distress and subject to grievous temptations of distrusting God's
promises, at the time wherein this Psalm was written. And he that will
diligently peruie the sacred history from David's Election or nomination to the
Kingdom of Israel until the return of God's people from Babylonish
Captivity, or the death of Zerubbabel, will hardly find more periods of time
then two, wherein the occasion or matter of this Psalmist's complaint can have
any cognation with his character or expression; which is a fundamental rule
for all Intelligent Writers to follow; and most exactly observed by such as
wrote by divine inspiration. The two periods of time wherein this Psalm can
with probability be imagined to be written, are either from the death of good
Josiah unto the Babylonish Captivity, or (as my conjecture leads me) shortly
after the forraging of Judah and ransacking of Jerusalem by Sesac King of
Egypt in the days of Rehoboam after the departure of the ten Tribes from
Judah. The best determination of this doubt or Quaerie depends upon
Chronologies or certain discoveries of the time wherein This Ethan the
Ezrahite, as is most probable, did flourish in the later end of Salomon's
reign, and in the days of Rehoboam, and was eesteem'd in his age one of the
wisest men after Solomon. 1. King 4. 30. 31. and Salomon's wisdom excelled
the wisdom of all the children of the East-country. and all the wisdom of
Egypt, for he was vviser then all men, then Ethan the Ezrahite etc.
Ethan the Ezrahite did live. The Psalm it self (as the title shows) is a
Psalm of instruction, and begins with praise and thankesgiving, and ends with
prayers and benedictions. As for the intermediate complaints or seeming
expostulations with God; as if he had forgotten his Covenant made to David;
these (I take it) are rather lively representations of the murmuring and
discontentments of the people in that age, then true expressions of the
Psalmist's own apprehensions concerning the true tenor of God's promise unto
David. For this is usual to most Psalmists in times of calamity; a point,
which if the Spanish Jew or Rabbin (mentioned by many good Bucer, Calvin,
Coppen, etc.
Authors) had considered, he would not have interdicted his Countrymen or
Scholars to read this Psalm.

2 But to come to the explication of this Psalm it self, or the meaning of
the holy Ghost in it; After many ejaculations of prayers and thankesgiving, or
recitations of God's mercy, The Lord is our defense, and the holy one of Israel
is our King. Then, Thou spakest in vision to thy holy one, and said, I have
laid help upon one that is mighty, I have exalted one chosen from among the
people: I have found David my servant, with my holy Oil have I anointed him
etc. The text upon which he made this sublime and long paraphrase following, is
recorded 2. Sam. 7. 11. And as since the time that I commanded Judges to be
over my people Israel, and have caused thee to rest from all thine enemies:
Also the Lord tells thee that he will make thee an house; and when thy days
be fulfilled, and thou shall sleep with thy Fathers, I will set up thy seed
after thee, which shall proceed out of thy bowels, and I will establish his
Kingdom. v. 13. He shall build an house for my name, and I will establish the
throne of his Kingdom for ever. I will be his Father, and he shall be my
son. If he commit iniquity, I will chasten him with the rod of men, and with
the stripes of the children of men. But my mercy shall not depart from him, as
I took it from Saul, whom I put away before thee. And thine house and thy
Kingdom shall be established for ever before thee, thy throne shall be
established for ever. According to all these words, and according to all this
vision, so did Nathan speak unto David. Diverse passages as well in this Text, as
in the forecited paraphrase in the Psalm upon it, have been literally
verified; so me in David, others in Solomon; but exactly fulfilled according to
the mystical sense in David's seed by promise, unto whose person, and to no
other, some few special passages according to the literal sense do refer.
The next labor is so to distinguish betwixt these several passages, as that
David and his son Solomon may have their due without derogation to the
prerogative of David's seed by promise, who was to be, and now is both
Salomon's and David's Lord. The 12th and 13th verses according to the most
exquisite literal sense refer to David's seed, not by carnal generation,
but by promise, or birth spiritual; and yet truly verified of Solomon
according to a lower degree of the literal sense; who was David's seed by
carnal generation. The establishing of Salomon's Kingdom is here indefinitely
expressed without any note of Universality in respect of time; nor was his
Line de facto perpetuated, until the promised seed was spiritually conceived
and made of our flesh and substance. If Salomon's Line (as is probable) did
determine in Ieconiah; yet this no way excludes it from being part of the
literal object, verse 13. He shall build an house for my name, and I will
establish the throne of his Kingdom for ever; that is, so long as that
material temple should stand, which was until the captivity of Babylon. The
first words likewise of the 14th v. I will be his father and he shall be my
son, were literally and in the historical sense meant of Solomon; albeit
exactly fulfilled in David's seed (...) in the mystical sense; that is,
Solomon, as his Father David before him, was instiled the Son of God, or
God's first borne amongst the Princes of the earth; and so instiled not by
Court-complement, or in the adulatorie style, but by the Spirit of God. Both
their Royalties and prerogatives did bear the same proportion to all the
praeeminencies of earthly Kings, which lived before them, or in their times
(especially for the perpetuity of the Kingdom) which the portion of the first
borne did bear, by the Law of God, or custom of Nations unto younger
Brothers. But the later part of the 14th verse and the whole 15th verse, If he
commit iniquity, I will chasten him with the rod of men, and with the stripes
of the children of men, are to be understood of Solomon, and the heirs of his
body only; they are not appliable to the Son of God made man, or to the son
of David made King and Priest, either according to the literal or mystical
sense. The 16th verse referres to David, and to Solomon, and their sons in
the literal, but to Christ and his Kingdom only, in the mystical sense, as
to the true body and substance; of which these two great Kings of Israel and
Judah and their Kingdoms, were but as brief Maps or Terrars. The Kingdom of
David's seed (...) and of Solomon his Successor in the Kingdoms of Israel and
Judah, do differ more in substance, then the map of Germany does from that
sometimes goodly Country, now wasted with war and famine.

3 But in all these passages before cited, there is no intimation of God's Oath
for the confirmation of his promise unto David and his Seeds, but to his
Seed. Yet this assurance unto his SEED we have in the 132 Psalm, which was
composed by David himself, toward the later end of his reign, or after he had
brought the Arc of the Covenant unto Mount Sion, the place dedicated by this
pious King for its perpetual residence. It is a point to me very considerable,
that as God did not confirm his promise of blessing to Abraham by Oath, until
Abraham had yielded up by faith his only son Isaac; so did he not give David
assurance by Oath that the seed promised to Abraham should be his seed; or
that this his seed should be the high Priest of the heavenly Sanctuary, until
David had first bound himself by sacred Oath to prepare a place for the Arc
of the Covenant, an habitation for the Almighty God of Jacob: Lord remember
David and all his afflictions, Psalm 132. v. 1! How he swear unto the Lord,
and vowed unto the mighty God of Jacob; Surely I will not come into the
Tabernacle of my house, nor go up into my bed; I will not give sleep unto
mine eyes, or slumber unto mine eyelids, until I find out a place for the
Lord, an habitation for the mighty God of Jacob, etc. This great service thus
consecrated, and devoted by the royal Prophet: the mighty Lord (who will not
suffer a cup of cold water given to a Prophet in the name of a Prophet to pass
unrewarded,) does abundantly recompense, not in general only, or by
equivalencie, but as before he had done Abraham's and Isaac's obedience, in
kind. Thus much is implied ver. the 11. The Lord has sworn in truth unto
David, he will not turn from it, etc. As if he had said, he will not reverse
his promise, nor suffer the blessing promised to fail; because both were
confirmed by Oath. What was the Blessing promised and confirmed by oath? Of the
fruit of thy body (or of thy belly, as the original has it) will I set upon
thy throne. The object of this Oath reaches to none of David's seed, save only
to him who was the promised woman's seed, the fruit of the Virgins womb; yet
were not David's sons, or the rest of his seed excluded by oath from reigning
in Judah and Jerusalem, until time should be no more; so it follows ver. the
12. If thy children will keep my Covenant and my Testimony that I shall teach
them, their children also shall sit upon thy throne for ever. But these (we
must consider) are words of Promise, not of Oath; and for this reason are
expressed not in an absolute form or tenor. And so must other promises not
confirmed by oath, be interpreted: although the condition be not always
expressed, they always imply more then a mere possibility; a true title to the
blessing promised, though not a title undefeasable.

4 But it is time to review the Paraphrase of the Psalmist, Psalm 89. upon
this last and other promises made respectively unto David himself, and to his
seed or sons. The original occasion, whether of that Psalmist's tentations
to question the truth of God's promises to David, or (which I rather think) of
the general distrust in the discontented multitude of those times, which he did
rather seek to represent then approve, was this; Either they did not
distinguish at all, or else not so well as they should, between the Articles
unto which God did swear, and the Articles unto which he tied himself by
promise only. The later were always conditional or subject to a forfeiture or
revocation upon the misdemeanour of the parties whose good it did concern. I
have found David my servant, with my holy oil have I anointed him, with whom
mine hand shall be established, mine arm also shall strengthen him: The enemy
shall not exact upon him, nor the son of wickedness afflict him. v. 20. 21.
22. etc. All this, no good Christian can doubt, was literally and punctually
meant of the son of Iesse. As little question there is of the 25. v. I will
set his hand in the Sea, and his right hand also in the Rivers. This, according
to the literal meaning, expresses the extents or bounds of David's or
Salomon's Kingdom here on earth: For that extended from the Sidonian sea on
the West, unto the division of Euphrates (on the East) into diverse channels.

5 But this promise with the blessing promised, whereof David and Solomon were
fully possessed, was mystically (as has been observed before) to be fulfilled
in the seed of David promised by oath, whose Dominion over this inferior
world reaches from sea to sea, over all the rivers and corners of the earth.
The 26. 27. 28. verses fall under the same rule or line. But although it were a
part and a principal part of the blessing promised to David, that the Messiah
should be his Seed or Son, yet were neither David or Solomon, nor any other
of David's sons any part of that promise. v. 29. His seed also will I make
to endure for ever, and his throne as the days of heaven. Thus the holy Ghost
speaks as the Apostle interprets the like promise (or rather the same
promise made before to Abraham) not of David's Seed as of many, but as of one
Seed, which is Christ. The Apostles Interpretation of God's promise to Abraham,
(I am not ignorant) has much perplexed some learned Interpreters; but (as was
observed before) men better versed in rules of Grammar then in mysteries of
Divinity. And many impertinent discourses for salving the truth, or supporting
the strength of the Apostles inferences we may oftimes read, and sometimes
hear. But the old maxim, Ex nihilo nihil fit, holds more true in this case,
then in the point whereto the Philosopher applies it: A groundless doubt can
never produce a pertinent answer, or be capable of a firm and solid
resolution. Now the men which have questioned the force of the Apostles
inference, did only or specially consider the grammatical use of the word
Seed; which although it be of the singular number, yet denotes a multiplicity
of persons. But the ground of our Apostles inference was from the matter or
blessing promised, not from the grammatical form of words wherein it was
expressed. He could not be ignorant, nor was he incogitant that most promises
made to Abraham and his seed, did literally refer to all his posterity,
especially to Isaac; yet he very well knew and considered that the promise of
that seed, wherein all the Nations of the earth should be blessed, could be
extended to no more then one seed, who was the promised seed of the woman.
And unto this seed alone (promised by oath unto David) the 29. ver. before
rehearsed must be confined, as is clear from the 30. ver. where, after he had
said, That his seed should endure for ever, and his throne as the days of
heaven, he there adds, If his children for sake my Law, and walk not in my
judgments: If they break my Statutes and keep not my Commandments, then will
I visit their transgression with the rod, and their iniquities with stripes. v.
30. 31. 32. This the holy Ghost speaks not of David's seed as of one, but of
his seeds as of many. Nor is it any where said, that any or all of their
thrones should endure as the days of heaven: For all David's children, besides
that one seed, were by the Psalmist's own acknowledgment, liable to such
visitations or censures as the Lord of Lords does pass on other Kings and
Potentates, according to their demerits at his pleasure. Nor are the
visitations here mentioned to be universally taken for Fatherly corrections
only, (a slumber wherewith some, otherwise good Interpreters, have been
overtaken;) but for true and real punishments.

6 What then, had David and his sons no prerogative above other Kings or
Princes? Did God make promise of no more favor and grace to David and to his
ordinary seed then he had done to Saul? If we should thus conclude, the tenor
as well of prophecies as of God's promises to David would convince us of error,
and the historical events would determine against us. For neither Salomon's
Idolatry, nor Rehoboam's Oppression (which was equivalent to Idolatry) a
foolish son of a wise Father, did utterly extinguish the promises made to
David and his Successors, though Rehoboam foolishly intending the oppression of
his Subjects, did impair the blessing promised. For after both these had been
gathered to their Fathers, the Lord in mercy and in memory of his Covenant with
David did often repair the ruins which such unwise Kings, as Rehoboam, and
some of his Successors were, had made in Judah and Jerusalem; by raising up
such lights unto David as Asa, Iehosaphat, Hezekiah, and Josias were. This
preeminence or prec^edency in God's promises, all David's lawful Successors
had over all the Nations under heaven; that they were as God's first borne
amongst the Kings of the earth; but with this limitation or condition, quamdiu
been, aut saltem mediocriter se gesserint. Now in later generations the Kings
and Princes of Judah (who had been the first in God's favor) by multiplying
their own, and making up the number of their forefathers transgressions,
become the very last; as remarkable objects of God's fearful visitations
threatened, ( Psalm. 89. verses 30. and 31.) as their godly Forefathers had been
of his blessings. And yet the forfeiture of their present estate, or of their
interest in the Covenant made to David and his seed, did reach no further then
to their own persons, or to their seed according to carnal generations, as
is most elegantly and punctually expressed in the verse immediately following.
Nevertheless my loving kindness will I not take from him (that is, from David
nor suffer my faithfulness to fail: My Covenant will I not break, nor alter
the thing that is gone out of my lips. v. 34. The true expression of the
mystery in these words, amounts to thus much at least, and to what more, I
leave it to such as have leisure and judgment to examine. However David's
posterity in future times may make a desperate for feiture of their possession
in the land of Ganaan; be excluded from all claim or title to the Kingdoms of
Judah or Israel; though the whole race which shall issue from David or Solomon
by ordinary right or Succession may be utterly extinguished or put out; yet one
thread shall be reserved inviolable from the force of the enemies sword,
famine, fire, or death it self. This (to my apprehension) is the true meaning
of that passasge, I will not break my Covenant.

7 The impossibility here implied for disinheriting the seed of David (...),
or (as we English speak) of cutting of the entaile in remainder to this
singular seed of David, after all the residue of his posterity either were or
might have been deprived of their crowns and dignities, or of all title to
the scepter of Judah, does depend upon the often mentioned confirmation of
David's throne and Kingdom by oath unto the seed of David by promise: So the
holy spirit by whose inspiration this Psalm was penned, (whatsoever the
Psalmist intended) most punctually expresses v. 35. Once have I sworn by mine
holiness, that I will not lie unto David. His Seed shall endure for ever, and
his throne as the Sun before me. It shall be established for ever as the
moon, and as a faithful witness in heaven.

8 The emphasis of the word once in the original (whether Hebrew or Greek,) is
as well expressed by our English Proverb or Apophthegme, Once done and aye
done, that is, so well done as it needs no correction, no amendment, or
reiteration. Nor do we read that God after the interposition of this oath
first made to Abraham, and afterward renewed to David, did ever resume the like
solemn Oath; or make fuller declaration of it; until the seed promised was
exhibited. This is that which the Psalmist means I have sworn once by my
holiness, that I will not Psalm. 89. 35.
fail David. The true expression of which phrase is equivalent to that before
mentioned upon the 18 verse of the 6th to the Hebrews. And the word in the
original is the very same with that which the Septuagint uses in the
translation of this 89. Psalm. The true meaning of both places is, that not
only the promise it self was irreversible, but that the blessing promised after
it was once exhibited, should be exempted from all possibility of expiration or
diminution. The true reason whereof was, because this promise was confirmed by
Oath and the declaration of his Oath reiterated in this Psalm, verses the 36.
and 37. being before avouched. v. 3. And such reiterations in Scripture are not
tautologies ^ut true characters (as from the Scripture it has been before In
the seventh Book of these Comments. Chap. 13 parag 3. etc.
observed) of the stability of the thing promised or signified.

10 The expressions in the beginning of this Psalm, and in the close, are
Indices optime moratae orationis* true characters of pious humility and
reverent devotion toward God: The intermediate passages are full of
expostulatorie passions. This difference in the character persuades me that
the Psalmist did pen his own part from the first v. to the 38. and represent
the murmurings of male contents from the beginning of that verse unto 52. which
is the last. Two points more there be which require a further review before we
leave this Psalm; as, first unto what former promises made to David in his life
time, the oath twice mentioned by the Psalmist, does literally refer. Our
later English in the margin upon v. the 3. sends the Reader an errand, (I must
confess not impertinent) unto the forementioned place of Samuel. 2. Chap. 7.
11. Yet an errand which that place cannot fully dispatch; for in that place
there is no mention of an Oath. Both the places cited out of the 89 Psalm
literally refer unto the promise mentioned by Samuel; but as it is confirmed
by Oath upon record Psalm 132. which, it is evident was composed by David
himself a long time after the promise avouched by Nathan in the 2. Sam. 7. and
longer before the 89 Psalm was penned. The next querie worthy the judicious
Readers consideration, is; what God's Oath by his holiness, or as the LXX
Interpreters have it (...) in or by my holy one does directly signify or
collaterally import. That God swearing by his holiness did directly and
immediately swear by himself is not controversed; for the Oath for its
substance and essential object is the very same with that Oath which he made
to Abraham Genesis 22. where it is said, by my self have I sworn; for God's
holiness is himself. But for the collateral object of this one and the same
Oath I refer the judicious and moderate Reader to Calvin's exposition or
resolution of this doubt thus related by Coppen in his ingenuous and learned
annotations upon the 36. v. of the 89 Psalm. Per sanctitatem, id est per
meipsum. Calvinus putat Deum jurasse per Templum tanquam praesentiae suae
symbolum, and quoddam habitaculum. Ita Calvinus in harmonia Evangelistarum v.
17. Chapter 23. Math. Vbi principium hoc ponit and figit, non esse fas nisi per
unius Dei nomen jurare; unde sequitur, quascunque ad jurandum formulas homines
adhibeant, uni Deo servandum esse suum honorem; unde colligitur, quomodo and
quatenus per Templum jurare liceat, videlicet quia seeds est and Sanctuarium
Dei, sicuti per coelum, quia illic refulget Dei gloria. Deus enim se in talibus
praesentiae suae Symbolis in testem and Iudicem advocari patitur, modo jus suum
salvum retineat.

11 If this annotation be true and othodoxall, that when God did swear by his
holiness, he did by way of attestation call his Temple his holy place to
witness, I should not understand the material Temple as then not founded in
Jerusalem, but that heavenly Sanctuary, or most holy place whereinto God's holy
one, whom he would not suffer to see or feel corruption in the grave, was,
after his Resurrection from the dead, to enter; and there to remain as our
immortal Mediator and Intercessor. For so the Son of God, God blessed for ever
should be as true and essential an object of this oath as the Father himself
was. And this interpretation does well accord with our Apostles expression or
exposition of God's Oath to Abraham (...) he did interpose himself, or
intermediated by Oath.

12 If the allegations hitherto mentioned cannot persuade, I hope the
authority and arguments of our Apostle will enforce the ingenuous Chtistian
Reader to grant the maine conclusion in this discourse intended. The Conclusion
is briefly this [However God's Promise made without an Oath be in the assertive
sense the very same with promises confirmed by Oath; yet in the charactericall
sense they much differ.] Mere promises are conditional and reversible; the
blessings so promised, mutable or determinable by time; but God's Oath annexed
to his Promises, is always a character of irreversibility, and of everlasting
immutability after the blessing promised be possessed, so far as it concerns
the life to come. Two places there are in the seventh Chapter to the Hebrews
very pregnant to this purpose, and which do sufficiently authorize the
forementioned prenotion or received rule for interpreting all the former
places of Scripture alleged, as we have done. For after many forcible reasons
to convince his Auditors that there was no such perfection in the Law or legal
Priesthood, as the Patriarchs and their godly forefathers did hope and wait
for: And that there was a necessity that both the Law and Priesthood should be
changed (which is the Subject of his discourse from verse the 10) he pitcheth
specially upon this verse, And in as much as not without an Oath he was made
Priest; for those Priests were made without an Oath, but this with an Oath, by
him that said unto him, The Lord swear and will not repent, thou art a Priest
for ever after the order of Melchisedech, by so much was Jesus made a surety of
a better Testament. Aaron and his sons had the promise, See Chap. 10. of this
Book.
and were authorized by express charter to offer sacrifice and to bless in
God's name for ever. And what more could be said (in the assertive sense) of
our high Priest? Or what argument can there be drawn from sacred authority
that the Priesthood of Aaron should not be, that the Priesthood of the son of
David should be everlasting and unchangeable? The only sure ground of this
inference is that mentioned by our Apostle [ because Aaron and his sons were
made Priests; were destinated and authorized to their function without an Oath,
whereas the son of David was destinated and assigned to his Priesthood after
the order of Melchisedech by solemn Oath interposed by him that said, Thou art
a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech; which words are three or
four times reiterated in this Chapter. The contents or importances of the Oath
are most divinely expressed by the Apostle from v. 23. to the end of the
Chapter. And they truly were many Priests, because they were not suffered to
continue by reason of death, but this man (or rather this Priest) because he
continues for ever, has an unchangeable Priesthood, wherefore he is able also
to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives
to make intercession for them, for such an high Priest became us who is holy,
harmless, undefiled, separate from sins and higher then the heavens, who
needs not daily as those high Priests to offer up sacrifice first for his
own sins, and then for the peoples; for this he did once when he offered up
himself. For the Law makes men high Priests which have infirmity, but the
word of the Oath which was since the Law This punctually referres unto Gods
Oath made to David, Psalm. 110 not to Gods Oath made to Abraham which was long
before the Law.
makes the Son who is Consecrated for evermore. Christ the son of David
was a mortal man before he was consecrated to be an immortal Priest; for his
very death was a part of his Consecration. And after the accomplishment of his
Consecration, the Priesthood of Aaron became void, as being never confirmed by
Oath. For all things not so confirmed, are at the best but commensurable to
time or succession; and time it self shall be abolished by oath, Rev. 10. 6.

Iuravit per viventem tempus non fore amplius.

That opinion of some heathen Philosophers as of Legem quidem superius Dei
actionem existere docuimus, eodem modo semper se habente per petua^ and
immutabilirati. one res omnes producentem. Iu siurandum deinceps ipsi causam
esse dixerimus, que omnia is eodem statu ita conservet at^ retineat; ut quae
iuramenti fide can firmata sunt, and legis ordinem tuentur, tanquam certus legu
effectus, in eorum recto ordine, quae condita sunt, existant. Quod enim eadem
lege stant onmia, sicuti disposita sunt, pr^ marium fuerit hoc divini iuri
siurandi opus: quod quidem inter eos, qui Deum semper in telligunt, maxim at^
perpetuo servatur. page 28.
Hierocles concerning the endless succession of time or perpetual continuance
of all things according to the course of nature (which now they hold) is
probable, did take its original from a mistake, or misapplication of the
tradition or prenotion concerning the stabilitie or everlasting condition of
things confirmed by Oath. He with some others apply this undoubted rule unto
things temporal or to this present world; which holds true only of the world
to come.

SECT. 4. By what Persons and in what manner the Consecration of Jesus Christ
the Son of God to his Priesthood was prefigured.
CHAP. 21. That Jesus or Iehoshua the son of Nun, Zerubbabel the son of
Shealtiel, and Jesus the son of Iehosadeck were special Types of Jesus
Christ the Son of God, (respectively) as he was to be made and now is both
King and Pr^est.
SOme good Historians have observed that many famous Kingdoms have been
ruinated or extinguished under Princes of the same name with those that first
did erect or advance them. Darius the first King of that name in Persia made
his Country famous, and the Persians Lords of the best part of the inhabited
world. Another Darius makes Alexander famous by his mighty overthrow, and
raises up the Monarchy of Macedon by the fall of the Persian. Augustus was the
second great Caesar and the first perpetual Roman Emperor; and in Augustulus
the very ^^le of Emperor did die; not so much as a shadow of the Roman Empire
remained after him Constantine the great did first erect the Eastern Empire,
and founded the City of Constantinople; the first of all Emperors that did
publicly defend the Christian faith: Another Constantine was the last Emperor
of Constantinople, leaving the Empire to the disposal of the Turk. Baldwin
Compeere of Godfrey of Bulloigne in the conquest of the Holy land and after his
death created King of Jerusalem, established this new King dome in peace which
he had won by war: Another of the same name and race leaves the Holy land
it self for a prey unto the superstitious Mahumetan, not repossest since his
death by any Christian Prince.

2 Nor do humane stories only (though many besides these alleged might be
produced) afford us instances or observations in this rank: The visible
Kingdom or Commonwealth of Israel (taking Israel for the whole race of Jacob)
was first established and settled in peace by Numb. 13. 8.
Hosea the son of Nun, whom Moses (upon foresight of this his good success in
planting the people of God in the land of their promised rest.) Numb. 13. 16.
named Iehoshua, that is to say a Savior. In the days of Hosea the son of Elah
did Israel (as opposed unto the Kingdom of David, that is ten Tribes of
twelve) utterly cease to be a Nation. Both King and people were led captives by
Shalmanezar. King of Assyria. The Kingdom likewise or Commonwealth of Judah
did finally expire and determine under Jesus the son of David, but altogether
through this peoples fault; he never ceast to be a Savior, a greater Savior
of his people then Jesus the son of Nun had been, for he was Salus ipsa,
Salvation it self. But his people was become so wicked, that salvation it
self could not save them, or preserve their commonwealth from ruin. Howbeit
to speak the truth, this Jesus our Lord and Savior did rather translate the
Kindome of Judah and David from earth to heaven, then suffer it utterly to
perish. He still remains a King, and of his Kingdom there shall be no end;
though his Kingdom be not of this world, nor over Israel or Jacob according to
the flesh, yet he still rules in Jacob unto the ends of the world, and so
shall rule world without end. This translation of the Kingdom of Judah and
David from earth to heaven, or this new erection of this heavenly Kingdom by
Jesus Christ our Savior, was prefigured by onother Jesus, as lively a Type or
shadow of Christ as Jesus the son of Nun had been.

3 For after Judah through her riot and intemperancy had procured her bane, as
her sister Samaria had done, and was carried for dead out of the dwellings
wherein Jesus the son of Nun had first seated her; the Lord in his
all-foreseeing providence, and in sign what was after to be accomplished and
fulfilled concerning the Kingdom of David, would have another Jesus, the son
of Iehosedeck, to let Judah after her recovery from captivity or civil death
on her feet again. So it is specified 2. Esdras. 3. Zach. 3. Haggai. 2. that
at this peoples return from Babylon into their land, Ieshua or Jesus the son
of Iehosedeck was their high Priest, and herein a Type of Christ as he is our
high Priest and Savior. Zerubbabel a Prince of the Tribe of Judah, and one of
David's Line (under whose conduct this people returned safe from Babylon) was
the type of Christ as King. In respect of their deliverance from Babel, or safe
conduct in the way Zerubbabel had the precedence of Jesus the high Priest, as
Moses had the precedence of Jesus the son of Nun in respect of the peoples
deliverance from Egypt. But as Jesus the son of Nun was God's principal
instrument in planting this people in the land of promise, so Jesus the high
Priest the son of Iehosadeck is the principal Savior of this people after
their safe return from Babel, into their native land; the principal type or
shadow of Jesus Christ our Savior as he is consecrated by God to be the Author
of everlasting salvation. Zerubbabel the chief Prince of Judah, and Jesus the
son of Iehosadech the high Priest (and for his time the sole successor of
Aaron in his office,) join both together, the one a lively type of Christ
Jesus the son of David as he was King, the other a lively Type of Christ
Jesus as he was ordained to be our high Priest in the building of the
material Altar, which was to be erected unto the Lord in the City of Jerusalem
after their return from Babylon. But whether of these two, to wit, Zerubbabel
the son of David, or Jesus the son of Iehosedech Aaron's successor, had
precedence in this great work of erecting the Altar unto God (the first work
of difficulty or moment to be undertaken by God's Servants upon their return
unto Jerusalem the City of God,) were hard to determine by any rule of sacred
heraldry. Ezra the scribe and sacred historian of this business gives Jesus
the Son of Iehosedeck the precedence in style, Ezra. 3. 2. Then stood up
leshua the son of Iozadak and his brethren the Priests, and Zerubbabel the
son of Shealtiel and his brethren and builded the Altar of the God of Israel,
to offer burnt offerings thereon, as it is written in the Law of Moses the man
of God. But in the second of Haggai verse 4. Zerubbabel the son of David has
the like precedence of style. Now be strong o Zerubbabel says the Lord, and be
strong o Ieshua the son of Iosedech the high Priest, and be strong all ye
people of the land, says the Lord, and work, for I am with you says the Lord
of hoasts.

4 Yet that Jesus the Son of Iosedech was the more illustrious and
principal* Type of Jesus Christ our Savior and Redeemer as he is the builder
and founder of God's spiritual Temple, (Gods holy Catholic Church) is most
apparent from the prophecies of Zachary, a Prophet in those times
extraordinarily raised up by God to encourage lesus the high Priest and his
fellow-Priests to go forward in building the material Temple in Jerusalem,
specially if we compare Zachary the third, and part of Zachary the sixth with
the Prophecies of Jeremy, Chap. 23. verse 33. To begin with Zachary Chap. 3.
Jesus the Son of Iosedesk, by progeny the son of Aaron is solemnly
enthronized as deputy or Proxy for the son of David the promised and
longexpected high Priest after the order of Melchisedech. This story or true
legend of the installment or enthronization of Jesus the Son of Iosedech as
in the right and interest of Jesus Christ the Sole Founder and Builder of the
holy Catholic Church whereof the visible and material Temple of Jerusalem
was but a type or shadow, is very remarkably set out unto us as in a Map. Zach.
3. The whole Chapter, as also the 2. Chap. from the 6. verse unto the end is
worth our perusal as most pertinent to this argument. First Satan, that is
the adversary of Jesus the high Priest, waxed bold to resist him in the
building of the material Temple, being encouraged thereunto partly because the
remnant of ludah then returning from captivity was but as a brand plucked out
of the fire, the light whereof in the eyes of Satan their adversary might
easily have been extinguished unless the Lord had rebuked Satan, as the Lord
there by his Angel does; and his rebuke was an Authentic prohibition.
Secondly Satan was the bolder to resist this work, because Jesus the high
Priest appointed by God and encouraged by his Prophets for accomplishing of it,
was for his bodily presence but weak, and would quickly have been daunted by
his potent adversary, unless the Lord by his Angel had rebuked and prohibited
him. Thus Satan himself in person resisted our Lord and Savior after his
baptism, when he first begun to lay the foundation of his Church and to erect
the Kingdom of God, being thereto emboldened by the weakness of his bodily
presence and appearance in the fashion of man and form of a servant, until
the Lord himself rebuked him (as the Angel in the name of the Lord did the
adversary of of Ieshua) saying, avoid Satan, for it is written thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve; And upon this rebuke
Satan immediately left him, and the Angels came and ministered unto him* Math.
4. This is the Evangelicall accomplishment of the vision which Zachary saw as
in the type or map. Zach. 3. v. 1. 2. But here it will be demanded, whether
the verses following. v. 3. 4. which were literally and historically meant of
Jesus the Son of Iehosedech can be applied to Jesus our high Priest, either
according to the literal or mystical sense? Jesus (says the Text) was
clothed with filthy garments and stood before the Angel, and he answered and
spoke unto those that stood before him saying, take away the filthy garments
from him, and unto him he said, Behold I have caused thine iniquity to pass
from thee, and I will cloth thee with change of raiment v. 4. Jesus his
outward habit or raiment, was sordid and unsightly, Qualem decet exulis esse,
Such as well became a man as yet retainer to the house of mourning, not fully
absolved from the house of his prison, or not yet admitted unto the house of
his freedom.

5 This Jesus in this habit was a true picture of Jesus our high Priest whilst
he continued in the form and conditiion of a servant, or whilst arraigned
before the high Priests, or Pontius Pilat; and although in this estate he knew
no sin, yet as the Apostle says 2. Cor. Chap. 5. v. last. He was made sin
for us that we might be made the rigteousnesse of God in him. He is said to be
made sin for us, because he bare the punishment due to our sins. And this
sin or iniquity God did truly cause to pass from him, because our sins
were never inherent in him, but made his by imputation only. The punishment
likewise due unto our sins did pass from him at his departure out of this
world unto his Father. The new rayments wherewith Jesus the high Priest was
clothed, are emblemes, or shadows of that glory and immortality wherewith
Jesus our high Priest since his Resurrection is invested. The fair Mitre,
which was put upon Jesus the Son of Iehozadeck's head, was the model of the
Crown of David which was to flourish upon Jesus the Son of David's head, as
it is Psalm 132. v. 18. But upon himself shall his Crown flourish.

6 Briefly, the protestation which the Angel in the verses following makes to
Jesus the Son of Iosedech is but a renewing or repetition of the promise which
God had made unto Abraham and David concerning their seed. The tenor of God's
promise here renewed or repeated unto Jesus the high Priest is the same: And
the Angel of the Lord protested unto Ieshua, saying, thus says the Lord of
boasts, if thou will walk in my ways, and if thou will keep my charge, then
thou shall also judge my house, and shall also keep my Courts, and I will give
thee places to walk among these that stand by. These words contain as ample a
patent for the temporal or legal Priesthood unto Jesus the Son of Iosedech
and his posterity, as David had for continuation of the temporal Kingdom in
his race or progeny; both the promises and patents were conditional. But that
there should arise an everlasting Priest, as well as an everlasting King, one
in whom God's promises should not be conditional but yea and amen, that is,
absolute and irrefragable, the Prophet Zachary adds, Hear now O Ieshua the
high Priest, thou and thy fellows that sit before thee, for they are, what are
they? monstrous persons, says our former English, or men wondered at says the
later; Viri portendentes says the vulgar. The Prophets meaning is that they
are men set for types or signs of great matters to come. The word in the
original is the same. Ezech. 12. 11. Say I am your sign, like as I have done,
so shall it be done unto them, that is, to the Princes of Jerusalem, and house
of Israel; they shall remove and go into captivity. As Ezechiel his digging
through the wall in the peoples sight, and carrying forth his stuff upon his
shoulders in twilight, with his face covered, that he should not see the
ground, was a sign or prognostication of Zedechiah's stealth or flight from
the Chaldeans army which besieged him: So Ieshua the high Priest, and all his
fellows in all this action or solemnity (specially in laying the foundation of
the Altar and Temple) were prognosticke signs or prefigurations of Jesus the
everlasting high Priest, and of the spiritual Temple, (the holy Catholic
Church) which he was to build by the ministry of the Apostles. So it follows,
for behold I will bring forth my servant the branch. For behold the stone that
I have laid before Ieshua, upon one stone shall be seven eyes, behold I will
engrave the graving thereof, says the Lord of hoasts, and I will remove the
iniquity of that land in one day.

CHAP. 22. Of the harmony between the Prophet Jeremy and the Prophet Zachary
concerning the man whose name is the branch: How his growth or springing up was
prefigured by Zerubbabel the son of David: His name and title as our high
Priest fore-pictured by the name and title of Jesus the Son of Iosedech: That
he was as truly the Son of God before all time, as the son of David in time.
THat this man whose name was the Branch was to build the Temple of the Lord;
that he was to take his investiture unto his priestly dignity by Jesus the
Son of Iehosadech as by his proxy is apparent from the sixth Chapter of the
Prophet Zachary 11. Take silver and gold and make Crowns, and set them upon
the head of Ieshua, the Son of Iosedech the high Priest, and speak unto him
saying, thus speaks the Lord of hasts saying, Behold the man whose name is
the Branch, and he shall grow up out of his This is as Iunius interprets,
out of Nazareth.
place, he shall build the Temple of the Lord, even he shall build the Temple
of the Lord, and he shall bear the glory, and shall sit and rule upon his
throne, and he shall be a Priest upon his Throne, and the counsel of peace
shall be between them both.

2 This place and the former are pregnant that the Servant of the Lord whose
name was Zemah the Branch, whose office was to build up the Temple of God,
should be a Priest, and should sit upon his Throne as Priest. But it cannot
from either place be gathered; it is not so much as intimated that he should
either be a Priest after the order of Aaron, or of Melchisedech, or of the
seed of Aaron as Jesus, or Joshua the Son of Iehosedech was. But as the
Prophet affirms not, that he was to be Priest after the order of Aaron or
Melchisedech, so neither in plain terms does he deny it: true, but as every
Prophet of God speaks nothing but the truth, so neither does one of them
speak all the truth, or all that is requisite for us to believe concerning
Jesus our Savior. That the man whose name was the Branch, (the same party of
whom Zachary here speaks) should not be of the seed of Aaron, or a Priest
after the order of Aaron is evident from the prophecy of Jeremiah. Ier. 23. 5.
uttered more then seventy years before Zachary began to prophecy. Behold the
days come says the Lord, that I will raise unto David a righteous Branch, and
a King shall reign and prosper, and shall execute judgment and justice upon
the earth. In his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely;
and this is his name whereby he shall be called, the Lord our righteousness.
It is plain then out of the fore cited prophecy of Zachary, that God's servant
the righteous Branch was to be a Priest: It is evident again out of Jeremiah
that he was to spring out of the seed of David, and to reign as King over
Judah and Israel, as David had done. And these two put together will directly
conclude, that this Branch of David was to be that son of David, concerning
whom the Lord had sworn and would not repent, that he should be a Priest for
ever after the order of Melchisedech, who was both King and Priest, and by
interpretation the King of righteousness, and King of peace: both which titles
are expressly given to this Servant of God and Branch of David, the one by the
Prophet Zachary, the other by the Prophet Jeremiah.

3 But is it intimated or foretold by either of them, that he should be as
truly David's Lord, as David's Son? Yes, Jeremy implies this in fuller terms
then David himself does Psalm. 110. for David says, the Lord said unto my
Lord Adonai, not Jehovah, whereas the Prophet Jeremy tells us that the supreme
style or title of this Branch of David should be not Adonai Tzadkenu, but
Iehova Tzadkenu, Jehovah our righteousness: So that he whom David in spirit
calls his Lord, was to be as essentially Lord and God; as he that said unto
him, sit thou on my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy foot stool. But
was he according unto this name or title prefigured or fore-shadowed either by
Zerubbabel the Prince of Judah, or by his associate Jesus the high Priest in
conducting Gods people from the land of their captivity into the land of
promise? Yes there is not one title or attribute mentioned in either prophecy
but it is fore-shadowed, either jointly both by Zerubbabel and Jesus the high
Priest, or severally by one of them.

4 As he is the Branch of David fore-prophecied by Esaiah. Chap. 11. 1. (where
to both these prophecies of Jeremiah and Zachary have reference,) he is more
exquisitely prefigured by Zerubbabel then by David himself, or any other
Prince of David's Line. The Branch which God had promised to raise up unto
David almost an 110 years before Jeremiah had uttered his prophecies, was to
grow up out of the stem or root of Iesse, as it is, Esaias 11. 1. that is, he
was to be a man of meaner parentage, then Iesse the Father of David was; a man
more unlikely to become a Prince or Ruler of God's people then David was, when
he kept his Father's sheep: Of David's lineage many after the captivity were
poor, and of as mean ability as Iesse David's Father was. Zerubbabel was
borne unto Salathiel in captivity and Salathiel himself the son of Ieconiah
a poor captive Prince: but wh^-Salathiel was the son of Ieconiah's body or
rather his son by adoption, I have no more to say then was said before.
Whether this way or that way he were his son, if we consider the potency of
the Chaldean Empire when he was borne, or the Chaldeans general averseness
from the Jews or their jealousy of the royal race, it was more unlikely that
any of David's line should be released from captivity, or be suffered to
return from Babylon unto their native land, then that Israel should be
delivered from the Egyptian thraldom by Moses. But the same God which had
showed his mighty power in the overthrow of Pharaoh and his powerful host, did
as miraculously show both his power and wisdom in the sudden surprisall of
Babylon, and overthrowing the Babylonian Empire by Cyrus. Of these two
wonderful deliverances of his people; the later in the Prophet Jeremy his
esteem, is the greater, therefore he says Ierem. 16. 14. 15. Behold the days
come says the Lord, that it shall no more be said, the Lord lives, that
brought up the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt; but the Lord lives
that brought up the Children of Israel from the land of the North, and from all
the lands whither he had driven them, and I will bring them again into their
land, that I gave unto their Fathers. The like you may read Ierem. 23. 7. 8.
Cyrus after his strange conquest of Babylon, sets Gods people free, and
authorizeth Zerubbabel the next heir then left unto the Crown of Judah, to
conduct them unto Jerusalem; there to serve their God as he in his Laws had
prescribed. But after their safe arrival there, they are molested by their
malicious enemies: the building of the City and Temple is after Cyrus his death
for diverse years hindered, until Zerubbabel by his favor and potency with
Cyrus his successors procures the revivall of the charter which Cyrus granted,
and frees himself and God's people from further molestation by their enemies,
as you may read it at large in the Book of Ezra. So that part of Ieremiah's
prophecy is verified of him, for in his days and by his means (under God)
Judah was saved, and Israel did dwell securely. Though he were not in name or
title a Savior, yet is he indeed the Savior of his people from present
distress and danger. And thus far this poor revived Branch of David is a
true and lively Type of that Branch of David, in whom all the promises of God
made unto Abraham and David were fulfilled, who was to be a Savior not in
realty only but in name or title, and called especially Jesus because he was
to save his people not from bodily distress or captivity but from their
sins. And as he is in this sensea Savior, Jesus the Son of Iehosadech is
the lively Type or shadow of him as well in office or function as in express
name or title; for he being their high Priest and Aaron's successor, did make
legal atonement for their sins, did sanctify the Temple, Altar, and their
offerings, and performed all legal righteousness for the^ insigne of greater
righteousness, and salvation by that high Priest which was to come, whose
supreme title was the Lord our righteousness.

5 But did either Zerubbabel or this Jesus the high Priest and his associates
prefigure or fore*shadow our high Priest in this royal name or title of being
the Lord our righteousness? Certain it is that Zerubbabel did not, for
neither his own name, nor his Fathers, nor any of his Progenitors names since
Iehosaphat's days had any reference to this title, nor import the thing
signified by it in their grammatical significations. But the Father of this
I^shua, or Jesus the high Priest was named Iehosadech which signifies as much
as the righteousness of the Lord, or the righteous Lord.

6 But here we must consider that names are of two sorts. Some names agree to
the things named substantially and directly. Others accidentally or in obliqu^.
The former fort express the condition and nature of the thing named. As the
name of Adam which God imposed upon the first man did express his nature or
substance; to wit, the red earth out of the which he was framed. So the name
which Adam gave unto the first woman did truly express the nature and
condition of the Sex, to wit, that she was made of man; that she was of his
flesh and of his bones, so likewise is the name of Eveh a true expression of
her nature, for she was the Mother and Fonntaine of life unto all posterity.

7 Names otherwhiles though solemnly given express or import some
circumstance or relation unto the nature or thing it self which they primarily
and properly signify. So Gideon was called Ierub-baal, not that ever he did
plead for Baal, but in remembrance of his fathers answer unto them which had
expostulated with him for cutting down Baal's grove.

8 So Moses called the Altar which he erected. Exodus 17. 14. Iehovah-Nissi the
Lord my banner. Not, thereby intending to occasion us to think, that the Altar
so named was either Jehovah, or his defense, but only to import or signify
that in that place wherein he built the Altar and at the time of this
inscription, Jehovah his God had been the defender and protector of Israel in
miraculous manner against the Amalekites. So likewise when our Savior called
Simon, Cephas or Petros, the name imports not that he was either the rock it
self, or Cornerstone whereon Christ's Church is founded; See the third Book
of these Comments Sect. 2. Chap. 7.
But only that he had some special reference or relation unto the rock or
foundation Stone which God had laid in Sion, or which is all one that he was
the first which did solemnly confess and acknowledge Christ Jesus to be as
truly God as man. The matter or object directly signified by these words is the
only true and real Foundation of faith See this point handled at large in the
third Book of these Comments.
as Christian; of the Catholic Church it self. Of this rank or sort of
names is the name Iehosadech as it was given unto the Father of Jesus the high
Priest, but this does no way import that he was either Jehovah, or a man more
righteous the^ other high Priests had been; and yet so called not by chance or
out of vain ostentation of his parents, but by divine instinct or appointment
of God: Or whatsoever intent his parents might have in giving him this name,
God did so direct their intentio^s, as he did Caiphas his speech to be a kind
of prophecy of what was to come. We may say of Iehosadech as the Angel said of
Jesus and his fellow-Priests, that he was vir portendens, his very name and
office did portend or bode that Jehovah himself the righseous Lord should
become our high Priest. And in as much as the Son of Iehosadech was the first
high Priest, the first of all the sons of Aaron that was called Jesus, that
is, a Savior, this likewise did portend or fore-shadow that the Savior of
God's people, the high Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech, should
be the son not of David only but of Iebovah the righteous Lord, or Lord of
righteousness. And if he were to be as truly the Son of Jehovah the
righteous Lord, as he was to be the son of David, then questionless he was
to be as truly Jehovah, that is, as truly and essentially God, as he is truly
and essentially man. For the relation betwixt the Father and the Son is much
more strict in the Divine nature, then it can be amongst men.

9 Amongst men it will follow that if the Father be a man, the Son must be a
man; if the Father be mortal the Son must be mortal: but it will not follow
that if the Father be a righteous or potent man, the Son likewise must be a
righteous or potent man. The reason is because they are divided in substance.
But in as much as the Son of God is of the same substance or essence with his
Father, it will directly follow not only, that if the Father be God, the Son
is God, but also that if the Father be Lord of righteousness, the Son also
must be Lord of righteousness. Yet in as much as not Iehosadech the Father but
Jesus the Son became legal righteousness or a temporal Savior to God's
people in captivity, this truly fore-shadoweth this truth unto us; that
although God the Father be as truly the Lord of righteousness as God the
Son, both being of one substance, yet is Jehovah become our righteousness
and our salvation, not in the person of the Father, but in the person of the
Son.

CHAP. 23. The objection of the Jews against the interpretation of the former
Prophecy Ierem. 23. answered. In what sense Judah is truly said to be saved,
and Israel to dwell in safety by Jesus the Son of God and Son of David.
YEt here the Jew will object that this prophecy is not yet fulfilled because
Judah is not fully saved, nor Israel planted in their own land. But the
Apostle has fully answered this objection, if we could as rightly apply his
solution. All (says he) are not Israel that are called Israel. Romans 9. 6. Yet
many are true Israelites indeed which are not so in name; Nor is he a Jew that
is one outwardly, but that is one inwardly. The Apostle in the same place gives
us to understand, that many are Jews or of Judah inwardly, which are not of
Judah outwardly, or so called by name. Whosoever is inwardly or in heart that
which the name of Judah imports, he is truly of Judah, though not the seed
of Judah or of Abraham concerning the flesh. Now the name of Judah or Jew
imports as much as a confessor or true professor of Abraham's faith, and
every one is a true Israelite, that is so qualified as Nathaniel was, one in
whose spirit there is no guile: unto all such and only unto such the Lord
imputes no sin: and all they unto whom the Lord imputes no sin; all such
as truly confess Christ to be the Son of God and promised Branch of David
are saved by him, whether they be the somes of Jacob or of Abraham, or Gentiles
according to the flesh. So that in conclusion all ludah and all Israel
according to the full extent of this prophecy are saved by this Jesus: for all
of them dwell in safety, they are not become afraid of themselves, but possess
their souls with patience. To become Jews or Israelites in this sense is the
first degree of salvation, and this degree they likewise have from Jesus,
through whom and in whom they are to expect the accomplishment of their
salvation. Christ then first saves us from our sins that are inherent in us, or
(as the Apostle speaks) he first sets us free from the Law of sin by the
spirit of life which is in him, and finally exempts us from the wages of sin
which is everlasting death. And thus much is contained in that forecited
promise, Ierem. 16. and in the close and conclusion of that prophecy, Ierem.
23. concerning the saving of Judah and Israel by the branch of David whose name
or title is, The Lord our righteousness. Behold the days come says the Lord
that they shall no more say the Lord lives which brought up the children of
Israel out of the land of Egypt; but the Lord lives which brought up, and
which led the seed of the house of Israel out of the North country: The Hebrew
phrase Meeretz zaponah, according to the usual and ordinary rate of that
language, signifies indeed from the North-land; yet the original of this
signification or importance of these words, was from a conceit which the Jews,
or such as had their habitation near unto the Aequinoctiall line, had; That
those parts of the world which were more remote from the Aequinoctiall or
Southern climes were hidden from the sun, and were at least in respect of
their Country, lands of obscurity and darkness. The very prime and native
signification of the original words in the Prophet, rendered by our English
from the North land or Country, is verbatim from the land of obscurity or
darkness. And whatsoever the land of Chaldea (whereof Babylon was the chief
City or Metropolis) was unto others, it was unto the captive Jews a country of
darkness, a land of obscurity; the very shadow of death. And their deliverance
from it was a true type or shadow of our deliverance from the region or land of
darkness it self. The full importance of the Evangellicall mystery included
in the forecited passage of the Prophet Jeremy according to the most proper
and most exquisite literal sense is expounded unto us by our Apostle S. Paul.
Coloss. 1. 12. 13. God the Father (says the Apostle) has made us meet to be
partakers of the Saints in light, and has delivered us from the power of
darkness, and translated us into the Kingdom of his dearly beloved Son.

2 So that this part of Ieremie's prophecy. 23. 6. In his days Judah shall be
saved, and Israel shall dwell in safety, must be fulfilled in every one of us
more exquisitely then it was in the whole remnant of Iudab and Israel which
returned in safety from Babylon the land of their captivity unto Jerusalem, the
place of their peace and rest. Every one of us must be saved from the land of
darkness, and translated into the Kingdom of light, before we can be sure of
our salvation; before our election and salvation can be made certain unto us.
For every one of us is by nature the child of wrath; every one of as as he is
the son of Adam carries a Babel or mass of confusion about with him, or
rather lives in it as in a walking prison. Every one of us is subject to
morethen Baby lonish, to more then Egyptian slavery. Our very souls which are
the light unto our bodies; our very minds which have the same place in our
souls which Goshen had in Egypt, are darkened or (as the Apostle speaks) are
darkness it self. Now to extract or draw us out of our selves, or out of that
servitude unto finne in which we were borne, or to bring us out of that
darkness which is within us, is a greater miracle a more remarkable document
of God's infinite power and wisdom then the bringing of Israel out of Egypt,
then the rescuing of Judah from the captivity of Babylon were. God did make the
wind and waters his instruments to overthrow Pharaoh and his host in the red
sea: he made his Angels ministering spirits to conduct Israel in their departure
thence; but to draw us out of our selves, to extract our minds and spirits
from the dreggs of the flesh, to translate them from the powers of darkness to
the Kingdom of light, the ministry or service of Angels or other creatures did
not suffice. For accomplishing this great work the Son of God himself
became a Servant. He that was essentially Jehovah, God himself did cloth
himself with salvation as with a garment, and became a Savior not in the
appearance of an Angel; not in our mere shape and likeness nor in the mere
form or shape of any other creature, but in our flesh and substance.

CHAP. 24. That our high Priest the Son of God did not only accomplish that
which was fore shadowed by the name and title and office of Jesus the Son of
Iosedech, but withal the legal rites or solemnities; now of which hoe did
destroy or dissolve as he did the works of the Devil, but change or advance
them into better solemnities to be observed by us Christians. That his solemn
accomplishment of the feast of atonement at the feast of the Passover was
prefigured in the Law, and fore-fignified by God's special command.
THe Son of God says S. John was manifested to the end that he might destroy
or dissolve the works of the Devil. Not only the works which he had wrought
in the nature of Adam and all his sons, (the manner of whose destruction or
dissolution the Reader may find discussed at large in the eighth Book of these
Commentaries;) but besides these all the solemn rites or ceremonies, whether
sacrifices or other services by which the subtle enemy of mankind had enticed
men unto, or retained them in obedience to his service. All these the Son of
God came into the world not to change or accomplish, but utterly to abolish or
destroy them. As for the Aaronicall Priesthood or legal ri^es dependant on it,
these he came not utterly to abolish or destroy, but to change or sublimate
them into a better kind of service. This orthodoxall form of words the Apostle
has taught us. Heb. 7. v. 12. The Priesthood being changed there is made of
necessity a change also of the Law; that is no destruction either of the Law or
Priesthood. The false witnesses themselves which were set up to accuse S.
Stephan of blasphemous words against the holy place and the Law, though
willing, no question, to charge him with more then he said, yet charge him with
nothing but this, We have heard him say, that this Jesus of Nazareth shall
destroy this place, and shall change the customs which Moses delivered us.
Acts 6. v. 14. But these malicious men with their accomplices and abettors did
destroy the material Temple by turning it into a den of thieves or
murderers, by practicing these and other like works of the Devil in it.
Notwithstanding the utter destruction of this den of thieves by these means
(the house of God; which was the Temple whilst it continued a house of prayer)
was not utterly destroyed, but rather changed or translated unto Jerusalem
which is above, as the Arc of the Covenant had been before, from Shiloh unto
Sion. As for any intention utterly to destroy any custom which Moses had given
them they had no pretense to accuse either S. Stephan or our Savior, who had
solemnly protested that he came not to destroy or dissolve the Law, but to
fulfill it. And none, unless perhaps some base Mechanicke or meaner metal
man, who thinks the matter whereon he works to be of all others the best,
would accuse an Alchimist or ingenious Artist for wasting or destroying copper,
lead, or brass, if he could change or sublimate them into pure gold.

2 The change or accomplishment of the best egall rites, even such as were
appointed by an everlasting covenant, was more admirable then this supposed
transmutation of baser metals into refined gold, can truly represent; for, as
has been In the first and third Sections of this Book.
observed before, Albeit our Savior was no Priest after the order of Aaron,
either before or after his Consecration, yet he did most exquisitely
accomplish the whole Aaronicall Priesthood, and other legal rites dependent on
it by his Consecration to a more excellent, truly everlasting Priesthood.
Circumcision was enjoined under this title of an everlasting covenant, and so
enjoined under a terrible penalty (before the Law was given by Moses) to all
the seed of Abraham throughout their generations. Was this rite or ceremony
then destroyed or annihilated by the Circumcision of the Son of God? Neither
destroyed then, nor changed before his death, but at his Circumcision designed
to be changed into an everlasting Covenant, and after his Resrrection and
Ascension, not so properly changed as advanced into a better Sacrament or Seal
of God's love unto mankind, under a stricter penalty to the contemners of it,
or the undertakers for both sexes, then Circumcision had been to the Hebrew
males. The Jewish Sabbath or Seventh day likewise was not so truly nullified
for the substance of the precept, which was to be a commemoration of God's rest
from all his works upon the Seventh day, as clarified or purged from the
droffe or dreggs of legal ceremonies; and changed into the Lords day: And the
Lords day besides the representation of God's rest from his works of creation
upon the Seventh day, contains a weekly commemoration of our Redemption from
the bondage of finne and powers of darkness (represented by the thraldom of
Israel in Egypt) through the Resurrection of our Lord and Redeemer. Again, no
solemnity in all the sacred Calender of legal foasts was more peremptorily
enjoined, or strictly observed then the feast of Expiation, or Atonement; yet
was not this anniveriary feast so properly abolished as accomplished or
advanced by that one everlasting atonement made once for all by the Son of
God upon the Cross. For albeit that atonement in respect of the sacrifice or
offering, was but once made, yet the virtue or efficacy of it is not
circumscriptible by time, nor interruptible by any moment or instant of time.
Though he dyed but once to make satisfaction for us, yet he lives for ever to
make intercession for us, and is a perpetual propitiation for the sins which
we daily and hourly commit, and for his sake and through his propitiation, all
our sins, who truly believe in him, and supplicate unto him for his
intercession shall be not in general only but in particular freely pardoned.
Not does the absolute everlasting perfection of this atonement any way
prohibit us Christians to keep a solemn commemoration of the day whereon it
was made once for all. But whether this commemoration were ordained or observed
by the Apostles themselves, or taken up by voluntary tacit consent of the
Church after the Apostles had finished their pilgrimage here on earth, I dare
not take upon me to determine: But whether from this or that authority or
example, most Christians are ready to humble themselves on the Friday before
Easter, and acknowledge it to be a good day because it is the Commemoration of
our Savior's Passion and atonement made by it. And albeit this humiliation
were much more ritually and severely observed by all of us then it is by some
few, we should not transgress any Law of God, nor swerve from the analogy of
Christian faith, but rather accomplish the true intent and purport of the Law
given by Moses for the strict observation of the day of legal Atonement. The
humbling of our selves upon that day by fasting and Prayer is a like common and
lawful both to the Jew and Christian, and the representation or Commemoration
of Christ's bloody Death upon that day by Communication of his Body and Blood
under the sacramental signs and pledges, is rather an accomplishment then an
abolishment of the legal sacrifices, or other ceremonies of the Priest's
entering into the Sanctum Sanctorum upon the tenth day of the month Tisri. A
commemoration of which day the modern Jews to this day celebrate with foolish
and phantasticke ceremonies, as by tormenting of a Vide. Buxdorf. Synagoga
Iudaica* cap. 20.
cock; especially a white one: Yet these phantasticke practices serve as an
imprese or emblem of that sacred truth which we Christians believe and
acknowledge, as has been observed at large in the fifth Book of Commentaries
upon the Creed. Chap. 4^. Parag. 2. and 3.

4 May we Christians then call the Friday be fore Easter our day of
Atonement, or the Dominicall next after it the great Sabbath? For assoiling
this or the like Querie about the use of words, especially such as are legal,
I know no fitter distinction then that plain maxim of the Schools, Omne
maius continet in se suum minus non formaliter tamen sed eminenter: Every
greater contains the less of the same kind, not formally but by way of
eminency. It were no branch of untruth to say that a quadrangle is two, and
that a five-angled figure is three triangles; yet would it be a solecisme to
say the one were three triangles, and the other two triangles. If we should be
directly demanded what manner of figure this or that were; the only true and
punctual answer must be that the one is formally a quadrangle, the other a
quinqangle. To deny any King of England for the time being to be Duke of
Lancaster, would be censured for more then an error or Logical untruth; for
since the annexion of that great Dukedom to the Crown, every King of England
has had as just and full a Title to it, as to the Kingdom it selse, or
ancient Crown Lands. And yet if a Lawyer or other skillful in drawing legal
instruments should in those very Charters or donations which the royal power
grants, not as King of England, but as he is Duke of Lancaster, enstile him
only thus, H. by the grace of God, Duke of Lancaster etc. do give and grant to
N. omitting his royal Titles, it would be a dangerous solecisme in Law. Now
the legal titles or names of feasts or of the services are so contained in the
Evangelicall services and solemnities, as two triangles are in a quadrangle, or
as Duke of Lancaster is in the royal Title of King of England. It is no sin
to say that the Friday before Easter is the day of our Atonement, or that the
first day of the week on which Christ rose from the dead is the Christian
Sabbath: but the more Evangelicall or royal Style is to nominate the one the
Lords day rather then the Sabbath; and the other rather Good Friday, or feria
quinta in hebdomade sancta (that is, the fifth day besides the precedent
dominicall in the holy week) then the day of our Atonement. The like may be
said of all other Christian festivals instituted as solemn commemorations in
testimony of the accomplishment of the legal rites or services by the
sufferings, Resurrection, and other glorious actions of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ.

To conclude this short digression with Erasmus his resolution of a question
less needful then the former, yet agitated by some as it seems in his days
or before him, Non hic agitab^ quaestionem, An in Christum competat servi
vocabulum: qui favent ejus dignitati, malunt filium dici quam servum;
quirespiciunt ejus humilitatem, and ad mortem usque obedientiam, non horrent
servi vocabulum: Filii nomine magis gaudent sacrae literae, and ipse dominus
patrem saepius appellat quam Dominum aut Deum suum, and tamen Paulus scribit
illi susceptam formam servi, hoc est, hominis ut interpretantur quidam, nec
servi modo verum etiam servi mali and verberibus digni, quemadmodum dictus est
eidem, venisse in similitudine carnis peccati. Sed absit hac de re inter
conservos contentio, qui servum appellare gaudent, imitentur illius
obedientiam; quibus magis arridet filii nomen, imitentur illius charitatem; qui
utrolibet nomine agnoscunt Dominum Iesum, utrumque pro viribus exprimant. In
rebus enim spiritualibus nihil vetat eundem nunc servum, nunc filium appellari.
Erasmus in Psalm. 85. ver. 2.

5 But seeing we Christians affirm that our high Priest did accomplish the
legal priesthood and sacrifices by his bloody sacrifice upon the Cross, the
Jew may object that however his satisfaction might be full for substance, yet
it failed in congruity of circumstances, and in particular for the circumstance
of time. [ O pus diei decenter fit in die suo;] Every work is then well done,
then better done then otherwise it could be, when it is done in its own time
or proper day: If then Christ made full atonement for all our sins by his
own sacrifice upon the Cross, this sacrifice had been offered in better
season upon the day of atonement which was the tenth day of the seventh month
or September, then on that day wherein he offered it, which was the fourteenth
day of the first month, a day as far different in time from the day of
atonement, as one festival day or solemnity can be from another. The answer
first in general is that seeing our high priest was to offer but one bloody
sacrifice, and that one not oftener then once (for as his death so his sacrifice
was never to be reiterated) it was impossible he should offer this one
sacrifice (by which all legal sacrifices and services were to be accomplished)
upon the same day, wherein all the sacrifices which did fore, shadow it were
offered or performed. As impossible it was that this his only sacrifice should
be offered at several times, as in several places. Although most in the
Romish Church seem to avouch both parts of this impossibility, yet they avouch
it with this distinction or limitation that his bloody sacrifice was but once
offered, and that but in one place, at one and the same time. But of this (if
God permit) hereafter. His bloody sacrifice that Church does grant was to be
offered but once, and therefore but upon a special day or solemn feast, which
did fore-shadow it by the proper sacrifice of that day. Now not only the
annual but all the daily sacrifices did fore-shadow this his bloody
``sacrifice once offered for all: and all of them were ``accomplished by it.
Reason, from these premises ``may instruct us, how requisite it was that he
should offer this sacrifice at that time, or upon that day on which the
principal sacrifices of the Law, which most exquisitely or most lively
fore-shadowed it, were offered. The services or sacrifices of other feasts were
to attend or conjoyne themselves to this. Now as Jerusalem was the Metropolis
of the Jewish Nation, the place wherein all the seed of Jacob wheresoever they
dwelt were to present themselves, and to perform the solemnities and services
of their principal feasts; so the Passover was the Metropolis of their
solemn feasts: all other feasts had special reference unto it; It did point
out the time as Jerusalem did the place wherein all other legal solemnities
were to be accomplished. Seeing then our high Priest was to accomplish as well
the sacrifices of the pa^chall Lamb, as the services of the atonement, it was
more requisite that the services usual upon that day of atonement should
yield unto the feast of the Passover for circumstance of time, then the feast
of the Passover should yield unto it; specially seeing our high Priest had
already punctually accomplished the principal solemnity used in the feast of
atonement, in die suo upon the very feast day of attonnement, which ( In
Christ's answer to John's Disciples.
as is before said) was the day of our Savior's Baptism, the day of his
consecration to his prophetical function. Albeit diverse bloody sacrifices were
offered upon the feast of atonement, yet the principal and most public
solemnity was the leading of the scapegoat into the wilderness. Levit. 16.
v. 20. 21. And when he has made an end of reconciling the holy place, and the
tabernacle of the congregation and the Al^ar, he shall bring the live goat,
and Aaron shall lay both his hands upon the head of the live goat, and consesse
over him all the iniquities of the children of Israel, and all their
transgressions in all their sins, putting them upon the head of the goat, and
shall send them away by the hand of a fit man into the wilderness. To
accomplish the mystery of this service our Savior was led by the Spirit into
the wilderness immediately after his Baptism, bearing the iniquity of this
people, even all the sins which had been confessed by Jerusalem and Judah at
John's baptism. And though he himself needed not to be washed and baptized as
being all clean; yet, as heesaith himself, it became him to be consecrated by
baptism to this service to fulfill all righteousness; and by fulfilling this
part of righteousness in bearing the sins, which this people had confessed,
into the wilderness he made a fuller atonement for Jerusalem and Judah then
any high Priest before had made. That curse wherewith Malachy had threatened the
Lord would smite the earth or land of Iewry was for this time averted, by this
his bloody service.

6 But as our Savior at the time of his baptism which was upon the day of
atonement had fulfilled the mystery of the scapegoat; so he was to
accomplish the mystery fore-shadowed by the bloody sacrifice of the paschall
Lamb. To this purpose John the Baptist upon his return from the wilderness
had prophesied behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the
world. John. 1. 29. He had borne the iniquity of Jerusalem and Judah by his
journey unto, by his fasting and watching in the wilderness, and from this
John foresaw he was to take away or bear (for so the original may import)
the iniquites or sins of the world. He is called by John and others the Lamb
of God, for his innocent and spotless life; yet not so much (if at all) with
reference to the Lambs offered in the daily sacrifices (which were altogether
without spot or blemish) as with reference to the paschal Lamb, which was to
be the choicest and fairest of the flock: and for this reason God in his
wisdom would have him sacrificed at that feast or very time wherein the
paschall Lamb was stain, id est, upon the fourteenth of the first month inter
duas vesperas betwixt the two evenings. Some think betwixt three of the clock,
and the day-going or starre-rising. Out Savior died a little after three, and
was brought in peace into his grave about the sunsetting, and by rest or
reposall in it has hallowed the houses of death as the paschall Lamb did the
houses of the Israelites wherein it was slain, and purchased our safety from
the destroying Angel, even whilst our bodies lodge within the land of
darkness or region of death. The congruity of time and other circumstances
between the sacrifice of the paschall Lamb and the sacrifice of our high
Priest are so manifest and so well known as they need no further comment.

7 The mystery fore-shadowed by Israel's deliverance out of Egypt (which first
occasioned the institution of the Passover) was so great that the Lord in
memory of it did give the month wherein that deliverance was wrought, the
pre-eminence of all the months in the year, whereas before that time the month
of September, in which the feast of Atonement was celebrated, was for order of
time or account the first, as being the season according to the tradition of
the Hebrews, and in all probability of reason, wherein the world was first
created. And after the month of Abib had by God's appointment got the
preeminence of all other months; yet the month Tisri, or September still
retains the precedence in the civil account of the Hebrews for matters
temporal or secular. The account of their years in matters of contract or
bargain, as of morgage or purchase was always to be taken from Iubile to
Iubile, or from one Sabbaticall or seventh year to another. And the year of
Iubile or Sabbaticall year did always begin and end in the month of
September. And as we of this land have two accounts, the one from the year of
the Lord, the other from the reign of the King; so had the Hebrews two
accounts of the year more distinct and certain then ours are. The one for
matters civil or secular, according to which account September was the first
month, and March the seventh month. The other for matters Ecclesiastical or
spiritual, and according to this account the month of Abib or March was the
first month, and September the seventh month. And because matters spiritual,
or belonging to the service of God, or state of his Church were the matters
which God did principally respect in the institution of his Law, therefore the
month Abib or March after this peoples deliverance from Egypt, though not
before, was to be accounted the prime and principal month.

8 So then albeit the feast of Atonement, and the feast of the Passover
differ as much in respect of the distance of time as any two feasts in the
year can do, as having just half a year betwixt them; yet for identity of
season, or congruity of other circumstances they agree the best. Both of them
are in their kinds the first months, light and darkness hold the same
proportion in both. Both of them distribute day and night by equal balance to
all the inhabitants of the earth. John Baptist's conception fell upon the feast
of Atonement, and the solemnity of this feast was in diverse respects
accomplished by our Savior at his Baptism or Consecration to his prophetical
function. Our Savior's own conception was about the feast of the Passover,
and fitting it was for congruity of time that he should finish the course of
his mortal life, and accomplish all the legal sacrifices by the bloody
sacrifice of himself upon that day, at that time wherein he had received the
first beginning of life as man; fitting it was that he should be conceived to
life immortal in the womb of the earth upon the same day, or at that time
wherein he had first been conceived in the Virgins womb to the miseries and
frail estate of mortality. Briefly then in the alienation of pre-eminence, or
precedence from September to March the translation of the Atonement or
Expiation from the one month or the other was included and foreshadowed. The
month Abib was by God's appointment made the first and principal month of the
whole year with reference to this great work of final Atonement or
Expiation which was to be wrought in it by the bloody sacrifice of the high
Priest, in which all other sacrifices and solemnities had their end and final
accomplishment. There was no legal feast of Atonement to be celebrated after
it.

9 Again for circumstance of time it was most fitting and congiuous that the
second tabernacle should be erected at the same time and season wherein the
first tabernacle was erected, that the high Priest of the new testament or
everlasting tabernacle should be consecrated at the same season wherein the
high Priest of the Old Testament or earthly tabernacle was consecrated. Now the
first tabernacle was erected and Aaron the high Priest thereof consecrated in
the first month Abib, as is apparent from Exodus 40. v. 2. The tabernacle was
begun to be set up upon the first day of that month, and was twelve days in
erection. Aaron was seven days in his Consecration, but whether he was
consecrated in the first seven days of the month, or whether his Consecration
begun from the eighth day and lasted to the fifteenth, is all one for congruity
of circumstance between the Consecration of Aaron, and the Consecration of our
high Priest. Sometimes it so falls out that the Evangelicall mysteries begin
where the legal shadows do end, and are as it were ushered in by them;
sometimes again the mysteries fulfilled upon the same day wherein the legal
services or solemnities, which fore-shadowed them, were, or ought to have been
celebrated. But it is more then probable from many circumstances, Levit. 8.
that Aaron's Consecration did not begin till the seventh or eighth day of the
month Abid, and ended the fourteenth or fifteenth.

CHAP. 25. In what respects the Consecration of Aaron and of his sons did
especially prefigure the Consecration of the Son of God; and in what respects
they specially differ. That the Consecration of Aaron did in diverse respects
serve as a foil to set forth the excellency of the Consecration of the Son
of God.
COncerning the Consecration of Aaron and his sons you may read at large.
Exodus 29. Levit. 8. Their Consecration consisted partly in the sacrifices
offered by Moses for them partly in other services or solemnities, either
performed by them or done unto them. The Priests of the Law, even Aaron the
first high Priest himself was to be consecrated by Moses the man of God. The
high Priest of the New Testament was to be consecrated by God the Father, by
him that had sworn to make him a Priest after the order of Melchisedech. We
are not to parallel the Son of God and Aaron according to every part or
solemnity of their Consecration, at least we are not to compare every part or
particular in kind. For in Aarons Consecration there be many circumstances
which necessarily imply, presuppose, or argue such imperfections and defects
either in Aaron's person, or in the sacrifices or rites by which he was
consecrated, as may not so much as be imagined in our high Priest, in his
sacrifice or any part of his service: But rather these imperfections in Aaron's
person, in his sacrifice or Priesthood, do serve as foiles to set forth the
excellent and absolute perfection of our high Priests person, of his sacrifice,
and of his Priesthood. First it was a defect or imperfection in Aaron's person,
that he should stand in need of a sinne-offring, or of an offering of
Atonement to make him capable of the dignity of legal Priesthood, or of his
Consecration to it. This dissimilitude between the Person of the high Priest
of the Old Testament and the high Priest of the New is expressed by our Apostle.
Hebr. 7. 26. 27. For such an high Priest became us, who is holy, harmless,
undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher then the heavens, who needs
not daily as those high Priests to offer up sacrifice, first for his own
sins and then for the peoples: For this he did once when he offered up
himself.

2 So far was our high Priest from standing in need of any sinne-offring or
sacrifice for himself, that he himself became the full and perfect
atonement for the sins of the whole world, even the sinne-offring for the
high Priests themselves which yearly made atonement for the people. Again
'twas a defect or imperfection in the sacrifices by which Aaron was consecrated
in that they were more then one or of diverse kinds; for of bloody sacrifices
there were three; a bullock for a sinne-offring, and two Rams, the one for a
fire-offring or sacrifice of rest, the other the Ram of Consecration or of
filling the hand. It argues again a greater defect in all these sacrifices,
whether you take them coniunctim or divisim, in that they were to be often
offered. And this defect or imperfection in the substance of these sacrifices,
or in the sacrificer, or his service, the Lord sought to recompense or supply
by the perfection of the number of several times or solemnities in which they
were offered. For these sacrifices were to be offered seven times. Aaron and
his sons were to fill their hands seven days together before their
Consecration was accomplished. Our high Priest as he had no sacrifice but one,
to wit, the sacrifice of himself; so was he to offer this sacrifice, or this
sacrifice was to be offered but once, either for his own or for our
Consecration. And by this once offering of this one sacrifice he did fully and
absolutely accomplish whatsoever was fore-shadowed by the full number of the
legal sacrifices or solemnities which were used at the Consecration of Aaron.
For the number of seven is a full number, yea a number full of mysteries, and
wherein the Spirit of God seems to delight. Herein then as has been intimated
before, the high Priest of the New Testament, and the high Priest of the Old
exactly agree; that as the Consecration of the one, so the Consecration of the
other was to last seven days. Aaron and his sons as you may read Exodus 29.
were commanded to attend at the door of the tabernacle seven days together.
Our Savior after his entrance into Jerusalem did attend the Temple five days
together teaching and instructing the people, and in curing the blind and lame
which were brought unto him. He was more frequent and diligent in performing
those and the like acts of mercy, then Aaron and his sons were in offering
sacrifices or performing other legal services. And having purged the material
Temple from brothery and merchandising, restoring it to the use of prayer,
which the high Priests of the Law had turned or suffered to be turned into a
den of thieves; having thus purged the Temple on the first or second day of
his Consecration, and afterward hallowed it by his Doctrine, by his presence
and exercise of holiness in it, he went the sixth day into his heavenly
Sanctuary, into Paradise it self to purify and sanctify it with his own
blood, to consecrate it for us, as Moses at Aaron's Consecration did purify
and consecrate the material Sanctuary and the Altar with the blood of Bullocks
and of Rams. Yet was not this Consecration as yet fully accomplished: the
period or accomplishing of it is from the moment of his Resurrection or
Reunition of his soul and body. As Aaron first, so every high Priest of the
Law after him was to continue seven days in his Consecration, that the seventh
day or Sabbath might pass over him; because no man, as they conceive, can be a
complete Priest until a Sabbath have gone over his head. But the Sabbath of
the Lord did never so exactly pass over any high Priest in his Consecratton as
it did over the high Priest of the New Testament. However it were of Aaron's it
was the last day of his Consecration: it was to him indeed a Day of rest, after
six days of labor, of watching, praying, fasting, and after he had
accomplished the works which his Father had sent him to doe^, by the torments
of his bloody sactifice, and whatsoever pains he suffered upon the Cross. But
after he had said consu^matum est, which was in the end of the sixth day, in
that day whereon God first had made man, and the Son of God had now redeemed
man; his Consecration was not yet consummate, his body was to rest the Seventh
day in the grave: And his soul in bliss all the Sabbath or Seventh day, and
after the heavenly Sanctuary had been thus hallowed by the rest and presence of
his blessed soul in it on the Seventh day, his soul and body were reunited
upon the first day in the morning, at that time when the light begu^ to be
distinguished from darkness. And this was the time of the accomplishment of
his* Consecration or of his admission to the Priesthood after the order of
Melchisedech.

3 So then to be seven days in Consecration was no imperfection in Aaron and
his Priesthood, but rather a mystery to be accomplished in the Consecration of
the Son of God. That Aaron should have his hands filled seven days together
by Moses with the sacrifices which were offered for him, was an argument as
well of his own personal imperfections as of the imperfections of his
sacrifices. Howbe it the mystery or moral employed by the filling of the hand,
was no point of imperfection; and for this reason was as exactly fulfilled in
the Consecration of ou^ high Priest as in the Consecration of Aaron. The moral
implied by the filling of the hand, was to signify that Aaron did not usurp
the dignity of Priesthood, or take it up (as we say) at his own hand, but was
hereunto lawfully and solemnly called by God, from whom he had received
whatsoever he had. The inference hence made by our Apostle is this, Heb. 5. 4.
5. No man takes this honor to himself but he that is called of God as was
Aaron: So also Christ glorified not himself to be made an high Priest, but he
that said unto him, Thou art my Son to day have I begotten thee. He that had
thus said unto him did likewise prepare or fit a body to him for his sacrifice,
he did not fill his hand with sacrifices or burnt offerings.

4. It was an imperfection likewise in Aaron's person or his sacrifices or in
both; his Consecration it self was imperfect in that his Consecration did not
serve for the Consecration of his sons, or his Successors: all of them were
to have their several sacrifices or other solemn rites of Consecration. The
perfection which this foil* sets forth in our high Priest and his Consecration
is this*, that we are sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus
Christ once for all. Hebr. 10. 10. Every Priest stands daily ministering and
offering oftimes the same sacrifices which can never take away sins; but this
man (or rather this Priest) after he had once offered one sacrifice for sins,
for ever sat down on the right hand of God, and henceforth expecting till his
enemies be made his footstool. For by one offering he has consecrated for ever
them that are sanctified. ver. 11. 12. 13.

5 As many as have reaped or hereafter shall reap any benefit, either from
Gods's Oath to Abraham concerning his seed in whom all the Nations of the
earth were to be blessed, or from the Renewing of this Oath to David concerning
his son which was to be the Dispenser of this blessing and to be made a Priest
after the order of Melchisedech who blessed Abraham; all, and every one of them
are consecrated to the patticipation of this blessing by the Consecration of
this our high Priest the Son of God. The Law (says the Apostle) makes men
high Priests which have infirmity, but the word of the Oath which was since the
Law makes the Son high Priest, who is consecrated for evermore; and by this
his Consecration we, even all the Israel of God are consecrated by an
everlasting Consecration. So says the Apostle Revel. 1. 5. Jesus Christ the
first begotten of the dead, and Prince of the Kings of the earth has washed us
from our sins in his own Blood, and has made us Kings and Priests (that is
Priests after the order of Melchisedech) unto God and his Father. By this his
Consecration likewise to his everlasting Priesthood we are hallowed and
consecrated as Temples to our God, so says S. Peter. 1. Pet. 2. v. 4. 5. To
whom coming as to a living stone, disallowed indeed of men, but chosen of God
and precious, ye also as lively stones are built up a spiritual house, an
holy Priesthood, to offer up a spiritual sacrifice, acceptable to God by Jesus
Christ.

5 But to take the several bloody sacrifices which were offered at the
Consecration of Aaron and his sons, into more particular consideration;
Albeit these sacrifices were all imperfect, not only absolutely, or in respect
of our high Priest's everlasting sacrifice, but even in respect of these
spiritual sacrifices mentioned by S. Peter which we are to offer unto God;
yet were they all in their kind most perfect The best and chiefest in the whole
rank of legal or Aaronicall sacrifices; they are as so many lineaments
pourtraying in part, or fore-shadowing that body or accomplishment not of them
only, but of all other sacrifices. All meet in it as so many lines in their
Center. The first bloody sacrifice that was offered at the Consecration of
Aaron was a Bullock. The Priests might offer no other sacrifice then this for
their own sinne-offering, because this was of all other the best, and yet in
comparison of this, says the Psalmist in the Person of this our high Priest in
his affliction, I will praise the name of God with a song, and will magnify
him with thanksgiving, this al^o shall please the Lord better then a bullock
which has horns and hoofes, that is, beginning to spread the horn and hoof,
for at that time they were most fit for sacrifice. Psalm. 69. ver. 30. 31. His
meaning was that this sacrifice of thanksgiving should be more acceptable unto
God then the very best sacrifice of the Law; and so it was, especially whilst
offered by our high Priest, even when he offered his bloody sacrifice upon the
Cross, and after his enemies had given him vinegar in his thirst to drink. For
after he had uttered that pitiful Song of the Psalmist. Psalm. 22. (whether
only out of his grief or anguish, or upon other respects and intentions) My
God my God why have Thou for saken Me, he finally commends his soul, his
spirit, unto his Father in the words of the Psalmists Song. Ps. 35. Father into
thy hands I commend my spirit! The uttering of both these Songs in this anguish
of soul argues he loved his God and our God, his Father and our Father, with
all his soul, with all his heart, with all his strength; and his performance
of this great Commandment, (as the Scribe which approved his answer to the
Pharisees, to the Herodians, and the Sadduces had a little before confessed, upon
his answer to his Question) was more then all whole burnt offerings and
sacrifices Mat. 12. from v. 12. to 34.

CHAP. 26. In what respects the Bullock offered at the Consecration of Aaron
etc. and the rites of offering ^^ did prefigure the bloody sacrifice of the
Son of God, especially the circumstances of the place wherein it was offered.
But you will ask wherein did the Sacrifice of the Bullock, which was offered
for a sinne-offering or Atonement at Aaron's Consecration, or the
circumstances in offering it, punctually fore-shadow the bloody Sacrifice which
our high Priest offered at his Consecration, or the manner or circumstance of
his offering it? It did in circumstance at least prefigure the Sacrifice of our
high Priest after the same manner or in respect of the same circumstance that
the annual sacrifices of Atonement did prefiure it; of which hereafter.
Inasmuch as the head and flesh etc. of the Bullock for sinne-offering or
Atonement for Aaron at his Consecation, was to be offered or burnt without the
camp, not to be burnt upon the Altar; It fell under the same Law, and
undergoes the same considerations which the annuall-Sacrifices in the feast of
Atonement did. For so it is expressly commanded, Exodus 29. 14. That the flesh
of the Bullock and his skin should be burnt without the Camp, because it was
a sin-offering. Now it was an universal and peremptory Law that no flesh of
any Sacrifice, whose Blood was brought into the Sanctuary to make Atonement,
should be eaten by the Priests in the Sanctuary.

2 It was again a Law as peremptory, that the Priests, especially the high
Priests might, (that is, had power to) eat the flesh of any Sacrifice whose
Blood was not brought into the Sanctuary. For to this purpose Moses Levit. 10.
17. expostulateth with Aaron's sons which were left after the death of Nadab
and Abihu. Wherefore have ye not eaten the sinne-offering in the holy place,
for it is the holy of holies, and it, (vz. the flesh of the sin-offring) he
has given to you to bear the iniquity of the Congregation, to make Atonement
for them before the Lord: Behold the Blood of it was not brought in, behold
indeed you should have eaten it in the holy place as I commanded you. Aaron in
his Apology for his sons against this accusation of Moses, in no case
questions the truth or extent of this commandment, but rather excuses
himself and his sons for not observing the purport of the Law as the case
stood with them; his two sons Nadab and Abihu being lately consumed with fire
issuing out from before the Lord, for offering strange fire, ( which he had not
commanded them) upon his Altar. And seeing that although they had put off all
the respect of the obedience of his sons, yet could he not put off the
affection of a loving Father toward them, or suddenly cease to mourn for
their untimely death; whereas to have eaten the Sacrifices in the holy place
with a sad countenance or heavy hear had been to pollute it. So that this sad
and ivofull accident made the eating of the sinne-offring in the holy place
unlawful or unexpedient to him and his sons, which ordinarily or in case no
such accident had befallen them, had not only been lawful but necessary. But
seeing the blood of the Bullock offered for Aaron's sinne-offering at his
Consecration had not been brought into the Sanctuary, and seeing no such woeful
accident or legal impediment had at this time befallen Aaron and his sons,
it may justly be questioned what was the reason they did not eat the flesh of
this their sinne-offring or Atonement? It was a sufficient warrant unto them
not to eat it because the Lord had forbidden it. Exodus 29. 14. But if it be
demanded what was the reason or intent of this Law; or rather of this
particular exception from the general Law by which they were commanded to eat
it? Some make answer that Aaron and his sons were not as yet complete
Priests, or Priests already consecrated, but in their Consecration only, and
therefore were not comprehended under the general Law which commanded the
Priest, forbidding all others, to eat the flesh of the sinne-offering whose
blood was not brought into the Sanctuary. But this reason concludes only in
probability against Aaron and his sons, who did now attend their
Consecration; it no ways concludes against Moses who did consecrate them, who
was not only permitted but commanded by God to eat of all the Sacrifices or
offerings which Aaron's sons or Successors might lawfully eat; yet did not
Moses eat any part of the Bullock offered at Aaron's Consecration for a
sinneoffring or Atonement, for God had expressly commanded it to be burnt
without the Camp. Their answer therefore to that former demand, is more
pertinent, who say that no high Priest, whether ordinarily called or
extraordinarily, (as Moses was for the Consecration of Aaron and his sons)
might eat of any sacrifice which was offered for a sinneoffring or Atonement
for the Priests themselves, although the Blood of it were not brought into the
Sanctuary. Of the Sinne-offrings for the people whose Blood was not brought
into the Sanctuary the Priests might eat, they were to eat.

2. This commandment for them to eat of the peoples sinne-offring, argues the
sins of the people were to be borne or taken away by the Priest. The
prohibition for the Priests to eat the Sinne-offrings made for themselves,
argues the sins of the Priest could not be borne or taken away by the Priests
of the Law or their sacrifices, but were to expect a better sacrifice of a
better high Priest: The legal sacrifices in the mean time were to be offered
in a place prefiguring the place wherein this better Sacrifice was to be
offered, a place without the gates of Jerusalem. Whiles the people wandered in
the wilderness without any settled habitation, or City to dwell in, the
Sacrifice or substance of the Sinne-offring was to be consumed with fire
without the trenches, or bounds wheresoever they did encampe, as Soldiers do
in the open field, near unto the Arc of the Testament. But after the Arc had
found a settled habitation or resting place in the Temple which Solomon built,
the City of Jerusalem in which the Temple stood, became the Camp of Israel.
And this and other like sodei^^ties and services which were commanded to be
performed without the Camp whiles the people wandered in the wilderness, were
to be performed without the gates of Jerusalem, albeit the Sacrifice was to be
offered in the Temple; whence seeing our Savior's Body was the offering for
sin or the Sacrifice of Atonement, by which the mysteries imported by all
other Sacrifices, were fulfilled, it was to be consumed or brought into the
dust of death in Mount Calvary, or Golgotha; or some place without the City. So
that the Apostle's argument Heb. 13. drawn from the annual Sacrifices of
Atonement, concludes as punctually for this Sacrifice of A^^onement or
Sinne-offring at Aaron's Consecration We have an Altar whereof they have no
right to eat which serve at the Tabernacle, for the bodies of those beasts
whose blood is brought into the Sanctuary by the high Priest for sin (as also
of those beasts which were offered for the Priests Sin-offring at the
Consecration, albeit their Blood were not brought into the Sanctuary) are burnt
without the Camp. Wherefore Jesus also that he might sanctify the people with
his own Blood suffered without the gate. Now this sanctification of God's
people by Christ's Blood was their Consecration with him to be Kings and
Priests, as he was now made King and Priest, that is a Priest after the order
of Melchisedech, and as he himself says John 17. 29. For their sakes I
sanctify my self, (that is, I undergo the rites of Consecration prefigured
by the Law) that they also may be sanctified through the truth, or truly
sanctified, that is after a better manner then they could be sanctified or
consecrated by the legal Sacrifices, ceremonies, or services of the Law.

3 The second sort of bloody Sacrifices offered by Moses at the Consecration
of. Aaron and his sons were two Rams, the one for a burnt offering to the Lord
for a sweet Savor and offering made by fire unto the Lord. Exodus 29. 18. The
mystery hereby fore-signified at our Savior's Confecration is expressed by the
Apostle. Ephesians. 5. 1. 2. Be ye therefore followers of God as dear Children,
and walk in love as Christ also has loved us, and has given himself for us
an offering and a Sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor. The other Ram
was to be offered as a peace offering and is called by Moses Exodus 29. the Ram
of Aaron's Consecration ver. 26. because Aaron and his sons were to be
anointed with the Blood of it.

CHAP. 27. In what respects the Ram of the Consecration and the Ram which
God did provide for a burnt offering instead of Isanck, did prefigure the
sacrifice of the Son of God. Of other special rites wherein Aaron at his
Consecration and in the function of his Priesthood, did prefigure the
Consecration and Priest hood of the Son of God.
NOw if we consider the special references of the Aaronicall Priesthood, there
could no fitter Sacrifice be offered for Aaron and his sons at their
Consecration then the Sacrifice of Rams; no other Sacrifices used in the Law
could be so fit an emblem or representation of our high Priest's Sacrifice at
his Consecration. The points whereto the Aaronicall Priesthood (whether during
the time of their Consecration, or after Aaron and his sons were consecrated
Priests,) had peculiar reference, were two. The first, the solemn memorial,
the commeration or reiteration of God's Covenant made with Abraham and with his
seed, or the continual acceptance of it, by performing the obedience which
God required at their hands in all their sacrifices. The second was a
perpetual representation of the accomplishment of this Covenant on God's part
in and by the promised Seed or Messiah. God had promised by oath to Abraham
that in his seed not only Abraham's seed after the flesh, but all the Nations
of the earth that follow the steps of Abraham, should be blessed. And in this
promise confirmed by oath it was implied, as has been often mentioned before,
that the Son of God should become Abraham's seed, and that the seed of
Abraham thus made the Son of God should be offered up to God in such a manner
as God required Abraham to offer up his son Isaac, that is in a true and
bloody sacrifice. Isaac's approach to death was a type, a figure, or
representation of our Savior's bloody death. Isaac's strange deliverance from
this bloody death menaced by his Fathers outstretehed hand armed with a bloody
knife, was a type or shadow of our Savior's Resurrection from death, which God
his Father had not only threatened but inflicted upon him. Now as that which
Abraham intended to have done to his son Isaac was accomplished by God upon
his only son, so Abraham's words to Isaac when he intended to offer him up
in bloody sacrifice became a true prophecy of our Savior's bloody sacrifice.
Isaac bearing the wood of the burnt offering upon his back, and observing his
Father to carry fire in the one hand, and a knife in the other, no creature in
the world besides themselves being present, moved this question, [ Behold the
fire and the wood, but where is the Lamb for the burnt offering?] And Abraham
answers, God will provide himself a Lamb for a burnt offering, my Son. Genesis
22. 7. 8. Whatsoever the natural construction of Abraham's answer in these
words might import, Abraham at this time had no other intention then to offer
up his son Isaac for a burnt offering. Howbeit his words without wrong to
their grammatical construction in the original might imply as much, and as
the Hebrews conceive, they did to Isaac's apprehension imply as much as if he
had said, [God will provide himself a Lamb for a burnt offering, even thee my
Son; or, God will provide the^ my Son for a burnt offering.] And from this
apprehension or construction of Abraham's words, Isaac (as the Hebrews have a
tradition) forthwith became willing to be offered up in sacrifice for a burnt
offering, suffering himself to be bound upon the Altar by his Father, being
able if he had been so disposed to make resistance, as being now at least 25
years of age.

2 However it were, Isaac was as willing to be offered as Abraham was to offer
him. And yet Abraham's former words are more exactly fulfilled even for the
present then if Isaac had been then offered upon the Altar: For though God had
commanded Abraham to offer his only begotten son Isaac for a burnt offering,
yet he had been a burnt offering of Abraham's providing; but the Ram which
was caught by the horns in the thicket was a burnt offering of God's provision
merely: It was no part of Abraham's store, of Abraham's provision, forecast or
foresight. The Ram questionless came not thither from any neighbor place
by chance; God did provide it for a burnt offering by a manner extraordinary
and miraculous. For if David would not offer a sacrifice to God of that which
cost him nothing, or of that which was another man's by former possession until
he had made it his own by a better title then by free donation, or his own by
a just price or valuable consideration, Abraham doubtless would not have
offered a sacrifice unto the Lord of that which he might justly suspect to be
the goods of another man until he had bought it of the known owner. But
knowing this Ram to have been of God's own or mere provision by means
miraculous or extraordinary, he forthwith offered it for a burnt offering
instead of his son. So then the League or Covenant betwixt God and Abraham is
concluded and subscribed unto on Abraham's part with the sacrifice of a Ram,
and was to be continued or accepted of by Abraham's posterity with continuation
of like sacrifices. The high Priests themselves who were in their rank and
order, mediators or intercessors for continuing and establishing this Covenant
between God and Abraham's seed, were to be solemnly consecrated by the
sacrifice of Rams; And in memorial or commemoration of Isaac's deliverance
from death, the Jews did celebrate that day wherein God provided this
sacrifice instead of Isaac, that was (according to their Calendar) the first of
September or feast of Trumpets, with the sacrifice of Rams. But they
considered not that in the words of God's oath to Abraham it was employed that
God would give his Son his only Son for such a bloody sacrifice or burnt
offering as Abraham intended to have made of his son Isaac. They considered
not that in Abraham's answer to Isaac, The Lord would provide himself of a
burnt offering, and in the miraculous provision of the Ram for a burnt
offering instead of Isaac, it was employed or fore-signified as well by matter
of fact, as by express word of prophecy, that God would provide matter of
sacrifice when he should offer his only Son after a more excellent miraculous
manner, then he had now done the Ram instead of Isaac. For seeing the Son
of God as God could not dye, he therefore provides him a mortal body taken
from the seed of Abraham, the substance of the blessed Virgin, and so unites
it to his divine person, that whilst this seed of Abraham was offered in
sacrifice, the Son of God was likewise offered, that whilst Abraham's seed
was thus consecrated by bloody sacrifice, the Son of God was likewise
consecrated to be the high Priest after the order of Melchisedech, that is, to
be the Author, Donour, and Dispenser of that blessing which Melchisedech in the
name of the most high God, whose Priest he was, bestowed on Abraham, and which
God upon Abraham's readiness to offer Isaac did by solemn oath bind himself
to perform, and to perform it in Abraham's seed. The necessary consequence or
abstract of which oath, as it is before manifested was this, that Abraham's
seed should be that most high God in whose name Melchisedech had blessed
Abraham.

3 The unusual and unexpected fulfilling of Abraham's words to Isaac. Genesis 22.
8. Jehovah lireh, the Lord will see, or the Lord will provide himself a Lamb
for a burnt offering, gave Abraham occasion to name that place Jehovah ^ireh,
as also to a common Proverb taken up from the name of this place, and from the
event, In the Mount of the Lord it shall be seen, Genesis 22. 14. or as the
original, without straining will more naturally bear, In the mountain the
Lord or Jehovah will be seen. And this Proverb taken up upon these occasions,
in whether sense or construction you list to take it, was more then a Proverb,
a true mystery or mystical prophecy exactly fulfilled in the crucifying of our
Savior. The Lord in the Mount did see and was seen by his special providence
when he provided the Ram for a sacrifice instead of Isaac. The mountain
whereon Abraham purposed to have offered Isaac, as he was commanded by God, for
a burnt offering was one of the mountains in the land of Moriah, and that (as
all interpreters agree,) was about the place wherein Jerusalem was afterward
built; most are of opinion that it was that part of mount Sion wherein the
Temple was afterward built, wherein the threshing-floore of Arauna stood,
which David consecrated for the Altar of God. But whether it were this
mountain or mount Calvary I will not dispute. Mount Calvary likewise was in
the land of Moriah, and in this mountain Jehovah did see, and was seen, he
did in this mountain provide himself of a Lamb for a burnt offering, he
himself became a Lamb or visible sacrifice for our sins, by whose blood he
himself, and we in him were consecrated Priests to God the Father. The other
circumstances, whether concerning Isaac or the Lamb, were visibly and
remarkably accomplished in the sacrifice of the Son of God. Isaac did bear
wood for the sacrifice up into the mountain where Abraham intended to
sacrifice him: The Son of God did bear the wood of the Cross whereon he was
sacrificed, at least part of it, up to mount Calvary. The Ram which God
provided instead of Isaac was caught by the horns in the thicket of brambles
or thorns; and the Lamb of God the Son of God marched to his Cross with a
Crown of thorns and brambles upon his head, as most of the Fathers and best
modern interpreters collect from the Evangelists story. For where it is said
that they took off the purple robe and other royal ensigns wherewith they
had in mockery invested him, it is not mentioned that they took off this Crown
of thorns; this was the thicket wherein the murderers caught him: For as ye
know he was condemned upon pretense that he affected the Crown of David, and
suffered himself to be entitled and saluted the King of the Jews, and in
derision of this great mystery which they understood not, they put a Crown of
thorns upon his head and crucify him in it.

4 But whilst the Princes of the earth and the Rulers take counsel against
him, while the heathen-Souldiers and Jewish pepole do rage and make a mock of
him, hec that sat in the heavens laughed them to scorn, what they did act in
jest or scorn here on earth, he turns into earnest and ratifies by an
everlasting decree in heaven. They cloth the Son of God with a purple or
royal robe, and bowing their knees thus they salute him, Hail King of the
Jews, unwittingly fore-prophecying as Caiphas did, as well by matter of fact
as by word, that God would now anoint the Son of David to be that King over
Sion to whom all knees should bow of things in heaven, of things on the earth,
of things under the earth. They in despite and bitter scoffs wreath a Crown of
thorns or brambles about his head, and fastened it on with a reed or
mock-scepter, which they had put into his hand, little considering that he
which sat in the heavens did consecrate him here by this part of his
afflictions to the wearing of that everlasting Crown of glory which David
Psalm. 132. had foretold should flourish upon him whilst his enemies were
clothed with shame. ver. 18. And of this Crown of Glory as well the royal
Diadem or Crown of David, wherein his Successors were enthronized, as the
Crown of holiness wherein Aaron and his Successors the high Priests were
consecrated, were but the shadows or models, and so no question was the Crown
upon the Arc or Mercy-seat. And it is a point which I will commend unto the
serious reader's observation, specially in the reading of the apocalypse or the
Revelation, that in all or most part of the visions made to S. John the
Disciple whom he loved, of Christ in his glory, he still appears, and his
appearance is still emblazoned by this Disciple, in some one or other of the
robes which Aaron used at his Consecration. Rev. 1. 13.
Sometimes he appears with a garment down to the foot, and girt about the
paps with a golden girdle: Such were the robes and girdle of Aaron the high
Priest; and to show that his Saints were consecrated likewise in his
Consecration, his Saints or Angels appeared thus clothed unto John. Rev. 15.
ver. 5. 6. And after that I looked and behold the Temple of the Tabernacle of
the testimony in heaven was opened; and the seven Angels came out of the
Temple, having the seven plagues, clothed in pure and white linen and having
their breasts girded with golden girdle^* Sometimes he appears with a Crown upon
his head.

5 His Palace or Kingdom likewise, his walk or verge is emblazoned or set
forth by the material Temple, the ministry likewise of his glorified Saints
and Angels: But of this hereafter.

6 Those temporary flashes of Royal salutations and greetings which the
multitude tendered unto him when he came into Jerusalem to be consecrated, were
ratified by an everlasting decree in heaven, So it is said Revel. 7. 9. 10. And
after this I beheld, and lo a great multitude which no man could number, of
all Nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the Throne,
and before the Lamb clothed with white robes and palms in their hands, and
cried with a loud voice saying, Salvation unto our God which sitteh upon the
throne, and unto the Lamb! This was the accomplishment of the multitude's
crying* Hosanna to the son of David with palm* branches in their hands, and
those which thus cried in heaven are they (as the Angel instructs S. John)
which came out of great tribulation and have washed their robes and made them
white in the blood of the Lamb; therefore are they before the throne of God
and serve him day and night in his Temple, and he that sits on the throne
shall dwell among them. Revel. 7. 14. 15. etc. This washing of their garments
in the blood of the Lamb* was likewise prefigured in the Consecration of
Aaron. Exodus 29. 21. Thou shall also take of the blood, that is on the Altar
and of the anointing oil and sprinkle it upon Aaron, and upon his garments,
and upon his sons, and upon the garments of his sons with him, and he
shall be hallowed and his garments and his sons, and his sons garments with
him. This blood wherewith their garments were sprinkled was the blood of the
Ram of the Consecration, whose blood likewise Moses as it is in the 20th
verse was commanded to take and put it upon the tip of the right ear of Aaron,
and upon the tip of the right ears of his sons, and upon the thumb of their
right hand, and upon the great toe of their right foot and sprinkle the blood
etc. This ceremony or service was literally and punctually fulfilled in the
Consecration of our high Priest. The high Priest of the Law was consecrated
with foreign blood, with the blood of Rams; The high Priest of the New
Testament was consecrated (...) with his own blood, and in this blood, not
only his hands, his feet or ears were sprinkled or anointed, but his whole
body was anointed or bathed. For though he was always internally sanctified,
and though this his internal sanctification was most absolute and perfect from
the womb, yet would the Lord have him thus visibly and externally consecrated
with his own blood, that we by the same blood might be sanctified and
consecrated after a better manner then Aaron was by the blood of the Ram of
Consecration. The moral employed in sprinkling of Aaron's right ear, the
thumb of his right hand, and the great toe of his right foot is this, Our
ears which are the sense of discipline, and the gate by which faith enters
into our hearts, must be consecrated and hallowed by the blood of our high
Priest, that we may, know God's will; our hands and feet likewise which are
the instruments of service are hallowed and sanctified by his blood, that we
may walk in his ways, and do his will. Finally as both our bodies and souls
have been redeemed by his blood, so both must be consecrated in it, and
enabled by it unto his service.

7 Another ceremony or service at Aaron's Consecration was the offering up of
one loaf of bread, one cake of oyled bread, and one wafer wherewith Aaron's and
his sons hands were first to be filled, and afterward to be burnt upon the
Altar for a burnt offering, for a sweet savor unto the Lord. Exodus 29. ver.
23. 25. The mystery signified by this and the other bloody sacrifice may best
be gathered from that which has before been said concerning the circumcision of
Isaac, and of Abraham's seed, or concerning God's demanding Isaac for a burnt
offering, which was then observed out of Rupertus an ancient Writer; God did
demand at Abraham's hands that he might thereby tie himself to give his own
son unto Abraham and his seed. To which may now be added the testimony of S.
Chrysostom in his comments upon our Saviors words to the Woman of Samarin; Da
mihi bibore, give me to drink. The Fountain of life sitting besides the
Fountain calls for drink, not that he was desirous to take but rather to give
drink: Give me to drink, says he, that I may make thee drink the water of
immortality. I thirst after the salvation of men's souls, not that I might
drink, but that I may give them salvation to drink. I imitate my Father who
said to Abraham offer me up thy Son, thy only Son Isaac whom thou love
for a burnt offering, this he said, not as if he had desired to accept
Abraham's son, but that he determined to give his own Son for the sins
of the world, as S. John says. Chap. 3. ver. 16. In like manner God required
the flesh and blood of Bullocks and of Rams, with unleavened bread to be
offered up in sacrifice unto him at the Consecration of Aaron, not that he
stood in need to eat the flesh of Bulls, or bread of wheat, or drink the blood
of Rams, but that he then purposed to consecrate for us and to give unto us
his only Son, whose flesh is meat indeed, whose blood is drink indeed, whose
body is the bread of life, which comes down from heaven, which who so eats
shall live for ever, for he that truly eats is consecrated by it to be a King
and Priest for ever unto God the Father.

CHAP. 28. A brief Recapitulation of what has been said in this parallel
between the Consecration of Aaron and the Consecration of the Son of God; the
conclusion of the whole Treatise concerning it.
TO recapitulate what has been said before: The beginning of the everlasting
Priesthood according to the order of Melchisedch is the determining of the
Aaronicall Priesthood, unless we shall say as perhaps we ought, that this
Priesthood with the legal rites and sacrifices did expire with the last
mortal breath of him who is now immortal.

2 The everlasting sacrifice whereby he is consecrated an everlasting Priest
was then accomplished, and the cessation of the Aaronicall Priesthood
proclaimed when he said consummatum est, and commended his spirit unto God.
Yet is it not probable that his Consecration, or the Consecration of the
everlasting Sanctuary were at the same instant accomplished. His sacred soul
perfumed with the fresh odor and fragrancy of his sweet smelling sacrifice,
anointed with his most precious blood into whatsoever other place it
afterward went, instantly repaired into the Holiest of Holies, into Paradise
it self. This is the accomplishment of our Atonement, prefigured by the high
Priest's entering into the holy place with blood, and the period of all
sacrifices for his own or our Consecration.

3 That the vale through which the high Priest after the order of Aaron did
enter into the most holy place, should rend asunder at the very instant wherein
the soul and spirit of this our high Priest did pass through the vale of his
flesh rent and torn, into his celestial Sanctuary, was a lively emblem to
all observant spectators, that he was no intruder but called by God. And
reason they had to observe this sign or accident, in that he had promised to
one of them that were crucified with him, Hedie mecum erit in Paradiso.

4 The public solemnity of Consecration has ever been a special testimony
or adjunct of lawful calling; and Christ's Consecration was more solemn and
public then Aaron's was. Such it was as flesh and blood could not affect;
such as nothing but filial obedience to his heavenly Father, could have moved
this our high Priest to admit, because it was to be accomplished by a lingering
and a bloody death. Moses at the Consecration of Aaron is commanded to gather
all the congregation together unto the door of the tabernacle. Levit. 8. Ad
tria voluit Dominus populum congregart: Primum ut pro eo sacerdos offerret,
eumque expearet: Secundum, ad instituendum sacerdotem, ut sciret populus Aaron
and filios ejus praefici sibi in sacerdotes and mediatores; and de caeter^
commendavit se illi. Tertione esset inter eos aliquis, qui postea sacerdotium
ambiret postquam omnes sciebant Aar^nem a Deo sacerdotem institutum* Oleaster.

5 For the like reasons God would have the Consecration of his Son accomplished
at the Passover, that is, as a Father speaks, at the Metropolis of Jewish
feasts, the most solemn, public and universal mee^ing that any one People
or Nation in the world ever had, besides the concurse and confluence of
strangers at the time of our Savior's Passion. The manner of whose death, and
the signs and wonders then exhibited, made the heathen Centurion, a man
altogether ignorant of these sacred mysteries, to confess that this Jesus,
whom he had seen crucified, was the Son of God. But the time, the manner,
and consequence of his Resurrection most directly proves as well his
Priesthood, as his calling to it, to have been from God; both more excellent
then Aaron's was.

6 We see it experienced Numb. 16. 17. that notwithstanding the public
solemnity of Aaron's Consecration by Moses, there wanted not such rebellious
spirits then, as the world is full of now, which thought themselves altogether
as holy, and as ^it to be high Priests as he. After the earth had swallowed up
the principals in this conspiracy; the ^ea^^^e^^e multitude, though ^e^^^^ed
for a while with the fearful disaster of their ringleaders, conspire a^^esh
against Moses and Aaron, and had utterly perished in this* rebellion had not
Aaron run into the midst of the congregation, which sought his life, and
stood with his center, as with a shield of defense, betwixt them and death. But
seeing neither the fearful examples showed upon Coreh, Dathan and Abiram* nor
Aaron's late compassion toward them, when wrath was gone out from the Lord
against them, and the plague was kindled amongst them, were able to quell their
jealousies, or appease their murmurings, the Lord lastly made the Rod of Levy
alone inscribed with Aarons name amongst all the rods of the Tribes of
Israel, to bring forth branch, leaf, blossom, and fruit in one night; and
thus beautified with flower and fruit, which were not to fade in so many
years, as they had been hours inspringing, to be laid up in the Arc of the
testimony, to stay the murmurings of the children of Israel, and to be as a
witness against them whenever they should question Aaron's calling.

7 The Tribes of Israel were never so maliciously and stubbornly bent against
Moses and Aaron, as the Tribe of Levi, and Aaron's successors with their
accomplices, were against the son of David; to whom the Lord destinated the
Priesthood after the order of Melchisedech by solemn oath. Though the earth did
quake, and the rocks rent in sunder; though the graves did open, and give up
their dead, more desirous to swallow up these rebellious miscreants quick then
to swallow up Coreh, Dathan and Abiram, as doubtless they had done, unless
this Priest of the most high God had made an Atonement for them, (saying,
Father forgive them for they know not what they do,) yet their murmurings
cease not with his life; their malice pursues him into his grave.

8 The last and peremptory sign reserved by the wisdom of God, either to stay
their murmurings, or to condemn them with Coreh, with Dathan and Abiram, unto
the everlasting pit, was the causing of this Rod of ^esse, this branch of
David whom these cruel and merciless men had quite stripped of flower, of
leaf, of branch, bereft of sap, and as it were scorcht and beaked in the
fire of affliction, to recover sap, and leaf, and flower again, to bring
forth the fruit which never shall ^^de now consecrated to be the tree of life
to all the Nations, enthronized in the heavenly tabernacle, and planted at the
right hand of God, until his enemies by the rod of his power be made his
footstool. Psalm. 110.
We have seen in part how fitly that testimony of the Psalmist, Thou art my
Son this day have I begotten thee, being understood of Christ raised from the
dead, is avouched by our Apostle to prove Christ's calling, his Consecration and
advancement to the Priesthood here mentioned, to have been from God; and from
the event answering to the Psalmist's prophecy, and from that other testimony
of Psalm 110. often mentioned, does S. Peter cause the murmuring of the people
of Israel to cease. For from the two premises Act. 2. ver. 36. he thus
concludes; Therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly that God has
made the same Jesus whom ye have crucified both Lord and Christ; that is as
much as if he had said, both King and Priest; by these declarations he gained
three thousand souls, which otherwise had perished in their murmurings.

9 So then the day of his Resurrection is the day wherein the dignity of
everlasting Priesthood is actually collated upon him, and as he himself
testifies, All power is given unto me both in heaven and earth. And if all
power; then as well the power of Priesthood, as the power royal. And as high
Priest he gives Commission to his Disciples to teach and baptize. The day of
his Ascension or placing at the right hand of God is the day of his solemn
enthronization, and immediately upon this he sent forth the Rod of his
strength out of Sion. For by this rod (foretold by the Psalmist, Psalm. 110.)
we are to understand that power, wherewith his Disciples were to be endued from
above, which they were to expect in Jerusalem at the feast of Pentecost. The
effusion of the holy spirit, and emplanting the Law of the Gospel in their
hearts upon that day or the day following wherein the Law of Moses was
proclaimed, was as a proclamation to all the world, that the Priesthood was
translated, or changed by this manifest translation, or change of the Law.

SICT. 5. Of the Resurraction of the Son of God. By what Prophets it was
foretold. By what Persons or legal Rites it was fore-pictured or
fore-shadowed.
CHAP. 29 In what high esteem S. Paul did hold the Article of our Savior's
Resurrection and Ascension etc. That the want of explicit belief to this
grand Article of the Resurrection did argue rather a dullness or slownesse to
believe the Scriptures then any infidelity, or incredulity, even in such as had
seen his miracles, and had heard him foretell his death and rising again
until the event did manifest unto them the truth of his former Doctrine and
predictions.
WHen the Doctor of the Gentiles says, 1. Cor. 22.
He esteemed to know nothing, amongst the great Masters of knowledge, save
Jesus Christ and him crucified, this exception no way excludes the knowledge of
his Resurrection from the dead, or implies that he had not the knowledge of the
Article in equal esteem with the knowledge of his Cross. How highly soever
he did esteem both mysteries, it does not argue that he did rate the
knowledge of his Ascension into heaven, his session at the right hand of God,
or his coming thence to judge the quick and the dead one mite lower. The
greatest blessing which he could either praise God for, or pray unto him for,
whether for himself, or for his beloved Ephesians, was the knowledge (as he
terms it) of these grand mysteries. Wherefore I also after I had heard of your
faith in the Lord Jesus and love unto all the Saints, cease not to give thanks
for you, making mention of you in my prayers; that the God of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Father of Glory, may give unto you the spirit of wisdom and
revelation in the knowledge of him: The eyes of your understanding being
enlightened, that ye may know what is the hope of his calling, and what the
riches of the Glory of his inheritance in his Saints, and what is the exceeding
greatness of his Power to us ward, who believe according to the working of his
mighty Power, which he wrought in Christ when he raised him from the dead, and
set him at his own right hand in the heavenly places, far above all
principalities, and power, and might, and dominion, and every name that is
named, not only in this world, but also in the world which is to come. Ephesians.
1. v. 15. 16. etc. But the high price of the knowledge of these mysteries, and
the fervency of his prayers for attaining unto such knowledge, are more
pathetically expressed. Phil. 3. v. 7. But what things were gain to me, those I
counted loss for Christ, yea doubtless, and I count all things but loss for
the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord; for whom I have
suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung that I may win
Christ, and be found in him, not having mine own righteousness, which is of
the Law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness
which is of God by faith; that I may know him and the power of his
Resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable unto
his death, if by any means I might attain unto the Resurrection of the dead.

2 The considerations of these raptures of our Apostles joy and hope, occasion
or rather revive the relics of my private sorrow and grief, even in this
subject of public joy and comfort. For the bitterest and deepest sting which
wordly crosses, or multiplicitie of buisinesses, or other vexations past have
left in my thoughts, is this, That my portion for many years in all these,
(respectively) has brought a necessity upon me, either not at all, or in my
old and decaying days to publish the fruits of my former labors in these
great mysteries, which to my apprehension had been well set in my flourishing
and vivid years; or (to borrow an expression from a more sacred and more
authentic Author) * Hezekiah 2. King. 19. 3.
that the children (of my desires) should come now to the birth when there is
least strength left to bring them forth: yet was the Lord his comfort and
strength who was the Author of this complaint; and on the same Lords gracious
goodness, my weakness whether of memory, judgment, or expression shall repose
it self. As for the Articles of Christ's Resurrection and Ascension, the
ingenuous Reader cannot expect, nor can I hope that I should say much which
has not been said before by many others, especially in this ripe age of
learning, these being the theames or subjects of anniversary Sermons upon the
solemn feasts unto which they properly belong as well in the Court, as in the
Universities, and all other well ordered Churches throughout this Kingdom; yet
somewhat I must say concerning these two points as being engaged to bring this
long treatise concerning the knowledge of Christ and him crucified to some
period.

3 The true or Christian belief of any Article in the Creed includes somewhat
more then an opinion, more then a pious opinion or mere probability of its
truth; and the knowledge of the mysteries last mentioned, in our Apostle's
meaning or expression, imports somewhat more then a mere belief of them; more
then such a belief, or the sight, or experiment of greatest miracles could
produce or establish in most docile Auditors whether of our Savior Christ
himself, or of his Apostles; for even the best and most docile of the
Disciples or Apostles which had been ear-witnesses of his heavenly Doctrine,
and eie-witnesses of all his miracles from his baptism or temptation in the
wilderness unto his reposall in the grave, did not know half so much
concerning the mysteries of his Cross, of his passion, and bloody death,
before his Resurrection as they did after it, nor did they so well understand
so much of the power and virtue of his Resurrection it self, for many days
after their experience of the truth of it, as they did after his Ascension into
heaven, and the descension of the holy Ghost upon them; by whose efficacious
inspiration or operation in their hearts and souls, the knowledge of all the
forementioned Articles was much increased, and their belief of the meanest
matters which did concern Christ, much better rooted and strengthened, then it
had been before his glorification: His placing at the right hand of God in his
throne of majesty did crown their former belief and glorious hopes with fresh
joy and comfort.

4 Wherein the knowledge of Christ, and the knowledge of other subjects,
whether philosophical, or mathematical, or in other terms, wherein the
faculty of Theology and sciences properly so called agree or differ, has been
discust at large in the seventh Book of these commentaries and in the fourth.
We are then properly said to know any effect, or conclusion in sciences
properly so called, or so reputed, when we discern the true cause why it is
so, and are assured that it cannot be otherwise. And we are then said to know
Christ, and him crucified according to the scale of speculative knowledge, when
we can discern the sweet harmony between the evangelicall relations, or
matters related by the Apostles concerning Christ, and the predictions of the
Prophets, or prefigurations by matters of fact in the Law, or legal services,
or in sacred histories. Again as in sciences properly so called there is a
regresse or knowledge of the cause by the effect, of the effect by the cause;
So there is a twofold knowledge of Christ, the one speculative (such as has
been described before) the other, which is the better, practical or
experimental, which later is better resembled by moral philosophy then by
natural experiments, or mathematical conclusions.

5 This experimental knowledge of Christ, and of the mysteries whereof we
treat, consists in that solid impression which the forementioned speculative
knowledge being liniamented in our brains does by the finger of God, that is by
his holy spirit, ingrave in our hearts, and instampe upon our affections. I
must begin with the speculative knowledge of these two Articles concerning
the Resurrection and Ascension of the Son of God; and conclude with the
practical or experimental.

6 The conclusions, or declarations of these mysteries are set down by the
four Evangelists didistinctly, and accurately both for substance, and
historical circumstances, and their several references to former Scriptures
avouched not only by them but by other of the Apostles in their canonical
writings, especially by S. Paul in his Epistles to the Ephesians, Colossians,
Corinthians, and to the Hebrews. The Evangelicall declaration of this great
mystery, with the manner how the belief or knowledge of it was improved or
enlarged, is most punctually and clearly related by S. John Chap. 20. This
blessed Apostle and S. Peter did at the first believe Mary Magdalen's report
more distinctly and expressly then they did the prophetical predictions. The
first day of the week, comes Mary Magdalen early when it was yet dark, unto
the Sepulcher, and sees the stone taken away from the Sepulcher. Then she
runs, and comes to Simon Peter, and to the other Disciple whom Jesus
loved, and says unto them, they have taken away the Lord out of the Sepulcher,
and we know not where they have laid him. Peter therefore went forth, and that
other Disciple, and came to the Sepulcher. So they run both together, and the
other Disciple did out-runne Peter, and came first to the Sepulcher. And he
stooping down, and looking in saw the linen clothes lying, yet went he not
in. Then comes Simon Peter following him, and went into the Sepulcher, and
sees the linen clothes lie. And the Napkin that was about his head, not
lying with the linen clothes, but wrapped together in a place by it self.
Then went in also that other Disciple, which came first to the Sepulcher, and
he saw and believed, for as yet they knew not the Scripture, that he must rise
again from the dead. Such knowledge or belief of the Scripture as for this
time S. John had, was farther improved by Christ's apparition unto them upon
the same day in the evening. Then the same day at evening, being the first day
of the week, when the doors were shut, where the Disciples were assembled for
fear of the Jews, came Jesus and stood in the midst, and says unto them,
Peace be unto you. And when he had said so, he showed unto them his hands and
his side. Then were the Disciples glad when they saw the Lord. Then said Jesus
unto them again, Peace be unto you: As my Father has sent me, even so send I
you. And when he had said this, he breathed on them and says unto them,
receive ye the holy Ghost. Whosoever sins ye remit, they are remitted, and
whosoever sins ye retain they are retained. But Thomas one of the twelve
which was called Didymus was not with them when Jesus came. The other Disciples
therefore said unto him, we have seen the Lord: But he said unto them except I
shall see in his hands the print of the nails, and put my finger into the
print of the nails, and thrust my hand into his side, I will not believe, and
after eight days his Disciples were within, and Thomas with them: Then came
Jesus the doors being shut, and stood in the midst and said, Peace be unto
you. Then says he to Thomas, Reach hither thy finger, and behold my hands, and
reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side, and be not faithless but
believing. And Thomas answered and said unto him, My Lord and my God. Jesus
says unto him, Thomas, because thou have seen me, thou have believed, blessed
are they that have not seen, and yet have believed. Unto some it may seem
questionable in what sense, or how far that of S. Paul is true, faith comes
by hearing, seeing S. Thomas professes that he would not, and S. John in this
place of himself confesses that he did not believe one of the fundamental
Articles of Christian faith, to wit, Christ's Resurrection from the dead,
until they had seen what they had to believe: Yet if we could accurately sist
the internal sense or kernel from the husk or shell of words wherein it is
contained, it will infer no more then this, that the sight of the eye or
miracles seen may be an inducement or introduction unto true belief; they
cannot be the true ground or anchor-hold of Christian faith. Such faith must be
grounded, and hope truly Christian must be pitched upon the testimony of Moses
or the Prophets, or other sacred and Canonical writings. The reason why S.
John did not believe our Savior's Resurrection before he saw his empty tomb,
and the linen clothes wherein he had been wrapped, was because before this
sight he knew not the Scripture which he had often heard read or avouched. The
sight then of this or of other miracles, did but open an entry or passage unto
the true knowledge of that which he had formerly heard. But more strange it
may seem to all of us, that two so great Apostles as S. Peter and S. John,
which had been for three years and a half together perpetual auditors of
such a Master as spoke as never man spoke, and often eyewitnesses of such
works done by him, as no man besides him could do, should now be ignorant of
that fundamental Article of faith whereof at this day to doubt were heresy,
which now to deny were infidelity: For if Christ be not risen from the dead,
then the dead shall not arise, and if the dead do not arise, then were both
preaching and hearing vain; our faith were vain; both Priest and people were
in a worse case then infidels; and we Christians should be of all men most
miserable.

6 Yet far be it from us to say or think that either of these two Apostles
were at this time in the state of Heretics, or that either of their cases
were no better then the cases of Infidels; rather it would be a branch of
infidelity in us to think that at this time they had no faith. The root of
their belief in Christ (as in their Messiah and Redeemer) was entire and
incorrupt; the stem of it was ^ound although until this time it had not shut
out into this particular branch of faith. This was the time wherein the actual
and express belief of Christ's Resurrection from the dead was to blossom and
bear fruit even in these two Apostles. That it did now break forth in them
and bear fruit was the work of God; that before this time it should keep in
and be in some sort snipt, was the ordinance and dispensation of the same God:
for if the knowledge of our Savior's Resurrection had been as express, as
explicit, and distinct before his death, as it was after his rising from the
dead, neither had their love either been so hearty in it self, or so manifest
to themselves, nor their faith so lively and cheerful as in the issue both did
prove: The heartinesse of their love unto him whilst he lived was manifested
even unto themselves, by their sorrow for his death, which doubtless had been
much less, if in the interim they had actually and expressly believed to have
seen him again within three days. The strength, the livelihood, or
cheerfulness of their faith was truly manifested and experienced in their
joyful entertainment of the glad tidings which were brought unto them by Mary
Magdalen, and whereof their outward senses were in part witnesses. Their joy
could not have been so great, nor their embracement of his Resurrection so
cheerful and hearty if it had been expressly and confidently expected by
them. It was by so much the welcomer, by how much the accomplishment of it was
less thought on.

7 But were these two great Apostles altogether without blame, in that before
this time they knew not the Scripture that Christ was to rise from the dead?
They might be more capable or worthy of blame, then we to lay any blame upon
them* wherefore not to pronounce what I think of them, much less to determine
any thing concerning them, I must make bold to be the Reader's remembrancer of
that which our Savior himself immediately after his Resurrection said unto
two of his Disciples which did doubt of the truth of it, albeit they had heard
it in a sort testified, the story is Luke 24. 22. 23. Gertaine women of our
company (say those two Disciples which went with our Savior to Emmaus) made us
astonished, which were early at the Sepulcher. And when they found not his body
they came saying, that they had also seen a vision of Angels which said that
he was alive; And certain of them which were with us went to the Sepulcher and
found it even so as the women had said, but him they saw not. Then he said
unto them, O fools and slow of heart to believe all that the Prophets have
spoken. Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his
glory. How far S. Peter and S. John were liable to this censure of the
supreme Judge that I leave for him to determine. S. John from this time did
expressly believe Christ's Resurrection. So did not S. Peter till afterward,
if we may believe the collections of cardinal ^^troe^nte Petro intravit etiam
alter discipulus, qui primus venerat: Sed ante Petrum ingredi non erat ausus.
Hic vidit etiam linteamina and sudarium, sed fecit aliud, quod non fecit
Petrus, credidit enim, nempe resurreris se Dominum: Petrus intravit quidem and
vidit. Johannes vero intravit, vidit, and credidit. Si credidisset tunc Petrus,
non utique soli ^ibi Johannes fidem tribuisset etc. Vide plura in annota. ibid.
so. John 20. 8.
Tollet upon this place.

8 The point, which from our Savior's words unto these Discipels, Luke 24. and
from our Evangelist's confession of himself in the 9. ver. of the 20. Chap. I
would commend unto the Reader's consideration, is this, that our Savior's
Resurrection from the dead was fore-signified and might have been fore-knowne,
not from one or two places of Scripture only, but from many; from the current
of that which Moses and the Prophets had written. So it follows Luke 24. 27.
Beginning at Moses and all the Prophets he expounded unto them in all the
Scriptures the things concerning himself. And when S. John says that the
Disciples as yet knew not the Scriptures, this is more then if he had said
that they knew not the Scriptures that he must rise again from the dead. The
phrase imports as much, as if the whole drift and scope of Scripture was to
fore* shadow, setforth, or exemplify the power and virtue of Christ's Death,
and Resurrection from the Dead.

CHAP. 30. That the Death and Resurrection of the Son of God was
aenigmatically foretold in the first promise made to our Father Adam, and our
Mother Eve. That his Resurrection was exquisitely prefigured by Isaac's escape
from death; and the Propagation of his Kingdom after his Resurrection, by the
strange increase, or multiplication of Isaac's seed. A parallel betwixt our
Savior and Joseph in their affliction and exaltation.
THe truth of our Savior's Resurrection is necessarily though but
aenigmatically included in the first promise made to mankind. Genesis 3. ver. 15.
And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between her seed and
thy seed; it shall bruise thy head and thou shall bruise his heel. This sacred
oracle, as has been to diverse purposes before observed, includes a literal,
and an emblematicall ormysticall sense. To the present purpose, by the heel of
this woman's seed (...) some of the ancients understand the Humanity of our
Savior, and not amiss, so it do not point out the similitude too precisely.
The warrantable punctual meaning of the place is thus; As a bruise in the
heel to an ordinary man is not deadly, so neither was death it self unto our
Savior, because he was God as well as man, and by the virtue of his divine
power, could as easily recover life again after he had been put to death, as a
strong body, whose vital or internal parts are whole and sound, can recover
health after some bruise in the heel, or other infirmity in his outward or
extreme parts; but so could not Saran recover the blow which our Savior by his
Sufferings gave him in the head; he has been ever since diminuti capit is
deprived of his wonted power, and dispossessed of such as were before his
captives: So says our Savior. Ioh. 12. ver. 31. Now is the judgment of this
world, now shall the Prince of this world be cast out; And I if I be lift up
from the earth, will draw all men unto me. And his drawing of men unto him was
a drawing of them out of Satan's bondage and dominion. So that Lucifer, as we
may hence gather, had a twofold fall, The one from heaven or his sear of
Angelical glory, when he sought to be like God his Creator: The other from
his power or dominion over this inferior world or morrall men; And this befell
him by seeking to make the Son of God more miserable than other men, by
attempting to have him lifted up upon the Cross, as the brazen Serpent was in
the wilderness. The same nails that nailed our Savior's feet to the Cross
did pierce the old Serpent's head. In brief, Christ was to crush the old
Serpent's head by conquering death, and death could not be fully conquered but
by dying. So that when it offered it self unto our Savior, he was to meet
with it, and to fight with it, not a far off, but hand to hand, yea to close
with it, and to receive the utmost force and power of it in every part. Not
thus thoroughly to have tasted it, had been to eschew it, or to have fled from
it, not to have conquered it: But thus to abide the extremity of it, to receive
the full dint of all the blows that death and hell, or all the powers of
darkness could reach mortality; and yet to put all off, or rather to redouble
their forces upon themselves was truly to subdue death, and him that had the
power of death. This is our Apostle's inference. Heb. 2. ver. 14. For as much
then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, He also himself
likewise took part of the same, that through death he might destroy him that
had the power of death, that is, the Devil.

2 Our Savior, as some of the ancients have wittily said, did as it were bait
his divinity with his humanity, that he might catch Satan in his own net, or
with his own hook. Satan being by nature an immortal spirit, did take upon
him the bodily shape of a Serpent to beguile the first woman; and our Savior
being the eternal Spirit and Son of God did take our flesh (that is, the
woman's seed) upon him, thereby to deceive or intrappe the great Tempter. For
unless the Godhead had been invested with the weakness of mortal flesh, the
old Serpent would not have so desperately adventured his sting or teeth upon
the Godhead as he did. But whilst he sought to swallow the bait of his flesh,
he has lost his sting, he has broken his teeth, and spoiled his jaws by
meddling with the Godhead.

3* But more plainly by much was our Savior's Resurrection, and victory over
death fore-pictured by Isaac's narrowescape from death. Genesis 22. 9. The Altar
was built on purpose for him, the wood was couched, and Isaac fast bound upon
it; the knife was in his Father's hand, whose arm was stretched forth to strike
him: But God by his Angel, and a voice from heaven delivers him from this
imminent danger, as it is v. 11. 12. This only Son of Abraham, this child of
promise, the only hope, or pledge of that promised seed which was expected
from the beginning, was to come thus near unto death, and yet to be delivered
from it, that the faith of Abraham concerning the Death and Resurrection of
Christ the promised seed, might be tried; or rather that by his trial, our
Savior's Death and Resurrection might be truly represented or forepictured by
Isaac's danger and delivery: So says the Apostle Heb. 11. 17. 18. 19. By
faith, Abraham when he was tried offered up Isaac, and he that had received the
promises offered up his only begotten Son; of whom it was said, that in Isaac
shall thy seed be called: Accounting that God was able to raise him up even
from the dead; from whence also he received him in a figure; to wit, of the
Re^urrection of Christ, or the promised seed.

4 The later part of this promise belongs merely and properly unto Christ, in
whom alone it could be fulfilled. For the more in number Abraham's children
according to the flesh were, before the promised seed did come; and the greater
their temporal prosperity, or happiness were, the worse it must needs go
with other Nations or kindreds of the earth. If the Messiah, or promised seed
should have erected such a temporal Kingdom here on earth, as the Jews
expected, the Nations of the earth could not have been blessed in him, as God
promised by Oath to Abraham: for it is no part of happiness, but rather misery
to have the Jews, or seed of Abraham according to the flesh for their Lords
and Masters.

5 Notwithstanding the former promise was in part fulfilled in the mighty
increase of Abraham's posterity by Sarah, this was a pledge of the later part
which was to be fulfilled in Christ. Through faith (says the Apostle) Sarah
received strength to conceive seed, and was delivered of ac^ild when she was
past age, because she judged him faithful who had promised. Therefore sprang
there even of one, and him as good as dead, so many as the stars of the ^kie
in multitude, and as the sand which is by the Sea* shore, innumerable. Heb. 11.
v. 11. 12.

6 It was one of the great wonders of the world, that from a woman that had
been barrentill after fourscore years of age, there should proceed above six
hundred thousand men within less the^ four hundred years.) Th^miracle
notwithstanding had been less, if her children had been more; but she brought
forth no more sons then Isaac: and this mighty Nation did spring from Jacob,
who was but one branch of Isaac ^ Sarah was as good as dead when she conceived
Isaac, and Isaac himself was at death's door before he gave life to others. So
powerful is God to raise strength out of weakness, and to make the barren a
fruitful Mother of many children. How beit this wonderful increase of Sarah's
or Isaac's posterity was but a shadow, a draught, or map of that great
miracle which was to be exhibited in the promised seed. More admirable it was
that the blessed Virgin should bear a Son, then that Sarah should conceive.
More strange and miraculous that Christ being put to death should become the
Father of more people then Isaac had been. Yet this we see has God
performed: For since his Resurrection he has begotten more sons to God
throughout the Nations then all the children of Abraham or Isaac according to
the flesh.

7 This miraculous birth of the Church, and this mighty increase of her
children, the Lord did as it were point out to future ages, in the
forementioned increase of Sarah's posterity; that the world might know the
body or substance when it should appear, by the picture which he had made of
it. And that Abraham's posterity according to the flesh might steadfastly
believe the spiritual promise by the temporal pledge* Of which pledge every
one of them was a part.

8 To this end and purpose says God himself by his Prophet Esaias. Chap. 51. v.
12. He or ken to me ye that follow after righteousness, ye that seek the
Lord: Look unto the Rock whence ye are hewn, and to the hole of the pit
whence ye are dug. Look unto Abraham your Father, and to Sarah that bare
you, for I called him alone, and blessed him* and in creased him.

9 It was more remarkably true of us Chrstians, (whether the poor remnant of
the sons of Abraham according to the flesh which were converted, or of us
Gentiles the seed of Iaphet,) then it was of the Israelites, which were borne
in Egypt. We* were not the greatest but the least of all people or Nations. It
was not our own wit or strength* made us so great a Nation as we are: But the
Lord our God which loved Abraham, loved us in Christ, and bestowed the blessing
of Isaac in fuller measure upon us. It was his power, his love and wisdom,
that did thus multiply and increase us. The Rock whence we were hewn, and the
hole of the pit whence we were dug was our Savior's grave. After his death
says the Evangelist S. Luke Chap. 23. v. 52. 53. Joseph of Ari^^t (...)t to
Pilat and begged the body of Jesus, and took it down and wrapped it in
linen, and laid it in a Sepulcher that was hewn in stone wherein man never
before was laid.

10 This Rock was the quarrie, out of which the whole Church of God, which is
now spread far and wide over the face of the whole earth, was dug. Our
Savior's Resurrection from the dead was the first opening* of it: And by
virtue* of his Resurrection, such as were dead in sins and trespasses* such
as without it should have consumed to dust in the grave, are become living
stones, even Pillars in the house of God; Abraham's children according to
pro^^se* for out of stones has God raised up children ante Abraham.

11 This Application of the Type is warranted by the Prophet Esaias. Chap. 53. v.
8. He was taken from prison, and from judgment, and who shall declare his
generation? What generation did the Prophet meane^ The eternal generation of
the son of God? So indeed some of the ancients have interpreted this place, and
too many modern interpreters have herein followed them. But this were to
runne-counter upon the Text. No print or footstep of the Prophet's progress in
this Chapter, no literal circumstance, or meaning does lead, or direct us this
way, but the contrary; to wit, to his generation or offspring; to such a
generation, but far more ample, as the Israelite^ were of Abraham, for so it
follows in the Prophet, He was out off from the land of the living, for the
transgression of my people was he stricken; And he made his grave with the
wicked, and with the rich in his death, because he had done ^^ ^^^lence,
neither was any deceit in his mouth, and ver. 10. When thou shall make his
soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed, he shall prolong his
days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand* He shall see of
the travel of his so^le and be satisfied, by his knowledge shall my righteous
servant justify many, for he shall be are their iniquities. v. 10. 11. They
whose iniquities he did bear and whom he justified, are his seed, or that
Generation whereof the Prophet does speak. Unto this purpose our Savior
himself does speak. Ioh. 12. ver. 23. 24. When Andrew and Philip came unto him
(a little before his Passion) and told him certain Greeks desired to see him,
he answered them saying, The hour is come that the Son of man should be
glorified! Verily, verily, I say unto you except a corn of wheat fall into the
ground and die it abides alone, but if it die it brings forth much fruit.

12 In respect of this his Resurrection out of the grave, he is called the
first begotten from the dead; for the Father of whom he was begotten before
all worlds, from all eternities, did now beget him as man unto glory and
immortality. According to his first birth as man by the blessed Virgin, he was
truly called the seed of Abraham, the son of David. According to the second
birth or begetting him from the grave he is called the Father of the world to
come; and as man, the Father of Abraham, the Father of David, yea, and of
Melchisedech himself who blessed Abraham. For the life of glory and
immortality does descend to all that ever shall be partakers of it, from the
man Christ Jesus now possessed of glory and immortality, as truly and really, as
his mortality or life in the flesh did descend from Abraham, from David, or
from his Mother the blessed Virgin.

13 Isaac (as all have known it) was the true picture, and shadow of our
Savior's death and deliverance from it. The mighty increase likewise of Isaac
and Jacob's seed was the emblem or pledge of our Savior's seed or generation
which cannot be numbered or declared.

14 But the circumstances of our Savior's selling, of his betraying, of his
cruel persecutions by Priests and people, the ungracious offspring of Israel
or Jacob, the whole legend of his humiliation unto death, and exaltation after
his Resurrection, are more exactly fore-shadowed by the cruel persecutions of
Joseph procured by his brethren; by his calamity, and advancement in Egyyt.
Their persecutions by the sons of Jacob do in a manner parallel themselves.
Both of them were sold by a Judas more for hope of gain then desire of blood
on their parts that sold them.

15 The pit whereinto Ioseph's brethren cast him, as also the pit or dungeon
wherein he lay in fetters after his coming into Egypt, were true pictures of
our Savior's grave, or of the pit whereinto his soul descended: So was
Ioseph's deliverance out of them, a true shadow or resemblance of Christ's
Resurrection. Ioseph's high advancement by Pharaoh an exquisite Type or map
of our Savior's glorious Kingdom after his Resurrection or birth from the
dead; so Joseph complains unto Pharaoh's butler. Genesis 40. v. 15. I was stolen
away out of the land of the Hebrews, and here also have I done nothing that
they should put me into the dungeon.

16 The whole story of Ioseph's depression and advancement is set down. Psalm.
105. v. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21. 22. He sent a man before the^ even Joseph, who was
sold for a servant, whose feet they hurt with fetters, This cannot be meant of
the written Word, but of that (...) mentioned by S. John Chap. 1. 1. and by S.
Paul, Heb. 1.
He was laid in iron until the time that his WORD came, the WORD of the Lord
tried him. The King sent and loosed him, even the Ruler of the people, and let
him go free. He made him Lord of his house, and Ruler of all his substance;
To bind his Princes at his pleasure, and teach his Senators wisdom.

17 A more express draught or map as well of our Savior's humiliation as of
his exaltation is Genesis 39. ver. 20. 21. and Genesis 41. ver. 39. Instead of the
prison or dungeon wherein Joseph lay, he is raised to the highest place in the
Kingdom under Pharaoh: Thou shall be over my house (says Pharaoh to Joseph)
and according to thy word shall all my people be ruled, only in the throne will
I be greater then thou. See I have set thee over all the land of Egypt, and
without thee shall no man lift up his hand or foot in all the land of Egypt: So
was our Savior after his Resurrection made chief Ruler over the house of God.
Every house is builded by some man; But he that built all things is God. And
Moses verily was faithful in all his house as a servant, for a testimony of
those things which were to be spoken after; but Christ as a Son over his own
house, whose house are we. The amplitude of Christ's Kingdom as man
foreshadowed by Ioseph's advancement under Pharaoh over all the land of Egypt,
is described. Psalm. 2. ver. 10. specially Psalm. 8. ver. 5. 6. Thou have made
him a * See Heb. 2. 7. and Book seventh of these Comments Chap. 17. Parag. 5.
little while lower then the Angels, and have crowned him with glory and honor.
Thou made him to have dominion over the works of thy hands, thou have put
all things under his feet. Yet says the Apostle 1. Cor. 15. 27. It is
manifest that he is excepted which put all things under him; And when it is
said, that he sits at the right hand of God until his enemies be made his
footstool, it is included, that he at whose right hand he sits, is in throne
or seat of dignity above him. Again, Joseph, instead of the iron wherein he
was bound, has the Kings ring put on his hand: Instead of his ragged or
squallid weeds he is arrayed in a vesture of fine linen or silk: Instead of
his fetters and bonds he has a golden chain put about his neck: All these
ornaments bestowed on Joseph as the ancient and learned well observe, were but
resemblances of those glorious endowments wherewith our Savior's Body or
Humanity has since his Resurrection been invested.

18 Joseph was placed by Pharaoh in the second chariot, and he made them cry
before him Abrech, that is as much as to say, Lord or King, to whom bowing of
the knee was due. All this and whatsoever more was done to Joseph is but a
model of that honor which, as our Apostle tells us, God has commanded to be
given to Christ. Wherefore God has highly exalted him, and given him a name
which is above every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of
things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth; and that
every tongue should confess, that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God
the Father. Philip. 2. verses 9. 10. 11. Let all the house of Israel know
assuredly, that God has made that same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, both
Lord and Christ. Act. 2. 36.

CHAP. 31. Showing the concludency of the allegations used by the Apostles S.
Peter and S. Paul to prove the truth of Christ's Resurrection; and in
particular of the Testimony Psalm. 2. Thou art my Son this day have I begotten
thee.
NOt to repeat other Types or prophetical testimonies of Christ's entrance
into immortal glory by the sufferings of death, of which the Reader may find
plenty as well in Postillers as Commentators, nor to dilate upon such general
testimonies, whether merely typical or prophetical, or typically prophetical
as have been heretofore handled in the seventh and eighth Book of these
Comments upon the Creed, as that of Psalm. 82. etc. I make no question but those
testimonies out of the Psalms or Prophets which are avouch'd to this purpose
by the Apostles themselves, specially by S. Peter and S. Paul were expounded by
our Savior himself unto the two forementioned Disciples which did accompany
him unto Emmaus

2 Now the testimonies most insisted upon by the Apostles, as well for
convincing the Gentiles, as the Jews, are specially three, that of Psalm. the
2. Thou art my Son this day have I begotten thee, and Psalm. the 6. Thou will
not leave my soul in hell, nor suffer thine holy one to see corruption; the
third [ The Lord has sworn and will not repent, thou art a Priest for ever
after the order of Melchisedech, or which is much what the same, The Lord said
unto my Lord sit thou at my right hand until I make thine enemies thy
footstool. The extraordinary success of all these allegations abundantly
testifies that they were most concludent, for many thousand souls at two
several times (besides others) were converted by them. The testimony out of
Psalm. 2. is pressed home by S. Peter Act. 2. v. 6. to the 37. to the Jews
specially, and by S. Paul both upon Jews and Gentiles. Act. 13. Though with
better success upon the Gentiles: The force and strength of this testimony,
and likewise how far it was meant of David and fulfilled in Christ has been
at large discust Seventh Book.
before. The point at which these present endeavors aim, is to declare how
these two testimonies [1. Thou art my Son this day have I begotten thee; and
2. Thou art a Priest after the order of Melchisedech,] do concludently and
irrefragably infer the Resurrection of Christ, that Jesus whom the Jews had
crucified being both the Son of God and son of David, and his Consecration
to his everlasting Priesthood, for unto this later point both testimonies are
drawn by our Apostle Heb. 5. v. 5. and 6. But how close they reach this point
whether jointly or severally is not so clearly set forth by most interpreters,
as that the Reader, unless his understanding far surpass mine, will easily
collect. The general meaning of our Apostle has been declared in the first
Section, and in the close of the fourth of this Book* it is punctually thus,
Seeing Aaron's calling to the dignity of Priesthood was publicly manifested
to be from God, no man after might take upon him to erect a new Priesthood, no
not to the temporal prejudice of Aaron and his successors, much less to
abolish this Priesthood which God had erected, unless he could manifest to man
and Angels that his Commission for thus doing was immediately from God, and
authentic, being sealed by oath, and solemnly executed. And seeing no man
might, therefore Christ though God and man did not glorify himself (as the
Apostle adds) to be made an high Priest, but he that said unto him Thou art my
Son this day have I begotten thee, did put this dignity upon him. Many
Interpreters have stretched their wits to make the literal sense of this
Psalmist's words reach home to our Apostle's purpose: Others so slight it as if
they would give us to understand or cause to suspect our Apostle himself did
not much stand upon it, but only pass by it unto the second testimony, Thou
art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech. Albeit in my opinion the
later testimony proves his fiat or Commission, the former his ordination or
execution of his Commission. I will not wrong the judicious Reader's patience
with profering variety of such expositors unto his choice as his wisdom cannot
approve. Cajetan has Ribera's approbation, and of all the expositors which
went before him draws the Psalmist's Oracle [ Thou art my Son this day have
I begotten thee] nearest to the point in question. So far I am from carping
at any thing which those two expositors have said to the point now in question,
that I will endeavor to explicate and extend their meaning in the best sort I
can. The Priesthood (says Cajetan, as Ribera expounds him) before the Law
given was annexed as a prerogative to the first borne, and descended from
Abraham to Isaac and by special dispensation to Jacob. Now the whole dignity
of the first borne being lost by Ruben was divided amongst three of his
Brethren. The Sovereignty or Principallity fell to Judah, the Priesthood to
Levi, and the double Portion to Ephraim. And in Aaron the son of Levi was the
Priesthood established long before the Kingdom was established in David the
son of Judah, and to the Priesthood so established David's sons had as little
right, as Aaron's sons had to the Crown or Diadem. God's peremptory decree
for thus dividing these two prerogatives, Azariah is not afraid to plead unto
King Vzziah's face. Chron. 2. 26. And his speech did take impression, for he
had no sooner made an end of speaking but the leprosy begun to appear in
King Vzziah's face; and for his usurpation of the Priest's office and intrusion
into the house of God; he is utterly excluded from his palace, and enforced to
resign the government unto his Son. But inasmuch as he, of whom the Psalmist
speaks, is solemnly registered and by him declared to be the first borne and
Son of God, it is not lawful only, but expedient, but very necessary that
all the branches of the first borne's prerogative which Ruben had scattered,
should be reunited in his Person. Again, in that he is the promised seed, he
is the complete heir of all the blessings bequeathed to Abraham, and out of
whatsoever tribe this promised seed was to spring, the honor of Priesthood was
as due unto him as the Kingdom. Levi and Aaron were but as foefes in trust for
conveying the Priesthood, as Judah and David were for making over the Kingdom
unto him.

3 All those suppositions and others (perhaps more then Cajetan or Ribera
though of) being granted prove only thus much, that the only begotten Son of
God, or first born to Abraham and to David had a just title to the eternal
Priesthood. They do not directly prove, that Jesus whom the Jews have
crucified to be that Son of God, and seed of David meant by the Psalmist in
the Psalm forecited: Or this being granted, all put together do not manifest
his Consecration or actual admission to the high Priesthood, by whose erection
the Priesthood of Aaron was changed, which is the conclusion punctually
intended by our Apostle.

4 For a more satisfactory declaration of the strength of this argument, we are
to take the words of the Psalmist into a further and more punctual
consideration then hitherto we had occasion to take them. As first, of what
GENERATION these words, ego hodie genuite, are principally meant, whether meant
at all of David, or how of him, and how of Christ the Son of God and Son of
David (...). Many of the Ancients being seconded by more of the Schoolmen, and
middle aged allegorizing Commentators, understand this Psalmist's Oracle of
that GENERATION of the Son of God which is mentioned in the NICEN Creed, or
that That is, the Constantinopolitane Creed.
Creed which is to be publicly read in the second service of our Church, [
Begotten of his Father before all worlds.] and in these men's construction by
the word HODIE is meant HODIE AETERNITATIS the day of eternity or eternal day
wherein there is no succession of parts of hours or minutes. But this
interpretation is disliked by Calvin who is always zealous for the literal
though sometimes with prejudice to the mystical or principally intended sense.
Yet that sense in this place cannot be expressed by HODIE AETERNITATIS, or by the
eternal Generation of the Son of God. That it cannot be the literal sense
of this Psalmist is apparent because neither the Resurrection of the Son of
God, nor his Consecration to the everlasting Priesthood can with any color of
probability be inferred or pretended from it: much less can it be the
mystical or true allegorical sense of this Oracle; for these always must be
grounded upon the literal, and no Scripture can be said to be fulfilled
according to the mystical or true allegorical sense until it has been first
verified according to the literal sense. Now the eternal GENERATION of the
Son of God cannot follow either his Resurrection from the dead, or his
Consecration to his everlasting Priesthood; nor could ever any Periphrasis or
notation of it be either fulfilled, or verified in time seeing it is before all
times.

5 May we say then with good Commentators as with Calvin for one, that these
words ( this day have I begotten thee,) have no manner of reference to the Son
of God's Generation before all worlds? Certain it is that this Generation is
no part of the object, no part of the immediate subject, (whether according to
the literal or mystical sense of the Psalmist's words) whether we consider
them written or intended by him, or as avouched by S. Paul and other Apostles
for the further confirmation of Christ's Resurrection from the dead. All that
can be said on their parts whom Calvin censures is this, that the eternal
GENERATION of the Son of God might be taken as a common notion or presupposed
truth, both by the Psalmist when he writ, and by the Apostle when he avouched
these words ego hodie genuite. That the Word or Son of God was from Eternity,
this was a common prenotion to all the Ancient learned or faithful Hebrews.
And that he who was the only begotten Son of God before all worlds should be
begotten by him from the dead, that is proved at large by S. Paul. Act. 13. And
that the raising of that Jesus the Son of David (whom the Jews had
crucified) from the dead unto immortal endless life was an authentic
declaration, that this Son of David was likewise the Son of God their
expected Lord and Messiah, is most sweetly deduced by our Apostle. Romans ^. v.
1. 2. 3. 4. Paul a Servant of Jesus Christ called to be an Apostle, separated
unto the Gospel of God. Which he had promised before by the Prophets in the
holy Scriptures concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord which was made of the
seed of David according to the flesh. And declared to be the Son of God with
power according to the Spirit of holiness by the Resurrection from the dead.
This passage rightly infers, that Christ was the Son of God, the uncreated Word
by whomall things were created before he was made the Son of David: ^^^ he was
made so only according to the flesh or humane nature; but this eternity of his
uncreated Person or essence was no part of our Apostles divine discourse or
most concludent argument* Act* ^3. Men and Brethren children of the stock of
Abraham* and whosoever among you fears God, to you is the word of this
salvation sent: For they that dwell at Jerusalem and their Rulers because they
know ^^^ not, nor yet the voice^ of the Prophets which are ^^^^ every Sabbath
day* they have fulfilled them in condemning him. And though they found no cause
of death in him* yet desired they* Pilat that he should be ^^^ine. And when
they had fulfilled all that is written of him they took him down from the
tree and laid him in a Sepulcher. But God raised him from the dead; and he was
seen many days of them which came up with him from Galileo ^^ Jerusalem, who
are his witnesses ^^to the people. And we declare unto you glad tidings, how
that the promise which was made unto the Fathers, God has fulfilled the same
unto us their children, in that he has raised up Jesus again as it is also
written in the second Psalm. Thou are my Son this day have I begotten the^*
And as concerning that he raised him up from the dead now no more to return to
corruption he said on this wise. I will give you the sure mercies of David*
from v. 26. to 34. For the clearer and fuller explication of this passage we
are to enquire what manner of testimonies or predictions in which the Apostle
instances, were; as whether prophetical only or typically prophetical.

6 To begin with the former; Ego hodie genui te, this day have I begotten thee,
that, with submission of my opinion to better judgments, is a prediction
typically prophetical, which kind of prediction as has been observed before
is the most concludent; and this one of the highest rank in that kind, that is
an Oracle truly meant of David according to the literal sense, and yet
fulfilled of Christ the Son of God by his Resurrection from the dead both
according to the most exquisite literal and the mystical or principally
intended sense. David without all question was the composer of the second
Psalm; and the joyful occasions or extraordinary matter of exultation which
raised his spirit to that high and majesticke strain of divine poesy, whereof
this and the eighteenth Psalm with some others bear lively characters, were
partly the triumphant victories which he had already gotten over the enemies of
Israel's peace and the confederators or conspirators against his Crown and
dignity; partly the glorious promises which through patient expectation of
deliverance he had obtained for the further establishment and advancement of
his throne, and the enlargement of his hereditary Kingdom. Before the
composition of the second Psalm he had the glorious and gracious promise of
which Ethan the Esrait so curiously descants. Psalm. 89. I will make him my
first borne higher then the Kings of the earth etc. Now it can be no solecisme
to say that he who in sacred language is instil'd the first borne should have
the title of the first begotten among the Princes of the earth. Seeing the
title of begetting is oftimes in sacred language to be measured not by the
scale of Philophes'^ or naturalist's dialect, ^ut of moral or civil language
or interpretation. For they that are sons by adoption only, or next heirs in
reversion to a Crown or dignity are said to be begotten of those which adopt
th^^, or of whom they be the immediate hears or successors* and in this sense
in the sacred genealogy Ieconiah is said to have begotten Salathiel. Mat. 1. 12.
So that David upon his own occasions (whether upon his anointing to the
Crown of Judah in H^^ron, or of Israel in Sion) might in the literal sense
avouch these words Psalm 2. of himself, I will preach the Law whereof the
Lord said unto me th^^ art my S^^t his day have I begotten thee.

7* For David to call the day of his Coronation, or of his design^ment unto the
Crown of Judah, or of all Israel, his birthday or begetting by God, by whose
special power and providence he was crowned, is not so harsh a phrase as some
happily would deem it, that either know not, or consider not that it was usual
in other states or Kingdoms beside Judah to celebrate* two n^tales dies, two
solemn (...) or birth-dayes in honor of their Kings and Emperors* the one
they called diem natalem imperatoris, the other diem natalem Inter alios
Scriptores de Die natali vide Martinu^ de Roa. Cap. 16. Suet in Calig. decretu^
autem, ut dies quo caepisset imperium, Palilia vocarentur, velut argumentum
rursus conditae urbis. Spartian. in Haedriano. Cor. Tacit. l. 2. Histor. de
imperio Augusti. etc.
imperij* The one the birthday of the Emperor whereon he was borne of his
natural Mother; the other the birthday of him as he was Emperor* which we
call the Coronation day. The reason might hold more peculiar in David then many
other Princes, because he was the first of all the seed of Abraham that took
possession of the hill of Sion, and settled the Kingdom of Judah
fore-phophecied of by his Father Jacob, upon himself and his posterity.

8* But whatsoever may be thought of David, or of his son; the day of our
Savior's Resurrection may be as truly and properly called the day of his
nativity, as the day wherein he was borne of the blessed Virgin Mary. This was
his birthday or nativity to his mortal life as he was the son of man, that
was the day of his nativity or begetting to immortality, the birthday of his
Kingdom and royal Priesthood. The most concludent testimony though least
observed by most Interpreters is that of the Apostle before mentioned See the
first Section of this Treatise Chap. 4.
Heb. 5. v. 4. No man takes this honor, to wit, of Priesthood, but he that
is called of God as was Aaron. So also Christ glorified not himself to be made
an high Priest, but he that said unto him, Thou art my Son to day have I
begotten thee, (It was he that did glorify him with this title) as he also
says in another place thou art a Priest forever after the order of
Melchisedech. The Apostles drift and meaning is, that our Savior did not
intrude himself into the Priesthood, but had as solemn a calling and
Consecration ^o it by God his Father as Aaron had to the legal Priesthood by
Moses. And he did deprecate his calling or Consecration to this Priesthood more
earnestly and fervently then any high Priest or Bishop did their Consecration:
Although they say, Episcopari nol^, they have no desire to be consecrated. But
sure our Savior spoke as he meant when he prayed unto his Father, Father if
it be possible let this cup pass from me* Now thus he prayed after God had
begun to anoint and bath him in his own blood unto the Priesthood after the
order of Melchisedech, as Moses had anointed Aaron with the blood of beasts
unto his legal Priesthood. And this place of our Apostle concludes the point
before handled, to wit, that our Savior did begin his Priesthood after the
order of Melchisedech from the day of his Resurrection, for upon that day was
the Psalmist's prophecy fulfilled; Thou art my Son this day have I begotten
thee.

9 The fulfilling of this Oracle (meant of David according to the literal)
according to the mystical sense in Christ Jesus the Son of David, is most
divinely expressed by S. Luke Acts 3. and 4. in which two Chapters many passages
above all others in this sacred history are worthy of serious and frequent
mediations, specially in respect of the circumstances of time and some other
occurrences. The holy Ghost as it is at large related Chap. 2. had been first
powered out upon Christ's Disciples a little before the ordinary time of the
morning's service or devotions at this solemn feast of Pentecost. And upon the
same day as it is very probable from the first verse of the third Chapter. Peter
and John went together unto the Temple at the hour of prayers being the ninth
hour, and bestowed a better alms upon a poor creeple then after many years
profession of that poor trade he durst presume to beg at their hands or pray
to God for.

10 The ungainsayable truth of the miracle wrought upon this creeple by Peter
and John (who, had they been as ambitiously minded as their examiners, might
have challenged the glory of it to themselves) did not so much grieve the
Priests and captains of the Temple with the Sadduces, as that upon this
occasion they taught the people and preached the Resurrection of the dead
through Jesus Christ, Chap. 4. ver. 2. 3. Upon this grief conceived at first
by some few there present, the next morning the high Priest with the whole host
of his assistants and kndred did injoyne these two Apostles, not to teach at
all, or speak in the name of Jesus; but upon that magnanimous reply, [ whether
it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto you more then unto God, judge
ye, ver. 19.] made jointly by Peter and John to the high Priest's and Elders
peremptory injunction, being let go they made report of the whole business
with the success, unto their own company, who, when they heard it, lift up
their voice to God with one accord and said, Lord, thou art God which have made
heaven and earth, and the Sea, and all that in them is; who by the mouth of thy
servant David have said, why did the heathen rage, and the people imagine a
vain thing? The Kings of the earth stood up, and the Rulers of the earth were
gathered together against the Lord and against his Christ. For of a truth
against thy holy child Jesus, whom thou have anointed, both Herod and Pontius
Pilate, with the Gentiles and the people of Israel were gathered together, for
to do whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel determined before to be done. Acts.
4. from verse 23. to 28. This joyful news thus brought by Peter and John did
raise the spirits of the other Disciples if not to prophesy as David had done,
yet to make a more lively expression or interpretation of his prophecy then
either he himself or any Prophet before our Savior's Resurrection could have
composed. As indignation sometimes will hammer out verses or rimes from wits of
duller metal: so extraordinary exultation or uncouth matter* of spiritual joy
will bring forth sacred hymns and poesies, or interpretations of Scripture
equivalent to the spirit of prophecy.

11 I cannot dismiss this testimony without some short paraphrase upon it, for
setting the parallel betwixt the Type and the body according to the rules
formerly delivered: Why do the heathen rage and the people imagine a vain
thing? The Kings of the earth set themselves, and the Rulers take counsel
together against the Lord and against his anointed. Psalm. 2. v. 12. All these
are truly and literally meant of David's affairs, for he had enemies both
amongst the people of Israel and among neighbor nations of the heathen, which
did oppose the flourishing estate or growth of his Kingdom which they feared
would bring their posterity unto subjection, Hence they said let us break
their bonds asunder, and cast their cords from us. v. 3. The same words
likewise a^e literally fulfilled of the Son of God in a more exquisite sense.
For as the Disciples mentioned Act. 4. express the fulfilling of this
prophecy, both Herod and Pontius Pilat with other Gentiles, and the people of
Israel were gathered together against him. Who was not only the anointed of the
Lord as David was but the Christ or Messiah (...). In those words following
likewise ver. 4. He that sits in the heaven shall laugh, the Lord shall
have them in derision, David had a peculiar interest, for they literally
refer to the defeates of malicious conspirators against David and his
Kingdom, and the good success which, notwithstanding those, he ascribes unto
the good providence of his God. v. 6. Yet have I set my King upon my holy hill
of Sion. Now there was no defeat either wrought or hoped for on David's part,
or on Salomon's his son which was not a true shadow and picture, (and no more
then so) of those strange defeates which HE, who then sat in the heavens, and
now sits there in our nature did bring upon all those which conspired against
the anointed of the Lord, the man, or as the Disciples call him, holy child
Jesus. Which description I take it referres unto him only whilst he was in the
form of a servant. By defacing this form they made him Lord. For albeit the
malicious and cruel plots of the high Priests to take away his life and fame
were so subtlely contrived, and so accurately executed as if they had continued
the Aaronicall Priesthood and bloody sacrifices to no other end and purpose
save only that they might become more cruel butchers or slaughter-men of the
anointed of the Lord, then their Predecessors had been of beasts or reasonlesse
sacrifices: Yet not he only, but the heavenly powers, Saints and Angels had
matter enough of joy and gladness to contemplate how the heathens, and this
worse then heathenish seed of Abraham could do nothing unto him, save that
which he that sat in the heavens would have to be done; albeit they did that
only which Satan would have them to do. They had consecrated themselves wholly
unto his service, and yet he that sits in the heavens made both their master
and them to be his instruments for accomplishing the Consecration of the Son of
David to his everlasting Priesthood and Kingdom.

CHAP. 32. The concludency of S. Paul's second Argument Act. 13. drawn from
the 55. of Isaiah.
THe second testimony avouched by S. Paul. Act. 13. v. 34. borrowed from Isaiah
55. v. 3. is for ought I can observe merely prophetical, or a vision: For
however the Prophet might take his rise from former Oracles concerning David,
yet his prophecy according to the literal sense could not be meant of any
person or party, either in the Prophets own time, or in the intermediate space
between his time and the exhibition of the seed promised to Abraham and to
David in our flesh, in whom alone, specially from the hour of his Resurrection
from the dead it was punctually verified, and once for all fulfilled, that is as
we say, begun to bear date, or be in essereali. The whole Chapter contains as
clear a prophetical vision of the exercise of Christ's prophetical and
sacerdotall function as any other passage of like quantity in all the writings
(now extant) of this Evangelical Prophet. The Readers whom the knowledge of
this great mystery most nearly concerns, may find more useful observations in
many learned Commentators upon that Chapter, then I dare either take upon me to
repeat or represent unto them, having resolved to insist upon no more then are
pertinent to the point now in hand, nor to touch upon any save only in the
passage to the third verse, thus the Chapter begins, Ho, every one that
thirsts come ye to the waters, and he that has no money, come ye buy and
eat, yea come buy wine and milk without money, and without price. Unto this
sacred Fountain of truth our Savior often directs his Auditor's, testifying
both by words and practices, that all these promises, or rather the blessings
here promised were actually exhibited in Him: as first those words of his in
the Sermon upon the Mount, Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after
righteousness for they shall be filled. v. 6. refer as punctually to this
place as to Esaias. 65. v. 13. Therefore thus says the Lord God, behold my
servants shall eat, but ye shall be hungry; Behold my servants shall drink,
but ye shall be thirsty; though punctually to that. But as the Prophet in this
place speaks, they were satisfied without any cost or charges, for he taught
the people without fee or reward, and declared himself to be not only the
inexhaustible Well and Fountain, but the bread and strength of spiritual
life, by his miraculous provision of bodily food for all such as did hunger and
thirst after his heavenly Doctrine. It follows in the second verse, Wherefore
do ye spend money for that which is not bread? And your labor for that which
satisfies not? Hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye that which is good,
and let your soul delight it self infatnesse. Upon these words our Savior
himself does paraphrase, John the 6. verse 27. Labor not for the meat which
perishes, but for that meat which endures unto everlasting life, which the
Son of man shall give unto you: For him has God the Father sealed. And again
ver. 32. 33. Then Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily I say unto you, Moses
gave you not that bread from heaven, but my Father gives you the true bread
from heaven. For the bread of God is he which comes down from heaven, and
gives life unto the world. And ver. 35. I am the bread of life, He that
comes to me shall never hunger: And he that believes on me shall never
thirst. In all these and the like passages, whether avouched by our Savior
himself, or by his Apostles after him, we are taught no other Doctrine then
the Prophet in his name, and by his spirit had taught the people. verse 3.
Incline your ear and come unto me, hear and your soul shall live, and I will
make an everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David. Was this
Covenant yet to make, being made before first with Abraham, then renewed with
David? The Apostle for conclusion tells us. Heb. 11. v. 39. Neither Abraham nor
any other of the Patriarchs or holy men, though in their generations renowned
for their faith, did receive the promise, and if not the promise, then not the
everlasting Covenant whereof the Prophet here speaks. What was that? The real
object of the Covenant or blessing promised. But if it be demanded what this
blessing promised was? It was Christ Jesus, not only as he was exhibited in the
flesh but raised from the dead; as is more largely declared in a treatise upon
v. 40. Chap. 11. to the Heb. to be annexed unto this present Treatise.

2 All this has been implied or intimated before in that of our Apostle Heb.
5. And being made perfect, he became the Author of eternal Salvation Is 55. 3.
to all them that obey him v. 9. that is (to reflect upon the Prophet Esay's
expression of this mystery,) to all that incline their ears unto him and
faithfully hear him. THE EVERLASTING COVENANT taken in this sense, that is for
the everlasting blessedness, or that degree of blessedness expressed in the
Gospel, is not actually made with any, none are real partakers* of it but
such as are true and lively members of Christ's body; such members of it as
Abraham and David were not, before the Son of God and the Son of David was
consecrated to his everlasting Priesthood and Kingdom.

3 According to the most strict and genuine sense of the Prophet and our
Apostle's interpretation of it, Christ Jesus being raised from the dead is the
very Covenant it self. For so the words of the Prophet, and our Apostle's
interpretation of them run verbatim, without any interruption or obliquitie
in construction; I will make an everlasting Covenant, to wit, the sure mercies
of David, or as the Latin more fully, misericordias illas stabiles Davidis.
That these words directly signify the Person of Christ and his benefits is
most clear from v. 4. Behold I have given him for a witness to the people, a
leader and commander to the people. So that Christ is called the sare mercies
of David, because in him and through him all God's promises or mercies promised
to David, are Yea, and Amen, that is, were actually performed, and made
everlasting not in promise only but in esse. Betwixt the Hebrew Text and the
seventy Interpreters, whose translation S. Paul in the forecited place does
follow, a mere Grammarian, or curious critic might observe some variation in
words, yet no difference or diversity in sense worthy the notice of a true
Linguist or rational Divine. The Apostle when he avoucheth this prophetical
Oracle Esaias. 55. 3. as a confirmation of the concludency of the former
testimony out of Psalm. 2. [ Thou art my Son to day have I begotten thee] omits
the first part of it [ I will make an everlasting Covenant with you], as being
fully contained in the later part, which is indeed an authentic exegeticall
exposition of the former, to wit, God's promise or Oath to give this people and
Nation in the time appointed, (...), that is, the holy and faithful things of
David, says our English. But the full and punctual expression of our Apostles
meaning will best appear from the manner how he inferres that conclusion which
he twice in this place avoucheth from the often mentioned place of the Prophet
Isaiah: For after that inference * v. 33. Thou art my Son this day have I
begotten thee, he adds Act. 13.
for confirmation v. 34. 35. And as concerning that he raised him from the
dead, now no more to return to corruption, he said on this wise, I will give
you the sure mercies of David. Wherefore he says also in another Psalm, ^
Thou shall not suffer* thine holy one Psalm. 16. 11.
to see corruption. The brief or extract of the Prophet Isaiah's meaning in S.
Paul's construction is this, THAT GOD BY RAISING UP CHRIST JESUS from the dead
never to die again did really exhibit, or actually perform that Covenant
made by Oath to David. Psalm. 89. ver. 28. My mercy will I keep for him for
evermore; and my Covenant shall stand fast with him, etc. and v. 35. Once have
I sworn by my holiness that I will not fail David, his seed shall endure
for ever, and his throne, (that is, not the successive throne of David but the
throne of David's SEED) as the Sun before me.

4 David in the days of his flesh did receive the the promise or Covenant if
you take it in the active or formal signification, as for promissio qua Deus
promitit, or pactum quo Deus paciseitur, but if we take this promise or
Covenant in the passive sense, id est, for the blessing promised or covenanted,
that was not performed till Christ was raised from the dead, and glorified, as
it follows Esaias. 55. v. 5. In this sense Zacharias calls the exhibition of the
promised Luke 1. 71.
seed though yet in the womb, the performance of the Oath which God had sworn
to give unto Abraham and his offspring. So that the word (...), the faithful
things of David is contradistinct not to dissimulation, or any suspicion of
faining in the promiser, but to the reversible or mutable state of the blessing
promised. It implies the immortality of the Son of David according to the
flesh, or the immutability of his holy Priesthood and Kingdom: Briefly the
word (...) is equivalent, and somewhat more then so unto the word (...) as it is
used by S. Peter. Epist. 2. Chap. 1. Give all diligence to make your calling
and election sure, or rather firm and strong v. 10. in which place the word
election must of necessity be taken not in the formal or active sense, but in
the passive material or real sense, not for electio qua Deus nos eligit, but
for the irreversible state in grace which is the effect of God's Election,
which estate is possible to be obtained in this life if we seek it as we
ought, and as the Apostle in that place does injoyne us. This distinction
betwixt the active and passive signification of the same words, since my first
entrance into the ministry, I ever wished heartily might have been, or yet be
taken into consideration by many in our days; by many who have skill abundant
as well in Logic as in the learned tongues etc. to deceive themselves, and
such as take their resolutions upon trust, but little skill to allay the
bitterness of contention, or comprimise many verbal differences very
comprimisible in themselves; and less will to exhort, instruct, reprove their
Auditors in the spirit of meekness, in points of necessary and useful
Doctrines, to set any Copy, or give any Character of Christian charity, either
by their Doctrine or practice.

5. And here I had set a period to this Chapter had not the discussion of the
former Questions Act. 13. called to my remembrance the saying of the same
Apostle. He that wrought effectually in Peter to the Apostleship of
Circumcision, the same was mighty in me toward the Gentiles. Galat. 2. v. 8.
Of which observation we have a lively document or experiment in the admirable
success of S. Peter's Sermon Act. 2. grounded for the most part upon the same
Text and arguments which S. Paul uses Act. 13. Three thousand souls were
converted by S. Peter, but all or most of them of the Circumcision or seed of
Abraham, his brethren according to the flesh; for unto them he directs his
speech v. 29. Men and Brethren etc. But with S. Paul's persuasions, though most
powerfully pressed upon them; few of the Jews or men of Israel, (unto whom in the
first place he tenders the fruits of his ministry (...), men and brethren,
children of the stock of Abraham,) were much taken: but of the proselites of
the gentiles to whom specially in the second place was directed, (...), that
is, and all such as are not the stock of Abraham, yet living amongst you, fear
the God of Abraham, scarce one that heard him but was overjoyed with his
discourse. Hence says S. Luke ver. 42. And when the Jews were gone out of the
Synagogue the Gentiles besought that these words might be preached to them the
next Sabbath. So many there were which were thus taken, that when the Jews saw
the multitudes they were filled with envy, and spoke against those things which
were spoken by Paul, contradicting and blaspheming. Then Paul and Barnabas
waxed bold and said, it was necessary that the Word of God should have first
been spoken to you; but seeing ye put it from you, and judge your selves
unworthy of everlasting life, lo, we turn to the Gentiles; for so has the
Lord commanded us. Act. 13. ver. 45. 46. 47. It were a point worthy the
discussion were it not extravagant from my present argument, How Paul and
Barnabas did deduce a necessity of command of preaching to the Gentiles upon
themselves from the words of the Prophet Isaiah. 49. 6. I have set thee to be a
light of the Gentiles, that thou should be for salvation unto the end of the
earth. The same command they might and no doubt did deduce from Isay 55. v. 4.
5. Behold I have given him for a witness to the people, a leader and commander
to the people. Behold thou shall call a Nation that thou know not, and
Nations that knew not thee shall run unto thee, because of the Lord thy God,
and for the holy one of Israel, for he has glorified thee. By the manner of
the Apostle's inference of deduction of command upon himself and Barnabas, the
Reader may easily inform himself that many things are undispensably enjoined
the ministers of the Gospel by force and virtue of the Old Testament, which
are neither expressed nor repeated in legal form throughout the New Testament.
Though not so repeated or expressed they may be concludently inferred by more
then analogy, by full equivalency to express legal commands. But this point
I shall commend to the serious consideration of some learned Divines who in the
just defense of orthodoxall Doctrines, which they are well able to maintain,
have engaged themselves to dispute in such matters as come in only upon the by.
Thus much we know in general, that we are enjoined to preach Christ crucified
and raised from the dead, as Paul and Barnabas did, submitting the success of
our labors unto him who has reserved the appointment of times and seasons, or
fitting opportunities to all occurrences unto himself; that Paul himself was
not taken at all with that most heavenly Sermon of S. Steven, with part of
which, or with some special arguments used by that blessed Martyr, he at the
time appointed won many thousand souls unto God.

CHAP. 33. That our Savior's departure, and passing out of this world to his
Father, or his entering into his Glory through afflictions was exquisitely
fore-shadowed by diverse solemnities in the legal passover, and by the
Israelites passing through the red Sea.
THough such testimonies of the Old Testament as are typically prophetical be
(as has been intimated in diverstreatises before) most pregnant proofs for
points of faith delivered in the Gospel: Yet this rule requires some
limitatio^, or some allowances to make it full current, the comparison betwixt
this and other sorts of testimonles must be secundum simpliciter ad
simpliciter; that is, The most clear and pregnant testimonies of this kind are
more exquisite then the most clear and pregnant of any other rank. But every
testimony of this sort is not more concludent and admirable then any testimony
of another rank; not more pregnant then some fore-significations of mysteries
to come, which are merely typical, or speak to us only in the Old Testament by
matter of fact. Of this rank was the type or sign of the Prophet Jonah; then
which there can be none more pregnant, in respect of the Article of Christ's
Resurrection, the force or concludency of it is warranted by our Savior's own
authority, and for this reason (happily) not insisted upon since by the Apostles
and Evangelists after his death, to whom it was all sufficient that he himself
had avouch'd it. But seeing this Type or sign implies diverse circumstances or
references as well to our Savior's Ascension as to his Resurrection, the
discussion of it shall be differed as the binding or coupling of this present
edifice. For finishing that part of it which concerns the Article of the
Resurrection only; the next inquisition must be how our Savior's passage to
immortal endless life through death was prefigured, or fore-typified by the
legal rites or solemnities of the passover, or feast of unleavened bread.

2 The occasion and first institution of the passover I doubt not every
ordinary Reader either knows, or will easily call to mind. It is set down
Ezod. 12. which is the first lesson appointed by the Church for the feast of
the Resurrection. The institution or occasion of it you have set down from
ver. 2. unto the 12. The meaning of the word, or quid nominis we have in the
12. v. It is the Lord's Passover for I will pass through the land of Egypt
this night and will smite all the first borne in the land of Egypt both man and
beast. And against all the Princes of Egypt I will execute judgment, I am the
Lord. And the blood (to wit, of the paschal Lamb) shall be to you for a token
upon the houses where ye are, and when I see the blood I will pass over you,
and the plague shall not be upon you to destroy you, when I smite the land of
Egypt. So then it is called the Passover because the Lord when he passed
through Egypt and visited every house with a fearful visitation he passed over
all the houses of the Israelites which lived amongst them, upon whose
door-poast the blood of the paschal Lamb was shed. Whether this visitation of
the Egyptians were held by some good Angel, or by that spirit or Angel whom
S. John calls (...) that is, as Moses Exodus 12. 23. entitles this visitor the
destroyer, I will not dispute; seeing it is certain the visitation or judgment
it self was the Lords. And by his appointment the visitor or executioner,
whosoever he were, good Angel or bad, one or more, was to pass over the
houses of the Israelites, as being exempted from his commission whilst he
smote the first borne of man and beast that pertained to any house of the
Egyptians. But at this present Passover wherein the Savior of the world
became a sacrifice, hell as we say, was broken up and let loose; the powers of
darkness were become as a raging Sea or swelling tide overflowing her banks,
and had wrought a more ruefull desolation upon all mankind, upon the face of
the whole earth, then the flood of Noah had done, unless by God's providence
they had been restrained. The flood in the time of Noah was a flood of waters
only, this was a stream of fire and brimstone, which the breath of the Lord
had kindled, unless his wrath had been appeased, and the flame quenched by the
blood of the paschall Lamb. The commission of the destroying Angel throughout
Egypt did extend no further then to the first borne of man and beast, and was
to endure but for one night, the powers of darkness did aim at all, and lie
in wait till the worlds end to devour all, whose hearts are not sprinkled with
the blood of this paschall Lamb, which was shed not for a few houses, but for
all. Every house in Israel was to have their several Lamb, or two houses at
the most could be privileged by the blood of one Lamb; but our paschall Lamb
as he was slain by the whole congregation of Israel, cried down to death by
the Priests, the Scribes and Pharisees, and the whole multitude; so his blood
was sufficient to redeem all the Israel of God from the Destroyer, even as
many throughout all ages and Kingdoms as will submit themselves unto his
Laws, and acknowledge him for their Redeemer. And for this reason he was
slain without the City, as a public sactifice in the open air. The Cross
whereto he was nailed was as the doore-posts of that house, of which he is the
Builder and Maker, that is, of the whole world it self. Now it is to be
presumed that the blood of that sacrifice which was to redeem and sanctify
all unto the worlds end, which seek Redemption and Sanctification by him,
should not be as blood spilt upon the earth which cannot be gathered up. As he
was to give life to others by his blood, so he was to give life to himself
again.

3 But is it imported in the institution of the Passover, or in any solemnity
belonging unto it, that the Lamb of God which was to take away the sins of
the world by his Death, should himself be restored unto life again? Yes. This
word Passover besides the former signification of passing over the houses of
the Israelites, has another fignification or importance, to wit, That all
those families which were privileged from the power of the destroying Angel
which smote the Egyptians, should pass out of the land of Egypt or house of
bondage through the red sea into the land of their rest and liberty, under the
conduct of Moses, who had the great Angel of the Covenant for his guide in
this passage. For the Reader's better apprehension how the mysteries of the
Gospel concerning our Savior's Passion and Resurrection were fore-shadowed in
the solemnity of the Passover, we are to consider that there is a twofold
sense of Scripture, the one literal, the other mystical: The literal sense
consists in the immediate or grammatical sense or signification of the words;
The mystical sense is that which the Facts or Persons immediately signified by
the literal or grammatical sense of the words, do fore-shadow. Thus by
Israel in the sacred story, sometimes Jacob the Father of the twelve Tribes,
sometimes the twelve Tribes themselves are literally meant. And Israel taken in
this sense is literally called the Son of God, but by this name Israel Christ
Jesus is mystically meant: He it is alone qui tanti mensuram nominis implet.
He it is which prevailed with God, and is more properly called the Son of God
then either Jacob or his posterity were. And that which according to the
literal sense was meant of Jacob's posterity; [ When Israel was a child then
I loved him, and called my Son out of Egypt. Hos. 11. 1.] was literally
fulfilled of Christin a more full and exquisite sense, as the Evangelist
instructs us. Math. 2. 15. For God called this his only Son out of Egypt,
literally taken, that is, out of the same land or Kingdom wherein Jacob's seed
had been sojourners, into the selfsame land of Canaan into which he had
brought them; so that every word in this prophecy is in the literal sense
truly verified as well of Christ as of Jacob's seed. But Egypt and Canaan
besides this literal sense and signification have a further mystical sense or
importance. The state of Israel or the Sons of Jacob in Egypt was a map or
shadow of our slavery and bondage unto the powers of darkness: Their passage
out of Egypt into the land of Canaan through the red sea, was a type of our
passage from the bondage of sin into the Kingdom of light, through the
region of death it self. Thus the paschall Lamb, literally taken, was a
picture of Christ's sacrifice upon the Cross; and so was Moses which
instituted the sacrifice, and conducted God's people out of Egypt but a shadow
of Christ: Ioshuah, or Jesus the Son of Nun which brought them into the land of
Canaan was no more. The great Angel of the Covenant which was with Moses, and
with Ioshuah as their guide and protector in this business was with the man
Christ Jesus in unity of person; and Christ Jesus is with us unto the worlds
end, as the Arc of the Covenant was with Moses and Ioshuah, or with the host
of Israel, to direct and support us in all our ways.

4 But is this passage from this vale of misery to a better life any where in
Scripture called a Passover? Or is it any part of the true meaning or
importance of this solemn feast? This mystery is unfolded by S. John 13. 1.
Now before the feast of the Passover (and it was but a day before) when Jesus
knew that his hour was come (...), That he should depart (as our English
renders it) or rather that he should pass out of this world unto his Father
having loved his own which were in the world, he loved them unto the end. Some
good Interpreters note an elegancy of speech in the original, or an allusion
unto the etymology of the Passover in Hebrew, as if in Latin he had said,
ante diem festum transitus sciens Jesus quia veniet hora ejus ut transeat: But
to my observation, wheresoever there is the like elegancy of speech or allusion
in the original, the elegancy is not affected for it self, as it usually is by
secular artists, but always denotes some mystery, or somewhat in the matter it
self, more useful to sober minds then any artificial elegancy of speech can
be to curious Artists. Now the mystery charactered unto us in that speech of S.
John, of Christ's passing out of this world unto his Father is this, to wit,
That the legal Passover which was instituted in memory of the Lord's passing
over the houses of the Israelites, and their passage out of Egypt through the
red sea did fore-shadow the passage of the Son of God out of this world wherein
he had lived in the state and condition of a servant, unto the land of his rest
and liberty; he therefore passed out of this world unto his Father, that in his
sight and presence he might obtain the liberty and prerogatives of the only
Son of God begotten of his Father before all worlds; but he therefore came
into this world that by his death and manner of departing out of it he might
open and prepare a passage for us out of this vale of misery. The land or
inheritance into which he passed is the inheritance of everlasting pleasure;
but the passage was on his part bitter and full of sorrow; yet this
notwithstanding he willingly endured for the love of his people: having loved
his own which were in the world, says the Apostle, he loved them to the end,
that is, he perfectly loved them which would not suffer him to forget them
when the hour of his bitter Passion approached, willing to suffer whatsoever
was laid upon him for their sake. And as Moses the night before the Israelites
passage out of Egypt did institute the Passover; so our Savior before his
passage out of this world, did institute this Sacrament or Supper, not only as
a memorial of his passage, but as a perpetual pledge of his peculiar
presence, for conducting all such as believe on him, and to be a vejand or
viaticum to strengthen and comfort all such as resolved to follow him as the
Israelites did Moses. Again as Moses instructed the Israelites in the Laws
and rites of the Passover before they eat it; so our Savior gave
instructions by precept and example for our due preparation unto this service.
The precepts are generally two; Humility, which he taught by his example in
washing his Apostles feet. ver. 13. to the 17. The second, Love, ver. 34. ver.
35. A New Commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another as I have
loved you; that ye also love one another, by this shall all men know that ye
are my Disciples if ye love one another.

CHAP. 34. The Resurrection of the Son of God, and the effects or issues of his
birth from the grave were concludently fore-pictured by the Redemption of the
firstlings of the flocks, and of the first borne males, and by the offerings
of the first fruits of their corn.
But was the legal sacrifice of the Paschal Lamb the only solemn memorial
either of the Lord's passage over the houses of the Israelites in Egypt, or of
the Israelites passage out of Egypt through the red Sea? Are all the mysteries
of the Gospel which immediately concern our Savior's Resurrection and
passage out of this mortal life to an immortal to be referred unto this one
legal Type or model? Is this the only scale by which we are to measure it?
No, the feast of the Passover was an anniversary, kept but once a year,
whereas the Lord would have as well the deliverance from the destroying Angel
in Egypt, as their deliverance from the host of Pharaoh to be often imprinted
in their memories; and their impressions to be renewed upon several and
frequent occasions. To this purpose was that precept concerning the first borne
directed to Moses before their passage out of Egypt. Exodus 13. 1. The Lord
spoke unto Moses saying, sanctify unto me all the first borne whatsoever
opens the womb among the children of Israel both of man and beast, it is
mine: and again ver. 11. 12. of the same Chap. Every first-ling of their
herds or flocks is expressly marked out for the Lord, with the stamp or
character of the Passover. And it shall be that when the Lord shall bring thee
to the lands of the Canaanites that thou shall cause to pass over unto the
Lord all that open the matrix, and every first-ling of the beast which thou
have, the male shall be the Lords, and every firstling of an ass thou shall
redeem with a Lamb, and if thou will not redeem it, then thou shall break
his neck and a^^ the first borne of man amongst thy children thou shall
redeem. The reason of this Law is given ver. 14. and 15. to wit, because the
Lord by strength of hand had brought them out of Egypt after he had slain the
first borne of Egypt both of man and beast, therefore they were to sacrifice
unto the Lord all that opened the matrix being males: But the firstborn of
their children they were to redeem; yet these, as all other legal rites and
sacrifices, had a double aspect or reference: The one to the first occasion of
their institution, which is here literally expressed; the other to fore-shadow
somewhat to come by the legal service or institution. The mystery
fore-shadowed by the legal sanctifying, or sacrificing the firstborn males
unto the Lord was the expectation of a firstborn male, by whose Consecration
or passing over unto the Lord, all these and the like legal ceremonies should
once for all be accomplished, and their children fully sanctified and redeemed.
That these legal services taken at the best could be no more then shadows of
good things to come, common reason might have taught this people: for seeing
the first-lings of the herds though offered in sacrifice unto the Lord, could
not sanctify the use of their flocks unto them, but the use of every dumb
creature was to be sanctified unto them, by a sacrifice of one of the same
kind; (As the use of their Lambs or Sheep was to be hallowed by the sacrifice
of a firstling-male Lamb, and so the goats by the firstling-male kid, and
their oxen and cattle by the sacrifice of the firstling calves or bullocks;)
who could in reason expect that the sacrifice of a Lamb, of a Kid, of a
Bullock, or any other dumb creature should be a sufficient price for the
Redemption of their first borne males, or able to sanctify or consecrate both
male and female in their several families unto the Lord; He that sanctifies
Heb. 2. 11.
and they that are sanctified are all of one, says the Apostle. Men were to be
redeemed and sanctified by man, and if the first borne male in every family had
been sacrificed for the rest, this would have made no satisfaction, no
sanctification, seeing the first born was by nature as unclean as the rest,
and every dumb creature which was by Law unclean, and could not be
sacrificed, was to be redeemed by the sacrifice of a firstling-male which was
by its kind clean; as the ass because it was by its kind unclean was to be
redeemed, that is, the use of it was to be sanctified or made lawful unto its
owner, by the sacrifice of a firstling Lamb.

2 But who amongst all the first borne of women was in his kind or by nature
clean? Not one besides the Son of the blessed Virgin, who was likewise the
only Son of God. It is he alone that was to redeem and sanctify the rest of
mankind; which were all by nature unclean: And with reference to the former
Law our Apostle instiles him primogenitus omnis creatura, the first borne of
every creature. Coloss. 1. 15. Now though it be most true that Christ was
before all things, that all things were created by him whether visible or
invisible, that all things consist by him as he is the only Son of God,
begotten of his Father before all Worlds, yet this is not the true and full
meaning of that most sacred maxim Est primogenitus omnis creature, he is the
first borne of every creature. One part of the Apostle's meaning in that
admirable passage. 1. Coloss. 13. to the 20. is, that unless Christ had been
the Son of God from eternity, all fullness could not have dwelled in him; nor
could he have had pre-eminence in all things which the Apostle there mentions.
Another part of the Apostle's meaning there, is, that in the same Christ as
man, it pleased God that all fullness should dwell; and that as man he should
in all things have the pre-eminence, and in as much as all fullness dwells in
him as man, and that in all respect he has pre-eminence, he is likewise as man
the firstborn of every creature; that is, all the prerogatives which the
firstborn males had before the after-borne or females, are contained in his
prerogative and fullness as man. Now as the firstborn males amongst the
offsprings of dumb creatures did sanctify all the rest of the same kind: So
Christ as man does sanctify all things, make all things acceptable unto God
which are capable of sanctification or acceptance: As man likewise he had all
the prerogatives of the firstborne in the families of the Patriarchs which were
especially two: The Priesthood and the principality or civil dominion over
their brethren and posterity. For Christ as man is made both King and Priest;
and albeit Abraham, Isaac, and the Patriarchs, and Melchisedech who blessed
Abraham were both Kings and Priests over their families and children; yet these
prerogatives they had by a solemn right derived from him which was to come,
who was to be a Priest after the order of Melchisedech* Again in respect of
the character of the first borne male, or of that which gave it the prerogative
of the afterborne he has the pre-eminence, for he opened the womb or matrix
in such a manner as no creature had done or shall do after him; for he was
made true man and truly borne of a woman, yet not begotten by any man. And
albeit Melchisedech, Abraham and David were dead long before he was conceived
by the holy Ghost; long before he was born or made man of a woman though he be
truly enstiled the seed of Abraham and the Son of David, which for this
reason were of necessity to be before him: Yet this precedence was a precedence
only of time, a precedence in respect of this mortal and miserable life. In
respect of that better life he has the precedence even of time; for he is the
Father of the World to come, and as our Apostle has it 1. Coloss. 18. He is
the first borne, or first begotten from the dead; that in all things he might
have the prehemi, nence.

3 Christ by his divine Power had raised the widows son of Naim, and his
friend Lazarus; the one some two years, the other but a few days before, from
death to life: but neither of them, nor any before them which had been so
raised could be truly said to be begotten from the dead, but rather begotten to
die again; for to be borne and begotten from the dead includes an everlasting
freedom from the power or approach of death, as it is in the hymn for the
morning prayer upon Easter day. Christrising again from the dead now dies
not, death from henceforth has no power upon him. According to this notion or
importance of primogenitus ex mortuis, of being the first borne, or first
begotten from the dead, Christ has the prehe minence every way; he was the
first in order of time, and was raised from death to an endless life. He was
the only prime in respect of power or causalitie; whosoever thus has been, or
shall be raised or begotten from death to an immortal life is thus raised and
begotten by virtue of Christ's Resurrection. Albeit the souls of Abraham of
Moses and David etc. were before this time seated in bliss: Yet were not their
bodies so much as capable of dowry o^ jointure with them, in the state of
bliss before such time as the Son of God was thus begotten from the dead;
yea might the souls of those and other righteous men have looked upon their
bodies o^ relics in the dust they would have loathed their company and
abhorred cohabiration with them as being things polluted and unclean.

4 How clean or well winnowed soever the corn were before it was sown; yet
the offspring of it after it dyed in the ground was unclean. The use of green
ears was not lawful unto this people, until the first fruits were offered up
unto the Lord. In like manner albeit Abraham, Moses, and David were justified
whilst they lived in the flesh, even sanctified persons through belief in
Christ which was to come: Yet their bodies were to inherit their Father Adam's
curse. Dust thou art, and unto dust thou shall return. Subject they were to to
corruption, altogether incapable of incorruption or immortality until their
expected Messiah became their first fruits for them. Christ says our Apostle
1. Cor. 15. 20. is risen from the dead and become the first fruits of them that
sleep, for since by man came death by man came also the Resurrection of the
dead. So generally true is that of the Apostle, that which sanctifies, and
that which is sanctified are both of one, that is both of one kind. Heb. 2. And
in this sense that saying of S. Ambrose which some in later ages have much
quarrelled, is most true. [ When thou had overcome the sharpness of death
thou did open the Kingdom of heaven to all believers.] The body of no Saint
was capable of entrance into the Kingdom of heaven before this time. None
could be consecrated unto this service before the Consecration of the high
Priest himself which was not accomplished till he was begotten from the dead,
and made the first fruits of them that sleep.

5 Briefly to mould up the scattered or dispersed notions in this and some
other former treatises; how the fullness of all things which were fore-shadowed
in the feast of the Passover with its rites did as our Apostle says dwell in
Christ, or how in all things he the pre-eminence: First he is in the literal
and most exquisite sense, the Israel of God, the Son of God which was to pass
out of this world unto his Father. Secondly he was the true Paschall Lamb
which was slain for our deliverance from the destroyer, and for our safety in
this our passage from this world into a better. Thirdly he is the real Moses
that must conduct us, for he was conductor unto Moses. Fourthly he is the first
borne of every creature, which by his sacrifice did sanctify all the rest and
make them acceptable unto God. Fifthly he is the firstborn or first begotten
from the dead; the first fruits of them that sleep, that is, he by whom such
as sleep in death and inhabit darkness, shall be made meet to be partakers
of the inheritance of the Saints in light as well in their bodies as in their
souls.

SECT. 6. He Ascended into Heaven.
CHAP. 35. How the Ascension of the Son of God was presigured by the
translation of Enoch, and by the taking up of Elias; And foretold by the
Psalmist. Psalm. 15. and Psalm. 24.
THE Son of God in the day of his sufferings as he was man did ascend in soul
into that Paradise, into which the souls of Patriarchs, of Prophets, with the
souls of holy and just men that dyed immediately after him, or at the same
time with him, were admitted. And on that day at least before the dawning of
the next which was the Sabbath he consecrated the celestial Sanctuary or
Paradise with his own blood. But his Ascension into Paradise, what part soever
of Heaven that were, on that day, is not the Ascension mentioned in our Creed:
For when it is said, HE ASCENDED into Heaven, this must be understood of his
Ascension thither in body which was forty days after his Resurrection from the
dead. And into Heaven, or that part of Heaven mentioned in our Creed he did
not then ascend only as an high Priest, but also as King of Heaven and earth.
The Day of his Ascension as was In the fourth Sect. of this Book Chap. last.
mentioned before was the day of his solemn enthronization.

2 The manner of his Ascension is punctually related, specially by the
Evangelist S. Luke in the last Chapter of his Gospel, and in the first of the
sacred history of the Acts of the Apostles. The special quaerees concerning
his or other Evangelicall or Apostolical avouchments of his Ascension are but
two: The first how that which they historically relate or avouch was
fore-pictured: The second how or by what Prophets foretold in the sacred
Writings of the Old Testament. And these two quaeries must be discust not by
dichotomy, or by way of opposition, but either severally or promiscuously as
the Texts of the Old Testament shall minister occasion.

3 The Ascension of this just and holy one, of the great Prophet promised by
Moses was first prefigured by the translation of Enoch which was long before
the Law was given, long before Moses was borne. But of Enoch's translation
little can be said upon sure grounds, or by just warrant of Scripture: Only this
we know from authentic testimonies that he was an holy man and one that
pleased God; A man both in life and in his translation from this life unto a
better, who did truly fore-shadow him in whom alone God was, and is, and ever
will be best pleased.

4 The manner of Eliah's Ascension or rather of his being taken up from earth
into heaven, or to a far better place then earth, was more visible and more
conspicuous, and the time of his taking up more publicly known, then the
time or manner of Enoch's translation was: He was taken or carried up out of
Elishah's sight who with many others did expect the time and day of his
translation, in a fiery Chariot; a fit emblem of Eliah's prophetical spirit
always burning with zeal toward the service of God, even to the destruction
of the enemies of it, or disturbers of the peace of Israel. Our Savior did
rather ascend in a Cloud then was taken up by it, albeit taken by it out of
their sight which saw him ascend from earth to heaven: The cloud it self in
which he did ascend being an emblem of his sweet and mild spirit, of those
gracious lips which did always distill words of mercy and love, allaying the
terrible heat and fervency of Eliah's, and other Prophets spirits which had
foretold his first coming into, and his going out of this world, and his
second coming to judge it.

5 Two illustrious predictions of his Ascension we have Psalm. 15. and Psalm. 24.
but whether the one or both of these Psalms which illustrate or confirm the
truth of the Evangelicall story, be merely prophetical, or typically
prophetical, or mixed, id est, thus literally verified in the Psalmists
themselves, or Penmen of these hymns, and afterward mystically fulfilled in
Christ, is more then I dare peremptorily either affirm or deny. Most probable
it is that the Author of the 15th Psalm. which doubtless was David himself did
pen his own part, and exercise his hopes and interest in the future Ascension
of his Son and Lord, of which he had a present pledge or token by his late
restitution into the tabernacle of the Lord from which he had sometimes been
excluded, not for any crime or demerite, nor by any Ecclesiastical censure of
excommunication or suspension, but by secular violence of hostile persecution:
During the time of his exile from the tabernacle he or the sons of Chorah
for him, uttered those patheticall complaints. How amiable are thy tabernacles
thou Lord of hosts. My soul longs, yea even faints for the Courts of the
Lord: My heart and my flesh cries out for the living God. Yea the sparrow has
found an house, and the swallow a nest for her self, where she may lay her
young, even thine Altar O Lord of hosts my King and my God. Blessed are they
that dwell in thy House, they will be still praising thee. Psalm. 84. ver. 1. 2.
etc. and again ver. 9. Behold O God our shield; and look upon the face of
thine anointed. After his restitution to his former freedom the kingly Prophet
out of his consciousnesse of his own integrity and righteousness of the cause
for which he was persecuted by Saul and by others, frames these divine
characters of such as have interest in the blessings prefigured by free resort
unto the service of the Tabernacle, or of the Temple (whose erection perhaps
was in his project) when he composed this 15th Psalm. Who shall abide in thy
Tabernacle, or who shall abide in thy holy hill? This Question he proposes to
Jehovah the Lord himself desirous to be instructed by him in this great
mystery before he took upon him to instruct others in it. And he receives this
answer, He that walks uprightly, and works righteousness, and speaks
the truth in his heart ver. 2. and thus concludes, he that does these things
shall never be moved. Which last words could not be exactly fulfilled of the
Tabernacle, which it self was moveable: None but men so qualified as the
character of the Psalm imports, had any just title or sure hope to be
perpetual partakers or inheritors of the blessings or comforts of this life
which did attend the true service of the Tabernacle much less of the eternal
blessings of the heavenly sanctuary. The ungodly and profane persons of those
times, or men tainted with the contrary vices unto those good qualifications
which he there requires, however they might by extraordinary mercies fare de
facto, did always de jure, or by the ordinary course of God's Justice forfeit
their interest in the blessings promised to sincere observants of the Laws of
the Tabernacle.

6 So that this 15th Psalm for its literal sense is a fuller expression of the
matter contained in the first Psalm, or a more lively character of the
blessings there promised. Now in as much as the Tabernacle whilst it was
moveable in the wilderness, whilst it was pitched in Shiloh, or in the Temple
it self erected by Solomon on Mount Sion, was but a Type or Figure of that
heavenly Sanctuary which God by his own immediate hand has pitched.
Whatsoever was literally meant or verified of the first Tabernacle or Temple,
and of the visible Founders of them, or sincere resorters to them, was in the
mystical sense verified of the heavenly Sanctuary, and of the invisible
Founder of it, Christ Jesus the Son of God who did consecrate it with his own
blood, into this holy Temple. He alone could enter by the sacrifice of
himself, he alone had right to dwell in it; but through his mediation and
intercession all such as follow the Psalmist's directions in that Psalm, which
are indeed the immediate precepts of God himself, are admitted to be partakers
of those joys which by right, as we said, belong to the holy one of God alone,
as all the faithful people during the Law were partakers of the sacrifices and
services of the Temple, though these were to be performed by the high Priest
alone; further, in as much as none besides the promised seed of David, or
David's Lord, could exactly perform, or solidby express the qualifications in
that Psalm required; none but he could have just right or ti^tle to enter
into that most holy Sanctuary whereof the sanctum sanctorum, or holy of holies
was but the model, nor ascend into that holy Mount whereof the hill o^ Sion was
at the best, but the footstool or lowest step to it. Into this Sanctuary the
Son of God our high Priest had better right to enter, more absolute authority
to ascend the royal throne in what part soever of heaven seated, then the high
Priest of the Law had to enter into the sanctum sanctorum, or Sanctuary within
the veil; into which he was to enter but once a year; nor might he then
admit any (...) or attendants to go in with him. But into this heavenly
Sanctuary, into which our hopes (even in this life) do enter, Christ Jesus (as
says the Apostle) is gone before us, being made an high Priest for ever after
the order of Melchisedech, and by verme of this Priesthood he has full power
and authority to consecrate us to be Kings and Priests unto God, even all us
that feel^^ to express the characters of the Psalmist's blessed man by
sanctity of life toward God, and syncerity of conversation amongst men.

6 That by the Tabernacle or holy hill mentioned Psalm. 15th the heavenly
Sanctuary whereinto our high Priest is entered, is principally intended
according to the mystical sense, besides the conclusion of that Psalm, the
close of the 24th Psalm makes it more clear. The Question and Answer proposed
and made by this Psalmist, is the same (but more distinct) with that mentioned
15. Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? And who shall stand in his holy
place? He that has clean hands, and a pure heart; who has not lift up his
soul to vanity, nor sworn deceitfully. He shall receive the blessing from
the Lord, and righteousness from the God of his salvation. ver. 3. 4. 5. Psalm.
24. But there follows another remarkable Question twice proposed in words
altogether the same; and twice answered in the same words for equivalency of
sense, with a preface most majesticke; Lift up your heads O ye gates, and be
ye lift up ye everlasting doors, and the King of Glory shall come in. ver.
7. The Question follows ver. 8. Who is this King of Glory? Sure neither David
who composed this Psalm, nor Solomon his son, but Jehovah potens in bello.
Jehovah the strong and mighty Lord, puissant in in battle. ver. 8. But least
his posterity should not be so observant of these mysteries as was befitting,
immediately after the reiteration of the former preface, Lift up your heads O
gates etc. and of the same Question, Who is the King of Glory, he resolves us
somewhat more fully then before, ver. 10. Jehovah exercituum ipse est rex
gloriae, the Lord of hosts he is the King of Glory, and concludes the whole
Psalm with Selah, which, as to my remembrance has been observed before, is
not only a musical note or modulation of the tone in singing, but a character
of some peculiar matter or mystery in the ditty, deserving attentive meditation.

7 Upon the matter then, or reckoning rectaratio being admitted Judge, this
Psalmist by King of Glory and Lord of hosts means the same Lord, and no other
then whom in the beginning of this divine hymn he had acknowledged supreme
Lord and Creator both of sea and land. The earth is the Lords, and the fullness
thereof; the World and they that dwell therein, for he has founded it upon the
seas (that is in such a sense as we say towns and cities are situated upon
the rivers on whose banks they stand) and established it upon the flood. ver.
1. 2. Yet may we not deny that this Psalm may literally refer to the
bringing in of the Arc into the hill of Sion, and to the exhortation of the
Psalmist to admit and entertain it as the feat of the King of Glory, God
blessed for ever. But this literal sense does no way prejudice, but rather
strengthen the force of their argument who hence conclude the deity of the Son
of God then admitted in triumph into the hill of Sion (or the Tabernacle
pitched in it) according to his divine nature only; this triumphant admission
being a sure pledge or earnest of his future admission into his heavenly
Sanctuary, the place of his everlasting residency as Lord and Christ in our
nature. No man who acknowledges or rightly esteems the authority of the
Psalmist, unless abundance of wit has besplitted his understanding, can
imagine that the King of Glory whom the Psalmist here mentions should be any
other party or person besides the Son of God Christ Jesus, whom the Jews (when
he came to the material Temple or Tabernacle wherein his divine nature did in
peculiar manner reside) did not entertain in such manner as David enjoined
their Forefathers to entertain the Arc of his presence. They would not
acknowledge him to be their Messiah because they knew him not, nor the
Scriptures which did foretell this his coming. For as our 1. Cor. 2. 8.
Apostle with special reference to the words of this Psalmist te^s us, had
they known him to be that Lord of Glory unto whose honor David consecrated
this hymn, they would not have crucified him. But by crucifying, or rather by
his humiliation of himself unto the death of the Cross, he was consecrated as
man unto his everlasting Priesthood, and made both Lord and King of Glory.

CHAP. 36. At what time, and upon what occasions th 68 Psalm was composed.
What reference it has (in the general) unto our Savior's Ascension.
ANother Psalm there is appointed by the wisdom of the ancient and continued
by the discretion of the English Church even since the first reformation, to be
read or sung as a proper hymn to the festival of our Savior's Asoension. A
Psalm full of mysteries and divine raptures apt to enkindle our hearts with
zeal and admiration, could we find out, or rightly seek after either the
historical occasions which ministered the matter or ditty of this divine song,
or the several parts of Scripture unto which most passages in it according to
the literal or historical sense do respectively refer. The occasion of
composing the Psalm, to wit, 68. Some Jewish Rabbis conjecture to have been
that glorious victory which Ezekiah, or rather the Lord of hosts in Ezekiah's
days, got over Senacherib and his mighty army. But the most of the more
judicious Christian Commentators with greater probability or discretion,
refer the occasion of composing this Psalm to that solemn translation of
the Ark of God from Kyriath Iearim into Mount Sion at large described 2. Sam.
6. David gathered together all the chosen men of Israel, thirty thousand. And
David arose and went with all the people that were with him from Baal of Judah,
to bring up from thence the Ark of God whose name is called by the Lord of
hosts, that dwells between the Cherubbims, or at which the name even the
name of the Lord of hosts was called upon.

2 This later opinion is in it self perswasible, or rather deserves full
credanee from the first words of the Psalm, Let God aris^, let his enemies be
scattered, let them also that hate him flee before him. ver. 1. These were
verba solemnia the accustomed solemn form of prayer used so often as the Arc
of the Covenant (which was to this people the most authentic pledge of God's
peculiar presence and protection, and for this reason called by his name) did
remove from one place to another during their pilgrimage in the wilderness.
And they departed from the Mount of the Lord three days journey: And the Arc
of the Covenant of the Lord went before them in the three days journey to
search out a resting place for them: and the Cloud of the Lord was upon them by
day when they went out of the Camp. And it came to pass when the Arc set
forward that Moses said, rise up Lord and let thine enemies be scattered, and
let them that hate thee flee before thee? And when it rested he said Return O
Lord unto the many thousands of Israel. Numb. 10. ver. 33. 34. 35. 36. Moses
prayed conceptis verbis that God would arise and take part with his people.
David out of the fresh experience of God's mighty protection over him, his
subjects, and allies so long as they worshipped him in truth and syncerity, in
this symbol of his presence, seems to utter Moses song rather by way of
congratulation for victories already gotten then by way of instant prayer for
present assistance; A great part of this most divine, most sublime ditty, is a
recapitulation of the glorious victories which the God of Israel had purchased
for his people, and upon their deliverance out of Egypt, and their other
peculiar protections, or succors which private men or women in their distress
had found, when they were helpless in the sight of men, or oppressed by their
neighbors; Sing unto God, sing praises to his name, extol him that rides
upon the heavens by his name Iah, and rejoice before him. A Father of the
fatherless and a Judge of the widows is God in his holy Habitation. God
sets the solitary in families, he brings out those that are bound in
chains, but the rebellious dwell in a dry land. ver. 4. 5. 6. The verses
following refer to the public deliverance out of Egypt, and the majesticke
apparitions about Mount Sinai: O God when thou wentest forth before thy people,
when thou did march through the wilderness, the earth shook, the heavens
also dropped before the Lord, even Sinai it self was moved at the presence of
God the God of Israel etc. 7. 8. Some good Interpreters here observe that the
Arc itself is called Jehovah, or the Lord God of Israel by the same form of
speech that the sacrament all pledges are called, the one the Body, the other
the Blood of Christ.

3 Now the sweet singer of Israel was confident that the God of their Fathers
would be as gracious to himself, to his people, and their successors, after he
came to dwell in Mount Sinai, as he had been to Moses and Ioshun in the
wilderness, ^or unto Samuel while the Taber nacle was in Shiloh or elsewhere,
either in motion or pitched. Hence sprung those encomiasticall expressions
throughout the Psalm of the glory of Mount Sion not so much for its native
situation, (though that were glorious,) as for that it was now become the
pedestall to the Arc wherein Jehovah, or Iah kept his residence. The hill of
God is as the hill of Bashan was a goody hill-Country, and graced with glorious
victories over Og the King of that region, unto which and the deliverance from
Pharaoh and his host, these passages in this Psalm do literally allude.
Bashan, an high hill as the hill of Bashan, Why leap ye, ye high hills?
This is the hill which God desires to dwell in, yea the Lord will dwell in it
for ever. ver. 15. 16. Yet all these glorious hopes or hoped promises
prophesied of in this Psalm, are to be interpreted according to the rules
before observed upon Psalm. 89. Many of the blessings hoped for and
fore-prophesied were meant according to the literal sense, of David himself
and his posterity, yet but conditionally true of them; absolutely,
irreversibly, and everlastingly true only of David's son or seed (...), that
is, of that God and Lord who in the fullness of time was to be enclosed in the
Virgins womb, and to have his everlasting habitation in the fruit of her
body, after a more admirable and peculiar manner then he resided in the Ark,
when David brought it unto the hill of Sion. He is often said indeed to dwell
in the Arc and in the Temple, but never so did dwell in them in such a sense
as our Apostle describes his habitation in the man Christ Jesus, (...) bodily,
or as Chemnitius renders it, by personal residence.

4 For the encomiasticall part of the 68. Psalm. sofarre as it concerns mount
Sion, Jerusalem, or Judah, the Reader may find a paraphrasticall exposition to
it Psalm. 48. which was composed after this, and as it is most probable in the
days of Iehosaphat. For any paraphrase or Comment upon that Psalm, I leave
the learned Reader to his own choice: I would only commend one passage of Haec
sunt ipsa Calvini verba: Propheta fitum and pulchritudinem Ierosolymae
commendat, acsi diceret, (...) esse optime munitam and inexpug^abilem: quia
aliqua ex part in his externis not is fulgebat Dei benedictio. Qu^^quam
memoria renendum est, quod pri^^ dixit, Deum in eius palatiis concpici in
arcem: Ne^ enim turre^ vel muru^ nunc commemorans, vult pio^u^ mentes in i^^is
(...), sed pot^^^ speculum proponit quod Dei faciem representet: Circundate
ergo Sion inquit, hoc est, attente circumspicite* Numerate turres, and studium
vestrum applicate ad considerandum murum eius: aestimate pro dignitate palatia
eius. Ita facile constabit urbem esse (...) electam; quia long supra alias
omnes emine at Nam in hec totos is it ut appareat qualitas illa and persons qud
Dominus Ierosolymam induerat, eam ^^^i in sacrarium and in domicilium popula
suo (...) Caeterum Propheta finem notando, ut narretur poster is forma and
splendour urbis (...), tacit innuere videtur venturum aliquando tempus quo non
ampliu^ peter it conspici. Quor sum e^im narratio in re manifesta and ante
^^^sos posita? Quanquam e^go (...) dixit, urhem illam perpetuo stabilitam esse,
nune per modum correction ^^ admenet qualis futura sit perpetuitas, nempe quae
ad renovationem duntaxat E^clesi^ ^^tet. Nos enim sumus illa posteritas ad quam
pertinet ac dirigitur narratio: Quia quac^^^ (...) Deas beneficia contulit,
nobis communia sunt: Non quod splendour ille externus, quo admirabilis fuit
Ierosolyma, hodie inter nos emineat, sed quia spiritualibus donis non minus
splendide ornata fuit Ecclesia post exhibitum Christum, quam oli^ (...) and
(...) instructa lerusalem sub legis (...) is, Calvinus in 13. ver, Psalm. 48.
Calvin's Comments upon it, which an ingenuous censurer of this great Dr when
he treads awry or speaks harshly, but a more friendly encomiast of him when
he goes aright, has commended to me, upon the close of that Psalm: Walk
about Sionand go^ round about her, tell the towers thereof. ver. 12. etc.
Argutum simul and solidu^ est, and diligenter not^ndum, quod hic ^alvinus
auguratur and interpretatur de excidio urbis and Templi, ut splendore^ Templi
narrent posteritati. Non opus erat auditu and narratione ^i visibus humanis
semper p^tuisset. Narrantur posteritati qu^ non exhibentur, veluti, quotidi^^^
^^^cula and spectacula. ^op. in v. 14. This commendable observation upon the
48. Ps. makes a speech of this same Calvi^ upon the principal passages of the
68. Psalm. more harsh and distastful to this inge^^o^s censurer, and to others
which have their senses exercised in the interpretation of prophecies,
especialy such as are alleged by the Apostles or Evangelists. So was the Thou
have ascended on high, thou have led captivity captive. Coppen, in v. 19.
19 v. of this Psalm urged by S. Paul to prove our Saviors Ascension. Ephesians.
4. Calvinus ait: Paulus locum hunc subtilius ad Christum deflectit; mallem
dicere, divinius ad Christum transfert and accommodat.

5 But this ingenious Writer, and accurate Latinist uses this word accommodat
in another sense then Iansenius, Suarez, or Maldonat, or other literalists do,
which oftentimes though not always, oppose the word accommodation, or
allusion, to concludent proof: for of all the prophesies which point directly
to the Article of Christ's Ascension, this 19. ver. alleged by S. Paul to this
purpose, is most concludent, if we could rightly parallel the literal or
historical passages which are well deciphered by Calvin with the mystical or
principally intended sense or actual accomplishment of David's words. The
historical occasion from which the spirit of prophecy in David took its rise
to proclaim this grand mystery of the Gospel, was the often mentioned
triumphant introduction of the Ark of God (or in equivalent sense, the God of
Israel which dwelt in the Arc) into the hill of Sion; which from this time and
occasion was instiled the place of God's rest; because the Ark of God (as was
presumed) was there to reside (without wandering) as in the place which God had
chosen for it. To this purpose Psalm. 78. He smote his enemies in the hinder
parts, he put them to a perpetual repreach. Moreover he refused the
Tabernacle of Joseph; and chose not the Tribe of Ephraim, but chose the Tribe
of Judah, the Mount Sian which he loved. And he built his Sanctuary like high
palaces; like the earth which he has est ablished for ever. ver. 66. 67. 68.
69. From this designation of the Arc to reside in Jerusalem, David (happily) who
knew best the tenor of God's promise concerning this business, would not
suffer it to go along with him when he fled from Jerusalem, as being in danger
of suprisall by his son Absolon.

CHAP. 37. Of the concludency of the Apostle's Allegation, Ephesians. 4. 7. 8. Out
of the 18. ver. of the 68. Psalm.
But to set forth the parallel betwixt the Prophet and our Apostle, The custom
among the Romans and other Nations, was to bestow congiaries or largesses upon
their friends or natives, when they led their enemies captive in solemn
triumph. Whether David led any enemies, of which he had conquered many, in
such triumph; or whether he did merely as a Prophet or sacred Poet, display his
former victories gotten over the enemies of God and his Church, by the manner
of the Nations triumphs over their enemies, is not in my observation evident.
This is certain, he dispersed not painted or poetical, but real largesses
unto the people, in grateful memory of the former victories which God had
given to him and his Predecessors, the former Champions, for the people of
Israel. And more then probable it is, that David in this hymn had special
reference to the victories and triumphs of Barach and his associates over
Sisera, most divinely expressed by Deborah in her song. Judge. 5. My heart is
toward the Governors of Israel, that offered themselves willingly among the
people. Bless ye the Lord. ver. 9. Awake, awake Deborah, awake, awake, utter
a song, Arise Barach and lead captivity captive, thou son of Abinoam. Then he
made him that remains, have dominion over the Nobles among the people. The
Lord made me have dominion over the mighty. v. 12. 13. Whether David when he
composed the 68. Psalm. did imitate the triumph of Barach and Deborah over
Sisera, General of Iabin's host, by matter of fact, as by leading his captives
in triumph, which is most probable; or only seek to exceed Deborah in his song
by more full expressions of his thankfulness toward God, who had given him
greater victories over greater enemies, is not manifest: But it is more then
matter of opinion, or pious credulity, that both the victories of Barach and
David over the visible enemies of God's people, or whatsoever other historical
occasions, Deborah or Barach, or David had to utter their songs, were but
types, or ominous or lucky prenotions of that great victory which the Seed of
David the Son of God was to obtain over the old Serpent and his seed, over
death it self, and all the powers of darkness. The triumph of the one or
other ( David I mean or Barach) was but a picture or painted shadow of that
triumphant conquest described by our Apostle. Colass. 2. And you being dead in
your sins, and the uncircumcision of your flesh, (...) he (...) together with
him, having forgiven you all (...), blotting out the hand writing of ordinances
that was against us, and took it out of the way, and having spoiled
principalicies and powers, he made a show of them openly triumphing over them
in it, ver. 13. 14. 15.

2. The harmony between the literal or historical sense of David's words,
though we weigh them only according to Calvin's Comments upon them: [ Thou have
ascended on high, thou have led captivity captive, thou have received gifts for
men] and the mystical interpretations of them given by S. Paul, is as sweet as
plain, such as need no descant besides the bare proposal of the Psalmist's
Text, and Apostle's interpretation of it, or conlsiderations of the occasions
which David had to speak as in the forecited place he does. David and Barach
with other Conquerors when they led captivity* captive gave gifts unto their
friends, gifts of diverse sorts to several persons, silver and gold, of other
guerdons to their well-deserving captains or soldiers, rayments of
needle-worke unto women of better rank, wi^e and cakes, or other like junkets
to poor women and children. As Soon as David had made an end of burnt
offerings and peace offerings, he blessed the people in the name of the Lord
of hosts, and he dea^t among all the people, even among the whole multitude of
Israel, as well to the women as (...) to ever^* one a cake of bread, and a good
piece of flesh, and a flagon of wine, so all the people departed; every one to
his house. 2. Sam. 6. ver. 28. 29. And this was the time when he brought the
A^ke of God in solemn procession into the hill of Sion. But unto every one of
us (says the the Apostle in the fore* cited place, which contains the
Evangelicall mystery parallel to this historical relation,) is given grace
according to the measure of the gift of Christ. Wherefore he says when be
ascended up on high he led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men. Now that
he ascended, what is it but that he descended first into the lower parts of the
earth. He that descended is the same also that ascended up far above all
heavens, that he might fill all things. And he gave some Apostles, and some
Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers; for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of
the Body of Christ. Till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the
knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the
stature of the fullness of Christ. Ephesians. 4. v. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13.

3 From this improvement of the Psalmist's literal sense and mystical
interpretation of his practice, which no good Christian will deny to be
authentic as being made by the Apostle, the diligent Reader may easily find
out the mystical or prophetical sense of the verses following in the 68.
Psalm., so far as they concern the Article of our Savior's Ascension, or the
propagation of the Kingdom of God, which followed upon it. To take the
cleareview of the mystical sense of the verses mentioned, the Reader with me
must take his rise from the literal sense, which is twofold; the one
containing an historical expression of what was to be acted for the present by
David and his attendants, when he brought the Arc into Mount Sion; the other a
relation or retro-aspect unto the solemnities used by Barach and his
attendants, in their triumph over Sisera. So it follows, They have seen thy
goings O God, even the goings of my God, my King in the Sanctuary. These words
are characters, or notes of the solemn procession of the Arc, for whilst the
Arc, or Sanctuary did go, or march unto Mount Sion, the God and King of
Israel did go with it and in it; and in this procession the singers went
before, the players on instruments followed after, amongst them were the
Damsels playing with Timbrels. v. 25* The solemnity of singing in God's
service was more complete in David's time, then it had been in the days of
Moses, or of the Judges; yet songs and music they had then in their solemn
processions or gratulations, and Damsels playing upon Timbrels, as it is
evident out of Exodus 15. Judges 5. and other ancient sacred histories. Though
such processions at this day, (such is the alteration of times and seasons)
would be as unsightly to us modern Christians whether Protestants or Papists,
as it would be to an English Protestant to see the consecrated host or Body of
our Lord, whilst carried about in solemn processio^, attended with a
ma^risk-dance, or other like gamboles. But the burden of the song used by
David was that, v. 26. Bless ye God in the Congregation, even the Lord from
(or ye that are of) the fountain of Israel. For not Judah only but the rest
had their portion in the son of Iesse, for there is little Benjamin with their
Ruler, the Princes of Judah and their council, the Princes of Zebulun, and the
Princes of Nepthali. ver. 27. These Tribes with their governors in all
probability did give David best attendance in this great service done to the
Arc, or rather to the God of Israel that dwelt in it, as some of them likewise
had been principal assistants unto Barak, highly commended for their service
by Deborah; Out of Ephraim was their a root of them against Amaleck, after
thee Benjamin among thy people. Judge. 5. ver. 14. After a sharp tax of some
other Tribes for their great backwardness in the service of God, she adds,
Zebulun and Nepthali were a people that ieoparded their lives unto the death in
the high places of the field. ver. 18. In the first procession of the Arc.
Numb. 10. All the Tribes with their Rulers did attend it, so did they not Barak
in the battle of the Lord against Iabin and Sisera; The excellent services of
these Tribes, mentioned by David in this pocession with the Arc to Mount Sion,
did prognosticate or portend that when the true Arc was exhibited, that is,
when the God of their Fathers should come and dwell and walk among them in the
midst of them, as Moses had promised, his chief attendants should be these
Tribes commended by Deborah and David. Christ Jesus himself the God of Israel
whom David and his Fathers worshipped, was of the Tribe of Judah, Paul of the
Tribe of Benjamin, Peter and Andrew, and most of the other Apostles or prime
Disciples, were of the Tribe of Zebulum and Nepthali, and made more then
Princes of their families, his witnesses and Ambassadors, not to the end of
the earth, but to the ends of the World.

4 Some of the Ancients, and among the rest S. Austin, if my memory fail not,
think they have found out S. Paul charactered in the fore cited prophecy,
there was little Benjamin their Ruler etc. And assuredly 'twas not a matter of
mere chance or fancy, that this great Apostle of the Gentiles should have his
name changed from Saul unto Paul, a name borrowed as some think from Sergius
Paulus, and Paulus in the Latin signifies a little one. And this was a name
better be fitting this great Apostles disposition after his calling then the
name of Saul, which was the name of the first King of Israel, and one of the
greatest of his Tribe. That Saul was little in his own eyes before he was King
but great after, whereas this Apostle Paul was little in his own eyes, but
great in the eyes of the Lord after he was made Ruler of the people; but to
wave this conjecture of the Ancients, and not to dispute the reason why
Benjamin should be called little by David in that Catalogue, wherein he had the
precedence in order of Judah; most other passages throughout this 68. Psalm.
from the 19. ver. are eminently prophetical. Blessed be the Lord who daily
loadeth us with benefits, even the God of our salvation. He that is our God is
the God of salvation, and unto God the Lord belong the issues of death. ver.
19. 20. These are characters of God incarnate or made man, or of the man Christ
Jesus, made salvation it self, and of this Jesus raised from death: for from
this title the issues of death or deliverance from it belong to him as his
peculiar: More apparently are those passages ver. 31. etc. literally meant, at
least exactly fulfilled of Jesus Christ after his Resurrection and Ascension to
his holy hill or heavenly Sanctuary. Princes shall come out of Egypt, Ethiopia
shall soon stretch out her hands unto God; Sing unto God O ye Kingdoms of
the earth: O sing praises unto the Lord. To him that rides upon the heaven of
heavens, which were of old. Lo, he does send out his voice, and that a mighty
voice. Ascribe ye strength unto God, his excellency is over Israel, and his
strength is in the Clouds. O God thou art terrible out of thy places; the God
of Israel is he that gives strength and power unto his people. Bbessed be God.
ver. 31. 32. etc.

5 As for the prayer conceived first by Moses, afterward assumed by David
after the removal of the Arc [ Let God arise let his enemies be scattered,
let them also that hate him flee before him] and all those menaces of fearful
judgments upon God's enemies, pronounced by David in this Psalm as appendices
to it; these were never so exactly fulfilled either of the Cananites, Moabites,
Philistims, or other enemies of Israel whiles the material Arc did remove
from place to place, or settled in Jerusalem, as they have been of the seed of
Abraham and of Jacob, since their God did arise from death in our nature, which
he consecrated to be the true and living Ark of God. Nor can the truth of
God's promises unto Abraham, David, or their seed, no not according to the
literal sense of the prophecies which concern them, be any way impeached by
taking his punishing hand from their heads, and laying it more heavily upon his
sometimes-chosen people. For seeing they became the sworn enemies of the God
of their Fathers revealed in the Arc of his flesh, the forementioned prayer
or imprecation of Moses and David, was more literally and punctually directed
against them, then against A^^alek, Moab, Ammon etc. For these, whether we take
them jointly or severally, were no greater enemies of God then other heathen
Nations were, save only in this, that they were, greater enemies to his Chosen
people the seed of Jacob, by reason of their vicinity as bordering upon their
costs, which always nurseth quarrels between Nations dis-united in
sovereignty, or form of government; whereas the Jewish seed of Abraham which
had been sometimes God's Elect people, without occasion given became the
immediate enemies of their God, and for his sake more bloody persecutors of the
Gentiles, yea of their own brethren according to the flesh, after they with
the Gentiles had become his Chosen people. Now Moses his prayer, or David's
imprecation did not aim at the persons of men, of what Nation soever, but at
their malicious qualifications or enmities against God, whether direct or
indirect; so that since the seed of Abraham became the enemies of God and his
Christ, they may be more truly said to have dashed against the Psalmists or
Moses curse, then it to have falled upon, or overtaken them; and yet for all
this as we learn from S. Paul Romans 11. that other prayer of Moses when the
Arc rested, shall bear date again, shall be fulfilled for the good of these
yet cast-awaies. When the Ark rested Moses said, return O God to the many
thousands of Israel Numb. 10. 36. This strange devolution of God's mercies and
judgments from one people to another, making the downfall of one Nation to be
the advancement of another to his free grace and mercy, (not the points of
Election and reprobation, as there has been a mist cast upon them by unskilful
Controversers, whereas S. Paul had left them clear enough,) was that (...)
Whose deeper consideration did extort that patheticall ejaculation from him. O
the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God, how
unsearehable are his Judgments and his ways past finding out etc.

CHAP. 38. That the manner of our Saviors Ascension was more clearly fore seen
by Daniel then by David, and most exactly fore-shadowed by matters of fact in
Mosaicall and other sacred histories: A parallel between Salo^mon's
Consecration of the Temple, and our Savior's Consecration, or sanctisying of
himself, and his heavenly Sanctuary.
WHether David did distinctly apprehend the manner of our Savior's Ascension,
and propagation of his dominion over all things in heaven and earth, both which
he did foretell and fore-shadow by matter of fact and service done to the
Arc; or whether he did at all fore-guesse, or suspect the turning of God's
heavy hand upon his seed and Jacob's seed according to the flesh, is a point
not altogether out of question, were it fit to be inquired into, But (as has
been In the seventh Book. Sect. 2. Chap. 16.
observed heretofore) our belief or right apprehension of the truth of divine
mysteries, does not depend upon their knowledge or appehension which did
foretell or relate their prefigurations, but on the contrivance of divine,
^inerting, all-seeing providence, by whose inspiration and secret instinct both
the Prophets and Evangelists did both speak and write. But be the former doubt
concerning David's apprehension of these mysteries, waved or determined as it
may be; this we know and may resolve, whatsoever in the former Psalm was
foretold or fore-shadowed by David, concerning the manner of our Savior's.
Ascension or propagation of his Kingdom, was more clearly foreseen by Daniel,
and as punctually foreshadowed by matter of fact in Mosaicall histories: To
begin with the testimony of Daniel which was merely prophetical, a pure
vision. And I beheld invisions by night, behold one like the son of man, came
in the clouds of heaven and approached unto the ancient of days, and they
brought him before him. And he gave him dominion, and honor, and a Kingdom;
that all people, Nations, and languages should serve him, his dominion is an
everlasting dominion which shall never be taken away: and his Kingdom shall
never be destroyed. In that he says he was like unto the Son of man, this does
not import that he was not truly man, or only like to man, but that more glory
was due unto him then to any mere son of man; and that he was the true son
of that ancient of days unto whom he was brought: And as our Apostle says
that being in the form of God, and equal unto God, yet he was found in the
liknesse and shape of man, that is, as essentially like to man as like to God.
The Prophet describes his presentation to his Father, by the Angels and
celestial powers attending him, which our Evangelist relates not, because
(happily) this could not be seen by waking and mortal eyes, but only by vision
or rapture of spirit. The same Prophet likewise describes the manner of his
Ascension, as exactly as if he had been a waking spectator of it with the
Apostles and Disciples.

2 But to resume the Prophets words: Behold says the Prophet one like the
son of man came in the clouds of heaven and approached unto the ancient of
days. he does not say he was brought up in the clouds of heaven, for the
motion was his own: He was the agent or mover, as well as the party moved in
this Ascension. So the Evangelist says. Act. 1. 9. And when he had spoken
these things, while they beheld he was taken up; for a cloud took him out of
their sight, and whilst they looked steadfastly toward heaven as he went.
Behold two men stood by them in white apparel which also said, ye men of
Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven: Emphasim habent verba he,
videntibus illis: It was remarkably said that he was taken up his Disciples
looking on, for this imports, as some of the ancients observe that Christ did
ascend by little and little as it were by certain steps that he might feed the
eyes and refresh the souls of his Disciples. He was not raught up as Elias
was, who had but one witness, nor as S. Paul who had no witness besides
himself, scarce himself a witness of his rapture, for whether he were taken
up in the body or out of the body God knows (says he) I cannot tell. But our
Savior went by the power of his omnipotency: he descended when he would, and
when he would ascended, appointing what spectators or witnesses it pleased him,
with the place, the time, the very day and hour.

3 As S. Luke's description of our Savior's Ascension is a complete
explanation of Daniel's vision* so is that vision, of the mystical sense of
Mosaicall or other histories, concerning the Arc or Tabernacle. For the
unfolding of this point we are to take the forementioned prenotion for our
rule, to wit, that the Arc of the Covenant wherein God was said to dwell* was
but a Type or shadow of the humane nature of Christ, in which the Godhead
dwells bodily, (...) The other branch of this prenotion is as clear, that
the Tabernacle which Moses erected in the wilderness, in which he placed the
Arc, was but a petty modle of that celestial Tabernacle into which Christ is
entered, of which the Temple built by Solomon was somewhat a fairer draught; yet
no more then a little map. Now immediately after* Moses had finished the work
of the Tabernacle, A cloud covered the Tent of the congregation, and the Glory
of the Lord filled the Tabernacle Exodus 40. ver. 34. etc. More expressly Numb.
9. v. 15. And on the day that the Tabernacle was reared up, a cloud covered the
Tabernacle, namely the tent of the testimony; and at even there was upon the
Tabernacle as it were the appearance of fire until the morning. The most
memorable history to this purpose is 1. King. 1. v. When Solomon had assembled
all the Elders of Israel, and heads of the Tribes, to bring up the Arc of the
Covenant of the Lord out of the City of David to the Temple ver. 1. And it came
to pass when the Priests were gone out of the holy place, that the cloud
filled the house of the Lord; so that the Priests could not stand to minister
because of the cloud; for the Glory of the Lord had filled the House of the
Lord. v. 11. The Son of God in whose breast as he is the Son of David, the
Covenant made with mankind is registered most exactly, and kept safer then the
Tables of the first Covenant were in the Arc when it was brought into the
Temple, had his Throne and Sanctuary prepared of old, or to use our Apostle's
dialect, non erat hujus structurae, they were not thrones or Sanctuaries made
with hands; yet to be consecrated by the blood of our high Priest; and being
thus prepared, a cloud did cover this living Ark of God and high Priest, upon
the day that he was to enter into the holy place: After the cloud took him
from his Disciples sight, he filled the everlasting Tabernacle with his Glory,
being more reverently adored by all the host of heaven, then he had been either
by Solomon, or the Elders of Israel when they brought the Arc of his Covenant
into the Temple, or by his Apostles after his Resurrection.

4 At the same time wherein the Arc was brought by the Priest into the most
holy place, Solomon kneeling before the Altar of the Lord first blessed God and
consecrated the Temple by that divine prayer never to be forgotten by good
Christians. And as soon as he had ended his prayer he rose up, and blessed the
congregation of Israel with a loud voice, saying, Blessed be the Lord that has
given rest unto his people Israel according to all that he promised; there has
not failed one word of all his good promises which he promised by the hand of
Moses his servant. 1. King. 8. v. 56. etc. His prayers to God and blessing of
the people are more then paralleled by our Savior's prayers for his own
Consecration and the spiritual blessings thence to be derived upon his
Apostles. Ioh. 4. 14. etc. One part of Salomons prayer when he blessed the
people was this, Let these my words wherewith I have made supplication before
the Lord, be nigh unto the Lord our God day and night, that he maintain the
cause of his servant, and the cause of his people Israel at all times, as the
matter shall require. v. 49. That all the people of the earth may know that the
Lord is God, and that there is none else. ver. 60. This part is rather
accomplished then paralleled by our Savior Ioh. 17. I pray for them, I pray
not for the world, but for them which thou have given me, for they are thine.
ver. 9. And for their sakes I sanctify my self that they also might be
sanctified through the truth. Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also
which shall believe on me through their word; that they all may be one, as
thou Father art in me and I in thee, that they also may be one in us: That the
world may believe that thou have sent me. v. 19. 20. 21.

CHAP. 39. Into what place or part of heaven our Savior did ascend, or in what
manner he sits at the right hand of God, are points not so fit to be
particularly inquired after, nor so apt to be proved or determined by
Scripture, as the other Articles of our Creed.
But however He whose prayers were always heard, did thus pray for his
followers a little before his agony and bloody Passion, and bestow his solemn
blessing upon them immediately after his Resurrection and before his Ascension:
Yet the extraordinary blessings which he prayed for and promised in his
Fathers name, were not really conferred until he was actually enthronized; but
shortly after showred down in abundance upon his Apostles and those that
believed through their report. So he foretold them when he was ready to
ascend. Behold I send the promise of my Father upon you: But tarry ye in the
City of Jerusalem until ye be endued with power from on high. Luke 24. 49.
The exhibition of the blessings here promised was Act. 2. ver. 32. 33. 34. This
Jesus has God raised up whereof we are all witnesses. Therefore being by the
right hand of God exalted and having received of the Father the promise of the
holy Ghost, he has shed forth this which ye now see and hear. For David is
not ascended into the heavens; but he says himself, the Lord said unto my
Lord, Sit thou on my right hand until I make thy foes thy footstool. When he
says David is not ascended into heaven, this must be understood of his
Ascension thither in body, and this negative he had strongproved before, But
whether David's soul had ascended or was carried into heaven before this time,
this place does neither warrant us to affirm or deny. David's soul before
this was in a place of bliss in heaven it self, not in limb: But whether in
that heaven, or that part of heaven, into which our Savior did now in body,
ascend, is more questionable then determinable. Some good Writers with great
probability and equal modesty affirm that Christ did now ascend in body
far higher then the mansions of bliss appointed for the Saints, Prophets,
Apostles, etc. or for Angels of the highest rank. And to this purpose is that
of our Apostle alleged by them. Ephesians. 4. 10. He that descended is the same
also that ascended up far above all heavens that he might fill all things*
and other like places wherein he is said to be* exalted above all powers and
principalities. Some grave Amongst others Didacus Yanguas.
Postillers or discreet Preachers would persuade us, that Christ's Throne of
Majesty was pitched in luce inaccessa in that region of light and bliss which
is inaccessable to any mere creature man or Angel, as being reserved for the
peculiar mansion of the invisible God and Father of lights and for his Son both
God and man enthronized as as King, and Priest on his right hand. But whether
the exaltation of the Son of God unto the right hand of his Father far above
all Powers, Dominions, and Principalities, do include a superiority, not of
sovereignty or dominion only but withal of place according to local distance,
or a supereminent Throne of Majesty, if the Lutherane will not be too
choleric, or Maldonat's associates too censorious, may be in fitter place
soberly debated.

2 But however the one or other of these may be affected, the best is, we need
not be too curious in these points, especially with men apt to quarrel about
phrases or expressions. Other Articles concerning Christ we are bound to
believe distinctly and explicitly according to the plain literal or
grammatical sense of the words, wherein the Evangelists and Apostles have
expressed them, without the vail of any rhetorical trope or allegory. And
strange it is not, if our belief of other Articles, or knowledge of them be
literally required; seeing the matter contained in them is sensible and
comprehensible to reason sanctified by grace: As his conception; although it
were wrought immediately by a supernatural cause; albeit the manner of it were
miraculous: yet for substance it was univocally the same with our conception:
He was as truly and properly conceived as we are conceived: He was as truly
made of the substance of his Mother, as we are made of the substance of our
Parents; or as Adam was made of the earth: He was as truly and as properly
borne as we are borne: He was really and as properly circumcised as any other
child of Abraham was: He suffered truly and as properly as any man can suffer:
He was as truly and as properly crucified dead and buried and rose again, as
any man ever was crucified dead and buried, or can rise again. But for the
place whither he ascended, or for the manner of his sitting at the right hand
of God, these cannot be so distinctly conceived by us, because they are not in
such proper terms expressed by the holy Ghost, but are wrapped up in a veil of
legal shadows or representations. Concerning the place whither he ascended,
we know in general that it was a place of joy, of bliss and glory; but which
place the Apostle himself could not better represent unto us, then by the
sanctum sanctorum, or the most holy place in the Tabernacle or Temple. This
hope we have Heb. 6. 19. as an anchor of the soul both sure and steadfast, and
which enters within the veil, whither the forerunner is for us entered, made
an high Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech. So S. John emblazons
the glory of Christ by the Pontifical attire and robes of Aaron, as likewise
he does the beauty of Christ's Kingdom by the feast of Tabernacles.

3 The best and safest means for conceiving aright, at least for not
conceiving amiss, of these two heavenly mysteries, is not by critical
scanning the literal sense or importance of the Prophet's words in their
descriptions of them, but by sincere practice of those known duties whereto
our belief of these unknown mysteries bind us. The most general and
necessary duty whereto we are bound by belief of our Savior's Resurection and
Ascension into heaven, is that of our Apostle. Goll. 3. ver. 1. 2. 3. 4. If ye
then be risen with Christ seek those things which are above, where Christ
sits on the right hand of God. Set your affections on things above not on
things on earth: For ye are dead and your life is hid with Christ in God. When
Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in
glory. Mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth, fornication,
uncleanenesse, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence and covetousness
which is idolatry, for which things sake the wrath of God comes on the
children of disobedience. But if these works of the flesh be mortified by the
spirit; the spirit of God, having gotten possession of our hearts, does
organize them, and frame a true model of the heavenly Sanctuary within our
breasts, albeit we cannot express our affectionate conceits, or experimental
representations unto others. Christ is present with us, or in us by this
renovation of our mind, or by imprinting these heavenly affections in our
souls, by following love, gentleness, meekness, temperance, patience etc.
Christ is really fashioned in us not by converting any substance into his
substance, or by real converting his substance into ours, but by conversion of
our earthly affections into the similitude of his heavenly affections: Our
affections being thus converted Christ has his Throne and Habitation in our
hearts, so answering to his heavenly Throne, as the light of the sun gathered
in some round body apt to reflect his beams, or to be penetrated by them, does
resemble the sun which really penetrates and enlightens them. For effecting
this real conversion of our affections into the similitude of his affections,
no other presence of Christ is either necessary or expedient, besides the
presence of his spirit, by which ten days after his Ascension he enabled his
Disciples to conceive aright of these heavenly mysteries, and to convert others
unto the truth of his Gospel.

4 That Christ's body should descend from heaven unto us or be bodily present
by trasubstantiation, or some other manner as some conceive, we have no reason
to hope nor warrant to believe; to lift up our bodies unto heaven we have no
possibility; but to lift up our hearts and spirits unto our Lord now placed in
his heavenly Throne, we have have peremptory precepts many. But how shall we
lift them up, or what power have we to lift them up? Not so much I confess as
we have to cast our selves down before his Throne, but casting our selves
down before him, which we cannot perform without his preventing and assisting
grace, we have a sure promise that he will lift us up. We are no where to my
remembrance commanded to pray to God that he would cast us down, and yet bound
to pray that he would give us grace to cast our selves down. As often then as
we meditate upon this Article of Christ's Ascension or sitting at the right
hand of God, let us beseech God and him, that the Priests may truly exhort
their charge, his people, to lift up their hearts, and that the people may as
truly answer we lift them up unto the Lord: And that we may all jointly sing
that hymn in reverence and true devotion, With Angels and Archangels, and
with all the company of heaven we laud thy glorious name O Christ evermore
praising thee and saying, holy, holy, holy, Lord God of hosts heaven and earth
are full of the Majesty of thy Glory, Glory be to thee O Lord most high. AMEN.

CHAP. 40. How the time of our Savior's Ascension into heaven upon the
fortieth day after his Resurrection from the grave, was prefigured by the sign
of the Prophet Jonas, with the exposition of that sign given by our Savior
Mat. 12. 39. 40.
ONe thing more I should have said in the former treatise but now must commend
it to the Reader's observation: And it is this, that many of those prophetical
passages specially in the Psalms of bringing great things to pass by the
right hand of the Lord, have been are and sahll be most punctually fulfilled
of, and in the Son of God incarnate, since he was placed at the right hand of
God the Father. That his placing there includes an extraordinary eminency of
power more then has been formerly manifested, the Lutheran I am sure does not,
and I hope others cannot deny. Two special manifestations of the power of the
right hand of God, were exhibited not long after his Ascension. The first
spiritual, as the descending of the holy Ghost from which time the holy
Catholic Church bare date or began to be in esse. The other was the
destruction of Jerusalem and the dispersion of the rejected relics of
Abraham's seed throughout the Nations.

2 The circumstance of the time wherein he ascended which is the only point
left to be discust is plainly set down by the Evangelist S. Luke. Act. 13.
The Queries upon it are two. The first how it was prefigured: The second what
it did portend.

3 For the resolution of both these Queries there can be no firmer ground then
the explication of a sacred text uttered by our Savior himself. Math. 12. v.
38. 39. etc. Then certain of the Scribes and of the Pharisees answered,
saying, Master, we would see a sign from thee. But he answered and said to
them, an evil and adulterous generation seeks after a sign, and there shall
no sign be given to it, but the sign of the Prophet Jonas. For as Jonas was
three days and three nights in the whales belly; so shall the son of man be
three days and three nights in the heart of the earth.

4 But yet for any help we have from most Interpreters, the explication of
this Text is in it self more difficult then most of the former alleged for
our Savior's Resurrection and Ascension. Who so will read as many ancient or
modern expositors as Maldonat had done, will happily subscribe to his censure of
such as he has read. So far was any of them from clearing this passage that
not one besides Hilarious did in his judgment touch the principal difficulty
contained in it. And he that shall read this learned Writer's Comments upon
this place will perhaps not condemnemy Nunquam inepte saepius acute rarius
exqui^ite.
opinion of him delivered in former meditations. But my desire is rather to
explicate his and other Interpreters meaning, whom he dislikes then contradict
them; and to rectify the parallels intended by them between Types or Figures
of the Old Testament and their accomplishment in the New.

5 The principal dissiculties in our Savior's parallel are first, what manner
of sign it was which the adulterous generation sought for. The second to what
purpose he gave them such a sign as they did not seek after. Our Savior
before, and his Disciples after this time had given the Jews one and other
many miraculous signs: How then does he say that no sign shall be given them
besides the sign of the Prophet Jonas? Some are of opinion that these Scribes
and Pharisees desired some such glorious sign from heaven as Elias and Samuel
had showed, and that our Savior should put them off with such an answer as the
Muscovite did a Neighbor Prince, who to pacify his anger had sent him Vide
Petrum Ramum in scholiis mathematicis. lib. 2.
a curious celestial globe; [ Tu mihi coelum mittis read terras de quibus
contendimus] The Scribes and Pharisees as these Writers think, demand a sign
from the heavens above, and our Savior gave them one from the earth or waters
below. But if they had demanded a sign to prove his divinity, as these Writers
think: The sign of Elia's Ascension had been more illustrious and effectual
to this purpose. Maldonat's resolution of this difficulty is, that our Savior
speaks not of a sign to persuade them as they sought, but of a sign to
condemn them, and that our Savior uses (as he does in many other places
quoted by this Author) an elegant ambiguity. That the men of Nineveh's
repentance at Jonas preaching, was an infallible argument of these Jews future
condemnation, or a sign which left them altogether unexcusable for not
repenting after our Savior's Resurrection from the dead, no Christian can
deny. But whether this sign was given them for their condemnation rather then
for confirming their belief, or for provoking them to repentance, we may well
doubt; and Maldonate if he had been constant to his positions elsewhere, must
acknowledge the later branch of this division to have been more probable. His
answer (tho) to speak the truth, brings us out of a blind by path into a fairer
way which leads us directly to a labyrinth of disputations, concerning the
cause or manner of these Jews rejection, into which at this time I will not
enter.

6 The true meaning of our Savior's words considered with references unto
former passages I should conceive to be, as if he had said albeit I have done
such works as none but the Son of God could have done amongst you, such as
would have cheered Abraham's heart to have seen, yet this adulterous generation
or degenerate kind of men which boast themselves to be the seed of Abraham,
demand a further sign; but though I should give them all the signs possible
in the heavens above, or in the earth beneath, or in the water under the earth,
there could be no sign like to the sign of the Prophet Jonas. Go therefore
and see what that means, or expect the fulfilling of it by the event;
otherwise the men of Nineveh shall condemn you, for they repented at Ionah's
preaching, yet was the sign* which God had given them by his deliverance from
the Whale, no sign in comparison of that which I give unto you: So that our
Savior's words do not* exclude all other signs either given by him, or by
his Apostles, but only argues that no sign for their instruction or future
safety could be given in comparison of this, so they would diligently enquire
after the meaning of it. But seeing they did not whom the meaning of this
aenigmaticall fore-warning did most, or in the first place (at least) concern:
Let us of this age, whom it much concerns to take instruction from their
folly, as far as we are able, redeem their negligence in this particular
enquiry.

7 When our Savior says, as Jonas was three days and three nights etc. so
the Son of man. This note of similitude (...) according to the ordinary rate of
speech implies, that the son of man should be fully as long in the belly of the
earth, as Jonas had been in the belly of the Whale. Now the time of Jonas
durance there is so punctually expressed Ion. 1 [ Now the Lord had prepared a
great fish to swallow up Jonah, and Jonah was in the belly of the fish three*
days and three nights] that any ordinary Reader will conceive it should
contain three natural days, as from friday in the morning until the
sunne-rising or dawning on Monday, or from friday at night till Monday at
night, that is, the whole course of three natural days. But thus long it is
evident our Savior did not remain in the Grave: For he was interred on the
sixth day toward the sunsetting, and rose again the first day with the Sun
or a little before it; so that the longest time of his imprisonment in the
Grave, was but so many hours as he had been weeks in the Womb, 36. or thrice
twelve in the one, and 36. or thrice twelve in the other. The difficulty
proposed then whether as it concerns the time of Jonas his abode in the belly
of the Whale, or of our Savior's in the Womb of the earth, cannot be clearly
resolved by that construction which Lawyers sometime make in favorabilibus,
that is, for the greater part of three days; nor by that Synechdoche which we
allow in ordinary cases; as if a man would prove that his friend had been in
the City to attend the Court three days together, it would not be expected
that he should make affidavit to prove that he had been three whole days from
morning to evening: It would suffice that he had been in the City some part of
every one of the three days; or that he had attended the Court at competent
hours in every one of the three days instanced in, as suppose* Wednesday,
Thursday, Friday. The true reason of all such legal allowances of
Synechdoches, as Grammarians and Rhetoricians term them, is grounded upon that
unquestionable rule of reason or Logic. Ad veritatem indefinitae propositionis
adstruendam sufficit verit as unius vel alterius particularis. He that says
the Athenians were learned men is not bound to prove this universal, that all
the Athenians were learned; it were enough to give pertinent instance in
somefew; for he that covenanteh to pay his day-labourer as his neighbors do,
is not bound to pay them as much as any of all his neighbors do, if he make
as just payment as any one or two of his good neighbors do to their
hirelings, this in legal construction will acquit him from breach of
Covenant: Now times and seasons, days, weeks, and hours have theiruniversall
or indefinite extense or limitations as well as men, or oher things numerable
or measurable. That may be truly said to be this days work which is done or
wrought upon any part of this day current. And according to this Synecdoche or
just allowance, our Savior may in legal or logical construction be truly
said to be in the womb of the earth three days and three nights; that is, in
some part of Friday, all Saturday, and in some part of Sunday. But this
Synecdoche will not either by legal or logical allowance reach unto three
nights: That he was two entire nights in the Grave is de fide a point of faith,
but no point of faith or probability that he should be in the Grave any least
part of any third night.

8 May we not then believe that he was three days and three nights in the
belly of the earth? By all means we must. Maldonat acutely discovers the
original of others error, or rather of the difficulty which had perplexed so
many of the ancients (who made it greater then in his opinion it needed to have
been) to be this, that they made their calculations according to the scale of
other Nations or languages, not by the Hebrew computation which does not oppose
day unto night, but take day and night for one natural day. His observation is
true and helps in part to salve the truth of the literal sense, if he had
given the true reason of this their account: But yet under correction the
instances which he brings from the Hebrew account of the fasting of Moses and
Elias (both which are expressed to have fasted forty days and forty nights)
do rather prejudice then clear the true meaning of our Savior's prediction [
That he was to continue three days and three nights in the belly of the
earth.] For certainly Moses and Elias, and so our Savior in the wilderness
did fast as well forty nights as forty days, or forty natural days complete
without any Synecdochicall abatement either of one day or night; whereas from
the three days and three nights wherein our Savior foretold he was to
continue in the womb of the earth, we must abate the one half of a natural
day besides the space of one hour, or one hour and an half at the most. This
abatement being fully made he did continue in propriety of sacred dialect in
the Grave three days and three nights, if we would measure his divine
prediction by the most ancient and original scale of the Hebrew account which
Moses used throughout the history of the Creation.

9 Briefly, the three days and three nights, in the 12 of Matthew are
equivalent to three of those evenings and mornings which made up half of the
six natural days wherein the World was created. The evening we know was in
order of time before the morning, whence it is that the Hebrews begun their
natural day from the vespers ortwilight; that which we call Saturday-night was
to them the beginning of the first day of the week; our Sunday at night the
beginning of their second; Monday at night of their third; Tuesday night of
their fourth; Wednesday night of their fifth, Thursday night of their sixth;
Friday night of their seventh day or Sabbath. Moses in his description of the
six days of the World's Creation, gives the true hint for interpreting our
Savior's words as we have done, when he said, The evening and the morning were
the first, second, and the third day etc. For this is all one as if he had said
the heaven and the earth were created in six days and six nights, and albeit
he made no mention of any evening or morning of the seventh day wherein God did
rest from his work. Yet may we not think but that day consisted of the same
parts whereof the other six days did, only the vicissitude of the evening and
morning is omitted in the description of that day, to represent the everlasting
Sabbath whereof it was a Type wherein is no night; as the genealogy of
Melchisedech in respect of Predecessors or Successors is not mentioned by the
same Moses, because the holy Ghost by whose direction he wrote would have him
brought in without genealogy because he might resemble the eternity of our
high Priest the Son of God. From these premises we may safely conclude that
when our Savior foretold he should be three days and three nights in the
belly of the earth, this is all one as if he had said he should be three
evenings and mornings in the womb of the earth. The conclusion being granted,
the former Synecdoehe is in this case most allowable; for it is evident that our
Savior was interred in the sixth evening and morning, that is on Friday, which
was the sixth day of the week according to the Hebrews account, before the
setting of the sun, or the evening following which was the beginning of the
seventh natural day or Sabbath, during all which as well the whole evening as
morning he rested in his Grave at least until the dawning of the first day,
during whose evening or night preceding he likewise rested there, So that he
was in the womb of the earth in part of the sixth evening and morning or sixth
night and day, and all the Sabbath as it consists of night and day, and all the
whole night succeeding the Sabbath, and part of the morning following, for he
did not arise till after the break of day, or till the sun begun to approach
the Horizon.

9 This form of accompting the wee^ke by day and night, or by evening and
morning, does, more lively character the s^^^ession of times or vicissitude of
seasons, then if we should measure the same space either by nights alone or by
days alone, as when we English describe the space of a complete week by seven
nights, or the space of half a month by a fortnight, or of a year by three
hundred, threescore, odd days, and minutes. But this by the way, the Reader
may find more for his satisfaction in good Commentators upon these words of
Daniel. Chap. 8. ver. 26. And the visian of the evening, and the morning, which
was told, is true etc.

11 Bt to return unto my task which is the unfolding of our Savior's
prediction in the 12^ of Matthew. That as many other prophecies, has his
peculiar mystical sense whose, explication must be grounded upon the former
literal sense, as it has been now explained. For that he should be interred
in the Grave in part of the sixth day, and there remain in the residue of it,
and all the Sabbath or Seventh day, and for a great part of the first day, or
of the first evening and moraing, wants not a peculiar, yea a triple mystery.
For the illustratio^ whereof it will not be amiss to premise the sweet harmony
between the six days of the Worlds Creation; by the Consecration, Death, and
Passion of Him by whom it was first made. As there was a week of Creation
which could not be fore-shadowed by any time precedent. So there was a solemn
week appointed for Redemption for-shadowed partly by the week of Creation and
God's rest from his works, partly by the week of Aarons Consecration and his
accomplishment of it upon the eighth day. To parallel the acts or works of
every day whether of the week of the first Creation, or of the week of
Aaron's Consecration, with the like acts or works of heb d^madae sanctae or
the week of man's Redemption by our Savior's Consecration, would be a work
more difficult to the undertaker whether by pen or preaching, then profitable
to the Auditor or Reader. It shall suffice me to exhibit the Evangelicall
Cycle from the first day of our Saviour'e Consecration, which was the first day
of the week following, (taking the day as opposed to night or evening) or of
the time interjacent betwixt the great Feast of the Passion, and the
Pentecost-following.

12 Upon the first day of that week wherein our Redemption was wrought our
Savior came in triumphant manner into Jerusalem not only to fulfill the
prophecy of Zachary before In the eight Book of these Comments. Chap. 18.
expounded at large, (for that might have been fulfilled at any other time or
day for its substance) but to testify withal that he was the true paschall
Lamb appointed pointed for the sacrifice of that great Feast, that Lamb of
God which ^ame too take away the sins of the world. For upon that very day of
the month Abib, were it the tenth or ninth in which our Savior came to
Jerusalem saluted with ecchoing cries of Hosanna the Son of David, was the
legal paschall Lamb according to first institution of the Passover brought
out of the fields unto the place appointed for the public assembly, with
greater pomp perhaps and solemnity prescribed by custom, than was expressly
required in the Law. Upon the fifth day day of this ^acred week, being (as I
take it) the fourteenth of the month Abib, our Savior being to be offered in
sacrifice at the time wherein the paschall Lamb* was eaten by seterall
families, did eat the Passover with his Disciples and preoccupated the usual
day for eating the paschall Lamb, upon necessity. In the night following which
was the evening of the sixth day, he was apprehended and arraigned in the
morning of the same day condemned by the Jews ^ and upon their solicitation
adjudged by Pilate to be crucified, and executed by the Roman Soldiers. In the
sixth day, or which is all one the sixth evening and morning of the first week
of times succession, God is said to have finished the works of Creation by
making the first man. In the sixth day, or in the sixth evening and morning of
the week of our Savior's Consecration, He by whom the world was made, did
solemnly declare the work of our Redemption to be accomplished in respect of
any labor, work, or pains to be further undertaken by him* For so farie his
solemn proclamation upon the Cross extends consummatum est. And so he went
into his rest upon the same day about the same hour wherein God was said to
rest from all his works of Creation; that is, in the close of that day a little
before the evening of the seventh day or Sabbath.

CHAP. 41. A Parallel between the day wherein Adam is thought to have been
cast out of Paradise, with the day wherein our Savior was Crucified: And
between the first day of the world's Creation and our Savior's Resurrection.
THere is a a tradition or rather a received opinion avouched by many good
Authors in their several writings, that Adam the first man should fall and
forfeit his estate in Paradise upon the same day wherein he was created. The
opinion it self we cannot disprove nor justly suspect to be a mere
conjecture, because we know not what warrant the first or immediate Authors of
this Doctrine had to commend it to posterity. But their language (I take it) is
much mistaken by some later schoolmen; the first Authors meaning or expression
of it must be limited or rather extended to the same sense or construction as
has been before In the sixth Book upon the Apostles Creed*
observed in the like words of Daniel. Chap. 7. That Belshazer was slain in
the same night wherein (after his carousing in the boules of the Sanctuary) the
handwriting was seen upon the wall, or that other 2. of Kings. that
Senacherib's mighty army * Chap. 19. v. 35. And it came to pass that night,
that the Angel of the Lord went forth and smote etc.
was discomfitted upon the night immediately following that day, wherein he
sent that blasphemous message unto Hezekiah, or the day wherein Isaiah,
returned his message to the good King. In both places the same night cannot be
understood of the self same natural day and night, but of the same night or
day after the revolution of one year or more. In like manner the first man,
according to the tenor of the former received opinion, did fall upon the same
day wherein he was created, yet not upon the same day numerically,
individually, or identically taken, but upon the same day after the revolution
of a week at least or more, that is upon the sixth day, and thrust out of
Paradise before the Sabbath ensuing, for his stealth or presumptuous usurpation
of the forbidden fruit. Upon the same day after revolution of many years, the
Son of God or second Adam now consecrated to be a quickening spirit, did restore
the sons of the first Adam to their inheritance which their Father had lost, by
giving a true natural son of the first Adam, a thief by practice, liverie de
sezin, or actual possession of the celestial Paradise. The bequest or legacy
was punctual and solemn. Amen dico tibi hodie mecum eris in Paradiso, Verily
I say unto thee this day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Upon the sixth day
of the first week or week of Creation or vicissitude of times, Adam's body was
taken out of the substance of the earth* Upon the same sixth day was the body
of the second Adam the Son of God, shut up into the bowels of the earth after
he had commended his spirit into his Father's hands which had given it him.
That temporal curse denounced against the first Adam [ In the day wherein thou
eatest thou shall die the death] was exactly now fulfilled in the second Adam.
For in the sixth day of the week of his Consecration he died the death of the
Cross, and was delivered to the earth whence the first man was taken; only he
was not to be resolved to dust, but rested there without corruption. For as God
had rested the Seventh day from his works of Creation though not of
Preservation; so the Son of God was to rest from all his labor or toil upon
the seventh day of the week of his Consecration, not only to bless and
sanctify that day and make it his own, but withal to hallow the grave or the
womb of the earth (whence all flesh was taken and by the course of nature must
return) by his sweet rest and presence in it. So says S. John. I heard a
voice from heaven saying, Blessed are the dead which hereafter die in the Lord,
even so says the spirit, for they rest from their labors and their works
follow them. Rev. 14* ver. 13. Their sleep or quiet rest in the grave thus
hollowed by our Savior's Death and rest in it, becomes the evenings or vespers
of their everlasting Sabbath.

2 The night immediately following the legal Sabbath wherein our Savior did
rest from all his Labors, was part of the first evening and morning or of the
first natural day of the week: His Resurrection upon that day, and at that
time of the day, and at that season, implies a twofold mystery, or the
accomplishment of two remarkable divine Oracles: First that of Genesis Chap. 1.
ver. 1. 2. In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth, and the earth
was without form and void, and darkness was upon the deep. The darkness
made the evening, and the separation of the light from darkness made the
morning of the first natural day. God (faith Moses) divided the light from the
darkness and called the light day, and the darkness he called night, and the
evening and the morning were the first day. As was the condition of this
visible world or form less earth before the Creation of light, or the division
betwixt it and darkness, such altogether was the condition or state of the
intellectual world before it was new made or redeemed by the Son of God. The
corrupted mass of mankind was overspread with darkness, and covered with the
mantle of Death, but this long darkness became more palpable then that of
Egypt, during the time of the Son of God's surprizall, and his enclosure in the
region of Death. These were the hours wherein it was permitted the powers of
darkness to domineere, but these powers were conquered and the darkness
dispelled by his Resurrection from Death, which was on the same day, and at the
same hour, wherein God the Father by him did first divide darkness from
light. From this hour of his Resurrection the night is gone and the day is
come, as many as believe in him raised from death, and adore the Son of
righteousness, who as the Apostle says having abolished death brought life 2.
Tim. 1. 10.
and immortality to light, they are the Sons of God, Heirs of Glory; but such
as love darkness more then the light of his gospel, they must remain the sons
of darkness and of death. All this and more, is implied in the circumstance of
the time and place which the day and hour of his Resurection had in that holy
week being the first hour of the first day. The other mystery is implied in
the circumstance of the time and place which the day of his Resurrection held
in that solemn feast of unleavened bread.

3 So it fell out by the sweet disposition of God's special providence that
the day of our Savior's Resurrection should for that year fall upon the
second day of the Feast of unleavened bread, or the morrow after the Sabbath of
that great solemnity. Now on that precise day the Israelites were peremptorily
bound by a strict Law to offer up the first fruits, as ears and blades of
corn unto the Lord, Lev. 23. 10. 11. When ye become into the land which I
give unto you, and shall reap the harvest thereof, then ye shall bring a sheafe
of the first fruits of your harvest unto the Priest, and he shall wave the
sheafe before the Lord to be accepted for you; on the morrow after the Sabbath
the Priest shall wave it. From this peculiar reference or parallel of the
circumstance of time between the day of our Savior's Resurrection, and the day
appointed for this legal feast of offering the ears of corn, The analogy or
parallel between the Type and the substance is thus: As the use of the corn
was not allowable to the people until some ears or blades of the same kind
were offered up in sacrifice by the Priest unto the Lord: So neither could the
seed of Adam or of Abraham, or of any man else (seeing all had been sown in
corruption) be either holy or acceptable to the Lord, or partakers of his Table
or prefence, or put on incorruption, until the high Priest of our souls the
Son of God had offered a sacrifice of the same kind, to wit, a body subject to
like mortality as ours are until it was consecrated to glory and immortality
by the sufferings of Death.

4 All were sanctified, all were reconciled to God by this one oblation of
himself as the first fruits of them that sleep. Yet even such as were upon
the day of his Resurrection really sanctified and actually reconciled unto God,
(the very Apostles themselves,) were not made up or wrought into one body, or
loafetill fifty days after, not until that very day wherein the new reaped
corn made into bread, was solemnly offered and presented to the Lord. Lev. 23.
15. 16. 17. And ye shall count unto you from the morrow after the Sabbath,
from the day that ye brought the sheafe of the wave offering, seven days
shall be complete, even unto the morrow after the seventh Sabbath, shall ye
number fifty days, and ye shall offer a new meat offering unto the Lord, ye
shall bring out of your habitations two wave-loaves of two tenth deals; they
shall be of fine flower, they shall be baken with leaven, they are the first
fruits unto the Lord. The one holy Catholic Church and Communion of Saints
which we profess in our Creed did not begin to be in esse (as by God's help
it shall appear hereafter,) or hear true life, until the effusion of the
holy Ghost; which is the soul of the one holy Catholic Church, or of the
mystioall Body of Christ: And that was upon the fiftieth day inclusively from
the day whereon the ears of corn, or sheafe of blades was offered unto the
Lord. On that fiftieth day the holy Curch received the first fruits of the
spirit, it being likewise another solemn day appointed for the legal offering
up of the first fruits.

4 Thus much of the accomplishment of the Type of Jonas his imprisonment in the
belly of the Whale, and of the mysteries contained in those three special
days and nights, or evenings and mornings wherein our Savior was in the womb
of the earth, and the time of his rising again. But the two former queries.
First, what our Savior's abode forty days on the earth from his Resurrection
to his Ascension, or which is all one, what the sign of Jonas did portend to
this evil and adulterous generation of the Jews. Secondly, how the space of
his forty days abode upon the earth after his Resurrection was prefigured; are
points worth the discussion, and for ought I know will make the fittest Period
of this long work concerning the knowledge of Christ and him crucified.

CHAP. 42. That the sentence proclaimed against Nineveh by the Prophet Jonas,
was in a full measure executed upon the adulterous Generation of the Jews; not
believing or repenting at our Savior's preaching.
THat a state so strong and mighty as Niniveh was then, when Jonas was sent
unto it, should upon these or the like brief Summons of a forrainer [ Yet fory
days and Niniveh shall be destroied] be so deeply stricken on a sudden with
extreme fear of death and ruin: Or that a Court so dissolute, luxurious, and
proud as that Court was, should so readily change their soft raiment into
sackcloth, and laying aside their perfumes and sweet odours, as the Text says
the King himself did, may well seem a greater wonder to a Reader qui ad pauca
respicit, then God almost at any time had wrought in Israel: But the
strangeness of the sudden change persuades, or rather assures me, or any
diligent Reader, that the constant fame of Jonas his miraculous deliverance or
escape out of the Whales belly, had come before him into Niniveh, and made way
for the efficacy of his preaching or due entertainment of his Embassage. And as
Naaman the Syrian from the experiment of his strange recovery of his health,
brake forth into that acknowledgment, Now I know there is no God in all the
world except in Israel: So these Ninivites did collect that he who had
delivered Jonas from the danger whereinto he had cast him, was able to kill
and to give life to whom he pleased: And as they dread his anger for
transgressions past, so they conceive hope of mercy upon their true repentance
and amendment: But however, it was not so strange that Ninivie upon Jonas
summons should so quickly repent, as wondrous that the Jewish Nations should
not repent after this sign of the Prophet Jonas was so peremptorily and
punctually given them by him that was far greater then Jonas, by a Prophet of
their own, according to their apprehension in their calmer thoughts, mighty in
word and in deed. The special points wherein the Ninivites condemn this
present generation of Scribes and Pharisees are, first their unpartiall
diligence in examining the truth of the miracle wrought on Jonas. Secondly
their readiness upon testification of it to believe God's Judgments and his
Mercies; of which the one did impell or drive, the other gently lead or draw
them to repentance.

2 But that which the Apostle says of the Jews in general was remarkably true
of this evil and adulterous generation in this particular. They had most
grieviously displeased God by putting his only Son to most cruel Death, and
after they had thus grieviously displeased God they became contrary to all men,
to the most grievous sinners of other nations; and in special to these
Ninivites which must rise or stand up in Judgment against them. The Ninivites
upon Jonas his preaching or embassage being ushered or countenanced by the fame
of his miraculous deliverance, repented in sackcloth and ashes. To have
repented in a more ample, more deep, or better manner then the Ninivites did,
this present generation of the Jews had motives many, all in themselves, or
absolutely more forcible then these heathens had. First to search more
unpartially after the truth of that great miracle wrought by and upon our
Savior Christ, being fore-shadowed by the deliveverance of the Prophet Jonas:
He who was much greater and had been in greater danger then Jonas was,
foretold them almost in the beginning of his prophetical function, when he
said unto them desiring of him a sign why he did those things, he gave them
this sign. Ioh. 2. 19. Destroy this Temple and in three days I will raise it
up. But this was a kind of riddle unto them, and so it was to his Disciples
till after his Resurrection, for he meant it of the Temple of his body: But
this riddle or aenigmaticall prediction he vouchsafed at this time to explicate
or unfold, not to the vulgar or common sort of people but unto the Scribes and
Pharisees who were the most curious Critics or Cavalists of the Law and
Prophets, and of the ceremonies, Types or Shadows contained in them, provoking
or inviting them withal by this preamble [ There shall no sign be given to it
but the sign of the Prophet Ionas] diligently to observe the parallel between
the Type or shadow exhibited in the Prophet Jonas, and the body or antype to be
exactly accomplished in himself. Some at least of the Scribes, of the
Pharisees and Elders, saw him die or linguering in the pains of Death upon the
Cross: All or most of them, and of this adulterous generation had the manner
of his Death both for circumstance and substance, testified unto them by
authentical witnesses. And to prevent all possible occasions of false rumors
or impostures which might be procured or attempted by his followers, they
provided a band of Soldiers to watch or guard his corpse in the Sepulcher,
during the time presixed by him for his Resurrection. All this notwithstanding,
he who commanded the Whale to restore the Prophet Jonas whom she had swallowed
up in the sea, did now command the earth or hard rock wherein our Savior's
Sepulcher was made, to yield up this her prisoner within three days and three
nights after his burial; within the time limited and prefigured by Jonas his
imprisonment in the fishes belly; and to yield him up not unto the earth or
sea, but unto heaven whence he descended. The sea was his and he prepared the
dry land, both sea and land, and all that are in them and upon them, were
absolutely and equally at his command and disposal, and so was the heaven of
heavens it self. And for fear of him the Keepers did shake and became as dead
men. Mat. 28. 4.
The earth now trembled at his rebuke, and men of war were affrighted at the
sight or presence of his heavenly messengers: If these Roman Soldiers or all
their legions had offered the least resistance to his person or to his
Resurrection, these heavenly Soldiers would have fought for him and for his
Kingdom, which now began to be propagated through the world, though it was
told the Roman deputy it was not of this world.

3 All the circumstances which besides these mentioned might be alleged, were
they put together and pressed home, might well occasion on half Christian, or
diligent Reader, or unpartiall observer of times and circumstances, rather to
suspect the truth of the Evangelicall story, then fully persuade him that it
were possible either for the Jews to attempt the subornation of the Roman
soldiers to testify so gross an untruth as they did, or for them to yield
upon any terms to so foul a temptation. But whether we resolve this spirit of
contradiction in these Jews unto their own unrelenting spleen and malice, or
unto divine infatuation, or respectively unto both; it would be a task more
easy then safe to parallel their stupidity and subtle disposition with with the
like or worse blindness in many, which verily believe the truth of our
Savior's Resurrection with the circumstances, and would be very ready to
confirm their belife of it, and most particular points of faith with their
blood. For the light and evidence of divine truth can hardly suffer a total
eclipse in any man professing Christianity, no not in men of spleen-bitten
brains; yet many fearful partial ecclipses it suffers in these men, in
respect of the particulars at which their spleen does rise or interpose its
dismal shade, whilst they are maintained or illustrated by others whose good
parts they envy, or whose persons they hate; but of this argument much has
been spoken before in other meditations, and more if God permit may be added in
a treatise promised as the Reader may observe in the Preface prefixed to the
first two. Books of these Commentaries.

4 But for the Jews which upon the fight or uncontrollable fame of our
Saviou's miracle had traduced him for a conjurer or sorcerer, it was no new
wonder in them, either not themselves to believe, or to persuade the Roman
Soldiers (being first half blinded with bribes) to believe or suspect that
his Disciples might use some means more then commendable arts or natural
skill could afford them, either for astonishing or deluding their senses, or
surprising their wits. However this of the Prophet Jonas being the last sign
or forewarning which this evil generation was to expect from our Savior the
consequence of their non-observance, or not repenting after the exhibition of
it, was most contrary to this examplary pattern of the Ninivite's observance
of Jonas embassage by turning to the Lord in sackcloth and ashes. Judah was now
become more contrary to our God then either her sister Samaria or then Assiria
or Niniveh had been; and God's ways became more contrary unto her and to her
children. The Ninivites repenting within the forty days limited for this
purpose, God repealed the sentence which he had pronounced against them,
although Jonas who proclaimed it did murmr or grumble at it. For he expected
that the Lord whose mouth and messenger he was, should at the forty days end
declare him to be a true Prophet by putting his sentence in execution: The Son
of God expects as long for the repentance of these Jews, which doubtless
would have pleased him much better then their destruction: But seeing they
would not repent within the forty days between his Resurrection and Ascension,
the sentence proclaimed by Jonas against Niniveh proceeds in fullest measure
against this wicked and adulterous generation or degenerate seed of Abraham.

5 But shall we be concluded from these premisles to say that Jerusalem and
Judah were destroyed immediately upon our Savior's Ascension? No: but this we
may safely say, that from the day of his Ascension which was the fortieth day
after his Resurrection, both the City and Nation did ipso facto and jure
incur the sentence of woe denounced against Niniveh by Jonas. And we may
further add that the destruction both of City and Temple, the desolation of
Judea and miserable dispersion of the Jews throughout the Nations, became more
necessary and more inevitable then heretofore they had been; not for the
indefinite substance only of the woe denounced, but the very measure of their
misery did daily by the like necessity increase both for intensive decrees and
for extension, especially in respect of the number of persons which did incur
the sentence or decree pronounced against them, and of the time ordurance of
the matter of woe denounced in it. Yet were none of these necessary but by
their continuance in their fore-father's sins, and by not repenting of them,
and by the daily increase of their own and their childrens sins.

6 During the time of these forty years after our Savior's Ascension the City
and State had a possibility of being freed a tanto though not a toto; though
not simply from destruction, yet from such fearful desolation as afterward
befell them. But continuing as impenitent all these forty years as they had
done for the forty days before his Ascensio^ the sentence within forty years
after his Resurrection began to be put in execution according to the strict
tenor of our Savior's prediction. Luke 19. 41. 42. 43. 44. During the time of
these forty days God's Judgments did lay seige against Jerusalem, but the son
of man Christ Jesus yet conversing as man here upon earth did bear off the
punishments due to their iniquity, as Ezechiel, entitled and in Type the son of
man, had before prefigured. Chap. 4. 6. Thou shall bear the iniquity of the
house of Judah forty days, I have appointed thee each day for a year. see v.
1. 2. And thus at the end of forty years after our Savior's Resurrection,
(allotting a year for every day of his abode on earth) the City and Temple
were destroyed. This Calender of a day for a year, was no new or uncouth
account to this people either in the days of Ezechiel, or at the time of our
Savior's Ascension; it was a Calender of God's own making as we may read
Numb. 14. 33. 34. Your children shall wander in the wilderness forty years
and bear your whoredoms until your Carkeises be wasted in the wildernsse
after the number of the days in which ye searched the land, even forty days
( each day for a year) shall ye bear your iniquities, even forty years, and
ye shall know my breach of promise. I the Lord have said it, I will surely do
it unto all this evil Congreg^tion that are gathered together against me in
this wilderness, they shall be consumed and there they shall die. The people
were gathered against God when they were gathered against Ioshuah and Caleb,
and bad stone them with stones ver. 10. And the Glory of the Lord which then
appeared in the Tabernacle of the Congregation before all the children of
Israel, had now more personally and visibly appeared in the man Christ Jesus
and yet how often were they ready to stone him to death? The former people for
their rebellion were to die in the wilderness without hope of seeing the
promised land.

7 For the rebellion of this later generation (specially after the Glory of God
was now revealed by his Resurrection) Jerusalem according to Micah's prophecy
was to become an heap of stones, and Sion the beauty of the whole Nation was
to be plowed like a field, and the mountain of the house which was the glory
of Sion was to become as the high places of the forest, a more ghastly
wilderness then that wherein their Fathers wandered. The cause of God's plague
denounced Numb. 14. was that generations credulity to believe the report of the
other spies concerning the land of Canaan, contrary to the good report which
Caleb and Ioshuah had made of it. And the cause why this generation were to die
of a more fearful plague in Jerusalem, and why Jerusalem was to become an
heap, was their distrust unto the promise concerning the Kingdom of heaven,
(whereof the land of Canaan in her highest prosperity was but the map)
avouched by John Baptist the Preacher of Repentance, and by Jesus the Son of
David, which had viewed it and presented the fruits of it unto them. And for
this their distrust, as their Fathers had wandered forty years in the
wilderness and never admitted to the land of Canaan, so this rebellious
generation had forty years time before they were cast out of the earthly
Jerusalem never to be admitted into new Jerusalem which came down from heaven.

CHAP. 43. That place of Zachary Chap. 14. v. 3. expounded showing that God did
fight with the Gentiles against the Jews as formerly he had done with the Jews
against the Gentiles. How the forty days of Christ's abode upon earth after
his Resurrection was foretold.
THis wath of God against Jerusalem was foretold by the Prophet Zachary. Chap.
14. ver. 1. 2. 4. Behold the day of the Lord comes (says the Prophet) and
the spoil shall be divided in the midst of thee, that is, her enemies should
not come against her as rievers' or boothalers, which dare not stay to divide
the spoil where they catch it, but as full Conquerors, as it follows ver. 2.
For I will gather all Nations against Jerusalem to battle, and the City shall
be taken, and the house rifled, and the women ravished etc. The contexture of
this Chapter (as the most learned Commentators upon it do confess) is very
perplexed, and yet in my opinion made so, partly by the somnolency of
translators, and incogitancy of Interpreters, or paraphrasticall Expositors of
it. Leaving the discussion of most particulars in it unto the learned Critics
of sacred Philologers, I shall endeavor to unfold one perplexity, or knot
which has been rather drawn closer, or cast harder by most modern
Interpreters then Eusebius, or the ancient Greek Writers did leave it. The knot
or rub is in v. 3. [ Then shall the Lord go forth and fight (...) amongst or
in the midst of the Nations] and arises from the ambiguous or various
importance of the Hebrew particle or preposition beth which in composition
admits as great a multiplicity of opposite or contrary senses, as the Latin
preposition in, or the Greek particle alpha does, both which are sometimes
privative or purely negative, sometimes vehemently affirmative: as in that or
other like speech, quod dixi indictum volo, the word indictum is a mere
negative and equivalent to non dictum, and implies a revoking or repealing of
what was said; otherwhiles the same indictum implies a peremptory declaration
or denunciation, be it of war or controversy etc. The Greek alpha admits
more variety, sometimes it is (...) a privative or pure negative as (...) gifts
no gifts, sometime (...) an augmentative, as (...) very thick wood, or a wood
full of trees, sometimes again more then so, an augmentative or intensive
implication of the contrary or that which it seems to deny^ as (...) is not
only a Lawless man, or one that knows not the Law, but one extremely opposite
to all good Laws, the epitheton or synonymum to (...) the greatest enemy of
Christ or of his Laws. The Hebrew particle or preposition (...) is sometimes
equivalent to (...) contrary or against, sometimes no more then cum, in, intra,
or infra, with in, or amongst, as in that speech of Balaam Numb. 23. v. 23.
There is no enchantment [ bejacob] most now render it against Israel, though
some heretofore have rendered it. There is no enchantment to be found in Israel.
The sense in the vulgar Latin is ambiguous because it is uncertain whether
Israel be the accusative or ablative case, if the accusative as some express
it in Israelem it may be as much according to the Author of the vulgar Latins
meaning as adversus Israelem against Israel, which is the most probable sense
of that place. However the most usual signisication of the same particle is no
more then the Latin in, or intra, or other variations of it according to the
nature of the subject wherein it is used: The like variation of the Hebrew beth
especially when it is prefixed to the infinitive mood arises from the
different parts of time unto which it referres, as in the title of the third
Psalm. entitled unto David (...) -- that is, verbatim in ipso fugere, vel
fagiendo, or dum fugeret, in his flying or in his flight, or, as our English
renders it, when he fled from his son Absolon. But in that petition of Naaman
the Syrian for absolution from the Lord (unto whose service he tied himself by
vow by the mouth of his Prophet) the same particle though a prefixe to the
infinitive mood, has another aspect, neither to the time present or future,
but to the time past, In this thing the Lord pardon thy servant bebea Adoni,
not when my Master goes, but in that when my Master has gone into the house
of Rimmon, he has leaned on my hand and I have bowed my self in the house of
Rimmon, that is, I worshipped in the house of Rimmon, the Lord pardon thy
servant in this thing. That this was a supplication for sins past, not a
dispensation for doing the like is apparent from the Prophets answer unto it,
go in peace, which was the solemn form of absolution used by the Ancient
Hebrews, and by our Savior himself. When the same particle beth denotes a
place or person, it is equivalent to the Latin Adverbe intus, or in, as
bemidber is no more then in, or within the wilderness: And so to trust
baihovah or Laihovah, is no more nor less then to trust in the Lord. The same
particle beth in many other places is equivalent to the the particle le, and in
this sense it must, both from the necessity of the matter, and from
circumstances precedent and consequent be taken in this 3. v. I will fight in,
or amongst, not against these Nations.

2 As in the place of the Psalmist, Psalm. 74. v. 14. Thou have broken the head
of Leviathan in pieces, and gave him to be meat to the people (...) in the
wilderness. The same particle le is as much as in or within, for by the people
in the wilderness the Psalmist means such ravenous land-creatures as wolves,
foxes and the like, or amphibious, as use to prey upon the earkeises, or bodies
forsaken by the sea wherein they were drowned, or cast upon the shore as
Pharaoh and his mighty host were, whose death besides the strangeness or
suddenness of it was disgraceful and terrible to all spectators. For (...) is
aequipollent to bemidber in its formal signification, only the word denotes a
more solitary and dry place then the wildernsse does, which perhaps was the
reason why the septuagint translate this place (...) to the Ethiopian people;
whether by that they understood men or crocodiles or other like monsters of
Aethiop or Africa is uncertain. Arias Montanus renders it populis
solitudinicolis which for ought I know may signify men somewhat more monstrous
then the Cannibals, which fed upon men's flesh, but whether on men cast upon the
shore or no I cannot tell. To omit other importances or significations of this
Hebrew particle beth, it must be taken in a sense equivalent to the particle
le, or to the Latin cum, in, or pro, in this place of Zachary. Chap. 14. v. 3.

3 And I cannot but wonder at the incogitancy or oversight of that most learned
and ingenious Writer Ribera, who having so fair hints and good directions as
Eusebius and other Ancients alleged by him for leavelling this passage made
rugged by Latin Interpreters or Translators, forsakes the dexter sense which
the Greeks had given, and embraces the sinister sense of the Latins: The
seventy Interpreters had rendered the original (...) He to wit, the Lord will
command in chief and order the battle of the Nations which he had gathered
against Jerusalem: For questionless he did not call or gather them against
Jerusalem to fight for it against them, but for them against it. This version
of the original is most consonant to that prediction of the Prophet Isaiah.
63. 10. He became their enemy, and (...) fought against them. The full and
just Paraphrase of the whole verse is in plain English thus, The Lord will as
remarkably show himself to be the Lord of hosts, or the Lord mighty in battle
by fighting for the Nations against Jerusalem, as he formerly had done by
fighting for Israel against Pharaoh and his hosts, or for Gideon against the
Madionites; for Barak and Deborah against Iabin and Sisera, or in other like
famous victories which he procured for his people; unto some one or other of
which, most Interpreters refer these words, as in the day of battle,
Zachary 14. 3. But the adequate or complete object of the literal sense is not
one or two, but all the famous victories which the Lord of hosts had bestowed
upon his people. And he that will diligently peruse Josephus History of the
Jewish wars, especially the sixth Book, may find as many pregnant documents
of God's displeasure and powerful hand against the Jews, and of his peculiar
temporal favor toward the Nations under the conduct of Titus, as had been
showed in any one age against the Nations on the behalf of Israel or the Jews.

3 It has been observed before that the best Commentators upon most prophesies
in the Old or New Testament, are such historians as did least remember or
understand them, or had no other aim or intention save only to relate matters
of fact unpartially. The best Commentary that the ordinary Reader shall easily
find upon this fourteenth Chapter of Zach. is the forementioned history of
Josephus ( lib. 6.) and the best Mercury or director that I can commend unto
him for finding out the accomplishment of this prophecy according to the
literal sense by the events or accurrences recorded in that history, is
Danaeus* who besides the literal explication, is in this particular most
orthodoxall for the moral sense of the Prophet, concerning Gods gracious
goodness unto these Jews in foretelling so long before, from what place the
City should be assaulted, and by whom, and in what manner taken. The place from
which the City was first assaulted and the defendants most prejudiced, was
clearly foretold by this Prophet. ver. 4. And his feet shall stand in that day
upon the Mount of Olives, which is before (or over against) Jerusalem on the
East and the Mount of Olives shall cleave in the midst thereof toward the East
and toward the West. etc. This part of the prophecy concerning the feet of God
which were to stand upon the Mount of Olives was never before so literally
verified as in the day of our Savior's Ascension. Many strange miraculous
reports are extant, concerning the print of our Saviou's feet, which continued
more then four hundred years after his Ascension, (if we may believe
traditions anciently recorded) and poor travelers are made to believe that
the Print continues the same unto this day. But to let these traditions pass
tanquam via navis in mari, certain it is, that whilst our Savior's feet did,
as upon the day of his Ascension, stand upon the Mount of Olives, the feet of
that God of whom the Prophet their speaks, did stand upon it. Now the time
allotted for the Jews repentance being expired and peace not made with him
before his Ascension, the very dust of his feet, much more the print of his
feet did remain as a witness against them. At the same time was that other
passage of the Prophet. ver. 3. Then shall the Lord go forth, to wit, our of
Jerusalem, literally fulfilled. If his feet had not stood upon the Mount of
Olives as a witness against them, the Roman army had never stood there to
execute his wrath upon them. For to omit allegories or forced interpretations
concerning the cleaving of the Mount of Olives mentioned by the Prophet, their
conjecture is more then probable, who think the prophecy was literally
verified when the Romans besieged the City and cast their trenches upon the
Mount of Olives. The time was now come that the Nations were to tread Jerusalem
under their feet, and the Jews which were Christ's enemies were to become his
footstooles. These be the issues of his setting his feet upon the Mount of
Olives as it concerns Jerusalem and the Jews. Unless the Lord of hosts had
set his feet upon Mount Olivet to fight for the Nations against Jerusalem, it
had never come into Titus his head to give command or directions, nor into his
soldiers hearts to put his directions conceived by himself (contrary to the
several advisements of his counsel of war) in execution, by raising that
mighty wall mentioned by Josephus ( l. 6. cap. 13.) in the space of three
days. His relation concerning the raising of that wall would have been to me
incredible or a lying wonder, unless the Prophet Zachary had foretold it.
ver. 4. And the Mount of Olives shall cleave in the midst thereof toward the
East and toaeard the West, and there shall be a very great valley, and half of
the mountain shall remove toward the North, and half of it toward the South.
The wall without question was not of stone, for to have attempted that had been
a madness, but at the most de cespite vivo, of earth and turfe. Now the
digging up of so much earth as would suffice to make a wall of that height, and
so many furlongs in length as Josephus describes, would necessarily cause or
occasion such a valley as the Prophet decyphers.

4 It is well observed by Danaeus, and so I presume by many others, that
Jerusalem should be distressed and exposed to ruin from that place wherein her
rulers had apprehended her native King and supreme Lord as a malefactor with
swords and staves; and that her Lord and God should make her amore miserable
prey to the Roman Soldiers, then they had made his son and his followers to
the Roman Deputy, or such as were under his command. But to parallel the
miseries which befell Jerusalem and her children by the rules of divine
retaliation, according to all that she had done unto her Lord and King, or to
set the exact proportion between Jonas his fore-warning to Nineveh [ Yet forty
days and Nineveh shall be destroied] and our Savior's fore-warning unto
Jerusalem [ as Jonas was three days and three nights etc.] and the issues or
executions of both fore-warnings; the one upon Jerusalem for her pepetuall
nonrepentance; the other upon Nineveh for returning to her vomit about forty
years after her repentance within the forty days prefixed by Jonas, would
require a large volume. Thus much for the present must suffice for answer unto
the former of the two queries last proposed, to wit, what our Savior's abode
forty days here on earth after his Resurrection did portend.

5 The second was how these forty days of his abode here on earth after his
Resurrection, were forepictured or foretold.

6 This second querie is in part already answered in the explication of the
sign of Jonas, for as he expected forty days what should become of Nineveh,
so our Savior did respite the solemn declaration of Ierusalem's doom as many
days. Nor can I mislike their opinion who think that the forty days
intervenient betwixt the hour of his Resurrection and Ascension were
prefigured by his forty days fasting in the wilderness after his Baptism, as
that questionless was by Moses fasting forty days and forty nights in the
Mount. Moses did then bear as himself does witness the iniquities of the
people, to wit, as in the Type; but our Savior as well in that long fast after
his Baptism as in the forty days after his Resurrection did bear their and
our sins really and according to the mystical and complete meaning of Moses
words.

7 But if we should descend unto more exact search of the particular
cricumstances of time as it includes the day of his Resurrection and Ascension
with the other thirty eight days intervenient; these were most punctually and
admirably fore-shadowed and represented by the day of his first birth from the
womb, and by the day of his blessed Mothers Purification and his Presentation
in the Temple in Jerusalem.

8 Inasmuch as all the firstborn are called holy unto the Lord, and God
requires them expressly of his people. Exodus 22. 29. The firstborn of thy
sons shall thou give unto me. This did imply that there should be some one
firstborn amongst them that were borne of women, in whom the light and life
of holiness, that holiness it self of which all the legal titles of
holiness were but shadows or glimmerings, should reside or be incorporated as
light in the body of the sun. Now that Jesus the Son of Mary was this
firstborn in whom the true and complete holiness did thus reside, the holy
Ghost did declare or proclaim by the mouth of Simeon, at that very time
wherein our Savior according to the Law of the firstborn was to be presented
unto the Lord in his Temple, to wit, the time of his Mothers Purification.
Simeon (says S. Luke) came by the spirit into the Temple, and when the Parents
brought in the child Jesus, to do for him after the custom of the Law, then
took he him up in his arms and blessed God and said: Lord now let thou
thy servant depart in peace according to thy word, for mine eyes have seen thy
salvation which thou have prepared before the face of all people, a light to
lighten the Gentiles and to be the glory of thy people Israel. And Joseph and
his Mother marvailed at those things which were spoken of him: And Simeon
blessed them and said unto Mary his Mother: Behold this child is set for the
fall and rising again of many in Israel, and for a sign which shall be spoken
against.

9 They good souls came not to the Temple with any such intent or expectation,
but to observe the Law of the firstborn male, as S. Luke tells us. Chap. 2.
22. 23. 24. And when the days of her Purification were accomplished according
to the Law of Moses, they brought him to Jerusalem to present him to the Lord
(as it is written in the Law of the Lord, every male that opens the womb
shall be called holy to the Lord) and to offer a sacrifice according to that
which is said in the Law of the Lord, a pair of turtle doves, or two young
pigeons. The ordinary offering which the Law in like case did require was a
Lamb, as you may read Levit. 12. 6. yet with this express dispensation that
if the party were not able to offer a Lamb, two turtle doves, or two young
pigeons should suffice. The Blessed Virgin whether by reason of her husband's
poverty, or (as I rather think) by reason she was delivered of her Son in a
strange place, without the Country or Province wherein she dwelt, was content
to use the benefit of this dispensation,

10 But though our Savior had this peculiar prerogative of the firstborn,
that he was most holy unto the Lord, and although, as he said at his baptism,
it became him to fulfill all legal righteousness, yet it is questionable
whether he were redeemed at other firstborn were. The sacrifice mentioned by
S. Luke was ordinary at every woman's Purification, whether the child brought
forth were male or female. As for our Savior of all first borne, he only
needed no legal Redemption because he was destinated from his birth not to be
redeemed, but to be offered up in sacrifice for the Redemption of others. And
in this he did fulfill that legal rite or shadow of redeeming those useful
creatures which were by the Law unclean, by the sacrifice of such Exodus 13.
11. 12.
as by the Law were accounted clean

11 But was he exempted by any more peculiar right from the Law of Redemption
then the blessed Virgin his Mother was from the Law of Purification? To this
demand it might be answered that the blessed Virgin was not free from all taint
of original sin as he was. But this reply or answer being admitted, it would
be a foul heresy or worse then so, to say that she was either legally or
naturally unclean during all or any part of the time of her separation from
the Sanctuary or holy assembly, for she was free from any actual sin in the
time or manner of her conception, and from all legal uncleanenesse either in
her travail, or for forty days after it. Otherwise that holy one which was
borne of her might have been conceived, or brought forth or nourished by her
milk in her uncleanness, which to avouch or conceive were foul blasphemy. Was
her observation then of the Law concerning Purification either a will worship,
or affected work of supererogation? Rather an excellent pattern or exemplary
rule of obedience unto all the sons and daughters of Adam that desire or intend
to be the sons and daughters of Abraham. The rule is that even such of either
sex as know themselves not to be conscious of the occasions nor much liable to
the temptations which public Laws or sacred Canons seek to prevent or
restrain from bursting out into matter of fact, shall do both wisely and
religiously if they submit themselves to the observance of such decrees or
injunctions as are useful or needful for most other men to observe. For it
well becomes and behooves the most strong and sound members of any body
natural, or civil, of Christ's mystical body especially, to sympathize, thus
far at least, with unsound or decaying parts of the same body, as to
restrain themselves from using that liberty which they for their own parts
might safely enjoy, were the object or matter prohibited void of danger unto
other members of the same society, which have more forcible temptations to the
contrary, or want skill or knowledge how to use their general liberty.

12 But to conclude the point last proposed and with it this present Treatise.
When the Evangelist says that the blessed Virgin with consent of her betrothed
husband brought her son into the Temple according to the Law of Moses; It is
clear that she did not come to present her self, or him in the Temple before
the fortieth day from his birth. For so the tenor of the Law concerning the
firstborn males is, that his Mother should be seven days unclean, to wit,
unto the day of her sons circumcision and thirty three days after it,
accounting the day of his Circumcision for one of these days.

13 The parallel before proposed lies directly between these four points or
terms of proportion: The first, the day of our Savior's birth from his
Mothers womb. The second, the day of the blessed Virgins Purification, or the
solemnity of his Presentation in the Temple. The third, the day of his birth
from the Grave, or of becoming the first fruits of the^ that sleep. The
fourth, the day of his Presentation to his Father in the heavenly sanctuary, or
of his enthronization both as King and Priest. Upon the fortieth day after his
birth from the womb of the blessed Virgin Simeon blessed Mary and Joseph; and
Hunna the daughter of Phanuel a Prophetess coming at that instant into the
Temple gave thanks likewise unto the Lord and spoke of him to all them that
looked for redemption. Luke 2. 34. 38. upon the fortieth day after his birth
from his maiden-grave the prophecy of Symeon and Hanna and their thanksgiving
to the Lord were more exquisitely accomplished then can by any mortal voice or
pen be expressed. As the legal Sabbath was to the Lord's day, so was the fourth
day of the first week, on which the sun, moon, and stars were created, but
the vespers unto the new creation, wherein the Lord of Glory and Son of
righteousness was placed in his supercelestiall sphere. On the first day of
that week in which he ascended, that joy of the fourth day of the first
Creation decyphered by * Job, the morning stars did sing together and all the
Sons of God, (the holy Angels, and Archangels. Cherubims and Seraphims,
Principalities, and Powers,) did shout for joy, was accomplished. The ditty or
manner of their song or joyful shout is unexpressible, uninvestigable. God
grant we may in this mortal pilgrimage so demean our selves as that we may be
able to stand before the son of man at his second coming unto judgment, and be
capable and docile to learn our parts in that heavenly ditty or song wherewith
the Church triumphant did entertain him at his Ascension.

FINIS.

