By the Lord Deputy and Council.
A Proclamation for the Banishment of Jesuits and Priests, etc.

HENRY FALKLAND.

IT is well known, by daily experience, what intolerable mischiefs and
inconveniences have grown upon this Realm, through the extraordinary resort
of such persons hither as are commonly called titulary popish Archbishops,
Bishops, Vicars general, Abbots, Priors, Deanes, Jesuits, Friars, Seminary
priests, and others of that Sect, who seeking to set up and maintain a
foreign power and authority within this his Majesty's Dominion, The said
Bishops, by pretense thereof, have usurped and exercised Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction within this Kingdom in all spiritual and Ecclesiastical causes,
to the great derogation of his Majesty's imperial Crown. And the said
inferior Secular Priests have likewise exercised all spiritual and
Sacerdotall functions, as christening, marrying, and such like, and by color
there of have taken and exacted sundry spiritual duties, from such as are
seduced by them, to the intolerable grieuance and impouerishing of this poor
nation, And they all seeking and daily endeavoring to pervert the hearts of his
Majesty's subjects, and to draw them from the true Religion here established,
to blindness and superstition, and to alienate their affections from their
Sovereign liege Lord the Kings Majesty, and to subject them to the said
foreign authority, to the general disturbance of the common peace and
tranquillity of this Kingdom. For reformation of which abuses, and avoiding
of such seditious persons, sundry Proclamations have been issued and published
in this Kingdom: some by immediate warrant from his Majesty out of England,
and others by authority of the Lord Deputy and Council of this Kingdom for
the time being, thereby strictly charging and commanding them forthwith, or
within some short time then after (and now long sithence expired) to depart out
of this Kingdom, and never to return hither again, unless they should
conform themselves to the Religion here established, and repair to the Church
duly and orderly: upon pain of his Majesty's high indignation, and such
punishments as might justly be inflicted upon the wilful contemners of his
Majesty's Royal command. All which notwithstanding, his Majesty is informed
that the said popish titularie Bishops, Vicars general, Priests, Jesuits, and
other persons before mentioned, have of late flocked hither in greater numbers
then at any time heretofore, And that such Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and
other Priests, Friars, Vicars general, Abbots, Priors, and Bishops so ordained
by foreign authority, which did before time secretly lurk in sundry parts of
this Kingdom, have of late time mo^e boldly and presumptuously showed and
declared themselves in the use and exercise of their functions in open
Assemblies, whereby his Majesty's subjects have been generally more seduced
and confirmed in their disobedience and obstinacy against his Highness Laws
and Royal commandments (in contempt of his Majesty and the said former
Proclamations) and are like to breed more and greater mifchiefes, if they be
suffered to abide and continue here any longer: Of which increase and insolence
of the said popish Bishops, Priests, and others as aforesaid, his Majesty
having taken special notice, has signified his high displeasure thereat, and
has thereupon commanded Us to put all Laws in execution (that are in force in
this Kingdom) that inflict any punishment upon such as exercise any thing to
extol or maintain the power or jurisdiction Spiritual or Ecclesiastical of
any foreign Prince or Prelate, within this Kingdom, and to revive the
Proclamation to remove and exclude all popish Bishops, Priefts, Vicars
general, and others as aforesaid, out of the same, as the principal
supporters and maintayners of the said usurped Authority.

Know ye therefore, that We in obedience unto his Majesty's Royal command,
and for absolute warning to be given in this kind, do denounce, and in his
Majesty's name strictly charge and command, That they shall all of them, that
is to say, all titulary popish Archbishops, Bishops, Vicars general, Abbots,
Pryors, Deanes, Jesuits, Friars, Seminary Priests, and other Priests
whatsoever, regular or secular (being made or ordained by any authority,
derived or pretended to be derived from the Sea of Rome, or by any other
foreign authority whatsoever) depart out of this Kingdom of Ireland
forthwith, or within forty days next ensuing, at the farthest, after the date
hereof. And that no such titulary Bishops, Vicars general, Abbots, Pryors,
Deanes, Jesuits, Seminary priests, or other priests or Friars, ordained by
foreign authority as aforesaid, shall from and after the said forty days,
repair, come or return into this Kingdom, upon pain of his Majesty's high
displeasure and indignation, and upon such further pain and penalty as may
be justly inflicted upon them by the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom. And
upon the like pain, We do in his Majesty's Name expressly forbid all, and
all manner of persons whatsoever within this Kingdom, to receive, relieve, or
converse with, be ordered by, or receive instruction from any such popish
titulary Archbishop, Bishop, Vicar general, Abbot, Pryor, Deane, Friar,
Seminary priest, or other priest which after the said forty days shall
remain and abide in this Kingdom, or come into the same or any part thereof,
contrary to the intent of this Proclamation. And We do further in his
Majesty's name declare, publish, and command, that if any such popish titulary
Archbishop, Bishop, Vicar general, Abbot, Pryor, Deane, Jesuit, Friar,
Seminary priest, or other priest, shall wilfully abide and continue in this
Kingdom after the said forty days, or shall voluntarily repair or return
into this Kingdom, or any part thereof: or if any person or persons shall
receive, relieve, converse with, be ordered by, or receive instruction from
any such popish titulary Archbishop, Bishop, Vicar general, Abbot, Pryor,
Deane, Jesuit, Friar, Seminary priest, or other priest, That then all and
every Provincial Governors, Sheriffs, Justices of peace, Mayors, Sovereigns,
Portrieffs, Constables, and all others his Majesty's officers and loyal
subjects in this Kingdom, shall use their best diligence and endeavors, to
apprehend all and every such popish titulary Archbishop, Bishop, Vicar
general, Abbot, Prior, Deane, Jesuit, Friar, Seminary priest* and other
priest ordained by foreign Authority as aforesaid, and all and every of their
receivers, relieuers, and followers* and them and every of them to commit to
some safe and strict prison, to the end such further order may be taken for
their punishment, as to Us the Lord Deputy and Council shall be thought fit.
And We require them and every of them, to be severe to put this his Majesty's
commandment in full execution, as they and every of them will answer the
contrary to his Majesty, who will call them and every of them to a strict
account touching the performance of their duties in this behalf.

Provided always, That if any of the said titulary Archbishops, Bishops,
Vicars general, Abbots, Pryors, Deanes, Jesuits, Friars, Seminary priests, or
other such priests whatsoever shall before the said forty days, or within ten
days next after his or their repair or return into this kingdom, submit
themselves before Us the now Lo: Deputy, or to the Lo: Deputy or other chief
Governor of this kingdom for the time being, or other the Governor of any
Province, or before any of his Majesty's privy Council in this kingdom, and
shall thereupon conform themselves, and repair to the Church duly and
orderly, according to the intent of his Majesty's Laws, That then it shall and
may be lawful for all and every such popish titulary Archbishop, Bishop, Vicar
general, Abbot, Pryor, Deane, Jesuit, Friar, Seminary priest, or other priest
that shall so submit and conform themselves, to abide and continue in this
kingdom, and to repair and return into the same, and to have and enjoy the
benefit of his Majesty's Laws and Royal protection, in as free and ample
manner as any other loyal subject, so long as they or any of them shall
continue in such conformity.

Given at his Majesty's Castle of Dublin, the one and twentieth day of January.
1623. Adam Loftus Canc. Hen: Valentia. Fra: Aungier. Fra: Blundell. Geo:
Shurley. I. Blener Hayset. Dudly Norton. Fra: Annesley. William Parsons. Roger
Jones. I. King. Adam Loftus.

God save the King.
Imprinted at Dublin by the Society of Stationers. Anno Domini M. D. c. XXIII.


