CONSTITVTIONS, AND CANONS ECCLESIASTICAL, Treated upon by the Archbishops,
and Bishops, and the rest of the Clergy of IRELAND.

And agreed upon with the Kings Majesty's license in their Synod begun at
DUBLIN, Anno Dom. 1634. And in the year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord
CHARLES by the grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, the
tenth.

And now published for the due observation of them, by his Majesty's Authority
under the Great Seal of Ireland.

DVBLIN, Printed by the Society of Stationers, Printers to the Kings Most
Excellent Majesty, An. Dom. 1635

THE TABLE.
Of the Church of Jreland.
1. OF the agreement of the Church of England and Ireland in the profession of
the same Christian Religion. 2. The Kings Supremacy in causes Ecclesiaesticall
to be maintained. 3. Of the prescript form of Divine Service contained in the
Book of Common prayer. 4. Of the form of Consecrating and ordering
Archbishops, Bishops, etc. and of the Churches established according to that
order. 5. Authors of schisms and maintayners of Conventicles censured.
Of Divine Service, preaching of the Word, and administration of the
Sacraments.
6. DVe celebration of Sundays and Holy Days. 7. The prescript form of
Divine service to be used on Sundays and Holy Days, with all decency, and due
reverence. 8. Of the ordering of certain parts of the Service. 9. Beneficed
Preachers being resident upon their livings, to preach every Sunday. 10. No
public opposition between Preachers. 11. Ministers to Catechize every
Sunday. 12. The people to be informed in the body of Christian Religion; and
reformed in their conversation. 13. Preachers and Lecturers to read Divine
Service, and administer the Sacraments twice a year at the least. 14.
Ministers not to refuse to Christen or Bury. 15. Ministers not to defer
Christening if the child be in danger. 16. Fathers not to be Godfathers in
Baptism, nor children not-Communicants. 17. Confirmation, or laying hands upon
children, to be performed by the Bishop once in three years. 18. Of the
receiving of the holy Communion. 19. Warning to be given before hand for the
Communion. 20. Notorious offenders not to be admitted to the Communion. 21.
Ministers not to preach or administer the Communion in private houses. 22.
Ministers not to hold private conventicles.
Of Bishops, Archdeacons, Deanes, and Prebendaries.
23. OF Ordering Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. 24. Of ordering the revenues of
Ecclesiastical persons. 25. Of Archdeacons. 26. Residence of Deanes in their
Churches. 27. Deanes and Prebendaries to preach during their Residence. 28.
Prebendaries to be resident upon their benefices.
Of the Ordination, function, and charge of Ministers.
29. I Our solemn times appointed for the making of Ministers. 30. The titles
of such as are to be made Ministers. 31. The quality of such as are to be made
Ministers. 32. The examination of such as are to be made Ministers. 33. Caution
for Institution of Ministers into Benefices. 34. Patrons of Ecclesiastical
Benefices. 35. Prevention of Symoniacall contracts in those that are presented
by them. 36. Small Parishes to be united and Residence enjoined. 37. Absence of
Beneficed men, and livings appropriated to be supplied by Curats that are
allowed Preachers. 38. None to be Curats but allowed by the Bishop. 39.
Strangers not admitted to preach without License. 40. Ministers to confer
with Recusants. 41. Ministers to visit the sick. 42. Soberness of
conversation, and decency of apparel required in Ministers. 43. Of
consecration of Churches. 44. A Terrier of gleabe-lands and other possessions
belonging to Churches. 45. Payment of Tithes. 46. A Registry to be kept of
Christnings, VVeddings, and Burials.
Of Marriages and Divorces.
47. NOne to marry within the degrees prohibited. 48. None to marry under XXI.
years without their Parents consent. 49. Security to be taken at the granting
of such Licenses, and under what conditions. 50. Oaths to be taken for the
conditions. 51. An exception for those that are in VVidowhood. 52. Ministers
not to marry any person without Bannes. 53. No sentence for Divorce to be given
upon the sole confession of the parties. 54. No sentence of Divorce to be given
but in open court. 55. In all sentences for Divorce, bond to be taken for not
marrying during each others life.
Of Ecclesiastical Courts, and Jurisdiction.
56. THe Order of Jurisdictions to be kept. 57. The restraint of double
Quarrels upon the respite of Institution. 58. Inhibitions not to be granted
without the subscription of an Advocate. 59. Inhibitions not to be granted
until the Appeal be exhibited to the Judge. 60. Solemn denunciation of
parties excommunicated. 61. Notorious crimes and scandals to be certified into
Ecclesiastical Courts by presentiments. 62. Schismatics to be presented. 63.
Not-communicants at Easter, to be presented. 64. Ministers may present. 65.
Ministers and Churchwardens not to be sued for presenting. 66. Churchwardens
not bound to present oftener than twice a year. 67. Churchwardens not to be
troubled for not presenting oftener than twice a year. 68. Convenient time to
be assigned for framing presentiments. 69. None to be cited into
Ecclesiastical Courts by Process of Quorum nomina. 70. Maturity required in
proceeding. 71. No sentence of Deprivation or Deposition to be pronounced
against a Minister but by the Bishop. 72. No Act to be sped but in open Court.
73. No court to have more than one Seal. 74. Convenient places to be chosen
for keeping of Courts. 75. Peculiar and inferior Courts to exhibit the
original Copies of Wills into the Bishops Registry. 76. The quality and Oath
of Judges and Surrogates. 77. Proctors not to retain Causes without the
lawful assignement of the parties. 78. Proctors prohibited the Oath in animam
domini sui. 79. Proctors not to be clamorous in Court. 80. The Oath de calumnia
not to be refused. 81. Abuses to be reformed in Registers. 82. A certain rate
of Fees to all Ecclesiastical Offiicers. 83. A table of the rates of Fees to
be set up in Courts and Registries. 84. The whole Fees for showing Letters of
orders, and other licenses, due but once, in every Bishops time. 85. The number
of Apparators restrained.
Of Parish Clearks, Churchwardens, and Schoolmasters, and their several
duties.
86. PArish Clearks to be chosen by the Minister. 87. The choice of
Churchwardens, and their Account. 88. The choice of Sidemen, and their joint
office with Churchwardens. 89. The old Churchwardens to make their
Presentiments before the new be sworn. 90. The duty of Churchwardens touching
such persons as are out of the Church in the time of Gods worship on Sundays,
and Holy Days. 91. Their duty touching those persons that are in the Church at
that time. 92. To keep the Church from being profaned at all other times. 93.
To see Churches and Churchyards kept in sufficient reparation. 94. To furnish
all Churches with things necessary for the celebration of Divine Service,
Preaching and administration of the Sacraments. 95. To provide things fitting
for every Communion, and to observe those that come, or come not to the same.
96. To provide a Chest for Alms in every Church. 97. To abolish all monuments
of superstition. 98. None to teach School without License, and Curates
desirous to teach to be licenced before others. 99. The duty of
Schoolemasters.
Of the authority of the Synod.
100. The authority of this National Synod established.
DIEV ET MON DROIT.

CHARLES by the grace of GOD King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the faith etc.
To all men to whom these presents shall come, greeting.
Whereas our Bishops, Deanes of our Cathedral Churches, Archdeacons, Chapters
and Colleges, and the rest of the Clergy within our Kingdom of Ireland, were
summoned and called by virtue of our Writts directed to the Archbishops of the
four several Provinces, and bearing date the four and twentieth day of May,
in the tenth year of our Reign to appear before the said Archbishops in the
Cathedral Church of S. Patricks Dublin upon the one and twentieth day of July
then next ensueing, then and there to treat and conclude upon certain high
and urgent affairs in the said Writts mentioned, who did thereupon at the time
appointed, and in the said Cathedral Church of S. Patricks aforesaid, assemble
themselves and appear in Convocation for that purpose, according to the tenor
of the said Writts. And whereas we for diverse urgent and weighty occasions us
thereunto moving, of our especial grace, certain knowledge, and mere motion,
did by virtue of our prerogative royal and supreme authority in causes
Ecclesiastical, give and grant by our Letters Patents under our great Seal of
Ireland bearing date the one and twentieth day of July in the tenth year of
our Reign, full power and authority unto the said Archbishops, Bishops,
Deanes, Archdeacons, Chapters, Colleges and Clergy of this Kingdom then
assembled in Convocation, in the said Cathedral Church of S. Patrick, that
they from time to time during the Parliament then begun at Dublin might
confer, treat, consult and conclude of and upon such Articles, Canons,
Orders, Ordinances, Statutes and Constitutions Ecclesiastical, as they shall
think necessary, fit and convenient for the honor and service of Almighty
GOD, and augmentation of his divine worship, the rooting out of heresies and
errors out of the Vineyard of Christ, for procuring of the good and quiet of
the Church and preservation of good government in causes Ecclesiastical, and
to the Jurisdiction of the Church belonging, as also to make and set down
ordinances and decrees to have such force and effect as other Canons and
Constitutions of the Church have, and the same (our royal assent being
thereunto first had and obtained) to set forth and publish freely and lawfully,
and that as well the Archbishops and Bishops, and all other inferior persons
whom it may concern, should yield due obedience thereunto, as in and by our
said Letters Patents more at large it does and may appear. Forasmuch as the
said Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons, Chapters and Colleges with the
rest of the Clergy of this Kingdom having met together at the time and place
before mentioned, and then and there by virtue of our said authority granted
unto them, have treated of, concluded and agreed upon certain Canons, Orders,
Ordinances, and Constitutions, to the end and purpose by US limited and
prescribed unto them, and have thereupon offered and presented the same unto
US, most humbly desiring US to give our royal assent unto their said Canons,
Orders, Ordinances and Constitutions, according to the form of a certain
Statute or Act of Parliament made in that behalf, and by our said Prerogative
royal, and supreme authority in causes Ecclesiastical, to ratify by our
Letters Patents under our great Seal of Ireland, and to confirm the said
Canons being one hundred in number, and contained in a Book entitled,
Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastical, treated upon by the Archbishops and
Bishops, and the rest of the Clergy of Ireland, and agreed upon with the Kings
Majesty's license in their Synod begun at Dublin Anno Domini 1634. and in the
year of the reign of our Sovereign Lord CHARLES by the grace of GOD King of
great Britain, France, and Ireland the tenth, which Book is remaining with
John Forth Clerk of the upper house of Convocation. WE of our Princely
inclination and royal care for the maintenance of the present estate and
government of the Church of Ireland by the Laws of this our Realm now
settled and established, having diligently with great contentment and comfort
read and considered of all these their said Canons, Orders, Ordinances and
Constitutions agreed upon, as is before expressed, and finding the same such,
as We are persuaded will be very profitable, not only to our Clergy, but to
the whole Church of this our Kingdom; and to all the true members of it, (if
they be well observed.) HAVE therefore for US our heirs and lawful
successors, of our especial grace, certain knowledge and mere motion, by the advice and consent of our right trusty and right welbeloved Cousin and
Counselor, Thomas Viscount Wentworth our Deputy general of our said
Kingdom of Ireland, and President of our Council established in the North
parts of our Kingdom of England, given and by these presents do give our
royal assent according to the form of the said Statute or Act of Parliament
aforesaid, to all and every the said Canons, Orders, Ordinances and
Constitutions, and all and every thing in them contained. And furthermore, We
do not only by our said Prerogative royal and supreme authority in causes
Ecclesiastical, ratify, confirm and establish by these our Letters Patents
the said Canons, Orders, Ordinances and Constitutions, and all and every thing
in them contained, as is aforesaid, but do likewise propound, publish, and
straightly enjoyne and command by our said authority, and by these our Letters
Patents the same to be diligently observed, executed, and equally kept by all
our loving Subjects of this our Kingdom, in all points wherein they do, or
may concern every or any of them; according to this our will and pleasure
hereby signified and expressed. And that likewise for the better observation of
them every Minister by what name or title soever he be called, shall in the
Parish Church or Chapel where he has charge, read all the said Canons,
Orders, Ordinances and Constitutions once every year, upon some Sundays or
Holy Days in the afternoon before divine service; dividing the same in such
sort, as that the one half may be read one day, and the other another day. The
Book of the said Canons to be provided at the charge of the Parish betwixt
this, and the Feast of Easter next ensueing. Straightly chargeing and
commanding all Archbishops, Bishops, and all other that exercise any
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction within this Realm, every man in his place to see
and procure (so much as in them lies) all and every of the same Canons,
Orders, Ordinances and Constitutions to be in all points duly observed, not
sparing to execute the penalties in them severally mentioned upon any that
shall wittingly or wilfully break or neglect to observe the same, as they
tender the honor of GOD, the peace of the Church, tranquillity of the
Kingdom, and their duties and service unto US their King and Sovereign. In
witness etc.

CONSTITVTIONS AND CANONS ECCLESIASTICAL, Treated upon by the Archbishops, and
Bishops, and the rest of the Clergy of Ireland; and agreed upon by the Kings
Majesty's license in their Synod begun and holden at Dublin, Anno Domini, 1634.
and in the year of the reign of our Sovereign Lord CHARLES by the grace of
GOD King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland the Tenth.
I. Of the agreement of the Church of England and Ireland, in the profession of
the same Christian Religion.
FOR the manifestation of our agreement with the Church of England in the
confession of the same Christian Faith, and the doctrine of the Sacraments: We
do receive and approve the Book of Articles of Religion agreed upon by the
Archbishops, and Bishops, and the whole Clergy in the Convocation holden at
London in the year of our Lord God, 1562. for the avoiding of diversities of
opinions, and for the establishing of consent touching true Religion. And
therefore if any hereafter shall affirm that any of those Articles are in any
part superstitious or erroneous, or such as he may not with a good conscience
subscribe unto, let him be excommunicated, and not absolved before he make a
public revocation of his error.

II. The Kings Supremacy in Causes Ecclesiastical to be maintained.
ALL Ecclesiastical persons having cure of souls, and all other Preachers,
and Readers of Divinity Lectures, shall to the uttermost of their wit,
knowledge and learning, purely and sincerely (without any color or
dissimulation) teach, manifest, open and declare, four times every year (at
the least) in their Sermons, and other Collations and Lectures; That all
usurped and foreign power, (forasmuch as the same has no establishment nor
ground by the Law of God,) is for most just causes, taken away and abolished:
and that therefore no manner of obedience or subjection, within his Majesty's
Realms and Dominions, is due unto such foreign power: but that the Kings
power within his Realm of Ireland, and all other his Dominions and Countries,
is the highest power under God, to whom all men, as well Inhabitants, as borne
within the same, do by Gods Laws, owe all loyalty and obedience, and to no
other foreign power and potentate in the earth. And whosoever shall hereafter
maintain, that the Kings Majesty has not the same authority in causes
Ecclesiastical, that the godly Kings had amongst the Jews, and Christian
Emperors in the Primitive Church, or impeach in any part his Regal supremacy
in the said causes restored to the Crown, and by the Laws of this Realm
therein established, let him be excommunicated, and not restored, but only by
the Archbishop of the Province, after his repentance, and public revocation
of his error.

III. Of the prescript form of Divine Service, contained in the Book of
Common Prayer.
THat form of Liturgy or Divine Service, and no other, shall be used in any
Church of this Realm, but that which is established by the Law, and comprised
in the Book of Common Prayer, and administration of Sacraments. And if any one
shall preach, or by other open words declare or speak any thing in the
derogation or despising of the said Book, or of any thing therein contained,
let him be excommunicated, and not restored, until he repent, and publicly
revoke his error.

III. Of the form of consecrating and ordering Archbishops, Bishops, etc. and
of the Churches established according to that order.
THat form of Ordination, and no other, shall be used in this Church, but that
which is contained in the book of ordering Bishops, Priests, and Deacons,
allowed by authority, and hitherto practiced in the Churches of England and
Ireland. And if any shall affirm, that they who are consecrated, or ordered,
according to those rites, are not lawfully made, nor ought to be accounted
either Bishops, Priests, or Deacons; or shall deny that the Churches,
established under this government, are true Churches; or refuse to join with
them in Christian profession, let him be excommunicated and not restored until
he repent and publicly revoke his error.

V. Authors of Schism, and maintainers of Conventicles censured.
WHosoever shall separate themselves from the Communion of Saints, as it is
approved by the Apostles rules in the Church of Ireland, and combine themselves
together in a new brotherhood; (accounting the Christians who are conformable
to the doctrine, government, rites and ceremonies of the Church of Ireland, to
be profane and unmeet for them to join with in Christian profession) or shall
affirm and maintain, that there are within this Realm other meetings,
assemblyes, or congregations, then such as by the Laws of this Land are held
and allowed, which may rightly challenge to themselves the name of true and
lawful Churches, let him be excommunicated, and not restored, until he repent
and publicly revoke his error.

VI. Due celebration of Sundays and Holy Days.
ALL manner of persons shall celebrate and keep the Lords day, commonly called
Sunday, and other Holy Days, according to Gods holy will and pleasure, and the
orders of this Church; that is, in hearing the Word of GOD read and taught in
private and public prayers; in acknowledging their offenses to GOD, and
amendment of the same, in reconciling themselves charitably to their
neighbors, where displeasure has been, in oftentimes receiving the Communion
of the Body and Blood of CHRIST, in visiting the poor and sick; using all
godly and sober conversation.

VII. The prescript form of Divine Service to be used on Sundays and
Holidays, with all decency and due reverence.
EVery Sunday and Holy Day, the Parsons, Vicars, and Curates, shall celebrate
Divine Service, at convenient and usual times of the day, and in such place of
every Church, as the Bishop of the Diocese, or Ecclesiastical Ordinary of the
place, shall think meet, for the largeness or straitness of the same, so as
the people may be most edified. All Ministers likewise shall use and observe
the Orders, Rites, Ornaments, and Ceremonies prescribed in the Book of Common
prayer, and in the Act for uniformity printed therewith, as well in reading the
holy Scriptures, and saying of prayers, as in administration of the Sacraments;
without either diminishing in regard of preaching, or in any other respect, or
adding any thing in the matter or form thereof. And in Cathedral, and
Collegiate Churches, all Deanes, Masters, and Heads of Collegiate Churches,
Canons and Prebendaries, being Graduates, shall daily at the times both of
prayer and preaching, wear with their Surplises, such Hoods as are agreeable
to their degrees. No man also shall cover his head in any Church or Chapel in
the time of Divine Service, except he have some infirmity, in which case he may
wear a nightcap or coife. Neither shall any person be otherwise at such times
busied, then in quiet attendance to hear, mark, and understand that which is
read, preached, or ministered: using all such reverent gestures and actions, as
by the Book of Common prayer are prescribed in that behalf, and the
commendable use of this Church received; and not departing out of the Church,
during the time of Service and Sermon, without some urgent or reasonable cause.

VIII. Of the ordering of certain parts of the Service.
ALso the Minister reading the Lessons, Epistle and Gospel, and the Ten
commandments, and such other parts of Divine Service, as do greatly tend to
the edifying of the people; shall so place himself, and so turn him to the
people, as they may best hearken thereunto, and be edified by the same. And
every Beneficiary and Curate, shall endeavor, that the confession of sins and
absolution, and all the second service, (at or before the communion, to the
Homily or Sermon) where the people all, or most, are Irish, shall be used in
English first, and after in Irish, if the Ordinary of the place, shall so
think meet.

IX. Beneficed Preachers being resident upon their Livings, to preach every
Sunday.
EVery beneficed man, allowed to be a Preacher, and residing on his Benefice,
having no lawful impediment, shall in his own cure, preach one Sermon every
Sunday of the year: And therein he shall teach no vain opinions, no
Heresies, nor Popish errors, disagreeing from the Articles of Religion,
generally received in the Churches of England and Ireland; nor any thing at
all, whereby the people may be stirred up to the desire of novelties or
contention: but shall soberly and sincerely divide the Word of truth, to the
glory of GOD, and to the best edification of the people.

X. No public opposition between Preachers.
IF any Preacher shall in the Pulpit, particularly, or namely, of purpose,
impugn or confute any doctrine delivered by any other Preacher in the same
Church, or in any other near adjoining; or otherwise make any public
opposition unto him, before he has acquainted the Bishop of the Diocese
therewith, and received order from him what to do in that case, (because upon
such public dissenting and contradicting, there may grow much offense and
disquieting to the people;) the Churchwardens, or party grieved, shall
forthwith signify the same to the said Bishop, and not suffer the said
Preacher any more to occupy that place which he has once abused, except he
faithfully promise to forbear all such matter of contention in the Church,
until the Bishop has taken further order therein: who shall with all
convenient speed so proceed therein, that public satisfaction may be made in
the Congregation where the offense was given. Provided that if either of the
parties offending, do appeal, he shall not be suffered to preach pendente
lite.

XI. Ministers to catechize every Sunday.
EVery Parson, Vicar, or Curate, upon every Sunday before Evening Prayer, shall
for half an hour, or more, examine and instruct the youth and ignorant
persons of his Parish, in the Ten commandments, the Articles of the belief,
and in the Lords prayer; and shall diligently hear, and instruct and teach
them the Catechism, set forth in the book of Common prayer. And all Fathers,
Mothers, Masters and Mistresses, shall cause their children, servants and
apprentises, which have not learned the Catechism, to come to Church at the
time appointed, obediently to hear, and to be ordered by the Minister, until
they have learned the same. And if any Minister neglect his duty herein, let
him be sharply reproved upon the first complaint and true notice thereof given
to the Bishop or Ordinary of the place. If after submitting himself, he shall
wilfully offend therein again, let him be suspended. If so the third time,
there being little hope that he will be therein reformed, then excommunicated,
and so remain until he will be reformed. And likewise if any of the said
Fathers, Mothers, Masters or Mistresses, children, servants or apprentices
shall neglect their duties, as the one sort in not causing them to come, and
the other in refusing to learn, as aforesaid, let them be suspended (if they
be not children,) and if they so persist by the space of a month, let them be
excommunicated. Neither shall the Minister admit any to be married, or to be
Godfathers or Godmothers, at the Baptism of any child; or to receive the
holy Communion, before they can say the Articles of the belief, the Lords
prayer, and the Commandments, in such a language as they understand.

XII. The people to be informed in the body of Christian Religion, and reformed
in their conversation.
FOR the better grounding of the People in the Principles of Christian
Religion, We ordain, that the heads of the Catechism, being divided into so
many parts as there are Sundays in the year, shall be explained to the people
in every Parish Church. In the handling whereof, the Ministers and Curates are
to use such moderation, that they do not run into curious questions, or
unnecessary controversies, but shortly declare, and confirm the doctrine
proposed, and make application thereof to the behoof of the hearers. The
Ministers also in all their preachings, and catechizings, and private
conferences, when need requires, shall teach the people to place their whole
trust and confidence in GOD, and not in Creatures, neither in the Habit or
Scapular of any Friar, or in hallowed Beads, Medals, Relics, or such like
trumperyes. They shall do their endeavor likewise to root out all ungodly,
superstitious, and barbarous customs; as using of charms, sorcery,
enchantments, witchcraft, or soothsaying; and generally to reform the manners
of the people committed to their charge, unto a Christian, sober, and civil
conversation.

XIII. Preachers and Lecturers to read Divine Service, and administer the
Sacraments twice a year at the least.
EVery Minister being possessed of a Benefice, that has cure and charge of
Souls, although he chiefly attend to preaching, and has a Curate under him,
to execute other duties, which are to be performed for him in the Church; and
likewise every other stipendary Preacher, that reads any Lecture, or
catechizeth, or preaches in any Church or Chapel, shall twice at the least
every year, read himself the Divine Service, upon two several Sundays,
publicly, and at the usual times both in the forenoone and afternoon, in
the Church which he so possesses, or where he reads, catechizeth, or
preaches, as is aforesaid; and shall likewise as often in every year
administer the Sacraments of Baptism (if there be any to be baptized) and of
the Lords Supper, in such manner and form, and with the use and observation of
all such rites, ornaments, and ceremonies, as are prescribed by the book of
Common prayer, (and the Act for uniformity printed therewith) in that behalf,
which if he do not accordingly perform, then shall he that is possessed of a
Benefice (as before) be suspended; and he that is but a Reader, Preacher, or
Catechizer, be removed from his place by the Bishop of the Diocese, until he
or they shall submit themselves to perform all the said duties, in such manner
and sort, as before is prescribed.

XIIII. Ministers not to refuse to Christen, or Bury.
NO Minister shall refuse or delay ^o christen any Child, according to the
form of the book of Common Prayer, that is brought to the Church to him on
Sundays or Holidays to be christened; or to bury any Corpse, that is brought
to the Church or Churchyard, (convenient warning being given to him thereof
before,) in such manner as is prescribed in the said book of Common prayer.
And if he shall refuse to christen the one, or bury the other, (except the
party deceased were denounced excommunicated majori excommunicatione, for some
grievous and notorious crime, and no man able to testify of his repentance,)
he shall be suspended by the Bishop of the Diocese from his Ministry by the
space of three months.

XV. Ministers not to defer christening, if the child be in danger.
IF any Minister, being duly (without any manner of collusion) informed of the
weakness and danger of death of any Infant unbaptized in his Parish, and
thereupon desired to go or come to the place where the said Infant remains,
to baptize the same, shall either wilfully refuse so to do, or of gross
negligence shall so defer the time, as when he might conveniently have
resorted to the place, and have baptized the said Infant, it dies through such
default unbaptized: The said Minister shall be suspended for three months, and
before his restitution, shall acknowledge his fault, and promise before his
Ordinary, that he will not wittingly incur the like again. Provided, that
where there is a Curate or a Substitute, this Constitution shall not extend to
the Parson or Vicar himself, but the Curate or Substitute present.

XVI. Fathers not to be Godfathers in Baptism, nor Children not communicants.
NO Parent shall be urged to present, not be admitted to answer as Godfather for
his own Child; nor any Godfather or Godmother shall be suffered to make any
other answer or speech, then by the book of Common Prayer is prescribed in
that behalf. Neither shall any person be admitted Godfather, or Godmother to
any Child, at Christening or Confirmation, before the said person so
undertaking, has received the holy Communion.

XVII. Confirmation, or laying hands upon Children, to be performed by the
Bishop, once in three years.
EVery Minister that has cure and charge of Souls, for the better
accomplishing of the Orders prescribed in the book of Common Prayer,
concerning Confirmation, shall take such special care, as that none may be
presented to the Bishop, for him to lay his hand upon, but such as can render
an account of their faith, according to the Catechism in the said book
contained. The Bishop also in his own person, every third year (at least) in
the time of his Visitation, shall perform that duty of Confirmation; or if in
that year, by reason of some infirmity, he be not able personally to visit his
Diocese, he shall not omit to do it the next year after, as he may
conveniently. And whenever the time shall by him be assigned, every such
Minister shall use his best endeavor to prepare and make able, and likewise to
procure as many as he can, to be then brought to be confirmed.

XVIII. Of the receiving of the holy Communion.
IN every Cathedral and Collegiate Church, at least once every month, and in
every Parish Church and Chapel, where Sacraments are to be admitted within
this Realm, the holy Communion shall be ministered by the Parson, Vicar, or
Minister, so often, and at such times as every Parishioner may communicate at
the least thrice in the year, (whereof the feast of Easter to be one)
according as they are appointed by the book of Common Prayer. And that no
Minister when he celebrateth the Communion, shall wittingly administer the same
to any but such as kneel: Provided that every Minister as often as he
administreth the Communion, shall first receive the Sacrament himself.
Furthermore, no bread, nor wine newly brought shall be used, but first the words
of Institution shall be rehearsed, when the said bread and wine be presented upon
the Communion Table. Likewise the Minister shall deliver both the bread and
wine to every communicant, severally.

XIX. Warning to be given before hand for the Communion.
WHereas every Lay person is bound to receive the holy Communion thrice every
year, and many notwithstanding do not receive that Sacrament once in a year.
We do require every Minister to give warning to his Parishioners, publicly
in the Church, at Morning Prayer the Sunday before every time of his
administering the holy Sacrament, for the better preparation of themselves.
Which said warning, we enjoyne the said Parishioners to accept and obey under
the penalty and danger of the Law. And the Minister of every Parish, and in
Cathedral and Collegiate Churches, some principal Minister of the Church,
shall the afternoon, before the said administration, give warning by tolling
of the Bell, or otherwise, to the intent, that if any have any scruple of
conscience, or desire the special ministry of reconciliation, he may afford
it to those that need it. And to this end, the people are often to be
exhorted, to enter into a special examination of the state of their own
souls: and that finding themselves either extreme dull, or much troubled in
mind, they do resort unto Gods Ministers, to receive from them as well advise
and counsel for the quickening of their dead hearts, and the subduing of those
corruptions, whereunto they have been subject, as the benefit of absolution
likewise, for the quieting of their consciences, by the power of the Keys,
which Christ has committed to his Ministers for that purpose.

XX. Notorious offenders not to be admitted to the Communion.
NO Minister shall in any wise admit to the receiving of the holy Communion any
of his cure, or flock, which be openly known to live in sin notorious,
without repentance. Nor any who have maliciously and openly contended with
their Neighbors, until they shall be reconciled. Nor any Churchwardens or
Sidemen, who having taken their Oaths, to present their Ordinaries all such
public offenses, as they are particularly charged to inquire of in their
several Parishes, shall (notwithstanding their said Oaths, and that their
faithful discharging of them is the chiefest means whereby public sins
and offenses may be reformed and punished) wittingly and willingly, desperately
and irreligiously incur the horrible crime of perjury, either in neglecting,
or refusing to present such of the said enormities and public offenses, as
they know themselves to be committed in their said Parishes; or are notoriously
offensive to the Congregation there, although they be urged by some of their
Neighbors, or by their Minister, or by their Ordinary himself, to discharge
their consciences by presenting of them, and not to incur so desperately the
said horrible sin of perjury.

XXI. Ministers not to preach, or administer the Communion in private houses.
NO Minister shall preach, or administer the holy Communion in any private
house, except it be in times of necessity, when any being either so impotent,
as he cannot go to the Church, or very dangerously sick, are desirous to be
partakers of that holy Sacrament, under pain of suspension for the first
offense, and excommunication for the second. Provided, that houses are here
reputed for private houses, wherein are no Chapels dedicated and allowed by
the Ecclesiastical Laws of this Realm. And provided also under the pain
before expressed, that no Chaplains do preach, or administer the Communion in
any other places but in the Chapels of the said houses, and that also they do
the same very seldom upon Sundays and Holidays. So that both the Lords and
Masters of the said houses, and their families, shall at other times resort to
their own Parish Churches, and there receive the holy Communion at the least
once every year.

XXII. Ministers not to hold private Conventicles.
FOrasmuch as all Conventicles and secret meetings of Priests and Ministers,
have been ever justly accounted very hurtful to the state of the Church
wherein they live: We do now ordain and constitute, that no Priests or
Ministers of the Word of GOD, nor any other persons, shall meet together in
any private house, or elsewhere, to consult upon any matter or course to be
taken by them, or upon their motion or direction by any other, which may any
way tend to the impeaching or depraving of the doctrine of the Church of
Ireland, or of the book of Common prayer, or of any part of the government and
discipline now established in the Church of Ireland, under pain of
excommunication.

XXIII. Of ordering Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.
NO Archbishop, Bishop, or other person whatsoever, having Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, shall appoint, constitute, make and confirm any Chancellor,
Commissary, or Official for longer time then their own incumbency, except he
be of the full age of twenty six years at least, and one that is learned in
the Civil and Ecclesiastical laws, and is at the least a Master of Arts, or
Bachelour of law, and is reasonably well practiced in the course thereof.
Neither shall they let their Jurisdictions to farm, or grant, or confirm to
any man, the next, second, or third advowson of any Prebend or Benefice, being
in their gift. And if they shall make or confirm any such grant or Patent of
the place of Chancellor, Commissary, or Official, for longer term, then
during their Incumbency, to any that is not qualified, as is hereby required,
then the said person so accepting the said Patent or Grant, is to be held and
declared incapable thereof, to all intents whatsoever. Lastly, the said
Archbishops and Bishops, shall provide, that the Clergy and people be not
burdened with unjust exactions by their servants and Officers in their
Visitations: And that neither the Archbishops therein, shall charge their
Suffragans, nor the Bishops their Clergy, with any Noctials, or Refections,
over and above their ordinary procurations, (reserving notwithstanding unto the
Archbishops in their Visitations, the Refections usually heretofore received in
those Diocesses, where the same procurations are not received by them, which
are yearly paid by the Clergy unto their Bishops.) And that no Archbishop,
or Bishop, shall demand from the Executors or Administrators of any of their
Clergy, any Heriots or mortuaries; as in some places of this Kingdom
heretofore has been accustomed.

XXIIII. Of ordering the revenues of Ecclesiastical persons.
NO Archbishop, Bishop, Deane and Chapter, or Dignitary, shall in any wise
diminish the ancient revenues of their Sees, or Churches, nor alienate their
Lands in fee farm, nor destroy their woods, nor give power to their Tennants
to make waste thereof, nor by any devise, demise their Mensall or demeasne
Lands, unless it be to their Curates, actually dischargeing the said Cures,
without forty days absence in any one year, and to them for no longer time or
term, then during their own Incumbency. Neither shall they join with any
Dignitary, Prebend, or other Beneficiarie or Beneficiaries, to confirm the
Leases or alienations, made or to be made, by him or them, of any
Ecclesiastical profits or obventions. And the said Archbishops, and Bishops,
shall carefully provide, that all Churches, Chancels, and Manse-houses, the
repair whereof properly belongs to them, or any of them; or to any other
Ecclesiastical person or persons; be from time to time preserved from ruin
and decay.

XXV. Of Archdeacons.
EVery Archdeacon which has authority to visit, either by common right, or by
prescription, shall visit the precinct of his Jurisdiction, once every year,
in his own person, and he shall not substitute any to be his Official, but
such a one as has been brought up in the University, and has studied the
Civil Law (if such a one may be had) being able not only in learning, but
also with gravity and modesty to discharge that Office.

XXVI. Residence of Deanes in their Churches.
EVery Deane, Master, or Warden, or chief Governor of any Cathedral or
Collegiate Church, shall be resident in his said Cathedral or Collegiate
Church, fourscore and ten days, conjunctim aut divisim, in every year at
least, so that they have houses, or ground to build houses upon, belonging to
their Churches; and then shall continue there in preaching of the Word of GOD,
and keeping good hospitality, (except he shall be otherwise let with
weighty and urgent causes, to be approved by the Bishop of the Diocese.) And
when he is present, he, with the rest of the Canons or Prebendaryes resident,
shall take special care, that the Statutes and laudable customs of their
Church, (not being contrary to the Word of GOD, or prerogative Royal) the
Statutes of this Realm being in force-concerning Ecclesiastical Orders, and
all other constitutions, now set forth and confirmed by his Majesty's
authority, and such as shall be lawfully enjoined by the Bishop of the Diocese
in his Visitation, according to the Statutes and customs of the same Church,
or the Ecclesiastical Laws of this Realm, be diligently observed. And that
the Petty Canons, Vicars Choralls, and other Ministers of their Church, be
urged to the study of the holy Scriptures, and every one of them to have the
New Testament not only in English, but also in Latin.

XXVII. Deanes and Prebendaries to preach during their residence.
THe Deane, Master, Warden, or other chief Governor, Prebendaries, and Canons
in every Cathedral, and Collegiate Church, shall not only preach there in
their own persons, so often as they are bound by Law, Statute, Ordinance, or
custom, but shall likewise preach in other Churches of the same Diocese where
they are resident, and especially in those places, whence they, or their
Churches receive any yearly rents or profits. And in case they themselves be
sick, or lawfully absent, they shall substitute such licenced Preachers to
supply their turns, as by the Bishop of the Diocese shall be thought meet to
preach in Cathedral Churches. And if any, otherwise neglect, or omit to supply
his course, as is aforesaid, the offender shall be punished by the Bishop, or by
him or them, to whom the Jurisdiction of that Church appertains, according to
the quality of the offense.

XXVIII. Prebendaries to be resident upon their Benefices.
NO Prebendaries, or Canons in Cathedral or Collegiate Churches, having one or
more Benefices with cure, (and not being residentaries in the same Cathedral
or Collegiate Churches) shall under color of the said Prebends, absent
themselves from their Benefices, with cure, above the space of one month in
the year, unless it be for some urgent cause, and certain time to be allowed
by the Bishop of the Diocese. And such of the said Canons and Prebendaryes, as
by the Ordinances of the said Cathedral or Collegiate Churches, do stand
bound to be resident in the same, shall so among themselves sort and proportion
the times of the year, concerning residence to be kept in the said Churches,
as that some of them always shall be personally resident there. And that all
those who be, or shall be Residentaries in any Cathedral, or Collegiate Church,
shall after the days of their residencie, appointed by their local Statutes
or customs, expired; presently repair to their Benefices, or some of them, or
to some other charge where the Law requires their presence, there to discharge
their duties, according to the Law in that ease provided. And the Bishop of the
Diocese shall see the same to be duly performed and put in execution.

XXIX. Four solemn times appointed for the making of Ministers.
FOrasmuch as the ancient Fathers of the Church, led by the examples of the
Apostles, appointed Prayers and Fasts to be used at the solemn ordering of
Ministers, and to that purpose allotted certain times, in which, only sacred
Orders might be given or conferred. We following their holy and religious
example, do constitute and decree, that no Deacons or Ministers be ordained
and made, but only upon the Sundays, immediately following Iejunia quatuor
temporum, commonly called Ember-weekes, appointed in ancient time for prayer
and fasting, (purposely for this cause at their first Institution,) and so
continued at this day in the Church of Ireland: And that this be done in the
Cathedral or Parish Church, where the Bishop resideth, and in the time of
Divine Service, in the presence not only of the Archdeacon, but of the Deane
and two Prebendaries at the least, or (if they shall happen by any lawful
cause to be let or hindered) in the presence of four other grave persons,
being allowed for public Preachers. And lastly that no person, of what
quality or gifts soever, be made a Deacon and Presbyter both together upon the
same day.

XXX. The Titles of such as are to be made Ministers.
NO person shall be admitted into sacred Orders, except he shall at that time
exhibit to the Bishop, of whom he desires imposition of hands, a presentation
of himself to some Ecclesiastical preferment, then void in that Diocese, or
shall bring to the said Bishop, a true and undoubted certificate, that either
he is provided of some Church within the said Diocese, where he may attend
the cure of souls, or of some Ministers place vacant, either in the Cathedral
Church of that Diocese, or in some other Collegiate Church therein also
situate, where he may execute his Ministry, or that he is a Senior Fellow of
some College in the University, except he be a Master of Arts of five years
standing, that lives of his own charge in the University, or except by the
Bishop himself that does ordain him Minister, he be shortly after to be
admitted either to some Benefice or Curateship then void, not to be removed
until he be otherwise provided for; except by his notable evil carriage he
deserve the contrary. And if any Bishop shall admit any person into the
Ministry, that has none of these Titles as is aforesaid, then he shall keep
and maintain him with all things necessary, till he do prefer him to some
Ecclesiastical Living. And if the said Bishop shall refuse so to do, he
shall be suspended by his Archbishop, being assisted with another Bishop, from
giving of Orders by the space of a year.

XXXI. The quality of such as are to be made Ministers.
NO Bishop shall hereafter admit any person into sacred Orders, which is not of
his own Diocese, except he be a gradua^^ of some University within the Kings
Dominions, or except he shall bring letters dimissory (so termed) from the
Bishop of whose Diocese he is; and desiring to be a Deacon, is three and
twenty years old, and to be a Presbyter four and twenty years complete:
and has taken some degree of School i^ some of the said Universities, or at
the least, except he be able to yield an account of his faith in Latin,
(according to the Articles of Religion, generally received in the Church of
England and Ireland, and to confirm the same by sufficient testimonies out of
the holy Scriptures. And except moreover he shall then exhibit letters
Testimonial, or Authentical Certificate of his good life and conversation,
under the Seal of some College where before he remained, or of three or four
grave Ministers together, with the subscription and testimony of other credible
persons, who have known his life and behavior, by the space of three years
next before.

XXXII. The examination of such as are to be made Ministers.
THe Bishop, before he admit any person to holy Orders, shall diligently
examine him in the presence of those Ministers that shall assist him at the
Imposition of hands. And if the said Bishop have any lawful impediment, he
shall cause the said Ministers carefully to examine every such person, so to be
ordered. Provided, that they who shall assist the Bishop in examining and
laying on of hands, shall be of his Cathedral Church; if they may conveniently
be had, or other sufficient Preachers of the same Diocese, to the number of
three at the least. And if any Bishop or Suffragan, shall admit any to sacred
Orders, who is not so qualified and examined, as before we have ordained, the
Archbishop of that Province having notice thereof, and being assisted by one
Bishop, shall suspend the said Bishop or Suffragan so offending, from making
either Deacons or Priests, for the space of two years. Neither shall any
person be received into the Ministry, nor admitted to any Ecclesiastical
Living, nor permitted to preach, read Lecture, catechize, or Minister the
Sacraments; except he shall first by subscription declare his consent to the
first four Canons of this present Synod, and every thing contained therein.

XXXIII. Caution for institution of Ministers into Benefices.
NO Bishop shall institute any into a Benefice, who has been ordained by any
other Bishop, except he first show unto him his letters of Orders, and bring
him a sufficient testimony of his former good life and behavior, if the Bishop
shall require it, and lastly shall appear upon the due examination to be
worthy of his Ministry.

XXXIIII. Patrons of Ecclesiastical Benefices.
THe Bishop shall earnestly and diligently exhort Patrons of benefices to
consider the necessities of the Churches, and to have before their eyes the
last day of judgment, and the Tribunal seat of God: Therefore that they
prefer no man to any Ecclesiastical living, but him which by doctrine,
judgment, godliness, honesty and innocence of life, is able to bear so heavy
a burden, that they do nothing therein, but uprightly, uncorruptly and
truly: But if any Patron shall be convicted to have made any Symoniacall
contract either directly or indirectly, let him be excommunicated ipso facto,
not to be absolved but after public penance in the Cathedral Church, and the
Church so Symoniacally presented unto.

XXXV. Prevention of Symoniacall contracts in those that are presented by them.
TO avoyde the detestable sin of Symonie, because buying and selling of
Ecclesiastical functions, offices, promotions, dignities and livings is
execrable before God, therefore the Archbishop, and all, and every Bishop or
Bishops, or any other person or persons, having authority to admit, institute,
collate, install, or to confirm the election of any Archbishop, Bishop, or
other person or persons to any spiritual or Ecclesiastical function,
dignity, promotion, title, office, Jurisdiction, place, or benefice, with
cure, or without cure, or to any Ecclesiastical living whatsoever, shall
before every such admission, institution, collation, installation, or
confirmation of election, respectively minister to every person thereafter to
be admitted, instituted, collated, installed, or confirmed in or to any
Archbishopricke or other spiritual or Ecclesiastical function, dignity,
promotion, title, office, Jurisdiction, place, or benefice with cure or without
cure, or in any Ecclesiastical living whatsoever, this Oath in manner and
form following, the same to be taken by every one whom it concerns in his
own person, and not by a Proctor. I N. N. do swear that I have made no
Symoniacall payment, contract, or promise directly or indirectly, by my self,
or by any other to my knowledge or with my consent, to any person or persons
whatsoever, for or concerning the procuring and obtaining of this
Ecclesiastical dignity, place, preferment, office or living, (respectively and
particularly, naming the same whereunto he is admitted, instituted, collated,
installed, or confirmed) nor will at any time hereafter perform or satisfy
any such kind of payment, contract, or promise made by any other without my
knowledge or consent, so help me God through JESUS CHRIST. And for the better
repressing of this cursed abuse, We ordain and appoint that if any Clerk, or
any other with his consent shall Seal any bond or bill to any person or
persons, with condition of resignation of his benefice, whereto he is to be, or
has bin presented, or shall make or covenant to make any Lease of the profits
of the said benefice, or any part thereof unto the Patron or any belonging to
him or any other person to his or their use, to continue during his
Incumbencie, or for above three years, or with notable diminution of the rent
under the true value, he shall be holden for convict of Symony, and proceeded
against according to the severitie of the ancient Canons in that behalf.

XXXVI. Small Parishes to be united, and Residence enjoined.
FOr remedy of the smallness of the maintenance of the Clergy, We ordain
that when there is in one Parish a Rectory and Vicarage, or portion of Tithes
collative, The Bishop shall unite them perpetually: And those unions the Deanes
and Chapters shall be bound to confirm to remain perpetually as one entire
benefice, And that no dispensations be granted to hold more than one benefice
of greater value than forty pounds English per annum: but to such only as
shall be very well able and sufficient to discharge his duty, having taken the
degree of a Master of Art at least in some University within his Majesty's
Dominions, and being a public and sufficient Preacher licenced. Provided that
he who is qualified as aforesaid, shall always reside in one of his benefices,
and some reasonable time of every year in each of them. And lastly, that he
have under him, where he does not reside a Curate able to Catechize, and
instruct the people, to have such maintenance as to the Ordinary shall seem
fit.

XXXVII. Absence of beneficed men, and livings appropriated to be supplied by
Curates that are allowed Preachers.
EVery beneficed man licenced by the Laws of this Realm, (upon urgent
occasions of other service,) not to reside upon his benefice, shall cause his
Cure to be supplied by a Curate that is a sufficient, and licenced Preacher,
if the worth of the benefice will bear it. But whosoever has two benefices,
shall maintain a Preacher licenced, in the benefice where he does not reside,
except he preach himself at both of them usually. Also every beneficed man not
allowed to be a Preacher, shall procure Sermons to be preached in his Cure
once every Month at the least, by Preachers lawfully licenced, if his living
in the judgment of the Ordinary will be able to bear it. And upon every
Sunday, when there shall not be a Sermon preached in his Cure, he or his Curate
shall read one of the Homilies prescribed by authority, to the intents
aforesaid. And as for those Churches where all the Tithes both great and small
are taken by the Appropriator, We ordain that the Bishop of the Diocese
according to the Laws of the Church shall allot out of the said appropriation,
such maintenance to a sufficient Curate, as in equity in his discretion shall
seem meet and competent.

XXXVIII. None to be Curates but allowed by the Bishop.
NO Curate or Minister shall be permitted to serve in any place without
examination, and trial first to be made of his sufficiency, sobriety and
fitness every way for the ministration, whereunto he is to be deputed. Having
respect to greatness of the Cure, and meetenesse of the party. And being found
worthy, he shall be admitted by the Bishop of the Diocese in writing under his
hand and Seal. And the said Curates and Ministers, if they remove from one
Diocese to another, shall not be by any means admitted to serve, without
testimony of the Bishop of the Diocese or Ordinary of the place as aforesaid,
whence they came, in writing of their honesty, ability and conformity to the
Ecclesiastical Laws of the Church of Ireland. Nor any shall serve more than
two Churches or Chapels in one day, and those to be in a convenient distance,
and unless the said Church or Chapel where such a Minister shall serve in
two places, be not able in the judgment of the Bishop, or Ordinary, as
aforesaid to maintain a Curate, Provided that no Clergy man holding any
benefice in title shall by this Constitution be debarred from nominating an
able Curate, to such benefice so often as the said Cure shall be void to be
examined and admitted by the Bishop as aforesaid.

XXXIX. Strangers not admitted to preach without license.
NEither the Minister, Churchwardens, or other Officers of any parochial or
Collegiate Church, shall suffer any stranger to preach unto the people in their
Churches except they know him to be sufficiently authorized thereto, as is
aforesaid. And if any in his Sermon shall publish any Doctrine, either strange,
or disagreeing from the Word of GOD, or from the Articles of Religion generally
received in the Churches of England and Ireland, they shall by their Letters
subscribed with some of their hands that heard him, so soon as may be, give
notice of the same to the Bishop of the Diocese, that he may determine the
matter, and take such order therein as he shall think convenient.

XL. Ministers to confer with Recusants.
EVery Minister being a Preacher, and having any popish Recusant or Recusants
in his Parish; (and thought fit by the Bishop of the Diocese,) shall labor
diligently with them from time to time, thereby to reclayme them from their
errors. And if he be not a Preacher, or not such a Preacher; the he shall
procure, (if he can possible,) some that are Preachers so qualified, to take
pains with them for that purpose. If he can procure none; then he shall
inform the Bishop of the Diocese thereof, who shall not only appoint some
neighbor Preacher, or Preachers adjoining to take that labor upon them: but
himself also (as his important affairs will permit him,) shall use his best
endeavor by instruction, persuasion, and all good means he can devise, to
reclayme both them, and all other within his Diocese so affected.

XLI. Ministers to visit the sick.
WHen any person is dangerously sick in any parish, (although they have not
formerly resorted to the Church,) the Minister, or Curate, having knowledge
thereof, shall resort unto Him or Her; (if the disease be not known or
probably suspected to be infectious,) to instruct and comfort them in their
distress, according to the order of the Communion Book, if he be no Preacher:
Or if he be a Preacher, then as he shall think most needful and convenient.
And when any is passing out of this life, a Bell shall be tolled, and the
Minister shall not then slack to do his last duty. And after the parties
death, (if so it fall out,) there shall be rung no more but one short peale, and
one other before the burial, and one other after the burial.

XLII. Soberness of conversation, and decency of apparel repaired in
Ministers.
NO Ecclesiastical persons shall at any time other than for their honest
necessities, so much as resort to any Taverns or Alehouses, neither shall they
board or lodge, in any such places. Furthermore they shall not give themselves
to any base or servile labor, or to drinking or riot, spending their time
idly by d^y or by night, nor shall they give themselves to playing at Dice,
Cards, or Tables, or any other game unbeseeming their function; but at all
times convenient they shall hear or read somewhat of the holy Scriptures, or
shall occupy themselves with some other honest study or exercise, always doing
the things which shall appertain to honesty, and ende^voring to profit the
Church of God, having always in mind that they ought to excel others in
purity of life, and should be examples to the people to live well and
Christianly, under pain of Ecclesiastical censures to be inflicted with
severi^ie according to the qualities of their offenses. We do likewise
constitute and appoint, that Archbishops and Bishops shall not i^tennit to use
the accustomed apparel of their d^grees. Likewise all Deanes, Masters of
Colleges, Archdeacons, and Prebendaries in Cathedral and Collegiate Churches,
(being Priests or Deacons) Doctors in Divinity, Law, and Physic, Bachellors
in Divinity, Masters of Arts, and Bachellors of Law having any
Ecclesiastical living, shall usually wear Gowns with standing-Collars, and
Sleeves straight at the hands; or wide sleeves, as is used in the Universities,
with Hoods, or Tippets of silk or sarcenet, and square Caps in places and
times convenient. And that all other Ministers, admitted or to be admitted
into that function, shall also ^sually wear the like apparel as is aforesaid,
except Tippets only. We do further in like manner ordain, That all the said
Ecclesiastical persons above mentioned shall usually wear in their journyes,
Cloakes with sleeves, commonly called Priests-cloakes, without gards, welts,
long buttons, or cuts. And no Ecclesiastical persons shall wear any Coyfe, or
wrought Nightcap, but only plain Night-caps of black Silk, Satin, or
Velvet. In all which particulars concerning the Apparel here prescribed, our
meaning is not to attribute any holiness, or special worthiness to the said
Garments, but for decency, gravitie and order. In private houses, and in their
studies, the said persons Ecclesiastical may use any comely and Schollerlike
Apparel. Provided that it be not cut or pinke, and that in public they go
not in their Dublet and Hose without Coats, or Cassocks: And also that they
wear not any light colored Stockins.

XLIII. Of consecration of Churches.
AS often as Churches are newly built, where formerly there were not, or Church
yards appointed for burial, they shall be Dedicated and Consecrated. Provided
that the ancient Churches and Churchyards, shall not be put to any base and
unworthy use.

XLIIII. A Terrier of Gleabe-lands, and other possessions belonging to Churches.
WE ordain that the Archbishops and all Bishops within their several
Diocesses; shall procure as much as in them lies, that a true note and Terrier
of all the Lands, Gleabes, Meadows, Gardens, Orchards, Houses, Stocks,
Implements, Tenements and portions of Tithes, and all rights whatsoever which
are in possession, or of right do belong to their several Sees, or to any
dignity Parsonage, or Vicarage, or rural Prebend, within any of their
Diocesses be taken by the view of honest men in every Parish, by the
appointment of the said Archbishops or Bishops whereof the Minister to be one,
and be laid up in their several Registries to the use of posterity. And the
Archbishops and Bishops shall in their Visitations carefully provide, that this
Canon be observed, and that the said Terrier be renewed every ten years. And
no Minister shall make any Lease of his Gleabe lands, or of his benefice, or
the profits or means thereof, above the term of three years at the uttermost,
saving unto all Patentees from his Majesty such power as is, or hereafter
shall be granted to them in their Patents, to demise their Gleabe or any part
thereof.

XLV. Payment of Tithes.
FOrasmuch as every man is bound to pay his Tithes, no man shall by color of
duty omitted by their Curats, detayne their Tithes, and so requite one wrong
with another, or be his own Judge, but shall truly pay the same as has been
accustomed, to their Parsons, Vicars and Curats, without any restraynt or
diminution. And for such lack and default, as they can justly find, in their
Parsons Vicars and Curats, they shall seek for reformation to their
Ordinaries, and other Superiors, who upon complaint and do proof thereof,
shall reform the same accordingly.

XLVI. A Registry to be kept of Christnings, VVeddings, and Burials.
IN every Parish Church and Chapel within this Realm, shall be provided one
parchment Book; at the charge of the Parish, wherein shall be written, the day
and year of every Christning, Wedding, and Burial, which shall be in the
parish, from the time that this Canon shall be established. And for the safe
keeping of the said Book, the Churchwardens, at the charge of the parish,
shall provide one sure Coffer, with three Locks and keys, whereof the one to
remain with the Minister, and the other two with the Churchwardens (...): So
that neither the Minister without the Churchwardens, nor the Churchwardens
without the Minister, shall at any time take that book out of the said Coffer.
And henceforth, upon every Sabbath Day, immediately after Morning, or Evening
prayer, the Minister and Churchwardens; shall take the said parchment Book
out of the said Coffer: And the Minister in the presence of the Churchwardens
shall write and Record in the said Book, the names of all persons Christened,
together with the names and surnames of their parents, and also the names of
all persons, Married and Buried in that parish the week before, by the
Minister or his Curate, and the day and the year of every such Christening,
Marryage and Burial. And that done, they shall lay up the bo^k in the Coffer,
as before. And the Minister, and Churchwardens, unto every page of that book,
(when it shall be filled with such inscriptions) shall subscribe their names. And
the Churchwardens shall once every year, within one Month after the 25. day
of March, transmit unto the Bishop of the Diocese, or his Chancellor, a true
Copy of the names of all persons Christened, Married, or buried, in their
parish in the year before (ended the said 25. day of March,) and the certain
days and Months, in which every such Christening, Marriage and Burial was
had, to be subscribed with the hands of the said Minister and Churchwardens,
to the end the same may faithfully be preserved in the Registry of the said
Bishop, which Certificate shall be received without Fee. And if the Minister or
Churchwardens shall be negligent in the performance of any thing herein
contained, it shall be lawful for the Bishop, or his Chancellor to Convent them,
and proceed against every of them, as contemners of this our Constitution.

XLVII. None to Marry within the degrees prohibited.
NO persons shall Marry within the degrees prohibited by the Laws of GOD, and
expressed in a Table set forth by authority in England, in the year of our
Lord God 1563. And all Marriages so made and contracted, shall be adjudged
incestuous and unlawful, and consequently shall be dissolved; as void from the
beginning. And the parties so married, shall be by course of Law separated. And
the aforesaid Table shall be in every Church publikly set up, and fixed at the
charge of the Parish.

THE TABLE OF DEGREES PROHIBITED IN MARRIAGE.
A Man may not marry his
Secundus gradus in linea recta ascendente. Consanguin. Avia. 1 Grandmother.
Affinit. Avi relicta. 2 Grandfathers wife. af. Prosocrus vel socrus magna. 3
Wives Grandmother. Secundus gradus inaequalis, in linea transversali
ascendente. Cons. Amita. 4 Fathers Sister. cons. Matertera. 5 Mothers Sister.
af. Patrui relicta. 6 Fathers Brothers wife. af. Avunculi relicta. 7 Mothers
Brothers wife. af. Amita uxoris. 8 Wives fathers Sister. af. Matertera uxoris.
9 Wives Mothers Sister. Primus gradus in linea recta ascendente. Cons. Matter.
10 Mother. af. Noverca. 11 Stepmother. af. Socrus. 12 Wives Mother. Primus
gradus in linea recta descendente. Cons. Filia. 13 Daughter. af. Privigna. 14
Wives Daughter. af. Nurus. 15 Sons Wife. Primus gradus aequalis in linea
transversali. Cons. Soror. 16 Sister. af. Soror uxoris. 17 Wives Sister. af.
Fratris relicta. 18 Brothers Wife. Secundus gradus in linea recta descendente.
Cons. Neptis ex filio. 19 Sons Daughter. cons. Neptis ex filia. 20 Daughters
Daughter. af. Pronurus.i. relicta nepotis ex filio. 21 Sons Sons wife. af.
Pronurus.i. relicta nepotis ex filia. 22 Daughters Sons wife. af. Privigni
filia. 23 Wives Sons daughter. af. Privignae filia. 24 Wives daughters
daughter. Secundus gradus inaequalis, in linea transversali descendente. Cons.
Neptis ex fratre. 25 Brothers Daughter. cons. Neptis ex sorore. 26 Sisters
daughter. af. Nepotis ex fratre relicta. 27 Brothers sons wife. af. Nepotis
ex sorore relicta. 28 Sisters sons wife. af. Neptis uxoris ex fratre. 29
Wives brothers daughter. af. Neptis uxoris ex sorore. 30 Wives sisters
daughter.

A Woman may not marry her
Secundus gradus in linea recta ascendente. 1 Grandfather. Cons. Avus. 2
Grandmothers Husband. af. Aviae relictus. 3 Husbands Grandfather. af. Prosocer,
vel socer magnus. Secundus gradus inaequalis, in linea transversali ascendente.
4 Fathers Brother. Cons. Patruus. 4 Mothers Brother. cons. Avunculus. 6 Fathers
Sisters husband. af. Amitae relictus. 7 Mother Sisters husband. af. Materterae
relictus. 8 Husbands Fathers brother. af. Patruus mariti. 9 Husbands mothers
brother. af. Avunculus mariti. Primus gradus in linea recta ascendente. 10
Father. Cons. Pater. 11 Stepfather. af. Vitricus. 12 Husbands father. af.
Socer. Primus gradus in linea recta descendente. 13 Son. Cons. Filius. 14
Husbands son. af. Privignus. 15 Daughters husband. af. Gener. Primus gradus
aqualis in linea transver^^. 16 Brother. Cons. Frater. 17 Husbands brother. af.
Levir. 18 Sisters husband. af. Sororis relictus. Secundus gradus in linea recta
descenden^e. 19 Sons son. Cons. Nepos ex filio. 20 Daughters son. cons.
Nepos ex filia. 21 Sons daughters husband. af. Progener.i. relictus neptis ex
filio. 22 Daughters daughters husband af. Progener.i. relictus neptis ex filia.
23 Husbands Sons son. af. Privigni filius. 24 Husbands daughters son. af.
Privignae filius. Secundus gradus in^qualis, in linea transversali descendente.
25 Brothers son. Cons. Nepos ex fratre. 26 Sisters son. cons. Nepos ex
sorore. 27 Brothers daughters husband. af. Neptis ex fratre relictus. 28
Sisters daughters husband. af. Neptis ex sorore relictus. 29 Husbands brothers
son. af. Leviri filius. i. nepos mariti ex fratre. 30 Husbands Sisters son.
af. Gloris filius.i. nepos mariti ex sorore.

1. IT is to be noted, that those persons which be in the direct line ascendent
and descendent, cannot marry together, although they be never so far asunder
in degree. 2. It is also to be noted, that Consanguinity and affinity (letting
and dissoluing Matrimony) is contracted as well in them, and by them which be
of kindred by the one side, as in and by them which be of kindred by both
sides. 3. Item, that by the Laws, Consanguinity and affinity (letting and
dissoluing Matrimony) is contracted as well by unlawful company of Man and
Woman, as by unlawful marriage.
LEVITIC. XVIII. and XX. None shall come near to any of the kindred of his
flesh to uncover her shame: I am the Lord.

XLVIII. None to marry under XXI. years without their Parents consent.
NO Children under the age of XXI. years complete shall contract themselves,
or Marry without the consent of there Parents, or of their guardians and
Governors if their Parents be deceased.

XLIX. Security to be taken at the granting of such Licenses, and under what
conditions.
THe security mentioned shall co^taine these conditions: First, that at the
time of the granting every such license, there is not any impediment of
precontract, consanguinitie, affinity, or other lawful cause, to hinder the
said marriage: Secondly, that there is not any controversy or suite depending
in any Court before any Ecclesiastical Judge, touching any contract or
marriage, of either of the said parties with any other. Thirdly, that they have
obtained thereunto the express consent of their Parents, (if they be living,)
or otherwise of their guardians or Governors. Lastly, that they shall
celebrate the said Matrimony publicly, in the parish Church or Chapel, where
one of them dwells, and in no other place; and that, between the hours of
eight and twelve in the forendo^^: Neither in the time of Lane, ^or of any
public fast, nor of ^^e solemn festivities of the Nativity, Resurrection, and
Ascension of our Lord, or of the Descension of the holy Ghost.

L. Oaths to taken for the Conditions.
FOr the avoiding of all fraud and collusion, in the obtaining of such
licenses and dispensations; We further constitute and appoint, that before any
license for the celebration of Matrimony, without publication of Bannes, be
had and granted, it shall appear to the Judge, by the Oaths of two sufficient
witnesses one of them to be known to the aforesaid Judge himself, or to some
other person, of good reputation then present, and known likewise to the laid
Judge That the express consent of the parents, or parent, (if one be dead,) or
guardians or guardian of the parties, is thereunto had and obtained. And
furthermore, that one of the parties personally swear, that he believes there
is no let or impediment, of pro^^^^ct, kindred or alliance, or of any other
lawful cause whatsoever; nor any suite co^menced in any Ecclesiastical Court,
to bar, or hinder the proceeding of the said Matrimony, according to the
Tenor of the aforesaid Licenc^.

LI. An exception for those that are in VViddowhood.
IF both the parties, which are to many, being in Widdow-hood, do seek a
faculty, for the forbearing of Bannnes; Then the clause before mentioned,
requiring the parents consents, may be omitted, but the parishes where they
dwell both, shall be expressed in the License, as also the parish named, where
the marriage shall be celebrated: And if any, having power to grant license; shall
offend in the promises, or any part thereof, he shall for every time so
offending, be suspended from the execution of his Office, for the space of six
Months: and every such license or dispensation, shall be held void to all
effects and purposes, as if there had never bin any such granted; and the
parties marying by virtue thereof, shall be subject to the punishments which are
appointed for Glandestine marriages.

LII. Ministers not to marry any person without Bannes.
NO Minister of what place soever, nor under color of any peculiar liberty or
privilege, claymed to appertain to any Church or Chapel, shall upon pain
of deprivation, if he be beneficed, or degradation, if he be not beneficed,
celebrate Matrimony between any persons, without a faculty or license granted,
except the bannes of Matrimony have been first published three several
Sundays or holy days, in the time of Divine Service, in the parish Churches
and Chapels, wherein the said parties have dwelled, by the space of three
Months before. Neither shall any Minister upon the like pain, under any
pretense whatsoever, join any persons in marriage at any unseasonable times,
but only between the hours of eight and twelve in the forenoone, nor in any
private place; but either in the said Churches or Chapels, where one of them
dwells, and likewise in time of Divine Service, nor when bannes are thrice
asked before the parties and Governors of the parties to be married being under
the age of 21. years, shall either personally or by sufficient testimony,
signify to him their consents given to the said marriage.

LIII. No sentence for Divorce to be given upon the sole confession of the
parties.
FOrasmuch as Matrimonial causes have been always reckoned, and reputed
amongst the weightiest, and therefore require the greater caution, when they
come to be handled, and debated in judgment, especially in causes wherein
Matrimony, having been in the Church duly solemnized, is required upon any
suggestion, or pretext whatsoever, to be dissolved or annulled. We do
straightly charge and enjoyne, that in all proceedings to Divorce, and
nullities of Matrimony, good circumspection and advise be used, and that the
truth may (as far as is possible) be sifted out, by the deposition of
witnesses, and other lawful proofs and evictions, and that credit be not
given to the sole confession of the parties themselves, howsoever taken upon
Oath, either within or without the Court.

LIIII. No sentence of Divorce to be given but in open Court.
NO sentence shall be given, either for separation, a Thoro and Mensa, or for
annulling of pretended Matrimony, but in open Court, and in the seat of
Justice. And that with the knowledge, and consent, either of the Archbishop
within his Province, or of the Bishop within his Diocese, or Sede vacant, of
the guardians of the spiritualties, or the Judge of the Prerogative, in their
several Jurisdictions, and Courts, and concerning them only, that are then
dwelling under their Jurisdiction.

LV. In all sentences for Divorce, b^^d to be taken for not marrying during
each others life.
IN all sentences pronounced only for Divorce and separation a Thoro and
Mensa, there shall be a caution and restraynt inserted in the Act of the said
sentence, That the parties so separated shall live chastely, and continently,
neither shall they during each others life, contract Matrimony with any other
person, and for the better observing of this lost clause, the said sentence of
Divorce shall not be pronounced, until the party, or parties requiring the
same, have given good sufficient caution and security into the Court, that
they will not any way break, or transgress the said restraynt or prohibition.
And if any Judge aforesaid giving sentence of Divorce, or separation, shall not
fully keep and observe the premises, he shall be suspended from the exercise of
his Office, for the space of a whole year.

LVI. The order of Jurisdictions to be kept.
FOr the avoiding of the unjust vexation of the people, and for the better
preserving of order in the exercise of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, We
ordain and appoint that the Probate of all Wills, and granting Administration
of the goods of any Defunct, shall be had before the Bishop of the Diocese where
he dwelled, unless it do appear, that the said Defunct had goods to the
value of five pounds sterling in any other Diocese: In which case, the said
Probate, and granting Administrations, shall be referred to the Prerogative
Court. Provided, That if any die, in itinere, the goods that he has about him
at that present, shall not cause his Testament, or the Administration to be
liable to the Prerogative Court. And the same order shall be holden in Appeals;
without passing by the intermediate Jurisdiction, upon pain of nullity in all
Acts contrary to this Canon. And if any Judge of the Prerogative Court, or any
his Surrogate, or his Register, or Apparitor, shall cite, or cause to be cited,
Ex officio, any man to the intents aforesaid, contrary to this Canon, not
having knowledge, that the probate of a Will, or granting Administration or
Devolution of the cause, do appertain to his cognizance, he shall restore to
the party so cited all his costs and charges, and the Acts and proceedings in
that behalf, shall be held void and frustrate: which expenses if the said
Judge, or Register or Apparitor shall refuse accordingly to pay, he shall be
suspended from the exercise of his Office, until he yield to the performance
thereof.

LVII. The restraynt of double Quarrels upon the respite of Institution.
WE do ordain and appoint, that no double Quarrels shall be hereafter granted
out of any the Archbishops, or prerogative Court, at the suite of any Clerk
presented to any benefice, except he shall first take his personal Oath, that
the space of two Months at the least is expired, since he first tendered his
presentation to the Bishop, and that he refused to grant him Insti^ution
thereupon, under pain of suspension of the granter thereof, from the execution
of his Office for half a year, and nullity of the said double Quarrel, so
unduly procured to all intents and purposes.

LVIII. Inhibitions not to be granted, without the subscription of an Advocate.
THat the Jurisdictions of Bishops may be preserved, as near as may be entire
and free, from prejudice; and that for the bohoofe of the Subjects of this
Land, better provision be made, that henceforward they be not grieved with
frivolous and wrongful suites and molestations: It is ordained and provided,
That no Inhibition shall be granted out of any Court; belonging to the Archbishop
of the Province, or the supreme Prerogative, at the instance of any party,
unless it be subscribed by an Advocate, practicing in the said Court, which,
the said Advocate shall do freely, not taking any Fee for the same, except the
party prosecuting the suite, do voluntarily bestow some gratuity upon him for
his counsel and advise in the said case. The like course shall be taken in
granting forth any Inhibition at the instance of any party, by the Bishop or
his Chancellor against the Archdeacon, or any other person exercising
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; and if in the Court or Consistory of any Bishop,
there be no Advocate at all, then shall the subscription of a Proctor
practicing in the same Court, be held sufficient.

LIX. Inhibitions not to be granted, until the Appeal be exhibited to the
Judge.
IT is further ordered and decreed, that henceforward, no Inhibition be granted
by occasion of any interlocutory decree, or in cause of correction whatsoever,
except under the form aforesaid. And moreover, that before the going out of
any such Inhibition, the Appeal it self, or a Copy thereof, avouched by Oath
to be just and true, be exhibited to the Judge, or his lawful Surrogate,
whereby he may be fully informed, both of the quality of the crime, and the
cause of the grievance, before the granting forth of the said Inhibition. And
every Appellant, or his lawful Proctor, shall before the obtaining of any such
Inhibition, show and exhibit to the Judge, or his Surrogate in writing, a true
Copy of those Acts, wherewith he complayneth himself to be agrieved, and from
which he appealeth: Or shall take a corporal oath, that he has performed
his diligence and true endeavor, for the obtaining of the same, and could not
obtain it at the hands of the Register in the Country, or his deputy tendering
him his Fee And if any Judge, or Register, shall either procure, or permit any
Inhibition to be sealed, so as is said, contrary to the form and limitation
above specified, let him be suspended from the execution of his Office, for the
space of three Months. If any Proctor, or other person whatsoever by his
appointment, shall offend in any of the premises, either by making, or sending
out any Inhibition, contrary to the Tenor of the said premises, let him be
removed from the exercise of his Office, for the space of a whole year,
without hope of release or restoring.

LX. Solemn denunciation of parties Excommunicated.
ALl Ordinaryes shall in their several Jurisdictions carefully see, and give
order that as well those, who for revolting, and still obstinate refusing to
frequent Divine Service, established by public authority within this Realm of
Ireland, as also, (especially of the better sort and condition,) who for
notorious contumacie, or notable crimes stand lawfully excommunicate, (unless
within three Months immediately after the said sentence of excommunication
pronounced against them, they reform themselves, and obtain the benefit of
absolution) be every six Months ensuing, as well in the parish Church, as in
the Cathedral Church of the Diocese, in which they remain, by the Minister
openly, in the time of Divine Service upon some Sunday declared, and pronounced
excomunicate; that others may be thereby admonished, and excited to refrain
their company and society.

LXI. Notorious Crimes and scandals to be certified into Ecclesiastical Courts
by presentiments.
IF any offend their brethren, either by Adultery, whoredom, incest, or
drunkenes, or by swearing, ribauldry, usury, or any other uncleanness and
wickedness of life; the Churchwardens, or Quest-men and Sidemen, in their
next presentiments to their Ordinaries, shall faithfully present all and every
of the said offenders, to the intent that they, and every of them, may be
punished by the severitie of the Laws, according to their deserts and such
notorious offenders shall not be admitted to the holy Communion, till they be
reformed.

LXII. Schismatics to be presented.
IF the Churchwardens, or Quest-men, or assistants, do, or shall know any man
within their parish; or elsewhere, that is an hinderer of the word of God to be
read, or sincerely preached, or of the execution of these our Co^stitutions,
or ^^^^tor of any usurped or foreign power by the laws of this Realm justly
rejected, and taken away, or a defender of popish or erroneous doctrine, they
shall detect and present the same, to the Bishop of the Diocese, or Ordinary
of the place, to be censured and punished, according to such Ecclesiastical
Laws, as are prescribed in that behalf.

LXIII. Not Communicants at Easter to be presented.
THe Minister, Church, wardens, Quest-men and assistants of every Parish Church
and Chapel, shall yearly within forty days after Easter, exhibit to the
Bishop, or his Chancellor, the names and surnames of all the parishioners,
as well Men as Women; which being at the age of sixteen years, received not
the Communion at Easter before.

LXIIII. Ministers may present.
BEcause it often comes to pass, that the Churchwardens, Sidemen,
Quest-men, and such others of the Laytie, as are to take care for the
suppressing of sin and wickedness, in their several parishes, as much as in
them lies, by admonition, reprehension, and denunciation to their Ordinaryes,
do forbear to discharge their duties therein, either through fear of their
Superriors, or through negligence (more than were fit,) the licenciousnesse of
these (...) considered. We ordain, that hereafter every Parson and Vicar, or
in the lawful absence of any Parson, or Vicar, the^ their Curats and
substituts may join in every presentment, with the said Churchwardens,
Sidemen, and the rest above mentioned, at the times hereafter limited, if the
said Churchwardens and the rest will present such enormities, as are apparent
in the parish; or if they will not, then every such Parson and Vicar, or in
their absence, as i^ aforesaid, their Curats may themselves present to their
Ordinaryes, at such times, and when else they think is meet, all such crimes,
an they have in change otherwise, as by them, (being the person that should
have the chief care for the suppressing of sin, and impiety in their
parishes, shall be thought to require due reformation. Provided always, that if
any one confess his secret and hidden sin to the Minister, for the
unburthening of his Conscience, and to receive spiritual consolation and ease
of his mind from him, We do not any way bind the said Minister, by this our
Constitution, but do straightly charge and admonish him, that he do not at
any time reveal, and make known to any person whatsoever, any crime, or
offense so committed to his trust and secrecy, (except they be such crimes, as
by the Laws of this Realm h^s own life may be called into question for
concealing of the same) under pain of irregularity.

LXV. Ministers, and Churchwardens not to be sued for presenting.
WHereas for the reformation of criminous persons, and disorders in every
parish, the Churchwardens, Questmen, Sidemen, and such other Officers, as are
sworn, and the Minister charged to present, as well the crimes and disorders
committed by the said criminous persons, as also the common fame which is
spread abroad of them, whereby they are often maligned, and sometimes troubled
by the said delinquents, or their friends: We do admonish and exhort all
Judges, both Ecclesiastical and temporal, as they regard and reverence the
fearful judgment seat of the highest Judge, that they admit not in any of
their Courts, any complaint, plea, suite, or suits, against any such
Churchwarden, Quest-men, Sidemen, or other Church Officers, for making any
such presentiments, nor against any Minister for any presentment he shall make,
tending to the restraynt of shameless impiety: and considering that the rules
both of Charity and government, do presume that they did nothing therein of
malice, but for the discharge of their Conscience.

LXVI. Churchwardens not bound to present oftener than twice a year.
NO Churchwardens, Quest-men, or Sidemen, of any parish shall be enforced to
exhibit their presentiments to any, having Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, above
once in every year, where it has been no oftener used, nor above twice in any
Diocese whatsoever; the Bishops visitation whereof to be one: for the which
presentiments of every parish Church or Chapel, the Register of any Court,
where they are to be exhibited, shall not receive in one year above
fourepence, under pain for every offense therein of suspension from the
execution of his Office, for the space of a Month, toties quoties: Provided
always, that as good occasion shall require, it shall be lawful for every
Minister, Churchwarden, and Sidemen, to present offenders, as often as they
shall think meat. And likewise, for any godly disposed person, or for any
Ecclesiastical Judge upon knowledge, or notice given unto him or them of any
enormious crime within his Jurisdiction, to move the Minister, Churchwardens,
or Side-man, as they tender the glory of God, and reformation of sin, to
present the same, if they should find sufficient cause to induce them
thereunto; that it may be in due time punished and reformed. Provided, that for
these voluntary presentiments there been Fee required, or taken of them, under
the pain aforesaid.

LXVII. Churchwardens not to be troubled, for not presenting oftener than twice
a year.
NO Churchwardens, Quest-men, or Sidemen, shall be called or cited, but only
at the said time or times before limited, to appear before any
Ecclesiastical Judge whosoever, for refusing at other times to present any
faults committed in their parishes, and punishable by Ecclesiastical Laws,
Neither shall they nor any of them, after their presentiments exhibited at any
of those times, be any fur^her troubled for the s^^ne, except upon manifest,
and evident proof, it may appear, that they did then, wittingly and willingly
omit to present some such public crime or crimes, as they knew to be
committed, or could not be ignorant, that there was then a public same of them
amongst diverse honest, and well reputed persons, or unless there be very just
cause to c^ll them, for the explanation of their former presentiments in which
case of wilful omission, their Ordinaryes shall proceed against them, in such
sort as in causes of wilful perjury, in a Court Ecclesiastical, is already by
Law provided.

LXVIII. Convenient time to be assigned for framing Presentiments.
FOr the avoiding of such inconveniences, as heretofore have happened, by the
hasty making of bills of presentiments, upon the days of the Visitation and
Synods, it is ordered; That always hereafter every Chancellor, Archdeacon,
Commissary and Official, and every other person having Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, at the ordinary time, when the Churchwardens are sworn; and
the Archbishops and Bishops, when he or they do summon their Visitation, shall
deliver or cause to be delivered to the Churchwardens, Quest-men, and Sidemen
of every parish, or to some of them, such Books of Articles, as they, or any
of them shall require for the year following, the said Churchwardens,
Quest-men, and Sidemen, to ground their presentiments upon; at such times as
they are to exhibit them. In which Book shall be contained, the form of the
Oath, which must be taken immediately before every such presentment. To the
intent, that having before hand, time sufficient not only to peruse, and
consider what their said Oath shall be, but the Articles also, whereupon they are
to ground their presentiments; they may frame them at home, both advisedly and
truly, to the discharge of their own Consciences, after they are sworn, as
becomes honest and godly men.

LXIX. None to be cited into Ecclesiastical Courts by Process of Quorum nomina.
NO Bishop, Chancellor, Archdeacon, Official or other Ecclesiastical Judge,
shall suffer any general Process of Quorum nomine to be sent out of his Court,
except the names of all such as are thereby to be cited, shall be first
expressly entered by the hand of the Register, or his deputy, under the said
Processes; and the said processes and names, be first subscribed by the Judge
or his deputy, and his Seal thereto affixed. And We further ordain, that when
any person appears upon citation whatsoever, that if the next Court day
after, there be not Articles or a Libell put in against him, he shall then be
dismissed with his costs.

LXX. Maturity required in proceeding.
NO man for neglect of appearance shall be excommunicated for the first absence,
but shall be cited again upon the same Process. And if he cannot be found, nor
afterward appear upon vijs and modis, then to be decreed Excommunicandum
fore. Yet for preventing such neglect, and that the party querelant may
sustain no detriment; hereby it is likewise ordered, that in causes of
instance upon the appearance of any such person, he shall pay the charge past,
before he be admitted to stand Rectus in Curia. And in the end of every Court,
the names of those that are decreed, shall be publicly read, to the intent that
they may avoyde the danger of the fearful sentence of Excommunication. Which
course also, We ordain, shall be holden with those that be already denounced
excommunicate, before the time of the signifying their obstinacy: to the end
they and others may be admonished of the danger in which they stand, and to the
aggravation of their obstinacy, if they continue in the same.

LXXI. No sentence of deprivation or deposition to be pronounced against a
Minister but by the Bishop.
When any Minister is complained of in any Ecclesiastical Court, belonging to
any Bishop for any crime, the Chancellor, Commissary, Official, or any other,
having Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, (to who^ it shall appertain,) shall
expedite the cause by Processes and other proceedings against him: and upon
contumacy, for not appearing shall first suspend him, and afterward (his
co^tumacie continuing;) excommunicate him. But if he appear and submit
himself to the course of Law, then the matter being ready for sentence, and
the merits of his offense, exacting by Law, either deprivation from his living
or depositio^ from the Ministry, no such sentence shall be pronounced by any
person whosoever, but only by the Bishop, with the assistance of his
Chancellor, the Deane, (if they may conveniently be had,) and some of the
Prebendaries, if the Court be kept near the Cathedral Church; or of the
Archdeacon, if he may be had conveniently, and two other at the least grave
Ministers and Preachers, to be called by the Bishop, when the Court is kept in
other places. It is likewise ordered that no Chancellor, Commissary, Official,
or any other person shall exercise any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, over a
Minister in causes criminal, except he himself have been admitted into the
holy Orders of Priesthood.

LXXII. No Act to be sped but in open Court.
NO Chancellor, Commissary, Archdeacon, Official, or any other person using
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction whosoever shall speed any judicial Act, either
of contentious or voluntary Jurisdiction, except he have the ordinary Register
of that Court, or his lawful deputy, or if he or they will not, or cannot be
present, then such persons, as by Law are allowed in that behalf, to write or
speed the same, under pain of suspension, ipso facto.

LXXIII. No Court to have more than one Seal.
NO Chancellor, Commissary, Archdeacon, Official, or any other exercising
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, shall, without the Bishops consent, have any more
than one Seal for the sealing of all matters incident to his Office; which
Seal shall always be kept either by himself, or by his lawful substitute
exercising Jurisdiction for him, and remaining within the Jurisdiction of the
said Judge, or in the City, or principal Town of the County. This Seal shall
contain the title of tha^ Jurisdiction, which every of the said Judges, or
their deputies do execute.

LXXIIII. Convenient places to be chosen for keeping of Courts.
ALl Chancellors, Commissaries, Archdeacons, Officials, and all others
exercising Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, shall appoint such meet places for
the keeping of their Courts, by the assignement or approbation of the Bishop of
the Diocese, as shall be convenient for entertaynement of those who are to make
their appearance there, and most indifferent for their travel. And likewise
they shall keep and end their Courts in such convenient time, as every man may
return homewards, in as due season as may be.

LXXV. Peculiar and inferior Courts to exhibit the Original copies of Wills
into the Bishops Registry.
Whereas Deanes, Archdeacons, Prebendaries, Parsons, Vicars, and others
exercising Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, claim liberty to prove the last Wills
and Testaments of persons deceased within their several Jurisdictions, having
no known nor certain Registers, nor public places to keep their Records in;
by reason whereof, many Wills, rights and Legacies, upon the death, or change
of such persons and their private Notaryes, miscarry, and cannot be found, to
the great prejudice of his Ma^esties Subjects. We therefore order and enjoyne,
that all possessors and exercisers of peculiar Jurisdiction, shall once in
every year exhibit into the public Registry of the Bishop of the Diocese,
or of the Deane and Chapter, (under whose Jurisdiction the said peculiars are,)
every original testament of every person in that time deceased, and by them
proved in their several peculiar Jurisdictions; or a true Copy of every such
testament examined, subscribed and sealed by the peculiar Judge and his Notary.
Otherwise, if any of them fail so to do, the Bishop of the Diocese, or Deane
and Chapter, unto whom the said Jurisdictions do respectively belong, shall
suspend the said parties, and every of them, from the exercise of all such
peculiar Jurisdiction, until they have performed this our Constitution.

LXXVI. The quality and Oath of Judges and Surrogates.
NO man shall hereafter be admitted a Chancellor, Commissary, Official or
Surrogate, to exercise any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, except he be of the
full age of six and twenty years at the least, and one that is learned in
the Civil and Ecclesiastical Laws, and is at the least a Master of Arts, or
Bachellor of Law, and is reasonably well practiced in the course thereof, as
likewise well affected and zealously bent to Religion, touching whose life and
manners no evil example is had; and except before he enter into or execute any
such office, he shall take the Oath of the Kings Supremacy, in the presence
of the Bishop, or in the open Court: and shall declare his consent, by
subscription to the two first Canons of this present Synod. And also shall
swear that he will, to the uttermost of his understanding deal uprightly and
justly in his Office, without respect of favor or reward; The said Oaths and
subscription to be recorded by a Register then present. And it is likewise
ordered that every Register shall take the said Oath of Supremacy, and
subscribe as aforesaid, before he be admitted to exercise that Office. And also
that all Chancellors, Commissaryes, Officials, Registers, and all others that
do now possess, or execute any places of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction or
service, shall before Christmas next in the presence of the Archbishop or
Bishop, or in open Court, (under whom or where they exercise their Offices,)
take the same oaths. Or upon refusal so to do, shall be suspended from the
execution of their Offices, until they shall take the said Oaths.

LXXVII. Proctors not to retain causes without the lawful assignement of the
parties.
NOne shall Procure in any cause whatsoever, unless he be thereunto
constituted, and appointed by the party himself, either before the Judge, and
by Act in Court; or unless in the beginning of the suite, he be by a true and
sufficient Proxey thereunto warranted and enabled. We call that Proxey
sufficient, which is strengthened, and confirmed by some authentical Seal,
the parties approbation, or at least his ratification therewithal concurring.
All which Proxeys shall be forthwith by the said Proctors exhibited into the
Court, and be safely kept and preserved by the Register, in the public
Registry of the said Court. And if any Register or Proctor shall offend herein,
he shall be secluded from the exercising of his office, for the space of two
Months, without hope of release or restoring.

LXXVIII. Proctors prohibited the Oath in animam domini sui.
FOrasmuch as in the probate of Testaments, and suites for administration of
the goods of persons dying intestate, the Oath usually taken by Proctors of
Court, in animam constituentis, is found to be inconvenient. We do therefore
decree, and ordain, that every Executor or suitor for administration; shall
personally repair to the Judge in that behalf, or to his Sutrogate; and in
his own person, (and not by Proctor,) take the Oath accustomed in these cases.
But if by reason of sickness or age, or any other just let or impediment, he
be not able to make his personal appeara^ce before the Judge; it shall be
lawful for the Judge, (there being faith first made, by a credible person of
the truth of his said hinderance, or impediment,) to grant a Commission to some
grave Ecclesiastical person, abiding near the party aforesaid, whereby he
shall give power and authority to the said Ecclesiastical person in his
stead, to Minister the accustomed Oath above mentioned, to the Executor, or
suitor for such administration. Requiring his said substitute, that by a
faithful and trusty messenger, he certify the said Judge, truly and
faithfully, what he has done therein. Lastly, We ordain and appoint, that
no Judge, or Register, shall in any wise receive for the writing, drawing, or
sealing of any such Commission, above the sum of fix shillings and eight
pence: whereof one moiety to be for the Judge, and the other for the Register
of the said Court.

LXXIX. Proctors not to be clamorous in Court.
FOrasmuch as it is found by experience, that the loud and confused cries and
clamors of Proctors in the Ecclesiastical Courts in this Kingdom, are not
only troublesome and offensive to the Judge, and Advocates, but also give
occasion to the standers by, of contempt, and calumny toward the Court it
self. That more respect may be had to the dignity of the Judge, than
heretofore, and that causes may more easily and commodiously be handled and
dispatched: We charge and enjoyne, that all Proctors in the said Court do
especially intend, that the Acts may be faithfully entered, and set down by the
Register, according to the advice and direction of the Advocate. That the said
Proctors refrain loud speech, and brabling, and behave themselves quietly and
modestly, and that when either the Judges, or Advocates, or any of them shall
happen to speak, they presently be silent, upon pain of silencing for two
whole terms, then immediately following every such offense of theirs. And if
any of them shall the second time offend herein, and after due monition shall
not reform himself, let him be for ever removed from his practice.

LXXX. The Oath de calumnia not to be refused.
WE ordain and appoint, that as well the Actor, as his Proctor and Advocate,
(if they be required,) shall take the Oath De calumnia, wheresoever in the
suite the same shall be tendered before sentence, upon pain that the cause
shall be dismissed by the Judge, with costs for the party grieved.

LXXXI. Abuses to be reformed in Registers.
IF any Register, or his deputy, or substitute whatsoever, shall receive any
certificate, without the knowledge and consent of the Judge of the Court, or
willingly omit, to cause any persons cited, to appear upon any Court day, to
be called or unduely put off, and defer the examination of witnesses to be
examined by a day set, and assigned by the Judge, or do not obey and observe
the said Judicial, and lawful monition of the said Judge, or omit to write,
or cause to be written such Citations and Decrees, as are to be put in
execution, and set forth before the next Court day: or shall not cause all
testaments exhibited into his Office, to be registered within a convenient time;
or shall set down or enact, as decreed by the Judge, any thing false or
conceyted by himself, and not so ordered and decreed by the Judge; or in the
transmission of Processes to the Judge ad quem; shall add or insert any
falsehood, or untruth, or omit any thing therein, either by cunning, or by
gross negligence, or in cases of instance, or promoted of Office, shall
receive any reward in favor of either party, or be of Counsel directly or
indirectly, with either of the parties in suite, or in the execution of their
Office, shall do ought else maliciously or fraudulently, whereby the said
Ecclesiastical Judge or his proceeding may be slandered or defamed: We will
and ordain, that the said Register, or his deputy, or substitute, offending in
all, or any the premises, shall by the Bishop of the Diocese be suspended from
the exercise of his Office, for the space of one, two, or three Months, or
more, according to the quality of the offense. And that some other public
Notarie do execute and discharge all things pertaining to his Office, during
the time of his said suspension.

LXXXII. A certain rate of Fees to all Ecclesiastical Officers.
NO Bishop, Suffragan, Chancellor, Commissary, Archdeacon, Official, or any
other exercising Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction whatsoever, nor any Register of
any Ecclesiastical Courts; nor any Minister belonging to any of the said
Offices, or Courts, shall hereafter, (for any cause incident to their several
Offices,) take or receive any other or greater Fee, than such as are, or shall be
allowed by lawful authority in this kingdom: under pain that every such
Judge, Officer, or Minister offending therein, shall be suspended from the
exercise of their several Offices, for the space of six Months, for every
such offense.

LXXXIII. A table of the rates of Fees to be set up in Courts and Registries.
WE do likewise constitute and appoint, that the Registers belonging to every
Ecclesiastical Judge, shall place two Tables, containing the several rates,
and sums of all the said Fees, one, in the usual place or Consistory, where
the Court is kept; and the other in his Registry: and both of them in such
sort, as every man whom it concerns, may without difficulty come to the view
and perusal thereof, and take a Copy of them. And if any Register shall fail
to place the said Tables according to the Tenor hereof; within the space of a
Month, after the same has been delivered to him, by the Bishop of the
Diocese; he shall be suspended from the execution of his Office, until he
cause the same to be accordingly done. And the said Table being once set up, if
he shall at any time remove, or suffer the same to be removed, hidden, or any
way hindered from sight, (contrary to the true meaning of this Co^stitution,)
he shall for every offense be suspended from the exercise of his office, for
the space of six Months.

LXXXIIII. The whole Fees for showing letters of orders, and other licenses,
due but once in every Bishops time.
FOrasmuch as a chief and principal cause, and use of Visitations, is, that
the Archbishops, Bishops, or other assigned by them to visit, may get some good
knowledge of the state, sufficiency and ability of the Clergy, and other
persons whom they are to visit. We think it convenient that every Parson,
Vicar, Curate, Schoolmaster, or other person licenced whosoever, do at the
Archbishops or Bishops first visitation, or at the next visitation after his
admission, show and exhibit unto them, his letters of Orders, Institution and
Induction, and all other his dispensations, lice^ces or faculty whatsoever, to
be by the said Archbishops or Bishops, either allowed of, or (if there be just
cause,) disallowed and rejected; and being by them approved, to be, (as the
custom is,) signed by the Register. And that the whole Fees accustomed, be
paid only once in the whole time of every Archbishop or Bishop; and
afterward but half of the said accustomed Fees, in every visitation, during
the said Bishops continuance.

LXXXV. The number of Apparitors restrained.
FOrasmuch as we are desirous to redress such abuses and greivances, as are
said to grow by Sumners or Apparitors: We think it meet that the multitude
of Apparitors, be (as much as is possible,) abridged or restrained. Wherefore,
We decree and ordain, that no Bishop or Archdeacon, or their Vicars or
Officials, or other inferior Ordinaryes, shall depute, or have more Apparitors,
to serve in their Jurisdictions respectively, than one in every Deanery at the
most, besides the general Apparitor of the Bishop. All which Apparitors shall
by themselves faithfully execute their Offices; neither shall they, by any
color or pretense whatsoever, cause or suffer their mandats to be executed by
any messengers or substitutes; unless it be, upon some good cause to be first
known, and approved by the Ordinary of the place. Moreover, they shall not
take upon them the Office of Promotors, or Informers for the Court: neither
shall they exact more or greater Fees, than are in these our Constitutions
formerly prescribed. And if either, the number of the Apparitors deputed, shall
exceed the foresaid limitation, or any of the said Apparitors shall offend in
any of the premises; the persons deputing them, if they be Bishops, shall upon
admo^ition of their Superior, discharge the persons exceeding the number so
limited; if inferior Ordinaryes, they shall be suspended from the execution of
their Offices, until they have dismissed the Apparitors by them so deputed,
and the parties themselves so deputed, shall for ever be removed, from the
Office of Apparitors. And if being so removed, they desist not from the
exercise of their said Offices, let them be punished by Ecclesiastical
censures, as persons co^tumacious. Provided, that if upon experience, the
number of the said Apparitors be too great, in any Diocese, in the judgment
of the Archbishop of the Province, they shall by him be so abridged, as he
shall think meet and convenient.

LXXXVI. Parish Clerks to be chosen by the Minister.
NO parish-Clerke, upon any vacation, shall be chosen, but by the Parso^ or
Vicar, or where there is no presentative, or collative Parson, or Vicar, by the
Minister of that place for the time being: Which choice shall be signified by the
said Minister, Vicar, or Parson, to the Bishop of the Diocese, to be by him
approved. And if the Parson, Vicar, or Curate, shall fail to make choice of
such a man, and present him to the Bishop, to be by him allowed, by the space
of forty days after the vacancy: in such case, the Bishop shall have power to
nominate and appoint a Clerk for that place. And the said Clerk shall be of
twenty years of age at the least, and known to the said Parson, Vicar, or
Minister, to be of honest conversation, and sufficient for his reading,
writing, and also for his competent skill in singing, (if it may be.) And,
where the Minister is an English man, and many Irish in the parish, such a one,
as shall be able to read those parts of the Service, which shall be appointed to
be read in Irish (if it may be:) and the Clerks so chosen shall be resident; and
perform their duties in their own persons. For which they shall receive their
due wages without diminution at such times as have been accustomed. And if any
question do arise, concerning the said custom or wages, the Bishop of the
Diocese shall set an order therein.

LXXXVII. The choice of Churchwardens and their account.
ALl Churchwardens or Quest-men in every parish, shall be chosen, on Monday or
Tuesday in Easter-weeke by the joint consent of the Minister and the
Parishioners, (if it may be:) But if they cannot agree upon such a choice, then
the Minister shall choose one, and the Parishioners another, and without such a
joint, or several choice, none shall take upon them to be Churchwardens,
neither shall they continue any longer than one year, in that Office, except
perhaps they may be chosen again in like manner. And upon the next Consistory
day after such election, they shall take their Oath before the Bishop or his
Chancellor: and in case the Parish shall fail to join, or elect as is
aforesaid, the Ordinary shall supply the defect. And all Churchwardens at the
end of their year, or within a Month after, at the most, shall before the
Minister and Parishioners, give up a just account of such Money, as they have
received, and also what particularly, they have bestowed in reparations and
otherwise, for the use of the Church. And last of all, going out of their
Office, they shall truly deliver up to the Parishioners, whatsoever Money or
other things, of right belonging to the Church or parish, which remains in
their hands: that it may be delivered over by them to the next Churchwardens
by Bill indented.

LXXXVIII. The choice of Sidemen, and their joint Office with Churchwardens.
THe Churchwardens of every Parish, and two or more discreet persons, in
every parish, to be chosen for Sidemen or assistants by the Minister and
parishioners, if they can agree; (otherwise to be appointed by the Ordinary of
the Diocese,) shall diligently see, that all the parishioners duly resort to
their Church, upon all Sundays and Holy Days, and there to continue the whole
time of Divine Service, and none to walk or stand idle, or talking in the
Churchyard or Church Porch, during that time. But especially they shall see,
that in every meeting of the Congregation, peace be well kept: and that all
persons excommunicated, and so denounced, be kept out of the Church, during the
time of Divine Service. And all such, as shall be found slack, or negligent in
resorting to the Church, (having no great or urgent cause of absence,) they
shall earnestly call upon them; and after due monition, (if they amend not,)
they shall present them to the Ordinary of the place. The choice of which
persons, viz. Churchwardens, or Sidemen or Assistants; shall be yearly made
in Easter week.

LXXXIX. The old Churchwardens to make their Presentiments, before the new be
sworn.
THe Office of all Churchwardens and Sidemen, shall be reputed ever hereafter
to continue, until the new Churchwardens that shall succeed them, be sworn,
which shall be the first Court after Easter, or according to the direction of the
Ordinary: Which time so appointed, shall always be the time in every year, or
one of the two times, when the Churchwardens, and Sidemen of every parish,
shall exhibit to their several Ordinaries, the presentiments of such
enormities, as have happened in their parishes find the last presentiments. And
this duly they shall perform, before the newly chosen Churchwardens and
Sidemen be sworn: And shall not be suffered to pass over the said
presentiments, to those that are newly come into Office, and are, (by
inte^dment) ignorant of such crimes; under pain of those censures, which are
appointed for the reformation of such dallyers, and dispensers with their own
consciences, and oaths.

XC. The duty of Churchwardens touching such persons, as are out of the
Church, in the time of Gods worship, on Sundays or Holy Days.
THe Churchwardens and their assistants, shall warn Inholders, Taverners,
Victuallers, and Alehouse-keepers, that they fell no meat, or drink, and that
they receive none into their Tavern, or Alehouse, all the time wherein there
is preaching or celebration of Divine Service, upon Sundays or Holy Days. If
any do contrary upon contempt, or stubornenesse; they shall present both him
and them, whom he received, by name, in the next Visitation. Also, they shall
see, that none of those light wanderers in Markets, and pelting-sellers, which
carry about, and sell, Pins, Points, and other small trifles, whom they call
Pedlers, set out their Wares to sale: And that no Beggars, or idle persons
abide, either in the Churchyard, or near the Church, all that time; but shall
cause them either, to come in, or to depart.

XCI. Their duty touching those persons that are in the Church at that time.
THey shall also see, that in every meeting of the Congregation, peace be well
kept; and that none behave themselves rudely, or disorderly in the Church. And
to that end, they shall warn the people, that they bring not with them to the
Church, Dogs, Hawks with bells, or Children which are not so nurtured, as they
can be kept quiet in their seats, without running up and down. Neither shall
they suffer any person to disturb the Service or Sermon, either, by untimely
ringing of Bells, or by walking, talking, laughing, or any other noise, which
may hinder the Minister, or offend the people. And the names of all such as
offend in this kind, they shall truly, and personally present in the
Ordinaryes visitations.

XCII. To keep the Churches from being profaned at all other times.
THey shall suffer no plays, feasts, banquets, suppers, Church-ales,
drinkings, exposing any wares to sale, te^porall Courts or Leets, Lay-juries,
Masters, Commissions, (other than for causes Ecclesiastical,) playing at ball,
or any other profane usage, to be kept in the Church, Chapel, or
Churchyard: Neither the Bells to be rung, either in the feast of all Souls; or
upon any Holidays, or Eves, abrogated by the Book of Common prayer, neither
for Months or twelve-moneths minds, or remembrances of the Dead, nor at any
time at all prohibited by the Bishop.

XCIII. To see Churches and Churchyards kept in sufficient reparations.
THey shall take care and provide, that the Churches be well and sufficiently
repaired, and so from time to time kept, and maintained; that the Windows be
well glazed, and that the floores be kept paved, plain and even; and all
things there, in such an orderly and decent sort, (withour dust, or any thing
that may be noisome, or unseemely,) as best becomes the house of God. The
like care they shall take, that the Churchyardes, be well and sufficiently
repaired, fenced, and maintained, with walls, rayles and pales, as have bin in
each place accustomed, at their charge, unto whom, by Law the same appertains.

XCIIII. To furnish all Churches, with things necessary for the celebration of
Divine Service, preaching, and administration of the Sacraments
THey shall provide in every Church, at the common charge of the parish, two
Books of Co^mon-prayer; one for the Minister, and the other for the Clerk,
with all convenient speed; but at farthest, within six Months after the
publishing of these Canons. And likewise the Bible of the last translation, set
forth in the time of King James, of blessed memory. And where all, or the most
part of the people, are Irish, they shall provide also the said Books in the
Irish tongue; so soon as they may be had. The charge of these Irish books,
being to be borne also, wholly by the parish. They shall also, at the same
common charge, provide a fit seat for the Minister to read Service in, a comely
and decent Pulpit, to be set in a convenient place for the preaching of Gods
Word; a Font of stone set in the ancient usual place, for the ministration of
Baptism; together with a fair Table, to be placed at the East end of the
Church or Chancell, and a Cup of Silver for the celebration of the Holy
Communion. Which Table also shall stand covered in time of Divine Service, with
a Carpet of silk, or other decent stuff, thought meet by the Ordinary of the
place, (if any question be made of it;) and with a fair lynnen cloathat, the
time of the ministration, as becomes that Table.

XCV. To provide things fitting for every Communion, and to observe those that
come, or come not to the same.
LIkewise, they shall at the charge of the parish, against the time of every
Communion, with the advice and direction of the Minister, provide a sufficient
quantity of fine white Bread, and of good and wholesome Wine, for the number of
Communicants, that shall from time to time receive there; which Wine they shall
cause to be brought, to the Co^munion-table, in a clean and sweet standing
pott, or stoop of pewter, if not of purer metal. Also they shall mark,
as well as the Minister, whether all and every of the parishioners, come so
often every year, to the holy Communion, as the Laws and our Constitutions
do require; and whether any strangers come often, and commonly, from other
parishes to their Church: and shall show their Minister of them, least perhaps
they be admitted to the Lords Table, amongst others; which they shall forbid,
and remit such home, to their own parish Churches and Ministers, there to
receive the Communion, with the rest of their own neighbors.

XCVI. To provide a Chest for Alms in every Church.
THey shall provide and have, within three Months next after the publishing of
these Constitutions, a strong Chest with a hole in the upper part thereof; to
be provided at the charge of the parish, having three keys: of which, one
shall remain in the custody of the Parson, Vicar, or Curat; and the other two,
in the custody of the Churchwardens for the time being. Which chest, they
shallset and fasten in the most co^venient place, to the intent the
parishioners may put into it, the Alms for their poor neighbors. And the
Parson, Vicar or Curat, shall diligently from time to time, (and especially,
when men make their Testame^ts,) call upon, exhort, and move their neighbors,
to confer and give, (as they may well spare,) to the said Chest, declaring
unto them, that whereas, heretofore they have been diligent, to bestow much
substance otherwise than God commanded, upon superstitious uses; now they
ought, at this time, to be much more ready, to help the poor and needy:
knowing, that to relieve the poor, is a sacrifice which pleases God, and that
also whatsoever is given for their comfort; is given to Christ himself, and is
so accepted of him, that he will mercifully reward the same. The which Alms,
and devotion of the people, the keepers of the keys, shall yearly, quarterly,
or oftener (as need requires) take out of the Chest, and distribute the same,
in the presence of most of the parish, or six of the chief of them; to be
truly and faithfully delivered, to their most poor and needy neighbors.

XCVII. To abolish all Monuments of superstition.
MOreover they shall, (with the approbation of the Ordinary of the place,) see,
that all Rood-lofts, in which wooden Crosses stood: all shrines, and coverings
of shrines, and all other Monuments of feigned miracles, pilgrimages, idolatry,
and superstition, be clean taken away and removed.

XCVIII. None to teach school without license, and Curates desirous to teach,
to be licenced before others
IT shall not be lawful for any to teach the Latin tongue, or to instruct
Children either in public School, or private house, but such, as shall be
allowed by the Ordinary of the place, under his hand and Seal, being found
meet, as well for his learning, and dexterity in teaching, as for sober, and
honest conversation; and also for right understanding of Gods true Religion,
(saving to all Patrons and founders of Schools the right of nomination.) And
in what parish soever, there is a Curat, which is a Master of Arts, or
Bachellor of Arts, or is otherwise well able to teach youth, and will willingly
so do, for the better increase of his living, and trayning of Children in the
principles of true Religion: We will, and ordain, that the license to teach
Grammar, shall be granted to none by the Ordinary of that place, but only to the
said Minister or Schoolmaster. Provided always, that this Constitution shall
not extend to any parish, where there is a public School founded already. In
which case, We think it not meet, to allow any to teach Grammar, but only
him, that is allowed for the said public School.

XCIX. The duty of Schoolema^^ers.
ALl Schoolemasters, and Vshers, shall endeavor to train up the Children
committed to their charge, in good learning, civility and piety. And in the
Latin tongue, they shall teach the Grammar, set forth in England by king Henry
the eight, and so continued ever since, and none other. They shall also teach
such other Books, as shall be allowed, and appointed by the Bishop of the
Diocese. Provided, that according to the privilege granted to the University,
near Dublin, Logic and Philosophy shall not be taught in Grammar schools.
Provided also, that none be admitted, or licenced to be a Schoolmaster, or
Usher within this kingdom, unless he first, by his subscription, testify his
consent to the two first Canons. And also, that every Archbishop, and Bishop,
and other Ordinary (having Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction) shall, by censures of
the Church, respectively compel, all such as are subject to their
Jurisdiction, which do now teach school, or hereafter shall presume to teach
school, not having testified their consent by subscription as aforesaid, to
desist from teaching of school.

C. The authority of this National Synod established.
THis sacred Synod, being the representative body of the Church of Ireland, in
the name of Christ, and by the Kings authorit, ylawfully assembled, does
pronounce and decree, that if any, within this Nation, shall despise and
contemn the Constitutions thereof, (being by the said Regal power ratified
and confirmed;) or affirm, that none are to be subject thereunto, but such as
were present, and gave their voices unto them: he shall be Excommunicated, and
not restored, until he shall publicly revoke his error.

FINIS.

