ARCHIDAMVS, OR, THE COUNCIL OF WAR.

Being 2000. years old, and written by Isocrates the courageous Orator,
translated by a Tho: Barnes.

LONDON, Printed by William Jones for Nicholas Bourne, and are to be sold at
his shop at the South entry of the Royal Exchange. 1624.

THE PREFACE.
BEing in my apprentiship of Grammar School, I cast a view upon that excellent
and most famous Panegyrique Oration, about which as some say, that flower of
oratorie Isocrates was in hammering ten years or more. But mine eye glauncing
a little further, I chanced to read that little less admirable Oration to
King Philip, which the Grecians so reverenced, inasmuch as King Philip and his
son and heir Alexander by reading thereof, were stirred up to set upon the
kingdom of Persia. But proceeding, I happened upon this no less famous then the
rest, entitled Archidamus; in the beginning whereof I found such excellency
of elocution, that it still more inflamed the scorching heat of my desire to
read it more exactly then the othets. First, because it was undertaken in so
important a cause, and for so Potent, and so Noble descended a young Prince:
Secondly, because in this Oration was required variety of matter,
Monarchical, Military, public and private, either advancement or ruin; and
lastly because it seems to me the Orator spent his best vigor and strength
of wit, and learning at least to parallel, if not to excel his other Orations.

But the noise I now hear of preparation for war, has made these his
Arguments, and whole discourse not only to run in my mind, but also to run out
at my pen. Has my plentiful instructor Isocrates taught me to speak any
Greek? why should not I teach him to speak a little English? In attempting
whereof, I do but pay a part of that gratitude, which I owe him as a reward
for mine education, which kind of duty he in this Oration calls by the name
of (...). If any man think that I soar too high in meddling with Orations that
concern politic affairs. I answer that in our Schools we read all manner
of Histories and discourses, wherein we look after only the outward bark of
the phrase, and Rhetorical figures. My end and task is only a (...), not of
soldiers, but of words, construction of Phrases, not application of Histories.
Therefore (good Reader) accept my petty labors, and pardon mine errors,
remembering that thy self either art a young learner, (like my self) or, having
been so, have learned at least this lesson Minori parcere, (that is) not to
strike with deeper censure those that have not withdrawn their hand from the
ferula.

Courtious Reader, farewell, and prosper, which is the word wherewith now I
salute Westminster School, thence hoysing sail for Eton.

Thomas Barnes.

THE ARGUMENT.
AFter the battle at Leuctra, the Thebanes invaded Lacedemon, and made much
spoil of them, so as the Lacedaemonians flying and their wives running to them,
thus spoke, Can we again receive you into our wombes? Whereupon they charging
the enemy, gave them the overthrow at Mantinea, being stoutly aided by a troop
of the Athenian horsemen. After this overthrow at Mantinea, by Ambassadors
they demanded a league or peace of the Thebanes: who promised it upon this
condition, that they should reedifie Messena, and suffer it to be a free City:
which some counseled the Lacedaemonians to yield unto, but Archidamus the
younger advised them to the contrary. This Prince Archidamus was son to King
Agesilaus. Some say, that Archidamus sending to Athens, obtained this Oration
from Isocrates, others say, that Isocrates penned it to exercise his Oratorie,
and to show what might be spoken by Archidamus, aduising the Lacedaemonians in
their Senate, or Parliament. And this is the Argument: the kind of this
Oration is deliberatiue, the principal matter is profit, or expediencie.

ARCHIDAMVS, OR, THE COUNCIL OF WAR.
SOme of you peradventure wonder, that I who have hitherto kept the Laws of
our City, so as I know not whither any of my equals have done, should have so
changed my manner, that concerning those things which mine Elders would fear to
speak of, I who am yet but of blooming years should begin to deliver my
opinion: but if any of them who are wont to make deliberatiue orations among
you, had spoken as the dignity and the honor of the City required, I had
been silent; But perceiving of them to whom the Commanders in war commit the
authority, or precedence, not stoutly to oppose, and others to be altogether
mute. I arose up, that I might declare what I thought concerning these
affairs. For if I should keep a retired state of life, I should hold it a
shame for to use the matter, that the City should have a respect to the
safety, and not to the honor thereof. And I suppose that if in any it be
lawful for young men to give their opinions, then in this surely: to persuade
to war or peace is most fit for them on whom the greatest part of the danger
shall redound; and then especially when it concerns all in general to see,
and to understand what is fit to be done. For if it should appear that they
who are grave, and stricken in years, only concerning all things judge
rightly, and that young men should be in all things deceived: then they might
take justly from us this privilege of delivering our opinions in consultation;
but since it consists not in multitude of years, that we should excel on
another in wisdom, but in the induements of nature, and diligence of
cricumspection, or care, why should we not (both of young and old) make trial
of the most able, that of such things as shall be consulted of, ye may take
the most expedient? it is wonderful to me that you should so absurdly think,
that we whom ye allow worthy to command both at sea and land, whereby we
cannot miscarry without great hurt to our City, should not open our mouths
to consult of those things of which you of your sole power are to determine:
wherein if we rightly judge, all receive a common benifit: and if we misiudge,
the dishonor is only ours, without any hurt or impeachment to the public.

Nor has any desire of speaking, or changing my former course of life, begot
in me this opinion concerning these affairs: but that I would exhort you not
to oppose the incitments of such as are not elder then my self, but out of age
to seek out who are able to give touching the present estate of things some
good and profitable advise. For never since this was made a State, did either
war or danger offer so weighty a consideration, as the things now to be
deliberated of. In former times we strove for dominion with others, but now not
to put our selves under our enemies designs or demands: which is an argument
of liberty: in defense whereof no perils are to be refused, not of us only,
but of all others who would keep the reputation of manhood, and despise not
the commendation of virtue. And for mine own part, (if I may speak what
concerns mine own particular) I had rather dig and loose my life for
refusing to undergo the conditions of the imperious demands of mine enemies,
then to prolong my days much beyond the ordinary course of nature, by
yielding to the Treaty of the Thebans: For it were a shameful dishonor for
me descended from Hercules, and from a Father which swayeth the Scepter of a
Kingdom, who am also Heir apparent of the same State of honor, to give way
as much as in me lies, that the State which our Ancestors left us, should
come to the managing of those who have been under our service and subjection;
wherein I would have you to consent with me, well knowing that in the Theban
war, though fortune have not favored us, and through our Captains
misleading errors, we have not in our bodies been conquerours, yet did ever
carry the minds of invincible conquerours.

And if for fear of any imminent dangers we depart from our own right, we
shall strengthen the insolency of the Thebans, and shall erect the Trophe
against us more conspicuous, and illustrious then that of Leuctra: for that was
done by much fortune; but this by our own choice and voluntary pulling of
mischief upon us.

Let me therefore persuade you not with so great dishonor to blemish this
City, for our associates have to unadvisedly given council that we should
entertain peace, ( Messena being left out) with which our associates you
should be justly much more offended, the^ with those who from the beginning
have defected and fallen away from you: for they when they had alienated
themselves from our friendship, have overthrown their own Cities with
seditions and slaughters, the whole State declining into worse. But these do
purpose to undo you, who doubt not but to persuade you to cast away in a small
moment all the glory which our Progenitors with many dangers, within the space
of 700 year have purchased and estated upon us. Then which the Lacedaemonians
could invent nothing more grievous, nothing more contumelious: so that
furthermore, they are so desirous to satisfy themselves with our damage, and
suppose us to be so addicted to cowardice: that they which think it honorable
that ye should often undertake war for your own estates, judge it not meet
that ye should undergo any peril in the behalf of Messena.

And that they may the better enjoy their own, they assay to teach you, how it
behooves you to submit to the enemy what is yours; and further more, do
threaten us that if we yield not to these ill men, they will make conditions
of peace for themselves alone, without us: and I think the danger will not be
so great, the honor will be unto you without them, more conspicuous,
illustrious, and your name before all men more glorious. And if not by others,
but by your own powers or endeavors you can save guard, or defend your selves,
and vanquish your enemies: this shall be very agreeable to the other former brave
acts of this State. And albeit I have not been an admirer of those men whose
best ability is in oratorie, but rather suspected these who are nimble in the
tongue; to be whit-livered in their hands. Yet now I desired nothing more then
I might have liberty to speak according to mine own opinion, of those things
which are now in agitatio^, (in performing whereof) I hope I shall do good
service to the common wealth at this time.

And first of all it behooves you to remember in what manner you got the City
of Messena; Now called Morea.
and for what causes ye were first planted or seated in Pelopomesus, being at
the first Doreans; and therefore I will begin to repeat the matter a little
farther off, that ye may understand that Province to be taken from you, which
ye possess by as good right as all the rest of Lacedemon. For when Hercules
deceased, and changed this mortal for an immortal life with the gods: his
children in the beginning by the power of the enemies nourished too and fro with
many trauells: but after the death of Euristhus, they set up their rest amongst
the Doreans; at last, three ages after they went to Delphos, to consult with
the Oracle of certain doubts: but the God Apollo gave them an answer to their
demands: and bad them return into their own native and proper Country:
considering therefore the oracle, they found Argos to belong unto them by right
of propinquitie. For Euristheus being dead, only they of all the stock of
Perseus remained: Lacedemon being brought under servitude, (for Tyndareus being
driven out of his Kingdom,) after that Castor and Pollux vanished (from humane
society,) being restored to his Crown by Hercules, gave him this Country
both in recompense for his noble deeds, and for affinity sake with his
children, ( Messena also then subdued by the sword:) for Hercules robbed of his
cattle which he drove out of Erythia, by Neleus and his children, ( Nestor
only excepted) conquering that City, put them to the sword which offered him
this wrong, and made Nestor Governor of this City: judging him a wise and
prudent man, in that he being the youngest, was not found culpable with his
other brethren: conceiving this therefore to be the meaning of the Oracle. And
taking in your Progenitors as confederates, and leuying a great Army, they
gave in common this particular country to such as followed them in the war;
but took the maine Empire into their own Soueraignitie, and upon these
conditions interchangably pledging their fidelity, made an invasion: But the
danger and other Acts in this expedition, (not pertinent for the present.) What
need I more amply persecute: they being then conquerours of the inhabitants in
these foresaid places, divided the Kingdom into three parts: ye therefore do
abide even to this day in the league which ye made with our progenitors.

Therefore in time past you have been more emminent then others, and being so:
ye may expect for the time to come, that your actions should make you more
honorable then now ye are. But these of Messena fell into that impiety, as
they trecherously put to death this Cities founder, Cresphon the Lord of the
Country, one of Hercules Progeny, and their Commander. And his offspring
having escaped this danger, became suppliant to this City, judging it worthy
that ye by a due revenge of this dishonorable act to their deceased father,
should get you honor surrendering unto you this Country; ye then suing unto
(god Apollo,) and he commanded to undertake this, and to redress the wrong:
ouercomming the Messenians, thus have possessed this Country. Nor have I
accurately treated of what your right was from the beginning, for the present
time is not sufficient to enlarge all: but it was requisite that I should
discourse of things more briefly then plainly. Notwithstanding I suppose even
by what has been uttered, it will appear unto all men why it should be
granted and confessed, that the Country of right appertains to us, we
possessing it on no other terms, rather then to be any way questioned or
doubted of. For we inhabit this by donation from Hercules offspring, and being
warranted from the Oracle of Apollo confirmed, and by conquest of them that
possessed it: that other we have taken from the same men, in the same manner,
and by the same Oracle. And if it be so with us, that there can be no proud
command laid on us touching contradiction in the one, or the relinquishing of
Sparta, it is a needless labor to trouble our brains concerning Messena. And
if none of you think it fit that you should live banished from your own
country: ye ought also to be like minded concerning Messena. For we must
plead the same right and reason touching them both. Nor is this unknown to
you, that all men account possession whether private or public, by
prescription of time, to be proper and patrimoniall. Now we got Messena before
the Persians got their Monarchy, or subdued the continent (Asia,) and before
some Cities of Greece were made habitable. These things remaining thus to you,
they (the Thebanes) have yielded Asia to a stranger as his own patrimony: who
has not had the Empire 200 years, but would take away Messena from us, who
have possessd it more then double that time. And Palatiua and Thespeas they
have now a late dimolished: but Messena after 300 years space they would have
reaedified, in both breaking the conditions and league. And as they should as
of right reduce Messena, yet they should be injurious or offend us with more
color, or show of reason. But now they plant vassells upon our confines; so
this is not the most fearful offense, that we should loose our City
contrary to all right, but to behold our vassells to be now our Cities
Masters.

Out of that which follows ye shall evidently discern, that now we suffer
intolerable wrong, and that formerly we justly held Messena; for after many
perils were sustained by us, we were constrained to make peace, fearing much
worse then if we had bin enemies: but yet our covenants being drawn in those
times, wherein it was not possible to have better, there fell out some
contention about other things: but about Messena, neither the great King (of
Persia,) nor the State of the Thebanes at any time could object any thing for
the holding thereof.

And how shall we find a more elaborate testimony touching our right, then
this decree make known by our enemies, and notified in our grearest
infortunats. Moreover the oracle which all acknowledge to be most ancient,
uniuersall, and faithful, foreknew that then Messena was ours, when upon the
gift or donation of Cresphons princely heirs, it bid us receive the City,
and releive the wronged; but the wars continuing a long time, both parties
sending to Delphos, they seeking for succor, and we questioning how we might
with most celeritie be possessed of the City, the Oracle gave no answer at
all unto them, as making no just petition, but declared to us what sacrifices
we should offer, and from whom we should have most strong aid. And how can any
give a more sure and clear testimony then these? First it was manifested, that
we received this Country of the true Lord, and owners thereof, (nor is it
unnecessary briefly to repeat and inculcate these points:) next by conquest,
as many other Cities in those times were erected, after that we cast out those
impious wrongers of Hercules children, who were justly expulsed all countries.

Add hereunto our right of possession by times prescription, our enimyes
approbation, and the goddess determination, every one of which is sufficient
to overthrow their words that dare accuse us, either now for covetousnes we
conclude a peace, or formerly for ambition of other men's estates, we waged
war against the Messenians. And of the possession of Messena happily the matter
affords more to be spoken, but I suppose what is already said is sufficient.

But they which advise us to make peace, affirm, that it behooves wise and
prudent men, not to carry one and the same mind, in managing their affairs
when they are in prosperity as in adversity, but to apply to the time, and
to follow Fortune, not to bear minds greater then means, nor to seek for
justice in those straites, but for expediency; In other things I agree with
them, but how expediency is to be preferred before justice, no man of the
deepest consultation, can persuade me. For I perceive that for justice sake,
Laws were enacted, and in justice upright and good men much glory and rejoice,
and for justice, Cities governed honestly, and honorably labor most
exceedingly. Yea and the wars in old times have had a succesfull end, not
according to force but faith: and the whole life of man perishes through
wickedness, but is conserved by virtue. Therefore they must not be weak, or
faint-harted, that try all dangers for just causes, but much rather they who
iniures others contumeliously, and cannot bear prosperity moderatly. Next you
must cast your eye on this point, that all men's opinions are agreed concerning
the justness of the matter, but difference is only about the expediency
thereof. And of two goods propounded: whereof the one is manifest, and the
other uncertain, how can you but do absurdly, if ye shall refuse that which
is certain and out of question, and choose that which is doubtful. Your own
election being so distracted in it self, for it is comprehended in your
speeches: that we should loose nothing of our own, nor involue the State with
any disgrace, and being exposed unto dangers for a good cause to hope our
battails shall have more prosperous success then our enimyes. And in all these
our advises to loose Messena, ye shall wrong your selves herein, and
peradventure miss in expediencie justice, and other things, which you expect.
For it is not assured, that if we grant our enimyes demands, we shall have a
firm peace, and I think ye are not ignorant, that all men use to discourse
of justice or equity to those that are defendants; but on those which are
somewhat more ready in yelding to the demands of their enimyes, worser
conditions are imposed then at the first were intended, so as it falls out,
that they who are inclined to war, settle a better peace, then they who
easily submitt to any conditions.

And that I may not be thought to wast more time about these things leaving
them all, I will address my speech to the most substantial point. If never
any, at any time having been put to the worse, have recovered themselves, nor
overcome their enimyes, neither could we by any likelihood hope to be by wars
advanced. But if often times it has come to pass that the stronger have been
vanquished by the weaker, and they who have laid seidge, have been put to the
worst by those who have been beseidged, what wonder were it, that the estate
wherein we now stand, should admit alteration. But of our City I can aver
no such matter; for in former times none ever thought stronger then we,
invaded these territories; but of others many instancies may be used, and
especially of the City of the Athenians, whom we shall find by incroaching
upon others to be much blamed by the Grecians. But for their revenging of
wrong, have been praised of all men. And if I should recount the old peril^s
which the under went against the Amazones, Thracians, and Peloponesians, who
breaking into these Countries with Euristieus, I should be thought to tell you
of things too high, and remote from these present times: but in the Persian
war: who knows not out of how great calamity, into how great prosperity
they were raised; for they only out of the inhabitants, which came from
Peloponesus, perceiving the power of the Barbareans to be vnsubsistable,
thought it unworthy for them, to condesend to the conditions propounded to
them: but presently resolved, to make less reckoning of their Cities
subversion, then to become servily in subjection. Therefore, forsaking their
Territories, and City, (minding their Countries fredome) associating us in
their dangers, obtained such a change, that they, who for a few days were made
a spoil, were for a long time after Lords over others; neither in this City
only is it very available for the common good, to take courage and to avenge
our selves upon our enimyes; but also even Dionysius the Tyrant: by his example
confirms the same. He being beseidged by the Carthaginians (there being left)
and having no safeguard or defense for him,) but hemmed in with war, and his
subjects hatefully hearted toward him, the tyrant offered to escape by
Sea-flight, one of his servants adventured to say, he that dies a King, leaves
a fair Monument, whereupon, being ashamed of what he had purposed, and again
bestirring himself and taking arms, slaying many millions of the
Carthaginians, made his Sovereignty over his Subjects far more firm, and
that power which he first had being more strengthened, he ended his days in
King-like authority, and left his son in the same honor, and
principallitie, wherewith he was invested. In like sort to these, did Amyntas
the King of the Macedonians, for being overthrown in fight by the barbarous
people, that bordered upon him, and being stripped of all Macedonia, first he
minded to leave his Country and to save his person, but hearing one commend
that, which was spoken to Dionisius, and taking courage as he did, surprised a
small Castle, or hold, and sending for aid thither, within three Months
space, he regained all Macedonia, and reigning all the residue of his life,
dyed very aged; we shall be very weary both in hearing, and speaking, if we
should search out all such actions.

If we should remember the deeds concerning the Thebean war, we could not
but lament for these present accidents; but for the future we conceive better
hope, for they being so hardy as to sustain our assaults and threats, in this
estate stood their affairs, that at other times being in subjection to us, now
they seek no less then to command us, it is a sensles thing to think that
when as such alterations have been in others, their should be a stand in us
only. But we must not be daunted with our present estate and bestirr for the
future, and trust in what time must bring forth, being confident: that Cities
remedy such calamities by wise Government at home, and by marshall skill abroad.
Nor shall any dare to gainesay, that our experience in the wars, is not much
more then others, and for good Domistick Govermentt, it is in us alone: such as
it ought to be; which being so, our affairs must needs be more fortunate then
theirs, who bestow small care upon either of these two.

But some inveigh against the war and tax it by uncertainty of events, using
as many other arguments, so especially those disastars which have befallen us,
and think it strange that any should judge it fit, to put confidence in a
thing so hazardous, and difficult. But I have known much happiness to have
accrewed to many by the wars, and through peace many have lost. For none of
these courses are of themselves: either ill, or good. But as a man shall use
things, and opportunities, so of necessity have they their events. For it is
behouefull that they who are in prosperity, should desire peace, for so in
that estate they shall greatly preserve that they have. But those that are in
adversity must listen unto war. For by troubles and bustling, a speedy
mutation will follow, and I doubt we practice the clean contrary to this.

For when we might have lived at ease and pleasure, we followed war more then
was expedient: but now that we are driven into great distresses, we seek for
ease, and take counsel for security. But they who would enjoy their liberty,
must shun compositions tendered by command or strong hand: as tending unto
servitude. And should come to parleyes, either when they have super eminency,
the better of their enimyes or at least equal to them, aliter) the conditions
of peace which any public state obtaines of the enemy are suitable to the terms
wherein their war has ended.
that they all may have such a League, as may bring a total cessation of
arms; which ye minding, ought not rashly to cast your selves into base and
ignominious conditions of peace, nor appear more timorous advisers in your
Countries behalf, then in other affairs, and remember that in times past, if
but only one Lacedemonian did aid any of their confederate Cities, which was
beseidged, all men would confess, that for that one man only, they did obtain
their safety. And a man may hear of our ancestors many such men, and my
self can reckon some of most note, and name.

Paidaretus going to Chius with his navy: preserved that City. Brasidas
entering Amphipolis marshalling but a few of them that were beseiged, in fight
overthrew many of the beseidgers. Gylippus also ayding the Syracusians did not
only save them, but captived all their enimyes army royal, both by Sea, and
Land. And how can this but be dishonorable to you, that in those times every
one of you, was enough to preserve other Cities, but now all of you dare not
attempt to save your own. And you have filled all Asia and Europe with your
tryumphes: when you fought for others, yet for your own Country, so manifestly
not only wronged, but reproached, there is no appearance of any battle, which
you have fought worthy so much as to be named, but other Cities in the defense
of our Empire, have endured the most extreme Leaguers, but we our selves have
not the courage to bear the least hardshippe, that we be not compelled to do
that which is dishonorable.

Now when as we are furnished with good troops of horse well fedd and trained
for the wars, should we now make so base a peace? As may be seem only those
that are brought down to the lowest ebb of necessities, and want means for
their daily sustentation.

But this of all is most unworthy: if we who are thought the most active of all
the Graecians, shall be most slow in these deliberations. And is it meet to
mention some of these braggs, with which we are outfaced by these men? They
(say these men) who are but once overcome, and have but one assault, or
impression made on them, so effeminately yielding, to what conditions soever
the enimyes propound, how will they be able to endure a continual calamity?
And who would not disdain us, (the Messenians enduring the seige of twenty
years in this Country,) if we should through a sudden composition forsake the
same, not remembering our Ancestors, but what they with much labor, and
danger, have possessed, we should through a verbal persuasion cast away?
Which some nothing respecting, nor regarding the dishonor that will fall upon
us, advise those things: which will make our State for ever infamous. And so
eagerly do they exhort us to deliver up Messena; that they have been bold to
discover the weakness of our City, and the strength of the enemy, and bid them
which oppose their advise, to answer and tell from whence any help can be
expected, whereupon we should give counsel for a war.

Truly I think the best procuring of aid for war, and the most assured, is
to undertake just causes. For it is right and meet, that even the good pleasure
of the gods should assist such; if we may conjecture of the future by the
present. Add hereunto to govern the Common wealth well, and warily, and even
unto the death to resist the enemy, and to judge nothing so heavy, as to be
ill spoken of by our own Country men, which worthy disposition is to be found
more in our Nation, then in any other: And truly for my parr, I had rather go
to the wars assisted with troops of our own Nation, then with the strength
of many millions of other Nations.

For we know our predecessors coming into these Countries, were not
Conquerours by the multitude of others aids, but by those virtues before
recited. Therefore it is unworthy to fear the enemy, because they are many,
but rather herein to set up our resolution, since we see our selves so to have
suffered calamities, as none others ever did, continuing in those constitutions
(of our Ancestors) which were ordained from the beginning: But some not
contenting, nor containing themselves within their happy estates, but being of
turbulent spirits, others combined with warlike confederacies invading other
Cities: others doing the clean contrary; and the rest are at difference with
their neighbors, rather about the bounds of their territories, then warring
against us. So as I wonder men should seek greater helps in war, then those
which the weaknesses of the enimyes afford, these shall be our aids, and
assistance.

But if it be needful to speak of foreign aid, there be many I think that
would leavie forces for us. First I know the Athenians, though they stand not
for us in all things, yet for their own safety will do any thing: and some
other States will join it in Counsel, for what may as well now avail us, as
themselves. Yea, Dionysius the tyrant, and the King of Aegipt, and other
Potentates of Asia as in them is, will readily send us assistance. And besides
these the wealthy and famous Graecians endeavors in all excellent actions,
though yet not joined to us, yet in good will are with us, of whom we have good
cause to hope well for the future. And I think the people in Peloponesus and
that Popular State which we may well think, although not hitherto yet at this
time would take care on our side. For they have not obtained by their falling
from us what they expected: but instead of their liberty the contrary has
befallen them: For they have both lost the best men in their estate, and are
now become subject to the worst of their own Citizens: and when they would
live after their own laws, they are fallen into many and greivious breaches
of all Law. And whereas heretofore they were wont with us: to go against
others, now they see others warring against them, and the seditions which they
heard before amongst their neighbors, now they also behold almost every day,
commotions amongst themselves. And they are so brought under by afflictions as
they be now, not who are the most miserable among them, for none of their
Cities are so without dangers of sword, that has not their neighbors doing
them mischeife, so as their territories are laid wast, their Cities
dimolished, their dwelling houses ruinated, their government turned top-side
turvie, their laws abrogated, which while they enjoyed: they were the most
happy of all the Graecians; and so faithless, and hostile are they among
themselves, as they rather fear their own Citizens, then the enemy. And
in-stead of that wealth which they enjoined under us, and good will which they
had from us, they are fallen into such barbaronesse and hard-hartinesse, as
they, that have wealth, more contentedly will cast it into the sea, then to
impart it to the poor in necessity, and the poor had rather rob, and
forcibly catch from the rich, then take them up though they might find them by
chance. And abrogating their sacrifices, they sacrifice one another on their
altars; and there are more exils now out of one City, then there were before
out fo all Peloponesus, notwithstanding all which recited miseries, those which
are concealed are more then are declared, there is no wretchedness, nor heaviness
which concurreth not with the times, with which some are already, and others
very shortly will be filled: all seeking to find deliverance from the present
calamity. For think not things can continue in this stay, for they whom
prosperities has burdened, how can they long endure the weight of adversity?
therefore not only if we get the victory by fight, but also if we remain
inioying peace ye shall see them changed, and they will think that
confederation with us will be their best safeties: this therefore is the hope
I have,

And I so far abstain from yielding to our enemies demands, that if none of
these things come to pass, no aid from others, and though some of the
Graecians should hurt us, and others of them should neglect us, I would not
hereafter be otherwise minded, but would sustain any dangers of war rather
then sign any such conditions: for I should be much ashamed of both these,
either to condemn our Ancestors, as if they had injuriously taken from the
Messenians their territories: or that we, if they have lawfully possessed
them, should give away any part, beyond right and equity. And neither of these
two must be done; but we must consider how we may make a war beseeming our
worth, least we should give the lie upon them, who praise and admire our
state: but rather so to behave our selves, that they might be thought to have
praised us less then we have merited. For I suppose nothing more grievous
shall ever fall out then what now is; and that our enemies consultations and
actions shall much advantage us. But if our hope should be frustrate, and we
should on all parts be circumuented, and that we could not preserve the
State, these are dangerous things which I shall speak of, (yet I will not
spare to speak freely of them, for these are better and more agreeable to our
wisdoms to be told among the Graecians then those which some advise unto) I
hold it meet our parents, children, and wives, and other our people should be
sent some into Sicilia, and Italy, some into Syrene, some into Epirus, whom all
these will willingly receive with sufficient proportion of ground for their
habitation, and other provision for liuelihood, some in rendering thanks for
the benifits already received from us, others in expectation of the profit they
may receive for the good they do to us. Those which remain and are willing,
and able to undergo perils shall forsake the City, and all their
possessions, and goods saving what we can carry with us, taking some Castle or
Hold which is well fortified, or fittest for war, to offend and infest our
enemies on all sides both by sea and land, till they shall give over
challenging that which is ours. And if we shall valorously attempt these
things without delay, we shall see those that now Lord it over us, and give
the Law, become our humble suppliants and suitors to receive Messena again,
and to make peace with them. Now which of the Cities in Peloponesus has
undertaken so great a war as is requesite this should be; if your wills be
not wanting. Yea who will not be astonished, and tremble, at an army so
mightily compacted, and so well exercised, so justly incensed against those
who have been the causes of these mischiefs, so resolute to spend their lives
in public service to imply them selves upon nothing else but upon the wars,
neglecting all other occasions not unlike those armies which consist of
mercinary forces whose trade is nothing but war. A description of Mansfieds
Army.
Moreover having no certain City of abode, able to live without houses in
the open field, rouing up and down throughout all countries, and can make them
selves borderers, or neighbors on whom soever they will, and think all places
which are fit for war to be their habitation and native Country.

I think if these words already spoken by me were diuulged through out
Graece, our enemies would find themselves very much perplexed, and so much the
more if necessity force us to put this in execution. For what shall we imagine
they will think, that they should be subject to suffer mischeife, but shall
not be able to do us any hurt, and shall behold seige laid to their Cities,
but ours so well appointed that it cannot fall into the like affliction, beside
nourishment for our bodies shall be easily had out of our goods brought with us,
together with such as shall come by forraging and spoil, but theirs will be
hard to come by, because it is not all one, to provide for an army and to feed
a company of people in a City, and that would vex them most of all, when they
shall hear, that our people do flourish in great experience, and wealth, but
shall see their own every day hunger-starved, and themselves not able to
supply their indigences, yea, when they shall plough their ground: they shall
have theirs reaped for them against their wills, and on the other side if they
leave it untilled, they shall never have to suffice them.

But perhaps they will unite their forces and raise a general army, and follow
us at the heels, and so hinder us from hurting them. But what will be more
wished of us, then to meet their fullest forces, and their best preparations to
battle, and in the same difficulties with us pitching their Tents against us:
their soldiers ill ordered, out of the common rout, using many generals, but
we shall easily make a quick hand of them, by compelling them to fight at our
pleasure not at their own choice.

The residue of the day would fail me, if I should take in hand to tell how
much our estate would be bettered by these courses. This is again manifest,
that we excel not the other Graecians in greatness of our City, nor in
multitude of men, but because we have framed our government, like to an Army
well ordered, willing to obey the commanders. And if we shall represent that
whose imitation has profitted us, it is not obscure that we shall be more
powerful then our enemies, for we know that they who were made Lords of this
City, having but a small army when they came into Peloponesus, have achieued
many and mighty enterprises.

It shall therefore well become us to imitate our ancestors, and returning to
our first original because we have stepped aside, endeavor to recover our
ancient honor, but we shall do most disgracefully if knowing how the
Athenians left their Country for the safeguard of other Grecian, we should not
dare to leave our City for the safety of our selves. And that when we ought
to give examples to others of such worthy atchiuements, we are not willing so
much as to imitate their honorable actions. Yea this is much more rediculous,
if the Phoceans flying from the dominion of a great King, leaving Asia, fled
into Massalia, we should come to this pusillanimitie, as to suffer, or
undergo their imperiousnes, of those whose masters we have been heretofore. We
must not ere in our minds to reuolue that day in which we should separate our
most dear, and near suddenly from us. But rather are we to look back to
those times in which as victours over our enemies we shall rectify our
City, and embrace those which are so near and dear unto us. And now we
are to make it appear to all, that we have been without desert unfortunate,
and that in former times we justly would have commanded over others. And thus
stands the matter. I have made this speech, not as that we should instantly do
these things, nor as though our safety consisted in no other course, but as
desirous to undergo these, and far greater miseries, before we make
composition about Messena, such as they require. Nor would I so fervently
exhort you to war, if I found not that this course which I have propounded to
be the best way for a fair and firm peace for future, but out of that which
others have counseled unto, it will be dishonorable, and for no time durable.
For if we shall dwell near this City enlarged and repaired, who discerns
not, that we shall ever be ending of our days in tumults, and dangers? These
therefore discoursing of security, hide from themselves that they make but a
few days peace for us, which will beget hereafter a continual war,

Feign would I hear of them, for what things and when they think we should
fight even to death, Not then when our enemies impose unreasonable conditions
upon us? Not then when they would catch us out of our country, and make free
our bond-slaues, and place them in the country which our Ancestors left to
us? Not then when they not only turn us out of that we have, but make us the
reproach and scorn of our neighbors. I truly think that for these it is fit
to endure not only fight, but flight, and death. For it is far better to end
our lives in the honor which we have, then to prolong our days in dishonor,
subiecting our selves to our enimyes command.

If I must not dissemble to say what is evident. It will be more tolerable
that our enimyes should destroy us, then deride us. For they who have lived in
such reputation of courage and worth as we have done: must choose one of these
two, either to be eminent among the Graecians, or else to dye every mothers
child of us, without subiecting our selves to bassenes, which we must think
on, not with love to our lives, nor following the opinion of our confederates,
whose guids, and rulers we have been thought worthy to be heretofore. But these
things being considered, to choose not what is most expedient for them, but
what is most comely for Lacedemon, and for our brave actions. For of the same
things all must not ever deliberate alike, but as from the beginning every one
has laid the foundation of that matter. For none will impute it as a fault to
the Epidareans, Philasians, and Corinthians, if they regarded nothing but the
life, and the preservation of themselves; but it is not decent, for the
Lacedaemonians to stoop to all kind of means, but if they cannot save their
lives with their honor, death must be preferred. For they who contend about
virtue, must labor in nothing so much as that they may be seen to do no
shameful act. And the cowardice of Cities is no less perceived in such
determinations, then in the hazards and perrills of the war. For the greatest
part of the things their done consists in Fortune, but what is decreed in
those things: is the very index of understanding. Therefore we must alike
studeously provide for those things which are here decreed, as the things
which in the wars are fought for. And I wonder that they who would dye for
their proper estate, should not bear the same mind for the public, for
which we should suffer any thing, and not shame our City, or see it forsake
the Orders, and gouerments wherein our Ancestors established it. And of these
many affairs, and mighty dangers which press us, and must be avoided of us,
this must especially be looked unto, that we appear not to do ought
effeminately, nor yield to our enemies beyond what is right. For it is a shame
that they who are dignified to command the Graecians, should stoop to their
enimyes demands, and be so far cast behind their Auncecestours, that whereas
they to get Sovereignty over others, were ready to suffer death. One the
contrary, we do undertake the danger of a war, to ridd our selves from
subjection unto others.

Well may we be ashamed to look on the games of Olympus and other famous
solemnities, wherein every one of us was emulous, and more admirable then any
champion that did bear away the bell in these games. Into which, how think
you any of us dare enter: when we are like to be scorned, instead of being
honored, instead of being conspicuous above all for virtue, and hereafter
obscured and despised of them for our dastardlinesse.

Besides we shall see our vassalls out of that Country which our Ancestors
left us, bring greater offerings and sacrifices then we: and we shall hear
from them reproaches so disdainefull as may be expected. For those who were
before our servants, and now have pircked up: to stand one even ground to make
conditions with us being their Masters: with which Couenanrs they will so
pinche us, as no man living by words can express; whereof we must (now)
consider, and not then repine when their is no other remedy. And now let us be
watchful how none of those things may happen, or light on us.

For what shameful baseness is this, in former times we could not endure to be
equalized of free men, but now we shall be seen to suffer the bold insolences
of bondmen. And we shall be thought heretofore to have flourished in
brauadoes, and when we were encouraged no better then other men, yet to have
set a good face upon it and to have put on a feigned gravity.

Let us therefore give no cause to such, as use to revile us, and endeavor to
convince their evil speeches with our deeds, acted in imitations of our
Ancestors worthy exploits. Remember our predecessors warring against the
Arcadians, whom as they say ranked, or ordered under the buckler of a few
targetterers, got the victory of many millions. And also those three hundred,
who at Thyrea, vanquished all the Arguies. And those embattailed thousand at
Thermopolis, who fighting with Seventie millions of the Barbarians, turned not
their backs neither were subdued, but left their lives upon life, where they
were set in array, showing themselves such, as they who employ their best art
and skill in celebrating commendations, cannot parallel their praises with
their virtues.

Calling all these therefore to mind, let us courageously prepare to battle,
not expecting any others to salve our present malady, but what dangers do
assail us, let us assay to defeat. For it behooves men of valor in such
times to be more courageous: For prosperity covers the vices, and cowardice
of all men, but adversity discovers what all men are, wherein we must show
that we have been better trained, and instructed in virtue. Nor must we
despair, out of those things which we now have: should arise those things
which we yet joy not.

For I suppose ye are not ignorant that many actions have happened: which at
the first all men accounted miseries, and were greiued with the enduring
thereof, but afterward ye experimented the self same to be the causes of much
happiness. And what need we foreign examples? (I say) of the Athentans, and
Thebans, have not come to that greatness by peace, but out of calamities of
wars have recovered themselves: and of one is become the chief of all, and
the other at this instant, so great, as none would ever have supposed it could
ever have been for renown, and shining greatness, affect not to be produced out
of sloth, but out of bloody conflicts, in desire whereof, neither our bodies,
nor lives, nor ought else that we have, are to be spared. For we shall set all
things in good plight, and recover our State into that dignity, from whence it
is lapsed, we shall surpass all our Ancestors in honor, and shall leave
nothing for our successors to exceed us; and we shall be in so good case that
they would speak well, who are willing to speak well of us, shall not be able
by their praises to equal our exploits.

Neither must we forget this, that all men set their minds and hopes on this
Parliament, and open your determinations in it. So therefore let every man set
down his resolution, as if we were now upon the common stage of all Greece.
It is but one mark that we aim at in all these deliberations. For if we will
resolve to maintain our upon equal terms even until death, we shall not
only be well reported of, but all the residue of our time we shall live
secured. But if we be faint-hearted in perils, we shall perplex our selves with
many encumbrances. Therefore exhorting one another, let us pay back to our
country her due for breeding and feeding us; and let us not behold our
Lacedemon as it is now contumeliously oppressed, and contemned. Neither let us
frustrate of their hopes, such as are our well wishers, nor making too much
account of our lives, appear traitors to our reputation, considering that it
is the highest point of honor to exchange a mortal body for an immortal
Glory. And (with expense of our lives, which we can enjoy but for a few years,
to purchase that good name, which we shall leave to all our posterity for
ever. For it is much better by this exchange, to get that honor which shall
never wear out, then to hedge our selves in with great reproaches for a little
season. And I think ye may be more encouraged to war, if ye represent unto
your mind, as present your parents, and your children, these calling upon you
not to stain the name of Sparta, nor the laws in which you were brought up
and instructed, nor the battles waged in their days, these other challenging
at your hands that country, which their Ancestors bequeathed them, their
Sovereignty over the Grecians, and their principality which they received
from their forefathers to whom we cannot answer, that either of them make
unjust requests. I know not why I should prolong my speech, only thus much:
that if for the many wars in this State, and dangers undergone, our enemies
at no time erected any trophe against us, while any King of our own family was
commander. And it is the part of wise men that whom they have used as Leaders,
and Generals in War with victorious success, by these deliberately aduising
touching future dangers, rather then by any others should they be persuaded.

FINIS.

