ARTICLES OF RELIGION, AGREED UPON BY The Archbishops, and Bishops, and the
rest of the Clergy of Ireland, in the Convocation HOLDEN AT DVBLIN IN The
year of our Lord God 1615. for the avoiding of Diversities of Opinions: And
the establishing of Concent touching true RELIGION.

LONDON, Printed by R.Y. for T. Downs, and are to be sold at the great North
door of Paul's. 1628.

royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

Headpiece: rectangular decoration; in the center, grain sheaf flanked by two
lions enclosed in circle surrounded by the motto "cor unum via una". Not found
in McKerrow. COR VNVM VIA VNA Articles of Religion agreed upon by the
Archbishops, and Bishops, and the rest of the Clergy of Ireland in the
Convocation holden at Dublin in the year of our Lord God 1615. for the
avoiding of Diversities of Opinions, and the establishing of Consent touching
true RELIGION.
Of the holy Scripture, and the three Creeds.


viz.

Of the Old Testament.
The 5. Books of Moses. Joshua. Judges. Ruth. The first and second of Samuel.
The first and second of Kings. The first and second of Chronicles. Esra.
Nehemiah. Esther. Job. Psalms. Proverbs. Ecclesiastes. The song of Solomon.
Isaiah. Jeremiah his prophecy and Lamentation. Ezechiel Daniel. The 12. less
Prophets.
Of the New Testament.
The Gospels according to Matthew. Mark. Luke. John.
The Acts of the Apostles. The Epistle of S. Paul to the Romans. Corinthians
2. Galathians. Ephesians. Philippians. Colossians. Thessalonians 2. Timothy 2.
Titus. Philemon. Hebrews. The Epistle of S. James. Saint Peter 2. Saint John
3. Saint Jude. The Revelation of S. John.
All which we acknowledge to be given by the inspiration of God, and in that
regard to be of most certain credit and highest authority.

Apocryphal, did not proceed from such inspiration; and therefore are not of
sufficient authority to establish any point of Doctrine, but the Church does
read them as Books containing many worthy things for example of life and
instruction of manners.

Such are these following.
The third Book of Esdras. The fourth Book of Esdas. The Book of Tobias. The
book of Judith. Additions to the book of Esther. The book of Wisdom The
book of Jesus the Son of Sirach, called Ecclesiasticus. Baruch with the
Epistle of Jeremiah. The song of the three Children. Susanna. Bell and the
Dragon. The Prayer of Manasses. The first book of Macchabees. The second book
of Macchabees.
as he does understand, but seriously exhorted to read the same with great
humility and reverence, as a special means to bring him to the true
knowledge of God, and of his own duty.





Nicen Creed, the Creed of Athanasius, and that which is commonly called the
Apostles Creed, ought firmly to be received and believed; for they may be
proved by most certain warrant of holy Scripture.

Of faith in the holy Trinity.






Of Gods eternal decree, and Predestination.
contingency of the second causes is taken away, but established rather.







be made sons of God by adoption, they be made like the Image of his only
begotten Son Jesus Christ, they walk religiously in good works, and at length
by Gods mercy they attain to everlasting felicity. But such as are not
predestined to salvation, shall finally be condemned for their sins.





Of the creation and government of all things.








Of the fall of man, original sin, and the state of man before justification.






works, to Faith, and calling upon God. Wherefore we have no power to do
good works, pleasing and acceptable unto God, without the grace of God
preventing us, that we may have a good will, and working with us when we have
that good will.







Of Christ, the mediator of the second Covenant.


Heaven, and there sits at the right hand of his Father, until he return
to judge all men at the last day.

Of the communicating of the grace of Christ.






Of Justification and Faith.


that which our infirmity was not able to effect, Christ's justice has
performed. And thus the justice and mercy of God do embrace each other: the
grace of God not shutting out the justice of God in the matter of our
justification; but only shutting out the justice of man (that is to say, the
justice of our own works) from being any cause of deserving our justification.

the merits of his most dearly beloved Son, our only Redeemer, Savior, and
Iustifier, Jesus Christ. Nevertheless, because faith does directly send us to
Christ for our justification, and that by faith, given us of God, we embrace
the promise of Gods mercy, and the remission of our sins, (which thing none
other of our virtues or works properly does:) therefore the Scripture uses to
say, that Faith without works; and the ancient Fathers of the Church to the
same purpose, that only Faith does justify us.





Of sanctification and good works.














Of the service of God.










(which of it self is a thing merely indifferent) but chiefly respects the
heart, how it is affected therein. It is therefore requisite, that first, before
all things we cleanse our hearts from sin, and then direct our fast to such
ends as God will allow to be good: that the flesh may thereby be chastised, the
spirit may be more fervent in prayer, and that our fasting may be a testimony
of our humble submission to Gods Majesty, when we acknowledge our sins unto
him, and are inwardly touched with sorrowfulness of heart, bewailing the same
in the affliction of our bodies.







and holy respect: and therefore all vain and rash swearing is utterly to be
condemned. Yet notwithstanding upon lawful occasions, an oath may be given,
and taken, according to the Word of God, justice, judgment, and truth.

Lords day, is wholly to be dedicated to the service of God: and therefore we
are bound therein to rest from our common and daily business; and to bestow
that leisure upon holy exercises, both public and private.

Of the civil Magistrate.


unto all godly Princes in holy Scripture by God himself; that is, that he
should contain all estates and degrees committed to his charge by God, whether
they be Ecclesiastical or Civil, within their duty, and restrain the
stubborn and evil doers with the power of the Civil sword.









Of our duty toward our Neighbors.










Of the Church, and outward Ministry of the Gospel.
triumphant, part as yet militant here upon earth. And because this Church
consists of all those, and those alone, which are elected by God unto
salvation, and regenerated by the power of his spirit, the number of whom is
known only unto God himself; therefore it is called the Catholic or
universal, and the Invisible Church.







of the people, is a thing plainly repugnant to the Word of God, and the
custom of the Primitive Church.





Of the authority of the Church, general Councels, and Bishop of Rome.
may it so expound one place of Scripture, that it be repugnant to another.
Wherefore although the Church be a witness, and a keeper of holy Writ: yet as
it ought not to decree any thing against the same, so besides the same, ought
it not enforce any thing to be believed upon necessity of salvation.





Jerusalem, Alexandria and Antioch have erred: so also the Church of Rome has
erred, not only in those things which concern matter of practice and point of
ceremonies, but also in matters of faith.

Rome now challenges, to be the Supreme head of the universal Church of
Christ, and to be above all Emperors, Kings and Princes, is an usurped power,
contrary to the Scriptures and Word of God, and contrary to the example of the
Primitive Church: and therefore is for most just causes taken away, and
abolished within the Kings Majesty's Realms and Dominions.

Rome is so far from being the Supreme head of the universal Church of
Christ, that his works and doctrine do plainly discover him to be that man of
sin, foretold in the holy Scriptures, whom the Lord shall consume with the
spirit of his mouth, and abolish with the brightness of his coming.

Of the state of the Old and New Testament.


are not to be heard, which faigne that the old Fathers did look only for
transitory promises. For they looked for all benefits of God the Father through
the merits of his Son Jesus Christ, as we now do: only they believed in
Christ which should come, we in Christ already come.





Of the Sacraments of the New Testament.


Baptism and the Lords Supper.

Rome are called Sacraments, to wit, Confirmation, Penance, Orders, Matrimony,
and Extreme Unction, are not to be accounted Sacraments of the Gospel: being
such, as have partly grown from corrupt imitation of the Apostles, partly are
states of life allowed in the Scriptures, but yet have not like nature of
Sacraments with Baptism and the Lords Supper, for that they have not any
visible sign or ceremony ordained of God, together with a promise of saving
grace annexed thereunto.

them unworthily, thereby draw judgment upon themselves.

Of Baptism.




Exorcisme, Oil, Salt, Spittle, and superstitious hallowing of the Water, are
for just causes abolished: and without them the Sacrament is fully and
perfectly administered, to all intents and purposes, agreeable to the
institution of our Savior Christ.

Of the Lords Supper.
sealing unto us our spiritual nourishment and continual growth in Christ.

Transubstantiation, cannot be proved by holy Writ; but is repugnant to plain
testimonies of the Scripture, overthrows the nature of a Sacrament, and has
given occasion to most gross Idolatry, and manifold superstitions.

represented; being no otherwise present with the visible elements, than things
signified and sealed are present with the signs and seals, that is to say,
symbolically and relatiuely. But in the inward and spiritual part, the same
Body and Blood is really and substantially presented unto all those, who have
grace to receive the Son of God, even to all those that believe in his Name.
And unto such as in this manner do worthily and with Faith repair unto the
Lords Table, the Body and Blood of Christ is not only signified and offered,
but also truly exhibited and communicated.



Augustine speaks) press with their teeth the Sacrament of the body and
blood of Christ: yet in no wise are they made partakers of Christ; but rather
to their condemnation, do eat and drink the sign or Sacrament of so great a
thing.



Lords Supper was not by Christ's ordinance reserved, carried about, lifted up,
or worshipped.



Eucharist by the Priest alone, without a competent number of communicants, is
contrary to the institution of Christ.

Of the state of the souls of men, after they be departed out of this life:
together with the general Resurrection, and the last Judgment.


The Doctrine of the Church of Rome, Limbus Patrum, Limbus Puerorum,
Purgatory, Prayer for the dead, Pardons, Adoration of Images and Relics, and
also Invocation of Saints, is vainly invented without all warrant of holy
Scripture, yea and is contrary to the same.





The Decree of the Synod.
IF any Minister, of what degree or quality soever he be, shall publicly
teach any doctrine contrary to these Articles agreed upon; If after due
admonition he do not conform himself, and cease to disturb the peace of the
Church; let him be silenced, and deprived of all spiritual promotions he does
enjoy.

FINIS.

