HERE BE THE GATHERED COVNSAILES OF saynct Isodorie to inform man, how he
should flee vices and follow virtues.

Thomas Berthelet regius impressor excudebat. An. 1534. CVM PRIVILEGIO.

Consideration of man him self.
O Man know thy self, know what thou art, know thy beginning why thou were
borne, unto what use or end thou were gotten, why thou were made, Eccl. 12.
of whose making thou were made, to what thing in this world thou were
fourmed: have mind of thy making, be such as thou were made, yea such as
thy maker formed the. Every day rensake thyn heart, every day examyne thine
heart: keep thy soul from synfulle thought, let not foul thought
overthrow thy mind. When a shrewd thought touches the, consent not to it.

Kill the serpent, when he first appears, tread down the serpents heed.
Cast under foot the beginning of yuell suggestion or styrrynge to sin.
Amend sin there, where it is known. In the beginning withstand a shrewd
thought, and thou shall escape well the remenant.

Against Lechery.
BE thou not defowled with any uncleanness, Gal. 5.
be thou not spotted through any foul lust: Let lecherye grow no more in
the, Chastity joins a man to god. To chastity is behyght the kyngedome of
heaven. If thou yet feel the styrynge of thy flesh, if thou be touched with
prickynges of thy flesh, if thou yet be styred with the suggestion of lust,
if the mind of lechery yet tyckle thy will, if thy flesh yet fight against
the, if lechery yet tempts the, if lust yet styreth the to sin: set
before the the mind of death, put before the, the day of thy death, set
before thyn eyes the end of thy life, put before the the strayte dome that is
to come, put before the, the hard turmentes that been to come, set before the
the everlasting fire of Hell, put before the the horrible peynes of Hell.

Busynes in Prayer.
PRay with weeping continually, The. 5.
pray busily, beseech god day and night: Mourn and sorrow ever for sin.
Arise in the night to prayer, let prayer be to the a continual armor.

This is the first virtue ageinste temptation. Devils ben ouercom by prayer:
Prayer auaylleth against all iuelles.

Fasting and Abstinence.
CHastise thy body by fasting, by Abstynence, and by scarceness: thou may
not overcome temptations in their high heat, but if thou be learned to fast.
Through meat forsothe grows lust, Plenty of meatis stereth men to
lechery: but by fasting, lust is restreyned, by fasting lechery is overcome.

Drinking.
Drink forsooth is instrument of lechery. Fire by casting to of wodde,
increases more and more, the more mattier is in the fire, the more is the
flame.

The sight.
THyn eien ben the first dartis of lust. Sight is desire of womanne, mind is
caughte by the eien. Psalm. 118.
Withdraw thine eien from wantonness: set them not in the beauty of flesh.
Behold not a woman for to desire her.

Do away the cause of synnynge. Eccl. 25.
Lay besides the, the mattier of trespasynge. If thou will be sure from
lechery, be thou disceuered from woman in body and in sight.

Felovvshyppe of women.
IF thou be departed in body from women, thou shalt fall from the intent of
sin. If thou sytte besides a serpent, thou shall not long be unhurt. If
thou be long before a fire, although thou were made of iron, sometime thou shall
melte. If thou abide right nygh peril, thou shall not long be sekyr: often
times leisure has overcome, whom will might not.

Traueyle.
LEcherye ouertornethe sone a man given to idelnes. Lust brenneth greuousely,
whom she fyndeth ydell. Lust gives place to travail, to warke, to busynes,
and to labor. Therefore beware of ydelnes, spend thy good in labor, use some
manner of business, seek unto the a profitable warke: whereupon the intent of thy
soul may be set.

Redynge of holy Scripture.
Give the much to redynge, take heed in Meditation of scripture, busye the in
the law of god, have a customable use in divine books. Redynge declares
trewely, what thou shalt shone. Redynge shewethe, what thou ought to dread.
Redynge tells whether thou go. In redynge wit and understanding
increases. Thou shalt much profit in redynge, if thou do as thou redest.

Meekness.
BE thou meke, be thou groundid in meekness, be thou leest and lowest of all.
By meekness make thy self least. Set thy self tofore no man. Aua^t not thy
self, bost not thy self wantonly. Streche not forth thy wings of pride. So
much thou shalt be the more precious before god, that thou set lyttelle
price by thy self. Bear therefore shamefastenesse in chere by minding of thy
defautes. For shame of thy syn be dismayed to look proudly. Walk with a low
chere, with a meke mouth, and a sad visage. In high worship, have great
meekness. Al though thou be high of power, restreyne hyghnes in thy self.
Let not worship make the proud. The higher thou art in dignite, the lower by
meekness make thou the.

Syckenesse and disease.
BE not sorry in thy diseases. In thy syckenesse thank thou god. Be busye
rather to be hoole in thy soul, than inbodye. If prosperity come, be thou not
proud: if aduersite fall, be thou not heavy. Know thy self, that god has
proved the in sorrow, for thou should not be proud. Be even therefore in all
things. For joy ne for sorrow, change never thy mind. Understande well,
there is nothing, but hit may fall as god will. And if those things be
thought on before, they ben the easier when they fall. And what so ever therefore
happeth, suffer it mekely with fre will.

Sufferaunce.
BE more ready to suffer disease than to do hit. Be patient, be meke, be soft,
be busye. Keep patience in all things: Keep softness: Keep meekness. Set
before a sharp word, the shield of Sufferaunce. Though any man styre the to
wrath, though he whet the, though he blame the, though he repreue the, though
he chyde the, though he do wrong to the: be thou stylle, hold thy peace,
set not thereby, speak not a word, strive not therageynst, by silence thou
shalt the sooner overcome. Learn at Christ manlynesse, take heed at Christ,
and be not heavy: he suffrynge wrongs left to us ensaumple, Mat. 26.
he was bobbed and buffetted, Luc. 22.
spytte upon, and scorned, nailed hand and foot, crowned with thorns,
dampened to the cross, and ever more held his peace.

Therefore what disease that falls to the, wit it well, it comes to the
for sin and for thy best. And so tempre thy disease by consideration of
rightousnes. And thou shall suffer it the lyghtlyer, if thou take heed,
wherefore it comes.

Love peace.
Love peace without fourth, love peace within forth, keep peace with all men,
witholde all men in myldenes, beclyppe Charity. Prove more thy self to love
then to be loved. Make piece there hate is. Have stablenes of mind. Have goodness
of will. Be ready in good desire. Eccl. 28.
Speak gladly to all men: Flee chiding. Beware of stryfes. Do away the
occasion of Strife, Despise strife, and live always in peace, strive not in any
wise.

Compassion.
BE not glad upon the death of thyn ennemie, Eccl. 8.
lest parauenture upon the fall the same, lest god turn his wrath from him to
the. For who so ever ioyeth in the fall of his ennemie, he shall soon fall in
the same. Be glad to sorrow upon him that is diseased. In other men's miseases
be not hard hearted: and for other men's mischeues mourn as thyn own.

Folovvynge of goodness.
IN all thy business, in all thy warkes, in all thy living follow good men*
follow holy men, have before thyn eien the ensample of sayntis, take heed to
work well after the virtues of holy me^, learn to live well by the teaching of
ryghtousnes.

Despisynge of praisynge.
DEspise thou praysyng, cherishinge and favor of people. Study rather to be
good than to seem good. Take none head who prayseth the, or who disprayseth
the, lest praysynge deceive the, or blaming let the. If thou set naught
by praising, lightly thou shalt set besides the blaming. Therefore suppose
not thy self good, though thou behold good in other men's tongues, ask thine
own conscience, deem thy self by thin own dome, and not by other men's speech,
but in thyn own mind inserche thy self. There may no man know better what
thou art, then thou that know thy self. What profyteth the, sythen thou
art wicked* to be hold good?

Honest conversation.
FLe thou symulation, feine not holiness in dark clothing. Such as thou
would ben hold, such be thou in deed. Show thy profession in living and
not in tokens. In clothing and in goinge have with the symplenesse: in thy
gate and in thy mouynge clennes, in thy bearing sadness, in thy walkyng
honesty, nothing of vilany, nothing of uncleanness, nothing of wyldenesse.

Be ware in thy governance, that there appear nothing of beastlynes. Give not
to other cause for to scorn the. Give thou not to any man cause to backbite
the.

Good felovvshyppe.
SHone yuel men, Nu. 16.
beware of wicked men, fle shrewes, dele not with brothels: flee the companies
of those men, which ben ever ready to vices. Join the to good men, Desire the
felowshyppe of discrete men: Seek the company of virtuous men. Who so goth with
wise men, he shall be wise: and who so draws to fools shall be like to
them. For like to like is woned to be joined.

The herynge.
Shut thine ears, Eccl. 28.
that thou here none yuell. Forsake unchaste speches. Fle dishonest words. For
a vain word soon defouleth the soul: and that that is light done, that is
gladdelye hard soon.

The mouth.
LEt nothing pass out of thy mouth, that might let virtue. Let the soune of
thy voice break forth nothing, but that needs. Let that proceed from thy
lyppes, that fouleth not the ears of the herers. Uayne word is token of a
void conscience. The tongue of man shows his manners: and such as the word is
such is the soul. Mat. 12.
For the mouth speaks of abundance of the heart. Luc. 6.
Refreyne thy tongue from yuelle speech and ydell. For an ydell word shall not
pass unpunished. Who so will not refrain his tongue from ydell words, he
shall fall lightly into sinful words. Let thy word be without reprefe. Let
it be profitable to the help of the herers. Besy the not to speak yt that
likes, but that that needs. Take heed what thou spekest, and what thou
spekeste not. And both in speking and not speking be right well ware, take good
auisemente what thou say: lest thou may not call again, that thou
saidest. Fle thou the chances of tongue. Let not thy tongue lose the. Have ever
more silence to thy friend.

Speak when time is, be still when time is. Speak thou not ere thou here. Let
asking open thy mouth.

Against the sin of backebytynge.
BAckebyte not the sinner, but be sorry for him. Kyt from thy tongue the sin of
backebytynge. Here not an other man's life. Defoule not thy mouth with an other
man's syn. That thou backbiteste in an other, dread hit in thy self. When thou
blamest an other, repriue thyn own syns. If thou will backebyte, think on
thyn own sins. Look not on other men's defautes, but se thyn own. Thou shall
never backebyte, if thou well behold thy self. Here no backebyters: Lysten not
to tale tellers. For like gilty ben the backebiters and the herers. Desire not
to wit that that perteyneth not to the.

That that men speak between them self, besy the not to know. Ask thou
never what any man speaks, says, or does: be not to besy, leave besines
that pertains not to the. By as great besynes amend thyn own sins, by
how much thou beholdest other men's.

Of lyenge.
FLe busylye all manner of lyenge, Eccl. 7.
and neither by hap nor by auysemente say thou not false. The mouth forsothe
that lyethe, Sap. 1.
slethe the soul. Therefore flee disceyte, Aduoyde lienge, beware of falsenes,
speak clenly, be true of word, Deceive no man in lyynge, ne bring no man to
miswenynge. Speak not one thing and do an other. Say not one thing and mean
an other.

Of svvearynge.
PUt fro the swerynge, Do away the use of swearynge. Iac. 5.
It is perilous sothely, for to swear. For often swearynge makes custom of
swearynge. Eccl. 23.
And a man much swearynge, shall be fulfilled with wickedness, and the plage
shall not depart from his house. Truth nedethe none oath. A feythfull speech
holds the place of a sacrament: as who says, a faithful word is as much
as all the swearynge of the world.

A vow made.
DO the good that thou haste behote. Deuteronomy. 23.
Be not light in word and hard in deed. Eccl. 5.
Thou shalt be much gyltye to god, Baruc. 6.
if thou yield not that thou haste avowed. They displeasen god, that fulfill not
their vows. They been accounted among hethen men, that perform not their
vows, I say not vows that been yuell but good. For if thou through thy folly
have made a fonned vow: through the dome of a discrete man be hit wisely
turned into good.

To god all thing is open.
SEy not one yuell word in thin heart. An yuel word may not be hid in
silence, that thou do or say within thy self. Believe thou that hit is
open before god. Sap. 1.
If men ben still, bestes speken. Therefore fly syn, as though thou myghtest not
keep it prive. Sin thou there, where thou know god is not. There is no
thing hyd from god, thou shall be found gyltye in the iudgementis of god,
though thou be hid to man's judgments. For he beholdethe the heart, Psalm.
7.
that is within forth. Romans 8.
He sees and knows, Apoc. 2.
that man him self knows not. Turn thy counsel and thy warke evermore to
god. In every deed ask goddis help. Arect al things to goddis grace, and to
gods gift. Trust not in thyn own desertis: in thyn own virtue presume
nothing.

Good conscience.
THere may no man fle from him self: and though an open fame harm the not,
yet thin own conscience, damneth the. For there is no pain greatter then
pryckyng of conscience. If thou will never be sorry, live well. A siker
conscience suffers easily heuines. A good liver is ever more in joy: the
conscience of a sinful man is ever more in peine. A gilty soul is never more
siker. Another wound needs shall fear the, if thou live well and trewely.

Hyde virtue.
IF thou wolt multiply thy virtues, show them not. By thy will, hyde thy
virtues priuelye for dread of pride and vain glory. Fle to be seen, and then
thou deseruest mede. That thou maistlese by showing, keep it by hydynge.

Confession.
Show the sins of thyn heart, make open thy shrewed thoughts. A syn showed
is sone healed: a defaute forsooth hyd, is made more syn, by silence it
increases more and more. Trewely than hit behooves to show yuel to amend it.

Fore thinking.
BE think the long before the deed: Auise the long before the warke. That
thou will do, inserche it long, prove it long: and so do it, when thou have
long bethought the. Do than as thou have proved, in things that been certain.
Of well doing tarry not, ne put it not over till to morrow. In good things
taryenge harmeth, and lets tho things that been needful.

Wisdom.
THere is no thing better than wisdom, nothing better than cunning,
nothing lustier tha^ knowledge: nothing worse tha^ lewdness. It is an high
counnynge to know what thou shall flee: and it is an high wretchedness, not
to know whither thou goeste. Therefore love wisdom, and it shall be showed to
the: go to it, and it shall come to the, be busy there about, and it shall
learn the.

Teaching.
Learn that thou canste not, lest thou be found an unprofitable techer, the
good that thou haste hard, sey it: the good that thou have learned teach hit.
The more that is youe^, the more it waxes: but yet let deeds go before the
word. The which thou show with thy mouth, fulfill hit with warke: that
thou teach by words, show it in ensample. For if thou teach and do hit,
thanne shalt thou be hold glorious. In thy techyng keep the from man's
praysynge. So inform other, that thou keep thy self. So teach, that thou
lose not the grace of mekenes. Beware, lest while thou reysyste other by
teaching, thou fall not thy self by praisyng. When thou teach, use not
darkness of words: say so that thou be vnderstonden. The diversity of persons
is to be seen: And when and how thou teach, be advised. Speak common
things to all men: And to few men show that is hid. Be not ashamed to
speak, that thou canste well defend. That thou want of cunning, ask of
other men. By cunning trewly showed, hyd things ben opened, and hard things
made light.

Curiosity.
BE not besy to know: that is hid, coueite not to know. In disputynge do
away strife: do a way frowardnes, and assente soon to troth. Say not against
ryghtousenesse. Strive not to avoid that is right. Love more to here than to
say. Here in the beginning, and speak last of all: the last spech is better
then the first.

Obedience.
VUorshyp every man for the merit of holiness. After their worthynes given to
every man worship. Suppose not thy self even to thy soueraygne. Give
obeisance to thyn elders. Serve their byddynges: bow to their authority:
follow their will. Obey to all men in good byddynges: yet so obey the to man,
that thou offend not the will of god. Therefore fulfylle mekely the charges yt
thou have take upon the, be obediente to gods ordinance: be not hardy to do
against his will. Dispose all things not with a sturdy but with an easy
heart. Beware of worshyppes, which thou may not have without sin.

Souerayntie.
BUsy the rather to be loved of thy subjects then to be drad. Let thy
subjects rather worship and serve the for love, than for dread or for need.
Quite the such to thy subiectis, that thou be more loved than dradde. With a
soueraygne goodness govern thy subjects. Be not ferdful to thy subjects: be
such lord to them, that they be glad to serve the. Both in punyshynge an
cheryshyng, keep a mean: be not to strayte, ne forgive not to soon. Keep
manner in all thy warke. It longs to a wise man to measure all things, lest of
good be made yuell. Behold certaynely, what is couenable for the time, where,
when, how, and wherefore thou byddest any thing to be done. That thou wolt to be
done to the, do thou to an other. Be such to other men, as thou desire other
men to be to the. Hinder no man with thy witness. Do no man harm, lest thou
suffer the same. Keep manlines, keep ryghtousnes, defend no man against
troth. When thou demest, be he poor, be he rich, behold the cause and not
the person. Keep truth in all things. Sit never in dome without mercy. Be
as meke in other men's defautes as in thyn own. So deem other men, as thou
desire to be demed thy self. While thou art merciciful in other men's gilt,
thou have mercy on thy self. The dome that thou put upon an other, thou
shall bear thy self. Mat. 7.
In what mesure that thou measureste, Mar. 4.
shall be measured to the. Deem no man by suspection: first prove and so deem.
In domes reserve the sentence to gods judgment. And that that thou knoweste,
to thyn own dome: and that that thou know not, to gods dome.

Despite of the world.
IF thou wolte be in rest, desire nothing of the world. Thou shalt have
rest of soul, if thou put fro the ye business of ye world. Cast fro ye all that
may let a good purpose, be mesured to the world, and the world to the, as
though thou were dead. Behold not the glory of this world. Set not by that
while thou lyuest, that thou may not have when thou art dead. What so ever
thou gyuest, give it with a good will. Do mercy without gift: give alms
without heaviness. The good will is more than that is given. That yt is given with
good will, Eccl. 3^.
yt god acceptethe: 2. Cor. 9.
but he that gives with heaviness, shall lose his mede. There is no mercy,
where is no good will. Do nothing for praysynge, nothing for worldely
opinion, but only for life ever lasting. Amen.

FINIS.

