Sinnelesse Sorrow FOR The Dead. A COMFORTABLE SERMON. Preached at the Funeral
of Mr. JOHN MOYLE, of Buck-well, in the County of Kent Esquire, the sixth of
January. 1614.

By THOMAS IACKSON, Bachelor in Divinity, and Preacher of Gods word, at Wye
in Kent.

Published by Authority.

LONDON. Printed by T. S. for Roger Iackson, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Fleetestreet near to the Conduit. 1614.

To the Right Worshipful, S^ DVDLY DIGGS, KNIGHT.
THrice worthy Sir; if Demosthenes his Oration, lost it grace though
pronounced by Aeschines; then much more does reading abate the power of
speaking Habet nescio quid latenti, (...) vnia vox, and in aures discipuli de
authoris ore transs^^sa fortius sonat. Hier. Paul^^.
: yet importunity of living friends, and duty to the dead; have forced me to
lay aside the speech and gestures of a living man; that so, (as far as in me
lies) I might by dead letters, both preserve him in living name, whom cruel
death has untimely laid in dust; and also publish to the world my love, and
loss. Yet what a detraction is this from the dead? that his weighty virtues,
and boundless perfections, whilst he lived: should (now that he is dead) be
ranged within the narrow compass of a few lines; and so easily turned over
with a few fingers En, sum quod digitis quinque; leuatur onus. Cornel. apud
propert. lib. 4. Eleg. 12.
?

I am bold to commend this my poor service to your Worships protection, as
assured of your sincere love and affection to him, whose memorial it still
reuiueth: as also, for those rare good gifts of God and nature, wherewith your
person is beautified, justly procuring present admiration, and future
expectation. And lastly, as a token of an obseruant and thankful heart, for so
many very honorable and immerited favors, and encouragements in my Ministry:
go on in your holy zeal to God, Noble carriage, and undaunted resolution, in
actions of best and greatest consequence: prosper in that Honourablest action
undertaken in the Christian world (for these many years) the plantation of the
Church of God, in Virg^^^^, and that graciously provided (...) thereof, the
Barmudas, (the (...) and Hogs, Matthew. 8.
into which they (...).) The best things are har^est, and meet with greatest
crosses; but all good men, with Countenance, Person, Purse, or Prayers, and
best wishes, do further it. Balak and Balaam shall not hinder it; and (when
all men's hearts and affections shall be rectified) God will bless that small
company, 1 Chro. 12 22.
(...) Host of God. And whosoever shall adventure life or living in so
honorable a service to God and his Country, Pro 10. 7. Psalm. 112. 6.
God will honor, ennoble, and eternize their names, that they may be had in
everlasting remembrance. Accept this (...) of my love, and small testimony
great desires; so shall you add (...) score, till Use far passes (...)
pardon all, (...)
I can pay (...) pray for you and yours, and (...).

(...) in all humble duty and service, THOMAS IACKSON

THE TESTIMONY, Given to M. John Moyle, at his Funeral, January 6, 1614.
Howsoever (...) never erring wisdom (...), nothing (...) John the Baptist
Matthew 11. (...).
, the Centurion, Matthew. 8. 10.
and others John 1. 4^
; yet is it freest from (...) error for (...) who are but of yesterday, and
know not what shall be tomorrow, in (...) the dead; the periode and compl^^n^^^
of whose days, we have seen expired, and the (...) as well discharged as
(...) neither the praiser, can be moved with flattery, nor the praised, with
vaineglory Quando, nee (...) mo^^t adulatio; (...) August.
being perpetually separate, from sight, hearing, and report: praise the
Mariner when he ariueth; the Soldier when he triumphs: and Man when he is
dead Dicique; beatus, ante obitum nemo.
. Whom, generally to favor, (if for no other cause, yet for that they have led
the way unto us, Tantum quia pre^^sserunt. Calcanda semel via lethi, etc. Ho^.1
Carm. 28
and obtained prioritie in eternity;) is the rule of Nature (...).
But to entombe them with amplest praises. whose lives have been virtuous and
honorable; and to set up the lamp of virtue, that it may shine in the house
of God, when Death has put out the light of life; is the rule of Religion; and
warranted both by best Examples in holy Scripture, (thus did David commend
Abner, 2 Samuel 3. 34
and Jonathan: 2 Samuel 1. vlt.
Elishah, Eliah 2 Kings 2. 12.
? and the Apostle those worthy Saints, whom the world was unworthy of Heb.
11. ^8.
:) and by the practice of the Church in all ages.

How am I bound then, by a threefold duty, viz. 1 to God. 2. to him; 3. to
you, to speak somewhat of the sanctified life, and blessed death of this
Religious Gentleman, ^ow to be ^^erred? To God for all his gifts we (...)
thankfulness Psalm. 216. 16.
and what greater thankfulness, then to be telling of his goodness to us or
others? so that in speaking of Gods gifts unto him, we do in our souls
bless God for him (...) Hier.


Secondly, as it ought to be the greatest care of the living to do well; so is
it the duty of the (...) to speak well, that, so far as lies in us) the
dead, may partake in the blessing promised, the righteous shall be had in
everlasting remembrance Pro 10 7. Psalm. 112. 6.
; for which purpose, our blessed Savior said, Wheresoever the Gospel should
be preached, throughout all the world, the good work of the woman, bestowing
the box of costly ointment upon his head, should be spoken of, for a memorial
of her Matthew. 26. 1^.
Yea, I wish that my congue were as the Pen of a ready Scribe to en^^re his
virtues Psalm. 45. 1.
that both he might partake in that blessing which Alexander pronounced at the
toombe of Achilles; Happy Achilles, that being dead, have such a Trumpeter of
thy praise, as Homer was O (...), cui mertuo (...) Praeco, etc.
: and I, in that blessing, which Naomi pronounced of Boaz, blessed be he of
the Lord, for he cease not to do good, to the living, and to the dead Ruth
2. 20.
.

Thirdly to you, that ye may know what to imitate, which is the maine use of
the Commemoration of the virtuous lives of the godly; that they may be
patterns to them that live, their very toombes, in their kind, speaking as
Abels blood, Genesis 4. 10.
Walk, as ye have had us for Examples.

A Gentleman worshipfully borne; and accordingly he lived, and well added, to
the worth, and wealth, of his house and family. Matched, to a virtuous
Gentlewoman, a right branch of a worshipful, religious, and fruitful tree The
daughter of M. Robert Honnywood Esquire, some^^^^ of (...) in Kent* (...) Essex
(...)
; Graund-child of a most godly Matrone, who (yet living) has seen of her
children, and childrens children, to the number of two hundred and threescore
at least, which do yearly increase, with the encreasings of God. A Mary by
name Mary Honny^^^^.
, a Mary by choice, and a Mary by condition, for the Lord has dealt very
bitterly with her (...)
. By whom he has had, an household like a flock of sheep (...)
; his Table beset with mary sweet children, like Olive branches round about
(...)
.

Of whom I may truly say, (after these twenty years inward familiarity with
him;) so sweet and peaceable a natured man (...)
, so sound and zealous a Christian; so sure and faithful a friend, amongst
many thousands, is not to be found. A diligent frequenter of the public
Exercises of Religion, a careful worshipper of God, and sanctifier of his
(...), it was but one se^^enth night before he died, when (...) with us in Gods
worship. he did b^^re his part in the Psalm (...)
, which we sung, with an extraordinary courage and (...) as if with the Swanne
he would end his days with a Song (...)
, which ministered no small comfort to me (and others that noted it) that for
one whole year and an half, having been visited in himself and his family,
with such exceeding sickness, yet he could so sweetly comfort himself in God:
whereunto we may add his daily exercises of reading and prayer with his
family. And as was his profession, so was his practice, though he lived not
without sin, yet without reproof Luke 1. 6. Sine. quarrels, non sine,
peccato. August.
, he kept himself unspotted of the world Iam. 1. ^^.
: a Father, more like then a friend to the poor; a settled good housekeeper,
and ever open-handed in any good cause, as free in Charity, as ever in Duty:
humble in prosperity, patient in adversity; sober in his health, comfortable
in his sickness, and most blessed in his death; though but a young man for
years, yet long has he waited for his change, and daily exercised himself in
the meditation of mortality; having his Iestament always ready, and, as
occasion served, renewed; so that though sickness came suddenly, he was
prepared, his house set in order, and himself free to prepare for God, to whom
with much peace and meekness, he resigned his spirit. And as he lived with
much love, so is he dead with as great lamentation; the Church of God, the
Commonwealth, the Parish, his family, and specially the poor, sustayning great
loss; but what do I speak of loss, seeing his gain does counteruaile the
same an hundred fold? we have lost but a man, he has sound God; we have lost
a friend, he has found his Savior; we have lost his Neighborhood, he has
found the fellowship of innumerable Angels and Saints: we have lost the help of
his prayers and purse, Counsel and countenance; but he has found the
blessedness of heaven, which all Gods people love and long for, in the
fruition whereof we leave him for ever and ever. Amen.

And to speak a word or twain of this his good Servant John Cook.
, who in Ruths resolution, has lived, is dead, and shall be buried with his
Master Ruth. 1. 16.
. Aman in his place worthy of great commendation, and a rare pattern for men
of his rank to look upon; an honest, harmless, careful, willing, diligent
and faithful servant: I cannot but note unto you, the good providence of God,
that no service performed by any other, being comparably acceptable to his good
Master, in his sickness and weakness; God was pleased even extraordinarily
to raise him from the gate of death, to attend his Master. To the closing of
his eyes, which service ended, that he should have a relapse, and in two days
also end his life. I may say of them both, as David did of Saul and Jonathan,
they were lovely and pleasant in their lives, and in their death they were not
divided 2 Samuel 1. 23.
; only this difference, he that in life time often rode before, is now carried
after: but now no more as Master and man, for in this path there is no
difference Hac, par d^uitibus, pauper egenus erit. Maximinianus.
; in Golgotha no difference, betwixt that skull which wore the Crown, and that
which bore the Tankard: all fellow-heires of the same inheritance; but one
kingdom, yet all reign; though degrees of glory, yet all have more then
enough, none envy them that have more, none disdain them that have less. In
which blessed fellowship, we leave them for ever. Now let us come to the Text.

[And Jesus wept John 11. 35. (...).
.] FOr three principal respects, have I chosen this Text, before others* with
Gods assistance, and your wonted Christian patience, at this time to speak of.
First, because unto profitable hearing, the shortest verse in all the Bible; so
that here needs no adding of line to line, or precept to precept Esaias. 28. 11.
; one bare reading will cause so sufficient an impression in the memory, that
I hope if many years hence any one should be demanded, what was our Text this
day, he or she will readily answer. [ Jesus.]

fet; mourning in feasting, and mirth in fasting agree not; it is sfit that
Occasion and Matter, Theme and Time, should accord; as Christ at Jacobs Well ^
John 4. 13.
did speak of the heavenly water; and from feeding the body with loaves and
fishes, (...) of the heavenly Manna and bread of (...). Now, John 6. 26.
if houses of sickness, be houses of mourning Eccles. 7. 4.
; times of dying, times of (...) Eccles. ^^ 5.
; and places of burying, places of weeping Genesis ^^. ^^.
, how fit is it for me to entreat of mourning and weeping, seeing we come from
an house of great and long continued sickness? Our friend Lazarus is dead and
we are come to the place of(...)* [ Jesus wept.]

Thirdly; as it is short and fit, so it contains very profitable matter, for
if it be the greatest perfection of a Christian, to govern his affections and
passions aright; and the best have been soyled, and bewrayed their weakness
herein: either weeping or rejoicing; on such (...) or in such manner, or to
such ends, as they should not; how profitable will it be, to direct this great
mourning, to a true mean? which I can not possibly better do* then by
proposing the sinlesse Sorrow of our blessed Savior, upon a like occasion,
Lazarus is dead, and Jesus wept. Would thou then* not sin in weeping,
look upon Christ, who wept and sinned not: yet if any in passion break their
bounds, let the words of my Text procure a charitable excuse; for even [ Jesus
wept.] When Christ was borne, there was much singing and mirth, old father
Simeon, he sung; Luke ^. 28.
Zach^rishe sung Luk 1. ^8.
, Marie she sung; Luke 1. 46.
and the Babe in Elizabeth's womb, did spring for joy Luke 1. 41.
; yea, the Angels of heaven sung Luke 2. 13.
but Christ his ministry, and specially his death were mournful times, and of
much weeping, some in passion; others in compassion. Christ he wept I Heb. ^. 7.
and the Disciples they wept M^^. (...).
; the daughters of Jerusalem they wept Luke 23. 27.
yea time Sun put on Sackcloth and that wept Luke 23. 15.
; the Temple rent in ^ayle, and that wept Luke 23 15.
; yea the cry of the Creatures was heard so far* that the Heathen
Philosopher said, either the (...) nature (...) or the world would (...) (...)
Deus (...) dissolu^^^r.
* but I am to speak only of Jesus his sorrow; [ Jesus wept.]

Christ and Lazarus, Mary and Martha two men, and two women; two sisters; and a
brother; three sinners, and their Savior: these that had so long loved, and
lived together; and many a time and often feasted and godlily rejoiced
together, have now their mirth turned into mourning; and singing into sighing.
Lazarus is dead, and Christ is absent, his sisters weep; the Jews come to
comfort them, and they weep; when they understand that Jesus is coming,
Martha she runs to meet him, and saluteth him with words of bitter
complaint, Lord, if thou had been here, my brother had not been dead: No
sooner had he with words of consolation, shut the sluices and floodgates of
her tears, but Mary she comes and breaks out into the same words of
doleful complaint, Lord, if thou had been here, my brother had not been
dead: the Jews, they weep. and Christ he wept; the sluices are broken up
again, as if all should be drowned with a deluge of tears: or at least here
were another Hadra-drimmon for Lazarus* as was for Iosuth. Zach. 12. 11.
We see then, though we be never so near or dear unto Christ, yet we may
not look to be exempt from mournful occasions: nay, Judgment begins at
Gods own house 1 Pet 4 1^.
; it is enough that Christ weepeth with us. who in the end shall wipe all
tears from our eyes Reu. 7. 17.
* where as the wieked being forsaken of God, shall weep and gnash their teeth
for ever Matthew. 22. 13. Division.
.

In these three Verses, verse. the 34. 35. and 36. we have four speakers;
Christ asks a question, ( Where have ye laid him?) Mary and Martha give
answer, as with one mouth, ( Lord, come and see.) The Evangelist reports his
passion, [ Jesus wept,] And the Jews pass their censure thereon, ( lo how he
loved him!)

[ Jesus wept.] As the Soldiers that marched after Ioab, stood still and
wondered at that they saw, so may we well stand still and wonder at that we
hear. What? Does the son of God, who was from all eternity with his Father,
as his delight, continually rejoicing before him Pro. 8 30.
; he that was anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows Psalm. 45.
7.
; he, who when he went to his passion, would not suffer the daughters of
Jerusalem to weep for him Lu. 23. 28.
; he that was sent, by his Ministry, to comfort them that mourned in Zyon,
and to give them oil of joy for mourning Esaias. 61. 3.
; he that in the end, shall wipe away all tears from the eyes of his children
Esaias. 25. 8.
; does he weep? yes indeed, and fit that now he should so do, that being
(...), and his works, theandricall, divinely humane Doct. Field. Of the
Church, lib. 5. cap. 13. page 38.
; in this great miracle of the raising of Lazarus, both this Divinity, and
humanity, by infallible demonstrations, might be seen Commode, futuro
miraculo praemissae sunt lachrymae, vt infirmitas carnis, diuinae virtuti
coniungeretur. Mald.
: he commanded Lazarus, being four days dead, to come forth; this was the
voice of divine Majesty; but he wept for Lazarus, and this was a passion of
true humanity Propriae sunt hominis lachrymae; vita vero, verae vitae est.
Greg. Nys.
; that so, if divine Majesty fear us, humane infirmity may encourage us: if
humane infirmity do offend us; divine Majesty may comfort us: and we both
love and reverence our blessed Emmanuell Esaias 7. 14.
, God with us. The like we may observe in other his miracles: as man, he spat
on the ground; as God, with clay, he made him that was borne blind to see
John 9. 6.
; as man, he fell on sleep in the ship; as God, he rebuked the wind and
seas, and they obeyed him Matthew. 8. 25.
. but first, Manhood, and then Godhead; first weakness, and then power; first
Humility, and then Majesty do appear; he first spitteth, and then
annointeth, first sleeps, and then rebukes; first weepeth, and commands.

[Iesus wept.] Amongst all the blessings which God gave unto man by Creation;
there were principally two which were as the perfection of his happiness, Viz.
Joy and Life; or a joyful life Threefold state of man, cap. 7. sect. 1. page
339.
. The one ad esse, the other ad been esse; without life no joy, for it is an
affection of the living; and without joy, no life, but a neuer-dying death. But
man by sin pulling up the flood-gate, has let in a Sea of misery, and
specially those two maine evils, viz. Sorrow, and death: or, a sorrowing death.
The child is borne with tears, and many times dies before it be borne to
live. But as the Garment breeds the Moath which eats it; and the Tree the
Worm that consumes it Vt Tinea ex ligno nata ipsum consumet Lact. de ira Dei.
cap. 13.
: so, Sin bred Sorrow and Death, and Sorrow and Death destroy Sin. To her
that in godly sorrow washed Christ's feet with tears, was pronounced, Thy
sins are forgiven thee Luke 7. 48.
; and he that is dead, is freed from sin Rom 6. 7.
. It was said to Adam, Sin and dye Genesis 2. 17.
: but to all his Children in Christ, Dye, and cease to sin. Christ came to
take away sin John 1. 29.
, and that he might utterly destroy it: first, he weepeth; and then, he
dies, and pronounces, It is finished. God reconciled, Heaven opened, Sin
abolished, and Death for ever destroyed.

It is written of Heraclitus, a Philosopher of Ephesus, that he continually
wept, but Democritus of Athens, continually laughed, at the fading joys and
follies of their times Sen. lib. de tranquil. vitae. Lact. lib. 2. cap. 2.
. Our blessed Savior, the Prince of all divine Philosophers, is said to have
often wept, but we read not in all his Story, that he once laughed
Obseruandum autem, quod fleuisse quidem legitur aliquoties, nunquam autem
visisse, Ferus in locum.
. And truly no marvel, for if the Wiseman have given his judgment aright, I
have said of laughter it is mad Eccles. 2. 2.
: and the sage Ethnicke, Laughter is an argument of great leuitie Risus
leuitatis argumentum. Sebast in 3. plat. de rep.
. and another makes it the badge of a fool (...), Ridet fatuus.
: if by conference of Scriptures with Experience, we shall seldom or never
read or observe, that any laugh, but it is either in folly, or at folly: if
the Proverb hence grew, to call that which is foolish ridiculous Dij boni,
qu^m ridiculosum habemus Consulem* Cato Vticens. ex Plut.
: if a man cannot endure to be laughed at, and the Scriptures have branded it
for a kind of cruel persecution Genesis 21. 9. Gal. 4. 29.
: if the Scriptures so often command weeping, but never laughing: if lastly,
to laughter be threatened a woe, and to weeping be promised a reward Luke 6. 21.
25
; how should he laugh that is Wisdom it self, Prou. 8. 12.
, and in whom, the treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge are hid Col. 2. 3.
? By whose example we are taught, in this world (which (as David calls it)
is a vale of tears Psalm. 84. 6. in Me^^re.
) to look for no sound or enduring joy, but continual occasions of sorrow and
mourning.

We do specially read, that our Savior did thrice weep. First, when he
came to Ieee lorusalem, and foresaw the misery thereof, he wept, and said, O
Jerusalem, if thou had known, at the least, in this thy day, those things
which belong to thy peace, but now are they hid from thine eyes Luke 19. 42.
! Secondly, now when Lazarus was dead, as my Text says, [ Jesus wept.]
Thirdly, when he prayed, for the Apostle says, He put up his Prayers and
Supplications, with strong crying and tears Heb. 5. 7. Doct.
. Whose example teaches us when to weep, viz.

First, when either with our eyes we see, or with our minds foresee, the
misery, ruin, or desolation, of any Kingdom, Country, City, Town, or
Family; and specially, of such Places and Persons, where, and by whom the
great Name of GOD is called upon, we ought to take it to heart, and, in token
of inward grief, to break out into tears is no effeminatenesse (as the
Ethnicke has censured it Nihil viro turpius muliebri fletu. Natta de immortal.
animae. lib. 1.
,) but an argument of a mild and melting heart 2. Chron. 34. 27.
, and warranted by best Examples. Thus did Jeremy lament the desolation of
Jerusalem, Oh that mine head were full of water, and mine eyes a fountain of
tears, that I might weep day and night for the slain of the Daughters of my
people Ier. 9. 1.
!

Secondly, for the deaths of our friends, and specially, if they were righteous
ones, by whose death the church of God has sustained loss: whereof more anon.

Thirdly, in our prayers: the Prayer of a righteous man avails much if it be
fervent James 5. 16.
. What greater feruencie then that which is testified by unfeigned tears?
Tears (as an ancient Father says,) are the blood of the soul, and wine of
Angels Lachrymae poenitentium, sunt vinum Angelorum. Bern. sup. Cantic.
, which flowing from the Wine Press of an oppressed and bruized spirit, are
more forcible with God then all the Eloquence and Rethoricke in the world
(...). Cypr.
Annah, when she prayed, wept sore, and God gave her a Son 1 Samuel 1. 10.
. And when God sent a Message to King Ezekiah, by the hands of the Prophet
Esaias, that he should set his house in an order, for he should dye, and should
not live, he turned his face to the wall, and presently dispatched
Ambassadors to Heaven (even his tears Mittit legatos, lachrymas Cyp. lib. 2.
epist. 7.
) to pray for life* which no sooner appeared, but were graciously heard, the
Lord sent him word, that he had seen his tears, and would add to his days,
fifteen years Esaias. 38. 5.
, David says, God has heard the voice of my weeping Psalm. 6. 8.
. The observation of which phrase, made a Learned man D. Plaif. Sermon. at
Spittle Mean in mourning. page 19.
demand this question; What, have tear, tongues, trow we? and answers, that
the cloud-cleauing Thunder of the Almighty, does not make so roaring a noise
in the ears of man, as our tears do in the ears of the God of mercy Oration
Deum lenit; sed lachyma cogit. Ier. in Esaiam.
. And truly no marvel, for even with man, whose mercies are cruel, the Poet
said true, that sometimes tears are weighty words Interdum lachrymae pondera
v^^i^ habent. Ovid. de Pont. lib. 3. Eleg. 1.
.

There were principally three things, which concurred to make Christ weep, and
so much to increase his sorrow, that if he had been but mere man, as he was
true man Si meras homo, vt verus homo.
, he had doubtless been foiled of his passion, as many holy men of God have
been: viz. 1. the death of Lazarus; 2. the sorrow of his Sisters. 3. the
misery of the Jews. Somesay that Christ wept not for Lazarus at all; for he
knew that he would by and by raise him again Quomodo fleret cum, quem
continuo suscitare vellet. Theod. Herac.
, as he told his Disciples before, Lazarus is dead, and I am glad for your
sakes, that I was not there, that ye may believe John 11. 15.
. 2. Others hold that he wept for Lazarus, not because he was dead, but that
for the glory of God, he was to raise him again; and so bring him, from rest
and happiness, to labor and misery A loco requetis, ad locum laboris and
miseriae. Isid. in Graec. Cat.
. And indeed, whereas there are but three places of residence for Gods Elect:
1. the Womb: 2. the Earth: 3. Heaven. The second does not so far exceed the
first, in liberty and comfort; as the third exceeds the second, in all true
happiness; as then, it were a miserable thing (if it could possibly be put in
execution) for a man to leave the comfort of this life, and be imprisoned in
his mothers womb; so, a thousand times more miserable were it for a soul to
leave the inconceivable joys of heaven, and to be imprisoned in the loathsome
dungeon of the body again: and therefore little did the Rich-man know what he
begged, when he would have had Lazarus to have left Abraham's bosom, and to
have gone to his Fathers house Luke 16. 27.
. But I hold it more probable, that as the godly weep for the death of others,
absolutely considering it; whereas Circumstances considered they should rather
rejoice, as Christ said to his Disciples, being full of sorrow to hear of his
death, If ye loved me ye would rather rejoice, because I go to the Father.
So, Christ, absolutely, and without circumstances considering his death Mortem
amici and sibi chari, absolute considerauit, and lachrymatos est. Toll. in
locum. annot. 10. col. 944.
, ( wept for him) which thing both the Context, and the construction thereof
do prove Iudaei in hac re non pessum auctores. Mald. Doct.
.

And this Circumstance teaches us, that it is lawful to take to heart, and
even to sorrow and weep for the death of dear friends, and godly persons; so
did the Israelires bewail the death of that good Patriarch Jacob Genesis 50. 11.
. And afterward for thirty days together did they weep for that singular
Prophet Moses Deuteronomy. vul. 8.
: and all Judah and Jerusalem so lamented the death of their zealous King
Josiah 2 Chronicles. 35.
: that ever after it became a Proverb, The mourning of Hada-drimmon in the
valley of Megiddo Zach. 12. 11.
: great lamentation was made for the death of Steven Acts 8. 2.
: and when Paul told the Christians they should see his face no more, they
sell on his neck and wept sore Acts 20. 37.
.

Which Examples of the best, do condemn both (as an extreme on the one side)
that Stoicall (...), with all the degrees of it, as first, 1 Use.
not to be moved with their death: which thing God long since reproved by his
Prophet, The righteous perish, and merciful men are taken away, and no man
considers it in heart Esaias 57. 1.
, but more, all shameless rejoicing, at the fall of good men, as those that
sent gifts one to another, when the holy witnesses of Christ were slain Reu.
11. 10.
. Secondly, and also that faithless (...), 2 use.
and excessive mourning, as an extreme on the other side: and directs all
Christians to the true (...) Aret prob. loc. 155. de luctu pro defunctis. page
495.
, mourning for the dead, but not as the Heathen which have no hope 1 These. 4.
13. 2.
.

A second concurring occasion, was the sorrow of Mary and Martha, whom he so
dearly loved: so says the Text, when Jesus saw Mary weep, and the Jews also
weep that came with her, he groaned in the spirit John 11. 33 Propter
lachrymas Mariae Amb. lib 2 de poenit cap 7. Chris Hom. 26
: and truly, Nature has so provided, that tears beget tears; and the sight
of those that weep in passion, provoke others to weep in compassion Natura
ita com^aralum est, vt ex conspectu (...).
.

And this Circumstance teaches us, the practice of that Christian virtue,
which the Apostle prescribes. viz. Be ye of like affection one to another:
rejoice with them that rejoice and weep with them that Romans 12. 10.
weep* Is there that Simpathie and fellow-feeling in the members of the
natural body, that if one member be honored, all the rest rejoice with it: if
it be hurt all do suffer with it; that if the elbow receive a rappe even the
fingers ends will tingle? and is there not much more such fellow-feeling in the
mystical members of Christ? assuredly, such as are either senseless of the
miseries and afflictions of Gods people, as those that the Prophet complained
of, Did drink their wine in (...) and anoint them^elues with the best (...),
but were not sorry for the afflictions of Joseph Amos 6. 6.
and as it is noted of Aha^^^erash and Haman, They sit drinking, when the City
of Sushan (...) in great perplexity: H^s^. 3 vlt.
or that (more wickedly) rejoice therein, as the children of Edom, who in the
day of Jerusalem, cried, Down with it, Down with it, even to the ground;
Psalm. 137. 7.
do fearfully show themselves to be rotten and dead members, and are near to
a heavy judgment: As God threatened Ashur the rod of his wrath; I will visit the
fruit of the proud heart of the King of Ashur, and his glorious and proud
looks Esaias 10. 12.
For as God is a God of mercy, and never but with grief corrects his
Children. Esaias 1. 4. 5.
so cannot he endure that ^ay should add affliction to affliction, by (...)
over his Children, being under his rod, but rather condole and compassionate
them, as Christ did here; Mary and Martha wept, the Jews wept, and when Christ
saw it ( he wept.)

Thirdly, Christ foresaw the misery of the Jews, Fleuit propter Iudaeoru^
infidelitatem. Hill. in Psalm. 68. Epiph. in Anchorato.
that they would be so far from believing this Miracle, and glorifying God,
that (as hereby more hardened) they would seek to kill him and Lazarus, John
12. 10.
and therefore as at another time, he mourned for the hardness of their
hearts, Mat. 3. 5.
so now he weepeth for it. ( Jesus wept.) And this Circumstance teaches us to
take to heart, Doct.
and to mourn for the sins of others, as David, whose eyes yielded rivers of
water when he saw men transgress the Commandments of God. Psalm. 119. 136
Oh shall we weep to see a friend at the point of death, or to hear that his
soul is departed for a season, and his body dead? and shall we not much more
mourn that men should be strangers to the life of God, through the ignorance
which is in them? Ephesians. 4. 18.
Oh ye melting and tenderhearted ones of God, mourn for them that continue
in sin, the Symptom of a neuer-dying death

Now, Applic.
forasmuch as it has pleased God (even of late) to take away by death many
good and merciful men, excellent members in the Church and Commonwealth; and
bring great affliction and misery upon diverse persons, families, and
Countries; by death of friends, famine, fire, inundations of Waters and Seas:
and yet sin and wickedness reign and abound every where; it is high time
for all Gods people to imitate the Example of their head; and to put in
practice the Counsel of the Apostle, Sorrow and weep, let your laughter be
turned into mourning, and your joy into heaviness Iam. ^ ^.
; least continuing in that reproved sin, the Lord of Hoasts did call unto
mourning and weeping, baldness and girding with sackcloth, but behold joy and
gladness Esaias 22. 1^.
, etc. We pull on our selves, the execution of that fearful doom threatened,
I will turn your Feasts into mourning, and all your Songs into lamentation,
and I will bring sackeloth on all loins, and baldness upon every head, and I
will make it as the mourning of an only Son, and the end thereof as a bitter
day Amos 8. 10.
.

Now the ends of Christ his weeping come to be considered (wherewith I will
conclude) and they are principally these two. viz. First, 1. Doct.
to show us the truth of his humane nature, in that he had not only the
substance of soul and body, with flesh and bones, which a spirit has not
Luke 24. 39.
; but also the infirmities of both, (so far as they were general and
blameless M* Perk. on the Creed.
) as in the body, hanger Matthew 4. 2.
, thirst John 19. 28.
, wearisomnesse John 4. 6.
, etc. and in the soul, sorrow Matthew 26. 38.
, and ignorance Mark 13. 32.
of somethings Merae priuationis, non prauae dispositionis.
.

Well did Simeon prophecy by the holy Ghost, that Christ should be for a sign
that should be spoken against Luke 2. 34.
, for even in the infancy of the Church, there did arise four maine
heretics, VIZ. Arrius denying his Deity; Apollinarius, maiming his
humanity; Nestorius, renting his Union; and E^^yches confounding his
essential proprieties: which four Heretics and Heresies, were condemned by
four Ancient general Councils, in sour significant Aduerbs. The Council of
Nice, August. de Haeres. cap. 49. 55. 91. 92. Zanch. de Incarnat. lib. 2. cap.
1.
defined against Arius, that Christ is (...), truly God: the Council of
Constantinople, against Apollinarius, that he was (...), perfectly man; the
Council of Ephesus against Nestorius, that he is (...), Doct. Hook. Eccles
polit. lib. 5. sect. 54. page 116 last impresi.
indiuisibly one person; and the Council of Calcedon against Eutyches; (...),
vnconfoundedly, retaining the proprieties of both natures: and as evil
manners, cause good laws: so these and such like heresies, have both caused
most renowned Councils, and procured most excellent Confessions of the
Christian faith; and specially (as an Antidote against the poison of the former
heresies,) that short, but most pithie confession of the Emperor Justinian:
The word was not changed into flesh, nor flesh into the word, but one in both;
and both in one: not one of his Father, and another of his Mother; but one way
of his Father before the beginning: and another way of his Mother, in the end
of the world Nec verbum in carnem nec caro in verbum, mutata est; sed vtrumque
in vno, et vnus in vtr^que est; non alter ex patre, alter ex matre; sed aliter
ex patre. etc. Justin Imperat. ad Ioannem 2 Papam, tempore. Council. Tolet.
.

The learned Ancients also skirmishing with the said Apollinarists, and
Marcionites, Manichies, and such as have denied the truth both of Christ his
humanity and actions; have (amongst others) discharged this Arrow against the
faces of them, alleging his tears, as an Argument of true humanity
Lachrymae, sunt reri corpores humores. Gu^l^. hem. l. 109.
, and not of distrust Nature, (...) diffidenti^ testes Barn. Sermon. 26. in
Cantie.
.

Secondly, this shows the sweetness of Christ, 2. Doct.
his Mediation and Redemption: in that our Redeemer is not a stranger to our
Nature, but (as GOD promised,) the woman's seed Genesis 3. 15.
, and seed of Abraham Genesis 22. 18.
; so has he performed it, in sending his Son made of a Woman Gal. 4. 4.
, a true man, like unto us in all things, ( except sin Heb. 4. 15.
. Oh, this was Jacobs comfort on his deathbed, that one wrapped in the Tunicle
should come Genesis 49. 10. Shil. Shiliah. Secundae eius Tremell.
: and Jobs comfort, that though he should dye, and all his life waited when
his change should come; yet his redeeming Kinsman (for so the word signifies)
lived Job. 19. 25. Goel. Ruth. 4. 14. Sic Pet. Galat. de occultis. lib. 4. cap.
4.
* Who is a merciful and faithful high Priest in things concerning God, who
has felt in his own soul and body, the manifold straitning passions and
perplexities that we feel in our several afflictions, has (as it were) his
bowels yearning toward us; and though now exalted into glory, yet his
compassion toward his poor members on earth is no whit diminished, as M.
Perk, on Creed, Treat. of Incarnat.
himself witnessed from Heaven, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me Acts 9. 4.
Use
? Let us then embrace this sweet Savior, whom GOD has sent into the world,
compassed with a cloud of witnesses, that all men may believe: and specially
with the foregoing of that Excellent Herald, and Trumpeter Jubilee, of Iobel,
a Trumpet; ^eron, de interpret. nom. Kerch. Heb. Concord. 1673 Buxt. Heb. Epit.
334. Bab on Leuit. page 202
of the blessed Jubilee, the Baptist; who went before his face to prepare his
ways, and to alter the state of Faith Fides in aduentu ipsius non erat
destruenda, sed solum status eius mutandus, vt quem venturum credebant venisse
crederent. Toll, in Johan. annot. 46.
by preaching the doctrine of Repentance, that is, they should not believe in
one to come, but in him that was already come Acts 19. 4.
; whom he pointed out with the finger unto them John 1. 29.
.

Oh go we ever with boldness, to his sweet throne of Grace Heb. 4. vlt.
: seek we to that Physician, who has been sick of the same disease
himself: lo we him, that has shed tears for us; love how he loved us: yea,
that shed his blood, and gave himself for us Gal. 2. 20.
! Oh how he loved us indeed! To him that so loved us, and washed us from our
sins in his blood, and made us Kings and Priests unto God, even his Father,
to him I say be glory and dominion for evermore Reu. 1. 5.
. Amen.

FINIS.

