Ecclesiastes. THE WORTHY Churchman, OR, THE FAITHFVLL MINISTER OF JESUS
CHRIST. Described by polishing the twelve Stones in the Highpriests Pectorall;
as they were first glossed and scholyed on in a Synod-Sermon; and after
enlarged by way of discourse, to his two Brethren. By JOHN IACKSON Parson of
Marske in Richmond-shire.

LONDON, Printed for Richard More, and are to be sold at his Shop in Saint
Dunstanes Churchyard in Fleetstreet. 1628.

To the Reader.
VOuchsafe in brief to understand the occasion of bringing these Meditations
from the Pulpit to the Press. The Author, so near to me, as nature and
function could allye us, at a Synod held at Richmond in the North sermoned
upon these twelve stones. A grateful fame of which discourse found quick and
safe conveyance to me by men of severe judgments. Capita libri excurro, vbique
summa cruditio, vbique fastidij expultrix, blandita varietas, and (quod
plurimum ingenij ac laboris postulant) tot tantorumque Authorum testimonio res
agitur, vt quicunque; sugillare aliquid ex istis lucubrationibus tuis
tentaverit, canis latrator haberi possit non demorsor. Iac. Antiquarius in
Miscell. A. Pol.
Whereupon I desired of him a copy, which upon request he was pleased
(repriving a while his more serious studies) to transcribe, fyling and
burnishing it over again, and adding hereunto (...) and secundam manum. He is
my brother, and therefore love will not suffer me to dispraise any thing, nor
modesty to commend much: let this small piece speak for him; yet thus far I
dare charge my judgment, (if I may be allowed to judge,) The conceit is new,
and the proper birth of his own brain, the matter likewise partly of his own
fresh invention, and his readings (which may commend him the more) clad with
the mantle of his own wit and phrase. He is throughout curt, cult, and
methodicall. The whole smelling of the oil of his lamp, and (which is much
better) of the anointing of Gods Spirit.

And tho the Burton in his Preface to his book of Melancholy.
forwardness and ambition of some is justly complained of, who the better to
put forward themselves, put forth their Sermons: A sermon preached at the
Court, A sermon preached in the University, A sermon at the Cross, A sermon at
an Assizes, A sermon at a Visitation, A sermon before the Right Honorable, A
sermon before the Right Worshipful, A sermon in Latin, A sermon in English, A
Marriage sermon, A Funeral sermon, A sermon, a sermon, a sermon, etc. Yet in
lieu thereof take the Censure and Sentence of a Noble and learned The L.
Verulam in his Advancement of Learning ad finem. Emanationes scripturarum in
doctrinas positiva^.
Gentleman speaking definitively: to wit, that if the choice and best of those
Observations, that have been made dispersedly in sermons, within his Majesty's
Islands of Britain, by the space of these 40. years and more (leaving out the
largeness of exhortations and applications thereupon) had been set down in a
continuance, it had been the best work in Divinity which had been written
since the Apostles time; and I doubt not but some things in this discourse may
worthily be cast into that volume. This little be spoken by way of Apology,
not for him but my self, lest any charge me with unnecessary intermedling.
Thus committing the Author, the book, and the publisher to thy kind love and
acceptance, I rest

Thine in Christ, N. ^.

THE POLISHING OF THE Twelve stones in the Highpriests Pectorall.
IT is usual (my good brothers) to earne the favor of great Ones by writing
books for their use, and entituling them to their names for their honor. I
will essay against no man, but suffer every one to enjoy his own wisdom. I
chose rather to give my thoughts issue upon a few sheets of paper to you: both
because I deem it more honest to pay debts, then to offer Presents, and to
serve virtue before fame: and also because I remember what I lately read in
Florentin^ Hist. lib. 7.
Machiavel, that wise child in his generation, that affected things do
procure more envy, then those which without oftentation are honestly covered.

The theme that I choose being a Churchman, and writing unto Churchmen, is to
make a draught of A WORTHY ECCLESIASTES, and a deserving Churchman indeed.

I will not at all preface in general terms, which like lightning breaks in
the air, but seazeth on no particular subject; it is better to cull out some
text of holy Scripture to be the burden of my discourse, and I know none
fitter then to polish those twelve precious stones in the High Priests
Pectorall, as they are twice set down by Moses in these words,

The Text. Exodus Chapter 28. v. 17, 18, 19, 20. and also Chap. 39. ver. 10, 11, 12,
13. And they filled the breast plate with four rows of stones. The order was
thus: A Sardius, a Topaze, and a Carbuncle, in the first row. And in the second
row, an Emeraud, a Sapphire, and a Diamond. And in the third row, a Ligure, an
Achate, and an Amethyst. And in the fourth row, a Tarshish, an Onyx, and a
Jasper. And they shall be set in ouches of Gold.

Which place is notoriously concentrique, with that Apocalyp. Chap. 21. verse.
19, 20. The foundations of the wall of the City were garnished with all manner
of precious stones, the first foundation was Jasper, the second of Sapphire,
etc. Yet I perceive some terms of difference; those are fundamentals, these
superstructives; those to adorn a City, the new Jerusalem, these the watchmen
of that city; those signified the 12. Apostles, these the twelve Tribes; those
have neither all of them the same order, nor the same names with these: for the
Jasper which is the first there, is last here; and four of those names, the
Calcedony which is the third, the Chrysolite the seventh, the Chrysoprase the
tenth, the Hyacinth, the eleventh; though (as S. Hierome, and our English
Rabbin) they be the same stones, yet are they otherwise called.

In both of which places we must not be so Religentem oportet esse religiosum
nefas. Agel. lib. 4. cap. 9.
superstitiously religious of the bark and shell of the letter, as to neglect
the kernel of the spiritual sense; We may not think these or those stones were
only for ornament and show, nothing for use and significancy. It is as easy to
imagine a shadow without a body, a ceremony without a substance, a type without
an antitype, a prophecy without an accomplishment, a promise without a
performance, as that nothing is hid under these stones. Under the leaves of
metaphors are often the sweetest truths. Unloose Benjamins sack, and the piece
of plate will be found; unvaile Moses his face and it will shine. Yet know I
not any text of holy Scripture more burdened with descant of man's wit, which
uses to churne the sincere milk of the word till it bring forth butter, and
wring the nose (profanely called a nose of wax) till blood come Prove. 30. vlt.
Naseus cereus, Albertus Pighius, hierar. l. 3. c. 3
. What vexed questions are here about the names, colors, properties of these
stones? What paralleling of every stone with a several Patriarch? what citing
of the authorities of Pliny, Dioscorides, Albertus, Aristotle, as if God and
nature had taken these into their cabinet-counsells in producing their works?
but be these things left to those who can trifle with a great deal of industry
Magno conatu nugari, Ter. in Heauton.
; they are rightly censured already to be Magorum vanitas Plin. lib. 37.
, learned trifles Doctae nugae.
, and we cannot better either confute their tenets, or punish the authors, then
by a forgetful neglect, and writing that in sand which they thought to have
cut in marble. I will not offer you that loss, as to obtrude on you any thing
which my self has been more curious to know, then credulous to believe.

Thus much is emergent hence by good conclusion, that the legal Priesthood
then, and the Evangelical Ministry now, should be as jewels and precious
stones. If Aaron and his sons were so under the Law, surely Christ and his
Apostles, and those who succeed them, are no less under the Gospel; it is
well therefore that they are mentioned by St. John, as well as Moses; in the
New Testament, as well as the Old; in the New Jerusalem, as well as the old
Tabernacle. We should all be Gems and Jewels indeed, as that worthy Antistas of
Salisbury B. Jewel, was both in name and nature, according to the Greek
Lyricks of Io. Brosserius a French man in his Epitaph Vita and mers luelli per
D. Humphredum.
.

(...)
(...)
, (...)
(...)
. Jewels and stones of price we are or should be: first in the esteem of God,
of whose mysteries we are disposers; let men think of us as meanly as they
will, we are a chosen generation, and a royal Priesthood to him, amat gente^
nostra^, he loves the Tribe of Levi, as they in the Centurions behalf, Luke 7.
Secondly, at the rate of good men, if the Galathians will give their eyes for
Paul, the Milanois will give animam pro Ambrosio, their lives for their
Ambrose. Thirdly, in regard of those rich endowments, and virtuous habits of
grace, which by coworking with God we should labor by frequent and iterated
acts, to introduce both into our own and others souls. Brightman a man of a
right heart and bright brain (his particular conceits reserved) I warrant him,
expresses himself in these words, which may serve for a good gloss on my
Text, in Apoc. c. 21.
It is certain (says he) that the excellency of gifts wherewith teachers
excel above other men, are noted unto us in this place by those things which
are most precious of all other upon the earth: and withal we are hereby
taught, both what precious account God makes of such teachers, as also how
greatly they ought to be esteemed amongst men; and it is no less certain that
every one of these excellent virtues did shine forth most clearly long ago in
the old Apostles. So he.

I need not trespass against mine own ease to labor for either words or
method; not for words, for rare beauties are most lovely plain dressed, and
stones rich in themselves show best set in a foil: not for method, it is
already ordo quincunx, one breast plate into four rows, and those four rows
into twelve stones, three in each row; as the year into four quarters, and
those four quarters into twelve months, three in each quarter: or methodo
analytica, twelve stones contracted into four ranks, and those four into one
pectorall.

So then according to the number of the stones, there are to be 12. several
rhapsodies or divisions in this discourse, as there are twelve chapters in the
book of the Preacher; or as Ahijah taking hold on 1 King. 11. 30.
Ieroboams garment rent it into 12. pieces; in every one of which shall be
touched first the hidden virtue of the stone, for I verily think there is no
precious stone without some egregious virtue, as Cardan Nullum lapidem
pretiosum alicujus egregiae virtutis expecte^. Car. Su^til. lib. 7
who made Millaine as famous for a Philosopher, and a Physician, as St. Ambrose
did it for a Bishop* Secondly, the apparent color or visible quality, which is
limited and bounded in the surface and extremity thereof, which is so notable
as many Armorists blazon by the colors of precious stones. You cannot expect
from me any digression at all, or long commoration upon any thing in
prosecuting these things. I may truly say as she prevaricated with our Savior
John 4. The well is deep, and I have little to draw with. I will therefore do
no more but lap of these waters tanquam canis Nilum, or as Gideons soldiers
Judge. 7. and not so much neither, till I have darted forth one ejaculation.

The Prayer.
BLessed Savior, who in thine incarnation was a stone Dan. 2. 34.
cut out of the quarry without hands, in thy Passion Zach. 3. 9.
a stone cut full of eyes, in thy Resurrection and Ascension 1 Pet. 2. 6.
a chief corner stone. Thou art the Son of God command these stones to be
made bread, even such heavenly Manna and spiritual food as may feed our souls
to life eternal, to this end give me thy book and thy roll to eat, that I
may speak truly, and judge wisely, and so worship thee the first truth and
chiefest wisdom. Take away the stoninesse of our hearts, that the seed of the
word fall not into stony ground, and prove fruitless. Lord, there is nothing
will hinder but our sins, which are ever interposing betwixt thy goodness
and our needs: make us therefore as truly sorry that ever they were committed
by us, as desirous that they may be remitted by thee, and as endeavoring that
we may not sin, as we are hopeful thou will not impute sin. O Jesus Christ,
whom will thou hear if not us who have no portion but in thee, having forsaken
all to be thine Altar servants? or who will hear us, if not thou, who art a
Priest as well as a Prophet or King? or where will thou hear us, if not in this
place which is the house of Prayer? or when will thou hear us if not in the
hour of Prayer, when so many of us are gathered together in thy name? and in
what words will thou hear us, if thou will not acknowledge the phrase and
style which thy self has taught us, saying, Our Father, etc.

THE POLISHING OF THE TWELVE STONES IN THE HIGHPRIESTS Pectorall.
SECTION. I. The Sardius.
THat which is the sixth in the foundation of the New Jerusalem, is placed the
first in the Pectorall: it took the name Primum Sardibus reperta. Plin. l. 37.
^. 7.
where it was first found, from Sardinia, an Isle in the Lybick Sea; as
Sardonius risus, so famous in the proverb from the same place.

The Virtue.
THis Stone is well known to be a Gemme of all others Sculpturae utilissima.
Plin. ibidem.
most profitable for engravement, and Sigillis aptissima. Carda^ l. 7. Subtle.
most fit for Seals: both because it is of a mean hardness to cut, and
because it parts clean with the wax, Persons of quality use to have their
crests cut in these stones, and set in Rings, which they wear as Signets. He
that makes Bartas speak so good English, calls it the 1 Week and 3 day.
Seale-fit Onix. I suppose he means the Sardius, both because it Nomen cum
Sardoniche communicavit. Plin. ibid.
communicates the name with the Onix, and Josephus also Lib. 3. cap. 8.
in his Jewish Antiquities, where he reckons up these twelve Gemmes, calls
this the Sard-onix.

And I take it for a fair abodement, that this is the apparent property of the
first Stone. Whosoever be of such stubborn metal, as he will not receive
impression, yet a Priest (like Judah Genesis 38. 25.
) must be known be his Signet: in that great setting open of the Seale-office,
Apoc. 7. the Tribe of Dan is noted to be put out, that the Tribe of Levi might
have room. It shall ever be a piece of my Collect, both at my private Mattens
and Even-song, for my brethren according to office, Cant. 8. 6.
Set them, O Lord, as a Seal on thine heart, and as a Signet on thine arm;
yea, Ier. 22. 24.
let them be as the Signet of thy right hand, which thou will not pluck off.
This Seal is double; the one of the person, the other of the office: that,
confirms us to be the children of God; this, the servants of men, in the
things of God. And so we keep still on foot the current distinction of
Dignita^ personae and tractationis.
the worthiness of the person, and the worthiness of demeanor. The seal of
our persons is the same with all other Saints, to wit, the giving of the holy
Spirit, Ephesians. 4. 24:
whereby we are sealed to the day of redemption: for as two parties covenanting
do mutually seal each to other: so we seal to God by faith John 3. 33.
, he to us by his Spirit Ephesians. 1. 13.
: and truly absi^ that spiritual men should quite want the Spirit, from which
they have their denomination. It has been long said, Greatest Clerks are not
always wisest men; so as it seems Scholars must be glad to take simplicity
to themselves by tradition: but it is more true, that the best-lettered are not
ever the profoundest Divines, ( Pro. 3. 32. Psalm. 25. 14.
the secret of the Lord is with the righteous,) it being just with God that
those who fall a bono, and care not to serve him, shall also fall a vero, and
cannot know him. I say not as some, that a carnal and unsanctified man cannot
convert a soul: but I suppose God does not usually work such noble effects by
such unworthy instruments: he will honor his own to negotiate in so high a
service, while he makes it the just reproach of others to be Ier, 22. ult.
written Childlesse. The seal of the Office is to beget children unto God. S.
Paul told his Corinthian Disciples they were 1 Cor 9. 2.
the seal of his Apostleship. Calvin to those that objected against him his
barren wedlock, answered, he had many children which he had begotten unto God.
We know, it was as bitter as death to the Hebrew Dames to be issuelesse: it may
be the rather, because every one thought with her self, why might not her
womb be teemed of the Messiah as well as any other daughter of Abraham. Shall
any be more sollicitous of generation and the first birth, then we of
regeneration and the new birth? because the Priest Melchisedechs style was,
without father or mother, shall ours be, without son or daughter? I expect not,
as when Peter preached, 3000 at one Sermon: we use not to sow our labors on the
hopes of such harvests: such births are as strange as the 365 children of the
Anno 1276. on Palmsunday baptized by Guidon Suffragan to the Bishop of Vtrech.
See the History of the Netherlands.
Countess of Henneberge at once. But what, have thou fished all thy life and
caught nothing? is there none whom thou have made smite upon their thigh, not
one at 3000 Sermons? surely thou have just cause to suspect thy faithfulness
in some point, and to be humbled. This of the virtue of the Sardius.

The Color.
THe color of it is red: the A rubeo color sic dictus. Paguin.
root shows the branch: for in the Hebrew the very name signifies red, and the
Adam homo and idem lapis pretiosus ab eadem sunt radice, i. Adam rubescere.
first stone consists of the same three letters, that the name of the first man
does, in regard of the red earth on which both are made: so that hereby we
are happily resolved to our principles, and put in mind of the pit out of
which we are hewne. Though we be spiritual men, yet we have a lay part,
which is theca animae, which must once yield to that great statute law primo
Adami, statutum est omnibus mori: Both Kings who Nebucadnetzar-like have golden
heads, and Priests who Chrysostome-like have golden tongues, yet stand but
luteis pedibus. Therefore in the Regal Diadem of England this very stone is
the first and highest in the Crown, Fearne in his Blazon of Gentry.
to denote that even Kings are but made up and elemented of the same red earth
that Adam was: and though Psalm. 82. 7.
they be Gods, yet they shall dye like men. The Pope at his Inauguration has
the Master of Ceremonies to burn flax before him, crying, Ecce sancte Pater,
sic transit gloria mundi. Both S. Basil and S. Augustine used the like remedy
against pride; the one on the day when he was propounded Pastor and Doctor to
the people; the other when he was applauded for his exquisite sermons. Surgite
mortui, we know was S. Hieroms ear* wig; We should do well when we feed, as
at the Court of Prester John, to have the first dish a Deaths head; when we
walk abroad, as the Lunaticke in the Gospel, to walk amongst the graves; in
our gardens as Joseph, to have a Sepulcher; in our Churches to visit the
Golgotha or Charnell-house; on our rings (if we be Iam. 2. 2.
(...)) to have a deaths head engraven: that thus when our eyes traverse from
object to object, they may out of every thing extract the meditation of our
mortality, and the remembrance of our end. This will make us Mic. 6. 8.
walk humbly with our God, and so better men, homo humi limus, cur non
humillimus; and also more diligent in our office, and so better Ministers,
knowing the day may suddenly come when we must give an account of our
Stewardship.

SECTION II. The Topaze.
THis is the ninth in the Apocalypse: a notable gemme it is. Pliny begins his 8
Chap. of his 37 book Egregia etiam Topazio gloria est etc.
, with setting a price on it. Vide lib. de lapidibus.
Cardan says of all other he chose this, both because of the hardness, and
beauty of it, to engrave his effigies and name in, and the very (...).
name of it sounds as much, as desirable: whence it is probable holy writ
ioynes together for their value Job 28. 19.
the Topaze and wed of fine gold; which text of Scripture withal to me seems
to compound the strife amongst the Etymologists, about the reason of the
imposition of the name, in that it calls it the Topaze of Aethiopia; and our
Cosmographers point us out an Isle in the red sea called Topazus.

The Virtue.
THe Virtue of this stone is, that it is sovereign against fear and sadness,
the two essential parts of Melancholy. Cardan the most industrious searcher
into the secrets of nature, says, he has seen a dosis of 15. grains given
to a melancholist a present remedy to him. We must strive with our hearts to
have them cheerful and comfortable, therefore not unfitly does this stone
immediately follow the former: because as obsignation is one office of the holy
Ghost; so consolation is another: as it is a seal, so it is a Comforter. John
14. 16.
Some indeed grace Melancholy so much, as to turn it over to adorn wisdom,
old age, virtue, and conscience; and indeed I think a sanguine complexion
which is so tempered with a convenient measure of natural melancholy, that the
sudden motions and enforcements of the blood be allayed, is both most wise
to see what is best, and most regular to perform it; but if it be once grown
to a S^oici vocant crebros and inveteratos motus, Morbos animi; primos autem
and leves, Affectus tantum. Lips. Constable. l. 1. cap. 1.
disease of the mind, it is the most unprofitable and unteachable passion of
all others; Post peditem equitemque sedebit atra cura.
therefore the Fathers did it no wrong to call it the Balneum and esca Dioboli.
bath and bait of the Devil. Satan, says holy Greenham, under the color of
repentance brings many to an extreme sadness. No sorrow, unless it be for
sin, is good for ought, and not that neither, if it be immoderate; a pound of
sorrow will not pay an ounce of debt, except it be our debts to God. A Minister
therefore ought first to work his own mind to a harmles jovisance; for the more
his heart is above, the better able he is to search out the whole counsel of
God, and find more divine truths. Knowledge and mirth are of near alliance:
for Salomons great knowledge of things was only latitudo cordis, the
largeness of his heart; and mirth we know does dilate and spread out the heart,
as grief does gripe and contract it. Besides, this is a compendious way to
make profelytes, and to draw customers to the profession of Religion, when they
see they must not needs be ever increasing the air with sighs, and rivers
with tears; but that Prou. 3. 17.
the ways of wisdom are ways of pleasure, and that they may be as far
from temporal dejection, as from eternal rejection. Secondly, he should
beware of making the hearts of Gods people sad, 2 Cor. 2. 7.
Paul had a care even of the incestuous Corinthian, that his spirit were not
too much contristated; they cast too much salt on their sacrifices, who are no
sooner clasped in their Pulpits, but as if they were on mount Sinai giving the
Law, speak thunder and lightning at every word, and can (...) as bitterly as
Archilochus, Isa. 50. 4.
but have not the tongue of the learned to minister a word in due season to him
that's weary; and throw forth a plancke, or break open the Spicknard box of
precious promises to him that is ready to suffer shipwreck; do such rigid
Orators consider how ten Barnabases, sons of consolation, cannot often put to
silence the voice of despair, which one Bonerges (son of thunder) has
coniured up? Must a poor soul that stands need of ghostly aid, and repaires
to the Priests lips, saying Cantic. 2. 5.
, Stay me with Apples, comfort me with flagons, return Sermon-sick,
complaining, Chap. 5. ver. 7.
I sought my beloved, but the watchmen that went about the City found me, they
smote me, they wounded me, the keepers of the walls took away my veil from
me, Job 16. 2.
Miserable Comforters.

The Color.
THe Color of the Topaze is yellow, of the color of gold or saffron, which
Loimat. Chap. 16. of his book of Colors.
signifies pre-eminence and superiority, because gold is the chief of all
metalls: whence it is that Miters, Scepters, Crowns, Thrones, iudgment-seates,
the Vestures of Emperors, Kings, Popes, are either of gold, or much adorned
with it: even the Church is said to be a Psalm. 45.
Queen adorned in a vestment of gold. How fitly therefore does the golden
Topaze follow the earthy Ruby; that going before, lest we be puffed up, this
coming after, lest we be too much cast down: this is the reason why Priests
were anointed with oil, which does supernatare, swim above all other liquors;
and the very names of Prelates, Primates, Priors, Overseers, Fathers,
Superintendents, Lords, Ambassadors, did surely in the worlds better days
entitle them to some priority both of order and jurisdiction. This precedence
should be twofold Prioritas dignitatis and pretiationis.
: the one of worth, the other of esteem, or of virtue and honor; that is
inherent in our selves; this imputed by others. The former is that whereby we
should strive to excel other in knowledge and holiness, and to work out our
own honor by Virtue: if we were such Clerks as Beringarius, who was said to
know all knowable; and such good men as Bonavent^re, of whom it is said, he
was of so sweet a disposition, that Adams fall could scarce be seen in him;
then surely contempt could not like a burre, thus stick to our coat as it
does; but some of us are so foolish, as no wise man, and some so wicked as no
honest man can honor us: there is no reason (as Bernard lib. 2. de Consid.
to Eugenius) that seeds prima and vita ima should go together. Isa. 9* 14, 15.
The Prophet that teaches lies deserves to be the Tail: or if he teach the
truth, if so be his practice give his pulpit the lie, the latter, to wit,
priority of esteem will as naturally follow the former, as the shadow the
body. Wise and good Christians will give us our 1 Timothy 5. 17.
double honor, and 1 These. 5. 13.
have us in singular love for our works sake: and a good name, though it
borrow but its valuation from opinion, yet if the ground of it be merit, and
the esteem of worthy men, it is then a precious ointment indeed. Knowledge has
no enemy but an ignorant man, nor godliness but a wicked man; and as for such
both their invectives are true Panegyricks, and God will sanctify unto us the
enmity of unreasonable opposites. And thus far we may safely be Io. ep 3. v. 92
(...)* After the Topaze follows

SECTION III. The Carbuncle.
IT is the third also in the Revelation, though it be there called a
Calcedonie, Plin. lib. 37. cap. 7.
which is a species of the Carbuncle. It is the name both of a disease, and of
a Gemme. Cuspinian de Caesar. and Imper. Romans
Leo the fourth Emperor of Rome, took out of the Temple of Sophia a Diadem,
the most precious stone whereof was a Carbuncle, and set it on his head, and
he was presently smitten with a disease called a Carbuncle. You have heard of
the prophetical Distich, fathered on Buchanan touching King James: Sexte,
verere Deum, veniet tunc terminus aevi,
Cum tuus ardenti flagret Carbunculus igne.


The Virtue.
THe manifest Virtue of this Stone is to shed abroad a glorious light, as of a
star or candle, even when the most pitchy darkness does enfold the day: from
whence it has the name in the three principal and learned languages. Bareketh
a barak, Coruscatio.
The Hebrew name comes of a root which signifies Coruscation, and Lightning.
(...), Carbunculus, Lychnites.
The Greek and Latin in the Theme signify a Coal, a Candle, a Fire.
Ludovicus Vartomannus, relates of an Indian King, who had them of such
splendor and bigness, that if he were met in the dark, he was thought to
shine as the Sun beams.

Ex Lapidario antiquo (...)
. Ardentes superat gemmas Carbunculus omnes,
Nam velut ignitus radios jacit undique Carbo,
Hujus nec tenebrae possunt extinguere lucem.
We must (...), and Math. 5. 16.
Let our light shine before men. It is no simple Encomium given us by Christ,
that we are Ibid. ver. 14.
the light of the world, which he ingenuously acknowledged, who said, if God
himself would become corporeal, he would take truth for his Soul, and light
for his body. We should be each of us an (...)
Oecolampadius in the house of God. When God made the great world, the very
first day, the first creature he extracted out of Chaos was light, though the
Sun the fountain of light was not made till the fourth day. So what is Man,
the model and epitome thereof, if he walk not as Ephesians. 5. 8.
a child of the light. But if a Churchman, who should be both lumen and lux,
enlightened and enlightening, be Ibid.
darkness it self, how great is that darkness? This light must be twofold,
of doctrine, and of life; that must be seated in our understanding, this in
our conversation. There is Vrim and Thummim, a brestplate, and an Ephod, a
tinckling bell, and a fruitful Pomegranate: there was blood to be put both
upon the lap of the Priests ear, which is the door of knowledge, and on his
thumbs and toes, which are instruments of action: there were for his part both
the breast, the seat of affection, and the shoulder whereon we carry burdens.
The Law of God was both to be bound as frontlets betwixt the eyes to read, and
bracelets about the arm to practice. These are the known distinctions of
Exodus c. 28. v. 30, 31, 34. and c. 29. v. 20. 27. and Deuteronomy. 6. 8.
Moses; instructions must be Pro. 7. 3. id est, opere imp. Lavater in loc.
bound on our fingers, as well as written on the table of our hearts, there is
the phrase of Pro. 6. 13.
instructing with the fingers, as well as with the tongue: there is to Zeph. 3.
9.
serve the Lord with the shoulder, no less then with heart or voice; there is
Mat. 23. 3.
to sit in Moses Chair, and to do as they say; there is 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3.
to feed the flock, and to be an ensample to the flock: there is 1 Cor. 9. 27.
preaching to others, and being ones self a cast away; there is to 1 Timothy 4.
16.
take heed to a mansself, as well as to his doctrine; there is both docere Act.
1. 1.
and facere. Christ healed the withered hand, and St. Peter the Cripples lame
feet, as well as made the blind to see, and deaf to hear. We read of Romans 2
20.
(...), a form of knowledge; 2 Timothy 3. 5.
and also (...) a form of godliness. So Scripture. There is Chrysostom. decaeco
nato.
(...) and (...), there is a preaching Theophilact. in Mat. 3. 5.
(...), and (...): there is Ex. Manusc. Epist. Lich. Cov.
(...) and (...): there is (...) and (...): There is Ru^^in. Eccl. Hist. lib.
2. c. 10.
the faith of the ear, and of the hand; there is a feeding the flock
Verbioratione, exempli exhibitione. Bern. Ser. 2. de res. Domi.
, as well by a holy life, as by Orthodoxe sermons: there is Aug vox sonet,
manus consonet.
when the voice is sonant, and the hand consonant. There is to keep the Lords
Vineyard, and to keep a man's own Vineyard: Cantic. 1. 6.
They made me a keeper of the vineyards, but I have not kept mine own
vineyard; which place occasioned Bernard to wish he had never taken on him the
charge of souls. There is to love to inform others, but to hate to reform our
selves: Psalm. 50. 16, 17.
Why do thou preach my Laws, and take my Covenant in thy mouth, where as
thou hate to be reformed? which words when Origin had read for his text, he
wept so bitterly, as he moved the congregation to weep with him. So the
Fathers. There is Graci norunt quid fit honestum, sed soli eo utuntur
Lace^emonij. Sever. apud Plutarch.
Graecian-like to know what is honest, and Lacedemonian-like to do what is
honest: there is a Sir F^: Bac. advancement of Ler.
speaking to the ear by voice, and to the eye by action. There are Sen. ep.
34. Eum tibi elega doctorem, quem magis admireris cum videris, quam cum
audieris.
Doctors no less to be admired when they are seen live, then when they are
heard teach. There are Vnus Bonifacius praestat december Benedictis.
Bonifaces as well as Benedicts. So humanists. In sum, there is both
Pulpit-craft and life-craft; science and conscience; chewing the cud, and
dividing the hoof; an enlightened understanding, and a spotless conversation;
a glow-worme requisite in the brain, and a lamp in the hand of a Minister of
the Gospel. Lo a cloud of witnesses. It was witty Apophthegme of Bois Sisi
the French Ambassador, who asking what Books Archbishop Whitgift had written,
that he saw him so much honored; and being told he had not only published
books in defense of our Ecclesiastical polity, but had founded a famous
School and Hospital at Croyden: Hospitale ad sublevandam paupertatem, and
Schola ad erudiendam inventutem sunt optimi libri, quos Archiepiscopus
conscribere potest.
Truly (quoth he) an Hospital to relieve the poor, and a school to train up
youth are the best books an Archbishop can write.

The Color.
THis stone is of a Flame-colour, such as burning coals are of, and therefore
may very fitly signify zeal. For (...) Onomatopoeia.
zeal is a word framed of the very sound that fire makes when it meets with
such an opposite as water. So (...). Iliad. (...).
Homer uses the word of the noise a Cauldron makes, when there is a good fire
under it. And the new-maried wives of the Romans adorned their heads with a
veil called Flamen, in token of their fervent affections to their husbands.
Neither God nor man cares to employ such Tit. 1. 12.
slow-bellied Cretians, as are Vinegar to the teeth, and smoke to the eyes of
them that send them. That thou do do quickly, and like a man of metal,
said Christ even to his death-boding Disciple. It is a goodly matter for a man
to be as forward as he dare, and then, like a Snaile, pull in his horns at the
touch of the first obstacle. It is Gal. 4. 18.
comely for any to be zealous in a good thing: but of all other let us beware
of doing the work of the Lord negligently. Whom should the zeal of Gods house
consume, rather then us who are Stewards of the house? on whose heads should we
heap coals of fire, sooner then on our own? whose tongues should be touched
with a coal from the Altar, rather then those who serve at the Altar, and live
of the Altar? how should we keep fire continually in Gods Tabernacle, if we
let it go out in our own hearts? Pity it were that so precious a stone as
the Carbuncle should be of a duskish color: and pity it were that light
should want heat; that such fair virtues as illumination and holiness should
want zeal, to set them a working. It was friendly counsel given to
Melancthon, that he should take heed of affecting so much the name of a
moderate man, as to lose his zeal: the word to Ier. 20. 9.
Jeremy was as fire in his bones, and to Job 32. 19.
Elihu as new wine in bottles. Did not he deserve the name of Convenient reb.
nomina, etc. Ovid.
Ignatius, who said, Let torments, fire, wild beasts, rackes, all the tortures
of hell come, so I may win Christ? is not Acts 1. 13. Simon Zelotes.
(...) a suting name for an Apostle? Is it not a sore matter that one of our
own should parallel Brightm. in. 3. cap. Apoc.
the Church of Laodicea and England; and tells us he did it not ficcis occulis?
Do not your spirits John 24. 32.
burn within you in an holy emulation? I say no more, but Reu 3. 19.
be zealous.

SECTION IV. The Emeraude, or Smaragde.
IT is the fourth in order both here and with S. John; and very fitly in both
places follows the coruscating Carbuncle: for as that by the excellency of
the object does destroy the eyes of the beholder, so this again with a
friendly and acceptable greenness does refocillate and cherish them.

The Virtue.
IF it had as many virtues as are assigned it, it should be the Pearl of
price, for which the wise Merchant sold all he had to purchase it. Yet must I
either Antipodes-like tread contrary to the opinion of all men, or allow it to
be a Vide Scalig. ex. 33.. 2.
chast-stone, and to have the same virtue among stones that Agnus castus has
among plants. Loimatius l. 3. c. 17.
The Persians used them both in espousing their wives, and burying their dead:
and it is reported that in the grave of Tulliola, Ciceroes daughter, was one
found, which Isabel Gonsaga of Este, Marchioness of Mantua had of late years.
Et vetusto codice.
One of the Kings of Hungary ever wore one in hora coitus, because of the power
he supposed it to have to retain the seed: and they aver, Wecker. Antidot.
Spec. lib. 1. sect. 6.
egregious Smaragds to have broken in the deflowring of Virgins: the reason is,
for that Cardan. l. 7. Subt.
it is a cold and tender Gemme, obnoxious to every injury: now in immoderate
venery the body is much heated, and the bones burnt to cinders, and also there
is a prodigal expense of blood and radical moisture, which are the foment and
stock of life. We must (...), and press hard after chastity and continency,
whether thoral and conjugall, or that of celibatude, according to the estate we
are in, bound or free. Spiritual men must not be carnally given: they that
worship continually in the Temple, should preserve their bodies as the chaste
Temples of the Holy Ghost. S. Paul advises even the married Laity to be
abstenuous, that they might give themselves to fasting and prayer. Moses his
Law suffered not a Priest to take to wife a widow, because she had known a
man: and if a Priests daughter played the whore, it was to her capital,
because she polluted her fathers house. Yea even under the New Testament, our
wives, if we have any, must be 1 Timothy a. 11.
sober, our bed an Heb. 13. 4.
undefiled bed, our children 1 Cor. 7. 14:
holy children, our greetings 2 Cor. 16. 20.
holy kisses, our persons, calling, office, day of service, places and
vestments of service, tithes, and offerings, all are holy: what is sufficient
to be written in the hearts of others, must be engraven on the Priests
Frontlet, the most prominent part of his face, as it were both for his own
improvement, and others example, Holiness to the Lord. Now there is no sin
so directly and e diametro opposite to holiness, as unclean lust and
fleshly-mindednesse: therefore Luke 7. 37. (...), behold a woman which was a
sinner, the learned Causab. not. in loc.
Anti-Baronius annotes to that place, that howsoever all unrighteousness be
sin, yet uncleanness especially, and observes out of Procopius, such as were
given thereto to be peculiarly and ob eminentiam called (...), Sinners. Erasmus
after his manner whets his style against these Salamanders that must needs fry
in unlawful flames, and asks them ( Enchirid. milit. Christiani.
ubi barba?) where their beard is, supposing there may well be a bush, but if
they shake their bottles, there will appear but small store of wine either of
wisdom or godliness. It was often turned to the reproach of Beza, both of his
person, calling, and religion, that he had written some licentious Epigramms,
though it was both when he was a very young man, and uncalled, and might have
said that Pagina lasciva, vita proba* Martial.
though his lines were wanton, yet his life was honest. And indeed I liked not
his excusing of himself in Praef. ad poem.
one place, till I found his hearty confession Annotat. in verbum (...), Mat. 1.
in another.

The color.
THe Color of this stone is so green, as grass and herbs in comparison of
it are not green: whence it comes to be so profitable for the eyes, by
affecting the air round about the object with rays of the same color, Cap.
5. l. 37.
and ita viridi lenitaete lassitudinem oculorum mulcet, says Pliny. Nero for
the benefit of his fight beheld the sword-players at Rome in a Smaragd. What
the eye is to the body, such is the understanding to the soul; and I find the
greenness of this stone applied Brightm. in Apoc. cap. 21.
to the knowledge of divine truths. It is both for ornament and use, if we be
versed in the whole (...), can dispute de omniente, and go down to the
Philistims to sharpen our axes and hammers: so as we pearke not the Handmaid
above the Mistress. But in our profession, in sacred Theology, it is no
curiosity for us to seek out the indivisible point of every question, and to
throw arguments, Judge. 20. 16.
as the men of Gibeah stones, at an hayres breadth. Let no man say to us, John
3. 10.
Art thou a master in Israel, and know not these things? We should not be
more skillful in the Statutes or tything-tables, then in Scriptures, Counsels,
Fathers, Ecclesiastical Histories, Canons, etc. we need not bid the Statist
read Tacitus, or the Physician Hippocrates Aphorisms, or the Mathematitian
Euclide, or the Lawyer Justinian. and Hor. ep.
discere and audire, and meliori credere non vis. I would many of us fell not
short of the industry of so great a Prince as Alphonsus King of Spain and
Naples, who read the Bible 14. times over, with Lyra's gloss upon it.
Excellent therefore does the color of this stone follow the color of the
last, to wit, knowledge follow zeal, (like fire and water in the solemnities
of the Roman Nuptials) lest Romans 10. 2.
zeal should be not according to knowledge: knowledge to abate the edge and
rigor of zeal, and zeal to quicken the dulnes and slownesse of knowledge. So
Acts 2.
cloven and fiery tongues was the form the holy Ghost assumed when it
descended on the Apostles. An expedite and cloven tongue, as was said of Neros
government, touches the instrument well, but winds the pinnes too low: and a
fiery zeal is as an heart without a pericardium in the little world, or as the
First-mover without a Chrystalline sphere in the great world, setting all on
fire: both together make a masculine Orator indeed, and have often undeafed a
stubborn ear, and left a sting (an higher hand co-working) in a steeled
heart: the former is like Moses, the meekest man; the other like Elias, the
most zealous Prophet; and if Christ work by his Spirit (as O that he may) then
are Moses, Elias, and Christ again met together.

SECTION V. The Sapphire.
THis is the second in the Apocalypse, but here the fifth in order; and it
stands well betwixt the Emeraud and Diamond, as being next to the one in
hardness, and to the other in beauty of color. The name sounds alike in the
Sappir Hebr. (...) Gr. Sapphirus Lat.
principal Languages.

The Virtue.
THe true virtue of this stone is that it is availeable against the disease
called the Carbuncle. Ex vetusto codice.
Albertus that famous Germane Priest, whom all Schools honored with the name
of Great, and P. Iovius makes the first of his Viri illustres, says he saw two
Carbuncles cured only with the touch of this gemme. Antidot. lib. 3.. 6.
Weckerus affirms it to be profitable both for this and all other diseases of
the skin; adding, ut ego sum expertus. Lib. 7. Subtle.
Cardan requires it be a good one and often applied, for then it has vim
alexipharmacam, Fran. Rueus de Gemmis lib. 2. cap. 3.
and is very averse to all pestilent and hot poisons: There is no scall or
ulcer so noisome to the body, as the bile or leprosy of Sin is to the soul:
and therefore the spiritual Physician is by all industry to take care left it
gangrene and become incurable. Leprosy is a disease of reproach as well as
smart: and whereas men in misery are usually comforted, pitied, and relieved of
their visitants, Lepers are as fast fled from by men, as they are pursued by
God. It is a note of infamy to the house of Austria that it is seldom or never
without a Leper. Azaria though he were a good King, yet was glad to dwell
apart, 2 King. 15. 5.
because he was a Leper. 2 King. 5. 1.
Naaman was a great man and honorable, but (as a fly to a whole box of
ointment) he was a Leper. We should be every whit as shye, left the fair table
of our own or others souls be smutted with the conversation of the wicked, as
of a pesthouse. We cannot plead want either of a precept to command it, while
we are so strictly bidden to Jude v. 23.
hate the very garments spotted with iniquity; or of an ensample to commend it,
while we know S. John so divinely precise as to fly out of the Bath wherein he
saw Cerinthus the heretic: and what else may be the principal end of that
spiritual outlawry, the high and supreme censure of the Church, when notorious
sinners are cast out of the congregation, but Virg. Eclog. 1.
ne mala vicini pecoris contagia laedant, lest if the rotten were not ejected,
the whole would be infected: and surely the rites and ceremonies of clensing
the Leper, laid down, Levit. 14. from the first verse to the 10. are excellent
directions how to proceed in the cure also of the both of sin. The scarlet
may signify that even Isa 1. 8.
scarlet and crimson sins may be whited over; that sins of the deepest
tincture( Hor.
bis murice tincta) are not only pardonable, but in the way to be pardoned.
The hyssope Pectus and pulmone expurgat. Lemmius de herbis bibl. c. 26.
is of a purgative nature, purge me with hyssope, says Psalm. 51. 7.
David, to note that the sinfulness of our nature is not healed, but where sin
is purged out: The Cedar wood which corrupts not but yields a fragrant and
sweet smell, shows that then are our corruptions purged indeed, when our
holiness and incorrupt manners ascend like incense before God and men. The
water and the oil represent the running and searching water of the Law to show
both the guilt and condign punishment of sin; and then the soft and supple
oil of the Gospel, which poured into our wounds makes all whole again The
dead Sparrow is Christ slain for our sins, the quick sparrow is Christ
risen again for our justification, and consequently the sinners mortification
and vivification. The shaving of the hair teaches, that eyes and hands are
not only to be seen to, that they offend not, but even all superfluities to
be payred away, and to account no sin small that defiles a man. The putting
of the oil upon the lap of the right ear, and the thumb and toe of the
right hand and foot, shows that hearing and doing must go together; but who
must do all this? Levit. 14. 2.
This is the law of the leper, he must be brought unto the Priest, that is,
not only unto the High Priest of our profession Christ Jesus, who cured ten
lepers at once, and can heal all our sins; but also unto us who are his
servants and stewards, for what he does (...) vertually, we do (...)
ministerially, what he binds or loses we must pronounce and declare. I am
the more brief in this Symbolicall divinity lest I incur peccatum Origenale:
neither would I have gone so far, if I had not had a Eusebius Emissenus.
guide-starre.

The Color.
THE Color is blew, inclining to the color of the heavens, whereby it comes
to Loimat. cb. 18. d. coloribus.
signify loftiness of mind, and a contempt of these sublunary and earthly
things. Isis the ancient Egyptian goddess had her Priests clothed in this
color, that the people beholding them might be put in mind of heaven. S.
Gregory ordained that the Friars called crucigeri should wear habits of blew.
Cicero used sometimes to wear this color, to show his aspiring mind: yea
Loimat. c. 3. lib. 18.
many of the Apostles, and the Virgin Mary till the passion of her son used
this color; and Christ himself is usually painted with a garment of it: And of
the four colors used about the Tabernacle, Blew, White, Scarlet and Purple,
both the lace to fasten the breast plate to the Ephod was blew, and the robe of
the Ephod was to be all blew: To teach us to make a sky-colored veil to our
eyes, and to cause our thoughts sit a brood on heavenly matters. Heavenly
mindedness is a fit temper for a Churchmans spirit. The ox, or farm, or wife,
may not so fill up our eye, as to neglect the Kings supper. We must not like
spire steeples, point upward, and poize downward. Whosoever can make such poor
things as a blast of fame, an husk of pleasure, or thorns of riches, matter of
felicity; yet let us make choice of the Lord to be our God; and when we have
done, maintain our choice. Numb. 18. 20.
Thou shall have none inheritance in their land, I am thy part and thine
inheritance. (There is both aliquid amplius, and aliquid melius) said God to
Aaron. We know the price St. Paul set upon other things was but Phil. 3. 8.
(...) doung, a word Beza in loc.
then the which nothing can sound more to contempt, for it is as much as (...)
scraps and offalls that we cast forth to dogs. Let us give it the true weight
upon our souls, and if any would offer us the whole world in competition to
God, let us say in an holy disdain, as Hazael to Elisha, 2 King. 8. 13.
Am I a dog that I should do this thing? Let the very site and position of
our hearts which are close-pointed toward earth, and open at the top toward
heaven incite us to be heavenly minded: let our faces which are turned upward
move us, in that God by nature, Os homini sublimi dedit, coelumque tueri: let
the very appellatives of (...) coming from (...), and of (...) from (...)
prevail with us, or let Saint Paul's word Romans 1. 1.
(...), which belongs to our office to do it: Let the impressed of our frontlet
Holiness, which is the separation of a thing from a terrene and common use, as
the term a quo (so much sounds the Greek word (...) ab a pr^v. and (...) terr^.
(...),) and the appropriating it to a divine use, as the term ad quem, do
it. Lastly, let the good word of God which has in it not only light to direct
us, but power to assist us, do it; while it is still admonishing us to use the
world as if we used it not, to seek those things that are above, to have our
conversation in heaven, etc. Let (I say) these things move us not only with
our eyes to gaze up into heaven like those Acts 1. 11.
Galileans, or like the Pope Sir Fr. Bacons Apophthegm.
who had found the keys, but sursum Corda like David, Psalm. 25. 1.

SECTION VI. The Diamond.
THis is one of those four which is not found in the Apocalypse, but by
another name: but of all others it is the stone of price: for as of all metals
gold is most precious, because it is most ductile and soft, so of all stones
the Diamond, because it is most hard, for else in color and beauty it is
inferior to the Carbuncle, Opale, Sapphire, and Emeraud. Cardan says there was
one at Antwerp valued at 150000 Crowns of Gold: therefore Kings under whose
Dominions they are, make such strict Laws, as if one exceed two drachms, it is
the Kings, and if any defraud him of one, he confiscates himself and all his
substance.

The Virtue.
AN Durities inenarabilis.
inenarrable hardness is the first and chief quality of the Diamond, in so
much as those that cut them can find out naught but their own dust to polish
them withal. Therefore the Jahalom a rad. halam, vide Pagnin ibid.
Hebrew name comes from a root signifying to break or bruise, either (...),
because it cannot be broken with any thing more hard, or because it breaks
all other stones: and the Greek Ab a priv. partic. and (...), domo, subigo, q.
d. (...),
word (...). sounds as much as indomable: which word also the Adamas.
Latins retain to call it by. Yet for all this it yields to and is softened
with the blood of a Goat. Hear Pliny aver it with an emphasis: Lib. 37. cap.
4.
Invicta illa vis, duarum violentissimarum rerum ferri ignisque contemptrix,
hircino rumpitur sanguine. So he. Subtle. excer. 344. S. 8.
Scaliger (the fourth man that Centur 2. Epist. 44.
Lypsius did admire since the world was) disputing the (...) hereof, why
thinner blood is resisted, and it admitted, referres it to occulta proprietas,
and principium commune, and professes ingenuously it is hidden from him. The
use is excellent, thus: we are all the sons of Ovid. 1. Metam
Iaphet, begot of stones, Virg. Aenid* 4.
Durus genuit nos cautibus horrens -- Caucasus. I would it were Nabal only that
were 1 King. 25.
tanquam lapis: but it may be said to every one Terent. in Heauton.
quid stas lapis? even Peter himself, if he had not been Petra a rock of
stone, would not have stayed so many crows before he wept, seeing Zanch. de
operibus Dei lib. 3. cap. 4.
the crowing of cocks foretells a shower. And which is worse, this callosity
or hardness is not of any mean part, like those Exodus 33. 3.
durae cervicis, but of the heart it self; Circa praecordia ferrum, it is the
heart, as is said of lob 41. 24.
Leviathan, which is harder then the nether millstone: yea and this is not the
hardness of any soft Pumex, but of the Diamond which is harder then hardness
it self, Zach. 7. 11.
adamantina corda is the Prophets own phrase, They have made their hearts as
hard as the Adamant: and which is still worse, besides that natural (...)
which is hereditary to every son of Adam and traduced with the seed, there is
an adventitious hardness which is more dangerous, as coming both from an
habit and custom of sinning, and from the just judgment of God, which does
punish one sin with another, as Romans 1. 27.
(...) a just recompense of our former error; but which is worst of all, as in
foam this hardness of heart is perceived, and felt, and complained on, and
means sought to help it: so in others it is not perceived, and felt; or if
perceived not felt: So holy Greenham See his Letter of hardness of heart.
distinguishes to his distressed friend. Such may say as Salomons Drunkard,
Pro. 23. v. ult.
Some have smitten me but I am not sick, some have beaten me but I feel it
not: by all this it appears that Churchmen are as the seed-man in the Luke 8.
Gospel, they must sow the seed of the word often amongst stones.

Notwithstanding, God be thanked that even an Adamant, as hard as it is, may
be mollified by the blood of a goat: Christ Jesus is this goat, he is hircus
emissarius the escape goat, carrying our finnes into the wilderness. It is
true, he is agnus immaculatus, an innocent sweet-breathed lamb in regard of
the purity of his own nature; but as our sins are imputed to him, he is
hircus foetidus, a stinking goat; so that it is true that Heb. 9. 12:
we are not purified by the blood of goats, that is, of the type: but we are
purified by the blood of a goat, that is, the antitype, Christ: and it pleases
me not a little to see Christ so pointed at in our pectorall. Christ crucified
must be the subject of all our preaching; when soever therefore we meet with
any that have a stone in their heart, apply wisely and faithfully unto it the
warm blood of the slain goat. We must both go our selves and bring others
by Golgotha and Calvery to the mount of Olives; by Christ crucified to Christ
glorified; by him descended into hell, unto him ascended into heaven. Divinely
Perkins, Of the right knowledge of Christ crucified
he: If thou would come to God for grace, for comfort, for salvation, for
any blessing, come first to Christ, hanging, bleeding, dying on the cross,
without whom there is no hearing God, no helping God, no saving God, no God to
thee at all.

The Color.
THe Color of the Diamond some liken ferr^ candenti, some to the light of a
lantern, others to Crystal, but more opake and dark, and yet more
transparent, and pellucide too; which color is very near, if not the same with
that of the female Ligure, next following, where I will speak of it.

SECTION VII. The Ligure.
THE Diamond is the last of the second row, and this is the first of the third:
our last English Translators, Josephus, Hierome, and the Septuagints call it
(...) Ligurium, the Ligure, as if it were from the Country Liguria. But two
great Clerks Erasmus and Vatablus correcting Hierome, will have it (...)
Lyncurium, as compounded of (...) Lynx, and (...) urina, because this stone is
engendered of the congealed urine which this spotted beast excerneth and
renders into the sand, there covering it as repining that any man should find
it.

-- Ovid.
quicquid vesica remittit,
Vertitur in lapides, and congelat aere tacto.
That there is such a beast I think no man doubts: for we had one of them in
the tower at London, which is fully described by that famous and learned
Physician D. Cay, the skinn whereof is or was lately to be seen. And that
there is such a stone ingendered of the urine of this beast we have the
testimonies of Aristole, Pliny, Plutarch, Dioscorides, Rabanus, Theophrastus,
etc. and he whom I last named labors to establish it by reason, that it is
as probable that the urine of a Lynx should congeale into a stone among sand,
as the urine of a man in his reins or bladder If any be curious to know more
hereabout, I refer him to the English Gesner of Mr. Topsel.
.

The Virtue.
THE natural property of this stone is to have an attractive power, that
Confricatus paleas ad se trahit. Rabanus, Theophrastus, nec folia tantum aut
stramenta ad se rapit, sed aeris etiam ac ferri laminas. Plin. lib. 37. cap. 3.
being rubbed, it draws unto it leaves, strawes, brass, iron, gold, and the
like, in regard of which quality it is like to the lodestone, jett and amber;
whereby thus much is strongly insinuated, that Ministers should endeavor for a
winning and drawing faculty. Wheresoever true grace is in the heart of any good
Christian, there is a desire and itch also to draw others to that sweetness which
they themselves have found in the ways of God; it is of a leavening and
communicating nature: here Prou. 9. 17.
hidden bread is not pleasant, nor stolen waters sweet. Genesis 22. 5.
I and the lad, said Abraham; Josh. 24. 15.
I and my house, said Joshua; Hest. 4. 16.
I and my maids, said Esther. John 1. 46.
Come and see, said Philip to Nathaniel; Chapter 4. v. 29.
Come see a man, said the Samaritane woman to her neighbors. Come and see was
the word of the four beasts, at opening the four first seals, Apoc. 6. But a
Churchman most of all should go as the male goat before the flock, Volentes
ducens, nolentes trahens.
leading the willing, and drawing the backward. He being converted must
strengthen his brethren: he having received a Talent of his Master must occupy
till he come: he must draw to, and build on the foundation Christ Jesus,
proselytes and converts of all sorts and conditions; 1 Cor. 3. 12.
gold, silver, timber, hay, and stubble: he, as Amphion by his harmony brought
men from savagenesse to civility, must bring men from reason to Religion: he as
another Orpheus, must draw after him wild beasts, and woods and stones to the
building of the new Jerusalem: he like another Hercules the Lady Proserpina,
must draw out of hell such poor souls as the Prince of infernal powers has
ravished, especially such as cry to Christ principally, to him ministerially,
Cant. 1. 3.
Draw me and I will run after thee. And the Ear is that by which such must
be drawn to God. Cynthius aurem vellit: There is no message or embassage from
God or man has access but through these gates. Therefore has God placed them
on the top of his building, as on two turrets, the better to attend, because
sound ascends: therefore also that the voice do not suddenly strike the
brain, but may lengthen it self in the access, have they such sloping and
hollow entries, turning Labyrinths, and bowed Meanders, as we know noises from
a Trumpet or Sagbut find a longer life then from a Flute or Fife, and raise
that echo from between the teeth of hanging Rocks, which they do not from
smooth-browed Plains: therefore also have we two ears, and those standing
ever open to all suitors, and one mouth, and that fenced with a double
port-cullis of the teeth and lips, that (as S. James counsels) we should be
swift to hear as slow to speak: therefore also Mercury in Mythologie though
he were a gentill-god, yet was a thief, because Eloquence steals away the
heart of men. For men, like some beasts, are soonest taken and surest held by
the ears. It is a notable Apophthegme of Plutarch, (...) Plut. polit.
They say in the Proverb, It is hard to hold a Wolf by the ears, but who so
will lead a city or a people, shall soonest do it by the ears: which they
shall never do, who come into their Pulpits no oftener then the High Priest
into the Sanctum Sanctorum once a year: who, if at any time they fly from
danger, I would wish them to go hide them in their Pulpits, where none that
knows them will seek for them.

The Color.
THE color of this stone Emaribus fulvum and igneum, e foe^i^is la^guidum
atque candidum. Plin. l. 37. c. 2.
if it be condensate of the urine of the male Lynx, is yellow and more fiery,
if of the female, white and more languishing. Of that color I spoke before in
the Topaze, which eases both you and my self of some labor: of this I am now
to treat. The female is a white stone, and a white stone signifies absolution:
for Vlpian. in D^most. cont. Ti^oc.
in judgments of old they used to give a black stone to a condemned person,
and a white stone to him whom they quit and cleared.

Ovid. (...)
Mos erat antiquis niveis atrisque lapillis,
His damnare reos: illis absolvere culpa.
In which respect it was that Alcibiades would not trust his mother in a
judgment of life and death, lest at unawares she should cast the black stone
for the white: and Apoc. 2. 17. there is promised to him that overcommeth, a
white stone, and a new name written in it, that is, absolution and
regeneration. Tertul. de resurrect. carni^
Therefore also primative Christians clad their servants in white at
Whitsontide, in token of their manumission: which may well admonish Ministers
to whom God has committed the word of reconciliation, having chosen,
separated, and set them apart to be the Committees of the loosing keys, so as
none can forgive sins but God, none can declare and pronounce them to be
forgiven but Ministers; others may comfort with good words, none can absolve
but they, that, I say, they do not so much neglect the exercising their power
of absolution, out of I know not what spicednesse of a non-informed conscience,
that it has too much affinity with auriculaer confession: but that Job 33 13.
when God strikes a man with malady on his bed, so that his soul draws near
to the grave, and his life to the buriers, there may be a messenger with him to
declare unto him his righteousness, that God may have mercy on him. Especially
seeing it is so consonant to Mat. 16. 19. etc. 18. v. 18. John 20. 21. 23. Iam.
5. 17. Apoc. 11. 6.
Scriptures, to Visitation of the sick.
the Liturgy of our Church, to Call. l. 3. instit. c. 4. sect. 12. Beza antith.
pap. and Christia.
those whom we esteem most orthodoxe, and D. Holland absolved D. Reinolds, etc.
the practice of worthy men. But besides this, Loimat. l. 3. c. 13.
white signifies innocence and purity: therefore Solomon's throne was of white
Ivory. Our Savior was both transfigured and buried in white. Lyps. electorum
l. 1. c. 13.
The ancient Romans used to wear a white garment in their solemnities, which
if it bore only the native color of the wool, was called (...) or alba toga,
if it did shine by art, (...) or candida. Cap. 9. v. 8.
At all times let thy garments be white, says Ecclesiastes. Pope Sylvester
refused Constantines rich Miter for a mean white one. White has ever been
usual for Churchmen to wear both under the Law and Gospel; yea even for the
heathen Priests in their sacrifices to their Panim gods: no doubt, to put them
in mind they should be as spotless as Lawne in an harmless and Dovelike
innocence. We must be wise as Serpents, innocent as Doves: T. T.
wise, I say, not wily; innocent, not innocents. It becomes us to be bunglers
in sin, and ignorant of the depths and methods of Satan, in regard of
treading those mazes our selves, though not of unsecreting them to others. To
soldiers a white shield was accounted inglorious, because they used to write
their exploits on them. Not so to us; but if we be rightly Candidati here, we
shall ere long Apoc. 3. 5. (...) 19. 8.
be clothed in white: as was said of Hooper and Ridly, they disagreed about
white at the first, (for good men may differ in judgment about matters of
ceremony) but they after agreed in black in prison, in ash color at the
stake, and in white in heaven.

SECTION VIII. The Achate.
SO called, Lib. 37. c. 10.
says Pliny, because it is found in Sicilia, by a river of the same name, and
is thought to be the same with the Chrysoprase, which is the tenth in the
Revelation.

The Virtue.
IT does admirably delight the beholders with the variety of forms, and
diversity of things, which is obvious to each eye that gazeth on it. It shows
you living creatures, fields, meadows, rivers, groves, trees, rocks, Natura
ludente, (says Cardan) nature even sporting and as it were wantoning with
change. That famous one in the ring of King Pyrrhus, wherein were the nine
Muses, and Apollo playing in the midst, is acknowne to every one either by
reading or relation. So that of this gemme may be fitly applied what the Ovid.
1. metamorph.
Poet said of Chaos, that it contains -- discordia semina rerum. Under which
may well be veiled that diversity of gifts wherewith it is requisite a Minister
of the Gospel should be endowed; one while weaving the warpe of faith, another
while the woofe of good works; now laying the foundation, anon building
thereon: first imitating the Be, the Muses bird, gathering the Prove. 25. 27.
honey of knowledge from the flowers of others; then the Spider, spinning a
thread of truth out of his own brain or experience. Alexander Hales is called
the irrefragable Doctor, Scotus the subtle, Bradwardine the profound, Occam the
invincible, Burley the perspicuous, Baconthorpe the resolute. Aquinas the
angelical, Bonaventure the seraphicall. These are swelling titles conferred
upon them, according to the Planet which was predominant in each of their
brains. Indeed S. Paul rightly censures them to be 1 Cor. 12. 4.
diversities of gifts, but the same spirit. So when one and the same man
undergoes the office both of a Doctor to teach, a Pastor to persuade, and a
Deacon to govern; beginning with chatechisticall Divinity to his A. b. c.
darians; proceeding to positive with grounded Christians; holding on to
polemicall with curious and exquisitive heads, and ending a casuist with
perplexed consciences; discreetly applying each point for and according to the
auditory Method^^ applicandi Scripturas, qua utitur D. Amandus P^lan^^^ and
alii etc
: first to (...)
teach truth by way of doctrine, then to (...).
improve error by way of elench, nextly to (...).
correct vice by way of reproof, besides to (...).
discipline in godliness by way of instruction, lastly to (...).
comfort and strengthen the heart in distress by way of consolation, (which
seems to be the most Scripture-like method of all others, 2 Timothy 3. 16. 17.
Romans 15. 4.) this I say, is 1 Cor. 12. 5.
differences of administrations, but the same Lord. And further, this
variousnes of the Achate appears in us, while we do not rest and subside upon
one object, but are strengthening this man's faith, anchoring another hope,
kindling another charity, blowing the coals of his zeal, urging his
repentance, directing his obedience, visiting his sick couch: thus when alma
matter Academia has once delivered us over to Sancta Matter Ecclesia, Dura Matter
to Pia Matter, we should make the Church the center, and the Parish the
circumference of our circular motion, every where espying where a great and
effectual door is open unto us; that so Bradfords speech be not true (...),
that the Devil is only diligent Bishop in his Diocese.

The Color.
THe color also is so various, as one would think their sight erred about the
proper object, which is color. It is white, red, yellow, black, green, blew,
what not? in so much Vt unum lapidem esse nom creda^. Cardan.
as it seems scarce to be one and the same stone. So must we garment our faces
with any color, and put on any passion, if by an holy temporizing we see we
are likely to prevail. We must be Proteo mutabiliores as well in our
affections and conversing with men, as in our doctrine. If with Amos we be
called to preach to Shepherds, we must Humi repentia verba, polit.
creep on the ground in vulgar terms; if with Isay to the Court, we must be
glad to speak sterling, and embellish our sentences with words as well as
things, if we will be heard; if we have to do with merry greeks, we must come
to them as Christ, eating and drinking; if with severe Catoes, we must approach
them as John, neither eating nor drinking; to sanguinists we must pipe; to
melancholists mourn; to Caligula we must thunder; to such 2 Timothy 4. 17. Ad
cantum Galli pavet Leo.
Lions as Nero (we must as Peter was roused) crow them to repentance. Hear S.
Paul; 1 Cor. 9. 20, 21, 22.
To the Jews I became as a Jew that I might win the Jews: to them that were
under the Law, that I might win them under the Law: to them that are without
the Law, etc. Briefly then thus much: Virgil throughout all the travels and
troubles of Aeneas, brings in still his faithful friend Achates accompanying
him: wherein Scaliger. Poet. lib. 3.
is to be observed the prudence of the Poet, not to suppose a man to wade
through such miseries as Aeneas did, without an alter idem, a bosom friend to
be (...), to be sorry for his harms, and so making his woes sit the lighter:
Even so a Churchman in all his ministerial pains and travels should be fido
comitavus Achate, in thus ringing of changes, and 1 Cor. 9. ^2.
being made all things to all men, that he may by all means save some.

SECTION IX. The Amethist.
The Virtue.
THis is here the ninth, and with St. John the last of all the twelve: look
what Virtue is given by herbarists to Coleworts, and the Almond tree, the same
do lapidaries give to the Amethyst, to wit, that it resists Drunkenness, by
consuming the vapor of the wine, and hindering it to ascend to the brain.
This is attributed to it not by one or two, but by all authors that I have
seen; except Vmbilico app^situs admodum vini vaporem ad se trabit and
discutit. Arist.
one that questions it: a Io. Tho. Frigius de lapid. pretios.
and the very Ab a priv. and (...) vinum*
name strongly imports it, q. d. from or contrary to wine. lib. 1. c. 177.
(...).
Dioscorides makes this word the concrete to bitter Almonds, saying that five
or six of them being taken (...) are as good as Amethysts. We should hereby
learn Plin. l. 27. c. 7:
(...) for this stone was not put into the pectorall for him that is 1 Timothy 5.
23.
(...) a Timothy, haec non scribuntur aquae potoribus, but to to Esa. 28. 7.
the Priest and Prophet who err by reason of wine, and fail in vision with
strong drink. Note then that there is here an Amethyst as well as a Rubie,
that these precious stones are not to be set on our noses or fuaces (which
many a man may thank his cold liver for) but on our breast-plates. Divinity is
an art Theologia est ars recte vivendi. P. Romans Th^^^.
recte vivendi, not bibendi, unless we will turn bibere into vivere, in our
lewd lives, as Hispani and Vascones B emolliunt ad V digamma, homines sobrij,
and quibus non placet bibere sed vivere. Lyps. de pronun. Lat. ling. cap. 12.
the Italians and Gascoignes do in their pronunciation. The office of a Divine
not (...) but (...) Acts 19. 8.
to persuade those things which belong to the Kingdom of God, unless we
think foecundi calices quos non fecere facundos? We must keep the Feast
Tabernaculorum, not tabernarum, of Tabernacles, not Tavernes; Prove. 31. 4.
It is not for Kings to drink wine, nor Princes strong drink: much less is
it for Priests. For it was the blessing of Judah the Lawgiver, not of Levi the
Priest, that Genesis 49. 12.
his eyes should be red with wine. It is true, the Church is called a
vineyard, but we are termed laborers in that vineyard; we are set to work,
not to eat clusters of grapes; let us a little reason the matter. Can it be
fit, that Christ for us should drink gall and vinegar, and we wine and sugar?
that he should thirst, and we be drunk? that those hands which give the blood
of Christ in the chalice to penitent sinners, should lift the blood of grapes
in bowls to themselves? that those eyes which should be sod in tears for the
sins of the people, should be red with wine? that it should now be a virtue
which was a curse, with stammering lips to speak to the people? that a
Prophet should usurp a Patriarchs blessing, to wash his garments in wine, and
lace them with streams of strong drink, so as like the dew of Hermon upon
Aaren, it run down his beard to the skirts of his clothing? that those whom
their parents and friends have dedicated ad aras, should suit better ad haras,
fitter to be a swineheard, then a shepherd? fitter (I speak boldly, but
faithfully) for a haltar, then an altar? The Law was so strict that a Priest
might not drink wine or strong drink Levit. 10. 9.
when he came into the Tabernacle of the congregation: and St. Paul requires
that we be not 1 Timothy 3. 3.
given to wine? Wine may be given to us ( Prove. 31. 6.
da vinum lugentibus) but we not given to wine. He is Genesis 49. 11.
an ass that is bound to a vine, that is, has said so often, I will seek it
once again; as now the drunken devil cannot be cast out of him: the matter
were less if no body would tell 2 Samuel 1. 20.
our disorder in Gath, nor publish it in the streets of Askalon: or if like
Noah, we had still some friend or son by us, to lie us on a bed, and cover
our nakedness: or if all were of noble (...) Zonaras, cap. 1. tom. 2. an.
Constantines mind, that if he were an eye witness of a Churchman offending,
he would cover him with the lap of his purple gown; or if our people
thought so well of us, as when they saw us courting a mistress, to think we
did it to bless her, or when they saw us drunk, to imagine us to be ravished
in spirit, or to have seen a vision. But the case is quite otherwise, they
look on our faults through multiplying glasses; if our sins be foul and
black, they show far on our white Ephods, if they be splendida peccata, they
show far on our black coats. Our Charge are ready to say as Michal of 2 Samuel
6. 2^.
David, our ghostly father has uncovered himself this day in the eyes of his
people, as a fool uncouereth himself. Yet God forbid I should seek to
abridge any of that lawful liberty which cost Christ as dear for us as any
other; tho others gnats and moats be our beams and camels, yet are not others
virtues our vices. Quod licet Christiano, licet manacho; not only Tully dates
his Epistle to Vide Cic. ad Atticum lib. 2. Epist. 11.
his Atticus, a tribus tabernis, but also Acts 28. 15.
St. Paul was met at the three taverns, the same place, so does he allow
Timothy 1 Timothy 5. 23. (...)
., a modicum, a little wine: and Solomon in his chiliads prescribes the same
dosis four several times, Cha. 15. v. 16.
a little with the fear of the Lord; Chap. 17. v. 1
a little with peace; Chap. 16. v. 8.
a little with equity; Chap. 15. 17.
a little with love; not (...) as in the feast in Homer; nor as in that of
Assuerus at Sushan, where Esther 1. 8.
every one drank as much as he pleased and would, unless we first will no
more then we should, and then we may what we will. Our Savior at Cana turned
water into wine, let us, if we have offended in intemperancy, turn that wine
into the tears of godly sorrow, the water of our second baptism; in a word,
if we stand, let us beware we fall not; if we have fallen, let us care how to
rise again. If any think I have shred to many gourds into his pot of drink,
it is my zeal against that vice, which I may rightly call dehonestamentum
Cleri.

The Color.
THE Color of the Amethyst is Amethysti fulgens purpurae Plin. l. 37. c. 6.
a fulgent purple, much of the color of wine; neither differs it much from the
color of the red Sardius, which was the first stone; Purple and scarlet did
not differ so much of old as they do now, although they were of diverse
ingredients, the purple of the juice of a shellfish, and the scarlet of the
grains of a berry, Rex Iacobus in his pattern of a Kings inauguration, p. 30.
Item Beza annot. in Mat. 27. v. 28 and Horat. ser. 2. sat. 6.
ancient purple was of a reddish color, tho now these sorts of dies be lost:
and that garment which the soldiers put on Christ, Matthew calls it Compare Mat.
27. v. 28. with Mark. 15. 17. Ioh. 19. 2
chlamidem coc^inea^, a scarlet robe, but both Mark and John call it vestem
purpuream, a purple garment. Anchises when he sacrificed, covered his head
with red, and Aeneas his son was commanded the same. Our eminent Prelates and
Doctors, and also the Cardinals in the Church of Rome do wear Hoods and
Gowns of Purple and Scarlet, which occasioned Beza's salt Epigram of Creed
mihi nullo saturatas murice vestes. Divite nec cocco pilea tinctavide^: Sed
quae rubrae vides sanctorum caede virorum; Et m^rsa insonti tota cruore
mandent. Aut memor istorum quae celet crimina vestis, Pro dominis iusto tacta
pudore rubet.
Cardinalis purpuratus. So also soldiers and men of Arms; for the Trojans and
Romans used to wear Mandilions of red. Tamberlaine the second day of his siege
set up a red Tent. The hearses of those that had fought valiantly, were covered
with red, as painters use to attire all in red, or to give them a red mantle in
token of their martyrdom, who have valiantly shed their blood for the faith of
Christ; the reason is because Loimat. in his book of colors chap. 14.
red or purple signify courage and magnanimity: Therefore the Lion and such
stout beasts cannot endure the sight thereof. We read in 1 lib. cap. 6. ver.
34.
Macabees how to provoke Elephants to fight, they showed them the blood of
grapes and mulberries; and surely those that have continually bellum cum
vitijs, stand as much need of courage, as those that combat with men: and I
see not why those who have gifts from God, and calling from men, should not be
as stout as Ambrose. The badge of Judah the Lawgiver, was a Lion: Zinglius dyed
in the field. Luther said, if every tile in Worms were a Devil, he would go
thither for the truths sake. Calvin, when the Senate of Geneva had granted a
relaxation of the excommunication of Bertelier said, before this decree take
place, either my blood or banishment shall seal it. Archbishop Whitgift feared
not to say, in these cases, The Lords of the Counsel are to be advised by us,
and not we by them, besides that one of his Apophthegms to his familiar
friends was, two things did much stead him to be confident in good causes,
orbitas and senectus. Campian wrote to the Lords of the Counsel, while they
had one drop of blood to lose at Tyburne, they would not forsake their cause. O
that such metal was misplaced! but certainly, They that dare do, dare suffer.
And this was the cause why in old time Ecclesiastickes Fax Act. Mon. page 113.
desired Martyrdom, as much as they do Bishoprics now. In a word, while we
be not 1 Pet. 4.
(...), but place right meer-stones to circumscribe and bounder in our
boldness, within the proper sphere of its own activity; it will well enough
become every one of us to challenge Baconthorps style of Doctor resolutus.

SECTION X. The Tarshish or Berill.
WIth this begins the fourth row, it is the eight in the Apocalypse, an
Indian Gemme which jewellers use to cut corner-wise, because it shows dull if
the color be not stirred up by the repercussion of the angles.

The Virtue.
PLiny and others are silent in the virtues of this stone. But I have a
laborious Lapidary by me, who is anonymus, and so antique that (as Vix divinare
Lectionem.
Erasmus said of the writings of Hierom) I can scarce divine the reading; who
affirms the Berill being steeped in water, and that water drunk, to be
availeable against all griefs and diseases of the eyes: which assertion he
confirms also under the mouths of three witnesses, Arnoldus, Dioscorides, and
one Nuba an author to me unknown. Lev. 21. 20.
Under the Law whosoever had any blemish in his eye was not capable of
Priesthood. Prove. 22. 9.
Blessed is the man (says Solomon) who has a good eye. Even Profecto in
oculis animus habitat, Plin. not. histor.
the whole soul seems to dwell and reside in that little round sphericall
ball of the eye, so as by that looking-glass, it is easy to know what passion
is predominant in the mind: if love, the eye looks; if sorrow, it weeps; if
admiration, it gazeth; if madness, it stareth; if anger, it sparkleth; if
fear, it twinckleth; if pride, it is lift up; if humility, it is cast down:
You will wonder, so little a substance to be obnoxious to so many infirmities
as the oculist will tell you. So are there many spiritual maladies therein,
for which we must provide eye salve: there is the Subsan^^s Pro. 30. 17.
scoffing and scorning eye first of all: secondly, the Immisericors, Pro. 22.
9. and cha. 28. ver. 27.
merciless eye: thirdly, the Caecus, Romans 11. 10. Ephesians. 1. 18.
blind ignorant eye: fourthly, Magnificus, Pro. 30. 13. and chapter 6. ver. 16.
proud and lofty eye: fifthly, the Venereus, 1 Io. 2. 16. Mat. 5. 28.
lustful venereous eye which is full of adultery: sixthly, the Rubicundus,
Prou. 23. 29.
red or drunken eye: seventhly, the Aemulus, Mat. 20. 1^.
envious maligning eye: eighthly, the Nictans, Pro. ^0. 10.
winking or dissembling eye: lastly, the Avarus, Eccles. 4. 8.
covetous insatiable eye; so that the SIC MVRAENA.
Muraena has not more eyes on a side then are evil eyes mentioned in holy
Scriptures. But the man of God should ever be provided of a Collyrium for his
ghostly patients affected with any of these kinds of sore eyes: first making
them wash them in their own syrrope, the salt and brackish tears of
contrition for what is past, and then anointing them with Psalm. 19. 10.
honey of Gods word, which ver. 8.
gives light to the eyes to direct the whole man for the time to spend, so as
he shall be constrained to speak out Ionathans words, 2 Samuel 14.
how are mine eyes enlightened since I tasted of this honey.

The Color.
THe color is a Sea-water-greene. And Pliny who seems to have had an exact
knowledge of the Berill, after he has reckoned up seven distinct kinds,
says, Probatissimisunt ex iis qui ^iriditatem puri maris imitantur. lib. 37.
cap. 5.
Those are the best which imitate the greenness of pure Seawater. Apocalypsis
Apocalypse^^. c. 21.
Brightmans conceit pleases me well in this point: The watery-colour (says
he) betokens lenity and humility, such as water it self is, which will
easily give place to every thing: and so it fitly follows the majesticall
Chrysolite (as S. John reckons them,) that so it may keep the stateliness
thereof within measure and compass. So he. By which element also Virgil
paraphraseth the same virtue, when he compares a meek man to a standing poole,
which yet is far more calm and gentle then the Sea, whose face is so much
vwrinckled with billows:

Virgil.
Mitis ut in morem stagni, placidaeque paludis. Hear S* Paul's
ordination-sermon, 2 Timothy 2. 24. 25.
The servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle toward all men, apt
to teach, suffering the evil, instructing with meekness, etc. Hear his
Consecration-sermon, Tit. 1. 7.
A Bishop must be unreproveable as Gods Steward, not froward nor angry, etc.
Indeed Aristotle calls anger Calcar virtutis
the Spur of Virtue: but I have heard there is an old canon that Churchmen
may not wear spurs, or have armed heels. The meek (says Mat. 5. 5.
our Savior) shall inherit the land: and yet those who inherit no land (such
were the Tribe of Levi under the Law altogether, such is it now for the most
part) must be meek. Ordinarily men will be persuaded to virtue, hardly
compelled; they may be led to heaven, not drawn: more are won with the
blandishments of sweet words, then with calling down for fire from heaven. The
word of God prevails more when it falls like rain into a fleece of wool,
then when it rattles as a shower on the tyles. Oratory is more grateful when
it is put in the form of entreaties, then when of commands. Counsels sound
better to us then praecepts. It is usually not so prevalent to come with a rod,
as to come with the spirit of meekness. Few are like nettles which bite being
gently touched, most are like thorns which will not be grasped. 1 King. 19.
11. etc.
When God appeared to Eliah, he was neither in the whistling wind, nor in the
quivering Earthquake, nor in the scorching fire, but in a still and soft voice.
Yet may this doctrine vary according to the differing dispositions either of
Pastor or People: To a meek and gentle Titus, Tit. 2. 15.
These things speak, and rebuke with all authority, especially having to do
with stiff natures. To a more forward Timothy, 2 Timothy 4. 2.
Reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long suffering: which difference of natures
S. Gregory observes to have been the reason of the Apostles differing
admonitions. There is need of the spirit of an Ambrose and a Luther, to contest
with an Emperor and a Pope.

SECTION XI. The Onyx.
WHich is the fifth with S. John: only note that there it is called the
Sardonyx: for the Sardius often grows out of the Onyx, so as in the bottom of
the stone is seen an Onyx, in the top a Sardius, whence it takes the name from
both, and is called a Sard-onyx. Such an one Vide lib. ^. Subtle.
Cardan had himself. And it well differenceth both the Sardonyx from the
Sardius, that the fifth, this the sixth in the foundation; and also the Sardius
from the Onyx, that the first, this the last save one of the Pectorall. The
want of observing whereof has bred not a little confusion amongst Authors.

The Virtue.
THis stone being Albertus.
hung about the neck, confirms and strengthens the whole body: Cardan.
which it does because it is of a cold astringent quality, whereby it unites
and constringeth the spirits: for which reason the Indians use to carry it
about them as an amulent against venery. And surely God had need to deck his
Priests with health, that his Saints may rejoice and sing. A painful labourer
in Gods Vineyard had need of a compact athleticall body, ne pe^cet ad extremum.
Let his breasts run with milk, and his bones with marrow, study and pains
will exhaust his spirits, and consume him as the f^^me does the oil in his
lamp. Notwithstanding, how many will make themselves our taske-masters,
speaking to us as to bricke-makers, Exodus 5. 17.
Ye are too idle? these, it may be, would even tell Tostatus as much, for all
his 14 Volumes in folio, which a Scholar knows could never have been done
but by an Edmund Iron-side, nor scarce written but Ier. 17. 1.
with a pen of iron. Reading is the least part of study, and yet Eccl. 12. ^2.
much reading is a weariness to the flesh: it is well that so wise a man as
Solomon has said it, and in that book too where he styles himself The
Peacher, else he would soon have been impleaded. Preaching is but one part
of ministerial pains, which is something if it were no more then declamare ad
clepsydram, to cry aloud, and lift up a man's voice like a Trumpet for an hour
together, which Perkins found, who after his preaching used to spit up his
lungs. But it is the soul that preaches, the understanding is busied to
conceive, the memory to recount, the affections to express, etc. therefore
(...) koheleth.
the Hebrew word, and (...).
Greek too is of the feminine gender, q. d. a she Preacher, meaning the
Soul. But if a man's bones were of brass, and his strength the strength of
stones, and yet he be so much wasted, as like S. John at Ephesus, he must be
carried to his Pulpit in a chair, his infirmities may be his comfort, if he be
divinis consumptus laboribus, as was Humphred. de Juello.
said of B. Jewel.

The Color.
THe color is just the same with the nail of a man's hand, Dicitur (...), quia
color similis est ungui humano. Plin. l. 37. cap. 6.
whence by reason of the similitude, it has the name of (...): therefore they
that parallel these 12 stones with the 12 Patriarchs, write Joseph's name upon
this, understanding by the flesh-coloured whiteness, Candorem virtutis, that
candidnesse and whiteness of virtue which was in Joseph. For Onyx color (like
Roses spread on Lawne) is ad unguem (...), virtues tincture and dye. Palenesse
in the face is rather the color of vice; for we are wont Hor. ep. 1. -- nulla
pallesce^re culpa.
pallescere culpa; besides that it is the color of death, sins proper stipend,
Apoc. 6. 8.
Behold, a pale horse, and death sitting on him: Hor. ^d. lib. 1.
Pallida mors, etc. Red is the color of guiltiness, anger, and choler: but
that inimitable mixture of both, which is in the nail, wherewith every finger
of the hand is so artificially tipped, as it were with pearle-shell, is the
proper livery of a pious and virtuous disposition. It is a shred of an Italian
Letany, From a black German, and a pale Spaniard, and a red Italian, libera
nos Domine. The application is this, that we take to us that sweetness of
manners, and amiablenesse of carriage, which may win men to our Ministry, and
endeare us to them with whom we converse, that we join to those Theological
virtues of faith, hope, and charity, without which we cannot s^ve our selves;
those Moral virtues of candor, gentleness, affability, courtesy, and
meekness, without which we shall hardly ever save others. Learning and grace (
Galba ingenium male habitat.
like Galba's wit) may dwell ill, to wit, in a morose and crabbed nature: but
we should do our endeavor, that Those who will not give ear unto the Word,
may without the Word be won by our blameless and candide conversation.

SECTION XII. The Jasper.
THis is the first stone in the foundation, though the last here in the
Pectorall, so proper is it here, The last shall be first. Yea there it is not
only one of the twelve, but Apoc. 21. 18.
the structure of the wall also is of Jasper: and Cap. 4. 3.
before it is put to represent the glory and Majesty of God the Father. We need
not fear to be mistaken in the stone, for nomen tri-lingue sounds the same
both in Iaspis.
Latin, (...).
Greek, and Iosphe.
Hebrew; and the Arabicke word Montanus says is Iasp.

The Virtue.
THe virtue of it is to confirm and comfort the stomach, for which the use of
it is approved in Physic. Vide Cardan. de lapid. Fr. Rueum de Gemmis, l. 2.
c. 1. Jo. Magyrum Physiol. l. 3. c. 2.
Galen affirms this to be true, if they be hung against the mouth of the
stomach, and professes himself to have made the trial. We need no greater
witness. We must Verbum est apud Dioscor. l. 5.
(...): it is not the least part of Ministerial wisdom to proportion
spiritual food to the strength of the receivers stomach: there are both Io.
21. 15. 16. 17
lambs and sheep to be fed: there are both Heb. 5. 13. 14
babes and adulti that must have meat: there are 1 Ioh. 2. 13.
fathers, young men, and little children to be written unto: in the primative
Church there were Catechumenoi, as well as there were knowing and instructed
Christians. So also is there 1 Cor. 3. 2.
both milk and strong meat: D. Augustine
shallow waths which may be foorded by a Lamb, and abisse whirlepooles where
Leviathan may swim and take his pastime: there are Mat. 21. 15. compared with
Apoc. 19. 1.
Hosanna's fitted for the mouths of babes and sucklings, and Hallelujahs sung
by celestial quires: there are Heb. 5. 12. with 1 Timothy 3. 16.
(...) the very elements and first principles of the word of God which the
simplest may learn, as there are (...) abstruse and profound mysteries which
do (...) seal and shut up the mouths of the subtillest. Sermons are as
riddles and clerums to uncatechized souls. He is not like to be a sound Divine
who reads Lombard or Aquinas before he be grounded by some orthodoxe
institutions; neither are those like to prove stable Christians, who have not
for the basis of their faith some Romans 6. 17.
(...) or 2 Timothy 1. 13.
(...), to be the touchstone of those doctrines which are propounded to them
to receive. Look into the writings of the Fathers both of the Greek and Latin
Church, and you shall find that Clemens Alexandrinus had his Pedagogue, Cyril
of Jerusalem his Catechism, Origin that famous Catechist his books (...),
Theodoret his Epitome (...), Lactantius his Institutions, Augustine his
Enchiridion, etc. we should first lay the foundation in the milk of
catechisticall points, and then build thereon the gold of positive or
polemicall Divinity. So Eccl. Polit. pref.
Hooker truly observes that two things procured Calvin all his deserved honor
through the Christian world, the one was his exceeding pains in composing the
Institutions of Religion, the other his no less industrious travels for
exposition of holy Scripture according to the same Institutions: wherein he
gained the advantage of prejudice against them which gain-sayd him, and of
glory above them which assented to him. It was Jacobs care of his flock Genesis
33. 14.
to drive softly, according to the pace of the cattle. We must both in our
dogmaticall decisions, and rhetorical enforcements rather stoop to the
capacity of the weak, then raise our matter, words, and method to the ability
of one or two intellectualists.

The Color.
THe color is a translucent greenness. Loimatius lib. 3. cap. 17.
Green signifies Hope; a necessary virtue for the ebbing estate of man in
this life, that seeing the dignity of his mind is not such as to bear evils
out of fortitude and judgment, the wise providence of God has provided him to
ride at anchor upon hope, by a kind of absenting and alienation of the mind
from the present to the future, and by giving scope to the mind to dwell upon
the very muse and forethought of good to come: which the Poets wittily
expressed in their Mythologie of Pandora, whose box being emptied of all
gifts, yet there remained hope still fitting on the brim thereof. Neither can a
Churchman be without it: for Gods promises do often bear a long date; and
the seed of the word even when it is sown in good ground, does bring forth
fruit (...) Luke 8. 15.
in tariance. Though some of our Disciples be of ductile dispositions, and
easily follow the worke-mans hammer, in their forming to grace; yet most are of
dull ears, stiff necks, and hard hearts, jeoparding the loss both of our
oil and labor. Now we had need have hope to expect with patience whilst we
offer grace, till the Spirit cloth our words with a hidden and strong power to
make them operative; we had need have hope, while they have breath, to see if
when they are gone up to their deathbeds, they may be gained on, that they
fall not into the grave and hell both at once.

Out of what has been already spoken you may easily gather who is a worthy,
and who is an unworthy Churchman; and surely Churchmen are either the most
deperdite, or else most happy men of all, even then when as holy writ phraseth
it Gn. 42. 36. Iere. 31. 15. Dan. 9. 26. Genesis 5. 24.
they are not at all. If others glister as flarres, they shall shine forth as
the Sun in the kingdom of God; If some burn as coals, they must fry as
brands in unquenchable fire. So while they are here fulfilling their Ministry,
they are either the worthiest or unworthiest of men. A mean is scarce given;
for look what degree of goodness a thing holds while it is right, it ebbeth
into the same degree of evil when it is retrograde. The best wines make the
sharpest vinegar, and the Reprobate spirits found not a solstice betwixt the
highest heaven, and the nether most hell. It Is true, we are all unworthy ( 2
Cor. 2. 16.
(...)) if we be brought to the Standart of the Sanctuary: it is well all is
required of the best of us, either by Saint Tim. 3. 2. and Tit. 1. 7.
Paul's rule, or Luke 1. 6.
Zacharies example is to be unreproveable, sine querela, non sine peccato,
blameless, not faultlesse: Yet it is better we are not to be judged by unequal
ballancers of things, or supercilious censurers, who cannot judge of another
moat for their own beam, whereby a man may come to be irreprehensibilis, as
the vulgar translates (...) 1 Timothy 3. 2.
the word, and not irreprehensus, as Beza: but first by the esteem of a
merciful and indulgent God, and then of wise and good men who expect not
absolute Saint-ship from those who are men of the same infirmities with
themselves:

That all were good which serve at the Altar ( non opis est nostrae) is part
neither of our power, nor care: None can help us here, but only the highest
power of the sword and keys. Moses and Aaron, the diadem and the rochet, the
one by his regal and imperial scepter, the other by their pastoral and
paternall care. If God would put into the heart first of our noble King to give
Miters and Altars, as David dedicates his Psalms Excellentissimo, Iun.
vincenti, Sanctes.
(...) or as Alexander legacyed out his kingdom (...) and then inspire those
Bishops, in their ordinations 1 Timothy 5. 22.
to lay hands suddenly on no man unworthy; and in their visitations to correct
those who had unworthyed themselves; O then might the unnatural sons of our
holy mother the Church, after their so long dishonesting her, be forced to
speak in the language of Nero, touching Agrippina, Nesciebam sane me tam
pulchram matrem habere.

But indeed it is every one of us our concerment in three regards; First that
every man be his own Diocessan, empyring over his own affections, and
stewarding his gifts and graces so as he may be most serviceable to God and his
Church. Nextly, in paying down a thousand daily vows on our knees, beseeching
the Lord, even our eyes glazed with tears (why should we spend such heavenly
due one earthly trifles?) that he would pedetentins form these thing in us;
still remembering that qui pro se solo orat, solus orat. Lastly, in stirring up
our brethren, as one beacon gives warning to another, and one coal sets
another on fire: It is parable which Solomon puts in my mouth Prove. 27. 17.
as iron sharpeneth iron, so does the face of a man his friend: wherein is a
helpless amity, better then an harmless enmity.

The Conclusion.
THese are those notions (my two and all dear brothers) which have been
suggested to me; I hope by a good spirit, while I was scholying upon the
Highpriests Pectorall, and polishing the twelve stones thereof; which thing I
could wish to have been the take of some polite Ieweller indeed, but now I will
not go about either to excuse my self for what was in mine own choice to
have done, or no: neither out of a foolish modesty and affected humility, to
supererogate your good opinions by aviling and treading on ( sed majori fastu,
as he rightly) these schedules. You are my germane brethren both by nature and
function; wherefore your love will not suffer you much to censure, nor your
modesty to commend, if they should prevail with you both ad veniam, and ad
gratiam; which they will the sooner do, if you remember that I write these
things not to teach, but to persuade you; or non ut doctiores, sed ut meliores
sitis; non ut mentem acuatis, sed ut pectus instruatis. It is apology enough
which I find the books of the Macabees closed withal; If I have done well,
and as the matter required, it is the thing that I desired, but if I have
spoken slenderly and meanly, it is that I could.

What remains is equally your care and mine, to wit, to set these gemmes non
in pectoralibus, sed in pectoribus, in your breasts, not in your brest-plates,
to move you to which noble endeavor, would God I knew how best to prevail
with you, whether to put my words into the form of entreaties or commands:
whether to milk you with the blandishments of sweet words, or like Elias, to
call down for fire from heaven. I could fill my mouth with arguments. Hereby
you shall show your love to Christ the great shepherd, by feeding his sheep
and lambs; you shall gratifye your holy Mother the Church, by adding to her
daily such as must be saved; you shall make the Kingdom of heaven suffer
violence, which multitudes shall even throng and crowd for it; you shall help
many a poor soul through the grievous pains of their first birth; you shall
make glad the hearts of of Gods people, and strengthen their faith, when they
see you go as the male goat before the flock; you shall help to wash away
the disrepute which sticks to our profession by those who startle at our want
of learning or holiness; you shall live comfortably and respectedly where your
charge is, and not be troubled with the chest-worme of an accusing conscience,
which bites more grievously, because not to death. Lastly, if the worst fall
out that can fall, you shall save your own souls, your Breast Plate shall be
made into a Crown in the new Jerusalem, 1 Pet. 5. 4.
and when the chief shepherd shall appear ye shall receive an incorruptible
crown of glory: so as when your spirits sit on your lips, like a Dove ready to
take flight, and the last inch of your taper is burning, you may confidently
exspire the last purle of breath in the words of the great Doctor of the
Gentiles, 2 Timothy 4.
I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith,
henceforth is laid up for me a crown of glory, etc. then shall your souls be
wafted in a ferry of tears to heaven, and your dormitories or graves (though
they want so much as a plain tombstone) shall be as Gods Chests or Exchequer,
wherein your bones as sacred relics shall expect their resurrection.

Nomen trilingue, Virtus and Color uniuscujusque gemmae in Pectorali Sacerdotis.
I.
1. Nomen. Hebr. (...) Odhem. Grec. (...). Lat. Sarda, ^ubinus, Carneolus.
2. Virtus. Sardius ante omnes sculpturae aptissima gemma, 3. Color. A rubro
Ebraum pulvere nomen habet.
II.
1. Nomen. Heb. (...) Pitdha: Gr. (...). Lat. Topazius.
2. Virtus. Creditur infestus bili esse Topazius atrae 3. Color. Creditur atque
auro fulvior esse Quidam. n. putant hoc nomen factu^ a Graeco articulo (...),
and Ebraeo nomine (...) paz. i. aurum, quia auro similis est ^ um ob valorem,
tum ob colorem.
(...) paz.
III.
Heb. (...) Bareketh. Gt. (...). Lat. Carbunculus.
Non minus ardenti gliscit Carbunculus igne: Et color ignitus, flaminis instar,
ei est.
IV.
1. Nomen. Heb. (...) Nophech. Gr. (...). Lat. Smaragdus.
2. Virtus. Enervatque Smaragdina gemma Cupidinis arcum: 3. Color. Et viridi
visum cum lenitate juvat.
V.
1. Nomen. Heb. (...) Sappir. Gr. (...). Lat. Sapphicus.
2. Virtus. Sapphiri solo tactu Morbussc.
Carbunc'lus abibit: 3. Color. Caerulei, lapidem hunc, aetheris umbra notat.
VI.
1. Nomen. Heb. (...) Iahalom. Gr. (...). Lat. Adamas.
2. Virtus. Solvitur ac Adamas Hircino sanguine: Ferro 3. Color. Candenti
simulant, atque aliis alii.
VII.
1. Nomen. Heb. (...) Leshem. Gr. (...) Lat. Ligurium, vel potius Lyneburium.
2. Virtus. Septima gemma trahens est, quam vesica remittit 3. Color. Lyncis:
foeminei candida, fulva maris.
VIII.
1. Nomen. Heb. (...) Shebu. Gr. (...). Lat. Achates.
2. Virtus. Et variis rerum formis quafi ludit Achates; 3. Color. In varia, quo
non, iride plura vides.
IX.
1. Nomen. Heb. (...) Ahlamah. Gr. (...). Lat* Amethystus*
2. Virtus. Sic vini humores Amethystus decoquit acres: 3. Color. Purpureus,
veluti myrice tinctus, is est.
X.
1. Nomen. Heb. (...) Tarshish. Gr. (...). Lat. Beryllus.
2. Virtus. Vi quasi Collyrii sanat Beryllus ocellos 3. Color. Languentes: puro
est parque color mari.
XI.
1. Nomen. Heb. (...) Shbham. Gr. (...). Lat. Onyx, Onychium.
2. Virtus. Firmum reddit Onyx corpus, si colla pependit 3. Color. Circum,
(...), quod unguis, habens.
XII.
1. Nomen. Heb. (...) Ioshphe. Gr. (...). Lat. Iaspis.
2. Virtus. Ventriculo appendens stomachum confirmat Iaspis: 3. Color. Gemmae
hujus speciem qualibet herba refert.
FINIS.

