Hiren: OR The fair Greek: By William Barksted, one of the servants of his
Majesty's REVELS.

OVID. -- non paruas animo dat gloria vires,
Et fecunda facit pectora laudis amor.
LONDON: Printed for Roger Barnes, and are to be sold at his shop in Chancery
lane, over against the Rolls. 1611.

TO THE HEROICKE Heroes, HENRY Earl of Oxenford, Vicount Bulbeck, etc.
SIr, if my vnpolish't pen, that dedicates now
The bashful utterance of a maiden Muse,
May gracefully arrive only to you,
Which for her virgin sake, do not refuse,
Time, and more studious hours shall we vow,
To sing your virtues, which are now profuse.
Kings have drunk water from a loving hand,
And truth's accepted, though we paint her poor.
The Poets say, the Gods that can command,
Have feasted gladly on a poor man's store,
Whereby great, Sir, we have to understand,
That humble Rivers add to the sea shore.
Live long and happy, and with gray hairs crowned,
Read thy youths acts, which fame shall ever sound.
Your honors obseruant servant, WILL. BARKSTED.

The fair Greek.
1
OF. Amuraths young spleenfull son I sing,
His son, who to the Strand of Hellespont,
And to the great Sea-cost his bounds did bring,
Whose Empire so the Grecians did confront,
That even from ^indus, and Thomao Mont*
From dark Morea to Corinthian streights,
From Burgon to Hungaria's broken wing,
His Navy fetched contributary freights.
2
Young Mahomet, the wanton of her eye,
Which teaches wars, and taught his nonage days
That gave such hansell of his tyranny,
In those first battails, and apprentize says,
Which did so hotly dart their early rays,
On Sigismond, or that wherein was taken,
Philip the noble Duke of Burgondy,
With him kept prisoner, o far better slain!
3
Young Mahomet to Greece the fatal scourge,
Which thither death, and desolation brought,
Even to the fair Constantinoples veirdge,
The Grecian Empires chair, the which he sought
For which a huge digested army fought.
And at the last, distressed Constantine,
And of all Christians did the City purge,
O shame to Europes Peers, and Kings divine.
4
Let Italy take heed, the New-moone threats,
To rear his horns on Romes great Capital,
And does not Rome deserve such rough defeats,
That should be mother of compassion all?
And counite the states, and principal
In league, and love, which now for trifles jar,
The Persian Sophy shames our Christian feats,
Who with the Souldan ioynes against Turkish war.
5
Had Constantine, that three times sacred Prince,
Been rescued then by power of Christendom,
Mathias never should have craved defense,
Of Germans, English, Spanish, France, and Rome,
Taxes of war, to these climes had not come:
Nor yet the Turk with all his barbarous host,
Durst with the Catholics such war commence,
Where now they have heard their drums, and feared their host.
6
Who reads or hears the loss of that great town
Constantinople, but does wet his eyes?
Where little babes from windows were pusht down
Young Ladies blotted with adulteries,
Old fathers scourged with all base villainies?
O mourn her ruin, and bewish the Turk,
eternal deprivation of his Crown,
That durst for paganism such outrage work.
7
When Mahomet had manned the walls, the town surpised,
Great grew the slaughter, bloody waxt the fight,
Like Troy, where all was fired, and all despised,
But what stood gracious in the victors sight.
Such was the woe of this great city right:
Here lay a Saint thrown down, and here a Nun,
Rude Sarazens which no high God agnis'd,
Made all alike our woeful course to run.
8
And in this deadly dealing of stern death,
And busy dole of every Soldiers hand,
Where swords were dul'd with robbing men of breath
Whilst rape with murder, stalk't about the land,
And vengeance did perform her own command,
and where 'twas counted sin to think amiss:
There no man thought it till to do all scath,
O what does war respect of bale or bliss?
9
There stood an ancient Chapel next the Court,
Where sacred Bishops said their morrow Mass.
And sung sweet Anthems with a loud report,
To that eternal Godhead, whose son was,
Sequestered from the Trinity to pass,
Under the burden of the holy Cross,
For our redemption, whose death did retort,
The sting of Satan, and restored our loss.
10
Hither was got of silly maids some few,
Whom happily no Soldier yet had seas'd,
Tendering their spotless vows, in child-cold dew,
Of virgin tears, to have the heavens appeased
But tears too late, must be too soon displeased,
And hither, like a Tiger from the chase,
Reeking in bloody thoughts, and bloody show,
Came Amurath himself to sack the place.
11
In Armor clad, of watchet steel, full grim,
Fringed round about the sides, with twisted gold,
Spotted with shining stars unto the brim,
Which seemed to burn the sphere which did the^ hold:
His bright sword drawn, of temper good and old,
A full moon in a sable night he bore,
On painted shield, which much adorned him,
With this short Motto: Never glorious more.
12
And as a Diamond in the dark-dead night,
Cannot but point at beams on every side,
Or as the shine of Cassiopae a bright,
Which make the zodiac, where it does abide,
Far more then other planets to be eyed:
So did fair Hirens eyes encounter his,
And so her beams did terror strike his sight,
As at the first it made them vale amiss.
13
O that fair beauty in distress should fall,
For so did she, the wonder of the east,
At least, if it be wondrous fair at all,
That stains the morning, in her purple nest,
With guilt-downe cursed Tresses, rosy dressed,
Reflecting in a comet wise, admire,
To every eye whom virtue might appall.
And Siren love, inchant with amorous fire.
14
A thousand Bashawes, and a thousand more,
Of Ianizaries, crying to the spoil,
Come rushing in with him at every door,
That had not Love given Barbarism the foil,
The fair had been dishonored in this while.
But o when beauty strikes upon the heart:
What music then to every sense is bore,
All thought resigning them, to bear a part.
15
For as amongst the rest, she kneeled sad weeping,
In tender passion by an altars side,
And to a blessed Saint begins her creeping,
He stood loue-wounded, what should her betide,
Whilst she saw him turned round, and well nie died.
Let darkness shroud quoth she, my soul in night,
Before my honor be in Mahounds keeping,
Prisoner to envy, lust, and all unright.
16
O, if thou be a Soldier, lend thy sword,
To open the bosoms, where yet never lay,
Ignoble Soldier, nor imperious Lord,
Of all whom war has gripped into her sway,
Only remain we few, let not this day,
Begin with us, who never did offend,
Or else do all of us one death afford,
If not, kill me, who never was Pagans friend.
17
But now (said Mahomet) thou shall be mine,
Thine eyes have power to such a great man's heart,
If then they work on me to make me thine,
Say thou art wronged? dishonor does impart
No love, where he may force: but mine thou art,
And shall be only in thine own free choice,
What makes me speak, makes me speak thus divine
Else could I threat thee with a conquerors voice.
18
What you may do (said she) I do not know,
But know you this, there is a thousand ways,
To find out night before my shameless brow,
Shall meet that day in guilt of such misrayes,
Oh how unjust art thou? the pagan says,
To him which sues for a respecting eye,
And no ignoble action does allow,
But honor, and thy faires to gratify.
19
The effect of both is one (said she) both spils,
And lays my shame over mastred at thy feet,
But greatness (said he) does outface all ills,
And majesty (make sour appearance sweet,
Where other powers the^ greatness does cut meet?
It does indeed, said she, but we adore,
More the^ a great Earth-monarch who^ death kills,
Mortal souls, think on the immortal more,
20
Alas fair Christian Saint (said Mahomet)
So young, and full of gray hair'd purity,
These are but shifts of Friars, tales far fet.
Dearest, I Will teach thee my divinity,
Our Mecha's is not hung with Imagery,
To tell us of a virgin-bearing-sonne,
Our adoration to the Moon is set,
That pardons all that in the dark is done.
21
O blind religion, when I learn, said she)
To hallow it, my body tomb my soul,
And when I leave the mid-day-sunne for thee,
Blush Moon, the regent of the nether roll.
What I hold dearest, that my life control,
And what I prize more precious then imagery,
Heavens, grant the same my bane and ruin be,
And where I live, wish all my Tragedy.
22
A dreadful curse replide the Saracen,
But I will teach thee how to cosen it,
An oath in love may be unsworn again,
Jove marks not lovers oaths every whit,
Thou will repent beside, when riper wit
Shall make thee know the magic of thine eyes,
How fair thou art, and how esteemed of men,
It Is no religion that is too precise.
23
Nor is this all, though this might woo a Greek,
To wantonize with princely Mahomet,
Much more by loves invention could I speak,
By which the coldest temper might be heat:
But I must hence, a fitter time I Will set,
To conquer thee, Bashawes these spare or spill,
Save Mustapha this maid, since her we like,
Conduct unto our Tent, now war he will.
24
She like Cassandra thral'd and innocent,
Wrang her white hands, and tore her golden hair,
Haled by the Eunuchs to the Pagans Tent,
Speechless, and spotless, vnpittied, not vnfaire,
Whiles he to make all sure, did repair,
To every Soldier throughout the field,
And gave in charge matters of consequence,
As a good general, and a Soldier should.
25
Then sent he forth, Polidamus to bid,
The Drums and Trumpets sound that days retreit,
For in his soul their rattling noise he chid:
For startling Cupid, whose soft bosom straight,
Had lodged him, and grew proud of such a freight.
Beside the sword and fire had swept the streets,
And all did in the victors hands abide,
Night like wise came, fit time for Loves stolne-sweets.
26
Thus tumbling in conceits, he stumbled home,
In the dark couerture of shady night,
Called for a torch, the which his chamber groom,
With more then speedy haste did present light:
To bed he went, as heavy in his spright,
As love, that is full of anguish makes the mind*
Feign would he sleep away this martyrdom,
But loves eyes open, when all else are blind.
27
What do you talk of sleep? talk of the Greek,
For being laid, he now grew almost mad,
What is she not as fair (quoth he) to like,
As Phedria, whom in Corinth once I had?
With that he knocked his Eunuchs up, and bad,
One ask the Grecian maid, what was her name,
What she made there, and whom she came to see,
And to what end into his Tent she came?
28
When he was gone, somewhat the fury staid,
And beat more temperate in his liuer-vaine,
Only he could not choose but praise the maid,
Whose eyes from his such womanish drops did strain
Did not thy face (sighed he) such faires contain,
It could not be, my heart thou could distract,
But all abstracts of rarities are laid,
In thy fair cheeks so feelingly compact.
29
Thus made, what may thou not command,
In mighty Amuraths wide Empery?
My tributary love, and not my land,
Shall pay it homage to thy proud bent eye,
And they who most abhor idolatry,
Shall tender Catholic conceits to thee,
O arm not honor still for to withstand,
And make a foil of love, which dwells in me.
30
By this time was the Carpet-page returned,
And told the prince the Greek was Hiren hight,
But so she wept, and sighed, and grieved, and mourned,
As I could get no more (said he to night,
And weeps (said Amurath) my love so bright.
Hence villain* borrow wings, fly like the wind,
Her beauteous cheeks with hot tears will be burnd
Fetch her to me: o love too deaf, too blind!
31
Then crossing both his arms athwart his breast,
And sinking down, he fet a soul taught groan,
And sighed, and beat his heart, since love possessed,
And dwelt in it which was before his own.
How bitter is sweet love, that loves alone,
And is not sympathis'd, like to a man?
Rich and full crammed, with every thing that is best,
Yet lies bed-sicke, whom nothing pleasure can.
32
Sometimes he would inuoke sweet Poets dead,
In their own shapes, to court the maid with words
But then he feared least they her maiden head
Should win from him: the^ sometimes arms and swords,
His old heroike thoughts, new room affords,
And to the field he would: but then love speaks,
And tells him Hiren comes unto his bed,
Which dasheth all, and all intendments breaks.
33
And lo indeed, the purple hangings drawn,
In came fair Hiren in her night attire,
In a silk mantle, and a smock of lawne,
Her hair at length, the beams of sweet desire)
Her breasts all naked, o enchanting fire!
And silver buskins on her feet she wore,
Though all the floor with Carpet-worke was strawn
Yet were such feet too good to tread that floor.
34
Now Mahomet bethink thee what is best,
Said she, compel me I will speak thy shame,
And tell thy hateful fact, at every feast,
Singers in balads shall berime thy name,
And for dishonoring me spot thy fair fame:
But if --: No more chaste maid said Mahomet:
Though in thy grant consists all joy and rest,
I will not force thee, till thou give me it.
35
But say I languish, faint, and grow forlorn,
Fall sick, and mourn: nay pine away for thee,
Would then for ever hold me yet in scorn?
Forbid my hopes, the comfort that should be
In hopes in do^ting hopes which tire on me:
O be not as some women be, for fashion,
Like sunshine days in clouds of rain still borne,
The more you will love, the more shall grow my passion.
36
And then he clasped her frosty hand in his,
An orient pearl betwixt two mother shells,
And scaled thereon a hearty burning kiss,
Kisses in love, force more then charms or spells,
And in sweet language; hopes desires foretells,
Ah lovely Greek, what heart have thou (quoth he)
What art thou made of? fire dissolueth ye,
Tigers relent, yet thou wilt not pity me.
37
Dwel'st thou on form? I can confirm thee than,
Sibilla lives to tell she did repent.
Let Latmus speak what it of Delia can,
And it will echo her loue-languishment.
Chaste eyes sometimes reflect kind blandishment:
Beside, thy sovereign will thy subject be,
Once a great king, now a despised man,
A vassal, and a slave to Love and thee.
38
Why do thou weep? it is I should drown mine eyes
And burst my heart with languor, and despair,
I whom thy unrelenting thoughts despise,
I who can woo thee by no suit, nor prayer,
Yet doting mad for thee, o cruel fair,
I swear by this divine white daizy-hand,
The love I bear thee, in my heart it lies,
Whose searching fire, no reason can withstand.
39
Will thou be mine? here shall thou live with me,
Freed from oppression, and the Soldiers lust,
Who if thou pass my Tent, will seize on thee,
And they are rude, and what they will thou must.
O do not to the common Kestrels trust,
They are not as the Eagles noble kind,
But rough, and daring in all villainy:
Honor with me, with them scarce safety find.
40
Honor and safety, both in true love is,
And Mahomet is zealous, o love him:
With him joy every thing that tastes of bliss,
Pomp, honor, pleasure, shows, and pastimes trim,
Care dwells not where he dwells, nor sorrow grim
Only till now, that he for Hiren mournes:
A Greek whom he, would bring to paradise,
He never took thought, but now he sighs and burns.
41
Will thou be his, on thee shall wait and tend,
A train of Nymphs, and Pages by thy side,
With ^aunes, horse, coach, and music which shall lend
The spheres new notes in their harmonies pride,
When thou will walk, and publikly be eyed,
To bring thee in thy hie way, clothed with flowers
Shall sent like Tempe when the graces send,
To meet each other in those fragrant bowers.
42
At home shall comic Masks, and night disports
Conduct thee to thy pillow, and thy sheets,
And all those revels which soft love consorts,
Shall entertain thee with their sweetest sweets.
And as the warlike God with Venus meets,
And dallies with her in the Paphian grove,
Shall Mahomet in bed show thee such sports,
As none shall have, but she which is his love.
43
Again: No more again (says she) great king,
I know you can do much, and all this to,
But tell me when we loose so dear a thing,
Shame can we take pride in, in public show:
Think you the adulterate owl, then would not so?
No, no, nor state, nor honor can repure,
Dishonored sheet's, nor lend the owl days wing
Ignoble shame a King cannot recure.
44
Now say mine eyes and cheeks are fair, what then?
Why so are yours, yet do I dote on you?
Beauty is black, defamed by wicked men,
And yet must every beauty make men sue?
Too good is worse then bad, you seem too true
Too easy, passionate, loue-sicke, and kind,
Then blame not me, that cannot so soon ren
Your course: the fault is in your forward mind.
85
But say great prince, I had a wanton eye,
Would you add Syrius to the summer sun?
And whurle hot flaming fire where tow does lie
By which combustion all might be undone?
For look how mightier greater Kings do run
Amiss, the fault is more pernicious,
And opens more to shame and obloquy,
Then what we err in, or is done by us.
46
A Monarch, and a mighty Conqueror
To doat, proves every woman is his better,
But I Will be true to thee (said he: (One hour
(Said she;) but what for truth, when it is fitter
We keep our own, then have a doubtful debtor.
But I will swear, said he: So Jason did,
Replide fair Hiren, yet who faithless more,
or more inconstant to his sworn loves bed?
47
Too many mirrors have we to behold,
Of men's inconstancy, and women's shame.
How many margent notes can we unfold,
Mourning for virgins that have been too blame?
And shall I then run headlong to the flame?
I blush, but it is you should be ashamed,
For know, if that you never have been told,
Virtue may be enforced, but not defamed.
48
Fair lovely Prince, let war your triumphs be,
Go forward in the glittering course you run,
The kingly Eagle strikes through Atomie,
Those little moates that bar him from the Sun,
Then let not both of us be here undone,
You of your Conquest, I of Chastity.
And pardon my rude speech, for lo you see,
I plead for life, and who is not loath to dye?
49
Death of my fame, which often proves mortal death
Witness the Prince-forc'd chaste Lucretia,
Ere I like her be raped, o reaue my breath,
And against thy nature, take a yielding pray,
That will embrace death, before thee this day.
If thou love me, show it in killing me,
Thy sword had never yet a chaster sheath,
Nor thou, nor Mahound a worse enemy.
50
He heard nor this, nor ought of what she said,
For all his senses now were turned to eyes,
And with such fired gaze he viewed this maid,
That sure I think not Hermes mysteries,
Nor all his Caducean novelties,
That flow from him like a slye winding stream,
(To which the Gods gladly their ears have laid)
Could once have moved him from this waking dream.
51
But sighs he sends out on this embassy,
Liegers that dye ere they return again,
Poor substitutes to coape with chastity.
She knew the pleading of their Liege was vain,
And all his tears like to a Mel-dew rain,
That falls upon the flowers, to defloure.
Yet, for it was tedious, she did ask him why,
Each sigh was over him such a conqueror.
52
By heaven he swore, and made his Eunuch start,
I sigh to cool Loves fire, then kissed her hand:
For know, thou wonder of the Eastern part,
He need not counterfeite that can command:
But by thy middle, Cupids coniuring wand,
I am all love, and fair believe my vow,
Sprung from a Soldier, now a lovers heart,
He swears to love, that never loved till now.
53
Not half so fair was Hellen, thy pre'cessor,
On whom the fiery brand of Troy did dote,
For whom so many rival kings to succor,
Made many a mountain pine on Symois floate,
Whilst fame to this day, tells it with wide throat.
Hector fell wounded in that warlike stir,
Peleus did faint, Ajax that lusty warrior,
Then blame not me, that love one far above her.
54
Nature devised her own despair in thee,
Thine eye not to be matched, but by the other,
Does bear the influence of my destiny.
And where they stray, my soul must wander thither
Beauty of beauty, mother of Loves mother.
All parts he praises, coming to her lip,
Currall beneath the waves, vermilion dye,
And being so near, he would not ouerslip.
55
Now tyres the famished Eagle on his pray,
Incorporating his rude lips in hers,
Sucking her balmey breath soft as he may:
Which did more vigor, through his breast disperse,
Such kisses lovers use at first converse.
All parts were to that center drawn I wis,
Close as the dew-wormes at the break of day,
That his soul showed, as it were a melting kiss.
56
Till breathles now, he breathed into her love,
Who scorned to take possession by degrees,
No law with her strange passion, will he prove,
But having interest, scorned one inch to leese,
Cupid, she will set thee free withouten fees.
But though his wings she well nie set on fire,
And burned the shaft, that first her breast did move,
Yet Cupid would be Lord of her desire.
57
It Is said, Aurora blushes every morn,
For fear that Titan should her fault espy,
And blushes so did Hirens cheeks adorn,
Fearing least Mahomet perceived her eye.
Lovers are blind, and what could he espy.
No, it was the hidden virtue of that kiss,
That her chaste lips were nere used to beforne,
That did vnframe her, and confirm her his.
58
Lovers believe, lips are enchanted baits,
After fifteen, who kisses a fair maid,
Had need to have friends trusty of the fates,
For by my muse (I swear) I am a afraid,
He Is Iourney-man already in Loves trade.
A kiss is porter to the cave of love,
Well see, and you may enter all the gates:
" Women were made to take what they reprove.
59
A kiss is the first Tutor and instinct,
The guider to the Paphian shrine and bowers,
They who before never entered loves precinct,
Kissing shall find it, and his sundry powers.
O how it moves this continent of aires,
And makes our pulse more strong and hye to beat,
Making us know when lips are sweetly linck't,
That to those Kickshawes 'longs more dainty meat.
60
And so indeed bewitched Hiren knows,
The pressure of his lips was not in vain,
Seldom prove women friends unto their foes,
But when with over kindness they are taken,
So weak professors do swalow their own bane:
Show them the axe they will suffer martyrdom,
But if promotion to them you propose,
And flattery, then to the lure they come.
61
Thus Mahomet blinds her with Cupids veil,
And this new conuertite building on hope,
Love makes folks hardy, alas the flesh is frail,
Dispences now a little with the Pope:
And from restrictions gives her heart more scope.
O Liberty, Author of heresy.
Why with such violent wing do thou assail,
To hurry virtue to impiety.
62
No pardon will she now implore of Rome,
Her self she pardons twenty times an hour,
Nor yet an heretic her self does doom,
Since she has Mahomet within her power.
O love too sweet, in the digestion sower!
Yet was he made, as nature had agreed,
To match them both together from her womb,
And be a joyful grandam in their seed.
63
A face Nature intended for a master piece,
And lovely as the maid (though a black pearl)
Painters and women say, an Eben fleece,
Does well beseem the shoulders of an Earl:
Black snares they were, that did entrap this girl
Each hair like to a subtle serpent taught her,
Of the forbidden fruit to taste a piece,
Whilst Eve is stained again here in her daughter.
64
His eyes were stuck like Comets in his head,
As if they came to treat of novelties,
And bring the world and beauty into dread:
That he must conquer chastest chastities.
O who such tempting graces could despise,
All voluntary sins souls may refrain,
But Natures self that of the flesh is bred,
Such power she has, that vice she will retain.
65
Let me, fair Greek, a little plead for thee,
Like a vain Orator, more for applause,
And swollen commends, of those are standers by,
Then profits sake, or goodness of the cause.
If men that upon holy vows do pawse,
Have broke, alas, what shall I say of these,
The last thing thought on by the Deity,
Natures step-children, rather her disease.
66
Maid, why commit you wilful perjury?
To you I speak that vow a single life,
I must confess you are mistress of beauty:
Which beauty with your oaths is still at strife.
Then know of me, thou, widow, maid or wife,
She that is fair and vows still chaste to stand,
Shall find an opposite to constancy,
Fools Oracles last not, are writ in sand.
The end of the first Tome.
TO THE PERFECTION OF Perfection, and wisdom of Womanhood, the intelligent,
and worthily admired, ELIZABETH Countess of Darby, wife to the thrice-noble
WILLIAM Earl of Darby.
When as the skillful Statuaries make,
The image of some great and worthy one,
They still, as they intend his form to take,
Forecast the Basis he shall rest upon,
Whose firm infixe thunders nor winds can shake,
Nor Time, that Nature deads to live alone.
So (worthiest Lady) may I proudly vaunt,
(Being never guilty of that crime before)
That to this Lay, which I so rudely chaunt,
Your divine self, which Dian does adore,
As her maids her, I have select to daunt
Envy: as violent as these named before.
Virtue and beauty both with you enjoy.
Gorgon and Hydra (all but death) destroy.
Your honors from youth obliged, WILL. BARKSTED.

The second Tome.
67
LOng did this beauteous martyr keep her faith,
Thinking that Mahomet was full of error:
Treading that high celestial milkie path,
Virginity, that did produce hels terror,
Yet knowing love in Princes turns to wrath,
She means to catch his fancies with her cunning:
But so resistlesse is this Princes feruor,
Though he imprison love, still fears his cunning.
68
For like a Castle seated on a rock,
Besieged by thousands danger each way spread,
That had withstood the battery of wars shock:
The living making bulwarks of the dead.
So did this Virgins thoughts to her heart flock,
Wiuing her danger, when her powers were lost:
Hyrena will yield up her maiden head,
A gift to make love proud, or silence bost.
69
He gently woes her with the misers God,
The Indians ignorance, and virtues slave,
Bright flaming gold, for where that has abode,
All doors flies open to the wish we crave.
Gold is man's mercy, and his makers rod,
She loves the King for honor and for riches,
He makes her eyes his heaven, her lap his grave,
A woman's face often Majesty's bewitches.
70
When news is brought him that his foes are come,
He catches strait this maiden in his arms,
Calling for music that is now his drum:
I Will keep thee safe (quoth he) for other harms,
Tho spoke in thunder they to me are dumb.
To counsel now they call him with low duty,
But her Idea so his senses charms,
He drownes all speech in praising of her beauty.
71
One tells him that the Christians are in field.
You do not mark her beauty, he replies.
Two mighty Cities to their power does yield:
Note but the luster sparkling from her eyes.
Your subjects hearts, against your life are steeld:
Her tongue is music, that strikes wonder dumb.
Your people struck with war by millions dies:
If she but frown then I shall overcome.
72
Shall I fear this worlds loss enjoying heaven,
Or think of danger when an Angel guards me?
Can greater glory to my life be given,
Then her maiesticke beauty that rewards me?
Nay is not he of happiness bereaved,
That never saw her face nor heard her voice,
And those that win our love, or most regards me,
Confess that we are godlike in our choice.
73
He left his Ianisaries in a trance,
And to her private chamber strait enioyes,
His blood within his azure veins does dance:
In love the effects are seen before the cause:
For nectar'd kisses and a smile by chance,
Are but love branches, though they grow up first,
And Cupid thus confines us in his laws,
To taste the fountain ere we quench our thirst.
74
Night like a Princes palace full of light,
Illumined all the earth with golden stars,
Here Art crossed Nature, making day of night:
And Mahomet prepares him for loves wars.
A banquet is ordained to feed delight,
Of his Imperial bounty with expenses:
A heaven on earth he presently prepares,
To ravish in one hour all her senses.
75
Her eyes could glance no way but saw a jewel,
As rich as Cleopatra gave her love.
Pictures have power to warm ice with loves fuel.
The gentle treading of the Turtle-doue,
The Camels lust that in his heat is cruel:
And Jupiter transformed from a man,
When with his breast the silver stream did move,
And ravish Leda like a snowy Swan.
76
The table furnished, to delight the taste,
With food above Ambrosia divine,
Such as would help consumptions that did wast:
The life blood, or the marrow, Greekish wine,
So high one draught would make Dian unchaste.
Nectar is water to this banquets drink,
Here Aesculapius did his art resign,
And pleasure drowned with standing on the brink.
77
To please her hearing Eunuchs sang as shrill,
As if that nature had dismembered them,
All birds that echoes music through the bill,
Sang joy to her in an vndittied antheme:
An artificial heaven stands open still,
Filling the roof with a sweet unknown noise,
Down falls a clowd like a rich diadem,
And shows a hundred naked singing boys.
78
The sense of smelling with all rare devises,
That rich Arabia or the world can yield,
The dew of Roses and choice Indian spices,
The purest of the garden and the field.
The earth to part with these rare gifts now nises,
And vows no more her nature so profuse,
Shall let her sweets be from her breast distild,
To feed their vanity with her abuse.
79
Then in a rich imbroidred bed of down,
Plucked from the constant Turtles fethered breast,
Upon her head he set imperial crown,
And to her goes: Now is his soul at rest.
This night he counts the end of his renown,
The sense of feeling, she feels by his power,
And like a subject yields to his request,
Whilst Mahomet a virgin does deflower.
80
Now fears this flower deflowered his love will waine,
Wishing the lustful act had bin undone,
The pleasure cannot counteruaile the pain,
For still she thinks with torment joy is won,
His love grows full, she gets it now with gain:
He like a ring of gold insets his jewel,
But fearing of his force she should disdain,
Till sighs and kisses did inflame Loves fuel.
81
Then like the God of War, caught in a net,
He twined his Venus, danger was not nigh,
And as a Diamond compared with Iet,,
So showed her sparkling eye against his eye.
The sunne-gaz'd Eagle now this done does get,
And gently gripes her, hurting not his pray,
She sounds with pleasure, second sweets are high
And wishes Phoebus blind all night, no day.
82
The red-cheek't morning opens now her gate,
And busy day breathes life into the world,
The heavens great coachman mounted is in state,
And darkness from the air to hell is hurld.
Now pleasures king by day light sees his mate,
Whilst she lay blushing like the damask rose,
His ietty hair she with her fingers curld,
He hugged her fast, least he his joys should lose.
83
Her fight begot in him a new desire,
For that is restless always in extremes,
Naught but saciety can quench loves fire.
Now through the crystal caseme^t Phoebus beams
Dazzled those twinkling stars that did aspire,
To gaze upon his brightness being a lover.
Tasting her petulans in waking dreams,
To hide her from the sun, he does her cover.
84
Then sweet breathed music, like the chime of spheres,
Did ravish pleasure, till this pair did rise:
More wonder then that sound was to men ears
Was her rare beauty to the gazers eyes.
Joy was so violent, the rocks it tears,
The noise and triumphs beats upon the air,
And like ambition pierces through the skies,
That Jove loo'kt down on her that was so rare.
85
Thus Mahomet both day and night does spend,
In observation of her eyes and pleasure,
Growing so jealous, least he should offend,
His souls perfection, natures unspent treasure.
If she but speak to him, he low does bend,
And such a servitude he does discover.
Neglecting of himself in that gross measure,
That Hiren clips her slave, no Emperor.
86
Her chamber is her prison (O most willing)
And there like house-doues they each other woo
At first she will shun him, after fall a billing,
And with imagination make him do.
Thy eyes quoth Mahomet, saues thousands killing
For all my force upon thee shall be spent,
Thy wars directions I do best allow,
Thy Arms my Armor, and thy bed my Tent.
87
Who does offend this paramour, straight dies,
As certainly, as if pronounced by fate,
Who does with duty please her, needs must rise,
Her face directs both his love and hate.
The grosest flatterer is held most wise.
Now reigns swollen gluttony, red lust, and pride:
For when the heart's corrupted in a state,
Needs must the other parts be putrifide.
88
The commons like wolves, bark against the moon
And swear they will depose him from his throne:
The Nobles whisper, and intend, that soon.
Some one shall let their grief to him be known.
To escape that office now is each man's boon,
Who speaks against her whets a fatal knife,
For he replies, I loose but what is mine own,
As sure as we have life, you loose that life.
89
They stand amazed, by hearing their own fears
Each viewing other with a face extracted:
Some praying, cursing, other shedding tears,
To see a Lover by a Soldier acted.
Patience does fool us that so long forbeares,
To tell our Emperor he is turned a monster,
And to such ease and vices so contracted.
The world, his birth, and titles does mis-conster.
90
Then Musstapha, beloved of the Turk,
Stood up, and said, I hazard will my head,
Know Countrymen, I Will undertake this work,
And if I fall, lament me being dead.
No flattery within this breast shall lurk:
For that to Princes ears is now grown common
Whilst Mahomet to have his pleasure fed,
Does loose the worlds sway for a fickle woman.
91
Unto her private chamber! straight he goes,
And finds his sovereign sleeping on her lap,
On sudden wakes him: Sir, here are your foes,
The sound amazed him like a thunderclap:
Although you sleep, awak't are all our woes.
The frantic Emperor upon him stares,
Relate in brief the worst of our mishap,
Man cannot wrong us, when a God not dares.
92
This danger Mehomet, attends thy reign,
The Gods are angry with thy lustful ease,
Thy private pleasure is the Empires pain,
To please your self you all the world displease:
The Sophy, German, and the King of Spain,
Begirt they safety with the ribs of death.
Then worthy Prince, your wonted valor cease,
And take my counsel, though it cost my breath.
93
You are but the shadow of an Emperor,
Not really effecting what you are,
A slothful Epicure, a puling lover,
That now en'e trembles at the name of war,
Oblivion all thy former acts do cover,
Most willing to remove you I will dye,
The sun of honor now is scarce a star,
Virtue at first was sire to Majesty.
94
The Emperor upon his subject stares,
As if a Gorgons head he there had seen,
How comes it vassal, that thy proud tongue dares,
Speak to remove me from this heavenly queen?
The gods would live on earth, to have their shares
In my Hirena: Sir, you want nurture:
Thy life I will not touch now in my spleen,
But in cold blood it shall depart with torture.
95
I fear not death, replied bold Mustapha,
At your command I Will clime a steepy rock,
Then headlong tumble down into the sea,
Or willingly submit me to the block,
Disrobe my nature, and my body flea:
Yet in that tyranny I Will speak my mind,
And boldly like a Soldier stand deaths shocke,
Concluding, lust can strike the Eagle blind.
96
His haughty words amazed this king of love,
Thou were not wont to speak thus without duty.
Can her embraces so my soul remove?
And must he be a coward dotes on beauty?
Such rarity of pleasure I do prove,
In her enjoying, that my soul is fed,
With that variety, to speak her truly,
Each night she gives me a new maidenhead.
97
Yet shall my subjects know my power in this,
That I can rule mine own affection:
I pardon freely what thou speak amiss,
Knowing it sprung from love, and thy subjection:
Your eyes shall see me rob the earth of bliss,
A sight too sad, all heaven strike men with terror,
And in that act cast such reflection.
That kings shall see themselves in me their mirror.
98
Go, tell my Bashaes, and the noble blood,
I do inuit them to a royal dinner,
And there I Will show them love can be withstood:
Yet he that wrongs my Greek is such a sinner,
He cannot cleanse himself, washed in loves flood.
Fortune this fate upon my love has hurld,
The Monarkes of the earth in hope to win her,
Against her beauty would stake all the world.
99
Leave us: and be thou comforted my fair,
I will advance thee bou'e the style of woman:
Let not my words bring thee unto despair,
Thou shall embrace the Gods, for here is no man
Worthy to taste thy sweetes, they are so rare.
Drawn by the Phoenix thou through heaven shall ride
And Saturn wounded by loves little bowman
Shall get his son to have thee stellifide.
100
Go deck thy beauty with heavens ornament,
Shine Cinthia like with jewels in the night,
As she with stars stuck in heavens firmament;
But thine, the greater will deface her light,
Making her yield to thee her government.
On Saturnes top thy face shall gain opinion,
Beyond cold Phoebe shining out so bright,
Thou shall be courted by her love Endimion.
101
Let joy possess thy heart, and be thou proud,
In sight of all the Turkish Emperors Pears,
Let not thy sun of beauty in a cloud,
Be hid from those, whose eyes with deawy tears,
For want of thy pure heat in shades do shroud,
Their drooping forheads, but thy beams exhales
All misty vapors, and the welkin cleares,
Like putrefying lightning, or Jove's balls.
100
Then hand in hand they pass out of the room,
Her beauty like a blazing star admired,
Well may I term it so, it showed the doom,
Of her lives date that instant was expired.
Now to the presence chamber they are come,
Where all in reverence kiss the humble earth,
Here nature took her own, and death has hired,
To give that back again, which she gave birth.
103
Now stands in the midst, and thus begins,
(Taking the fair Hirena by the hand:)
Which of you here, that such a creature wins,
Would part with her, for honor, love, or land?
The gods were envious when they made those sins
Which are th crowns of this frail worlds content,
Nor can it with their humane reason stand,
To think our joys begets our punishment.
104
View but her hand, her lip, her brow, her eyes,
The smalnesse of her waste, and comely stature,
And let your judgment bou'e your hatred rise,
The^ you must needs confess, she excels in feature.
That you are only fools, I truly wise,
Do not her presence admiration strike,
And broken is her frame by angry nature,
For fear she wrongs herself, and make the like,
105
What man that having toild in hidden Art,
Spent all his youth, and substance to the bone,
All books and knowledge in the deepest part,
To find that Phoenix, that gold-getting stone,
And having it, to comfort his weak heart,
Shall he his servants, wife, or friends to please,
With his own eyes go see that jewel thrown,
Into the bottomless and gaping seas.
106
Or which of you can have the fortitude,
to lop a limb off, or pull out an eye,
Or being in a heavenly servitude,
To free your selves would with the damned lie?
Offorce with me you now must all conclude,
That mortal men are subject to loves rod,
But here you shall perceive that only I,
Am natures conqueror, and a perfect God.
107
Then with a smiling look, he came unto her,
And kissed her, bad her pray, and then he smiled,
I must not in my constancy now err,
Since by mine own tongue I a God am sti'ld.
He draws a fatal Turkish Simiter,
With it he parts her body from her head.
And though his tyranny did prove so vile,
She seemed to mock him smiling being dead.
108
Until he took it in his bloody power,
And then a crimson flood gusht out a pace,
The favor changed from smiling, and looked sower.
And senceles tears ran trickling down her face,
As who should say, I thought within this hour,
For me thou would have opposed heaven with strife,
That earthly being is like falling glass,
To thee I lost virginity and life.
109
Long stood he mute, and gazed upon her form,
Till Mustapha came in to play his part,
His eyes shot lightning like a horrid storm,
The^ with his fauchion runs him through the heart,
O could this devil my soul so tranforme,
That I must eat that snake in him did lurk,
But this is hels instruction, the black Art.
To give our sins the means by which they work.
110
O my Hirena, Mahomet then cries,
Look through the orbs, and see an Emperor sad
Detain her not you rulers in the skies,
But send her once more, to make Monarkes glad.
My soul to thine like Tartars shaft now flies,
They held his arm, or else he had done the deed
This mighty Mahomet with love grown mad,
Can nothing ease you, but your heart must bleed.
111
Where is that Godhead due unto your birth,
Descended from the Prophet Mahomet,
Recall your spirits to their former mirth,
And keep your color constant like the Iet,
Now show your fortitude, be God on earth,
Marshall your men, give ear unto your Drum,
And let your valor with the sun being set,
With the resplendancy burn Christendom.
112
Awake dull mate, and leave this trance,
Be perfect man, as thou have here thy being,
Not subject unto passion or chance;
But like thy self, with Kingly thoughts agree,
Our silver moon to heaven we will advance,
And Christendom shall mourn for Hirens fall,
That heathen Princes our brave acts seeing,
Shall yield the world to us, we king of all.
113
And for my loves unkindly Tragedy,
A thousand Cities for her death shall mourn,
And as a relicke to posterity,
Our priests shall keep her ashes in their vrne,
And fame to future times with memory,
Shall sound ber glory, and my loves effects,
For, till this universal Mass does burn,
Her beauty rests the wonder of her sex.
114
Now order my affairs for bloody war,
For here I vow this love shall be my last,
No more shall downy pleasure, like a bar,
Stop my designs that now at honor gast,
Shoot prophet on my forhead a blessed star,
A Tigers fierceness, and my heart shall move,
Because with Hiren all affections past,
I Will pity none, for pity be gets love.
FINIS.

