NAZARETH AND BETHLEHEM, OR, ISREAL'S PORTION IN THE SON OF IESSE. AND,
MANKINDS COMFORT FROM THE WEAKER SEX. TWO SERMONS PREACHED IN St Maryes
Church in Oxford. BY THOMAS IACKSON, Bachelour of Divinity, and Fellow of
Corpus Christi College in Oxford.

1. TIM. 3.16. Without controversy, great is the mystery of godliness: God is
manifest in the flesh. AT OXFORD, Printed by John Lichfield, and william
Wrench. 1617.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND Father in God, and my very good Lord, JAMES, by divine
providence Lord Bishop of Winchester T. J. wishes all Grace and Happiness.
RIGHT REVEREND And HONORABLE,
SInce it has pleased such as have hitherto been spectators, as well of my
weakness, as of my industry in the Ministry, to pardon the one for the others
sake; it is, and ever shall be my care, to have your Lordship, (under whose
patronage, as Honorable Successor to my worthy Founder, I now enjoy the
continuance of former opportunities) no witness of my sloth, or idleness. Yet
these papers I produce not, either in testimony of my pains, which in so
little a work cannot be great; or as a proof of my diligence in polishing
what hereafter I mean to set forth. Rather out of indulgence to my bodily
indisposition, and diligent fore cast how long my iourny is like to be, I have
begun after such a manner, as by Gods assistance, and your Lordships wonted
countenance, I may hope to continue. To leave some fuller explication, then I
have found, of the admirable consonancie between ancient praesignifications,
whether prophetical, typical, or historical, and Evangelicall relations,
concerning our Saviors conception, his birth, his baptism, passion,
resurrection, and ascension (or other like parts of his humiliation, and
exaltation) is the point, whereto my studies have been consecrated, and my
observations principally directed, since I undertook the ministry. And in
this respect, I may truly call my meditations in this kind, the first fruits of
all my labors. Now of this crop, which, with reference to my poor harvest, is
like to be very great, as much at least as all the rest, and as I trust most
acceptable to my God; I have brought this little Sheafe unto your Lordship,
humbly desiring that you would vouchsafe to offer it up unto Him, by whose only
blessing all the rest must be sanctified. Thus omitting longer preface, until
I may fit it with a larger work, I humbly commend your Lordship to the
gracious protection of our Heavenly Father, and this slender pledge of my most
entire observance to your benign acceptance.

From my study in CORPUS CHRISTI COLLEGE in Oxford: September. 6. 1617. Your
Honors, in all duty and service to be commanded, THOMAS JACKSON.

JEREMIAH 31. VER. 21.22. Turn again O Virgin of Israel, turn again to
these thy cities. How long will thou go astray O thou rebellious daughter? For
the Lord has created a new thing in the earth, a woman shall compass a man.
1 IT is the observation of a most ancient Father. Irenem.
Omnis Prophetia priusqua^ impleatur aenigma est. Every prophecy before it be
fulfilled is a riddle. And amongst prophecies the latter part of this Text not
the least aenigmatical. For our better understanding the true meaning of these
words in themselves, their coherence with the former, and my Prophets drift or
scope in all: may it please you (Men, Fathers, and Brethren) to consider the
time was now come, wherein the Lord had put Judah also out of his sight, and
cast of Jerusalem the city which he had chosen. Benjamin was become Ben-oni, a
son of sorrow unto his mother. Chap. 31. verse. 15.
For a voice was heard in Ramah mourning and bitter weeping, Rahel weeping for
her children refused to be comforted because they were not, in the land of her
burial and their fathers birth. But the Lord always more tender and
compassionate toward his chidren, then a woman toward the children of her
womb, yea then tender hearted Rahel her self toward her dearest son, whose
birth had cost her life, in the midst, yea even in the first beginning of these
his judgments remembers mercy. He now sends Judah into captivity after
Israel, but as a second arrow to find out a former lost. And Benjamin must
go, though as sore against his own will into Chaldaea, as he had done
sometimes against his Fathers into Egypt; yet in the Almighties determination
as well now as then to redeem his brother from that thraldom, wherein he had
been long detained. For the Lord had put up Ephraims lamentation, with Rahels
tears for Benjamin, disirous, as he himself in the verses following protests,
to prepare one and the same medicine for both their maladies. Chap. 31. verse.
18.
Refrain thy voice from weeping Rahel, and thine eyes from tears, for thy
work shall be rewarded, says the Lord. And they shall come again from the
land of the enemy: and there is hope in thine end, says the Lord, that thy
children shall come again to their own borders. I have heard Ephraim bemoaning
himself thus, thou had corrected me, and I was chastised, etc.

2 But as Ephraims intemperancie had been greater, more wilful, and of longer
continuance, then Iudahs or Beniamins had been, to his recoverie was now more
difficult, and put his heavenly physician to a greater plunge then when it
enforced him to cry out, Hos. 6. v. 4.
O Ephraim what shall I do unto thee? He was become as a man whose nature is
so far spent that no physic can be safely administered to him. Long
calamity and distress brings oftimes the souls of Gods children so far out
of rast with his sweetest mercies, that they loath their very proffer no less
then sick men do the sight of meat. Judges 6. ver. 12.
The Lord is with thee thou valiant man, says the Angel of the Lord to Gedeon:
But he replies. Ah my Lord, if the Lord be with us, why then is all this come
upon us? and where be all his miracles, which our fathers told us of and said.
Did not the Lord bring us out of Egypt? but now the Lord has forsaken us, and
delivered us into the hands of the Midianites. More wayward and diffident, my
Prophet fore saw, Ephraim or Israel, for the most part, would be. The best of
them albeit they mistrust not the truth of Gods promises unto Abraham; yet
doubt whether theirs and their fathers sins have not forfaited their interest
in the^. If they acknowledge Gods summons for Iudahs return and theirs to be
the same, yet with old Anchises in like case, they find a difference in their
estates, -- Virg. Aen. 2.
Vos o quibus integer aeui
Sanguis ait soliaaeque suo stant robore vires
Vos agitate fugam. --


Such as bad fresh and lively spirits to weild their strong and able limbs,
seeing their arms could not defend their country from the violence of their
enemies, might use the benefit of their legs to escape their burial in her
ruins. Me si caelicole volnissent ducere vitam,
Has mihi servassent seeds.
But sure, if the Gods intended Anchises any longer lease of his life, they
would allow house-rome to his aged bones in Troy. Thus why Judah and Benjamin
should return unto their borders, distrustful Ephraim could conceive these or
like reasons. The time of their captivity is not set so long* but many which
have seen Jerusalem in her glory, may live to see the Ier. 30. v. 18.
city built up upon her own heap, and her palaces remaining after their
wonted manner. Verse. 21.
Their children shall be as aforetime, their noble ruler shall be of
themselves, their governor shall proceed from among them. But as for Ephraim,
our fathers said it in their have and fury, and we their posterity must for
ever be bound unto the bargain. 1. Kings, chapter 12. verse. 16.
What portion have we in David? we have no inheritance in the son of Iesse.
Many of his goodly stemms, now planted by the palms of Babel, may take root
again in their native soil, and be as a shelter to the tender graffes that
must sprout out of the lower shrubs of Judah: but he that shall look upon the
remediless spoil and wast, long since made throughout all the mountains of
Samariah; will he not take up his parable and say, Ephraim is as a wood
destroyed, wherein is never a Samplar left? The youngest sprig that was removed
thence, is now doated or withered with Eld in a strange and wearyish soil. How
many of our fathers, which had never seen the light in the land of their
conception, being brought captives hither in the womb, have we seen, (after
their sight had failed them, for very age and long expectation of return)
enclosed in the bowels of a foreign earth; yet now no more a stepmother to us
their children that are left behind. An hundred years are past and gone, since
our fathers were rooted out of their native land, and seaventie more are yet to
come before our promised deliverance be accomplished. And what comfort can it
be to any of Ephraims race, to return after so long time, into the land of
Israel, now as strange and uncouth unto us, as Media and Assyria were to our
fathers.

3 That Ephraim was thus affected, the issue did too well prove; for few, if
any of this tribe did return with the captivity of Sion, and such of them as
afterward returned; did, for the most part, inhabit Galilie, or regions
allotted to other tribes. This backwardness, whether general in Israel, or
more particular in Ephraim, was portended in the ominous character of this
prophecy: wherein that God, which was a loving father to all the sons of
Abraham, appears more anxious and sollicitous for Ephraim, then for Judah and
Benjamin, whose return from captivity was more speedy and entire. And my
Prophet from foreknowledge of this distrustful temper in Ephraim, makes trial
of so many courses to make him relish Gods promises, which he condites of
purpose for his palate in sweetest terms of dearest love; sometimes
entreating him under the name of Ephraim, sometimes under the name of Israel,
as if he would try whether the one were not more luckie then the other.
Sometimes wooing him with fairest promises of gracious favors to come. Ier.
31. v. 4.
I will build thee and thou shall be builded o virgin Israel: thou shall still
be adorned with thy timbrels, and go forth in the daunces of them that be
joyful. Thou shall yet plant vines upon the mountains of Samaria, and the
planters that plant them shall make them common. Sometimes recounting his
former kindness. Ver. 9. Why Ephraim is called Gods first. borne.
I am a father to Israel, and Ephraim is my first borne: for when I shared
Rubens dignity amongst his brethren, did I not so esteem of Ephraim? Levi had
his priesthood, and Judah his kingdom; but the double portion was reserved for
Joseph: and the lot, whose disposition belongs to me, fell to Ephraim, though
the younger brother; in the fairer and larger ground. Sometimes again, like a
pensive father jealous of every occasion that might scarre a fugitive, wild
untamed son from approaching his presence, he protests his sorrow for his
severe chastisements past. Ier. 31. v. 20.
Is Ephraim my dear son? is he my pleasant child? Should I tell him so, his
bitter correction would not suffer him to believe it. Yet since I spoke unto
him, I still remembered him, my bowels are troubled for him. I will surely have
mercy on him, says the Lord. If the difficulty of the way deter thee, thou
shall not wander as thy fathers did in the wilderness: whiles the paths by
which the spoilers led thee are in fresh memory, Verse. 21.
set thee up way-markes, and make thee high heaps for thy direction, and set
thine heart toward the pathway that thou have walked. Thy return shall be as
quick and speedy as thy departure. Or if the mountains of Ephraim be
polluted, Tabor and Hermon are not so. Zabulon and Nepthalim must yet see a
wondrous light. Let Ephraim, if he loath his own inheritance as unclean,
take possession among his brethren; or in case he linger behind, as disdaining
that Judah should be his leader, let not his bad example entice the other
sons of Jacob to draw back, as it sometimes did them to revolt from David.
Turn again O virgin Israel (for thou shall no more be obbraided with the
adulteries of Samariah) turn again to these thy cities my beloved daughter,
my pleasant child only refractorie and rebellious in this, that thou will not
hasten thy retire, when as the Lord has purposed to create a new thing in thy
territory, there the woman shall incompasse the man. This is the vpshot of all
my Prophets sweet and patheticall invitations of Israel to return from
captivity. This new and strange event of a woman incompassing a man is as a
peerless garland, profferd, first to Ephraim as the head of his brethren, or
in the second place, unto such of the ten Tribes as would be most forward to
undertake the course. We must needs then with venerable antiquity, and some
most Pomeranus.
ancient reformers of the religion, which we profess, acknowledge some
extraordinary matter to be here promised. Howsoever sundry learned
interpreters of latter times seem not to account it such: but as if they had
begone to slumber, when they came to the words of my text, (disposed to take a
nap with my Prophet, or with him of whom he spoke v. 26. Upon this I awaked and
beheld, and my sleep was sweet unto me) they pass over this mystery as in a
dream.

4 For the right unfolding whereof, four words there be in the original of
remarkable use, and we may well dispense with ordinary translations, for not
fully expressing them, when as many learned Commentators otherwise very skilful
in the Hebrew, scarce deigne to take notice of their true and proper
grammatical value, much less of their prophetical references or importances.
The first (...) translated as you have heard, in the earth, which phrase in our
English is usually as much as if he had said, in orb terraru^, in the world;
whereas by the circumstances of the place, and consonancie to the Hebrew
dialect (most frequent in prophetical writings) it must be restrained unto
that part of the earth, whereunto he sollicits these Israelites, return. I
create a new thing in the land, to wit, of Israel, or the kingdom of Ephraim,
as it is opposed unto the two other Tribes: as Pomeranus has learnedly
observed. The second original word is here rendered (as well as conveniently it
could be in one word) by woman: yet is it not (...) or (...) but (...) as if he
had said, THE FEMALE SHALL COMPASS THE MALE; though some what more be
included in the word (...) then a male, or man.

5 The sacred mystery of this speech may best appear by comparing this new
creation of the second Adam in the Virgins womb, with the creation of the
first woman in Adam: with reference whereunto this is called a new creation,
wherein the order of the former is inverted. It is said Genes. 1. Genesis 1.27.
In his image created he him, he created them male and female. The reason of
which aenigmaticall speech (whence Plato, as I think, took his fable of
Androgyni) is because Moses there speaks of Adams creation only, in whom
notwithstanding Eve was in a sort created or enclosed as bone of his bone, and
flesh of his flesh: He speaks of him in both numbers, as of vnum actu, which
was potentia plura. The like manner of speech he uses in the first verse. In
the beginning God created the heaven, and the earth. Yet neither, was then
distinctly created but the mass, whence both were afterward distinguished as
it were into male and female: that is, into such heavens, as now are the
agents, and such an earth, as now is the mother, whence all earthly creatures
are produced. In this new creation the Lord encloseth not Zakor Ish or Adam,
not masculus only but Gever (i) vir fortis, the valiant or strong man, the
grand heroicke of the world, in the female or weaker vessel. The female shall
incompasse the male, not after the usual manner of childrens enclosure in the
womb, but as Evah was enclosed in Adam, or as the shell encloseth the kernel;
whose first root of existence is from within, not from without; whose enclosure
every way is entire, never opened to receive what it encloseth, but only to
have it taken forth. This, I take it, is the natural and true meaning of these
words in this subject, whereof we speak, considered, with such references as
have been specified.

6 Our small acquaintance, whether with the peculiar signs of these ancient
times, or with many common prenotions (concerning the manner of Messiahs birth
or conception) which either my Prophet might presuppose as sufficiently known
to them for whose good he wrote, or this prophecy occasion their successors
to enquire after against the time appointed, will not suffer us to apprehend,
either the appositenesse, or efficacy of these brief persuasions, so fully as
the observant Israelites, before, or about our Saviors coming might easily
have done. Yet, if we may guess at the force of his argument, by such
references and circumstances, as have left some print behind them in the
revolutions of times unfolding this prediction, which he had wrapped up in
aenigmaticall generalities, it is more fully thus.

Do thou therefore stand off, and disdain thy return to these thy cities, O
thou Virgin, but haughty and rebellious Israel because the glory of Shiloes
birth shall be thy sister Iudahs and not thine? Does it greiue thee that
Bethlem Ephratah sometimes so little amongst the thousands of Judah, should now
overtop the chief cities of Samaria? A Prophet from the mouth of the Lord has
said it, and it must of necessity come to pass, Micah. 5. v. 2.
that out of Bethlem, he shall come forth that shall bear rule in Israel; whose
goings forth have been from the beginning, and from everlasting. Ephratah it
was rightly called of old, and it happily height Bethlem since, ordein'd from
eternity to bring forth the bread of life: but neither has Israel born
Ephraims name for naught. Fruitfulness also is with thee. These thy Cities,
though little and barren in thy sight, are not forsaken of thy God: thou have
likewise a Prophets word for thy assurance, that albeit Judah must bring him
forth, yet Israel shall be the land of his conception, of whose kingdom there
shall be no end. Account it not blind chance but thy good hap, that thy name is
first mentioned in the reestablishing of my ancient grant. Ier. 33. verse. 14.15.
Behold the days come (says the Lord) that I will perform that good thing
which I have promised unto the house of Israel, and to the house of Judah. In
those days and at that time will I cause the branch of Righteousness to grow
up unto David, and he shall execute judgment and righteousness in the land,
Ierem. 33. v. 14, 15. Search the Prophets at the time appointed, and it shall
be showed thee, that whilst one of them made this glorious promise, in my name,
to Bethlem, Esa. 11. v. 1.
another (no enemy to the house of Judah) did foretell thy fathers, that the
root of Iesse should recover his sap, and give first beginning of life to the
branch of Righteousness, within thy borders. Though by birth he must be a
Bethlemite, and of David's lineage, yet the name by which he must be best known
shall be taken from one of thy Cities, wherein Esa. 53. v. 2.
being first conceived, he shall grow up as a branch out of a decayed trunk,
or as a root out of a dry ground, not as a young plant from the live seed of a
former tree: That this place of his conception is not so clearly named by
Isaiah, as the place of his birth by Micah; does this dismay thee? The greater
secrecy is a sign of a greater mystery. I know thee of old, thou art coy,
thou art strange, and must be wooed with rarities and new wonderments. And
what wonder since the world began has been heard of like to this new thing
which I create in these thy Cities, that a woman (without the consort of man)
should enclose him in her womb, whose outgoings have been from everlasting.
The creation of heaven and earth may in comparison of this new creation be held
stale and trivial.

7 Of this Aenigma in my text, and that other forementioned Chap. 33. we may
say as Joseph did of Pharaohs dreams both are one. So is that nurserie of
mysteries Isaiah, 11. v. 1. wherein the place of his conception and education
is secretly named: and the like Isaiah. 53. of a root growing up out of a dry
ground. This metaphor of the root, as also the emphasis of that speech
delivered in Gods own person: I will cause the branch of righteousness to
grow up, aenigmatically fore-shadowe, Ier. 33. v. 15.
that this grouth should not be by ordinary generation, but by Creation; that
as trees and plants in the first creation did merely grow up out of their
mother earth, without seed precedent; so should this branch of Righteousness,
this root of Life, take his whole substance from his earthly mother by the sole
immediate power of his heavenly father.

Thus much of the coherence of these words with the former, the true meaning of
this aenigma, and of the Prophets drift and scope in this place: which is to
assure Ephraim or Israel that he should share with Judah in the glory of their
Messiah, as after he did in his conception and education. It remains that we
prosecute the manner how this prophecy was fulfilled in the mystery of our
Saviors conception, and other such accidents as fell out in Israel, well
deserving their speedy return.

8 The Jewish Rabbis have a tradition, that God before he made this great
world, did try his skill in making many lesser. But this, I am sure, you al
detest as a fable in it self most impious, because it impeacheth Gods
omnipotency: most frivolous, because prejudicial to his wisdom, which
works all things for testification of his glory, or confirmation of his
creatures faith; neither of which could have any place before men and Angels
were created. But it is a point well fitting our meditations at this season, to
consider how the Lord in sundry ages, since the first promise of man's
redemption by the woman's seed, did give illustrious documents as of his power,
so of his purpose to effect this NEW CREATION: delighting to raise strength out
of weakness, and by known effects of this nature, to purchase unto himself
that title (often inserted amongst his most glorious attributes) of making the
barren womb to bear, and become a joyful mother of children. He foresaw as
his Prophet Isaias complains, with what difficulty the world would believe
his Prophets reports of their Messiah growing up as a branch out of a dry
ground: and for this purpose he sought by famous experiments of their
conceptions, that were most lively types of Him, to train up his peoples
hearts to firm belief of his future strange miraculous conception.

Genesis 18. v. 10
9 I will come unto thee (says the Angel of the Lord to Abraham) according to
the time of life, and lo Sarah thy wife shall have a son; This message
seemed so strange to Sarah, who overheard it, that she shows by her laughing
how glad she could be if it might be so, rather then apprehend any
probability that so it should be. Hence the Angel reproues her slownesse to
believe. Shall any thing be hard to the Lord? Verse. 14.
And as if it had been a matter of greater difficulty to rowse her dull faith,
then to quicken her dead womb, he reiterates his message again, At the time
appointed I will return unto thee, even according to the time of life, and
Sarah shall have a son. This strange work of the Lord once accomplished, was
to be as a perpetual sign for confirmation of his peoples faith in the
expectation of a far stranger, in due time to be effected. For this use
Isaiah made of it. Esa. 51. v. 2.
Hear me, ye that follow after righteousness, and ye that seek the Lord,
look unto the rock whence ye were hewn, and ad cisternam perforatam vnde
excisi estis: alluding unto the dead womb of Sarah, as he expounds himself
in the next words; Consider Abraham your father, and Sarah that bare you, for I
called him alone, and increased him. The end which the Prophet aims at
throughout that Chapter, is to rectify and establish their conceit of Gods
power, who was able even of stones to raise up children unto Abraham:
intimating withal that Christ's Church, though far surpassing the amplitude of
Abraham's present seed, was to be raised, from materials more weak and slender
in the sight of man.

10 Again, Manoahs wife had as little hopes to conceive a son as Sarah had,
much less to conceive such a child or Geber as should begin that which the
Geber here mentioned in my text, was to finish, that is, to redeem Israel from
the oppression of their enemies. And the Angel of the Lord, desirous to avert
such a mistrustfull reply as Sarah had given, prevents it by insinuating his
knowledge of what she could pretend: for so he begins his message. Judge. 13.3.
Behold now thou art barren and bear not, but thou shall conceive and bear
a son, the child shall be a Nazarite to God from his birth; and he shall begin
to save Israel out of the hand of the Philistines.

As little hope was there of Hannahs barren womb, until out of the fullness
of sorrow for her forlorn estate, she conceaues faith, that God was able (as
in her song she expresses) to make the barren bear seven children. Perhaps
she meant Benshebang, septenarium filium, one that should be of better steed
to Israel then any other seven; a governor of Gods people, a lively type of
her long expected redeemer.

11 But least these examples of Isaacs, Sampsons, and Samuels birth, all sons
of barrenness, might in the fullness of time, have less force upon men's
hearts, by reason of their distance: the Lord will have Christ's forerunner John
Baptist to be conceived of a woman more unlikely to bear, in their sight that
measure all things by humane probability or experiments of present times. So
strange these news did seem to Zachary his Father, that when the Angel told
him his prayers were heard, and his wife Elizabeth should conceive and bear a
son, one that should be filled with the holy Ghost from his mothers womb,
he is not yet satisfied but demands. Luke 1.18.
Whereby shall I know this for I am an old man, and my wife is of a great age.
This distrustful demand, was, at this time, (wherein God had determined to
exact of all his people, great and small, outward confession of inward belief
unto a far more strange and miraculous conception) so unseasonable and
preposterous, that in sign of his power to take away the barrenness of
Elizabeth's womb, he seals up the priests lips, disenabling him to bring
forth one word, until his wife, according to the word of the Lord, had brought
forth her promised son. Now the famousnesse of this event throughout Jury
should have served for a sign, to confirm men's faith of Christ's conception.

12 If one of Ierusalems devoutests Priests, come so far short of Abraham's
readiness to believe Gods promises: no marvel if the best of women bewray some
spice of her mother Sarahs mistrust. But it is far from my disposition at any
time, or my purpose at this, to urge, farther to aggravate the infirmity of a
vessel so sanctified, elect, and precious. And I am persuaded the Evangelist
did not so much intend to disparage hers, as to confirm our belief, by
relating her doubtful question, and the Angels reply; the one being but Sarahs
mistrust refined with maidenly modesty, the other Sarahs check mitigated and
qualified by the Angel. Genesis 18. v. 12
After I am waxed old and my Lord also shall I have lust? says Sarah! as you
heard before: thus checked by the Angel, Wherefore did Sarah laugh: shall any
thing be hard to the Lord? The blessed Virgin, upon a more strange salutation,
only demands of the Angel. Luke 1. v. 34
How shall this be, seeing I know not a man? And the Angel answered her, not
by way of reproof or interrogation, but for her instruction, Verse. 36.
giving her a further sign. Behold thy Cousin Elizabeth, she has also
conceived a son in her old age, and this is her sixth month, which was called
barren: for with God nothing shall be impossible. This heavenly dialogue was
first uttered, and in such particular sort related by St Luke, to instruct us,
that as the Virgin did now with better grace and decency act that part, which
Sarah had before somewhat misacted: so this her son, was that promised seed,
whereof Isaac was but the type, and his strange and unusual conception as it
were a praeludium to this miraculous conception of our Savior, foretold by
Jeremy, and thus related by the Evangelist.

Instead of an exhortation or applicatorie use (which my text being it self an
exhortation directed to another people, and out of date in these our days,
will hardly yield without wringing) give me leave to spend the short remainder
of time in proposing matter of admiration, especially to younger students,
happily not so well acquainted with the manner of our Saviors conception,
birth, and education, or how far Israel shared with Judah, or Nazareth with
Bethlem in these circumstances or the like.

13 I know by the folly of my youth, how ready young wits, against this good
time would be to see Menechmus or some more queint comoedie of like errors
acted: wherein no one particular, considered alone, is worth the noting; only
the dependence of one upon another, being unusual, makes the whole contrivance
pleasant: yet such as can breed no firm persuasion of any historical truth,
but rather bewraies it self to be a fiction. And no fiction can yield delight
or pleasure, save only ex hypothesi, in as much as our imagination supposes
that as true, wherein there appears no repugnancie or impossibility why it
might not be such as the representation makes show of. As poems usually
delight more then true stories, only because the Poets faigne a likeness or
image of more amiable and admirable truths, then can ordinarily be found or
observed in the common course of life. Yet even in their rarest inventions, the
Orators argument holds still true of the spectators. If they can afford
applause in re ficta, how would the like real truth it self affect them? what
would they do if they should see a solid and substantial edifice, more
beautiful and proportional in every part, then the superficial platform or
draught which they so liked. Shall we then applaud the curious fictions of
humane fancy, and not be ravished with admiration at the real and most truly
admirable effects of the Almighties providence in our Saviors conception? This
would be infinitely more preposterous and phantastique, then if you should
loath or scorn the rarest liue-beautie of most amiable reasonable creatures,
such as your selves, and run mad with love of Babo^nes shadows, or for an
Ape or Monkies picture. What effect either so admirable in it self, or of such
unspeakable consequence for our good, was ever presented on the stage of earth,
seen, or heard within the circumference of this mighty amphitheatre, or is
possible to be conceived by the heart of man, as the birth and conception of
our Savior Christ? yet is the concurrence or contrivance of all circumstances
precedent or consequent, so unusual, so far surpassing humane expectation,
that if we compare their whole frame, with the most curious form of any humane
invention extant: Illam homines dicas, hanc posuisse Deum: you will say that
the one might easily be invented by such as your selves, but that the other
could not be forecast, contrived, and acted without the all seeing wisdom of
the Almighty God. And I am fully persuaded that if either Jew or Atheist would
but search the Scriptures with hearts as devoid of prejudice, and minds as free
from other thoughts and cares, as most men bring to famous plays or Comoedies:
this contemplation would enforce the one to acknowledge, that prophecies in old
time came not by the will of man: the other, that Jesus the son of Marie was
he, of whom Moses and all the Prophets spoke.

14 First Isaiah foretells the condition or estate of his mother: Micah the
place of his nativitie; Jeremy the place and manner of his conception; the two
former more then six, the last five hundred years, before, he was conceived
or borne. What hopes could the blessed Virgin have either in her own, or
others sight to be the mother of so great a Monarch? you will say she was of
the lineage or stock of David: so were many more of far greater place and
dignity then she, all seated in Jury about Bethlem or Jerusalem, the
supposed places of his conception and education, until the event did prove the
contrary. Suppose old Samael had been then living, and the governors of
Judah should have presented such of the daughters of Iesse as they thought most
likely, to see whom he would nominate to be their Messiah mother: the
election doubtless would have been far longer then David's was to the crown
of Israel. To have fought the blessed amongst women in Galile, would have
seemed more strange to the me^ of Judah, the^ the seeking out of their king
amongst the sheepfolds, did to Iesse and the men of Bethlehem. But God who sees
not as man sees, usually delights to cross our expectation whether of good
or bad, by contrary success. It was the absolute nullitie rather then
improbability of any such hopes as are now suggested, which had excluded Marie
from the princely tribe, contented to live an obscure life with her husband in
Nazareth a poor City of Zabulon, as most think, or as others, bordering on
Zabulon in the tribe of Nephthalie; however within the kingdom of Ephraim, or
Israel. And thither the Angel of the Lord repaires unto her. The effect of his
embassage being to unfold this aenigmaticall prophecy, which had been sealed
up until this time appointed, for the fulfilling of it. Luke 1. v. 26.
In the sixth month (says the Evangelist) the Angel Gabriel was sent from
God, unto a City of Galile named Nazareth, to a virgin espoused to a man,
whose name was Joseph of the house of David. Here some profane companions
captiously demand, seeing it was Gods will to have his son, (as Isay had
foretold) borne of a pure virgin, why would he not make choice of a maid or
woman vnbetroathed, of whom there could be less suspicion? As passengers of
good respect, would often pass by unregarded by poor Cottagers, did not ill
nurtured curres notify their approach by barking: so many divine mysteries
would be less observed then they are, did not profane obiectors become our
remembrancers. As the former captious demand, to what intent soever conceived
by unbelievers, does but solicit this answer from the Orthodoxe. The first
promise was made under this style; Semen mulieris: The seed of the woman
espoused, though a virgin (such as Eve was when she sinned) shall crush the
serpents head. Yet the mouth of prophanes not herewith stopped is more ready to
quarrel with the message it self, as too vulgar for an ambassador of such
state as the Angel Gabriel* Behold: what should she behold? thou shall
conceive in thy womb and bring forth a son. Why? do not all women conceive
before they bring forth children, or, do others conceive in their aprons? But
to dismiss this audience of the Atheists false descant, or division upon this
plain song, as he esteemed it. Is the phrase in many professed interpreters
judgment any better, then a tautologie, or, at the best, then an Hebrew
Pleonasme? yet even tautologies in sacred language, seldom want their weight,
or observation. And Hebrew Pleonasmes, in Prophetical or Evangelicall
writings, are often times full of mysteries. Or what if this phrase be sometimes
vulgarly used in vulgar narrations? yet in extraordinary subjects, it may, and
by the analogy of orthodoxall interpretation, ought to be taken in the most
proper and remarkable sense, whereto it can literally be extended. The express
mention of the usual place (...) excludes the ordinary cause* and implies an
unusual manner of conception. The interposition of the primitive (...) which
was emphatically expressed in the salutation (...), and must here be repeated
(...), will much alter the sense or importance of the phrase. So does the
dependence which the demonstratiue ecce has with the words which went before.
Fear not Mary for thou have found favor with God, (...) Behold thou shall
conceive in thy womb, [not from without.] The importance is fully aequivalent
to the Hebrew Tes^beb in my Text, (thy fruit shall be enclosed in thy womb* yet
shall thou not be less fruitful then she that conceaueth by a consort. For
thou shall bring forth not a daughter, not a male child only, but such a son
as may well brook the name of Savior for he shall be great, Verse. 32.
and be called the son of the most high. And is not this as much as Geber?

15 And yet God in his wisdom would have the blessed virgin her self to be,
for a while, ignorant of this construction, that her doubtful reply might
occasion the Angel to enlarge his Comments upon my Prophets riddle. Verse. 34.
Then said Mary unto the Angel how shall this be, seeing I know not a man?
And the Angel answered and said unto her the holy Ghost shall come upon thee,
and the power of the highest shall over shadow thee. As if he had said, what
have thou to do with a man? who have found this favor with God, that it shall
not be with thee, as with other women? thy conception of this thy son is a
work new and unheard of hitherto in Israel: a work not of generation but of
creation; it must be wrought by the immediate hand of God. But let it not seem
so impossible, as new and strange, seeing he has foretold it by his Prophets,
who is able to bring to pass what ever he fortells. Nor would the Evangelist
in my opinion have been so careful to specify the Angels name, in these two
stories of John Baptists, and our Sauviours conceptions, without reference to
his principal message or office; which was to annunciate his birth, to whom
this name Gabriel did best agree; one that should be Geber-ell, the strong
God, or the strength of God.

Thus you see how this prophecy of the Females enclosing the mighty man, or
heroic, by way of creation, not of generation, in the land of Israel is in due
time fulfilled, beyond her expectation that did conceive him, until the Angel
did instruct her.

16 And now it seems she apprehends as much, as the Angel had told her and
no more, That the Lord would give the throne of David to her son; and whether
from express notice of Ezechiels words, or rather from the same spirit, whereby
he spoke: She makes part of his menacing prophecy a strain of her joyful
song, so inverting his words, as the Lord had done the line of David; making
first, last; and last, first. Ezekiel. 21.26.
Exalt him that is low (says the Prophet) and abase him that is high. Luke. 1.
v. 52*
He has put down the mighty from their seat (says the blessed Virgin) and
exalted them of low degree. The abasing of the high and mighty was verified,
whilst Ezechiel lived, in the sudden deposition of Zedechiah: so, perhaps, was
the exalting of him that was low, historically experienced in the exaltation
of 2. kings. 25. v. 27.
Iehoiakin, but not fulfilled until this time, wherein God, from the womb of
his poor handmaid, raised up this light to David, unto who^ the Ezekiel. 21. v.
27.
Diadem of right belonged. Yet all this time she thinks as little how Micahs
prophecy should be fulfilled, as she had done before of Ieremies or Isaies:
she had gone indeed, not long after this co^ception, into Jury, to confer
with her Cousin Elizabeth; but as the Evangelist tells us, she was returned
again to Nazareth, whence she and her husband departed a little after,
against their wills. For, unless Augustus at this very time, had given out his
commandment, for taxing all that were subject to the Roman Empire, there is no
intimation of any purpose either in Mary or Joseph to repair to Bethlehem
Ephrata the City of David. But the less they minded it before, the more they
are confirmed by the experience of the event, and the manner how Gods
prophecies are fulfilled.

17 Thus by the disposition of the Almighty, not by any purpose of Augustus, or
consultation of man, the son of God is come first into his own City, but
his own receive him not; he has not so much as house room fit for man; an
ill omen that his subjects will not acknowledge their allegiance to him. For as
the Lord long since had complained of their more then brutish ignorance and
stupiditie. Isaiah. 1. v. 3.
The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his masters cribbe, but Israel has
not known, my people has not vnderstaod. What did not Israel know? or what
would not his people understand? It is the note of a judicious convert Hebrew
(and I now remember not wether he give any further reason of it) that the verbs
(...) and (...) there used, are transitiues, and must be referred to that,
which went before, Israel has not known his owner, my people will not
acknowledge him for their master, that lies swadled in a cratch or manger. This
is a stumbling block to the proud and haughty Jew, that fixes his eyes on
lofty towers, and stately palaces, as if these were the places of his Messiahs
birth; who in his prime, must come to Zion, as one too meek and humble to
mind such matters; as one that would testify the place of his birth by Zach.
9. v. 9.
riding upon an Ass, and upon a colt, the foale of an Ass. But though Judah
and Israel be more stupid then the Ox or Ass, yet even in this humility of
his birth Arabia and Sheba shall bring gifts to him, as to their king. Yet so
provident is the Lord, least any hand of man should show it self in his
exaltation, that these foreign Princes open profession of allegiance to this
newborn child, indangers his innocent and harmless life. But what will the
Atheist say? Cannot God protect his son from all likelihood or approach of
danger? yes he could, but his purpose was now to show his wisdom, not his
power, in defeating great Herod's vigilant and anxious care, and all the
subtilest proiects of his cunningst politicians, by the cou^terplots of a poor
dreaming man. Rahel must have cause again to weep for her children about the
borders of Benjamin: and Herod by striking at the son of God, must kill his
own son: whilst he that was indeed a father to all the sons of men,
because the true and natural son of God, he, in whose right, Israel inioy'd
the promises, and had an adoptiue title to be called the son of God, must in
part of his nonage be sustained in Egypt, as Israel had been, by a Joseph;
that so, what was verified of the one, as in the type, might be fulfilled in
the other, as the substance. Hosea. II.VI
Out of Egypt have I called my son.

18 But whither did God call his son? sure if his supposed father Joseph do
not with young Samuel mistake the callers voice, he was to return into Iudaea,
the fittest place, in his apprehension, for the education of him, that was
borne unto the crown of David; a place, wherein if Herod's first designs had
stood firm and sure, he might have lived securely. But God that directed
Jacobs right hand to the head of Ephraim, contrary to his father Joseph's
expectation; has turned the heart of Josephus. lib. 17. c. 10.
Herod on a sudden to affect him most in the last draught of his will and
testament, whom he had respected but in the second place in the former. And
Joseph approaching the Coasts of Jury, advertised that Herod had a successor
there, not Antipas, as he perhaps with others had expected, but Archelaus as
bloody a villain as the Father, suspects (as it seems) either the truth of
his admonition by a dream in Egypt; or his construction of it. He doubts
whether they be dead, that sought the life of the child: for as the Evangelist
says. Mat. 2. v. 22.
He was afraid to go into Iudaea. (...), Yet seeing he had been warned in a
dream, (or perhaps being warned again) though he avoid Judah, he will at
least go into some part of Israel. If he had two warnings, this latter was to
instruct him in the true meaning of the former, whereby he was not directed to
Iudaea in particular* but into the land of Israel, as I take it, with
opposition to the land of Iudaea. And so says the Evangelist, he left his
purpose for Iudaea, and turned aside into the parts of Galil^, to the place of
Christ's conception. Ibid.
And thus by his doubtful resolution; the will of the Lord, which he had
spoken by the Prophet is undoubtedly fulfilled; to wit, that Christ from the
place of his conception and education should be called Nazaraeus. A name (in
their intendment that sought to fasten it first upon him) of disgrace and
scorn, but by the disposition of the Almighty, a known title of greatest
honor, convicting such as used it otherwise, even whilst they spoke it, of
blasphemy; which way soever we interpret the meaning of it. For if this
Cities name, whose Etymology is hardly found in the old Testament, were
Natsoreth, or Natzareth, or as Dicunt Christiani Iesum natum esse in Bethlehem
and educatum fuisse in civitate, quae in lingua eorum Nazareth in nostra vero
Nezer vocatur.
Elias Leuita says, Netzer (t^^ word which Isaias uses) it is by
interpretation the City of plants or grafts; in plain english Graftowne. Whence
if the Jew captiously demand: was it ever heard that any Prophet should arise
out of Nazareth? We may answer (as our Savior did Pilate) Infidel, thou
have said it, though unwittingly, as Caiphas thy predecessor did foretell his
dying for the people. For did thou never hear of a man, whose name was the
branch; never of a plant Netzer that should grow out of the root of Ishai?
What if thou can not revile this Jesus, whom we preach, but thou must
acknowledge him Hanotzeri surculus ille, or surcularius ille, or germen illud;
The PLANT, THE BRANCH. For though the obiectour mean to disgrace him, yet God
had ordained his glory as well out of his enemies mouths that meant him
mischief, as out of the mouths of silly babes, that meant him neither good
nor ill. And it is very suitable to the ways of Gods providence, to suggest,
by ambiguous words or speeches, unto the attentive hearer, conceits quite
contrary to their meaning that utter them. Appian.
So Crassus in his Parthian voyage, wills his soldiers (disheartened with a
dismal way, which Abgarus had led the^) to be of good cheer; they should not
come that way back again: his meaning was they should return a better, but
they take this as the sentence of death from their Generals mouth; and so march
on drouping, in such dead silence to their miserable disastre, as me^ condemned
do to the place of ^^ecution. This speech of Crassus was worse taken, then it
was meant: but many of like observation I could here allege, which ill meant
by such as uttered them, have been well interpreted by the parties whom they
concerned: Val. Max. lib. 1. c. 5.
as the Apollonians, soliciting aid of the Epidamnians against the Illyrians,
finally, put off with this flowting answer. We will send (...) (so was the
river called which ran by their City) to your succor: cheerfully accept
the offer, and take heart and courage at the very mention of (...), as if Ajax
(who height so in Greek) had bin reviu'd to be their leader. And their
confident hopes, conceived upon the imaginary conduct of such a noble
General, did, by divine providence, bring forth real success, and unexpected
victory. And so no doubt the faithful Hebrews, as often as they heard the Jews
call our Savior in contempt, Hanotzeri, did interpret their speech, otherwise
then they meant it, as S. John did that of Caiaphas. And this was the
Evangelists meaning, when he says, our Savior went to Nazareth, that he
might be known by this name, used both by his followers and his enemies.

19 Yet do I no way reject, but most willingly embrace their interpretation of
this place, who think that speech of the Angel unto Sampsons mother. Judge.
13. v. 5.
And he shall be a Nazarite from his birth was fulfilled of Christ, who was the
true Nazarite indeed. Nor is this interpretation, (as most think) incompatible
with the former: both are branches of the tree of life, in both shine most
glorious rays of the divine providence, would not men be more contradictious
then their opinions. For, first it is a needless doubt moved by the one,
whether this Cities name in Hebrew were written with Z.TS.
Zaiin, or with Tsadhi; and it is an impertinent observation of the other, to
tell us that Nazaraeus or Nazarenus for a Nazarite, comes not from the Hebrew
Natzar, but from Nazar: for the Evangelists and Greek writers of the new
Testament, not our of ignorance, but by the direction of the holy Ghost, and of
purpose, use the Hebrew names as they are mollified by the Septuagints, for the
more facile pronunciation of the Gentiles: as the famous Rainolds wisely
admonished Iunius, for this reason to use Samaria for Someron; and the like;
seeing the holy Ghost had so spoken. It will suffice then, for our purpose,
that the words signifying an inhabitant of this City and a Nazarite, such as
Sampson was, are one and the same in the Greek and Latin. As for that
different character, which some observe by writing the one Naziraeus, and the
other Nazaraeus, or Nazarenus, I have just reason to suspect it for Critics
coin; first invented, and since observed by such as had better marked the
different character of the Hebrew words, whence they are derived, then the
disposition of the divine providence in suffering no difference betwixt them in
the Greek and Latin. It is a point (I know) very behoofful in arts, or
sciences, or humane histories to distinguish such aequivoca acasu, as often
fall out in translations, or corruption of speech, by some note of difference
in the original character. But these words Nazaraeus or Nazaraenus we suppose
to be aequivoca, not acasu, but a consilio divino, by the divine providence,
which oftimes in the ambiguity of speeches, has intendments quite contrary to
the ill meaning of such as speak them; as in bad actions he usually has an
end much different from the purpose of the doer. And for mine own part, I
never could more fully comprehend how incomprehensible God was in his wisdom,
nor how inscrutable in his ways, then whilst I consider, how foreseeing from
al eternities, that the chief thing which either the proud or stubborn Jew,
the curious Grecian, the haughty and stately politic Roman, could object
against his son, exhibited in the infirmity of our flesh would be the
meanness of his parentage and education; he could yet so dispose that he
should be conceived and brought up in such a City, as if his adversaries
would vpbraid him with the baseness of it in Hebrew, they should withal,
though unwittingly, enstile him by that glorious name, which Isay, Jeremy, and
Zacbarie had appropriated to the Messiah: that is, he should be publicly
known by the name of the branch, or plant of Iesse. Or if they would nickname
him from it in Greek, or Latin, they should withal, though unwittingly,
acknowledge him to be that Nazarite of God, of whom Sampson was but the type*
or to use his own words, Ioh. 10.36.
(...) illum, quem pater sanctificauit, thus turning the note, or article of
disgrace, to signify the quite contrary (...). And for this purpose the Lord
in his divine providence, would have as well this title of Nazarite. Jesus
Nazarenus, written in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin capital letters, upon the
Cross, as the title of King. Now we all know that even the title of King, was,
by such as procured the inscription, intended by way of scorn, or contempt:
but yet in the Almighties disposition; this inscription in these three famous
tongues, was as a public authentic proclamation of his right unto the Crown
of David: such a testimony that he was heir of all things in heaven and
earth, as shall condemn all such, throughout the world, of rebellion, as have
not unfeignedly acknowledged allegiance to him, as to their supreme Lord and
King. In like sort, whatsoever they intended by this title of Nazarenus, unto
the faithful it must serve, as a public and authentic testimony, that
Christ Jesus was the man, which was to be known by the name of branch, the
branch of righteousness, the Netzer of Iesse, the Nazarite, the holy one of
God. The chief reason that moves me to embrace this interpretation, is,
because these two words Natzar and Nazir, with their derivatiues, or words of
aequivalent signification, are the very titles, wherein the holy Ghost seems
to delight, when he describes the kingdom of Christ. His very Crown is called
by a word of the same Root with Nazaraeus or Nazarenus the Nazarite, as Ps.
132. Upon him shall his Crown flourish. Nor do I see what can be objected
against us, save only this. If what was said of Sampson as the type, be
fulfilled in Christ, as in the body or substance: then Christ should have been
a true Nazarite as Sampson was. Out of doubt he was so; but as he was a true
and perfect Priest, though no legal Priest after the order of Aaron, but
according to the order of Melchisedeek, which was more eminent and excellent:
so he was a true and perfect Nazarite (though no legal Nazarite from his
birth) or rather the perfection or Idaea of Nazarites, and therefore to be
separated from that concretion of ceremonial matters, wherein the form and
essence of legal Nazarites devotion did consist. And yet, as it became the
Prince and crowned King of Nazarites the (...) and (...) of Nazarites (...), or
him, on whose head the Nazarites crown was to flourish, he performed the legal
rites of Nazaritisme by his Ambassador John Baptist, in whom he set an end to
those legal rites. As for the manner of their birth, and the Angelical
predictions, with other occurrences; no type in Scripture agrees better with
the Idaea or prototypon, then Sampson, and John Baptist, with our Savior: How
that which was literally meant of Sampson, may be said to be principally
meant of Christ, shall elsewhere (God willing) appear. I would now only
request you to observe that in some Copies of the 70, it is said that Sampson
should be (...), in others (retaining the sense or exposition, not the
Etymology) it is said he should be (...), or sanctificatio Domini (i) Domino
sanctificatus. And so the holy Ghost, when he gives us the true exposition of
the Greek (...) as by the disposition of the divine providence it should sound
to us, extorts this confession from the unclean spirit. What have we to do
with thee Jesus Nazarene, I know thee who thou art, Luke 4. v. 34. If the
wicked spirit did speak this in Greek he spoke according to the use of the
word Nazarenus in the Septuagint
not simply (...) as it was said of Sampson, but (...), that holy one, of whom
Sampson, and legal Nazarites were but types. Again, where it is foretold by
the Angel, that Sampson should begin to save Israel out of the hands of the
Philistines, this speech, me thinks, should implie a relation to some greater
Savior, that was to accomplish this salvation of Israel from the hands of
their enemies. And besides the spiritual redemption of them and us, (of all
the Israel of God) accomplished by Christ, and prefigured by Sampsons temporal
saving of them from the Philistines: to my simplicity, it seems not
altogether void of observation, that as Sampson was borne when the Israelites
were first oppressed by the Philistines, so Christ likewise was then borne, when
Herod an aliant, and a Philistin by birth, was tyrant as well of Iudaea as
Palastina.

20 That I may conclude in one word, as I intended, with you noble stemmes, or
other hopeful plants here seated in this famous nurserie of arts; whose grouth
I wish in all the knowledge of foreign nations; only, in the bowels of
Christ Jesus our Savior, let me beseech you, and in his name, as his unworthy
Minister, charge you: that neither out of phantasticke doting love, to
foreign nations, or natural pride of your hearts, you ever say with that
Syrian Courtier. Are not Isther Po and Maeander, the beautified subjects of
delicate Grecian or Italian wits, better then Jordan or Kedron, then all the
waters of Israel? Slander not the mountains of Samaria (no not in your secret
thoughts) for dry and barren in respect of Parnassus or Cythaeron: but though
with Ephraim, you wander to view the glorious sights, or learn such choice
experience, as the famous monarchies of Assyria, Babylon, Greece, or Italy can
afford you: yet let not your souls, which God by Christ does woo more
earnestly, then he did Ephraim by my Prophet, be ever affianced to these
Aliants: but return at length to these your Cities of Israel; and visit
Nazareth wherein the Lord has wrought his wonders, wherein the rod of Iesse
sprung up. And what way soever you bend your course, take Gods providence for
your pilot, and let Jesus of Nazareth, the star of Jacob, the branch of
David, and Nazarite of God, in whom all the Prophecies of different ages meet
as lines in their center; for the making up of whose glory, as well the
scurrilous appellations of his deadly enemies, as the glorious salutations of
his followers, concur as the diverse Meridians, of distant Regions, or
opposite hemispheares in the pole; be always Load-starre of your thoughts.

THE WOMAN A TRVE HELP TO MAN, OR MANKINDS comfort from the weaker sex.
GALAT. 4. VER. 4.5. 4 But when the fullness of time was come, God sent forth
his Son made of a woman, made under the Law.

5 To redeem them that were under the Law, that we might receive the adoption
of Sons.


1 ALL things naturally desire their preservation. There is as true a longing
of bad humors, to feed and strengthen themselves by semblable nutriment, as
of nature, to expel them. And since the corruption of nature, became, in a
manner, natural to the sons of Adam, it has ever been the property of it,
if not altogether to loath the food of life; yet to mingle it with such sauces,
as strengthen the flesh to resist the working of the spirit.

A dangerous spice of this intemperancie, you may behold in these Galatians,
now seeking to allay the sweet promises of the Gospel, which their corrupt
taste could not relish, with the bitter threars and curses of the Law. The
pretenses, used by favorers of Circumcision, to color this ill co^pounded
receipt, might be more then can possibly come to this ages notice. Two more
principal, are sufficiently, though implicitly, notefied unto us by our
Apostles answers, or preventions. The former is drawn from the glorious
testimonies, given by Gods Saints to the Law, before the revelation of the
Gospel. For, taking these Jews, as they were, many hundreds of years before
Christ was born. Ps. 147. v. 20.
The Lord had not dealt so with any nation, as for his judgments they had not
known them. And can these Galatians, by nature Gentiles, the offspring of
Heathens, excel Israel, without observation of that Law, by which Israel had
so far exceeded all the nations of the world?

2 But as the dawning, though in respect of former darkness, it may seem as
day, compared to the bright sunshine following, is rather to be reputed part
of night: So the state of the Jews under the Law, although a freedom in
respect of that thrall and ignorance, wherein they had lived in Egypt, was but
bondage and slaverie to the liberty of the Gospel. And these Galatians, in
turning to the Law, after they had been so well entered in the Gospel, renewed
the Israelits sin; who being on their way to Canaan, resolved to turn back
to the house of bondage, whence the Lord had freed them. Or, to make the best
that may be of their opinion; say they did not indeed (as in express words
they did not) utterly revoke the Gospel, but only couple it with the Law: yet
even t^is their error and disobedience, is the very same as if the Israelites
should have resolved not to use Manna, which God sent them from Heaven, for
bread, unless they might have Onions and Garlic and the fleshpots of Egypt
for their meat.

3 The second argument, wherewith these Jewish seducers had bewitched these
foolish Galatians (as we may gather from our Apostles praeoccupation in this
present Chapter) was much what the same with that maine charm, wherewith the
Roman Sorcerers so mightily prevail with the ignorant of our times.

These, or the like quaeries, you may imagine, were often propounded to these
late converts, by the Jews. Whose successors would Paul, would Apolloes,
would others, which abandon Circumcision, or the Ceremonial Law, be reputed?
Do they not call themselves the children of Prophets? Would they not be
accounted the sons of Gods chosen people? And what religion (I pray) did the
Prophets, or their godly forefathers profess? Did they not all subscribe to
the Ceremonies given by Moses? Did they not live and die in these practices,
which we persuade you to? And so living, and so dying, did they live or die
like slaves or bondmen; or as free borne sons of Abraham; and heirs of the
everlasting promises?

4 To bring this controversy, between our Apostle and these seducers, to a
more short and distinct issue. First, they agree, that only such, as lived
under the Law, were the true Church and people of God. Secondly, that only the
true Church and people of God, were the sons of Abraham, and heirs of the
everlasting promises. But from these grants or suppositions, our Apostle thus
inferres.

As every other heir, so the Church of God was to have a time of nonage,
before she could come to her full age, or be enstated in the inheritance
bequeathed; that during this nonage, the state or condition of Gods Church and
people, as of all other heirs in their childhood, did nothing differ from the
condition of servants. Whence again it will follow, that as the authority of
Tutors, of Gardians, and Feoffees in trust (though, for the times being, most
absolute) is utterly to expire and determine, at the time, by the Testator or
Doner appointed for the heir to enter upon his inheritance: so the Law of
ordinances, which God himself had given by Moses, though, during the time of
the Churches non age, most absolute and sovereign, was to be repealed and
cancelled, at the fullness of time (i) at the time appointed by God for the
full age of the Church. Where it will be no digression by the way to observe,
that the period of other heirs non age, was not always precisely determined
by humane Laws; but might be longer or shorter according to the appointment of
the Doner. Lastly, as secular heirs, by not entering upon their inheritance at
the time appointed, do much prejudice their title, and deserve (as we say) to
be begged for fools; so the Church and people of God, by not abandoning the
yoke of the Law, at the time appointed by God for their full age, did thereby
make themselves incapable of the blessing bestowed on the^ in the Gospel.

5 This is the point most pressed by our Apostle in this and the Chapter
following. Chap. 5. v. 1.
Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ has made you free, and
be not entangled again by the yoke of bondage: behold, I Paul say unto you,
that if ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing: for I testify
again to every man, that is circumcised, that he is a debtor to do the whole
Law: Christ is become of no effect unto you, whosoever of you are justified by
the Law: ye are fallen from grace.

Now that which determined the Churches non age, and did ipso facto extinguish
the sovereign authority of the Law, was the sending forth of the son of
God, who was heir of all things. But when the fullness of time was come, God
sent forth his son, made of a woman, made under the Law, to redeem them that
were under the Law, that we might receive the adoption of sons. Or according
to the dialect of our english Law, that the inheritance of sons might be
co^veied or made over unto us (for so much the Greek, (...), may import:) and
it was to be convaied unto us, not by right of birth (all of us being children
of wrath) but by adoption. Now, adoption is the ingraffing of a forrainer, into
a better stock or family. The only stock whereinto we (which were not
sons, but servants) could be ingraffed, was the true and natural son of
God. He alone could set Gentiles free from the bondage of sin, and Jews from
the curse of the Law, which was added because of transgression. The sum then
of our Apostles doctrine in this place, is the same with our Saviors. Verily,
verily I say unto you (that boast of Abraham's seed, Ioh. 8 v. 33.
and never were in subjection to any) to you, I say, that whoeuer commits
sin, is the servant of sin, and the servant abides not in the house
forever, but the son abides ever. If the son therefore make you free, ye
shall be free indeed.

6 Referring the act of redemption, and this glorious prerogative of being the
sons of God unto some better occasion; give me leave, first, to unfold, what
the son of God has done for his part, that he might be a perfect and
impartial redeemer: secondly what is on our parts required, that we might be
capable of his redemption.

In the former I shall endeavor to stir up admiration at the wisdom and
love of God; the use whereof shall be to kindle love and thankfulness in our
selves, and to incite our alacrity in performing such duties as are required
at our hands.

The sum of that, which the son of God has undertaken for us, is by our
Apostle gathered to these three heads. 1 He was sent forth into the world. 2 He
was made of a woman. 3 He was made under the Law.
Of these in their order: and of their several necessities and conveniences.

To be a son, necessarily presupposes a begetting. If then we be the sons
of God, we must be begotten by him; and of us that are his children by
adoption, Iam. 1. v. 18.
says St James, He begat us with the word of truth, that we should be the
first fruits of his creatures. This word of truth, by which we must be
begotten, must first be conceived by us; and yet is it the principal of those
good and perfect gifts, al and every one of which (as the Iame Apostle speaks)
are from above, Verse. 17.
and descend to us from the father of light. But who shall ascend up into heaven
to fetch them thence? No man (says our Savior) ascends up to heaven, Ioh.
3. v. 13.
but he that descended from heaven, the son of man which is in heaven. When
he discoursed of heavenly mysteries: He spoke what he knew, and testified
what he had seen; others spoke but by guess or hearsay, as they had been
taught. No man (says St John) has seen God at any time, Chap. 1. v. 18.
but the only begotten son, which was in the bosom of the father, he has
declared him. Being in the bosom of the Father from everlasting, he could not
but know him, and his will concerning man from everlasting. But so long as he
remained in the bosom of God, not manifested to the world, we could no more
approach the place of his dwelling, then we could the dwelling of his father;
we were as incapable of his instructions, as of his fathers.

7 Requisite therefore it was he should be sent forth, that he might be our
teacher; such a mature authenticke teacher, as saving truth, able to beget
sons unto God, should issue as naturally from his mouth, as ripe seed, apt
for propagation, does from fruitful trees. From this his efficacy in
teaching, did the people admire God, speaking in him, for he taught not as the
Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 7. v. 29.
but as one that had authority; being indeed the author of that doctrine,
which he taught; one from whose fullness all former teachers had received their
measure of knowledge. Moses himself that gave the Law, much more the Scribes
and Pharisees, the expounders of it, were but as ordinary schoolemasters;
their best auditors but as schooleboyes, or grammar-schollers, laboring all
their life times, to learn the first rudiments or elements of saving
knowledge. But after the DIVINE WORD had spoken to the world by the mouth of
man, Great was the number of Preachers: Ephesians. 4. v. 11.
He gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some
Pastors and Teachers: Of such mysteries, as no secular Artists, nor children
of Prophets, could ever attain unto; nor did they which taught the world these
mysteries, learn them by rule or method.

8 But you will say, all this might have been done, although he had been
sent in the form of an Angel, wherein he appeared unto the Fathers. He that
taught Moses without the substance of man, could have taught the Apostles and
Evangelists, the whole doctrine of the Gospel, although he had not been borne
of a woman: he that overthrew Pharaoh and all his host in the red sea, put the
Cananites, and other enemies of Is^ael to flight, by his sole invisible
presence: could not he have vanquished sin and Satan without the assumption
of our nature? does the flesh add strength unto the spirit?

The question is not what he could have done by his Almighty power, but what
in his wisdom was most fit and convenient for our redemption. Now, this we
say, that by the eternal rules of equity, which God observes in all his
ways, it was not only convenient but necessary (though not for our
instruction, yet for our redemption and sanctification) that his son should
be not only man, but man made of a woman: and our Apostle in saying thus, says
a great deal more, then if he had said, borne of a woman.

9 Every man, except the first man Adam, is borne of a woman, but no man
besides the son of God, by whom man and all things were made, was made of a
woman. The mysteries contained in this manner of speech, cannot be duly
valued or unfolded, without some explication of that peculiar reference, which
these words, in the Apostles intent and meaning, have to the first creation of
man and woman.

10 And here I must entreat you of the weaker sex, to observe with me, that
our Apostle, as well to put you in mind of that duty which you owe to your
husbands, as also to stir up your thankfulness toward God, for your
redemption; still referres you to the manner of your mother Eues creation, and
transgression. Two testimonies shall at this time suffice, for the establishing
of this truth; both taken from our Apostles writings. Of which the one best
expounds the true force and meaning of this phrase; Made of a woman: The other
unfolds the mystery therein contained.

The former is 1. Cor. 11. v. 7. etc. For a man indeed ought not to cover his
head, for as much as he is the image and glory of God, but the woman is the
glory of the man; for the man is not of the woman, but the woman of the man;
neither was the man created for the woman, but the woman for the man. Thus he
deriues your subordination to your husbands, from the first original of your
sex: this method and manner of instruction he learned from our Savior, who
resolved the difficulty proposed concerning divorce, from the Canon, or
Institution of Matrimony, enacted by God, with Adams consent, and voice,
whilst Eve was formed. Nevertheless, to qualify and moderate this authority,
which the man by priority of creation, has over the woman, the Apostle adds;
Verse. 11.
Neither is the man without the woman, nor the woman without the man in the
Lord: for as the woman is of the man, even so is the man also by the woman; but
all things of God. The first woman then, was made of the first man; all men
since have come into the world by the woman: but the son of God came not only
by the woman, but was made of the woman; as the first woman was of the first
man. This great mystery was precisely, fore told by the Prophet Jeremy, though
not so plainly, as many at the first sight would observe it. The Lord has
created a new thing in the earth, a woman shall compass a man, Ierem. 31. v.
22.
or the female shall enclose the male, or man of strength. It is called a new
creation, with reference to the first creation, wherein the woman was enclosed
in the man; as here quite contrary, the man is enclosed in the woman, by the
immediate hand of God, conceau'd and borne without any concurrence of man; as
the first woman was brought forth out of the substance of man, without the
help or consort of a woman.

11 The second place in our Apostles writings, which truliest explicates the
meaning of the mystery contained here in my Text, or in the place of Jeremy
last cited; and best sets forth the incomprehensible wisdom of Gods
proceedings in the admirable work of man's redemption, is 1. Tim. 2.11. Let the
woman learn in silence with all subjection, but I suffer not a woman to teach,
nor to usurp authority over the man, but to be in silence: Why is her
usurpation of authority over the man, so insufferable? the reason in the next
words is given, in part from the order of her creation, for Adam was first
formed then Eve. This proves that she should have been under man's authority,
though neither he nor she had sinned. But the principal reason why she is put
to silence, especially in the Church, is from the manner of her transgression,
in the verse following: And Adam was not deceaved, but the woman being deceived
was in the transgressio^. Because she had boldly adventured to hold partly with
the old serpent without her husbands leave, and contracted with so great danger
to all mankind, without his instructions; because this done she took upon her
to be the serpents agent to bring over her husband (whom she was to counsel,
when her advice was demanded, not to lead,) into the same combination;
therefore is this modesty and silence which the Apostle speaks of, enjoined
the whole sex, by way of punishment, or at least, to put them in mind of
their mothers first transgression. For Eues disease, or surfeit of the
forbidden fruit (until God in his infinite wisdom found out a sovereign
remedy by the contrary) was more dangerous and preiudicious to the whole
sex, then Adams was to his sons.

This truth is included in the last clause of our Apostles discourse,
concerning this point, 1. Tim. 2.15. Nevertheless she shall be saved. This
adversatiue particle ( Nevertheless) supposes a tacit objection; this or the
like: But is there no means left for Eues salvation, as well as for Adams;
though she only were seduced by the serpent? or shall not the woman which is in
subjection, be saved as well as the man, which has authority over her? Yes,
she shall be saved too; but by what means? (...), through child bearing: but
alas, what shall then become of the barren womb, or of her that bears no
children?

12 Cornelius a lapide, a late Jesuit, would have the pains of child birth,
to be in this place established as a Purgatory, without which this sex could
not enter into heaven. Must then the excessive, or extraordinary sufferings of
some mothers, supererrogate for other women that bear no children? I shall not
need to trouble my self with removing this stone of offense, which can stumble
none but the daughters of the blind Church. I will pass over it, and proceed:
As this place of Timothy best expounds the words of my Text, so may these
words in it (...) best be expounded by another place in this Epistle, wherein
the Apostle, Genesis 22.18.
discoursing of that promise of God to Abraham, (In thy seed shall all the
nations of the earth be blessed;) excellently observes (what the matter and
circumstance of the text, not the grammatical singularity of number does
necessarily infer,) this is not spoken to his seed as of many, Gal. 3.16.
but as of one and to thy seed, which is Christ; To comment therefore upon St
Paul, by the analogy of his Comments upon Moses; he says not in this place,
the woman shall be saved through bearing of children, as speaking of many, but
through her childbirth, as meaning one, which is Christ; the Son of God, made
of a woman, without man.

13 It is usual with the Hebrews, to put the abstract for the concrete,
substantives for adjectives. Ps. 126. v. 4.
Cause our captivity to return like the Rivers in the South; (that is) bring
home our captives with speed: so Salvation is often put for Savior; Glory for
glorious, Justice for just, etc. Now by the same privilege, which admits
captivity for captives, or sanctificatio domini, for domino sanctificatus; must
(...), childbirth, go in this place for as much as (...) is all one with
(...), she shall be saved by her child. Briefly, the woman's childbirth is as
much as the woman's child, and the woman's child is somewhat more than the woman's
seed. For, that the woman's seed which was to crush the serpents head, should
become a child and be brought forth by his mother, not conceived only, is no
paradox of our invention. It was the meaning of Gods promise, when first he
made it, that this seed should be such a child, so conceived and brought forth,
as might truly call a woman his mother, but no man on earth his father.

14 To give you a more distinct view of Gods wisdom, in contriuing the means
of our salvation. The first woman, by yielding her consent to the wicked
spirit, ears of the forbidden fruit, in hope she and her husband should become
Gods, and their offspring like young Gods, knowing good and evil. The issue of
this adulterous compact with the serpent, was, that she conceived sin and
brought forth death, before she was a mother of children. And her children with
their posterity, were by nature the sons of wrath, the serpents seed, and
heirs of his everlasting curse. To cure this malady by the contrary; God in
his wisdom, so ordaines, that another of the weaker sex, of a temper quite
contrary to her mother Eve; one as lowly as she was proud, whom the old
serpent had never tempted with dreams of being a Queen, much less of being a
Goddess on earth; one whose spirit rejoiced in the lowly estate of an
handmaid, should, by yielding consent to the blessed spirit, conceive him that
was the son of God, the tree of life, in whom as many as believe, receive the
adoption of sons, and are co-heires with him of everlasting bliss. No
marvel if the issues of their co^sents should be so contrary, when as the
principal agents, with whom they contracted, were such opposites; the one was
the SPIRIT of TRVTH, the author of life, and GOD of LIGHT: the other the spirit
of falsehood, the father of lies, and prince of darkness. Lastly, the first
woman, did thus adulterate her soul, by contracting with Satan without advice
or consent of her husband: and this is that which made her estate, and the
state of her sex, far more desperate then Adams was. For, as Divines
observe, the wicked Angels, because they sinned wittingly and willingly,
without a tempter, are left without all means of a mediator, or redeemer. Now
the woman, in that she did partake more deeply of this their sin, (for being
tempted by them, she forthwith turned tempter with them) was more liable to
their remediless punishments then the man: until the Lord in mercy, found out
the means, here mentioned by our Apostle to releive her. The conclusion
intended by him in that discourse, is, to assure woman kind, that Evahs
assenting to Satan, without the advice of her husband, was not more available
to condemn the sex, then the blessed Virgins bringing forth of her first
borne, whom she conceived by mere reliance on Gods promise, without the
concurrence or furtherance of man, was to redeem it.

15 This exposition of the place in Timothy is so clear and natural, that
not the meanest student here present (so he will mark the former references
to the first creation) but may well wonder how any professed interpreter could
omit it. Imagine with me, that the whole tenor of this assurance, devised in
terms most exquisite, for security and comfort of the weaker sex; were to
be perused by any ordinary Lawier, but with half the diligence men use to
examine Leases, or other Evidences concerning their private commodities: The
principal clause, or demise it self, would, at first sight, appear to be
contained in these words, (...). It would likewise be as apparent, that faith,
love, holiness, sobriety, and temperance, did follow only by way of
condition or proviso. Or to speak in our own dialect: Seeing faith, love,
etc. are added as conditions, or qualificaons on the woman's part, who is the
subject or patient; the means or meritorious cause of salvation, being
emphatically assigned under scholasticke character in the clause precedent,
(...): this has always seemed to me, a demo^stration as evident as any can
be, ab effectu, that the principal object or foundation of saving faith, (the
promised woman's seed) must needs be comprised in the word (...). Gal. 5.6.
In Jesus Christ (says the Apostle) neither circumcision avails any thing,
nor uncircumcision, but faith which works by love. But neither love, nor
faith working by love, can avail more without Christ Jesus, then circumcision
in Christ Jesus. And bootlesse it had been to have added this co^ditional, (if
they continue in faith, etc) unless the foundation of faith, and salvation had
been comprised in the former words, She shall be saved by her child birth.
Now as fidelity, chastity, and practices of charity, are necessary to all,
but in a peculiar and remarkable sort necessary to those, whose forefathers
have been perfidious, adulterours, and oppressors: so, albeit none can be
saved without these virtues here mentioned, (faith, charity, holiness,
temperance) yet are these peculiarly necessary to the weaker sex, in respect
of the first woman's sin: to the several parts or degrees whereof they are
most divinely and accurately suited and ranked by our Apostle. One part of her
transgression (perhaps the first) was infidelity, or distrust to Gods threats
and promises: therefore it is required as a condition necessary to all women,
(...), that they be constant in faith. Another part of the first woman's sin,
(besides disloialtie) was breach of that sociall love, which by order of
creation was due unto her husband. For as she had beginning of being from him,
so she was not to have contracted any business concerning her estate without
him. She should have known his consent, before she had presumed to have
passed hers; and because she did not so, but brake the bond of sociall love;
it is required of all women that they continue in love.

16 Again, the first woman polluted her soul with spiritual adultery, by
listening to Satan's impious suggestions. Hence it is required of the weaker
sex, that they continue in holiness and chastity. The claspe that must keep
all these ornaments, or spiritual habits close about the^, is Temperance. For
so the Apostle concludes; Notwithstanding they shall be saved, if they continue
in faith and charity, and holiness with temperance. As if he had said, it was
their mother Eues intemperate appetite of the forbidden fruit, fair in show,
which did quicken and give life unto the first transgression; whose first seed
(perhaps) was pride; and for this reason continent eyes, and temperate
appetites are on the woman's part required in the last place, as subjection is
in the first. For conclusion of this point. As this Catalogue of virtues in the
last clause, has express reference, to the several parts of her
transgression: so have these words (...), as peculiar relation unto the promise
concerning the woman's seed, Genesis 3. v. 15.
which was to bruise the serpents head.

17 I shall not need to trouble this learned audience, with a doctrine very
frequent, because most useful in the Primitive Church. A necessity was laid
upon the Reverend Fathers of those times, to use this place, as one, amongst
many, most pregnant, for refutation of such heretics, as held our Savior did
take only the shape, and figure, not the true flesh and substance of man, from
his mother. But seeing their herisies have for these many years, slept with
their bodies: I hold it a sin to awake them, by entertaining any solemn
dispute with them, or making loud declamation against the^. Taking the truth,
which these men are not able now to contradict for unquestionable (as being the
principal subject of all Christian knowledge*) Their observation is neither
unnecessary for any time, nor impertinent to this present occasion, who out of
this phrase MADE OF A WOMAN, would give us the true MEDIVM, or causall
demonstration of another conclusion, essentially subordinate to the fore cited
observation of the Ancient. The conclusion is, that our Savior, did with the
substance or flesh of man, take upon him all the infirmities, and weaknesses of
our mortal flesh.

18 The heathens although they feined Pallas to be a Goddess, yet conceived
her to be of a masculine valor and true heroical spirit, as being wholly
conceived and borne of Jupiters substance, not participating of Iunoes nature,
or disposition. That wisdom in the Greek tongue is of the feminine gender,
was to them a sufficient Hint, thus to transform the wisdom of God, into a
Goddess of wisdom. What they spoke of this Goddess or daughter of Jove, was
most true of the wisdom and Son of God. He was begotten from all eternities
of his Father without a mother, very God of very God, Geber el, or the strong
God. And whilst He remained in the bosom of his Father only, sending forth
wise men and Prophets unto his people, he did in no wise participate of any
infirmity. But that this wisdom and Son of God, should be conceived and
borne of a mother, without a father, and sent forth into the world upon the
same embassage thar he had sent his servants; was a ttuth far remote from
that hemisphere of darkness wherein the heathen sat; yet a common prenotion
amongst Gods people. And what better proof can be desired for evincing him to
be a man (as the Prophet terms him) of infirmities, then his taking his whole
substance from the infirmer and weaker sex. Job 14. v. 1.
The man that is borne of a woman (says Job) is of few days full of trouble;
Intimating, as some think, that as life and strength are from the Father, so
frailty and mortality are from the Mother. It is not then strange, if He who
took his whole substance from his mother, were peculiarly capable of
infirmities. A dry and wearyish soil, cannot naturally send forth goodly
Cedars, full of sap: nor could the incredulous Jew have expected, his promised
Messiah should be a Giant, or man of strength, had he but duly considered,
that he was to be the woman's seed, flesh of her flesh, and bone of her bone;
not so of Man's. And more particularly of this sprig of Iesse, says the
Prophet, Isa. 53. v. 2.
He shall grow up before him, as a tender plant, and as a root out of a dry
ground: he has no form nor comeliness, and when we shall see him, there is
no beauty that we should desire him, he is despised and rejected of men, a
man of sorrows and acquainted with grief.

19 Marriage well fitted is a kind of music, and consists in a true consort
of the stronger and weaker sex. But in this happy marriage betwixt HEAVEN and
EARTH, between the Divine, and Humane Nature; the Son of God, and the Seed
of Abraham, there is a consort of contrarieties (of strength and weakness) in
their abstracts. He, that was Geber^el, the strength of God, is indissolubly
linkt with the weakness of man, with the flesh and substance of a woman. He,
of whom God might have said, as Jacob did of Reuben before his fall. Genesis 49.
v. 3.
My first borne, my might, and the beginning of my strength, the excellency of
dignity, and the excellency of power, is become (sin only excepted) like
unto Reuben, when his dignity was gone, unstable as water: The son of God,
(not by adoption, but by eternal generation) is sent forth, made of a woman,
and thereby subjected to more infirmities, then any man before him, had bin, or
after can be. Strength was thus to stoop to Weakness, that weakness might
become strong; and Aeternitie to match with Mortality; that our mortal bodies
might be immortal. For as Man and Wife are one flesh; so much more the Son
of God, and the woman's seed, make but one Christ. And in this consort, the
Spouse, or weaker nature, Coruscat Mariti, Titulis is really dignified, with
these late mentioned, or the like titles of her Lord and husband. Strength is
now become her girdle, and immortality her wedding garment; freedom, joy, and
happiness everlasting, are made her ioynter, whose former state was
mortality, charged with servitude and infirmities.

20 The former observation concerning the importance of the word mulier here
used, though (in my opinion) not impertinent to our Apostles meaning; may in
better judgments, seem rather to increase then diminish, a common
difficulty. First, were his meaning such as we suppose it; he had said
better, (...) then (...), factum ex foemina, rather then ex muliere. For
foemina being the proper name of the weaker sex, seems to import fragilitie,
more directly then Mulier does. Besides, this phrase factum ex foemine would
have well consorted with that principal article of our belief, He was made
and borne of a Virgin: With which, this form of speech in my text, factum ex
muliere, may seem scarce compatible. For virgo and foemina are subordinate,
every virgo is foemina; but virgo and mulier, or (...) and (...) are rather
opposites. Some learned Interpreters, notwithstanding, have observed the Greek
(...), to be sometimes taken for (...), as mulier likewise in the Latin is for
virgo. And why might not the Apostle use the like language? Yet in saying thus
much and no more, they make the manner of his speech more capable of excuse,
then meritorious of admiration; whereas to my apprehension, there lies a
mystery in the word (...) as here it is used by the Apostle, which had not
been so well expressed, either by the common name of the sex, (...), foemina, or
by (...), virgo.

For better notification of what I conceive; you are to consider, that virgo
and mulier (as the words answering to them in the Greek) have two
significations, or rather importances. Virgo sometimes implies no more then
foeminam intectam, or viri ignaram, a woman that knows not a man: sometimes it
signifies, foeminam intactam, nec desponsatam; a woman not betrothed. Mulier
likewise implies sometimes an opposition to the first importance or
signification of virgo, and signifies as much as foeminam corruptam, or viri
gnaram; sometimes it imports no more then foeminam viro desponsatam. And this
later use or importance whether of the Latin mulier, or of the Greek (...),
is not opposite but coincident to the second use or importance of virgo, or
(...). One and the same foemina, may be intacta, and yet desponsata, a wife or
woman betrothed unto a man, and yet a virgin. So Eve is called by the
septuagint (...) (in the original Ishah) a wife, at her first creation:
Matrimony it self was established, in her extraction out of Adams side. In
this sense she was mulier, a wife, when she committed the first transgression,
and yet (...) or foemina intacta a virgin too; for she did not know her
husband, before she had contaminated her soul with lusting after the serpents
bayts. And for this reason, would the wisdom of God be made man of a virgin,
and yet withal ex muliere, of a virgin betroathed unto an husband, that Eues
miscariage might be regaind in her. Eve was created to be a help to Adam, but
proved his ruin. The blessed virgin must likewise be solemnly consecrated for
an help to Man, but so consecrated, becomes a comforter, not to Joseph only,
but to all his brethren, to all the Israel of God, whether they be Jews or
Gentiles.

21 For the wisdom of God, thus solicitously and accurately to contriue and
plot the means of mankinds redemption, it was expedient and necessary, in
respect of that inbred superstition, wherewith both Jews and Gentiles were
deeply tainted. All of us, from our cradle, from the womb, are sick of our
mother Eues disease; prone, upon every light accidental circumstance, or want
of ceremonial references, to pick occasion when none is offered, to distrust
Gods promises for our good. The subtletie of the old serpent, continues still
the same, rather increast by long experience, then impaired by age. No
Sophister so captious, no Lawier so cunning, as He, to misperswade men either
that the instruments of their assurance want words to carry the inheritance
unto all, or that their Redeemer is unable or unwilling to instate the^ in it;
or that some, at least in respect of their particular condition or state of
life, are incapable of the good intended. For preve^ting this his cunning, has
God in his wisdom incompast and hedged in all mankind with such a world of
references, and admirable alliances unto his Son made man of a woman, as no
sort or condition of men, that frame their aspect aright, can suspect
themselves to be excluded. Every circumstance of his person, conception, birth
and life, are suited, as it were of purpose, to give check unto the utmost
curiosity of superstitious humane fancy.

22 Had our redeemer been only man, though a man much more after Gods own
heart, then his father David was; we would have said of him as we do of a
friend whose mind we know to be better then his means; Surely, he wishes
me well, and would lay down his life to do me good: but being once dead,
what dominion can he have over death? Or raised again; yet being far absent
in the highest heavens; how shall he guard me against Satan and his Angels,
still present to assault me here on earth? Again, had he been only the Son
of God; we would have conceived of him, as we do of many great ones, whom we
acknowledge to be honorably disposed, but not so tenderly compassionate of
poor men's cases, as might be wished; because they have no acquaintance with
poverty or the miseries that attend it. To prevent these temptations to
distrust; God would have his only Son to be made a Man of sorrows, and of
entire acquaintance with grief; a man subject to greater bodily vexations then
any in this life can taste. And yet at last to be exalted according to his
humane nature unto glory, that we might have a solicitour in the Court of
Heaven, of our own corporation and stock: one that could pity our wants,
and compassionate our grievances, by the lively experience, and never fading
memory of his own more grievous sufferings whilst he lived on earth; able
withal to plead our deliverance from danger, out of that infinite wisdom
which He is, and to procure it by that infinite favor and respect, which he
has with his father from everlasting.

23 Or if the son of God had been made man, as Adam was of the earth, or not
thus miraculously made of a woman: the old serpent might easily have brought
the weaker sex into a relaps of their native distrust unto Gods promises.
Fear, if not despair, would in temptations have overtaken them, least Christ
had been sent forth to redeem the Man only, whose sex he assumed, not
silly woman, to whom he had no special reference. Or had he been made MAN of
a Virgin only, not of a wife or woman betroathed to an husband; married
persons might have mistrusted, least matrimony had made them more capable of
their first parents curse, then of the blessing made in the promised seed* or
least the conjunction of twain in one flesh, might have caused a divorce of
both from him, unto whom whosoever is conjoined, 1. Cor. 6. v. 17.
is made one spirit w^^h him. Now that the world might know marriage to be
honorable among all men; and that the bonds of undefiled wedlock, are no
setters to the soul: it pleased the wisdom of God to be conceived in
wedlock, and borne of a virgin affianced to a man. On the contrary, least the
Eunuch, (He, I mean, that either by nature is unfit for marriage, or out of
judicious resolution and discreet choice, holds marriage unfit, or inexpedient
for him) should take up his complaint, and say, alas, I am a dry tree, and
can bring forth no fruit unto eternal life: it has pleased the only begotten
SON of God to grace and sanctify single life, by his own practice and
example. For though he were made man of a woman, betroathed unto an husband:
yet was he never betroathed unto any woman: that no humane soul of what
condition, or sex soever, might have occasion to despair of being eternally
betroathed to him. The end and issue of his admirable chastity, was to
institute, that supernatural and sacred Polygamie, which was (perhaps) by
peculiar indulgence of divine dispensation legally foreshadowed in the
multitude of David's wives, or in the Polygamie of others, from whom he
descended. Howsoever, Esaias 54. v. 1.
as the desolate has more children then she that has an husband, so are the
spouses of this chaste and holy one, more in number, then the wives and
concubines of luxurious Solomon. He is that everlasting bridegroom, whose
Courts no multiplicitie of consorts can pollute: there is no soul, so it bring
faith for its dowry, but may be assuredly espowsed to him. What was spoken of
Eve in respect of Adam is true of all (be they male or female) that are once
espowsed to him. They are members of his body, (and therefore cannnot be cut
off) of his flesh, and of his bones: and being such, there is no danger of any
Nullitie; they can never be divorced from him; there is nothing that can
diminish or estrange his love. Barrenness by one woman's child birth, is now no
more a reproach unto the rest: so they be not barre^ in faith, the childlesse
are more dear to him than was Hannah to her husband. Virginity it self is
become exceeding fruitful, by the fruit of the Virgins womb. And the Eunuch,
which in time past, Deuteronomy. 23. v. 1
might not enter into the Congregation of the Lord, Isa. 56. v. 5.
has now gotten a place and name in the house of God better then of sons and
daughters, for there is no name so dear and tender as the name of Spowse; none
so capable of everlasting habitation with the immortal king.

24 But all this being granted, that our Redeemer was made man of a woman, who
was both wife and virgin, that he himself made choice of single life: these
circumstances only minister hope to both sexes, or states of life. But he that
was thus made and thus lived, is the undoubted heir and Lord of all things:
And what comfort can the destressed captive, the poor servant or bondslaue
reap, from his incarnation, that is by nature the Son of God, King of this
world, and Father of the world to come? Surely, as much as any other, if not
more, so he brook his estate with patience; for it follows: He was made under
the Law, etc.

25 If such as were under the Law, were (as the Apostle often inculcates) in
bondage, or in the state and condition of pupils, or servants: then
questionless the Son of God, in being made under the Law, became a serva^t,
for his present estate and condition, that he might make servants free men,
and sons of God. And this reason is expressed by the Apostle, in my text:
Besides this; unless the son of God had professed his obedience, and service
unto the Law, by being circumcised the eight day: Men of Jewish progeny, might
have been tempted to doubt whether God had not set the badge or seal of
circumcision upon their nation, as he did his mark upon Cain, in token they
should be vagabonds, and fugitives from his presence. Indeed the greatest part
of the circumcision, proved Cains brethren in the event: but that God did not
by circumcision mark them to exile and slaughter, is sufficiently manifested
in that he caused his only Son to be circumcised. So then he is circumcised
and made under the law, that such as were of the circumcision and under the
law, might have full assurance he was sent forth to be their redeemer. Yet had
he been conceived in the same province wherein he was borne and circumcised:
the ten tribes, or kingdom of Israel, might well have doubted, whether Gods
promises had not been entailed unto the tribe of Judah; whether their
fore-Elders had not releast their interest in them, and forespoken all their
posterities hopes, by that desperate and unhappy speech, which fell from them
when they first revolted from Rehoboam: What portion have we in David? 1. King.
12.16.
neither have we inheritance in the son of Iesse.

26 This, or the like temptation, upon whatsoever ground conceived, wrought
strongly with this people whilst they remained in captivity* and for this
reason, when God persuades them to return with Judah into the land of promise,
he is enforced to promise them by the Prophet Jeremy, that the expected
Messiah (for whose birth Micah had taken up Bethlehem) should be co^ceiu'd and
made of a woman in the land of Israel. To this purpose I have heretofore, out
of this place, expounded that passage, Ier. 31. Turn again o virgin of
Israel, etc. For the Lord has created a new thing (not in the earth or wide
world, at random: but) in thy land; the female shall enclose the male. His
speech is full, and yet precise and wary: for he was only enclosed in the land
of Israel, and brought forth in Judah.

27 But the better right or title these circumstances of Christ's conception,
birth, or circumcision, convey either to the kingdom of Israel, or Judah
severally, or jointly to the whole seed of Abraham after the flesh: the less
hope could we Gentiles have, of any portion in the son of Iesse, had not the
Lord, out of his infinite mercy and wisdom, made the covenant of life and
blessing with Abraham, before he took upon him the mark of circumcision; that
is, before there was any legal distinction between the Jew and Gentile. This
is a point so admirably pressed, by the great Apostle of the Gentiles, for their
comfort, that it shall suffice me, to quote some few passages of his comments
upon Moses narrations; which I can never read without admiration, and secret
joy of heart. And the Scripture foreseeing that God would justify the heathen
through faith, Gal. 3. v. 8, 9.
preached before the Gospel unto Abraham, saying in thee shall all nations be
blessed. So then they which be of faith, shall be blessed with faithful
Abraham. As he had said to the like purpose before. Abraham believed in God,
and it was counted to him for righteousness. Know ye therefore, Verse. 6.7.
that they that be of faith, the same are the children of Abraham.

The true issue, or (...), of that great controversy between him and his
countryme^, is, whether Circumcision and observance of that Law whereby the Jew
was distinguished from the Gentile, or BELIEF in Gods promises concerning the
seed to come, did make men sons of Abraham and of blessing. Our Apostles plea
for BELIEF is unanswerable, because Abraham by believing God, received the
promises in the name and behoof of the nations, before he received the sign
of circumcision: which may hence be argued to be no infallible sign of
blessing, in that it was imparted as well to Ismael, Abraham's son; according
to the flesh, as unto Isaac, who was the son of promise. Much less could the
observance of the law, which was not given till four hundred and thirty
years after the former covenant was established, make men sons of Abraham,
and of blessing. Covenants which receive their whole strength and virtue from
the will or purpose of men, being once confirmed, Gal. 3.15.
no man may disanull, or add ought to them. The contractors themselves must
change their minds, or revoke their mutual coments, before any other may
correct or change their deeds. But Gods promise for man's good can neither
change of it self, nor be changed by any. Yet had Abraham not Gods promise
only, but his solemn oath to assure the inheritance of blessing to him and his
seed. There is no mention of any release on Abraham's part; and it were impiety
to think, that God, without some release made by him whilst he lived, would
be so injurious, as to retract, or alter the covenant after his death. Or
shall a title immediately grounded on his solemn oath, whose word alone gives
strength and being to al things that are, (eve^ power and authority to laws
themselves) need the corroboration of any Law? To what end the^ was the Law
given so long after Abraham's death* that his posterity might plead their title
by it, to the inheritance before promised? This is that which our Apostle
prosecutes, with such deep, but just indignation, throughout this discourse.
For this was in effect to distrust Gods oath, and for their parts, utterly to
renounce all interest in the covenant made to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; by
seeking thus to draw the free Doner into new legal bonds with Moses. Yet if
the Law added nothing to their former assurance, the question still remains,
why it was given? Gal. 3. v. 19.
the Apostle resolves us It was added because of transgression. In which words
he would give us to understand, that the whole world was quoad rem, for its
present estate or condition, under the curse denounced against Adam: the best
of whose children were heirs of blessing, only quoad spem; the life of our
hope or expectation, being in the promised seed, which was to come into the
world. In the interim, till his coming, God gave his Law to Abraham's seed
after the flesh, that the threats and curses contained in it, might imprint a
lively sense and feeling of that first curse, under which the whole world
stood; and that the sense or feeling hereof, might bring forth a more eager
longing after the second Adam, or promised seed, who was to propagate the
blessing unto mankind: who being manifested in the flesh, was to redeem all
from that curse which had befallen the whole nature in Adam; and being made
under the Law, was to redeem the seed of Abraham from the particular curses of
the Mosaicall or ceremonial Law. This Law then, whilst it lasted, concurred no
otherwise to the adoption of sons then privation does to the constitution of
natural bodies. It was principium transmutationis, non constitutionis: to
vanish out of the world whiles the world was regenerated. The principal point
whereat our Apostle aims in this Epistle, is to ascertaine both Jew and
Gentile, that their deliverance from the forementioned curses, was on their
parts to be expected, by the same means, and upon the same condions, that the
promise of blessing had been established with Abraham. This is the maine
co^clusio^, Wherefore the Law was our schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ,
Chap.3.23. etc
that we might be justified by faith. But after that faith is come, we are no
longer under a schoolmaster. For ye are all the children of God by faith in
Christ Jesus. For as many of you, as have been baptized into Christ, have put
on Christ. There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free,
there is neither male nor female, for ye are all one in Christ Jesus. And if
ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise.

28 Thus you have heard rudely, and briefly, what the Son of God for his part
has done, that he might be a perfect Redeemer, and impartial Mediator
between God and man: and you know what on our part, is required, for the
accomplishing of our redemption, Abraham's faith. Now were it as well known,
what it is truly to believe, as that true belief is on our parts only
requisite, for attaining the blessing promised to Abraham, and to his seed;
most of our ministerial labors were at an end. But my time for provision has
been so short, and my opportunities for intentive meditations in this short
time so few, that I could not hope, either much to amend the characters of
larger Comments to this purpose; or that these unrefined, should make any
better impression, whiles I utter them, in your ears; then they have done, or
may do, whiles you read them, in your eyes. I was the willinger to spend the
whole time now allotted, in laying these foundations; because men usually
expect strength rather then curiosity of workmanship in foundations scarce
brought above ground. Howbeit, no man would willingly tharch upon a strong
foundation, though rude and plain. And a better cover I could not in this
exigence provide, if I should make up the structure or application. All I have
to say unto you, is by way of request; that as often as you shall compare, or
hear lively faith compared unto a tree, and good works unto the fruit; you
would vouchsafe to take this note of remembrance from me: Faith is a plant of
Paradise, which comes not up by generation, but is herein truly like to trees
of the first creation, that it does not send forth leaves before blossoms, nor
blossom before it bring sorth fruit. For it has his fruit created in it. If
you further demand what be the proper fruits of true belief, as it is fixed on
this peculiar object or article of faith, [ The son of God, Abraham's seed
made of a woman:] He himself has resolved you they are, Mat. 5. v 1, etc.
Poverty in spirit, godly sorrow, meekness, hunger, and thirst after
righteousness, mercifulness, purity of heart, etc. For that blessedness
which God did promise, without a sequester or mediator unto faithful Abraham,
and in him to all true believers, is, by this son of God, and sole fountain
of al blessings promised, expressly bequeathed with the mouth of man, unto the
poor in spirit, to mourners, to the meek, to the merciful, and pure in
heart. Albeit the denominations be much different, yet these qualifications
differ no more from Abrah^^^ ^aith, then fractions or parcels do from their
proper integr^ms. To believe in Christ made of a Virgin, is to have him
fashioned in our hearts whose whole life and conversation was a pattern of
such practices, as he there commends unto us, in the beginning of the
Evangelicall i^bilie. Now, did we put Him on as truly in our daily
conversation, as we have done by profession* at our baptism: we might be as
well known to be sons of adoption by these Christian habits, as Academicks,
or Graduats by our weeds and ornaments. But if we should make inquiry after
the first parcel or f^action of true faith in Christ (such (...) and spirit as
was in the blessed virgin; which conceived him) amongst the rich and mighty:
we may perhaps find some shadow of it in their outward complement, like a
beggar at a potentates gate, within which he may not enter. To give harbor or
lodging to such a base gest in their hearts, is a disparagement to their
greatness. Even poverty her self, may bewail the paucitie of the poor in
spirit amongst her children. Such as have been mightily humbled by potent
adversaries, have iuster occasion to lament the want of true humility in their
breasts, then the abundance of grievances, or heavy burdens, which others lay
upon their back^* For the most of us, seeing we make our mouths issues either
of bitterness, scarrility, corrupt communicatio^, or of jesting which is nor
comely* shall we not sin against our own souls, and give the spirit of God
the lie; if we say we are pure in heart? Yet says St John* Every one that has
this hope in him (of being the sons of God by adoption in this life, 1 Ioh. 3.
v 3.
and of seeing God in the life to come) does purify himself as he is pure.
What shall we say then? Lord if thou will thou can make us clean? but alas,
how often would thou have purified us, and we would not be purified? Yet
grant, MOST GRACIOUS FATHER, we beseech thee, that our particular wills and
desires may evermore want success, rather then their accomplishment should
defeat or frustrate our general Desire, of being blessed with faithful
Abraham. Accept This (good Lord) we entreat thee for our final desire, and
let it be registered in everlasting Records, as our last will and Testament, Not
as we will, but as thou will, For our wills are tainted with corruption, and
naturally ^end unto destruction* or though they be sometimes set aright, and
freed from error in their actual choice; yet their choice is always subject to
change; as variable as temptations are various. But as thou art, so is thy will,
most holy and righteous, without shadow of change, a will of life and
salvation: Lord let not these our corruptible wills, but this thy everlasting
will be fulfilled in us. AS thou have promised blessedness to faithful Abraham,
and in him to all believers: so, we beseech thee, bless us with true belief,
with lowliness of spirit, with meeknes, with purity of heart, and with
whatsoever other fruits of faith, to which thy Son our Savior has bequeathed
his blessing.

FINIS.

