The raging Tempest stilled.

THE HISTORY of CHRIST his passage, with his Disciples, over the Sea of
Galilee, and the memorable and miraculous occurrents therein.

Opened and explaned in weekly Lectures (and the Doctrines and Uses fitly
applied to these times, for the direction and comfort of all such as fear Gods
Judgments) in the Cathedral and Metropoliticall Church of CHRIST, Canterb.

By THOMAS IACKSON, Doctor of Divinity, and one of the Prebends, and Lecturer
there.



LONDON, Printed by JOHN HAVILAND for Godfrey Emondson and Nicolas Vavasour.
1623.

DIGNISSIMIS Clarissimisque Viris, Domino DECANO, ac PREBENDARIIS, Ecclesiae
Cathedralis, and Metropoliticae, CHRISTI Cantuar. Fratribus charissimis,
Gratiam and Pacem in Domino.
QVanquam (Viri, Patres, Fratres, in Christo Reverendi) plurimum latentis (...)
viva vox habet, and in aures discipuli, de Authoris ore transfusa, adeo sonet,
(quod habet Hieronymus Hieronym. epist. Paulino, Tom. ult. Basil. apud I^.
Frob. anno 1524.
) ut illa, rei scriptae, quantum homo vivus picto homini, antecellat Tull. de
Orat. lib. 3.
; tamen, dubitandum non est, quin (iuxta dictum illius Clem. Alexand. Strom.
lib. 1. Basil. anno 1556.
) mirificos fructus, res scripta afferat, and etiam quoddam praedicandi genus
sit. Quod identidem mihi consideranti, cum iam per triginta annos, in Ecclesia,
quasi in acie, cum vitijs pro virtutibus Concionator depugnarim; videor me, non
prorsus inutile, facturum; si conscientia zeli erga benignissimum meum
Salvatorem motus, and publicae utilitatis (...) quadam ductus, ista, qualia,
qualia fuerint, praelo mandem, and in lucem emittam. Equibus, si vel minimis
Domini mei conservis, in Ecclesiae navicella (heu, (...) pene operta!) hinc
inde fluctuantibus, aliquantulum solatij emersisse persentiscam; me aliqua ex
part officio meo functum, nonignarus conijciam.

Non desunt Iesuitae (deessent utina^) reru^ publicaru^ flagella, and
seditionu^ flabella Dr. And. Co^cion. ad Convocat. anno 1592.
; qui (...), in Ecclesia excita^tes, quibus possunt medijs, vi, dolove,
veritate^ indies magis, magisque (proh dolor!) conantur obstruere. Vbi enim non
est locus tormentis, utuntur argumentis; ubi terrore non movent, errore
decipiunt; ubi non compellunt minis, precibus compellant; denique aut regunt,
aut rogant; and in his, ipsi susque deque cursitantes exuda^t Videant Lectores,
societatem Iesuitarum, (a Iesuita)-Cosmopolitam dictam. Cornel. a Lapid. in
Numb. 1. 5. page 774. (...): Grae^. Paroem.
. Quidinterim nos, (...) 1 Cor. 4. 1.
? In utramque aurem otiose dormitabimus; dum cymba Christi patiatur naufragium?
Absit, absit dico; utut.n. dormire ad tempus videatur Nauclerus, nobis interim
Ministris, remis and velis, (...), totis (quod aiunt) viribus, gnaviter
incumbendum est. Evigilabit siquidem tempestive Dominus; ehodum mare, ac ventos
obiurgabit; and magna erit tranquillitas Hoc auguror, hoc voveo. Amen.
. Quae, quo citius oriatur, tuam Clementiam, Bone Rector Maris, precamur; ut
averruncentur hinc procul sceleratissimi Iesuitae, cum iniquitatis suae
cooperarijs, sacerdotibus Pontificijs; a quibus (sine Scriptura, Theologis;
sine miraculis, Apostolis; sine veritate, Catholicis; sine pace, Sacrificis;
sine Patientia, Martyribus; sine vera fide, Religiosis August. Tom. 6. contr.
Manich.
;) nulla securitas expectanda est: utpote, quorum ars, quam mars; pax, quam
fax; mel, quam fell; proditio, quam expeditio; amicitia praefucata, quam
inimicitia despicata, long gravius est extimescenda Sylv. Girald. Topogr.
Hiber.
.

In Conciunculis interim his, quas ipse crasso (quod aiunt) filo contexerim, si
vel nihil, vel per-parum occurrat, quod acriori ingenio, and sublimiori judicio
aetatis nostrae, (quae (...) expectat,) plane arrideat Poscentes vario nimium
diversa palato. Horat. inserm.
; ne miremini obsecro. Scitote, me, rebus Dei, non phalaris humanis studuisse;
homines, non humana; 1 Cor. 1. 17.
utilitatem, non elegantiam; emolumentum, non ornamentum quaesivisse: quippe,
qui, a Christomissus Euangelizare (neque illud, (...)) (...) Eruditum sa^is,
quod clarum est.
, apud me judicarim. Veritatem Dei, (qua non fortius desiderat anima justa
August. in Johan. tract. 26. col. 225. D.
) nude proposui. Gloriam suam quaerit, qui, splendore verborum, gloriam crucis
Christi obscurat, ut non illa sed ipse laudetur Ambros.
: Et, Rhetoricorum pompa verborum, Daemonum cibus est Hieronym. Damas. page
131. Basil. Apud Io. Eroben. Anno 1524.
.

Methodus, quae mea futura sit, primo limine introspicienti, est obvia; quam,
cum (...), mihi probonitate sua impertierit, ipsam nemo despiciat Sic non te
spernat, qui pro nobis dignatus est sper^^. August. tom. 2. Ep. 2^. coll. 100.
: sed in singulis, quaelegerit, ubi pariter certus est, pergat mecum; ubi
pariter haesitat, quaerat mecum; ubi errorem suum cognoscit, redeat ad me; ubi
meum, revocet me August tom. 3. de T(...). lio. 1. cap. 3. coll. 241.
. Si quid in his been est, divinum agnoscat; si quid male, quod humanum est,
ignoscat; si quid placeat, habeat Deo gratias propter me; si quid non, ignoscat
mihi propter Deum Lu^ovi^. Viv. in August de C^vi at. Dei, ^^b. 22. cap. ult.
ad (...), coll. 1398.
Si quid monendum censuerit, libere (modo candide) f^ciat; sentiet enim me, in
id operam navare sedulo, ut commune Religionis negotium, dictis, scriptis,
fact^^, pro virili promoveam; quaeque Deograta Ecclesiae utilia, mihique ad
salutem necessaria fuerint, (...) peragam.

Cogitanti autem mihi, cujus tandem Patrocinio, has impolitiores oratiunculas,
pro more, darem; subinde se ultro obtulit praelustris Fraternitas vestra, (viri
gravissimi:) quorum and pio affectu, and pleno consensu, cum in Praelectorem
inclytae nostrae Ecclesiae Cathedralis, ac Metropoliticae, electus, extremum
vitae curriculum, apud vos praeclaros meos Symmistas egerim, and per continuos
hosce annos octo, Sacrae Scripturae locis (praesertim Parabolicis) explicandis,
inservierim, Deoque annuente, inservio; aequissimum duxi, ut tenues hos meos
labores, vobis, qui praesentia sedula, and arrectis auribus, eosdem viva voce
prolatos, cohonest astis; quo possum cum affectu, quo debeo cum respectu,
(...).

Accipite ergo, sicut accepistis, (rogat vos avide, qui pro vobis orat
quotidie,) (...) hoc, levidense fateor, at amoris synceri (...); candida, qua
datur, mente suscipite. Quid hinc mihi solatij certo venerit, quidve libro
balbutienti splendour is emicuerit, vobis veluti parcens August. Tom. 2. Ep.
110. coll. 515. B.
, scriptis gravabor conijcere.

Quinimo studijs vestris gravioribus consulens, Coronidis loco, Deum Opt. Max.
intime precabor, ita cogitationibus and conatibus vestris superne benedicat, ut
pace, colloquio, consilio mutuis (sicut fecimus) ad Dei gloriam, Ecclesiae
commodum, et nostrum solatium, perpetuo fruamur: quo fiet, ut qui in Ecclesia
militante, fratres convivimus unanimes, intriumphante, regnemus coheredes; ubi
hymnidici Angeloru^ chori, and societas civium supernorum; ubi semper melliflua
hymnorum organa sonant, suavissima Angelorum melodia, Cantica Canticorum mira,
a supernis civibus decantantur August. Tom. 9. Manual. cap. 6. coll. 794.
; Vbi gaudium plenum, and plusquam plenum; pleno quippe cord, plena mente,
plena anima, pleno toto homine gaudio illo, adhuc supra modum, supererit
gaudium August. sup. Manual. c. 36. coll. 808.
. Hoc, obnixe obtestatur,

Frater, and Orator, foelicitatis vestrae studiosissimus: T. J.

A Logical ANALYSIS of the Text.
IN the history of Christ his passage by Sea, two principal things are to be
observed, viz.
1. Their shipping, in the 23. verse: where note, 1. The persons, who; and are
made known by two things: and 1. By their number, who were and CHRIST, and His
Disciples.
2. By their order, (Christ went before, and h^ Disciples followed him)
2. The vessel wherein, (a ship.)
2. Their sailing: where note, 1. Their danger, in verse. 24. wherein observe,
1. A note of attention, (Behold.) and 2. A Narration; which has two parts: 1.
A declaration of the cause; and that is, 1. (...), (a Tempest.) and 2. (...),
by two things, 1. Quality, (it rose suddenly.) and 2. Quantity, (a great one.)

2. A^a^gravation of the danger by two circumstances, 1. The ship was even
covered with waves. and 2. Christ himself was on sleep.


2. Their deliverance, which is 1. Procured in the 25. verse^ where note, and
1. The persons procuring it, (His Disciples.) 2. Of whom they procure it,
(Him.) 3. What they do being come to him, (they awoke him.) 4. What they said
which being supplicatory has two parts, 1. Their suit, (Lord save ^s.) and 2.
Reason, (We perish.)

2. Performed by a double reprehension, viz. 1. He reproves his Disciples; and
that for two sa^^ts, and 1. Their excessive fear, (Why are ye fearful?) and
2. Their defective faith, (O ye^ of little faith!)
2. He rebukes the winds and sea: where note, 1. A preparation, (He arose.)
and 2. Reprehension it self, (He rebuked the winds and the sea.)


3. The effects, which were of two sorts, 1. In the winds and sea, (There was a
great calm.) and 2. In the men; and was twofold, viz. 1. Admiration, (But the
men marvelled.) and 2. Interrogations where note 1. A (...), (What manner of
man is this?) and 2. A R^^son thereof, (For even the winds and sea obey him.)




THE RAGING TEMPEST STILLED.
MATTHEW. 8. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27. And when he was entered into a ship, his
disciples followed him. etc.
Comment.
lit. THey that go down to the Sea in ships, and occupy their business in
great waters; these see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep:
for he commands and raises the stormy wind, which lifts up the waves
thereof: they mount vpto the heaven, they go down again to the depths, their
soul is melted because of trouble. They reele to and fro, and stagger like a
drunken man, and are at their wits end: then they cry to the Lord, in their
trouble, and he brings them out of their distresses; he makes the storm a
calm, so that the waves thereof are still. Then are they glad, because they be
quiet: so he brings them to their desired haven. Psalm. 107. 23 - 31. mystic.
Navicula, Ecclesia est; quae mari. i. seculo; fluctibus, i. persequutionibus
inquietatur; Domino, per patientiam, veluti dormiente; d^nec orationibus
Sanctorum suscitatus compescat seculu^, and tranquillitatem suis red dat. T^rt.
l. de Baptismo cap. 12.
LORD IESV CHRIST, who art ascended Prayer.
on high, leadest captivity captive, and give gifts unto men; captivate, and
bring into subjection, mine understanding, will, affections; furnish me with
gifts, and guide mine heart, tongue, and pen, that I may think, write, and
speak, such things as may be for thy glory, the edification of thy Church, and
the peace, and comfort of mine own soul. Amen.

And when he was entered into a ship] Amongst Preface.
other co^forts and refreshings, which travelers have in their journeyes, and
voyages in this world, this is none of the least, that being wearied with
tedious land-trauell, they may more easily pass by water; one maine end, of
the sea, and of great rivers, wherewith it has pleased God, to interlace the
habitable world, as the natural body with veins of blood. We have traveled
a long and wearisome journey by land, and fetched home the prodigal from a far
country: now if it please God, and you, we will refresh our selves by water;
we have been in travel, with the Wisemen, who came from the East; we have
been in the High Priests house, where Peter denied his Master; we have been
in the Pharisees house, where the penitent woman washed Christ's feet with
tears; we have been in the Temple, where Judas cast down his silver; we have
been in the field, both in seed time, in the parable of the sower; and in
harvest, in the parable of wheat and tares; we have been in the garden, in the
parable of the sowing, and growing of mustard seed; we have been upon Mount
Tabor, in the story of Christ his transfiguration; and on Mount Calvarie,
where, one of the thieves penitently confessed: we have been in the
wilderness, in the parable of the shepherd seeking his lost sheep; we have
been in the Indies, in the parable of seeking for hidden treasure; yea we
have, in our meditations, been in the joys of Heaven, and torments of Hell,
in the parab^e of Dives, and Lazarus; we have been almost every where: but,
upon the sea, in all our travels, we have not taken ship till now; but now by
Gods grace, we will make a sea-voyage. But, as wise mariners, though wind and
weather be never so fair and calm, provide for a storm; so I wish you
provide your tacklings; for I assure you, we shall have a great storm: but
fear neither wind nor sea, rock nor sand; for Christ is our pilot; and every
passenger, though much weather-beaten, yet shall in the end arrive safely at
the wished haven: only, as Paul before he took ship, kneeled down and Acts
20. 36.
prayed; be not wanting in your private prayers, that God would send us a
prosperous journey.

If it please you, I will first parallel this story with some other both
positive and exemplary Scriptures: the former is in the Psalms, where the
Psalmist says, They that go down to the sea in ships, and occupy their
business in great waters, these see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in
the deep; for he commands and raises the stormy wind, which lifts up the
waves thereof; they mount up to the heaven, and go down again to the depths;
their soul melts, because of the trouble; they reele to and fro, and stagger
like a drunken man, and are at their wits end; then they cry unto the Lord in
their trouble, and he brings them out of their distresses; he makes the
storm a calm, so that the waves thereof are still; then are they glad because
they be quiet, so he brings them to their desired haven: Oh that men would
therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, and declare his wonderful works
to the children of men Psalm. 107. 23. 5.
. Oh what an excellent Comment is that, on this story! Other such examples the
Scriptures afford; as a like story we have in Jonah, when he flying to Tharsis
from the presence of the Lord, the Lord raised a wonderful storm and tempest,
the sea wrought and was troublous, the ship like to be broken, so as the
mariners were afraid, and cried to their gods, and cast forth their wares into
the sea; but the sea would not be calm, till Jonah was cast into it Jonah. 1.
4.
. A like we have, in the New Testament, in Paul's dangerous voyage toward Rome,
there rising so great a tempest, that all hope to be saved was taken away, and
though they cast out the very tacklings and all, yet upon boards, and broken
pieces of the ship, all came safe to land Acts 27. 14.
. The letters of which story afford many excellent and useful instructions,
and specially to seamen; yea and to be laid up for future use of us all; for
howsoever we have been borne, and lived long upon the land, yet it may be, we
have been, or we know not how we may be endangered, and tossed upon sea,
before we die. But specially the mystery does greatly concern us all: for
preparation whereunto, be pleased to note, that there are many histories in the
word, which either are Allegorical in signification, or may be Allegorically
compared and resembled; we have good warrant from the Scriptures for it. It is
a plain story, that Abraham had two sons, the one by a freewoman, Sarai; the
other by a bond-maid, Hagar Genesis 16. penult. and 21. 2.
: yet the Apostle says, these things are an Allegory, and signify the two
Testaments Gal. 4. 22.
; or Covenants of Works and Grace. Noah's Arc, wherein eight persons were
saved, a true story Genesis 6, 7, 8 cap.
; yet S. Peter makes it a figure of Baptism, whereby we are saved 1 Pet. 3. 21.
. The children of Isreal's passing through the red sea, a true story Exodus 14.
; yet the Apostle makes that also a figure of Baptism 1 Cor. 10. 2.
. The children of Israel did drink of the water out of a rock, a true story
Exodus 17. 6.
; yet the Apostle says, that rock was Christ 1 Cor. 10. 4.
. God fed them with Manna from heaven, a true story Exodus 16. 14.
; yet Christ says, I am that bread of life, which came down from heaven Ioh.
6. 48, 51.
. Solomon's marriage with Pharaohs daughter, a true story 1 King. 3. 1.
; yet represents unto us, Christ his espousing of the Churches of the
Gentiles Psalm 45. 9, 10.
. Many such there might be produced, of which nature this present story is,
(as all that I have seen commenting on the same, do unanimously affirm) And
therefore reserving the I. Sea.
truth of the story Salva rerum gestarum fide. August. lib. de unitate
Ecclesiae, cap. 5.
; by sea here, we may understand this world; so it is compared by S. John;
Before the throne there was a sea of glass like Crystal Rev. 4. 6.
: like a sea; for as it is sometimes calm, so does it many times rage, and is
in wonderful motion and agitation, and full of rocks, syrtes, and sands; by
allusion whereunto, the Apostle speaks of some tossed to and fro, and carried
about with winds of doctrine Ephesians. 4. 14.
; yea and speaks of some, that have made shipwreck 1 Timothy 1. 19.
: but a sea of glass; for no glass so brittle, and subject to cracks, as this
world; but a sea of Crystal too: Satan is the prince of darkness Ephesians. 6. 12.
, and his children are children of darkness Romans 13. 12.
; and their works are works of darkness Ibid.
; such subtle and politic plots and projects against the Church, as no eye
can see or discern them: but as a man's eye will easily discern the least
spot, yea or mote in Crystal; so, and a thousand times more clearly, does God
see and discern, even the secretest thoughts of men's hearts, all things being
naked, and open before his eyes, with whom we have to do Hebr. 4. 13.
; and the eyes of Christ being like a flame of fire Rev. 1. 14.
, carrying light which way soever it pleases him to look. And as the Arc of
Noah, so this ship, into which Christ and dis disciples 2. Ship.
entered, may represent unto us the Church militant, wherein Christ and all the
faithful do pass toward the haven of happiness; and in most resemblances is
wonderful fit; as hereafter more fully.

Thirdly, this great tempest upon the sea, endangering 3. Storm.
the ship, does lively represent the great troubles and persecutions, which the
Devil and bloody Tyrants raise in the world, against the true Church of
Christ; threatening, in man's judgment, the utter ruin and destruction thereof;
whereof David thus speaks, in one metaphor, The sorrows of death compassed
me, the floods of ungodly men make me afraid Psalm. 18. 4.
: and again, If the Lord had not been on our side, when men rose up against
us, the waters had overwhelmed us, the stream had gone over our soul: Then
the proud waters had gone over our soul Psalm. 124. 4.
. And the Lord thus threatens, I will bring upon them the waters of the river,
even the King of Assyria Esaias 8. 7. Ierem. 47. 2.
. And David thus prayed, Save me O God, for the waters are come into my soul,
I am come into deep waters, where the floods overflow me Psalm. 69. 1.
.

Fourthly, Christ his being on sleep, in this 4 Christ his sleep.
storm, when the ship was in such danger, does represent Christ his seeming to
neglect his Church, in her persecutions, and to leave his people in their
enemies hands; about which they thus expostulate, Why do thou absent thy
self, in this needful time of trouble Psalm 10. 1.
? we cry, and thou hear not Psalm. 22. 2.
: O God, how long shall the Adversary do this dishonor, how long shall the
enemy blaspheme thy name, for ever: why withdrawest thou thine hand, eve thy
right hand? pluck it out of thy bosom: arise O God, plead thine own cause
Psalm. 74. 10, 11, 22.
. Arise, O Lord to save me, Psalm. 3. 7.
etc. And again, more plainly in the metaphor of my text: Arise O God in thine
anger, lift up thy self, because of the rage of mine enemies, and awake for
me, to the judgment that thou have commanded, Psalm. 7. 6.
etc. And again, Awake, why sleep thou? O God, arise, cast us not off for
ever, wherefore hidest thou thy face, and forgettest our affliction and
oppression Psalm. 44. 23.
? The like in other places, whereof more hereafter.

The Disciples coming unto Christ, and as it 5 Called upon and awaked.
were with outcries awakening him, does shadow out the prayers of the
faithful, who in the distresses of the Church, do day and night call and cry
to him to awake, arise, and defend his Church, whereof I have even now alleged
some examples out of the Psalms.

Christ his arising, and rebuking winds and seas, 6 Causing a calm.
and causing a great calm, does represent Gods entering into judgment with the
enemies of his Church, apparently rebuking them, with sudden death, or some
great and visible judgment, whereupon great peace comes to Gods Church and
people. So that I know no Story, which may be allegorized, by greater authority
from the Scriptures, than this. And as by authority of the Scriptures, so of
the learned Fathers; witness that short metaphrase of Tertullian, lib. de
Baptismo, cap. 12. a very learned, and one of the ancientest Fathers, for there
were but Justin Martyr and Irenaeus before him; Clemens Alexandrinus was his
synchronos, or coetaneus, viz. within two hundred years after Christ; so
rarely qualified, humanis and divinis disciplinis, that both Ierom and
Lactantius commend him: and Cyprian usually called for his works, thus, Da
magistrum. Sixtus Senens. Navicula, Ecclesia est, quae mari,.i. seculo,
fluctibus. i. persequutionibus inquietatur, Domino per patientiam velut
dormiente, donec orationibus sanctorum suscitatus, compescat seculum, and
tranquillitatem suis reddat. I need not translate it, it is but the sum of
that you have heard before. And so I hope that handling it according to letter
and mystery, as if it were a real parable, it will prove profitable unto us.
For our more orderly proceeding wherein, we will first observe the Context, and
then the parts of the Text.

For the Context. In the former part of the Chapter, 1 Context.
the Evangelist shows that Christ had wrought diverse miracles: he had cleansed
a Leper, restored a Centurions servant, cured Peter's wives mother of a fever,
cast out devils out of the possessed, healed many that were sick, and
instructed by word of mouth some that would have been his disciples; but all
this was done upon the land. in terra: jam transit ad mare. Ludolph* ex Origin.
Now he will to sea, and there work miracles, and really instruct his
Apostles, that he may declare himself to be Lord both of sea and land.

In Christ his transfretation over the sea of Galilee Analysis.
with his Disciples, two things are principally to be noted, viz. first, their
shipping, in this 23 verse. and secondly, their sailing in all the rest. In
their shipping, two things, viz. the persons, and the means; who, and wherein:
the persons are known by their number, ( He, and his Disciples) and their
order; He went before, and ( the Disciples followed him:) the means, or
vessel wherein they passed, ( a ship.) In their sailing or passage, three
things are to be noted, viz. 1. their danger: 2. their deliverance: 3. the
effect. In declaration of their danger, we are to note the cause, and
greatness of it: the ordinary cause of their danger was ( a tempest) which is
described, first, by the quality ( it arose suddenly) and secondly, by the
quantity, it was ( great.) Secondly, the greatness of their danger is
declared by two circumstances, viz. ( the ship was even covered with waves) and
secondly, ( Christ was on sleep.) As concerning their deliverance out of this
danger, two things are to be noted, viz. first, the procuring; and secondly,
the performing thereof. In the procurement of deliverance, three things are to
be noted, viz. first, to whom in this distress they seek for deliverance, (his
Disciples came to Him:) secondly, what they do being come to him, (they awaken
him:) thirdly, what they say unto him; wherein observe, 1. a great Suit (Lord
save us.) 2. A weighty Reason (we perish.) In the performance of deliverance
thus procured, note a double Reprehension: 1. Of his disciples: and he
reproves them for two things, viz. first, excess of fear, (why are ye
fearful?) 2. Defect of faith (O ye of little faith.) In the second, we are
to note two things, viz. Preparation, (he arose) 2. Reprehension, (he rebuked
the winds and seas.) The effect of this deliverance is twofold, first in winds
and seas, (there was agreat calm:) secondly, in disciples and beholders; and
that is twofold, viz. first admiration, (the men marvelled) and secondly,
proclamation (who is this, that even the winds and seas do obey him?) Thus I
have made ready the ground, laid the foundation, proposed a model, laid in a
readiness the materials; the half of my work is now over, but the whole
profit thereof to you remains. Of these parts therefore now orderly for our
further instruction and edification. And first of their shipping; and therein,
first of the Passengers: and of them the first and chiefest comes orderly in
the first place to be considered, Part. 1.
(He.) Who is that? mentioned in the verse immediately before my Text, whereunto
this is a relation, (Jesus.)

And when Jesus was entered.] Our Savior went diverse times, and on several
occasions, into ships: sometimes, for more conveniencie in his preaching 1. For
preaching.
and ministry of the Word: So when there were great multitudes gathered
together to him, he went into a ship, and sat, and the whole multitude stood
on the shore: And he spoke many things to them in parables Matthew. 13. 2.
: And at another time; the people pressing upon him to hear the word of God,
as he stood by the lake of Gennezareth, he seeing two ships, entered into one of
them and sat down, and taught the people out of the ship Luke 5. 1.
: That, as out of the ship they used to cast their nets, and catch fishes, he
might by his example teach the Apostles how to cast the net of the Gospel, and
catch men; as he said unto them, Follow me, and I will make you fishers of men
Matthew. 4. 19. 2
: Sometimes also being weary with travel, and with preaching of the For
recreation.
Gospel, for the refreshing of himself and his Disciples: As they withdrew
themselves from the multitude, he saying unto them, Come apart into a desert
place, and rest a while, for there were so many coming and going, they had no
leisure so much as to eat; so they departed into a desert place by ship
privately Mark 6. 31.
. So good and gracious Christ was, knowing the bodies of his Disciples, not to
be iron nor brass, but flesh and blood, subject to faintness and
wearisomenesse, to allow them refreshings and recreations; though, alas, it was
but a poor refreshing, and for a little while: For the people saw their
departure, and ran on foot thither out of all Cities, and he had compassion
on them, and began to teach them, and healed all their sick Mark 6. 34.
Matthew. 14. 13. Luke 9. 10. 11.
. Thus could he scarce ever take rest. If he sit down weary on Jacobs Well
to rest him, by and by comme^^ a woman to ^raw water, and gives him occasion
of a large discourse. Though wearied with the labor of the day, yet even on
the night time, Nicodemus comes to him to be instructed John 3. 2.
. If he go into the desert, the people are there as soon as he, and he must
teach, and heal, and feed them. If he enter into a ship, no sooner on sleep,
but his Disciples awaken him, because of a storm; that as he had not whereon,
so he could no where rest his head Matthew. 8. 20.
.

Even such are the occasions of doing good, which Application.
God offreth to his servants, who are his Stewards, Husbandmen, and laborers,
that their work goes round with the year, they must follow it, in season and
out of season 2 Timothy 4. 2.
: labor to wearisomenesse, and yet never be weary of labor; but as the
proverb is, lay weary to weary, and comfort themselves with that of Saint John,
Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, for so says the Spirit, they rest
from their labors, and their works follow them Revel. 14. 13.
.

But it may seem, there were other two more special causes of his entering into
ship, and going to sea with his Disciples at this time; viz. First, that he 3.
The working of the miracle.
might proceed from doctrine to miracles, which may be observed still to be his
manner; As having preached upon the mountain, he was no sooner come down, but
he cleansed a Leper, healed the Centurions servant, cured Peter's wives mother,
and many that were diseased; for his miracles were as the seal of his
doctrine, as himself has said, The works that I do, bear witness of me,
that the Father has sent me John 5. 36.
. And again, If I do not the works of my Father, believe me not; but if I
do, though ^^^ believe not me, believe the works John ^^* 37.
. Now if we compare this with the other Evangelists, it will appear, that
Christ had taught the people many things in parables Mark 4. 34. Luke 8. 22.
, and therefore went purposely to the sea, that he might by miracle there (as
it were) seal the truth of that doctrine which he had taught, and delivered;
for as our Savior asked Philip, Whence shall we buy bread, that these may eat?
did it only to prove him, for he himself knew what he would do John 6. 6.
: So our Savior knew what he would do on the sea, and for what work he
purposely went thither at this time.

The fourth and last, was the trial of their faith, 4. Trial of his Apostles
faith.
who having been now some good time with him, he would make trial of their
proficiencie, as God tried Abraham Genesis 22. 1.
: not that God was ignorant what was in Abraham, or Christ ignorant, what was
in his Apostles; but they were ignorant what was in themselves, and presumed
they had more faith, than they had: wherefore it pleased our Savior Christ, by
bringing them into this danger on the sea, to let them see the weakness of
their faith, and by doing such a miracle strengthen it, and make them in all
future dangers, to rest more steadfastly on his Almighty power, and not fear
any evil, by water or land.

In whom we may behold, and learn for our instruction, Doctr.
what is the Lords usual manner of dealing with his Disciples. No
Schoolmasters does Simile.
make that trial of his scholars, of their proficiencie, that God makes of
his, concerning their profiting, and growth in Knowledge, Faith, Repentance,
Confirmation.
Patience, Zeal; none shall be long in his School, but he will try them,
either by sickness of body, discomfort of soul, losses, crosses, dangers; by
water or land, false doctrine, evil example; one way, or other; All that live
godly shall be sure of their trials 2 Timothy 3. 12.
. The Apostle says, That is no strange thing 1 Pet. 4. 12.
; yea, as the Apostle Paul says, They that are without correction, are
Bastards, and not sons Heb. 12. 8.
: So they that are without trials, are Bastards, and not sons; all Gods
children are partakers thereof: you cannot be ignorant of the great trials of
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Moses, David, Job, the Children of Israel in
the wilderness: it is our common condition, and therefore good counsel that
Syracides gives, My son, if thou come to serve the Lord, prepare thy soul for
temptation Ecclus. 21.
.

Thou can not be long with Christ on the land, Prevention.
but he will have thee into the ship, thou must to the storm; and yet all for
the best: in regard whereof, Saint James has pronounced, Blessed is the man
that endures temptation, for when he is tried, he shall receive the crown of
life, which the Lord has promised to them that love him James 1. 12.
. And Saint Peter says, Our faith being tried, and found more precious than
gold that perishes, shall be found unto praise, and honor, and glory, at the
appearing of Jesus Christ 1 Pet. 1. 7.
.

Oh, if the graces of God, as Knowledge, Faith, Use.
Patience, Humility, Zeal, do appear in excellent measure, as they did in
Abraham, Job, David, and others, specially the holy Martyrs; how greatly is it
for Gods honor, and their true comfort and happiness? but if these be very
weak and feeble in us, and humane frailty exceedingly appear; yet how
profitable is it, to know our wants? as for those Apostles, to know how weak
their faith was, that so they might walk in greater humility, and pray the
more earnestly, Lord increase our faith Luke 17. 5.
.

Wherefore be not afraid of the storm, (if thou Exhortation.
be sound at the heart) it shall be for thy good: which made David so pray,
Examine me, o Lord, and prove me, try my reins and my heart Psalm 26. 2.
: And again, Search me, o God, and know mine heart, try me, and know my
thoughts, mark well if there be any way of wickedness in me Psalm. 139. ult.
. For howsoever David knew his integrity, yet the heart of man is deceitful
above all things, who can find it Ierem. 17. 9.
? and he desired to know, if his faith were weak, or any wickedness lay lurking
in any secret angle and corner of his heart; as holy Job suspected himself,
Though I were perfect, yet will I not know, that is, justify mine own soul
Job 9. 21.
: and S. Paul in jealous humility confesses, I know nothing by my self, yet
am I not hereby justified: he that judges me is the Lord 1 Cor. 4. 4.
. Thus in an holy and humble jealousy, we should be glad to know if there be
any weakness or wickedness in us. The manifestation whereof in his Apostles,
was a principal motive to lead them to the sea and into this storm.

For a conclusion of this first point, let it be observed, Comfort.
and for ever remembered that my Text says, Christ is the first that entered
into the ship. He sends not his disciples to sea, and himself stands fast
on shore; but He first entered into the ship. The greatest comfort to the Church
of God in general, and every Christian in particular, is, that Christ is
present with them in all their troubles and dangers. God spoke to Moses out of
the burning bush. And this is it which he has so often and graciously
promised; As to Moses, when he sent him to speak to Pharaoh, and deliver his
people, Certainly I will be with thee Exodus 3. 12.
: and the like to Joshua, As I was with Moses, I will be with thee, all the
days of thy life, I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee Josh. 1. 5.
: and unto Jeremy, Speak all that I have commanded thee, and fear not their
faces, for behold, I am with thee, to deliver thee Ierem. 1. 8, 19.
: yea the promise is made to all Gods people, When thou passest through the
waters, I will be with thee, and through the rivers, they shall not ouerflow
thee; when thou walk through the fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall
the flame kindle upon thee Esaias 43. 2.
. And again, Because he has set his love upon me, I will be with him in
trouble; I will deliver him and bring him to honor, Ps. 91. penult. And Christ
his promise to all his disciples is, Lo, I am with you always, even unto the
end of the world Matthew. 28. ult.
: and, for confirmation thereof, appeared to JOHN, walking in the midst of the
seven golden Candlesticks Rev. 1. 13.
; whose corporal presence gave Peter such boldness and comfort, that he
presumed to walk upon the waters toward him Matthew. 14. 29.
: yea the assurance of his spiritual presence gave David such courage, that
he said, I will not fear to go through the valley of the shadow of death, for
thou art with me, thy rod and thy staff comfort me Psalm. 23. 4.
.

But on the other side, Gods absence and departure Absence fearful.
is most grievous and fearful (specially in times of danger and distress) as
when God was angered by the golden Calfe, he told Moses, he would not go any
longer before them as he had done; whereupon Moses grew very importunate with
him, that he would never carry them thence, if his presence went not with them;
and never left him till he prevailed that he would go with them, as he was
wont Exo. 33. 2. 3. 14.
. It was an heavy sight, and the forerunner of great destruction, that the
Prophet in Vision saw the glory of the God of Israel, gone up from the Cherub,
whereupon it was, to the very threshold of the house, as ready to depart Ezech.
9. 3.
. Christ telling his disciples that he must go away, their hearts were full of
sorrow John 16. 6.
; yea, and though Christ labored to give them comfort, that they might take
his departure well, as that it was expedient for them John 16. 7.
; and that he went to send the Comforter Ibid.
; yea that he went to prepare a place for them John 14. 2, 3.
; and that he would come again, and take them to himself, and they should be
with him for ever Ibid.
; yet all would not serve, it was an heavy sight, to see their Master taken out
of their sight Acts 1. 9.
; and Christ (after his resurrection) took notice how the two disciples that
traveled toward Emmaus, were sad Luke 24. 17.
. If the disciples were thus distracted with fear, notwithstanding Christ went
into the ship before them, and was there in the storm, though on sleep; how
would they have been affected, if he had not been there, but left them alone?

Wherefore it behooves all Gods people, in times Use.
of dangers, to make very special search, and inquiry, whether Christ be
present or no?

And here me thinks, I hear that of Gedeon Objection.
commonly objected, who being saluted by the Angel, The Lord is with thee,
thou valiant man, answered, Oh my Lord, if the Lord be with us, why then is all
this befallen us? where be all the miracles which our fathers told us of Judges
6. 12, 13.
? If the Lord be with us, why is all this befallen us? our houses are burnt,
our goods and labors spoiled; yea Gods temples demolished, his servants
slain; sword, fire, and famine prevail.

I answer, God testifies his presence two ways, Solution. 1. Miraculous
deliverance.
viz. sometimes outwardly, in the miraculous deliverance of his servants out of
evils: thus was God present with Daniel in the Lions den, stopping their
mouths, that they could not hurt him Dan. 6. 22.
; and with the three children in the fiery furnace, not suffering an hair of
their heads to be sindged Dan. 3. 27.
: Thus was God with his people in Egypt, red sea, wilderness, and Canaan; a
thing exceedingly to be wondered at, that thrice a year, viz. at their solemn
feasts, all the males going from all parts of the Land up to Jerusalem to
worship, and none left at home to keep their frontiers from invasion, Cities
and houses from burning, and goods from spoiling, but only weak women and
children; yet so long as they continued in Gods fear and obedience, he
protected their lands, houses, and goods, that no enemy invaded, or offered the
least violence: for so God had promised, at those times, No man shall so much
as desire thy land, when thou shall go up to appear before the Lord thy God
Exodus 34. 24.
. Oh how mavelous was God in the famous victories which he gave his people
over their enemies in the days of Moses, Ioshuah, Judges, David, Iehoshaphat,
Ezekiah, breaking the bow and arrows, knapping their spears, and burning
their chariots in the fire Psalm. 46. 8.
; showing his puissance and power, making bare his right hand, in the sight of
the Heathen, restraining the rage of enemies, turning it to his praise, and
making himself terrible to the Kings of the earth Psalm. 76. 3, 10, vlt.
. But yet, sometimes it pleases him, when his ship is in a dangerous storm,
to sleep, and only to testify his presence another way, suffering their
enemies to prevail, to kill, murder, and spoil, and only 2. By gracious
supportation.
furnish his people, with faith, repentance, patience, humility, zeal,
contentation, comfort, joy, and inward peace, with other such like inestimable
graces of his Spirit, whereby his servants are enabled, by suffering, to
prevail, and get most glorious victories; howsoever flesh and blood would
persuade, God has forsaken that people, in whose defense and preservation he
does not appear; yet the holy word of God teaches us, that it is an
infallible Argument of Gods powerful presence, that his servants are able to
suffer, with patience and joy, whatsoever it shall please God, to suffer their
enemies to lay upon them. The Apostle speaking of tribulation, distress,
persecution, famine, nakedness, peril, sword; yea that for Gods sake, they
are killed all the day long, and counted as sheep for the slaughter, yet says
he, In all these things we are more than conquerours through him that loved us
Romans 8. 35. (...), supervincimus.
. Was not Christ with the Apostles, when being scourged, they went out of the
Council rejoicing Acts 5. penult.
? Was he not with Paul and Silas, singing Psalms of praise at midnight in the
dungeon Acts 16. 25.
? Was he not with the Hebrews, suffering with joy the spoil of their goods
Heb. 10. 34.
? Was he not with those Saints, of whom the world was unworthy, though being
destitute, afflicted, tormented, wandering up and down in wildernesses,
mountains, dens, and caves of the earth Heb. 11. 35.
? Was he not with Ignatius, who being condemned to the beasts, and hearing the
Lions roar, he cheerfully said, he was Gods corn, to be ground with teeth of
wild beasts, that he might become pure manchet for God? Was he not with those
Martyrs in the Primitive Church, who esteemed Tyrants as gnats, and their
torments but as flea-bitings Tyrann^s, ipsumque Neronem, velut quosdam culices.
Chrysostom. 2. Homil. de laudibus Pauli.
? Was he not with them, who (as Tertullian said) to be accused, wished, and to
be punished for Christ, they accounted felicity Tertull. advers. gentes, non
procul ab initio.
? A certain woman running in all haste with a child in her arms, toward the
place of execution, and being asked the cause of her haste, O (says she) I
hear a great sort of Christians are to be martyred, and I am afraid that I and
my little one shall come too late. How did many holy Martyrs in this land, in
the days of Queen Marie, most willingly forsake offices, houses, goods,
parents, wives, children, liberty; most cheerfully receive sentence of death;
most gladly go to place of execution, and most comfortably kiss the stake,
embrace the faggots, and clap hands in flaming fire? And whence was all this?
Was it not from Christ, who in that great tempest was in the ship with them?
Let the blessed Martyr Gl^ver witness; who having received sentence of death,
though the remembrance of the fire was so terrible, that he was exceedingly
perplexed, and made his dullness and heaviness known, which continued all
that night, and the morning, till he came within the sight of the stake, but
then was suddenly filled with boldness and joy, which made him call to his
friend, He is come, he is come. Oh this is a glorious victory indeed, as one
says of the martyrdom of Saint Laurence: God did more gloriously triumph in
his patience and constancy, when he was broyled on the gridiron, than if he
had saved his body from burning by a miracle Rupert*
. Thus Christ has shipped himself first, and thereby assured us that he is
with his Church and people in all their dangers and distresses, and will
witness that his presence, either by miraculous deliverance, or most merciful
supportance, as he sees it to be most for his glory, and their true good.

The second sort of persons, that were shipped, Part. 2.
are called his [ Disciples.] Disciple, is properly a Latin word, and does
signify in English, a Scholar, or learner; from the verb Disco: the Greek
also is of the same signification (...), ex (...), disco.
, and is often so translated; as where our Savior says, Learn of me Matthew.
11. 29.
: And every one that has heard and learned of the Father, comes unto me John
6. 45.
. Let the woman learn in silence, with all subjection 1 Timothy 2. 11.
. In which, and many other places which might be alleged (but that these are
sufficent for instance) you have the word of the Text translated, Learn, as it
properly signifies. So that every scholar, or learner, is called a disciple;
and of whom he is taught, or learneth, he is called his disciple: So we read
of John's disciples Matthew. 11. 2.
; and of Moses disciples John 9. 28.
; and so all Haeresiarches or Schismatickes, that are factious and
Schismatic, seeking to draw men to learn of them, and embrace their
opinions, are said to draw disciples after them Acts 20. 30.
. And thus all that professed Aristotle for their Master, and were scholars in
the school of the Peripatetickes. Plato, Pythagoras, Zeno, and others, are
said to have disciples, that is, scholars, learners, and professors of their
doctrine and maxims (...), saepe apud Plut.
. The Hebrew also in Munsters Copy, agrees with both these Talmudav. from
Lamad, didicit.
. And as from the Greek word, some special Sciences Arts numerandi and
metiendi: Astronomy, Arithmetic, Geographie, Keck. pracognit. Philosoph. lib.
1. c. 2. p. 17.
, are, (...), called the Mathematickes, because of their deepnesse of learning,
and sharpness of wit, and capacity required in all the learners thereof: so
from the Hebrew word comes the Jews Thalmud, that is, Doctrinall, a
Systhema, or composition of their doctrine. The ancientest was composed about
230. years after Christ, and was full of Jewish fables, and Rabinicall
Traditions, but was afterward refined and purged of many idle fables,
traditions, and disputes, by Moses the son of Maimon, which is in great
request amongst the Jews unto this day, and much alleged out of it, by our
best Writers Chemnit. Exam. 1. part. 13. and Har. cap. 79 page 242. Shind^^r^^
Penteg. in Lamad.
. You see then what the word Disciple signifies, according to the propriety
of holy languages.

Christ had two sorts of Disciples: First, in the largest sense, all that
professed the doctrine, or Gospel of Christ, were called his Disciples,
whether that profession was in sincerity, or but in hypocrisy; so the
Disciples were first called Christians in Antiochia Acts 11. 26.
: And many of his Disciples went from him, and walked no more with him John 6.
66.
.

Secondly, and more strictly they were called his 2
Disciples, that not only learned and professed the Gospel, but were also
called and appointed of him to preach the Gospel to others. And they were of
two sorts: first, and of a lower order, the seventie, 1
sent forth two and two, before his face, into every city and place, whither
he himself would come, to preach the Gospel, and work miracles Luke 10. 1.
. And these both in Scriptures, and Ecclesiastical stories, are known by the
name of The seventy disciples. Who these were, though Eusebius, Epiphanius, and
others, tell us; yet in the Gospel their names are concealed, and Christ bade
them rejoice, that their names were written in heaven Luke 10. 20.
. The other, and higher order, were the twelve Apostles, many times called his
Disciples, 2
and made known by their names Matthew. 10. 1. Mark 3. 15. Luke 9. 1. 5.
. The learned Divines say; herein the truth answered ancient types, both of the
twelve Patriarchs, and seventy Elders, called their Sanedrim; as some, the
seventie souls that came with Jacob into Egypt: Others, the twelve fountains
of water, and seventie Palme-trees in Elim Exodus 15. vlt. Numb. 33. 9. Sic
Tertul. cont. Marcionem lib. 4. ca. 24. Ierom. Epist. ad Fabiolam Mansio. 6.
. Who those Disciples were that entered with Christ into the ship, is a
question, because the Text does not clear it: it is most probable, that all
the Apostles were there, for confirmation of whose faith, this miracle was
wrought: likewise, that there were others, as Mariners, and, it may be
professors too, for it is said, the men marvelled; but not the seventie: I
will not say, none of those out of whom the seventie were chosen, for that
might be; but not the seventie being chosen: for by chronotaxie, and harmony
of the Evangelists, it appears, that this miracle was wrought in the latter
end of the first year of Christ's Ministry; the choosing and sending of the
seventy, was not till the third and last year of his preaching August. lib. 2.
de consens. Euang. cap. 23. Tollet. Cardin. in Luc. 10. 1.
. And this is all the light I have received from the Scriptures and Fathers,
concerning those Disciples, that entered with Christ into the ship.

Now observe, I pray you, the passengers; Observe. 1. As the Master of the house
went to see the guests, let us well view these passengers.
and observe it well, that Judas is gone aboard amongst the disciples; a wicked
man ever, though as yet he had not committed that transcendent wickedness of
betraying his Master. What more observed by friends that stay behind? Yea
observe, Christ has a ship wherein Judas was not; but all passengers in it
shall be saved; believing one God, one Faith, one Baptism, one Church, which
is Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic, out of which there is no salvation No more
than life, out of Noah's Arc.
. Therefore, as the Lord added daily to the Church, such as should be saved
Acts 2. 47.
: so every one that has a care and desire of salvation, must be sure that he
be a member of that holy Church, which is invisible; an article of our Faith:
The Church, what.
not but that we see the bodies and professions of such; but saving grace is
not seen, nor their election known, but in judgment of charity, being that
company of the elect and faithful only, gathered out of mankind, by the Word
and Spirit, consenting in true faith; here living, and warring against the
Devil, world and flesh: and this is called in Latin Ecclesia, which yet is
properly a Greek word, and comes from such a theme as does signify to call
forth (...), evoco.
. It was an ancient custom in Athens, that a company of Citizens were called
sorth by the voice of a Crier from the rest of the multitude, to such an
assembly, wherein some public speech was made, or to hear relation, of some
sentence, or judgment of the Senate; from whence it seems the Apostles
translated the name Ecclesia, to signify such a congregation as comes not
together by chance, but are called from the profane multitude by the Crier of
the Word and Spirit, to profess God and true godliness. I say again, that it
is absolutely requisite to salvation, that a man be a member of this Church,
and called Company: he that is not in this world a member of the Church
Militant, shall never in the world to come be a member of the Church
Triumphant. And therefore Saint Peter charge men to give all diligence, to
make their calling and election sure 2 Pet. 1. 10.
.

Observe secondly, that all the Disciples went Observe. 2.
into the ship where Christ was, even Judas amongst them, for whose sake, as
some of the Fathers conceive, this storm did arise. Then is this society a
shadow or figure of the visible Church. By visible Sense. Termini.
and invisible, I do not mean two distinct Churches (as our Adversaries falsely
charge us) as if a member of the visible, were not also a member of the
invisible: but I distinguish the diverse considerations of the same Church
Field. lib. 1. c. 10.
; which is visible in respect of profession, and use of the Word and
Sacraments; but invisible, in respect of saving grace, wherein only elect do
communicate, and whose bodies and profession is visible; but saving grace,
invisible, and unknown of us, (saving in the judgment of charity) As all men
might know Nathaniel to be an Israelite, but to be a true Israelite, in whom
was no guile, that Christ only knew; so that many of the invisible lie hid in
the visible, as John 1. 47.
a part in the whole; which visible Church may be thus described: viz.
Described.
It is a mixed company, that profess that doctrine which is according to
godliness, having the word of God (for matters fundamental) purely preached,
and Sacraments (for substance) sincerely administered. And I say, this is a
mixed company: For in such Similies.
a company, may be ludas, and many unregenerate, and hypocrites, in the
visible, which are not of the invisible Church. This Church was shadowed out by
Noah's Arc, wherein were both clean and unclean beasts Genesis 7. 2.
; by a floare, having a heap of corn and chafe mingled together Matthew. 3. 12.
; a field, wherein wheat and tares grow together Matthew. 13. 24.
; a draw-net, gathering all sorts of fishes, good and bad Matthew. 13. 47.
; a wedding, wherein are guests that have the wedding garment, and that want it
Matthew. 22. 11.
; by a company, wherein are both wise and foolish virgins, the one having
lamps and oil, the others lamps only Matthew. 25. 2.
; a flock of sheep and goats, Matthew. 25. 32. a great house, wherein there are
vessels of gold and silver, so also of wood and earth, some to honor, and some
to dishonor 2 Timothy 2. 20.
. And this visible Church is twofold, Universal and Particular: the
Universal Distinguished.
visible Church, is the company of all such as profess the doctrine of
godliness, and enjoy the ministry of the Word and Sacraments, wheresoever in
the world they be. A Particular visible Church, is a company, professing as
before, but receiving denomination from the Country, Kingdom, or City; as
the Church of England, Scotland, Bohemia; Corinth, Galatia, Ephesus, Philippi:
which is the reason, why particular visible Churches are so affected with joy
or grief, at one another prosperity or adversity, because (in effect) they
are even the same, and as members of the same body, parts of the whole. Thus
we have shipped the passengers. Now, as friends at parting have commonly some
loving Charge or other; suffer me, before they launch forth, to give to them,
and in them, to you and us all, a double warning; viz. Beware of departure
from, and of division among; I say, beware of departure, and division; go not
out, fall not out.

For the first, howsoever Judas the covetous 1. Departure. Departure upon two
pretenses, 1. Doctrine: 2. Discipline: upon the one the Romanists, upon the
other the Novellists.
wretch, and who afterward was Traitor, be in the company, yet let none depart
from the ship, and forsake the fellowship of Christ, and the rest of the
disciples, for his sake; it had been no less dangerous to the body of any of
them, to have gone out of the ship into the sea, than it is to the soul of
any, to depart from a true visible Church, where Christ and his Disciples are.
I do not deny, but for many respects it may be warrantable for a man to depart
from one visible Church, to become a member of another; yea, for a time to dwell
where no visible Church is; but to depart, because of some corruptions,
specially in discipline, or manners, is the dangerous departure, condemned by
the Scriptures, and the ancient Fathers, in Donatists, Novatians, Catharists,
and such like Separatists; of all whom S. John has pronounced, They went out
from us, but they were not of us, for if they had been of us, they would, no
doubt, have continued with us 1 John 2. 19.
; neither shall such departers, ever satisfy their blind and preposterous
zeal. There never was, nor will be a visible Church in this world without
great blemishes, faults, and corruptions. Look upon the state of the Church
from the beginning of the world, and you will find it so; yet in all the
Scriptures there is no precept (rightly understood) commanding to depart, nor
warrantable example of any, that have so departed. A thing also, which the
Fathers in their times, have exceedingly declamed against. Not that we should
sit down careless, and not take to heart the corruptions of Church or
Commonwealth; or as if Magistrates and Ministers, by word and sword, should
not endeavor Object. Sol.
reformation. Indeed the Master said to his servants, Let both grow together
till the harvest Matthew. 13. 30.
; which place the Anabaptists abuse amongst others, to prove a toleration; and
S. Augustines opinion was so at the first (as himself confesses Me^ primitus
senten^i^. Epist. 48.
) and gave his Reason, lest professed Heretics should become dissembling
Hypocrites: but Luther has both shortly and soundly expounded the place,
saying, It is not a sentence of approbation, but of consolation Non
approbation^, sed consolation^, Luth. l^c. com. tit. de zelo.
; that we should not endeavor reformation, but a comfort, when we cannot so
reform, but still there will be corruptions; yet for them not to forsake the
fellowship, as the manner of some is Heb. 10. 25.
. But these things I have more largely handled, and pressed in this place
hereto fore from some other Scriptures Sermon on parab. of wheat and tares, Mat.
13. 30. page 27 Serm^on 10. Virgins, Matthew. 25. 1. page 27.
; and because such departure is not now so hot, and common as it has been, I
pass it over with this touch and caution in few words given.

The second charge I give, is the same that Joseph 2. Division.
gave to his brethren, Beware of division, and falling out. All division is
dangerous, be it of Kings, Cities, or Families, as our Savior says, Every
kingdom divided against it self, shall be brought to desolation; and every
city or house, divided against it self, shall not stand Matthew. 12. 25.
; but no division so dangerous as that in a ship, and specially in a storm;
what does that threaten but ship wrack and destrucction to them all? Wherefore
there is nothing that Satan more labors, and wherein he does more hurt,
than by causing of divisions; and nothing more commanded, than peace, amity,
and unity; Have salt in your selves, and have peace one with another Mar. 9.
vlt.
. The Angels at Christ his coming into the world, proclaimed peace Luke 2. 14.
; and Christ at his going out of the world, bequeathed peace, My peace I leave
with you, my peace I give unto you John 14 27.
. The Apostles still wished Grace and Peace to those Churches to which they
wrote; and enjoined the Saints, If it be possible, and as much as lies in
them, to live peaceably with all men Romans 12. 18.
; yea, to follow peace with all men Heb. 12. 14.
; and to strive to keep the unity of the Spirit, in the bond of peace Ephesians.
4. 3.
. And here I cannot sufficiently wonder at the Romanists, that considering our
unite, and the great and grievous divisions in the Synagogue of Rome; yet the
Romanists are not ashamed to make Unity one of the marks (or their seventh
note) of the true Church, and assume that to themselves, and impute Division to
us Bellar. de notis Ecclesiae, lib. 4. ^. 10.
. First, for their Divisions, it is strange (but that men of that side will say
and write any thing) that Bellarmine should say, they all join in obedience to
their Head, and that their Councels, Popes, Decrees, and Writers do
wonderfully agree, though writing in diverse tongues, places, occasions; whereas
the world has taken notice, yea all must needs know, that know any thing, how
Rome it self, by her own children, has been sacked, siedge laid to the
Castle of Saint Angel, and the Pope taken prisoner By the Duke of Bourbon,
Leader of the Emperors army.
. Is this their Canonical obedience? How diverse Popes have challenged the
Popedom, and three stood at once. Many battles have been fought, and thousands
slain. Who was the head of their Unity then; and when a woman was Pope? How
Popes have cut off Cardinals heads: one Pope abrogate and condemn the Decrees
of others So true is that of Platina in Stephan. vita, for the most part it
has been the manner, that the later Popes have either infringed, or wholly
taken away the decrees of the former.
; yea in extreme hatred, dug up their bodies, and cutting off two of the
fingers, to bury it again; and sometimes cut off head, and cast the body
into Tibur; one Council condemning what another had decreed. What Writers ever
more eagerly opposite, than Dominicans and Franciscans, Priests and Jesuits,
yea Schoolmen themselves, about the books of Canonical Scripture
themselves? the Virgins being without sin, Transubstantiation, Purgatory;
yea Justification, merit of works, worshipping of Images? yea what point of
difference is there betwixt them and us, wherein some of their own side, do
not side with us against them Whites Way, Digress. 24. page 154.
? yea, as the Church of Rome is wholly departed from that ancient faith it
professed in the days of the Apostles; so the modern Church is exceedingly
declined from that faith it formerly professed, even since it came to be the
seat of Antichrist; which being so abundantly cleared by diverse of our learned
Divines, in their polemicall Tracts and Discourses See the peace of Rome by D.
Hall.
, and hoping that either you know, or do not doubt of the truth hereof; I will
not insist upon probation of particulars, which were infinite Vid. D. White de
notis Ecclesiae. Will. Synop. page 71. D. Whites Way, Digress. 23.
: and therefore if Unity be a note of the true Church, Rome cannot be it; so
divided, as it must needs one day come to ruin and destruction.

For our own divisions, (which we do not deny, have been some, and too
many, yet) 1. Justified, in comparison with others.
such as disprove not the true Unity of the Church, but are justified, not
only by the divisions of the Romish Church, which are more and greater, (and (it
is like) will never be composed) but the divisions, (which by Satan's malice,
and subtle abusing of the weakness of some,) have ever infested the true
Church of God, even in Rome, in her best estate, Saint Paul says, There were
therein that caused divisions and offenses, contrary to the doctrine Romans 16.
17.
; And tells the Corinthians there were among them, envying, strife, and
contention, some holding of Paul, some of Apollo, some of Cephas 1 Cor. 3. 3.
: Paul and Barnabas were at variance Acts 15. 39.
: Paul and Peter had iarres Galath. 2. 11.
: great strife betwixt East and West Churches, about the keeping of Easter, so
as they excommunicated each other: no less broils in the Churches about
Rebaptization: What Tragical troubles did Theophilus Patriarch of Alexandria
raise against Chrysostom, Bishop of Constantinople? a chief adversary to
whom was Epiphanius Bishop of Cyprus. The event was, Chrysostom lost both
Bishopric, and life in banishment; many were flame in taking parts, the
Cathedral Church, and Senate House in Constantinople burnt down to the
ground, in pursuit of revenge Socrat. lib. 6. cap. 17. 21. Nicephorus lib. 13.
cap. 17. 21. Baron. Annal. 400. number. 31.
. How did the Orthodox Bishops in the Council of Nice fall at variance, and
complain of one another to the Emperor, so as Constantine had much ado to
compose the difference. In the second Council of Ephesus, such eager
contention, that Flavianus, the Bishop of Constantinople was not only deposed,
but also pitifully murdered Evagr. lib. 1. cap. 10.
. Too too many such grievous contentions, Ecclesiastical stories witness to
happen in the Churches of God, in Councels, and amongst the learned Fathers,
and Bishops, so lamented by Cyprian, and Basil, as the cause of persecution,
and the turning away of many from embracing of the Christian religion, and a
great advantage to Arrius, and such like Haeretikes, to spread the poison of
their haeresies, far and near. Thus you see, there have been, yea, and as
long as Satan has leave to compass the earth to and fro, and that Gods
Saints be imperfect in knowledge, and weak in affections, there will be
divisions, they have been and are greater than amongst our selves, yet not
disproving a true Church.

Secondly, our divisions are not of the Church, 2. Not of the Church.
but of some in the Church: our Church does wonderfully accord, in the unity
of faith, and uniformitie of government, and therefore are falsely imputed to
the Church.

Thirdly, not in matters of faith, wherein as our 3. Not matters of Faith.
Church does accord with other Reformed Churches abroad, in all fundamental
verities, there being no fundamental dissension, betwixt any the Reformed
Churches Non est fundamentalis dissentio. Whit. controv. 2. quaest. 5. cap. 8.
page 322.
; (as the Harmony of Confessions bears witness) so, neither is the
difference, or dissension, amongst such in our Church, (except Popishly
affected) about matters of substance, but of circumstance; not about the boords
or body of the ship, anchor, cable, card, or who shall be Pilot; but about the
sail, and ceremonies, of black or white.

Fourthly, though these differences have been 4. Not with extremity pursued.
too hotly and eagerly followed of some; yet, God be thanked, not pursued by
fire or death, nor to the pronouncing of each other, Heretics; as both
anciently, (as partly you have heard, and might hear much more, if I delighted
in this Argument, and would for this purpose search the Authentike histories of
the Church) and lately also in the Romish Church, betwixt the Popes themselves,
and the Franciscans, with all cruel extremity, persecuting the poor
Dominicans.

Lastly, blessed be God, even in this happy calm, 5. Well composed.
our divisions and contentions are well slaked and composed, notwithstanding
they were kindled and nourished especially, by the cunning of subtle, and
secret Papists lurking amongst us, as the remnant of the Canaanites, to be as
pricks in our eyes, and thorns in our sides; but a little storm would make us
perfect friends, as some of our learned forefathers, who in time of
prosperity, were much divided, and abounded in their several senses, and
opinions, concerning such matters, yet in the days of Queen Marie, went
joyfully to the stake, and died together, for that truth which they jointly
believed: it being most true of an ancient Father, The communion of good things
oftentimes breeds envy and hatred, but communion in misery, breeds love
and compassion.

Thus I have shipped the passengers: I have given Conclusion.
them their charge. Looking upon the sea, I see many ships, when I come to
handle the vessel wherein they pass. It is a needful question for these
days, which is that ship wherein Christ and his disciples pass, and how may
it be infallibly known from all other? When I come to that, I hope to make it
clear to all (whose eyes the god of this world has not blinded) that all the
pinnaces of Heretics and Schismatikes, and specially that great Romish ship,
though painted and gilded fair, and has large sails, with top and top
gallant, tacklings and cordage, is indeed no better than an hot man of war, a
ship of Pirates. It has leaked long; and though Bellarmine has put to all his
strength in pumping, and the Jesuits, like cunning Diverse, have used, and do
use all their skill to stop this leake; yet shall they not be able: it shall
one day sink, and make shipwreck. In the mean time, know, that the Church of
England is a glorious visible Church, a fair ship, wherein Christ and his
disciples are, and therefore (for this time) I discharge you, with renewing of
the former charge; Take heed you depart not from her; take heed you cause not
division in her; but every man seek her welfare, follow faith to the
conservation of the soul, and keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of
peace: beware of Heresy, beware of Schism: God, for his Christ sake, help us
to keep faith and a good conscience, to the end, and in the end. Amen.

Followed him] (...). sequuti sunt cum. (...), sequor.
We have heard the number of 2. Part.
passengers, Christ and his disciples; the Evangelist also notes the manner or
order of their shipping, viz that Christ went before, and his disciples
followed him. Christ ordinarily called the Disciples and Apostles, in this
form and phrase of speech, as to Simon and Andrew being fishing, Follow me,
and I will make you fishers of men Matthew. 4. 19.
; and in the verse before my text, Follow me, and let the dead bury their dead
Matthew. 8. 22.
; and to Matthew, sitting at the receipt of custom, Follow me Matthew. 9 9.
; and to the young man, If thou will be perfect, go and sell that thou have,
and give to the poor, and thou shall have treasure in heaven, and come and
follow me Matthew. 19. 21. Reason.
. The reason why Christ would specially have the Apostles conversant with him,
during the time of his Ministry here, was, that hearing his doctrine, seeing
his miracles, and observing his manner of life, after his departure, they might
be witnesses to the world, of that which they had heard and seen 1 John 1. 1.
Acts 4. 20. John 15. vlt.
: and for this cause, after the death of Judas, there was care had, that such
an one might be chosen into his room, as had accompanied with them, all the
time, that the Lord Jesus went in and out before them Acts 1. 21.
. Therefore the Apostles commonly followed him from place to place, in City and
Country, field and house, by water and land: though sometimes for some
special causes, he admitted not all, but some few of them: as Peter, James,
and John, were only admitted to see the miracle of raising the Rulers daughter
Luke 8. 51.
; and his transfiguration on the Mount Matthew. 17. 1.
; and his agony in the Garden Mar. 14. 33.
. The words are sufficiently cleared for their literal sense.

The letter teaches us to give due honor and Doct. lit.
respect to one another. The impression of superiority and subjection, command
and obedience, domination and service, is not only stamped on 1. On man.
man, a sociable creature, a little map or model (as it were) of the great
world, though never so barbarous; subjects following Kings, soldiers their
Captains, servants their Masters, children their Parents, and wives their
Husbands; whereby that Eutaxie and decorum, which is established by nature, and
fortified by Moral Law, Honor thy Father and Mother, is preserved; and ataxie
and confusion prevented: but God has also stamped in man, the members subject
to the 2. In man.
head, the body to the soul, and appetite to reason: yea this impression is
stamped upon the whole face of nature; in the heavens, God has 3. On all
creatures.
placed a greater light to rule the day, and a lesser to rule the night Genesis 1.
16.
: yea if we ascend higher, amongst the Angels, there are Principalities,
Thrones, Powers, and Dominions Coloss. 1. 16.
; and Michael an Archangell Jude 9.
. If we come to the earth, the very birds by instinct of nature, are subject to
the Eagle, the beasts to the Lion, and very Bees have a master, whom they (in
their kind) do reverence and follow, else their Commonwealth could not
subsist: yea, if we descend lower, the very Devils of Hell have Beelzebub for
their Prince Matthew. 12. 24.
; if that kingdom were divided in it self, it could not endure Matthew. 12. 25.
; there must be precedencie, and subsequencie, a going before, and following
after, in all creatures; specially amongst men and women, who as they are many
ways to testify inferioritie, and respect to Gods ordinance, so this way
specially. Christ was their Lord and Master John 13. 13. Confirmation by
Scripture.
; they his servants, and scholars: it was therefore comely, that so often we
hear in the Gospel, and, even in shipping, that Christ entered first, and his
Disciples followed him. And it is a perpetual rule of Civilitie, which the
Apostle has prescribed, that in giving honor, we should prefer, or (as some
Translations have it) go one before another Romans 12. 10.
. As men and women should not be proud and ambitious; (a thing reproved by
Christ in the Pharisees, for loving the chief places at meetings Matthew. 23. 6.
;) shuffling and thrusting, being dry drunken in the opinion of their own
worth; (as if none knew them but themselves) whereby (in Gods justice) they
make themselves vile, and hated; whereas the way to honor, is to be bid sit up
higher: so neither should any, but most willingly, in gesture, word and deed,
acknowledge the worth and dignity of others; and specially Christians, should
in all places carry themselves modestly and humbly, that amongst them, all
things may be done decently and in order (...), 1. Cor. 14. 4. ult.
. This is the fosterer of love Fomentum amoris. Calv.
, and the spur of virtue, and nourisher of Arts Honos alit arts.
; for what does more prick forward, and inflame men to great and noble
enterprises, especially of learning, and chivalrie, than respect, honor, and
glory Tu sola, animas mertemque perurisgloria.
? All men naturally desire esteem, and regard, and to seek it by virtue and
goodness, is very lawful. It was no ambition or vainglory in David, to ask,
What shall be done to the man that kills this Philistim 1 Samuel 17. 26.
? If there be any praise, think on those things Philip. 4. 8.
. For Christ to go before, and disciples to follow him, is a comely sight. But
I leave the letter.

In the mystery, this does concern us all, and in Mystery. Sense.
what the Disciples did bodily, we may see, what we ought to do spiritually:
viz. If we be Christ his disciples, or Christians, we must follow him. [To
follow] is properly an Hebraisme, and signifies to serve, and obey, and
imitate in such things as concern us; as it is said, The men of Israel went
from after David, and followed Shebah the Son of Bichri 2 Samuel 20. 2.
: and God reproving his people for Idolatry, asks, How can thou say, I
have not followed Baalim Ierem. 2. 23.
? And the Pharisees say one to another, concerning Christ, Behold, the world is
gone after him John 12. 19.
; that is, acknowledge him for the Messiah, and submit themselves to receive
his doctrine, and obey his precepts, and imitate his example, as their only
teacher and pattern. And, lest any should think it concerned only the
Apostles and Disciples, in the days of Christ, Christ generally, in the
spiritual and mystical sense, enjoyneth it unto all; Whosoever does not bear
his cross, and come after me, cannot be my disciple Luke 14. 27.
. Yea, lest any should yet think, that this was only enjoined to all the
faithful in those days; the Apostle, after Christ his Ascension, bids the
Ephesians, and in them all Christians to the end of the world, Be ye followers
of God, as dear children Ephesians. 5. 1.
. If any shall yet ask me wherein can we follow Christ? Not in bodily manner,
Quest. Answ.
as the Apostles, and Disciples now did; that is unpossible; he is gone,
ascended above these visible Impossible.
heavens; Henceforth the world shall thus know Christ no more 2 Cor. 5 16.
.

As it is to us impossible, so was it to some unprofitable; it shall do Judas
and many no good, Unprofitable.
that they followed him from place to place for sinister respects, as to see
his miracles, hear novell doctrine, as himself said, Verily ye seek me,
because ye did eat of the loaves, and were filled John 6. 26.
. Some shall plead this at the last day, saying, We have eaten and drunken in
thy presence, and thou have taught in our streets Luke 13. 26, 27.
: but mark what answer shall be given them, I know you not whence you are,
depart from me, ye workers of iniquity. All cannot follow him in the
Ministry and preaching of the Gospel, none, but such as are thereunto called:
How can any preach, except he be sent Romans 10. 15.
? Few or none can now follow him in working miracles; as giving sight to the
blind, speech to the dumb, hearing to the deaf, cleansing lepers, curing
diseases, and raising the dead; for these were miraculous, and tended to the
confirmation of his doctrine: with which power, though some in the Primitive
Church were endowed for a while, that as they preached new doctrine, they might
do new works; yet now that the doctrine of the Gospel has taken root, it
needs no such watering; this gift is ceased. Bellarmine may well challenge
it, for it is a mark of the Antichristian Synagogue. The Apostle says,
Antichrist his coming shall be with all deceiveable signs and wonders 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9.
. But now the true Ministers of Christ are known, not because they do, but
because they do not miracles Hinc ver^s agn^f^^mus verbi ministres, non quia
faciunt, sed omnino quia non faciunt miracula.
. And says S. Augustine, Miracles now adays, are either the prodigious works
of lying spirits, or fables and lies of deceitful men Portenta mendacium
spirituum: aut mendacia fallac^^m hominum.
. But let us go to the cited text, and see what following of Christ the
Apostle now requires. What the word is, which the Evangelist here uses, you
have heard, and the signification of it; viz. requiring a bodily motion and
action (...), pedessequus.
; and very rarely used in any figurative, or metaphorical sense: but the
Apostle uses another word (...).
, which is properly referred to imitation of virtues, as Saint John bids us,
follow that which is good 3 John 11.
: And the Apostle Paul bids us follow faith Heb. 13. 7.
: The signification of which word, the Apostle expresses in the next verse,
adding (...), Walk in love, as Christ has loved us. For the full clearing of
this point, know, that man has two feet, whereby he comes to Christ, and
follows after him; the first is of faith, whereby he believes his doctrine,
whereof Christ has said, He that comes to me, shall not hunger, and he that
believes in me shall not thirst John 6. 35.
: Where he shows, to come, is to believe. And as we come, so we follow, which
is by faith. Secondly, the practice of Christ his moral virtues; he being
therein the perfect copy and Exemplar. To which purpose the Fathers have
excellent sayings: Fathers.
He says not unto thee, Thou shall not be my disciple, except thou walk upon
the sea, or raise the dead, But, Learn of me, because I am humble and meek
Non tibi dicit, non eris discipulus meus. Aug. praefat. in Psalm. 30.
. And again, the same Father expounding those words, observes, That Christ
does not say, Learn of me to make a world, and create visible and invisible
things; But, Learn of me, I am meek and humble Non mundum fabruare, visibilia
and invisibilia creare. Aug. de verbis Dom. sermon. 10.
. And another, We cannot follow Christ in power, magnificence, and the like;
but we may follow him, in humility, meekness, charity Non possumus in
potentia, magnificentia: sed in humilitate, mansuetudine. Ierom.
. And another says, No man is worthily called a Christian, who so far as he
can, does not imitate Christ in his manners Nemo recte Christianus, nisi qui
Christo moribus. Cyprian.
. In this it is, Christ bids us learn of him; and the Apostle bids us be
followers of him: and another Apostle says, Christ has suffered for us,
leaving us an example, that we should follow his steps 1 Pet. 2 21.
: and a third Apostle says, He that abides in Christ, ought to walk, as
Christ has walked 1 John 2. 6.
. Then look unto your copy, if you would be truly accounted Christians, look
unto Christ the Exhortation.
Author and finisher of your faith Heb. 12. 2.
. If you be true members of the Church, vow and perform as she did, Draw me,
and I will run after thee Cant. 1. 3.
. Behold his poverty, who being rich, for our sakes became so exceeding poor
Matthew. 8. 20.
, that he had not whereon to rest his head 1 Pet. 1. 23.
: and if it be required of thee for his sake and the Gospels, stick not to
forsake all, and follow him in this; behold his meekness, who being reviled,
reviled not again Mat. 12. 19, 20.
, broke not the bruised reed, nor quenched the smoking flax, whose voice was
not heard in the street. Behold his patience, taking a reed in his hand,
wearing a crown of thorns, mocked, buffetted, spit on, and says not a word
Matthew. 27. 29.
. Behold his charity, praying for his cruel enemies, Father, forgive them,
they know not what they do Luke 23. 34.
. Behold his contentation, thanking God for barley bread John 6. 11.
. Behold his diligence, preaching and working miracles, til he was weary John
4. 6.
; yea, and on the night time, when he should have slept John 3. 2.
. Behold his devotions, spending whole nights in prayer Luke 21. penult.
. Behold his zeal, purging the Temple, scourging out buyers and sellers, and
overthrowing the tables of money changers John 2. 15.
. Behold his humility, choosing poor fishermen and tole-gatherers for
Apostles Matthew. 4. 18, 19.
: Wearing a poor seamelesse coat John 19. 23.
: Fleeing when they sought to make him King, Ioh. 6. and riding on an Ass into
Jerusalem Matthew. 21. 5.
. Behold his constancy, who never gave over till the work was finished John
19. 30.
. Oh that we could do thus, when Satan tempts us to pride, revenge,
idleness, discontent; how would it dash temptations to say, Avoid Satan, I
must follow Christ, and he did not so. Oh that we could do this, when, like
men, we have failed in our duties, and sinned; how would it break the heart
with godly sorrow, and make us smite on breast and thigh, and say, Oh wretched
man that I am, Christ did not so, and I should have followed him; oh follow,
follow.

And here give me leave to encounter our Adversaries, Confutation. Gallica
^irata est Calvinum Ecclesia, nuper quo nemo docuit doctius: was said and
written by no child in Divinity.
who falsely and full spightfully, call us Calvinists, and Lutherans, and
Zuinglians, as if we taught you to follow Calvin and Luther, to believe every
point of doctrine, and to conform your selves in all poins of discipline and
government, as they have prescribed. No, no, we leave that to the Papists,
whose faith and manners are tied to the Popes sleeve, and they depend on his
mouth what to believe, and do, and receive his decrees with greater reverence,
piety, and devotion, than that of Christ himself: it being most true in them,
that Christ imputed to the Pharisees, they made the Commandment of God of none
effect, through their traditions, yea, teach for doctrine the commandments of
men Matthew. 15. 3. 9.
; and do glory to be called Papists, acknowledging the Pope to be their
Nauclerus or Pilot Tortur. Tort. p. 15.
: we leave that to the Franciscans, Dominicans, Benedictines, Jesuits, and many
other sorts; which some of the best writers of our Adversaries well know, as
Orladius, Salmeron, D. Carr. page 158 Iansenius, that have verbatim transcribed
whole leaves; and Pighius reading Calvin upon Justification by Faith, with a
purpose to confute him, was converted by him, as Tapperus in his 2. Tom. 8.
Artic. confesses, who sometimes was his fellow-pupill under Adrian the sixth.
What need I tell you what wonderful testimony Thuanus, D. Stapleton, and
Panygirolla, have given him, though Doctor Carrier a seduced malecontent, do
spite him, a man not worthy to light his candle when he went to his study:
More precisely observing the rules of their order, and following the prescripts
of their Founders, than they do of Christ. As for Master Calvin and Luther,
whom they do so extremely hate, (for that they have given an incurable wound
to Popery) we know they were learned men, and singular instruments of Gods
glory, such as lived and died godly, (notwithstanding that lying Cochlaeus and
Bolsecus, most wickedly slandered them; and Bellarmine in his Oration prefixed
to his 4. Tome, would make the world believe, he and his followers are the
wickedest men in the world) but we neither follow them, no nor Saint Paul
himself, further than they followed Christ: and so far we have good warrant,
for Saint Paul bids, Be followers of me, and look on them which walk so,
as you have us for an example Phil. 3. 17.
. And again, Be ye followers of me, even as I am of Christ 1 Cor. 11. 1.
. He, nor they never required more to him, nor them; we never yielded more; we
do not make Master Calvin our Nauclerus. Let men be never so learned and holy,
yet in this life we know but in part, are sanctified but in part; never any so
dear to God, but have had their errors and blemishes; none ever wrote so
fair, but blurred his copy; only Christ is the perfect copy, for doctrine
and conversation Sic Basilius vocat Christu, (...).
: and him only we teach and persuade you to follow. Oh, follow, follow him.

And thus that I have directed you in what society Encouragement.
to ship your selves, and showed you what men are: Now be pleased that I
encourage al such as are godly minded, to this following of Christ, whereunto I
exhort them. Which I shall the better do, if I remove such lets and
hindrances, which the Devil, the world, and their own corrupt reason, do
cast in their way to hinder them.

First, me thinks I hear some complain, Alas, Object. 1.
Christ is so perfect and absolute an example, I cannot come near him; so
fair a copy, I am clean out of heart to write, or once to take pen in hand.

I answer, that in following, Christ requires quality, Sol.
but not equality Justin. in Ephesians. 5. 1
; a similitude, but not proportion; a perfection indeed (as Christ says, You
shall be perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect Matthew. 5 ult.
,) but a perfection of parts, not of degrees: what we do, let us do it in
truth, and sincerity; be loving, humble, diligent, zealous, without
hypocrisy; and the Lord will accept according to that which we have 2 Cor. 8.
12.
; so there be an holy and honest endeavor, with godly sorrow, that we come so
far short, and, with Peter, that we follow so far off Luke 22. 54.
: and hearty and continual prayer with the Church, Draw Lord, and we will
run after thee Cant. 1. 3.
: He knows what pase we are able to make, better than ourselves, he will
bear with our limping and halting, and accept of the will for the deed.
Wherefore (so there be truth and sincerity in the inner parts Psalm. 51. 6.
) let us not be out of heart with our weakness, but follow after, though we
creep with the Snaile Cursu testudineo, Bez. in Cant. 3.
. What dullness did David find in himself, when he said, My soul cleaves to
the dust, oh quicken me Psalm. 119. 25.
: And I shall run the ways of thy Commandments, when thou have enlarged
mine heart Psalm. 119. 32.
. How did our holy Mother Church find her soul and affections fettered and
shackled with worldly cares, carnal pleasures, vain delights, when she
prayed Christ to draw her Cant. 1. 3.
; with his Word, Spirit, Mercies, Corrections. Therefore streng then the weak
hands, and comfort the ^eebleknees Esaias 35. 3.
. Whosoever follows with an holy endeavor, shall be sure to obtain. A good
Scribe will bear with his scholar, if against his will and purpose, he make a
blot, or deformed letter; and if he eye his copy, and have a care and desire
to imitate, he will guide his hand: but no man on earth has that loving regard
to his scholar, that Christ has to the weakness of all such as follow him.

Oh, but hereby I shall expose my self to many Object. 2.
evils, checkes, mockes, taunts, disgraces; it may be persecution, to the loss
of goods, liberty, life.

Indeed it is true, it many times fares better Sol.
here, with those that follow the Devil, world, flesh, that protesse any
doctrine, follow the Pope and Mahomet, and live never so profanely; than it
does with the holy servants of Christ, professing the Gospel in sincerity,
and striving to live accordingly: wherein Christ and his Apostles have dealt
faithfully, deceiving none with vain hopes; he said, his Kingdom is not of
this world John 18. 36.
; and telling him (that with an earthly mind offered his service, Master, I
will follow thee whithersoever thou go) The Foxes have holes, and birds of
the air have nests, but the Son of Man has not whereon to rest his head
Matthew. 8. 20.
: And called Zebedees sons from the crown to the cross, Are ye able to
drink of the cup, and be baptized with the Baptism, I must be baptized with
Matthew. 20. 22.
? Whosoever will be my disciple, must take up his cross daily, and follow me
Luke 9. 23.
; Yea, He that does not forsake father and mother, wife, children, house and
lands for my sake, and the Gospels, cannot be my disciple Luke 14. 26.
: And therefore would have all men to sit down, and cast their account, what it
will cost them Luke 14. 28.
: because to set hand to Gods plough, and look back, makes a man utterly
unfit for Gods Kingdom Luke 9. 62.
: And it were better never to have known the ways of godliness, than
afterward to depart from the holy Commandments given unto them 2 Pet. 2.
penult.
. Oh no marvel that so many are so loath to go from home, and so hard a task
to get them aboard. But see, oh see, the happy reward Promises.
of all followers in the end; Behold (says Peter, in the name of all the
Apostles, yea of all disciples, when ever living, that for action or affection
can truly say with him) we have forsaken all, and followed thee, what shall we
have therefore? Verily, I say unto you, ye that have followed me in the
regeneration, when the Son of Man shall sit in the throne of his glory, ye also
shall sit upon twelve thrones, and judge the twelve Tribes of Israel: andevery
one that has forsaken houses, brethren, sisters, father, mother, wife,
children, or lands, for my names sake, shall receive an hundred fold, and shall
inherit everlasting life Mat. 19. penult.
. And again, Ye are they that have continued with me in my temptation: And I
appoint to you a kingdom, as my Father has appointed to me: That ye may eat
and drink at my table in my Kingdom, and sit on thrones, judging the twelve
Tribes of Israel Luke 22. 28.
. According to which promises, the Apostle says, If we suffer with him, we
shall reign with him 2 Timothy 2. 12.
. It is a most true saying of the Apostle, If in this life only we have hope in
Christ, we are of all men most miserable 1 Cor. 15. 19.
. But in regard of the Conclusion.
reward to come, such as follow Christ to the end, are of all men most happy.
Moses had respect to this recompense of reward, and it made him leave following
of Pharaoh and his Court, and choose to suffer afflictions with the people of
God, rather than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season Heb. 11. 24.
. This made the Apostles, being scourged, to depart out of the Council
rejoicing, that they were counted worthy to suffer for the name of Christ.
This has encouraged thousands and millions of holy Martyrs, to suffer with
patience and joy, all the tortures and torments, that the Devil and Tyrants
could devise, and by no means be pulled from following of Christ.

Oh then, on, on, follow, follow him; let Exhortation.
us all be Acolytes; (I neither mean it, according to Philosophy, the Stoics
being so called, because they always followed their opinions, and did with
obstinate pertinacie, adhere to their doctrine, and counted it a shame to
forsake the same; neither do I mean it, according to ridiculous Popery,
wherein Acolytes are one of their Ecclesiastical Orders 1 Timothy 3. 8. Rhem.
ibid. sect. 7.
, whose office is to light tapers and candles; for there must be candles light
whenever the Mass is celebrated, though at noonday, and Sun shine never
so bright Trisag. p. 549.
; and no marvel, for it is a work of darkness: but) by Acolytes, I mean
according to the word in my Text, let us follow Christ his doctrine, and moral
conversation, and let our light so shine before men, that they may see our good
works, and glorify our Father which is in heaven Matthew. 5. 16.
.

Pressed.
Oh follow him in troubles and temptations, and you shall follow him in glory,
for so is the promise, They shall follow the Lamb whither soever he goes
Revel. 14. 4.
. Follow him on earth, and you shall follow him in heaven: follow him in
momentanie misery, and you shall follow him in endless felicity: follow him
in temporary death, and you shall follow him in everlasting life: then suffer
with him, and you shall reign with him. Now follow him that rides upon the
white horse, and is gone forth to war Revel. 19. 11.
, and you shall follow him in triumph, with Palms in your hands Revel. 7. 9.
, and crowns on your heads, when the Devil and all enemies, shall be trodden
under foot Romans 16. 20.
.

But now give me leave, before I conclude this Application.
point, to lament the paucitie, the small number of those that follow Christ.
The time was, when it was said, The whole world followed him Ioh. 3. 26. 12. 19.
: but now may we complain, that all follow the world; as the Apostle long
since did, All seek their own, and not those things which are Jesus Christ's
Phil. 2. 21.
. Good Lord, how greedily, and unweariedly, do men and women follow, and even
run, some after their pleasures, of Hawks, Hounds, Cards, Dice; some their
profit and gain; some their honor and preferment; some one sin, some
another: and in that pursuit, will endure any hardness, any discouragements!
but how few follow Christ in the way of obedience to the Gospel! Which S.
Bernard in his time lamented, and discovered the folly of, in a witty
descanting upon a Latin word Decipiam, inficiam, interficiam, reficiam.
. The world says, I will deceive thee; the flesh says, I will infect thee;
the Devil says, I will destroy thee: but Christ says, I will refresh thee.
Yet how many follow the other, and how few Christ. They would come to Christ in
heaven, and are ready to say with Stephen at their departure, Lord Jesus receive
my spirit Act. 7. penult.
; but will not follow Christ on earth Ad Christum, non post Christum; consequi,
sed non sequi.
: they would, with Balaam, die the deaths of the righteous Number. 23. 10.
; but cannot abide their lives: they wish the end, but not beginning Optant
extrema, sed non principia justorum.
; or if they will follow Christ on the shore, they will not to sea with him; can
endure in times of liberty, peace, plenty, and prosperity, to profess the
Gospel, but not in trouble and persecution; they will bring him to the
waterside, and if he will preach out of the ship, they will stand on shore and
hear him Matthew. 13. 2.
; but if it be rough, they will not to sea with him.

But know you, that the mark of a true disciple is to follow Christ in
temptations, tribulations, perils, and persecutions; yea it is adversity
tries and declares a true disciple; not like the Israelites, to rejoice and
sing, when they passed safely through the red sea, but murmr when they wanted
bread or water: wherefore follow him in sickness, poverty, disgrace,
imprisonment, death; follow him to the sea, let winds and waves rage never so
horribly; yea follow him into the sea, if he call thee thereunto: what hurt had
the children of Israel by following the Cloud and Arc into the midst of the
red sea? The Lord is with his in all their temptations and tribulations, he
will deliver them, and bring them to honor Psalm. 91. Penult.
. Thus the passengers are all shipped, we have observed both their number and
their order; Christ went in before, and his Disciples followed him. It now
follows to speak of the Vessel wherein they passed; but for this time I
conclude with that Prayer our holy mother Church CCC. on Saint Peter's day. Anno
1622.
has taught us in the Collect for this day.

Almighty God, which by thy Son Jesus Christ, Part. 2.
did give such grace to thy holy Apostle Saint Peter, and commandedst him
earnestly to feed thy flock; make we beseech thee, all Biships and Pastors
diligently to preach thy holy word, and the people obediently to follow the
same, that they may receive the crown of everlasting glory, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

Into a ship.] We have observed the Passengers, for their number and order of
shipping. Now let us consider the Vessel wherein they pass, which is here
said to be a [ Ship (...): ex (...) navigo; navis, dempto, n* avis; both do
fly, one with wings of nature, the other of Art, velis quasialis volare
docuit. Bell. de ascen. mentis ad Deum, grad. 8. ca. 5. and both in the
intermediall Elements, air and water; and easily changed one into another; the
water rarefied with heat, becomes air; and air condensate with cold,
turns into water: but I leave the word.
.] The Romish Peterlings say this was Peter's ship: and in that they have a
great mystery Ber. tom. 2. lib. 5. cap. 6. Rhem. annot. on Luke 5. sect. 1.
; that Christ and his Disciples are in their Church. Indeed that Christ once
was in Peter's ship, and taught out of it, and drew a great draught of fishes,
the Text is clear Luke 5. 3.
: That also Christ and his Disciples were in the Church of Rome, is as clear,
when Saint Paul says, Their faith was famous throughout the world Romans 1. 8.
, and affoorded so many Martyrs: and let it be granted, that this was Simon
Peter's ship, which he had left when Christ called him Matthew. 4. 19.
, but not aliened the property, but afterward used it for fishing John 21. 3.
. Yet then let the Papists be pleased to note, that if it were Peter's, it was
but a fisher boat, a (...), a navicula, rather a cock-boat, or small Bark:
Ascendente in naviculam. Vulg. Mald. Band, and omnes Pontificij: no man of war,
with flags, and streamers, and abundance of cast pieces, as theirs is, a Bear
with 3. ribs in his mouth. Alas, the Church of God is poor, simple, and
abject, in comparison of other societies. Witness God himself, who has
described it thus, saying, Oh thou afflicted, tossed with tempest, and not
comforted Esaias 54. 11.
; far unlike the Romish Church, which challenges Unity, Visibilitie,
Antiquity, Universality, Miracles, and whatsoever may make her glorious in
the world. I beseech you, let us not contend with them in this, for the
judgment of God is so upon them, that nothing does more disprove them from
being the true Church of God, than what they do most challenge for themselves.

But why would Christ enter into a ship, seeing Quest.
he could walk upon the sea? was it not he that led the people of Israel
through the red sea, himself walked on the sea, and made Peter to do so too?
If then he would not enable his Disciples to do so, yet why did he not compel
the Disciples to enter into a ship, but himself to walk after them upon the
sea, as at another time he did Matthew. 14. 25.
?

I Answer, though he that made the sea, could Answ. I. Declaration of humanity.
have walked on it; yet for three causes specially, he would now go in the
ship. First, to declare the truth of his Humanity, which he well foresaw
would be denied by Manechies, Marcionites, and other Heretics; and therefore
as at other times; so specially when he wrought any glorious miracle, for
declaration of his Deity, he also gave some testimony of true Humanity. As
man, he did spit upon the ground; as God, with clay he cured him that was borne
blind John 9. 6.
; as man, he wept for Lazarus his death; as God, he raised him that had been
four days dead John 11. 35. 43, 44.
; as man, he entered into a ship and slept; as God, he stilled the raging of the
winds and seas. If the Disciples seeing him but once to walk upon the sea,
were troubled, saying, It is a spirit, and they cried out for fear Matthew. 14.
26.
: What would they have thought, if he had used it ordinarily? And if they were
so terrified and affrighted, supposing they had seen a spirit, because the
doors being shut, he stood in the midst of them Luke 24. 36.
: What would they have thought, if he had always, so supernaturally, and
miraculously, so behaved himself? Wherefore to declare the truth of his
Humanity, he would now enter into a ship with his Disciples.

Secondly, for the confirmation of their faith, 2. Trial of Apostles.
and enabling them to greater trials; first, he would now be with them, and but
on sleep; but the next time he will be absent, and see how they profited by
this. Thus does God proceed from lesser to greater, seeing what use we make of
former providence, help, grace, and goodness.

Thirdly, that by his Example, he might teach 3. To teach the use of means.
us to use lawful means in our callings, and as we travel by water or land,
and not tempt God, by rashness and presumption, casting our selves into
needless perils and dangers: the Devil placed Christ on a pinnacle of the
Temple, and bade him cast himself down, which he could have done without
hurt; yet to teach us how to carry our selves in the like case, he answered,
It is written, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God Matthew. 4. 7.
. So if men have occasion to pass over rivers, or seas: we must not with
Peter, strive to walk upon the sea, lest we link and be drowned, (as he might
have been, if his Master had not saved him) but by bridges, ships, and such
ordinary ways and means, as God, by man's art has appointed. So much for the
sense.

The letter teaches us, that it is a thing lawful, Doct. lit.
and warrantable for Christ his Disciples, as occasions serve, to travel in
boats and ships from place to place; yea and if there arise a storm, and they
Illustration.
come into danger of life, yet not to be out of heart, as if they were not in
their ways, and therefore not to hope for protection, yea though they might
with more toil, have gone to the same place on foot, and by land; for Christ
and his Disciples might have gone from Bethsaida to Gaderen by land, this sea
being but a lake, so as if they would have compassed the lake, they had met
with no water, saving Jordan, over which, there were doubtless bridges, and safe
passages; but Christ and his Disciples, to avoid that toil, and being weary,
take ship, and go by sea, warranting the like; yea if any shall take ship, but
for pleasure and recreation, it is lawful, as for pleasure, to ride on horse,
or in coach; Christ has sanctified these things to his children.

I am not ignorant that this doctrine is gainsaid, Confutation.
and that wise men (specially amongst the Heathen) have disliked Navigation,
and declaimed against it, and the invention thereof; as one says, Go and
commit thy life to the winds, trusting in wood, not four inches from death I,
nunc and ventis animam commit. Juven.
: Horace admireth the boldness of him that first went in ship Illi robur and
as triplex circa pectus erat. Hor. 1. Carm. 3.
: It was one of the three things that Cato repented, Travel by sea, when by
land he might have gone: And Antigonus gave his sons charge, that they never
hazard themselves on such adventures: and the Greek Comicke says, It is
better to be poor by land, than rich by sea (...)
. But these were Heathen men, and though some fearful Christians be little
wiser, thinking it ever safest to see raging waters from the shore Neptunum
pr^cul a terra.
: yet we are better taught in Gods School, viz. That as all other Arts are
primarily and originally from God, that first and most perfect intelligible
Primum and perfectissimum intelligibile. Kecker. Physic. li. 4. c. 4. p. 1611.
: so specially this of Navigation, for God himself gave express direction to
Noah, how to build the Arc for the saving of the creatures in the Deluge,
which was the first vessel (for any thing we know) that ever floated on the
sea, and which resting upon the Mountains of Armenia, was the model or Idaea
for the building of ships; the Phenicians, and after the Egyptians being the
first that practiced this Art Strabo. lib. 16. Plin. lib. 3. cap. 56. Kecker.
Problem. nautica. T. 1. page 1991.
; which is grown to a wonderful perfection; specially, since the invention of
the Lodestone: and it is primarily from God, which by experience is grown to
such perfection, so exceeding useful and profitable for Man; for this is first
a singular means of 1. Invectio Commeatuum.
provision, for how does the sea contend with the earth, for plenty, variety
and delicacie? how many sundry sorts of most wholesome and delicate fishes for
food, and most useful for their bones and oil, does the sea yield? which we
could never enjoy, to Gods praise and our comfort, but by the benefit of ships.
Again, God having enriched several 2. Copula distantiu^.
Countries, with several commodities, and scarce any one that affords all
things, even for the being, much less the well being of man; but as some have
great store of Corn; others abound with Wine; others have plenty of Fruits;
others stored with mines of Gold, Silver, Copper, Tin, Lead, or Iron; others
are for breed of Cattle Even India it self, the great storehouse of the
world, wants many things, which we have. Thus has the great Creator
disposed these earthly good things.
: that as in the body of the little world, the head cannot say to the foot, I
have no need of thee; so in the body of the great world, one Country cannot say
to another, I have no need of thee: and though never so far distant; yet by
benefit of Navigation, the Commodities of several Nations are exchanged;
merchandise with wonderful increase of wealth, is maintained; yea the
knowledge of God propagated; far remote countries, by this means, being made
as near neighbors, and daily passage from one to another, as over a wooden
bridge. Lastly, 3. Compendium itineris.
it is a wonderful ease in journey, shipping makes great burdens light, and
long ways short; conveying both persons and commodities, from place to place,
both with more ease, in shorter time, and with far lesser charge: so
beneficial is the Art of Navigation.

Now to make Application. Jacob blessing his Application.
Sons before his death, and in spirit foreseeing their placing in Canaan, as
if with Iosuah, he had seen the Lots cast and fallen, gave this blessing to his
Son Zebulun: Zebulun shall dwell at the Haven of the Sea, and he shall be for
an Haven of Ships Genesis 49. 13.
. In this Tribe was this Sea, and Corazin, Bethsaida, Capernaum, which was so
commodious and gainful a dwelling, that Moses before his death blessing the
Tribes, ^^ddeth Rejoice Zebulun in thy goings out Deuteronomy. 33. 18.
; First, in thy prosperous voiages; whereby they did suck of the abundance of
the Seas, and of treasures hid in the Sands Deuteronomy. 33. 19.
. The people were so rich in Solomon's days, that in Jerusalem, Silver was as
plentiful as stones 1 King. 10. 27.
: but by his Ships he fetched it from Ophir 1 King. 9. ult.
. England is a fruitful Country, and as complete in it self, as any I read
of, a very Canaan flowing with Milk and Honey, specially abounding with such
things as are for food and apparel, which give the Law to all other
Merchandise. Yet we want (I say not Tobacco) I would we wanted that Indian
Gold, and Silver, and Wine, and Weed and all, rather than it should be so
abused through wantonness and riot. But we want Spices, and thousands of
comfortable blessings. Our Merchants fetch them from far in their Ships,
wherein they excel all Nations Hoc certum est, omnibus hodie gentibus,
navigandi industria and peritia superiores esse Anglos. Kecker. prob. nautic.
page 1992.
. Lastly, whereas Inhabitants in the maine Continents are subject to sudden and
violent incursions of enemies, so as many times when no danger is suspected,
Cities, and Castles are surprised, and Princes led into captivity by their
enemies: how does Nature and Art secure us Islanders; Nature having dug so
great and unpassable a Ditch (without great and long preparation) and Art
builded such strong, though wooden, Walls, Castles, and Bulwarks? Wherefore
that we may be happy still, as well in Earthly, as Heavenly things; let us
pray God to maintain Merchandise, the sinew of our wealth, peace, and welfare;
that they may cheerfully go out and in, and with Zebulun rejoice in their
trading; export such things as we can spare, and import such blessings as we
want: And specially, for his Majesty's Royal Navy, that, that may be as a
ready-well-furnished Wall and Castle of defense, for the propulsation of every
invading Foe. And so much be said of the Letter.

It is generally agreed, by the ancient Fathers, Mystical sense.
and later Divines, both orthodoxall and heretical, that the Ship is a most
excellent Emblem and Hieroglyphick, wherein is most lively (almost in all
things, as may be gathered from the Scriptures, and writings of learned
Divines) represented, the state and condition of a true visible Church in this
world; The Ship (I say) resembles the Church; the Sea, the world; the storm,
persecutions; Christ his sleep, his patience; the Haven, is Heaven; the Pilot
is Christ; the Mariners, Prophets, Apostles, Ministers; the Passengers,
Christians; diverse rooms, diverse orders and offices; the maine Mast, Christ's
Cross; the Sails, profession of godliness; the wind, the Spirit of God; the
contrary winds, the counterblasts of Satan, by false Doctrine; the Card and
Compass whereby they sail, Gods Word; the pixis nautica, which only eieth the
fixed North Pole, Faith; the Cable and cordage, Love; the Anchor, hope;
prayers, and tears, their Ordnance; Word and Sacraments, their food; Gods good
pleasure, the Rudder; and prosperity, the Remora, which makes the Ship stand
still, or sail very slowly. If I should now insist upon these things, and
show you both by what authority, from Scriptures, or Fathers, or both, I frame
this Allegory; and how fit this resemblance is, in all the passages thereof,
in many a Lecture, I could not dispatch it. I hasten to things more profitable,
and do only in general propose it, and refer the particulars, to your own
further meditation; and now come to resolve the waightiest question which
troubles so many in these days, viz. Which is Quest.
that Ship wherein Christ and his Disciples are, seeing every Ship says he is
there; which is that true visible Church in these days, wherein to live, and
whereof to be a member, is most happy? To search Answ.
all the Ships, Pinnesses, and Cock-boats, which are or have been upon the
Sea, were an endless labor, (there are or have been so many Jews, Turks,
Arrians, Anabaptists, Familists,) yea and fruitless; for many of them which
formerly have failed fair, and troubled the eyes of beholders, have suffered
Shipwreck, and are long since sunck: only some few pieces of their broken
Ships, do float here and there; and others have received great leakes, and
will sink of themselves; which show, that Christ is not in them. I will only
search two, viz. the Romish Ship, (which they say is the only Ship of Christ
and Peter;) and the Ship of the Reformed Church (which they say, is but an
haereticall Cock-boat.) Have but patience, and by Gods grace, I shall resolve
the question, in whether of these do Christ and his Disciples pass, that so
we may ship our selves with them. For the Church of Rome, there is nothing
better pleases them than this Allegory; they say theirs is Peter's Ship, and
therefore express it upon the Walls, and in Tabletures, in portraiture of a
beautiful, and goodly Ship, under sails Splendidi^ picturis hanc naviculam
exornare solent. Chem. Harm. cap. 64.
; the Pope at the Stern; Cardinals, and Bishops, and Shavelings, the Mariners,
and plying their tacklings; and the poor Protestants, as Heretics, cast over
board, and swimming a while for life; but in the end drowned. And therefore
they send out their Emissaries, Jesuits, Priests, to draw all Disciples to
board there. But let me tell you, I have searched that Ship, and find it a
fair one to look on, and furnished with Masts, Yards, Cables, Cordage, large
Sails, and mighty Ordnance, a number of cast Pieces: but Christ is not there,
nor his Disciples: if Inquisition can find them out, they must over board.
They will suffer Jews, Atheists, and all sort of wicked livers, but not
Christ's disciples. This shall suffer wrack. And therefore we call to all
Passengers therein, Come out from amongst them Revel. 18. 4.
.

And for this purpose I allege the Testimony of one of their own, (whom I
do not name for honor, being such a wretched, and faithless Hypocrite and
Renegade; but because such as are Popishly affected, it may be, will regard his
saying,) thus therefore has he painted in paper the Romish Church: Marcus
Antonius de Dominis, in a Sermon preached in Italian in Mercers Chapel, page
33, 34.
It is a good Vessel, well built, not rotten, nor fallen in pieces; but
indeed, the Pilot, who sits at the stern, has thrown aside the ordinary
Compass, and left the use of the approved Sea Map, and out of his own
capricious conceit, devised a new Card, and contrived a new found Compass of
his own, whose Needle has no aspect toward the Pole, or touch at all of the
Lodestone, suitable hereunto; he has, out of his own head, framed certain
Cardinal winds, which serve only for his Card, and propounding only one Port,
his own greatness, and temporal pomp, has in his devised Compass,
quartered out his own counterfeit winds, which must blow for that haven; but he
ring-leads them all to wrack. And will you hear what testimony he has given
of the Reformed Churches ship, in the same Sermon: The Reformed Churches (says
he) have cast out that strange intruding Pilot, and yielded up their ship to be
governed by their own true Steeresman, such as God himself has ordained, and
so using the infallible Card of the holy Scriptures, and the true Compass,
quartered out into the four ancient Cardinal winds, of the four first
General Councels, and seconded with the under winds of the Holy Fathers, they
make an happy Voyage, and without wandering arrive at the appointed Haven of
Salvation Sermon. sup. page 36.
. If he had believed this with his heart, which in the name of God, he preached
with his mouth, he had been an happy man; but dealing falsely with God, God
has justly discovered him. Let them take him, we renounce him as an hypocrite,
and nullifidian, and regard not what he has said or written. I will only
produce the Testimony of a Pope, viz. Pius the fifth, who offered to Q.
Elizabeth, to approve as good the whole public service and form of Religion
in our Church, with Sacraments and Bible, and that he would change nothing, so
her Majesty would receive it from him, as Pope and Vicar of Christ; which
because she refused to do, he presently excommunicated her. Let Popishly
affected, note that, how well pleased the Pope would be with all, so he might
have the government. For this are we such Vide Trisagio. lib. 3. cap. 18. page
593. D. Carr. let. page 45. edit. 1613.
Heretics. I will join issue with a man of greater worth, dignity, and
esteem amongst them, than Spalato was, or now will be, viz. Bellarmine
himself, who takes upon him by certain infallible notes, (to the number of
four) to declare which is the true ship or Church, wherein Christ and his
disciples are. It would ask a great time to examine them all, it has been
worthily done by famous and learned men already D. Whit. D. Reynold.
. I will only select one or twain: and first be it known unto you, that
whereas there are only two infallible marks and notes, of a true visible
church, viz. the sincere preaching of the word; and the administration of the
Sacraments: these are none of Bellarmines notes, he does with all his learning
oppose them as no true notes: I must therefore join in some others of his own
coining, granting such to be, as indeed are not, that yet it may appear, even
those do more concern our Church, than theirs: which though it might be made
good, in examination of them all, yet I will only choose two, because I will not
confound the memories of the weak; and such two, as are most visible, that so
the common people may see which is the true Church indeed.

The former of these (but the eighth in Bellarmines number) is holiness of
doctrine Sanctitas doctrinae. Bell. Tom. 2. lib. 4. cap. 11.
; and he adds, there is no sect of Pagans, Philosophers, Jews, Turks, or
Heretics but teach errors; but the Church of Rome teaches no error, no
turpitude, nothing contrary to reason; and therefore that is the only true
Church. I would to God Bellarmine meant as he says, that by this note of holy
doctrine, it might be, without partiality, tried which is the true Church: for
the Scriptures containing the most holy doctrine, it would follow, that what
Church does preach and profess that doctrine purely, by this note must needs
be the true Church of God. But I do wonder, that Bellarmine should dare to
offer such a note; whereas they teach for doctrine their own Traditions and
Ceremonies, give authority to the Pope to dispense with the Law of God; yea
rob Christ of all his offices, (as might be showed by induction of
particulars) give men liberty to finne, by their Auricular Confession,
Indulgences, and Pardons, and easy deliverance out of Purgatory. Is that an
holy doctrine, which teaches, that the marriage of Ministers, is the worst sort
of Fornication? That it is better to maintain a Concubine, than a Wife? That
allows swearing and blaspheming; so as Saupanlinus but for reproving a man
for swearing, was suspected to be a Lutheran, and thereupon examined,
condemned, and burned Tox Martyr. p. 904.
? Is that an holy doctrine, which teaches no more than a very Reprobate may
believe and practice Mr. Perk. Reform. Cathol.
? Is that an holy doctrine, which teaches killing, and poisoning of Kings and
Princes? Is that an holy Religion, which does canonize for Saints, Thomas
Becket, Garnet, and such like notorious Rebels? That teaches lying,
equivocation, mental reservation, breaking of oaths? Is that an holy
doctrine, which teaches the breach of all the moral Commandments? In a word,
the Romish doctrine, is a most profane, carnal, and obscene doctrine, and
most pleasing to carnal, wicked, and unregenerate men, a maine cause why it
has so many professors; all the holiness of it, is but in Apish and mimicall
gestures, bowing of knee, lifting up of eyes, and hands, abstaining from some
meats, weeping, knocking, crossing, whipping, which are prescribed? So that as
a worthy Divine amongst us has truly said, a great part of Popery is very
Magic Perkins T. 1. page 40. Col. 2. in C.
, and nothing else but a politic Atheism; being Divines without Scripture;
Religious, but without Faith Sine Scriptura Theologi, sine vera fide Religiosi.
; in the name of the Lord, putting to death, such as die, for the name of the
Lord. To conclude, seeing the doctrine of Popery, is a renewing and reviving of
all ancient Heresies; a doctrine of liberty, and all licentious living;
teaching and allowing most filthy positions, and practices; the Romish Church,
is not the true Church of God, or ship, wherein Christ and his disciples pass;
because they have not holy doctrine. The second (but tenth note in Bellarmines
account 2.
and number) is, Sanctity and bolinesse of life Sanctitas vitae. Bellar. T. 2.
lib. 4. ^ap. 13.
; the very naming of which note, would make any man of grace and modesty,
blush, that Bellarmine so well knowing, what are the lives and conversations of
men and women in that Church, should not be ashamed of this, and is
sufficiently confuted by their own jest, of the Duke of Vrbins Painter, who
being hired by a Cardinal to picture the Images of Peter and Paul, the
Cardinal told him, he had painted them too high-colored in the face; the
Painter replied, that when they were alive, they looked pale, with preaching
and fasting; but now they were so red, with blushing at the wickedness of
their successors. I will not deny but Rome was an holy Church, when S. Paul did
write his Epistle to it, and during the continuance of 63 Bishops, till
Boniface the first, Pope, set up by Phocas, who had killed the Emperor
Mauritius, and his wife, and children. Many of which said Bishops, were Martyrs
for Christ and his Gospel, which they now persecute; and sanctitas vitae is
gone. Way to the Church, page 217. ex Balt. Castill. lib. de Aulico.
I need not reprove the Laymens lives, wherein some live civilly and morally,
yea in superstition and blind devotion, severe, and not sparing the body. But
if they would have the world believe Romanists are so holy, they must not wipe
and expunge, but burn Bernards Sermons, Platina, Baronius Annals, Iansenius,
etc. who have made it known to all the world, that Popes themselves have been
convicted of Atheism, Sorcerie, Heresy, Blasphemy, Sodomie, Incest,
Whoredom, Adultery, Simonie: as for * Dr. Will. sinop. controv. 2. quaest. 3.
page 83. Trisagion. lib. 3. cap. 39. page 767.
Covetousness, Pride, Drunkenness, ordinary faults ``. Only let us mark,
that as they deceive the simple, with glorious titles, of Catholic, and holy
mother Church, and honor the Pope, with the like, of Christ his Vicar, and
Peter's Successor; so do they strangely gull the world, in changing the Popes
names. The first was Sergius, who, because his own name Bocca di Porco, or
Swinesmouth, was not consonant to his dignity, he was called Sergius; and so
ever since, if any be an absolute Atheist, he is called Pius; if a bloody
Tyrant, Clemens; if a Coward, Leo; if a Rusticke, Vrbanus; if an harmefull man,
Innocens; if a drowsy sluggard, Gregory; if an earthly minded man,
Coelestinus; if cursed of God, and man, Benedict. Thus they take great pains
to gild and deck their Pilot, who sits at the stern: by which means they
draw not a few passengers into their vessel, and having put a fair Coape upon
the Pope, and made him, in his name, an holy, blessed, and good man; then they
stand for sanctitas vitae, to be a note of the Church; and might have done so
with fairer pretense, if they had also changed Pope Joan the harlots name, and
have called her Casta, or Matrona. etc. Was not Pope Joan a fit Head for such
an holy Church, which having played the whore, fell in travel, in the midst of
procession? Was not the Cardinal of Crema, a fit Legate from such an holy
Church, who in a Council at London, inveighing against the marriage of
Priests, and with these words, It was a shameful thing, to rise from the sides
of an whore, to make Christ's body; was the same night following taken in bed,
with a notable whore? Yea they must be sure also to burn all the Rolls and
Records in England, the suppression of their Abbeyes and Nunries here, bringing
to light such abominations, as are not only a shame to speak, but rehearsal
whereof, would infect the air: yea they must be sure to burn the book of
Revelation too, for that tells us, and we find true by experience, that
Rome is an habitation of Devils, and a cage of all unclean birds Revel. 18. 2.
, a sink of sin and confluent of all uncleanness and iniquity. I will
conclude with the testimonies of two men; the first, one of their own, a
famous Predicant in Turin in Savoy, who coming to speak of Sancta Ecclesia,
he was so far from making it a note of the Church with Bellarmine, that fearing
he should rather prove the Calvinists to be the true Church by that, he
thought good rather against all points of schollership, and specially in the
tongues, to derive sanctam from sancio, sancivi. Sic Panegirolla, ut in Car.
Let. page 118. The other a worthy Doctor of our Church, having spent many
years amongst the throng of Papists in Lancashire, professes, that fowlest
disorders were ever in those parts where the people were most Pope-holy, being
generally buried in sin, swearing, uncleanness, drunkenness, most
dissolute, fierce and inhumane behavior, ringleaders in riotous companies,
drunken meetings, seditious assemblies, in profaning the Sabbath, quarrels,
braules, and all Heathenish customs Doctor Whites way to the Church, page 210.
. But I purposely forbear to rake, in this filthy puddle, which I would have
passed by, if they had not been so shameless to make holiness of life, a
note of the Church. Let us Conclusion.
bless God, that in our Church and other Reformed Churches, we have for a
Pilot and Master, one of the Trinity House; we have the holy Scriptures and
Sacraments, purely and sincerely preached, and administered. According to the
four first general Councels, and whatsoever the Fathers, living within the
first five hundred years after Christ, unanimously taught as needful to
salvation, we believe and profess Kings Works in his Premonition. page 302.
. And though we have too many sins amongst us, yet by the Word and Sword of
Civil and Ecclesiastical Magistrates, they are so rebuked and reformed, that
if we stood to the trial of these two notes, it would be found that our Church
is the holy Church of God, the true ship wherein Christ and his Disciples are,
and the Church of Rome an Antichristian, Heretical, Apostaticall and profane
Synagogue Master Perkins on the Creed, in T. 1. p. 305. coll. 2. in. A.
, a man of war, and ship of Pirates: and therefore all men must take heed of
passing in her.

VERSE. 24. And behold, there arose a great tempest in the Sea, in so much that
the ship was covered with the waves: but he was on sleep.
THe passengers being all shipped, now we proceed Division.
to the hoyssing of the sails, and launching forth into the deep, and the
whole story of their voyage; wherein three things are to be considered, viz.
First, the great peril and jeopardie they were in. Secondly, their deliverance
out of it. Thirdly, The effects thereof. Their peril and danger is reported in
this 24. verse, where we have, First a note of attention, [ Behold] Secondly,
the Narration thereof it self, which has two parts, viz.

First, a Declaration of the cause of their danger, Sub-division.
and secondly an aggravation of the danger it self. In the Declaration, the
cause of danger is first in one word expressed, [ a Tempest] secondly,
described by two things, viz. First, the quality, it was sudden; [ it arose]
secondly, the quantity, [ it was great.] The danger is aggravated by two
circumstances; the first concerns the cause of their danger, the tempest was
so great, [ that even the ship was covered with waves;] the second, concerned
the means of their safety and security [ Christ was on sleepe] which in
their conceit, did not a little aggravate their peril. Of these in order.

And first, for the first part, viz. The note of regard (...), ecce.
. Such is the goodness of God in the desire of our good, by causing atte^tion to
his word co^taining all our good, that there is scarcely any memorable and
transcendently excellent saying, or work, but by some helps of attention and
regard, or other, we are provoked well to consider it. These helps, that I may
range them in order, and yet but touch them, are of two sorts, viz. either from
such as did speak, or from such as did write the word. The Prophets, Christ and
his Apostles, in preaching to the people, how have they called on men to hear,
harken, and consider what they said unto them! Helps from writing (and
specially some of these, to such as are able to read the original copies,
wherein some of them only continue) are of two sorts, viz. in words, or in
form: words are principally two, the one initiall, or in the beginning, which
is the word in my Text, [ Behold;] or final, and at the end, which is the word
[ Selah] at the end of many sentences, in the Psalms and Habakkuk only, and
retained in translations. About which word, learned men have much disputed, and
laid down several opinions, with rehearsal whereof, I will not now trouble
you. I take it to be derived from such a word as signifies to lift up Selah.
Sic Lorin. in Psalm. 3. 3. page 56. coll. 2.
; and the Septuagint, Symmachus, and Theodotion, interpret it, Diapsalma, the
change of the tune or song; for by changing the tune, and extraordinarily
lifting up the voice, in singing such a streine, they did signify such were
most remarkable sentences. I told you, that also there are helps of attention,
from the form of writing, I mean in the Hebrew copies, (for Interpreters take
no notice hereof) but are most observable of all such as are learned, and they
are threefold, viz. in regard of letters, pricks, or blankes. Letters are of
two sorts, viz. either in regard of location, or of proportion. In regard of
location; a very strange and remarkable (if not mystical) thing it is, that
mem clausum, which is ever final, should only in one word in all the Bible be
found so written, in the midst Esaias 9. 7. vide Pet Galat. lib. 4. ca. 19. de
ar^anis, in Lem^rbeh. ad multiplicandum.
. Secondly, for proportion; whereas the Hebrews were most curious in their
Orthographie; yet in some places, some letters are of extraordinary size, and
hold no proportion with the rest of the word or sentence. As where Jacob
reproved his sons, Simeon and Levi, for their cruel murdering of the
Sichemites; they answered him with big words, Should he deal with our
sister, as with an Harlot Genesis 34. ult.
? And in the word Zonah, the first letter is of an extraordinary proportion:
and where it is said, That Abraham mourned for Sarah his wife Genesis 23. 2.
. Caph in [ Bachah] is of a very little size: and as in letters, so also in
pricks, (whereof I lately gave some instance in this place) some words having
such pricks as are neither* Grammatical, Rhetorical, nor Musical; and
sometimes in blanckes, breaking off, and making a pawse in the midst of a
sentence, and a great space left empty, and only an o in it, as where it is
said, Cain talked with his brother Genesis 4. 8. 35. 22. Deuteronomy. 2. 8.
; and these things are preserved in all their copies, and therefore could be no
error in the Printer. But the most common word of attention and regard,
thorowout the whole Scriptures, of old and new Testament, is this initiall
word, or Adverbe of demonstration, [ Behold] which is specially used in three
cases. First, when some strange thing 1
is presented to the eye; as when Jesus came forth wearing a crown of thorns,
and a purple roabe, Pilat said to the people, Behold the man John 19. 5.
: the strangest thing that ever was presented to the eye of man, never the like
before nor since, the Son of God, who wears the crown of eternal glory,
crowned with thorns.

Secondly, it is used, when both some thing is to 2
be seen with the bodily eye, and the mind is to contemplate, and consider
something represented, by that visible spectacle, as when Christ rode into the
City of Jerusalem, the Prophet calls, Behold thy King comes mecke, and
sitting on an Ass Matthew. 21. 5. Zach. 9. 9.
. Oh see him ride with thine eyes, oh consider his meekness with thy mind!

Thirdly, when men are bid ( Behold) when yet 3.
nothing can be seen with bodily eye, and then it signifies, regard and
consider. So the Prophet says, Behold a Virgin shall conceive, and bear a
son Esaias 7. 14.
, that was many years after fulfilled according to the letter, therefore the
people in those days could but consider it. So here, we are bid, Behold, there
arose a tempest, that tempest is many hundred years ago calmed, we cannot see
it with our bodily eyes, but wheresoever this story is preached, the people
shall be called upon to muse, and meditate, hearken, and consider the same.

The Use of all that has been said, is to move Use.
us with consideration of our dullness, who need so many, and such great helps,
to provoke us to the consideration of heavenly things, Gods word, and works.
Oh, for earthly things, as dignity, wealth, Aggravation
honor, preferment, our profits, or pleasures, we are watchful, and careful
enough, as quick-sighted as Eagles to see things a far off, and exceeding
attentive to whomsoever shall talk of these things. Yea, many do even wear
away themselves with continual care, thought, and meditation; or if at any
time we fall into a slumber about these matters, yet the least whispering will
make us to start up, stand upon both legs, look round about us, and over every
bodies head, yea ride, and run, and what not? but for the greatest works of
God, or mysteries of godliness, we have no eyes in our heads, to see them, no
ears to hear them, no minds to consider them, but please our selves in our
spiritual sluggishnesse, and drowsinesse, like the sluggard in the Proverbs,
folding our arms, and saying, Yet a little more sleep, a little more slumber,
that the Holy Ghost (in love of our salvation) does call upon us, and stir us
up to attend, Behold, behold. So much for the note of attention.

In the narration, we have first the cause of their great danger, in one word
expressed,

A tempest] (...), Concutio, quatio.
The word in the Original, signifies 2. Part.
a shaking or quaking, with which words the Greek Authors do commonly
express an earthquake (...) Arist.
, which Varinus also describes in the word of my Text (...).
; yea we have it twice in one verse, Whose voice shook the earth, Hebr. 12.
26. (...); and Christ says, There shall be earthquakes, Matthew. 24. 7. (...).
Which also our Latin Translators follow, Motus magnus. Mont. valg. Concussio
magna, Bez. which being caused by a sudden and vehement wind, (as we shall
hear) is well translated a storm, wherein the ship was so shaken, tumbled,
and tossed, as if there had been some mighty earthquake. The Hebrew word, which
Munster has here, is Sagnar, the word which is in Jonah, where it is said, The
Lord sent out a great wind into the Sea, and there was a mighty tempest, so
that the ship was like to be broken Jonah 1. 4.
. So much for the sense of the word.

But as the Jews said of Christ concerning the death of Lazarus, Could not be
that opened the eyes of the blind, have caused, that even this man had not
died John 11. 37.
? So I say; He that stilled the tempest, and raging of the Sea, could not he
have caused, it had not been at all? Yes verily. Let us then search out
Reasons.
for what causes, it was his pleasure, that this great tempest should arise.
Some of the Fathers tell us, it was for Judas his sake, as the great storm
arose for Jonas his sake Sic Ambros. sermon. 11. Beda. 1. For Judas sin.
. But at this time Judas had not betrayed his Master. Doubtless he was a
covetous wretch, which gave Satan the advantage to tempt him to that sin:
but I suppose, as yet, Satan had not so much as put it into his heart John 13.
2.
. But because it is the Fathers, I will not reject nor confute it. Only by the
way, and in a word, make this use of it. Let us so much as we can, keep out of
the society of wicked men, as the Apostle bids, Have no fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness Ephesians. 5. 11.
. For as a Father says, Where sin is, there will be a storm Vbi peccatum,
ibi procella. Chrysostom. ad pop. Antioch.
. The Scriptures are plain to teach us, that even for the sin of some one man
(the punishment whereof was neglected) a whole family, tribe, and people have
been punished. As the making and worshipping of the Golden Calfe, though it
was not the sin of all, yet it endangered all; and God told Moses, he would
consume them all Exodus 32. 10.
. For Achans sin, how did the people fall before their enemies Josh. 7. 12.
? Which made all Israel so afraid, when the two Tribes and an half had erected
an Altar, (as they conceived, to offer sacrifice on, contrary to the
commandment of God) and sent messengers to tell them, that if they did rebel
against the Lord that day, to morrow he would be wroth with all the
Congregation of Israel Josh. 22. 28.
villainy committed by some of the Inhabitants of Gibeah, in abusing the
Levites concubine, the heavy vengeance of God came not only upon the persons
themselves, but upon the whole City, wherein such wickedness was committed;
yea upon the whole Tribe, because they delivered not up those wicked men to be
punished, but seemed to defend them: yea not upon the Tribe alone, which seem
justly to be condemned as accessarie; but also on all such as came not up to
war, and helped not to take vengeance for that wicked fact; as upon all the
Inhabitants of Iabesh Gilead Judge. 19. 25. 20. 13. 21. 4.
. And do you not remember how for Saul's cruel fact in killing the Gibeonites,
there was a great famine in the Land for three years together 2 Samuel 21. 1, 2,
3.
? So good a thing it is, if we can prevent it, that Judas be not in Ship,
House, or Town, where we sail or dwell; as S. John fled out of the Bath,
where he saw the wicked Heretic was: or at the least, Ministers, Magistrates,
people, and all must endeavor, that sin be punished, and so taken away, else
the guilt and punishment may lie on all.

But I suppose, there were other two principal 2. Trial.
Reasons, for which Christ was pleased, that this great tempest should arise,
viz. First for trial of his Disciples faith, which is specially tried in times
of danger, distress, and perplexity, yea though he knew it to be weak, yet
themselves did not so, and it was very profitable for them to know, how weak
their faith was.

Lastly, that by this miraculous deliverance, he 3. Confirmation.
might confirm their faith, and teach them in all future dangers and
perplexities, to cleave unto him, and trust in him: which teaches us, that
former experience of Gods providence, power, and goodness, in ministering to
our wants, and delivering us out of evils, should strengthen our faith in
assurance of the like, if it shall please God to bring us into them; as we see
David made that use of his deliverance from the paw of the Lien and Bear,
that, that God would also deliver him out of the hand of the Philistim 1 Samuel
17. 37.
. And so much for the Reasons.

Now for further instruction: observe, that as Literal observation.
there is a manifold, singular, bodily, or earthly use of the Sea or
Navigation; so is there also singular Divine and heavenly use to be made, and
specially, for contemplation. There is no creature visible, wherein in fairer
capital letters we may read, the goodness, greatness, power and Majesty of
God, than in the Sea, that huge and uncontrollable creature, and specially in a
storm, to see the waves how they roll, and rage, and to hear them even many
miles off, how they roar in beating one against another, and against the
shore; so true that is of David, They that go down to the Sea in ships, and
occupy their business in great waters: These see the works of the Lord, and
his wonders in the deep Psalm. 107. 23.
. If God challenge such glory, from the wings and feathers of Peacocks and
Ostriches, the wild Goats, Hindes, Ass, Unicorn, Hawke, Eagle, Horse,
Behemoth and Leviathan, Job 39. 40, 41. Chap. Oh how great is his glory from
creation and government of the Sea?

Therefore God himself often urges his Dominion Confirmation.
over the Sea, that unruly and boisterous Element, for declaration of his great
Majesty, as unto Job; Who shut up the sea with doors: who set bars, and
said, Hitherto shall thou come, and no further, and here shall thou stay thy
proud waves Job 38. 8. 11.
? And again, Fear ye not me, says the Lord, will ye not tremble at my
presence, which have placed the sand for the bound of the sea, by a perpetual
decree, that it cannot pass it, and though the waves thereof toss themselves,
yet can they not prevail; though they roar, yet can they not pass over it
Ierem. 5. 22.
? Who ever saw tempest on sea, whose heart was not smitten with fear, and
reverence of the Majesty of that God, who has made, and does govern it? And
again, Thus says the Lord, who divides the sea, when the waves thereof
roar, the Lord of hoasts is his name Ierem. 31. 35.
. As God himself does urge it, so holy David specially, was very frequent in
the meditation thereof; He gathers the waters of the sea together, as on an
heap, and lays up the deep as in store houses: Let all the earth fear the
Lord, let all the inahbitants of the world stand in awe of him Psalm. 33. 7.
. And again, It is God, that stilleth the raging of the sea, and the noise of
its waves Psalm. 65. 7.
: And again, He turned the sea into dry land, he rules by his power for ever
Psalm. 66. 6.
: And again, I will meditate of all thy works, and talk of thy doings, thou
art the God that do wonders: the waters saw thee, O God, the waters saw
thee, and were afraid, the depths also were troubled Psalm. 77. 12.
: And again, God is greatly to be feared in the assembly of the Saints, and to
be had in reverence of all them that are round about him, O Lord God of hoasts,
who is a strong Lord like unto thee, thou rulest the raging of the sea, and
stillest the waves thereof, when they arise Psalm. 89. 7, 8, 9.
: The floods, O God, have lift up their voice, the floods have lift up their
waves, but the Lord on high is mightier than the noise of many waters, yea than
the mighty waves of the sea, Psalm. 93. penult. Many such like there are in the
book of the Psalms, whereof these are but a taste.

But now if we come to our selves; who but has Application.
seen, or heard of a tempest on the sea? But who so religious and devout, as
thence to take occasion, to meditate, or talk of the greatness, power, and
Majesty of God? Oh the Atheism, I say again, the Atheism, which lurketh in
our hearts, and then does specially break out, and bewray it self, when there
are extraordinary winds, storms, and tempests, by sea and land, with thunder,
lightning, hail, rain! but specially, if therein we sustain hurt and loss,
in our houses, lands, cattle, goods; then as if God were on sleep, and minded
no such thing, they will say, there is conjuring, and witches are abroad, or
else fall to cursing and banning, and blaspheming; almost as mad, as Herodotus
reports Zerxes the Persian Monarch to have been, who having received a great
loss, by the tempestuous rage of Hellespont, he caused abundance of fetters
and manacles to be cast into it, as if he would make it his prisoner, and bind
it with linkes of iron at his pleasure. And another no wiser than he, who
because the River Ginde had drowned him a white horse, threatened the River to
divide it into so many streams, that a woman great with child should go over
it drie-shod Doct. King on Jonas Lecture 4. page 55.
. Alas, alas, men may be more tempestuous, raging and mad, than the sea, but
the sea will know none, but him that made it. What manner of man is this, that
both winds and seas obey him? Pharaoh King of Egypt asked proudly, Who is the
Lord? and the sea might ask, Who is Pharaoh? It did acknowledge the Rod of
God, in Moses his hand, and gave way, but drowned Pharaoh and his Host. Oh
look we up unto God; for from him, all winds and weather, by sea and land,
thunders and lightnings, haile-stones and stormy tempests, all are at his
assignement, be they for a blessing or a curse: and therefore let all flesh
give glory unto God, and fear that Majesty which shines herein. And so much
for the Letter.

A Tempest] It is very frequent in the Scriptures, Mystic. sense.
to represent the persecutions of Gods Church, by storms and tempests. David
in such a storm, thus prays; Save me, O God, for the waters are come in even
unto my soul, I am come into deep waters, where the floods overflow me Psalm.
69. 1, 2.
: And again, The floods of ungodly men made me afraid Psalm. 18. 4.
: and thus describes the persecutions of Gods Church; If the Lord had not
been on our side, when men rose up against us, then they had swallowed us up
quick, then the waters had overwhelmed us, the stream had gone over our
soul, even the deep waters of the proud, had gone over our soul Psalm. 124. 3.
. So God threatening persecution by the King of Assyriah, the Prophet delivers
it in this form; Because the people refused the waters of Shiloh, which run
softly: Behold, the Lord will bring upon them the waters of the river, strong
and many, even the King of Assyria, and all his glory, he shall come up over
all his channels, and go over all his banks Esaias 8. 7.
. And verily never did sea in a storm or tempest, so Aptness.
rage, and roar, and foame, as the enemies of Gods Church and people do; as
the Prophet Esaias says, The wicked are like the raging sea, which casts up
mire and dirt Esaias 57. penult.
. Oh how outrageous, merciless, cruel, and bloody, were Pharaoh, Moabites,
Amonites, Idumaeans, Canaanites, Philistims, Antiochus, Herod, Nero, Domitian,
Dioclesian, Julian, and those Kings and Princes, who have the mark of the
beast in their hands and foreheads, and abuse their power to persecute the
Saints of God? None so cruel, bloody, barbarous, yea inhumane, as
persecutors. More mercy to be found of the sea in a storm or tempest, than of
persecutors in their rage, when they can prevail. Never any tyrants devised
such exquisite tortures, and torments against Rebels, as persecutors have
against the Church of God. You see the mystical sense, and how fit it is. Now
mark and receive your lesson for instruction.

Where Christ and his Gospel are truly preached Doct. mystic.
and professed, there commonly follow great storms and tempests of anger,
troubles and persecutions. Before Christ was borne, there was a General peace,
and all the world was quietly taxed Luke 2. 1.
; but no sooner was he borne, and the Wise men enquired, Where is he that is
borne King of the Jews, but Herod was troubled, and all Jerusalem in an uproar
Matthew. 2. 3.
; and many little children were slain Matthew. 2. 16.
.

The sea was calm enough, till Christ and his Confirmation.
Disciples came upon it; but then, behold a tempest. Good Lord, what stirs
were there upon Christ his preachings? Some said he was a good man, and some
said no, but he deceived the people John 7. 12, 43.
: some said, he did all things well; others said no, but he cast out Devils by
the power of Beelzebub prince of Devils Matthew. 12. 24.
. Good Lord, the tumults and uprores, that grew in Athens, Corinth, Ephesus,
Antioch, Lystra, Iconium, and other Cities, where the Apostles came, and
preached the Gospel! But after God raised up his servant Luther, to preach the
Gospel; oh what thundering and lightning from Rome! How did the Popes Bulls
roar, and his Excommunications fly? What a tempest in Germany, France,
England, and almost in the whole Christian world? What eager Disputations in
Universities? What part-takings, some of the Princes with him, some against
him. It is so still: in every Kingdom, City, Town, or Parish, where the
Gospel is sincerely preached and professed, there will be divisions, and
stirs, and troubles; some zealous followers, others malicious opposers;
laboring to stop the passage of the Gospel, and to pervert the straight ways
of the Lord Acts 13. 10.
: and some neither cold, nor hot Rev. 3. 16.
. It cannot be otherwise; God has put enmity between the woman, and the
serpent, and their seed Genesis 3. 15.
: and Christ has said, Think not that I am come to send peace on earth, I
came not to send peace but a sword; I am come to set a man at variance against
his father, and the daughter against her mother Matthew. 10. 34.
. And again, I am come to send fire on the earth Luc. 12. 43.
. You see, our Savior compares the Gospel to fire, the world is compared to
water: water Similies.
is quiet; but if fire come, what a contention is there? He has again
compared the Gospel to a fan: the heap lies quietly till the fan come;
but then does the chafe fly. The world is like unslaked lime, but now and
then a small crack; but if the water of the word be powered upon it, then it
heateth, and smoketh, and sparkleth, and flies, as if it would set all on
fire. The word is like light, and Christ compared to the Sun: in the
darkness, though things differ never so much in color, yet they seem all
alike; but when light comes, then the variety of colors is soon descried.
In the time of ignorance, men may think they accord in unity of Judgment and
Affection; but when the light of the word comes, the thoughts of many hearts
are opened, and then the diversity of humors, and variety of affections and
dispositions appears.

The very wicked do see this truth, and abuse it Prevention.
to a wrong end laying all the blame on the Gospel, and the preaching of it.
What more common in these days, than to hear men say, whilst all were
obedient to the Pope and Church of Rome, what great peace? what wars but
against the Turk the common enemy? But since the preaching of the Gospel,
what sects, wars, tumults, what divisions, what killing, murdering,
massacring, and burning of one another, giving advantage to the common enemy,
to incroach, and in the end to prevail greatly? What more common than to hear
country people complain, So long as we had nothing but Service, or Reading, we
lived very lovingly, peaceably, and neighbourly, every man meddling but with his
own business; but since we have had so much preaching, there is nothing but
siding and partaking, all good fellowship is lost; nothing but strife and
contention, and quarrelling of neighbor against neighbor, yea many times
division in the same house, and father and son, yea husband and wife divided,
and varying in opinion? It is like enough that the most of this is true; but,
what is properly the cause, is the Question. Is it Christ, and his Gospel, and
the preaching of it? So too many conceive, and are not ashamed to say, and wish
they had less of it, and they think they should have peaceable and golden
times; and then take occasion to open their black mouths, and rail upon it,
and the Preachers, and professors of it, accusing them for factious, humorous,
turbulent, seditious: as Ahab to Eliah, It was he that troubled all Israel, 1
King. 18. 17. and Tertullus accused Paul for a pestilent fellow and mover of
sedition, Acts 24. 5. Good Lord, how clamorous are Atheists, and Papists in
this kind! But let me tell you, Christ is the prince of peace Esaias 9. 6, 7.
; his word, the Gospel of peace Ephesians. 6. 17.
; his Ministers, the preachers of peace Esaias 52. 7.
; his Disciples, men of peace, so far as is possible, seeking to have peace
with all men Romans 12. 18.
, and striving to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace Ephesians. 4. 3.
. Wherefore these are no causes, but by accident, no more than Christ, and his
Disciples, in this ship, were the cause of this storm in the Sea* Alas, says
David, what have the righteous done Psalm. 11. 3.
? Christ must die, but his Judge said, he found no cause worthy of death in him
Luc. 23. 22.
. You know what an uprore was in Ephesus, raised by Demetrius and the Silver
smiths against Paul, what a confusion there was, some crying one thing, and
some another, and Gaius, Aristarchus, and Alexander like to be murdered: but
what says the Towne-Clarke; We are in danger to be called in question for this
days uprore, for there is no cause of such a concourse Acts 19. penult.
: no cause indeed, given by Paul and his companions. Will you then know and
see, whence are those storms and tempests, that do so commonly follow the
preaching and profession of the Gospel? I pray you look to the letter of your
story, what caused this tempest? The Winds and Seas. Christ rebuked them, and
then there was a great calm; he found no fault with any in the ship. Even so
there are two The true causes of troubles and persecutions. 1. Satan.
causes of these troubles, viz.

The first is Satan, the Prince that rules in the air, who so soon as the
Gospel begins to be preached, which is the power of God to salvation, he
presently blows, and puf^eth, and raises mighty winds of false doctrine, and
heresy; he stirs up false Brethren, Sophisters, and Tyrants, by policy and
power, fraud and force, and every way that he can, to hinder the course of the
Gospel, and overthrow the Church; it is He, that by Gods permission raises
these winds; as he did, for the overthrow of Jobs house Job 1. 19.
.

The second is the Sea, i. the corrupt and unregenerate 2 Corruption of nature.
nature of man, which cannot abide the word; but if Satan blow upon it, it
will rage like the Sea: as our Savior says, He that does evil, comes not
to the light, to have his works made manifest, but hates it John 3. 20.
. The man or woman that have any sin reigning in them (though for some
sinister respects, they may show a fair countenance, yet) do hate the word,
and if occasion serve, will storm, and rage, and procure all the trouble they
can; for it is as a fire, they cannot endure it, as we read in the book of
the Revelation, that fire went out of the mouths of the two witnesses, and
tormented them that dwelt on the earth Rev. 11. 6, 10.
. That fire, is the word of God, which being sincerely and powerfully preached
by the two witnesses, i. the Ministers of Christ, does torment and vex the
Inhabitants of the earth; i. unregenerate, earthly, carnal, and worldlyminded
men; and this makes them procure all the trouble they can, and so to rejoice,
and send gifts one to another, when they are dead. Oh let Satan, and man's
corrupt nature be blamed for these storms and tempests!

To conclude, Christ and his Disciples are Conclusion.
shipped, and under sail, and behold a tempest, even as great a tempest as
ever was so generally known in the Christian Sea. The Lord awake, and rebuke
the winds and waves that make it, preserve, and make us thankful for our
calm, which affords so safe harbor, to so many Saints, as fly hither for
succor. S. Jerome has truly said, There are tempests of the mind as well as
of the Sea Tempestates and mentis and maris. Ierom.
. I have spoken of the tempest of the Sea, (according to the letter of my Text)
and also of the general tempest of the Church, through persecutions of
Tyrants, in the last Lecture. Give me leave now to speak of the tempest of the
mind; of the inward billows, surges, and waves of a troubled soul, wherewith
a man's particular Vessel or Cockboat is even covered with waves of fearful
distress, and is like even every moment, to sink, and be cast away. Wherein
for more orderly and profitable proceeding, I will first speak of the tempest
that the wicked have, and then of the tempest that the godly are many times
tried withal. For the first.

Howsoever the wicked and ungodly may seem The tempest of the wicked.
most merry, and joyful, and as if their consciences were mavelous quiet,
peaceable, and calm, yet the Holy Ghost assures us, their souls are ever in
a tempest, their very tranquillity is a tempest Tranquillitas, tempestas est.
Jerome. ad Heliodor.
: There is no peace to the wicked, says my God, but they are like the troubled
Sea, which cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt Esaias 57. ult.
: and Solomon says, Their laughter is but from the lips, the heart is
sorrowful Prove. 14. 13.
. Howsoever they may show fair weather without, they have grievous storms and
tempests within, though sometimes and on some occasions, their consciences do
rage more horribly, that at others.

Shall I make this clear, by a few Examples? Examples.
When God had summoned, arraigned, examined, convicted, and sentenced Cain for
the murder of his brother, oh behold a tempest, My punishment is greater than
I can bear, thou have driven me out this day from the face of the earth, and
from thy face shall I be hid, and I shall be a fugitive, and vagabond in the
earth, and it shall come to pass, that every one that finds me, shall kill
me Genesis 4. 13.
. When Satan in the habit of Samuel, had told Saul, that the morrow after, he
and his sons should die, and the Host of Israel should be delivered into the
hand of the Philistims, oh behold a storm, He fell along on the earth, and was
sore afraid, and there was no strength in him 1 Samuel 28. 19.
. When Belshazzar in the midst of his feast, saw the palm of an hand, write on
the plaster of the wall, oh behold a storm; His countenance was changed, and
his thoughts so troubled him, that the ioints of his loins were loosed, and
his knees smote one against another Dan. 5. 5, 6.
. When Judas had betrayed his Master, and saw he was condemned, oh behold a
great tempest (...).
, yea as ever did arise in the soul of a wretched man: and as Mariners in a
great tempest (as in the stories of Jonah and Paul we may perceive) stick not
to run up and down, and cast out goods and tacklings; so he ran into the
Temple, and cast out his sins by confession, and threw his money in the
Temple, and all to calm his tempestuous soul, but it would not be, and being
persuaded, that death would ease him, he desired to die; yea he cared not what
death, so he did die, and rather than not die, he would die a dogs death, and
be his own executioner, he went and hanged himself Matthew. 27. 5.
.

Cardinal Crescentius the Popes Vicegerent at the Council of Trent, and a
notable enemy to true Religion and the professors thereof, on a time writing
long letters to Rome, full of all devilish policy, and plotting all manner of
mischief, against the Protestants, and the cause of Religion, had a strong
conceit, that the Devil, in the likeness of a huge dog, walked in his
chamber, and couched under his table, which raised such a fearful tempest in
his soul, that neither Physicians nor friends could calm, but he died in a
most comfortless manner. Oh, Tyrants, and learned men, abusing their
Epiphonema.
power and policy, may raise up strange tempests, in other men's bodies, goods,
and estate; but withal they raise up such storms and tempests in their own
souls, as are intolerable, incurable; according to that of Solomon, The spirit
of a man will bear out his infirmities: i. if a man's conscience be quiet, and
comfortable in God, he will bear with patience, and cheerfulness, manifold
pains, and diseases, tortures and torments in his body, and all outward
crosses, as we have most memorable examples, in many holy, and glorious
Martyrs; but a wounded spirit who can bear? A spirit, or conscience full of
horror and anguish, through guilt of sin, and apprehension of divine
indignation, who can bear that? It is the Hell on Earth (as you have seen in
the former examples, and many more such might be produced) curelesse, and
remediiesse, for nothing can calm them, but Christ who rebukes winds and
seas, and him they have not, without whom all other means do fail.

There is no sickness, but Physic has some Amplificatio^.
medicine for it; no sore but Chirurgerie has a salve for it; no restraint so
great, but freedom and enlargement may be procured, by friends or money; no
disgrace so great, but time will eat it out; no plague so hot, but a man may
fly from it: but as there is no strappado, rack, wheel, or most exquisite
torment, comparable to this: so no help for it, (I mean in the wicked, that
fly from God) no physic can purge; no cordial can comfort; no corasive can
eat it out; no lenative, assuage it. Friendship, entreaty, gifts, may deliver
a man out of prison, and captivity; but who can unlocke the prison doors of a
guilty conscience? or knock off the bolts of horror, and distress of mind?
Men may fly from plague, but cannot from this, because he ever carries it in
him: he may fly from field to city; from city to his own house; from house
to chamber; from chamber to closet; from closet to his bed Fugit ab agro ad
civitatem. August. in Psalm. 45.
; but wherever he becomes, Erynnis conscientiae. Melanct.
the Hellish Hags, and Infernal Furies of evil conscience, do vex and
torment him. Though their Assistants were an Army of millions of men; their
friends the great Princes of the world; their dominions as large as the Sun
shines on; their meat, Manna; their apparel as costly as Aarons embrodered
coat; their palaces as stately as Nabuchadnezzars; their music like that at
the setting up of Nabuchadonozars Idol; yet nothing can calm this tempest, but
when they die, they are cast into Hell, where they shall be tormented for ever.

Oh, labor then, for the peace, quietness, and Use.
calmness of your conscience, the greatest jewel in the world, a continual
feast, and brazen wall against all oppositions.

Oh, beware of sin, the cause of storms and tempests, yea (as Solomon says)
If sinners entice thee, consent not; be not deceived. Thou shall hear them
insult against this exhortation, and say; Tush, I have thus and so sinned; and
yet have I as cheerful, light, and merry an heart, as any man in the world;
I eat, and drink, and sleep, as well as ever I did; I am not troubled with
melancholic thoughts and passions: I never had experience of such storms and
tempests as they speak of. Indeed, great is the security of some men, whose
consciences are seared, as with a glowing iron; and who are given over to a
reprobate sense, to sin with greediness; long custom in sin, having taken
away the sense of sin: but conscience, though it sleep, it cannot die; it
may hold peace, but it cannot forget; this is Gods truth. The wicked have no
true peace; and, first or last, tribulation and anguish shall seize upon them;
where sin is, there will be a tempest Vbi peccatum, ibi procella.
; which whenever it rises, they shall never see end, yea eternity it self,
shall not overlive it; it shall live when they die, and make them live, that
feign would die, that so they may die eternally Mors sine morte; finis sine
fine: mors semper vivit, finis semper incipit. Greg.
: in which endless tempest I leave the wicked.

I come now to speak to the comfort of Gods 2. Tempests of the godly. Observe.
children, who have experience of great and grievous storms, and tempests, in
their souls and consciences, and what only ways are to be used, for the
calming of them. Observe then, that as Christ being entered into the Sea, there
arose a great tempest; so into what soul soever Christ enters by Faith to
inhabit, there will first or last arise a tempest, which will be the more
grievous, if Christ be on sleep, it will cause great calling and crying indeed.

Herein behold the example of Job, A man that Confirmation.
feared God, and eschewed evil: Good Lord, in what great and grievous storms
and tempests was he tossed, and like to be swallowed up! I mean not in regard
of his body, and estate, but chiefly in regard of his soul, when he so
complained, that God did set him as a But to shoot at; that the terrors of God
did set themselves in array against him, Job 6. 4. that he did write bitter
things against Job 13. 26.
him; made him possess the sins of his youth; would not suffer him to
swallow his spittle Job 7. 19.
; and If I say my bed shall comfort me, and my couch shall ease my complaint,
then thou skarest me with dreams, and terrifiest me with visions; thou
appointest wearisome nights to me; when I lie down, I say, when shall I arise,
and the night be gone? and I am full of tossings to and fro unto the dawning of
the day; so as my soul chooses strangling, and death rather than life Job 7.
13. 3. 4.
; yea in weakness, he cursed the day, and all the services of his birth Job 3.
1.
; and was so weary of the tempest, and not able to endure it any longer, he
made his suit to the Pilot to cut asunder the Cable, and let the ship run
against the rocks, saying, Oh that I might have my request, and that God would
grant me the thing that I long for, even that it would please God to destroy
me, let his hand loose, and cut me off Job 6. 8.
! Oh here was a tempest indeed! so as if God had not kept him, he would have
leaped over board into the Sea, rather than have endured it. In what a tempest
was David, when he said, His spirit was in perplexity, and his soul amazed
Psalm. 143. 4.
; and that from his youth he had suffered the terrors of God with a troubled
mind Psalm. 88. 25.
; and as if he could afford to leap over board too, has much ado to persuade
his soul to patience, saying, Why art thou cast down, oh my soul, and why
art thou so disquieted within me Psalm. 42. 5, ult.
? Jonah his body was not so tossed in the tempest, as his soul in the tempest
of Gods anger, when he said, All thy billows, and thy waves passed over me,
then I said, I am cast out of thy sight Jonah 2. 3.
. In what a tempest were the jews, when they came in such consternation to
Peter, and the Apostles, asking, Men and brethren, what shall we do to be
saved Acts 2. 37.
? Yea Christ himself was in a greater tempest in his soul on the Cross, than
now his body was on the Sea, when he so cried out, My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me Matthew. 27. 46.
? S. Paul was often in perils on the Sea 2 Cor. 11. 26.
; but nothing did so much shake him, as his inward terrors 2 Cor. 7. 5.
; the inward tempests of his soul made him cry out, Oh wretched man that I am,
who shall deliver me Romans 7. penult.
? So true is this doctrine, and by these few examples (instead of many) fully
confirmed, that into whose soul soever Christ does once enter to live and
dwell by faith Ephesians. 3. 17.
, they shall be sure of storms and tempests; whereof these two principal
reasons may be rendered, viz.

First, the extreme, and unappeasable malice of 1. Reason. Satan's malice.
Satan, who so long as he does reign in the soul and conscience, and is
obeyed in his lusts, there is great peace Luc. 11. 21.
: but if Christ a stronger than he come, and dispossess him, he will rage,
and will make that soul to shake and tremble that entertaineth Christ; he will
besiege it, and roar with his Cannons of temptations, that howsoever such a
soul may have sweet peace with God, yet it shall have perpetual war with
Satan, who will do all the mischief he can. If the woman be with Vision.
child, and nigh in her travel, and bring forth; the great red Dragon will
stand ready to devour the child; and if he cannot prevail, he will cast
great water-flouds after her Rev. 12. 2, 4, 15.
. Though the Vision most properly concern Christ, yet is it most true in his
members; no sooner is any child of God conceived in the womb of the Church,
by the immortal seed of Gods word 1 Pet. 1. 23.
, and that he is formed Gal. 4. 19.
, and brought forth, but Satan the great red Dragon will seek to kill and
destroy it; as Christ says, He is a murderer from the beginning John 8. 44.
: and as the Apostle says, He goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom
to devour 1 Pet. 5. 8.
; and if herein he be restrained, yet will he cast out great floods of
temptations, lies, slanders, fears, doubts, perplexities, he will not fail
to raise a grievous tempest.

The second Reason is the corruption of our nature, 2. Reason. The corruption
of our nature.
for though the Regeneration and Sanctification of Gods children be most true,
yet is it imperfect, (in regard of degrees) and the best of God children are
partly spirit, and partly flesh; and that throughout all the inward powers and
faculties, and outward parts and members; as in the dawning Similies.
of the day, when it is neither altogether light, nor dark; and in lukewarm
water, it is neither altogether cold nor hot: so there is some ignorance in
their minds; some hardness in their hearts; some frowardness in their wills;
sin though it reign not Romans 6. 12.
, yet it dwells in them Romans 7. 20.
, to defile and stain their best works, and stir up storms and tempests, in
their Souls and Consciences.

Here then, first, is a sweet comfort to Gods 1 Use.
Children, who have experience of the truth of this Doctrine, in their own
Souls: me thinks I hear them thus lament; The time has been, when I could
have been merry and glad, and had abundance of joy and comfort in God, it was
my greatest delight to hear, read, and pray; I was able to be a comfort and
stay to others: but now my Soul is heavy and pensive, sad and sorrowful. I
think on nothing but my sins but those, though many years ago committed, I
do as perfectly remember with the circumstances thereof, as if they were but
yesterday; I can think of nothing but Gods anger, and the punishments of the
Reprobate; neither have I any delight in godly exercises; or if I do perform
them, I find no comfort in them, but return from Church as void of comfort,
as I went thither; rise up from prayer with as heavy an heart, as I kneeled
down. I am even oppressed with fears, doubts, and distrusts, that I have not
truly repented, that I do not truly believe, that I am not sanctified, that I
am not Gods Child, that he loves me not, that my sins are not forgiven; and
that I have but served him in Hypocrisy. Oh behold, what waves, surges, and
billows of discomfort may cover a poor Soul!

But let all such be of good comfort: for first, 1 Comfort.
this is no other, than that all Gods Children first or last, more or less,
have experience of. Thou think none ever were in such condition: thou art
deceived.

Secondly, it is an argument of good estate: for 2 Comfort.
so long as Satan possesses the Palace, all is in peace Luke 11. 21.
; so long as a man is wholly unregenerate, all is in quiet. Rebekah, by the
striving of the Twins in her Womb, knew she was with child Genesis 25. 22.
; the barren feel no such matter. The Children of God know that there is
Spirit within them as well as flesh, because these do so lust and strive one
against another. There cannot be a greater argument, that a man or woman are
altogether carnal, and unregenerate, and earthly, than that they have no
experience of this spiritual warfare and conflict, but rather glory, that
they never doubted of Gods love, remission of sins, and salvation, but were
ever assured of those things, not doubting but if any be saved, they shall. Oh,
it is most wonderful, to hear the vild and strange presumption of men and
women, who yet are most sinful, and wicked in their lives and conversations;
and thereby proclaim, that there is no true knowledge, fear, nor love of God
in them. Oh, this is a fearful condition indeed, and a flat argument of a
reprobate sense, of a benumbed, yea a seared, and cauterized Conscience:
therefore tremble to think of this, but rejoice in the other.

Thirdly, this storm will over, it never endures 3 Comfort.
longer than this life, seldom (if ever) so long. Heaviness may endure for a
night, but joy will come in the morning Ps. 3^. 5.
. Christ has said, ye shall weep and lament, but the world shall rejoice: and
ye shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy, and your joy
shall no man take from you John 16. 20, 22.
. How many thousands of Gods Children who have been in their times tossed with
waves, and billows, of discomfort, and distress, who have now found eternal
rest to their Souls Ierem. 6. 16.
, and praise God day and night who lead them through fire and water, into such a
wealthy place.

Lastly, know, that Christ is in thy Soul, in all 4.
this thy doleful estate and condition, he will not leave thee, nor forsake
thee, no more than he did this Ship in the Tempest: he may be as on sleep, and
make as if he heard not, and regarded not, the more to try thy faith and
patience; but he is a sure and a faithful friend, never nearer than when he
seems furthest off; never will do a man more good, than when he seems
least to regard him; in his good time he will rebuke Satan, and thy rebellious
Lusts, and send a most gracious calm; That thou may say with David, now
return to thy rest, oh my Soul, the Lord has well rewarded thee Ps. 116. 7.
. Yea, thou shall be compassed about with Songs of deliverance.

Oh but how might we procure this happy Quest.
calm?

I answer, that many times, it is the evil temper Answ.
and disposition of the body, as melancholy, that causes such troubles and
storms in the Soul; and in such case, the Physician is to be advised with,
and his counsel and direction followed. But which way soever it do arise; the
context will teach you, there are three ways and means for the quieting and
calming of the troubled soul, viz.

First, their own prayers. You see in this tempest 1
the Disciples go to Christ, and pray to him. So has God commanded, Call on
me in the day of thy trouble, and I will hear thee Ps. 50. 15.
: Is any afflicted? let him pray, Iam. 5. 15. Thus did David, in his distress,
give himself to prayer; and got him to his Lord right humbly Ps. 30. 8.
; and prayed, My God, my God, look upon me Ps. 22. 1.
: So did Christ, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me Math. 27. 46.
? and put up his supplication with strong crying and tears Heb. 5. 7.
: So did Jonah, Out of the belly of hell I cried unto thee Jonah 2. 2.
.

Neither let any of Gods children be discouraged, Prevention.
though they cannot express their wants, or 1.
desire supply of grace, as they would, or as they hear others: The Apostles
did but pray, Lord save us, we perish; and Christ heard them, and rebuked the
winds and seas: The Publican did but pray, Lord be merciful to me a sinner,
and went home justified Luke 18. 14.
: The penitent thief on the cross did but pray, Lord remember me when thou
come into thy kingdom; And Christ promised, that night he should be with
him in Paradise Luke 23. 42.
. If thou can but say, feelingly, fervently, Lord save me, Lord have mercy
on me, Lord give me peace of conscience, Lord quiet my mind, Lord rebuke
Satan, Lord help mine unbeleefe, Lord assure my soul of thy love: even such
are most powerful prayers with God.

Neither yet let them be discouraged, because they 2.
are not presently heard, but many and many times they have prayed, and receive
no answer: Remember, it was David's case, I cry all the day long, and thou
hear not Ps. 22. 2.
. It was the woman of Canaans case, who received many discouragements from
Christ, and his Disciples; yet still continuing her prayer, in the end received
a gracious answer, O woman, great is thy faith: be it unto thee even as thou will Math. 15. 28.
. Let us not prescribe God his time, or means, when, or how; but still, with
Jacob, wrestle Genesis 32. 24.
, and resolve he shall still hear of us till he do help us, and assuredly,
he has a good time, when he will speak peace to our Souls. The storm shall
not continue for ever; in the mean time he will be sure to keep from drowning.

Secondly, note, that in this storm some one does 2.
not go of himself, neither do they make one or two, as Peter or John, their
Deputies, or Committies, to go and awaken Christ, and to pray him save them;
but the Text says [ the Disciples went to him.] So the second way of comfort
which God has appointed, that sinners sink not into despair, is confession
of our case and condition, and to crave the help and comfort of others prayers
and good counsels, and above all the comfort of the Ministers absolution, in
the name of Christ, pronouncing remission to every true penitent. Oh there is
nothing more dangerous to the Soul, or that Satan more labors, than that a
sinner should keep his counsel, and by no means make his grief or
disconsolate estate known; for verily even in making it known, the Tempest is
half calmed. Howsoever then the Papists, (and namely a sometime rotten member
of this body Carr. Let. Cap. 2. Sect. 42.
) to make us and our profession odious to the world, declaime against us as
enemies to praying, fasting, virginity, good works, confession, yea that the
people in our Church are deprived of a great comfort, that though their Souls
be never so oppressed, and disquieted through sin, they have none to go and
confess unto, that has the seal of secrecy: We give all the world to
understand, that we neither write or speak against any of the former works of
piety and godliness, but against their corruptions; not against prayer, but
performance of it in a strange Tongue; for custom, not of conscience;
according to the number of Beads, not sense of want. We speak not against
fasting, but the Pharisaicall abuse of it; not against true Virginity, but the
fained show of it, when as the body is defiled with monstrous pollutions; not
against necessary poverty, but voluntary choice of it, in opinion of more
pleasing God; not against good works, but the proud conceit of meriting by
them; not against confession, but against the abuses and corruptions thereof,
which are such as no Papist in the world can justify by Scriptures, Fathers,
or Reason: as namely, that it is enjoined of 1
absolute necessity, and only of mortal sins; and 2
whatsoever such are not confessed, are not forgiven: 3
That it must only be in the ears of his own 4
Priest; and is of it self an act meritorious. These 5
foul corruptions being pared away, we have Confession in right use amongst
us. As we begin our public Service with confession of our sins, and have
remission of sins by Gods Minister pronounced to all such as truly repent,
and unfeignedly believe the Gospel. So if any be troubled in Soul, and cannot
rightly apply the means of comfort, on death-bead, or at other times, our
Church in the second exhortation before the Communion, exhorts such to
repair to some godly and discreet Minister, from whose prayer, counsel, and
advice, they may receive comfort, and the conscience may be quieted; has
prescribed a form of absolution; and in the Canons of our Church Canon 113.
, are enjoined, upon pain of irregularitie, all lawful secrecy. And this is
a singular means which God and our Church has prescribed, for the quieting
and calming of stormy and tempestuous Souls; and which cannot be godly used,
without much comfort.

The third and last way for calming of these inward 3
tempests in the minds of Gods Children, is the voice and speech of Christ, he
rebuked the winds and Seas; and so still does speak to the troubled Soul. Yea
whatsoever benefits, or friends, or delights, or pleasures, any man have, yet
none, nor all these, can soundly comfort the distressed Soul, but the word of
Christ. Therefore says Jeremy, Thy Word is the joy and rejoicing of mine
heart Ierem. 25. 16.
. And David says, The Statutes of the Lord are right, and rejoice the heart
Ps. 19. 8.
. And again, I had perished in my trouble, if thy Laws had not comforted me
Ps. 119. 92.
. And again, This is my comfort in mine affliction, for thy Word has quickened
me Ps. 119. 5^.
. And therefore prays, Cause thou me to hear the voice of joy and gladness,
that the bones which thou have broken may rejoice Ps. 51. 8.
. Much more might be said to this purpose, but this may suffice, and therefore
if ever thou will have the storm and tempest in thy Soul stilled and calmed,
thou must diligently hearken to the Word of God read and preached.

But me thinks I hear some object against this, 1 Object.
and say: Oh I was never troubled till I began to hearken to the Word, till I
got a Bible and delighted in reading, and took delight to hear Sermons: I
think it was the hearing of the Word, raised the Tempest.

I answer, that the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Sol.
Word of God Ephesians. 6. 17.
, has two edges Heb. 4. 12. Revel. 1. 16.
; it hurts with the one, and heals with the other; it cutteth with the one,
and cures with the other; it humbles, and exalts; it terrifieth, and
assures; it afflicts, and rejoiceth the heart: Wherefore if it have wounded
thee, stick to it, it will heal thee; if it have raised a storm, it will also
calm and still it.

Oh, but I have read it much, and heard it often, 2 Object.
and yet still I am as much troubled, and as comfortless as ever I was.

I say with David, Oh tarry the Lords leisure, be Sol.
strong, and he will comfort thine heart Ps. 27. ult.
. Our mother Church having lost Christ, sought him in bed, and found him not;
in streets, and found him not; met with many discouragements, but found not him
whom her Soul loved: yet in the end she found him, and laid hold on him Cant.
3. 1, 2, 3.
. Never any sought constantly comfort from Word and Sacraments, but in the end
found it. Wherefore say with David, I will hearken what the Lord God will say:
for he will speak peace to his people, and to his Saints Ps. 85. 8.
.

The Wind and Seas, which cause thy storm and Conclusion.
tempest, are within thee, bring them to Gods house, first or last, the Lord
will with his Word rebuke them, and thou shall have a calm, and praise God for
thy peace. And so much for the cause of their peril, viz. a Tempest, both
according to the letter and mystery; and that both generally, in the Church
where Christ his Gospel is professed; and particularly, in the Soul, where the
same is believed. Now let us proceed to the description of this Tempest.

Wherein the first thing to be considered, is the 1. The Quality.
quality of it, It was sudden, in this word [ There arose] or (according to the
original) It was made (...): facta est concussio.
: it did not arise, or was made by little or little, but on the sudden, there
came such a gust, and the sea did so rage, that in an instant, the ship was
even covered with waves. Whereof something is first to be said according to the
letter, and then the mystery. According to the letter, let us consider the
Author, and the means, who, and how, this Tempest was made. For the first.

It is out of all doubt, he made this Tempest that 1 Lit observe.
stilled it Non ex se orta est tempestas, sed Christi imperio. Gloss. O^din.
. The Scriptures plainly show, that God 1 Author.
is the Author of storms and tempests, by sea and land. So says David, They
that go down into the sea in ships, and occupy their business in great
waters, these see the works of the [Lord] and [hu] wonders in the deep Psalm.
107. 24.
. And again; At the brightness of his presence, the thick clouds passed,
haile-stones and coals of fire, the Lord thundered out of heaven, and the
highest gave his voice, haile-stones and coals of fire, he sent out his
arrows and scattered them, he shot out his lightnings and discomfited them;
then the channels of water were seen, and the foundations of the world were
discovered: at thy rebuke, O Lord, at the blast of the breath of thy nostrils
Psa. 18. 13, 14, 15
See how lively the Prophet describes a Tempest, and ascribes the glory
thereof unto God. And again; It is the glorious God that causes the thunder,
the voice of the Lord is a powerful voice, the voice of the Lord is full of
Majesty, it breaks the Cedars, even the Cedars of Lebanon; shakes the
wilderness, even the wilderness of Kadesh. And he withal declares the use
of storms, and tempests, thunder, lightning, and rain: Give to the Lord the
honor due to his name: in his Temple, let every man speak of his praise Psalm.
29. 2. etc.
. And again, he says, Fire, and hail, snow, and vapor, stormy wind, and
tempest, do fulfill Gods word Psalm. 148. 8.
.

Oh then it is a great sin, for men to impute the Use.
raising of storms and tempests, winds, and foul weather, to the Devil,
Conjurers, Witches, and Wizards, Aeolus, etc. Indeed, I will not deny, but that
Satan is called the prince that rules in the air Ephesians. 2. 2.
; and that he is very cunning and artificial to work strangely, in all the
regions of the air, to stir up meteors, lightning, thunder, wind, rain,
hail (as appears from the story of Job:) neither will I deny, but that
Witches and Conjurers, by the help of the Devil, with whom they are in
league, may raise storms and tempests in the air, which may easily be
discerned from natural tempests, in respect of the sudden and violent raising
thereof Kings Daemono^^. lib. 2. c. 5. p. 117.
: but this is certain, the providence of God ex ends it self to all, even
most minutiall things, and neither Devil nor Conjurer can do any exploit, but
by limitation and leave Archbishop Abbot, on Jona^s Lect. 3. page 51.
; not being able to exceed one hairs breadth beyond that is granted unto them.
Wherefore, whether we be let, hindered, or hurt, by sea or land, with any
storm or ^mpest, let us assign all to the providence of God, depend on him
for safety, and give him the honor due to his name for such great works.
Herein was Job well taught, who said, The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away
Job 1. penult.
.

But though God be the Author, yet he has ordinary 2 Means.
means and instruments, subserving to his pleasure, in raising of storms; and
those either supreme, as (by his permission) Satan; or inferior, as slaves,
and expirations from the cavernes and cranies of the earth, where the air
being imprisoned, and laboring to get out, as it makes a (...), and
earthquake, so on sea a great concussion and shaking; but most commonly by
wind, which, if it blow vehemently, does greatly work upon that liquid and
^luid plain patent body; but specially, if it be contrary to the natural fl^x
and motion of it, which we call the Tide. So David describing a tempest by
sea, says, He commands, and raises the stormy wind, which lifts up the
waves thereof Psalm. 107. 25.
. And God sent out a great wind, and there was a mighty tempest on the sea
Jonah 1. 4.
: And Saint Paul describing the tempest he was in, says, It was caused by a
tempestuous wind Ty^honicus v^ntus.
, called Euroclydon Acts 27. 14.
. That this Tempest was caused by a wind, is clear; for Saint Mark says,
There arose a great storm of wind Mark 4. 37.
: And S. Luke says, There came a storm of wind upon the lake Luke 8. 23.
: And our Evangelist says, Christ rebuked the winds: yea the other two
Evangelists tell us the name of this wind (...), turbo.
; which receives not denomination from the quarter from whence it blows, as
the Scriptures do speak of East Wind, West-wind, and others, both cardinal,
and collateral; but of the vehemency of it; yea not properly one wind, but a
conflict of many winds Est ^ute^ (...) sive turbo, plurium conflictus ventoru^.
Lorin. in 2 Pet. 2. 17. page 389. coll. a.
: A whirlwind, such a wind, as at once smote all the four corners of the
house, wherein Jobs children feasted Job 1. 19.
; such a wind, as was neither side nor contrary, but at once smote every part
of the ship, and brought the waves every way upon it, as if at once it would
have buried it, and all the passengers therein, in the surges. So much for the
Sense.

Here for instruction we may learn, that there is Doct. Lit.
no creature so good and necessary, useful and serviceable for man, but God
can make it his scourge. What more necessary and comfortable than fire? yet
with it he destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah Genesis 19. 24.
; and two Captains with their fifties 2 King. 1. 10. 11. etc.
. What more necessary than water? yet with it, he destroyed the old world Genesis
6. 17.
; and Pharaoh and his hoasts Exodus 14. 28.
. The wind also a most comfortable and useful creature (as it were Gods fan)
for purging of the air, growth of all vegetables, and passage by sea; and God
has used it as an instrument in some of his most renowmsd miracles. With a
strong East Wind he dried up the Red sea Exodus 14. 21.
; Brought Quails Numb. 11. 31.
; and God himself is said to fly upon the wings of the wind Psalm 18. 10.
: But with an East Wind God brought locusts upon the Land of Egypt Exodus 10.
13.
; Overthrew the house on Jobs children, Job 1. 19. and brake the ships of
Tarshish Psalm. 48. 7.
; and like to have drowned Jonah, and Paul, yea Christ and all the passengers
with them; as it has done many thousands.

Wherefore, it behooves us not to rest contented, Use 1. Wherefore we ask
daily bread, though we have bread.
that we have the creature we stand in need of, but to pray to God for the
sanctified use thereof: else we may eat of the best, and yet not be nourished;
be clothed with the costliest, and yet not be warmed Hag. 1. 6.
; yea our table become a snare, and our prosperity our ruin Psalm. 69. 22.
: that which may be to others a blessing, may become to us a curse.

Secondly, have thou been endangered by fire, Use 2.
wind, or water? bless God for thy deliverance. Have thou sustained loss? cry
not out on Chance or Fortune; do not rail and curse: but humble thy self, it
was Gods hand: even the winds do blow according to his pleasure. So much for
the Letter.

There arose] By the rising of this tempest on Sense mystic.
the sea, is shadowed out the arising of troubles in the Church of God. As God
was the Author of the one, (the winds and all creatures being subordinate to
his pleasure) so is he of this; both Devils in Hell, and Men on Earth, being
but his instruments, who cannot move an hair from the heads of his children,
but according to his good pleasure Matthew. 10. 30.
. There is no evil done in the City, and the Lord has not done it Amos 8. 6.
. Even the Medes and Persians are called Gods sanctified ones, Esaias 13. 3.
Ashur that afflicts, Cofirmation.
and leads the people of God into captivity, is but the rod of Gods wrath
Esa. 10. 5, 6.
; And the mighty staff of his anger. The ungodly man is but Gods sword Psalm.
17. 13.
. Rabshakeh said to Jerusalem, Am I now come up without the Lord against this
place, to destroy it? the Lord said to me, Go up against this land, and
destroy it 2 Kings 18. 25.
. And Pharaoh Necho King of Egypt, coming up to fight against Carchemish at
Euphrates, and Josiah going out against him, he sent Ambassadors to him,
saying, What have I to do with thee, thou King of Judah, I come not against
thee, this day, but against the house wherewith I have war, for God commanded
me to make haste; forbear to meddle with God, who is with me, that he destroy
thee not: but Josiah would not hear, but went and fought with him in the
valley of Megiddo, and there was slain 2 Chronicles. 35. 20.
. Oh does the providence of God extend it self to most minutiall things? as
the blowing of winds, falling of Epiphonema.
rain, flying of birds, numbering of hairs, clothing of grass, growing of
plants, biting of worms, swimming of fishes? Yea does Gods providence order
and dispose things most contingent and casual; as the flying off of the Axes
head from the helve, whereby a man is slain Deuteronomy. 19. 5.
; and an arrow shot at random, yet should hit the King Ahab betwixt the ioints
of his Brigandine, and slay him 1 Kings ult. 34.
? Yea if the Lot be cast into the lap, even the whole disposition thereof is it
from the Lord Prove. 16. 33.
? And shall any be so ignorant and faithless, as to think, that any stirs
and troubles can arise in the Church of God, to persecution, imprisonment,
loss of goods, liberty, and lives of Gods children, without God his good
pleasure, and purpose?

Oh, as I have from the letter reproved the Reprehension.
Atheism of those men, who in storms and tempests on the Sea or Land, do not
look up to the seat of Majesty, and give him the glory thereof, who does,
rule and govern that huge and vast Element: So let me reprove the Atheism of
those, who when storms and tempests are raised in the world, or against the
Church of God, do not look up to the ruling and overruling hand of Jehovah;
but cry out upon chance, or fortune; or gaze too much upon the means: Oh if
this had not happened, or that had not been! whereas all is but under God, for
the executing of his good pleasure and purpose.

Did not the Lord stir up Hadad the Edomite, to Use.
be an adversary to Solomon 1 Kings 11. 14.
? and stir up another adversary also, Rezon the son of Eliadah 1 Kings 11.
23.
; and Jeroboam also, not only to lift up his hand against the King, and trouble
him in his peace; but also in the days of his son, to rent away ten Tribes
from his house, and perpetually to divide the Kingdoms of Judah and Israel 1
Kings 12. 16.
? Does not God say, he has created the destroyer to destroy? Esaias 54. 16. Good
Lord, how plain and plentiful are the Scriptures in this point, if I would
enlarge my self! Oh that men would therefore look to the hand that smites;
search out the causes of such tempests; bear with patience his hand, and seek
unto him for a calm.

I beseech you, learn this lesson, That all the enemies Exhortation.
of Gods Church they are Gods soldiers, he has levied them, and gives them
pay, they fight under his banner, and he has sent them to destroy, though
themselves do not know so much. The Lord of Hoasts mustreth the hoasts of the
battle, Esa. 13. 4.
.

Oh, but why will God suffer such havocke and destruction to be made of his
people? Object. Sol.


I answer, because through long peace, plenty, and prosperity, they are become
unthankful, loath the heavenly Manna, earthly-minded, proud, covetous,
rebellious against Gods word and ordinance, and will obey it no further than it
does like themselves; profaning his Sabbaths, growing senseless and obdurate
at his corrections of famine; pestilence, sickness; despising the warnings of
his servants, and in stead of repenting and turning to God, and meeting him
with the entreaty of peace, falling foul upon his messengers, mocking and
abusing them.

These are the sins which he has threatened to punish Levit. 26. 3. 14. etc.
Deuteronomy. 28. 15, etc.
; these were the sins, oh these were the sins of Gods people, in France,
Palatinate, and other places of Germany, whereby the Lord of Hosts being
provoked to anger, has mustered his Application to the Churches abroad.
Armies, and sent his Soldiers to destroy, and avenge his quarrel.

Oh therefore that they had grace to humble Use.
themselves under the mighty hand of God, to turn to the Lord in fasting,
weeping, and mourning; to rent their hearts for their sins, and become more
cheerful in their obedience to the Gospel, and zealous in the profession of
it: Oh then would the Lord soon humble their enemies, and turn his hand
against those that hate them; and either cause their rage utterly to cease, (as
he did sundry times in Judah, when the people so sought his face) or if in his
justice he did harden their hearts, to pursue, as the Egyptians did the
Israelites into the heart of the Sea, they should not need to fear, but even
stand still, and see the salvation of God, in the perpetual confusion of such
cruel and bloud-thirstie enemies.

Oh England, God calls to thee to be warned Application to England.
by the example of thy neighbors, friends, allies, and brethren, to meet the
Lord by repentance, and whilst he does shake the rod at thee, to shake off that
sluggish and careless profession of the Gospel, to scour off the rust of
those sins, which so long peace, plenty, and prosperity have bred; to cause
thy love to spring again afresh to the Gospel, and more sincerely to practice
the duties of piety and godliness, being fruitful in all good works. If thou
do so, the Lord of Hosts will cashier and discharge his Armies, put an hook
in their nosthrils, and a bit in their jaws, as he did against that proud
Sennacherib Esaias 37. 29.
. Or else they shall plot and fight without him, yea take our parts against
them, and arm the winds and waters against them, as sometimes he has done, to
his everlasting praise. But if England will not be reclaimed and reformed, but
still refuse and be rebellious, hating to be reformed, adding drunkenness to
thirst, making a mock of Gods Judgments, when they are threatened; the Lord
will turn thy calm into a storm; and to trust in any earthly thing, were but
to make vanity our refuge: There is no wisdom, counsel, nor strength against
the Lord: It is the Lord that raises tempests, and if he be disposed to raise
one, it shall rise indeed, he has ways and means which we see not. David was
as confident as we can be, that his mountain was so strong that it could not
be moved; but it was moved and shaken indeed. Cannot he that hangs the earth
on nothing, shake a mountain? He does weigh them in scales. Remember this
doctrine.

Yea let every one that is inwardly troubled and Use. 2.
afflicted in soul, know, that howsoever God may therein use Satan, and
permit him to vex and disquiet, or else the melancholic evil disposition of
our bodies, yet such spiritual afflictions are from God David and Job call
them the terrors of God.
: They neither come by chance or fortune, nor properly from Satan, or our
selves; but God Almighty lays such troubles upon our souls, for exercise of
our Faith, Patience, Meekness; and he will not suffer us to be tempted above
that we shall be able to bear, but will give issue with the temptation 1. Cor.
10. 13.
; and in good time cause a calm. And therefore still let us provoke our souls
to wait upon God, and to be of good comfort in him. So much for the quality.

Now as this tempest was raised suddenly, as a Part. 2.
whirle-winde, or gust upon the Sea; so for quantity, it was a great one
(...): Motus magnus, Concussio magna.
. It is worthy to be observed, that when our Savior wrought any miracle, the
Evangelists are directed to describe the greatness of the evil by such
circumstances, as declare, that the evil was by natural help and means
utterly incurable; As a man full of leprosy came to Christ, and he did but
touch him and cure him. Luke 5. 12.
A woman had been diseased with an issue of blood twelve years, and had spent
her living on Physicians, neither could be healed by any Luke 8. 43.
; came behind him, and did but touch the hem of his garment, and immediately
her issue of blood stanched. A man that was borne blind, having his eyes
anointed with clay, was made to see John 9. 1.
. Lazarus, who had been dead four days, and was said to stink, by the voice
of Christ was raised to life. John 11. 39.
The like may be observed in many others. So here, that the glory of this
Miracle might be the more, which redoundeth to Christ from causing this calm,
the Evangelist tells us, there was a tempest, a sudden tempest, a great
tempest; and it appears it was so, from diverse passages of the story: For
first, the isntrumental Cause, was a (...), a sudden and furious wind, which
God did cast upon the Sea, (for so the word in Jonah signifies) He^ill; from
Hill in Hiphil, Eiecit, Proieci^.
the waves also so lifted up, and tossed with it, that the very ship was
covered with them, or (as the word signifies) was filled brim full; for S.
Mark uses the same word which is used in S. John at the Mariage-Feast in Cana
of Galile, where the Waterpots are said to be filled up to the brim Ioh. 2. 7.
(...) Implete: (...) u^ iam impleretur. Mar. 4. 37.
; yea the passengers, whereof some of them were Fishermen, as Peter, Andrew,
James, John, were exceedingly fearful they should be drowned. Surely they had
seen many a tempest before, and were men inured and accustomed to such
dangers, of whom the Poet says truly, Their hearts are of brass, and oak, to
encounter dangers Illis robur, and ^s triplex. Horat.
; yet even they are, as at their wits end (as David says) and distracted with
the greatness of this peril, and cry out to their Master, Save us, we
perish; All which, declare the truth of my Text, that this was a great, and
dangerous tempest indeed; whereof more, hereafter, whe^l come to speak of the
ship being covered with waves.

In the mean time receive this doctrine, (which Doctrine.
contains both the History and Mystery;) viz. That God many times suffers
his people, to come into great perils, dangers, extremities, and very hard
exigents, before he deliver them; which being a doctrine lately and largely in
this place handled from another Text Sermon. on Hesth. 3. ult. page 13. etc.
, I only now barely propose it, and proceed.

Upon the Sea:] When God divided the waters Part. 3. Sense lit.
from the dry land, he called the dry land, Earth, and the gathering together
of the waters, Seas Genesis 1. 10.
; and ever since, the Hebrews have usually called all collections, and
gatherings together of waters, Seas. Yea, that vessel which Solomon made for
the use of the Temple, in stead of the Laver in the Tabernacle, and was for
containing of two or three thousand Baths of water for the Priests to wash
with, is called a Brazen Sea, and Moulten Sea 1. Kings 7. 23. 2. Chron. 4. 3.
. And howsoever my Text calls this gathering of waters (Sea) and elsewhere it
is called the sea of Galile John 6. 1.
, because the promised Land, being divided into three Provinces, Galile,
Samaria, and Iewrie, this Sea was in the Province of inferior Galile: It is
also called the Sea of Tiberias Ibid.
; from a City on the bank of it, of that name Built by Herod in honor of
Tiberius Caesar.
. It is in the Old Testament, called the Sea of Chinnereth Numb. 34. 11.
; and in the New Testament, it is called the Lake of Genesar^th Luke 5. 1.
; A lake, (and so it might more properly be called, than Sea Isidor. l. 13. c.
19.
) and so S. Luke calls it, even in recording this story, A storm of wind
came on the Lake Luke 8. 23. (...)
; for that it was but a few leagues in compass Plin. lib. 5. c. 15.
: and the Lake of Genesereth, because the country of Genesereth adjoined unto
it Matthew. 14. 34.
. I^ was a Sea, that abounded with Fish Varia sunt in ^o p^scium genera.
Joseph. de bell. Iud. lib. 3. cap. 18.
, and there was the place where Peter, and Andrew, James, and John were
Fishers. It was nourished with that sweet and pleasant River of Jordan, which
rising at the foot of Mount Libanus, running in a narrow channel, did first
enlarge it self in a small Lake, called Merom, where Iosuah discomfited the
Canaanites; Ios. 11. 4* 5, 7. and then contracting it self again, kept
channel till it came secondly, more to enlarge it self in this Lake or Sea;
and then passing out of it again, did at the last empty it self into the
dead Sea; a (Sea) though having no intercourse with the Ocean; and (dead)
because no fish, or other creature does live in it, because of the bituminous,
and sulphurous matter. I know no waters in the world, comparably renowned to
this River, and this Sea. Howsoever 1. Jordan.
disgracefully Naaman once said, Are not the rivers of Damascus, Abana^, and
Pharpar, better than all the waters of Israel 2 Kings 5. 12.
? Yet has God enabled the waters of Israel, above all the waters of the world,
and the waters of Jordan above all the waters of Israel. The waters of this
River (betwixt this, and the salt Sea) did stand as on an heap (at that time
when Jordan overflowed all his banks) till his people Israel passed over it,
on dry ground, into the land of Canaan, right over against Jericho Ios. 3. 13
-- 17.
; Eliah and Elishah divided the waters of this River with their cloak, and
went over on dry ground 2 Kings 2. 8, 14.
. Naaman the Syrian, washing seven times in it (according to the word of the
Prophet) was cleansed of his leprosy 2 King. 5. 10, 14.
. In this did the Prophet Elisha, cause the Iron to swim 2 Kings 6. 6.
. Yea, in this was Christ baptized, and the Baptist saw heaven open, heard the
voice of the Father, and saw the Spirit in likeness of a Dove, descend and
light on Christ Matthew. 3. ult.
.

Oh, that famous River of Jordan! no Sea, more 2. The Sea.
ennobled than this, through which it ran. Here did Christ call ^oure of his
first and prime Apostles Matthew* 4. 18, 19.
: On this sea, Christ and Peter walked Matthew. 14. 26. 29
: Here did he calm the Tempest; and here he appeared after his Resurrection,
when they took an exceeding multitude of fishes John 21. 1. 11.
: On this famous sea, now this great Tempest was. So much for the Letter. I
having formerly showed how mavelous God is, in this Creature, and provoked
you to give him due glory.

As the Ship represents the Church; so the Sea, Sense mystic.
this world: and may so fitly in a threefold respect.

First, as the sea is always in motion, but specially 1. Unstable.
tempestuous, when the winds do blow; so this world is restless, ever in
action, but then specially stormy, and tempestuous, when Tyrants and Heretics
do blow upon it.

Again, as the sea is Dangerous, for shelfes, rocks, 2. Dangerous.
sands, unless men sail by a very good compass, and thousands do make
shipwreck, to the loss of lives and goods: So in this world, are many
dangers, and perils; and specially, heresies, and sins, are as rocks, whereon
thousands, even all that do not sail by the true compass of Gods word, do
make shipwreck, to the eternal destruction of soul and body; as Saint Paul
says, that Hymeneus and Alexander did 1 Timothy 1. ult.
.

Lastly, as the ^ea is full of fishes and living Creatures; 3. Full of living
creatures.
there go things creeping innumerable Psalm. 104. 25.
: so is the world: and as fishes in the sea are caught with nets; so are men by
the net of the Gospel, as Christ said to his Apostles, Follow me, and I will
make you fishers of men Matthew. 4. 19.
: And the kingdom of heaven is like to a draw-net cast into the sea, Matthew.
13. 47. And as in the sea, small fish are a prey to greater: so in this world,
the poor and weak are as a prey, devoured of the rich and strong. In which
respect, the Lord, by his Prophet, calls them Fishers Ierem. 16. 16.
: for which (and diverse other respects, if I would stand upon them) the world
may very fitly be compared to the Sea. Yet, the Book of the Revelation does
teach us, that this world is a very strange sea; and and that in two principal
properties, viz.

First, it is like a sea of cristall glass Revel. 4. 6.
: [ Of glasse] 1. Of Glass.
because it is most brittle, no man's estate in this world, being more certain
than the glass, which now being whole, and useful, fair and beautiful, anon
with a rap is broken all to pieces. How quickly has many men's great and fair
estates, been utterly broken, in one night, in an hour; how wealth, honor,
health, liberty, life, and all lost, as a glass which is broken all to
pieces. And of Cristall; for howsoever there are many works of darkness in
the world, which the eye of man cannot see and behold; yet is the world as
clear as a Cristall-glasse before him that sits upon the Throne: All things
are naked and o^en before his eyes, with whom we have to do Heb. 4. 1^. (...).
: He discerns the very least obliquity, and irregularitie of thoughts; no man
can more clearly see a blot in a cristall glass, than God does the sins of
men, be they in thought, word or work; and therefore we should strive to be
holy, as being ever in the eyes and sight of God.

Secondly, it is a sea mingled with fire Rev. 15. 2.
: It is ordinary 2. Mingled with fire.
in Scripture* by fire, to signify tribulations, as when thou passest through
the fire, I will be with thee Esaias 43. 2.
: I went through fire and water Psalm. 66. 12.
: And brethren think it not strange concerning the fiery trial 1 Pet. 4. 12.
: The sea of this world is mixed with abundance of that fire; wheresoever Gods
children become, they shall meet with hot and s^orching tribulation and
afflictions, yet shall this fire but scour away the dross, to make them shine
the brighter in Gods eyes; the bush burned with fire, but consumed not, Exodus
3. 2. This fire shall only consume the Reprobate. And so much for the
description of the Tempest, now follows the aggravation of it.

In so much that the ship was covered with waves] 2. Genesis part. Sense lit.
Now the Evangelist does aggravate, the perils that Christ and ^i^ D^^ciples
were in, by two maine Circumstances; the first from the greatness of the
tempest, which was such, that even the ship was covered with waves; the word
which Saint Mark uses, signifies to f^^^ (...): Mark 4. 37.
; and is so translated, so that the ship was now full. Saint Luke also uses
another word of the same signification; and so also translated, and they were
filled (...): complebantur.
; for it is in the plural, They, that is, the ship which carried them, by a
Me^onimie of the adjunct; and also by a Sinecdoche, the ship, for hatches,
which are but a part. But our Evangelist uses another word, which according to
the propriety of it, signifies, to cover (...), ut operiretur, of (...) tego.
, or hide a thing from sight, as no man lights a candle, and covers it with
a bushel Luke 8. 16.
; and the Reprobate shall say at the day of judgment to the hills, fall on us
and cover us Luke 23. 20.
: In which, and many such like places in the new Testament, we have the word of
my text, in it proper signification; though the words be diverse, the sense and
thing intended is all one, viz. They were in so great jeopardie of drowning,
that the ship, that is, the upper part or hatches, were even filled, or
covered, that they could not be seen: And wherewith was the ship covered? not
with wind, but waves (...). a fluctibus, (...).
; and in Saint Jude there is added an Epithet, the raging waves of the sea
Iud. 13 (...).
. And verily nothing in this world does so rage, and is so furious, as the
waves of the sea, in a storm or tempest. And so much be said of the Sense of
the words.

Whether only that this ship, wherein Christ and Quest. Answ.
his Disciples passed, was thus endangered, and covered with waves, and the
rest safe or no; is too hard ^ question for me peremptorily to resolve, because
I am content to see no more, than the eye of my Text has described unto me:
the Text says, The tempest came upon the sea; therefore likely, that all the
ships on the sea at that time, were endangered, though possibly, this ship was
more endangered than the others, both in regard of Christ his purpose, and
Satan's malice.

The Letter teaches us, what great perils and Doct. Lit.
jeopardies seafaring men do many times fall into, sometimes lifted up to
heaven, with one wave; and sometimes falling even down to hell; and sometimes
the ship, as this, even covered with waves, that they see nothing but present
death: and are as David says, Even at their wits end, and cry unto God in
their distress Psalm. 107. 28.
. But of this sufficient. From handling the Tempest, the Circumstance
(according to Mystical sense) affording us three singular instructions,
concerning the state of the Church, viz.

First, what ever has been, is, and will be, the 1. Doct. mistic.
common condition of Gods Church and people, viz. To be exercised with crosses,
tribulations, afflictions, public and private; yea and sometimes with sword of
bloody and persecuting foes and enemies: which doctrine I have lately more
largely handled Sermon. on Burning Bush page 4. etc. and Sermon. on Hest 3. ult. p.
6. etc.
; with Reasons, Uses, Application, and Exhortation; and therefore do now but
barely propound it.

The second Doctrine is this; That as this ship 2. Doct.
was covered with waves, so as none but themselves knew, they held out; others
might suppose they were drowned: so a Church which has been visible in the
public ministry of the Word and Sacraments, may through persecution of
Tyrants, be so covered, ^s become visible to most.

This is represented in the vision, the Church resembled Confirmation.
to a woman clothed with the Sun, and the Moon under her feet, and upon her
head a crown of twelve Stars: oh then was she vi^ible and conspicuous: But
at another time driven into the wilderness, out of the sight of men; then was
she covered Rev. 12. 1, 5, 6.
. Come to our own Emblem; A ship on the sea when it is calm, is plainly
seen (yea it is one of the comely sights of the world, a ship under sail in a
prosperous gale) but if there arise a great tempest, it may be so overtopped
with waves, and for a time be betwixt them, so as scarce the top of the mast is
seen, and most will think she is drowned, yet anon she rises upon the
wave, and is seen again: It is the condition of the Church of Rome, sometimes
visible and a glorious Church; but now persecuteth the faith it professed, the
godly being covered with waves: It is the condition of the Cities in Erance;
and it was the case of the Church of God in this Land, which was glorious and
visible in the days of King Edward; but covered with waves in the days of
Queen Mary, but restored to former glory by Queen Elizabeth, wherein for above
sixty years it has continued, most eminent, in the eyes of the world.

The Papists do hold, that the true Church of Confutation.
God is ever visible Ecclesia visibilis, non potest def^ere. Bell. de Eccles.
lib. 3. cap. 13.
; has had, and shall have, a perpetual Succession of Pastors and Ministers,
and of public service and worship: They also say, that their Church has been,
and is so visible; ours not, therefore theirs is the true Church of Christ, and
ours is not.

For the first, we say that howsoever the Catholic 1
and Universal Church, has continued from the beginning of the world, and
shall continue to the end; the Lord shall never want on earth a company of
faithful men to serve him; yet this Church is ever invisible, an article of
our Faith, to believe there is such a Company, and that we are of that number:
but for a congregation of men and women to have the Word truly preached, and
Sacraments administered, in public, and by Authority, (which we call a
visible Church) and is a mixed company; there has not always been such, neither
can we be assured, that there always shall be such.

For the second, viz. That they say the Roman 2
Church has been visible, and enjoyed such a succession, without
interruption, since Christ and his Apostles time, professing the same faith
without change. I answer, there has not been in the Church of Rome, that
perpetual succession, they boast of. For to say nothing, whether Peter was
ever Bishop of Rome or not; or who succeeded him, whether Clement or Linus,
which is disputed amongst themselves; it is most clear, that there have stood
three Popes at once; and did the Succession hold, when Pope Joan stepped into the
Papal Chair, and managed the affairs of the Church? Was she also Saint
Peter's Successor? and they lawful Cardinals, Bishops, and Ministers of her
ordination? Neither are his Arguments to be despised, who proves, that now for
diverse years, ever since Sixtus, they have had no Popes, nor Cardinals, nor
Bishops, according to their own Councels and Canons, etc. But grant them what
succession soever they challenge; yet succession of persons and place, without
succession of doctrine, is nothing worth; as Jerome said, Ye hold the Seat,
and Faith of Peter Et fidem, and sedem. Jeron. Damaso.
; if faith be gone the state is no better, then a chair of pestilence: Now the
faith is gone, and not only this latter Rome holds doctrine contrary to the
Ancient Rome, within the five hundred or six hundred years after Christ, but
now maintains strange and novell doctrines and service, which Rome knew not,
when it first became the seat of Antichrist; as the Conception of Mary; Latin
Service; suppression of Scriptures; the marriage of Priests; adoration of
Images; supremacy of Pope; Communion in one kind; Transubstantiation, etc.
and therefore is long since ceased to be any true visible Church.

Lastly, whereas all Popishly affected persons, 3
do commonly demand, Where was your Church, and who professed your Religion,
before Luthers times? I will answer plainly, that the simple may understand;
the Doctrine, Faith, and Religion, which we profess, is the very same, that
all the Christian Churches throughout the world professed, for many hundred
years after Christ and his Apostles; all the blessed Martyrs in the Primitive
died for no other, but our Faith and Religion; after that the Church had peace
(by means of godly Constantine) the learned Bishops and Fathers taught Doctor
Field of the Church, lib. 3. cap. 8.
no other; the people believed, received, professed no other; (though as the
mystery of iniquity began to work in the Apostles time, so) the longer, the
worse, and more errors, and corruptions; crept into the Church, till in the end,
the ship came to be covered with waves of heresies and persecutions; that the
Church was not so glorious, eminent, visible, and conspicuous as before. Then
came the dark time of Antichrist for many hundred years: yet even then were
the Waldenses, Bohemians, and others, who agreed with us in the substance of
Religion; and spoke and wrote against the corruptions of those times: but when
it pleased God, to stir up John Husse, Jerome of Prage, Martine Luther, and
other his worthy servants, to open the skupperholes, the waves which so
oppressed the Church, ran out; the ship came aloft again; and that Faith which
had so long been oppressed, began publicly to be professed, and a fair
visible Church in one place or other has ever since continued, and I trust
shall now to the end of the world, and shall never be universally covered
again.

Neither let any Papist suppose it a forfeiture of Prevention.
the cause, if we cannot show a precise and exact Catalogue, of the persons,
places, and times, by whom, where, and when, our faith was professed.

For first* howsoever in all ages some have often appeared, 1
and given singular witness to our faith, (as our Martyrologe has recorded)
so the Church may be in some places, where none can see it; as in Elias time,
there were seven thousand in Israel, and yet he saw never an one of them 2
King. 19. 18.
: And as we doubt not but there are at this day in Spain, Italy, Rome, even
where Satan's throne is Rev. 2. 13.
.

Again, through defect of history, many things 2
are hid from us, and specially the Church of Rome, doing her best to deface
the memory of any thing, that might witness for us and our Religion. If in
these days they will not spare man living, but wipe names out of books, give
commandment, that none shall name them, but with contempt, and charge the
Protestants with such horrible opinions as we hold not And are antiqua and
convicta convitia.
; As that God is the Author of sin, we condemn prayer* fasting, poverty,
cha^^itie, good works, confession; what may we not think their Ancestors
have done, in former Way to Church. page 319. etc.
ages to men of our Religion? So as it may be there were many more Martyrs, that
then died for our Faith, yea more Churches that professed our Faith, then are
come to our knowledge.

Thirdly, howsoever the Church in these parts of 3
the world, might for many years be oppressed, as the Moon in Eclipse, and
as a ship covered with waves, yet even then Christ might have most glorious
visible Churches, in other parts of the world; for howsoever the Jesuits brag
exceedingly of their conversion of the Indies, where they say our Religion is
scarce heard of Doct. Whites way. page 355.
: Yet that learned Jewel of our Church has long since showed out of Vespatius
Bishop Jewel. Defense of Apol. page 37.
, that in the East Indies, there were many godly Bishops, and whole Countries
professing the Gospel, before the Portugals came there, or Popes name heard
of. Yea, do not they say; that the Apostle Thomas lies buried in a City
there, and that he converted them to the Faith of Christ? and did S. Thomas
preach Popery, or no? If they say true, our Religion was there professed before
Popery.

Lastly, give me leave (in a word) to answer 4.
them out of themselves. Thus writes Gregory of Valence. When we say, the
Church is always conspicuous, this must not be taken, as if we thought it
might, at every season, be discerned alike easily: for we know, that sometimes
it is so tossed with the waves of Errors, Schisms, and persecutions, that it
shall be very hard to be known Annal. sid. lib. 6. cap. 4. and comment Theol.
tom. 3. p. 145
. Yea, the learned Papists do generally confess, that in the supposed, or
imagined reigue of Antichrist, their Church shall be invisible. Thus says
Acosta: In the days of Antichrist, all light of Ecclesiastical Order shall
lie buried; the Priests lament; the Church empty; the Altars forsaken; and
none come to the Lambs solemnity Acosta de noviss. tempor. lib. 2. ca. 15.
. Many others, as Pererius, Suarez, Ovandus, and others, speak to this purpose
Dr. ^hite* W. p. 87.
. I conclude, with that of the Rhemists; It is very like that the external
state of the Roman Church, and public intercourse of the faithful with the
same, shall cease Rhem. annot. on 2 Thessalonians. 2. 2. sict. 6.
. With what face then can the Romanists deny our Church to be the true Church
of God, because of the covering or obscurity thereof, whereas they do
acknowledge their own, subject to the same.

Thirdly note, that it is said, the ship was [ covered] Doctrine 3.
with waves, but not broken or dashed in pieces, or sunk into the waves (...).
So^^^^^tur a vi slu^lu^m.
. No, no, the waves may toss, and shake, and cover, but cannot break, nor
sink this Ship. Your third lesson then is, Persecutors may, by cruel and
bloody practices, wars, murders, and massacres, trouble and disquiet the
Church, lessen the number of professors, hypocrites falling away, as the Corn
which wants moisture withers, when Sun shines hot Matthew. 13. 21.
. They may destroy, for a time, the visibilitie of the Church, and make such as
have publicly served God in his Temple, now either serve God privately in their
Houses, or Chambers, or in Wildernesses, Woods, Caves, Dens, and solitary
places. All this they may do: but to destroy the true people of God, they
cannot. They may cut them off, and put hundreds, and thousands of them to
death: but as they fall by unities, they will rise by multitudes. The blood of
the Mattyrs will be the seed of the Church Semen in tempestate persecutionis,
iactum est. Tertul.
. Nothing more dangerous to the Church than prosperity. Herem is the Proverb
true, the Daughter devoureth the Mother Filia devoravit matrem. Tertull. Apol.
cap. 45.
. Religion, brings prosperity; and prosperity, destroieth Religion.

Gods Church is like the Air, the more it is fanned Similies.
with the Winds, the sweeter it is: like Water, the more it runs on Stones,
the wholsomer: like Gold and Silver, the oftener tried in the Fire, the purer it
is: like Camomill, the more trodden on, the deeper it rooteth, and thicker it
grows: like the Laurel, the more oppressed with weight, the further it
spreads: like the Vine, the nearer cut, the more Fruit it bears: like
Spice, the more it is beaten and bruised, the sweeter it smells.

The more the Egyptians sought to destroy, the Confirmation.
more the people of God multiplied Exodus 3. 2, 3.
; being like the Bush, all in flaming fire, but consumed not. After the cruel
decree of Haman, that all the Jews should be destroyed, many of the people of
the Land, became Jews He^^. 8. ult.
.

Never so glorious a Church (for zealous profession) Examples.
in England, as immediately after the days of Queen Mary, in whose days, Gods
people had been as dry Stubble before the flaming Fire, and one would have
thought but few left. Never more Protestants in France, then since their
massacre: nor never more Protestants in the Christian world, then since the
league for to destroy them, and that the Jesuits have so far prevailed with
Princes, to seek utterly to root them out and destroy them. These are the
Israel of God, that may truly say, Often they have afflicted me from my youth
up: but they have not prevailed against me Psalm. 129* 2.
. Christ is in this Ship, and though on sleep, yet it is great weakness in
Faith, to fear the drowning of it. But all other Ships, though sailing fair
for a while, shall suffer shipwreck; Atheism, Arrianisme, Turcisme, Iudaisme,
Anabaptisme, Libertinisme, Papisme: and if there were as many Religions in the
world, as there are Orders and sorts of Friars in Rome; yet shall they all
consume and vanish: nothing shall continue, and abide in the waves, and outride
all storms and tempests, but the pure Religion, of the Gospel of Christ. So
says Christ, in another Metaphor, Every plant which mine heavenly Father has
not planted, shall be rooted out Matthew. 15. 13.
. Such Trees may, for a time, yea a long time, take deep root, and flourish,
and spread: but the Axe is at the root, they must down, and into the fire
Matthew. 3. 10.
.

To conclude, seeing Popery is no plant of Gods Conclusion.
planting, but a wilding; a composition of novelties; a miscellanie of
heresies; brought in by packing, and ambition of some; God may suffer it to
spread and flourish, to sail fair for a while: but it shall one day be
overturned with the breath of God, and sink into the waves. Christ is in the
Field with all his Armies; the Beast and false Prophet shall be taken. An Angel
standing in the Sun, Rev. 19. 17, 18, 19, 20.
has bid the guests to the supper of the great King, and told them their
cheer, even the flesh of Kings and Captains. All Kings that make war
against the Gospel, must to it.

To shut up all in a word, know, that not one drop of water can come into the
Ship, but according to Gods pleasure: and therefore, that he suffers such a
storm and tempest, as the Ship even to be covered with waves, is doubtless
for his glory, and the spiritual good of his Church. No affliction (says the
Apostle) for the present is joyous, but grievous. Oh Lord, how grievous and
enough to draw tears from that heart which is not harder than the nether
Millstone, that enemies should come with Fire and Sword, to ruinate and waste
whole Countries, and Provinces, take away the lives of so many, and utterly
undo more, make many a widow, and fatherless child! But see the good of it: by
this means he has made many smite on breast and thighs, and shed many a
tear, breathe out many a sigh, power out many a prayer, which otherwise God
had never heard of. How does the misery of Gods Church, covered with waves
abroad, cause in England, Scotland, Ireland, and other places, where by Gods
mercy they enjoy a calm, to be thankful and pray. Verily, if the covering of
the Ship with waves, do not wonderfully affect you and do you good, it is not
well with you; but I trust it does, and the Lord turn it to more good. So much
for the first circumstance, aggravating their danger, The ship was even covered
with waves: The second follows.

But he was asleep.] Sleep properly taken, signifies Part 2. Sense lit.
the rest of the body: and is a sweet blessing of God, as David says, He
gives his welbeloved sleep Psalm. 127. 2.
(...). Homer.
; yet ordinarily caused by natural means. For (as the Physicians say) the
evaporations of meats from the stomach, being condensate and thickened with the
cold of the brain, do stop the passages of the spirits, and so lock up the
senses from execution of their functions, and stay all the parts and members of
the body from their labor. And this is that sweet dew of nature Ros naturae.
, the repast of the body, and the greatest comfort that nature has, and
without which no living creature can long continue Quod caret alterna requte,
aurabile non est.
. And sleep has two degrees, either it is weak and remiss, such as in sick
persons or aged people, who (as Solomon says) awake at the chirping of the
bird Eccles. 12. 4.
; and this is called a slumber, Whilst the bridegroom tarried long, they all
slumbred, or (as the word signifies) nodded with the head (...), Nictaruni:
From (...): and that from (...), annuo.
. And David places this in the eyelids, I will not suffer mine eyelids to
slumber Psalm. 132. 4.
; for this is only a heaviness in the eyes, the lids falling down, and by and
by lifted up again: it comes not near the heart, as the Church describes
it, I sleep, but mine heart awaketh Cant. 5. 1.
; and such are very easily awakened Heb. Numab. Gr. (...). Lat. Dormitie,
Nictatio.
: but there is a greater degree in sleeping, when senses are fast bound and
locked up; and this is expressed in English many times by addition of some
other word, as deep, sound, heavy, fast, and dead sleep; or (as the
Scripture phrase is) A sleep of God; as when David took away the Spear, and
Cruse of water from Saul's head, no man saw it, nor knew it, for a sleep of God
was fallen upon them 1 Samuel 26. 12.
. Which kind of sleep the Poets call the Mortis Imago. Ovid.
Image and (...). Hom.
brother of death. So it is said, When God took a rib out of Adams side, God
cast him into a deep sleep Genesis 2. 21.
; and Stserah, when Iael drove the nail of the tent into his head, is said, To
be fast on sleep Judge. 4. 21. Nirdam, soporatus.
: and Eutichus (whilst Paul continued long preaching) is said to fall into a
deep sleep Acts 20. 9. (...): Demersus somno pr^fundo.
: And Jonah went down into the ship, and lay fast on sleep Jonah 1. 5. and
soporatus.
; fast indeed, when in stead of those (...) Suadentia somnos, that Ovid and
Virgil speak of, as silence, etc. neither the raging nor roaring of the Sea,
tumbling nor cracking of the Ship, like to be broken with every wave, the
crying of Mariners on their gods, their noise in casting out their goods, could
awake him. Well might the Ship-master say, What meanest thou o sleeper Jonah 1.
6.
? And verily, our Saviors sleep at this time was very fast, deep, sound, and
(as I may say) a dead sleep, for that the word (which is here, and in Saint
Mark used) signifies (...), ex (...); and (...) been, and (...), vere
soporatus. And yet the word (...) S Lube, uses, (...) p^e^seth some ^^vines,
as more emphaticall, (...), amplius quiddam significat, quam (...). Bez. in Luc.
; His senses were well and fast bound; he was fast asleep. But what? Had he
any (...) or Soporiferum? Where was he? or what means of sleep did he use?
Was he betaken into some Cabin, or with Jonah into the Ship, and there laid
upon some bed of Down? No, indeed, only Saint Mark tells us, He was in
the hinder part of the Ship asleep on a pillow Mark 4. 38.
; which yet (if we believe good Authors) was but a wooden pillow Cervical
ligneu^ in Euthym. Theophilact.
: and indeed it is most true of the Apostle, He that was rich, for our sakes
became poor 2 Cor. 8. 9. Luke 2. 7.
: poor in his birth, borne in a stable; poor in purse, borrowing money of a
Fish to pay his tribute Matthew. 17. ult.
; poor in his greatest triumph and solemnity, riding on an Ass into
Jerusalem, Matt. 21. poor in apparel, wearing a Seamelesse coat John 19. 23.
; poor in diet, feeding on Barley bread John 6 9.
; poor in lodging, not having where to rest his head Matthew. 8. 20.
; poor in his Disciples, not Princes and Philosophers, but Fishermen and
Tole-gatherers, of the poorest of the people, Matthew 4. 18. poor in death,
dying on a Cross Luc. 23. 33.
; poor in his burial, being laid in another man's toombe, Ioh. 19. 41. And all
because his kingdom was not of this world, Ioh. 18. 36. Yet always contented
and thankful; and thereby teaching all his Disciples so to be with what it
pleases God to send. But alas, how proud are his Disciples? Proud in their
houses, diet, apparel, lodging, etc. because they set their hearts on these
things, as if their kingdom were of this world. But probable it was, he was
weary with exercise of his Ministry amongst the multitude on the shore, or
had spent some night before in prayer, and therefore now fell so fast on
sleep. But though these might be natural means, they were but subordinate to
his good pleasure: for though his sleep was sound, and not fained; yet was it
so, by Divine providence and dispensation, that the Faith of his Disciples
might be the more thoroughly tried. For even this did not a little add to their
fear, that in this dangerous tempest, he was so fast asleep. Thus much be
said for the opening of the Literal and Historical sense. From whence, first,
according to the sense Literal, we learn,

That Christ is true man. (Which some ancient Doct. lit.
Heretics, as Manichees and Marcionites denied;) But he, not only took upon
him the true nature and substance of our souls and bodies, with the Essential
properties of both; as, in Soul, Will, Understanding; in Body, dimensions:
but Merae privationis, non pravae dispositions.
also the infirmities of both; as ignorance of some things, fear, sorrow, and
wearisomnes of body, hunger, thirst, spitting on ground, weeping, sleeping,
pain, ache, soreness, etc. Even like unto us his brethren in all things
except sin Heb 4. penult Naturales, and indetractabiles passiones. Aquin.
. Which doctrine yet must be understood and qualified with a double caution:
First, That infirmities of soul are either unblameable, or sinful; He took
the first only, and not the second (...). Damasc. Non repugnantes perfectioni
scientiae and gratiae. Aquin. Sum. part. 3. quest. 14, etc.
: Secondly, That infirmities of body are of two sorts, viz. either general,
which accompany the nature of man, and may be found in every true man, as
hunger Matthew. 4. 2.
, thirst John ^9. 28.
, sleeping Matthew. 8. 24.
, wearisomnesse John 4. 6.
; to be sick or sore, if beaten, etc. Or else such as are personal and
particular, arising from some private natural causes, or laid on some, as the
particular judgments of God; As to be borne blind, deaf, dumb, lame,
crooked, deformed, or to be sick of a burning fever, consumption, dropsy,
plurisie. Now Christ took but such as are general, and do accompany humane
nature Quae pertinent ad communem. (...). Zanch. de incarnat. lib. 2. fol. 116.
, not the particular; for then he could not have been our Redeemer, no, nor
have lived one hour; but he need not take any personal infirmities, no more
than he did any man's person.

And verily, here is a matter of most sweet comfort Use.
to the children of God, that we have not a stranger to our nature, for our
Redeemer; but (as Job calls him) a Goel, a Kinsman: a Shiliah, as Jacob
says, one that has been wrapped in the Secundine or Tunicle, borne after the
manner of men; yea that has had experience of our infirmities, etc. This
comfort the Apostle lays down in these words, He took not on him the
nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham; yea in all things it behooved him to
be made like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful
high Priest in things pertaining to God; for in that he has suffered and
been tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted Heb. 2. ult.
. And again, We have not a high Priest, which cannot be touched with the
feeling of our infirmities, but was in all points tempted as we are, yet
without sin: Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we
may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need Heb. 4. ult.
. Who can fully express the sweetness of this comfort? that we have such a
Savior to fly unto in all our wants and necessities, as was true man; not
senseless, as iron and steel, but sensible of miseries, as having true flesh
and blood; such an one as has had experience of Satan's temptations, of
poverty, hunger, thirst, wearisomenesse, slander, buffetting, cruel pain,
death, distress, etc. Exsensu miseriarum nascitur co^miseratio. Non ignaramali
miseris su^currere dis^o. Dido Virg. Aeie^d. 2.
.

How comfortable, I say again, that we call on one, that had himself
experience of these things! Admiration. Example.
If a man be sick of any disease, he is much comsorted that his Physician has
been sick of the very same: for he assures himself, he will both have the
more care and compassion on him, and knows best how to go about the cure.
Nay more, we call on such an one, as is not only willing and able to hear and
help, but has an unconceiveable simpathie and fellow-feeling of all the
miseries of his children: he is even pinched as much with their poverty, want,
and distress, as themselves. Patient Job in all his misery, felt nothing which
Christ felt not with him; neither did Lazarus suffer any thing wherein Christ
did not partake with him. So long as the mystical Union holds (which by no
means can be dissolved) Christ the head must needs suffer with the members of
his body. He that touches the faithful, touches the apple of his eye Zach.
2. 8.
. And he called to Saul from heaven, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me Acts
9. 3.
? He thought he had but to do with the poor abject and despised people of
Damascus, and such as had no man on earth, of any sort, once to speak for
them, but were esteemed as the offscouring of the world; and whom he thought
he might have bound, and imprisoned, and have killed, and slain, without
controulement; yea have done God service, and purchased much favor and
preferment: But behold, beyond his expectation, there is a glorious Lord
calls unto him out of heaven, whose voice was of such power and Majesty,
that it cast him upon the ground, and he would know the Reason why he
persecuted him.

Oh that men and women had grace to know, Use.
believe, and consider that all the reproaches, slanders, and hurts, done to
his people, (how simple soever in the world) are done to Christ; and though he
sleep for a while, and seem utterly to neglect them, yet will he, at the day
of Judgment, set all before them, and account all the good, or evil, done to
the poor Saints, as done to himself, and will accordingly reward or punish
them Matthew. 25. 34.
.

In the mean time, let all the people of God rejoice, Conclusion.
that their Savior does but sleep, that they have such an high Priest, as
has had experience of their infirmities, and therefore cannot but have
compassion on them. And thus much bespoken of the Letter.

As a man that is on sleep, hears no cries nor Sense mystic.
complaints, regards not the wrongs and injuries done to him or his; but is
altogether senseless of such evil, as being awake he would not endure, but
either restrain, or revenge: so when God makes as though he heard not the
prayers and complaints of his people; suffers his enemies to reproach and
blaspheme his name, and at their lust, to make havocke of his Church, and to
destroy Religion, his Temples, and houses, where he was wont to be worshipped:
then the Scriptures speak of God, after the manner of men, that he is asleep.
The sleep of Christ then, in this storm, does lively represent Gods seeming to
neglect his Church in their great troubles, and letting the enemy even do
what he lust. Which patience or sleeping has several effects; in the godly,
and the wicked: first, it causes the godly exceedingly to mourn, and
complain; yea and through Satan's malice, and their weakness, to fear, and
much ado to keep from despair. So the people of God being extremely
afflicted, and brought to great misery, under the persecution of Antiochus,
do thus complain; Oh Lord, thou go not forth with our armies, thou make
us turn our backs upon our enemies: they that hate us spoil our goods; thou
have given us like sheep appointed for meat, and scattered us amongst the
Heathen: thou sellest thy people for naught, and take no money for them: thou
make us a scorn, and derision, a byword, a reproach, and shaking of heads.
And then they pray in this form; Awake, why sleep thou, O Lord, arise, and
cast us not off for ever, wherefore hidest thou thy face, and forgettest our
affliction, and our oppression Psalm. 44. 23, etc.
? And David thus for himself; Arise, O Lord, in thine anger, lift up thy
self, because of the rage of mine enemies, awake for me to judgment which
thou have commanded, oh let the wickedness of the wicked come to an end, but
guide thou the just, Psalm. 7. 6. Yea, as Christ his sleep did most trouble the
Disciples, (they had never been so fearful in the storm, nor so earnestly
called upon him, if he had been awake) so there is nothing so troubles Gods
people, in their general and particular distresses, as that God seems not to
regard them: this, oh this, has more disquieted them, than any thing else, and
caused most bitter complaints and expostulations; as, Why stand thou so
far off, and hidest thy self, in this time of affliction, when the wicked in
his pride does persecute the poor Psalm. 10. 1. etc.
? And again, How long will thou forget me, O Lord? for ever? how long will thou hide thy face from me? how long shall I take counsel in my soul, and be
so sore vexed? how long shall mine enemy be exalted over me Psalm. 13. 1.
? And again, Will the Lord absent himself for ever? is his mercy clean gone,
and will he shut up his loving kindness in displeasure Psalm. 77. 9.
? By which, (in stead of many places which might be alleged for this purpose)
it is most evident, that Gods children have never such conflicts, and such
wrestling betwixt the flesh and spirit, as when either the Church of God, or
themselves are in distress, and God seems not to regard them, but to have
cast off all care of them, oh this breeds complaints and roaring indeed.

And as it begets great fear, and perturbation, 2. Encouragement to the
wicked.
yea almost despair, and denial of Gods providence, as David said of
himself; My feet were almost gone, my steps had well-nigh slipped: I was so
grieved at the foolish, and to see the wicked in prosperity Psalm. 73. 2, 3.
: So does it wonderfully encourage the enemies of Gods people, and make them
proud and insolent: Then say they, Come, let us make havocke of them
altogether, and let us cut them off from being a Nation, that the name of
Israel may be no more in remembrance: let us take to our selves the houses of
God in possession Psalm. 83. 4. 12.
: And say God has for saken them, persecute them, and take them, there is none
to deliver them Psalm. 79. 11.
: Down with Jerusalem, down with it even to the ground Psalm. 137. 7.
. Oh how evil and wicked men bestirre themselves, when they perceive Christ to
be asleep; then the sea rages indeed.

Oh great is the storm, which is now upon the Application.
sea, and no small trouble it is, to such as are awake, to see men and women
every where asleep in security; specially to see those so fast asleep, who
should waken others: Simon sleep thou Mark 14. 37. Simon dormis?
? What, Jonah asleep in a storm? What meanest thou O sleeper Jonah 1. 6.
? But that which most troubles (if ever) now Christ is asleep, notwithstanding
that the ship of his Church is in such great peril and jeopardie; which as it
(above all things) most perplexeth Gods children, and causes much godly sorrow
and complaining; so does it (above all things) animate and encourage the bloody
enemies of his people, to insult, threaten, yea and triumph, as if all were now
in their hands, to dispose as they lust, and Gods people shall now for ever be
swallowed up quick. Whither shall I lead you, to sweeten your souls in this
gall of bitterness? nay whither can I lead you in all the Scriptures to a
place of greater comfort, to Gods people, or of fear, to all persecuting
enemies, then to this that Gods providence offreth to our consideration? Oh
what meat comes out of this eater? what honey out of this strong one? what
joy from this occasion of fear? how does it abound with comforts? and
specially these three: viz.

First note, that it is said, He was asleep: it is not 1. Observe. ^ Comfort.
said, He was dead: (...), he that is dead, can by no means be awakned; he
that sleeps may; which comfort affords three branches.

1. The great security of Christ and his Church, I. Security.
in greatest storms and tempests. A man that is in danger, by water or land,
will not sleep. The Shipmaster wondered, that, in such a storm, Jonah would or
could sleep; What meanest thou, O sleeper Jonah 1. 6.
? How did David reprove Abner for sleeping, when Abishai went and took the
spear and cruse from Saul's head 1 Samuel 26. 12.
. Our Savior says, If the goodman of the house knew what hour the thief
would come, he would watch, and not suffer his house to be broken up Matthew. 24.
43.
. Our Savior knew of this Tempest before; it rose by his appointment: if there
had been any danger, would he have slept? No, no, he laugheth the waves and
winds to scorn, and when the sea most rages and threatens destruction, he
lays him down to rest, falls on sleep, and is angry with his Disciples,
for so fearfully awakening of him: he sleeps soundly, as it were contemning
the danger Dormit securus, contemnit. Aret. in Matthew.
.

Well, if Satan could not drown the ship when Use.
Christ was asleep; can he drown it, now he is awake? No, no, Caesar bade
the Mariner in a storm be of good comfort, he carried Caesar Confide nauta,
nam Caes^r^m vehis.
: Let the Exhortation.
Church of God be of good comfort, for Christ is in it. Oh let the people of
God rest upon their security, and say, Gather your selves* O ye people, and
ye shall be broken in pee^es; gird your selves, and ye shall be broken in
pieces; take counsel together, and it shall come to naught; speak the word,
and it shall not stand, for God is with us Esaias 8. 9.
: And again, The Lord is my light and my salvation, whom then shall I fear?
The Lord is the strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid? Though an host
should encampe against me, my heart shall not fear Psalm. 27. 1.
. And again, God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble,
therefore will not we fear, though the earth be removed, and though the
mountains be carried into the midst of the sea, though the waters roar and be
troubled, and the mountains shake with the swelling thereof Psalm. 46. 1.
. Oh the boldness and security of the faithful, that have Christ, though he
be asleep.

Secondly, though he be on sleep, he takes 2. Precise observation.
good notice of the plots and projects of enemies; and of all the troubles and
persecutions of his Church and people. The Church said, she was asleep, but her
heart was awake Cant. 5. 1.
: Christ in his Manhood was asleep, but his God head was awake; He that
keeps Israel, does neither slumber nor sleep Psalm. 121. 4.
. David says, His eyes behold, and his eyelids try the children of men Psalm.
11. 4.
. Saint Augustine says, there is apertio and opertio, oculorum: God sees with
open eye, when he discovers a thing at first; but when God suffers the
wicked to go on, and win^keth at their ways, taking leisure and respite,
before he power any judgment upon them, then he seems to sleep; yet even
then his eyelids try the children of men: Oh he is never more intent, than
when he seems to sleep.

Thirdly, in his good time he will awake and deliver 3. Seasonable deliverance.
his, and punish such as have abused his patience. Noah was asleep, but he
awaked and cursed Cham, who abused him in his sleep, Genesis 9. 24. Solomon
says, He does all things in number, weight and measure; much more does he
number, weigh and measure the tribulations of his children. To the Angel of
the Church of Smyrnah he wrote, saying, I know thy tribulation and poverty.
Behold the Devil shall cast some of you into prison, that ye may be tried, and
ye shall have tribulation ten days: be faithful to the death, and I will
give thee the crown of life Rev. 29, 10.
. Lo, how he tells before it come, how far tribulation shall extend, and
how long it shall last. Note, 1. The author, [ the Devil:] 2. Persons, [ some
of them:] 3. Extent, [ cast into prison:] 4. Time, [ but for ten days.] At
another time we read, that the Disciples were in a great storm upon the sea,
and Christ was not with them; but the Text says, Christ saw them toiling in
rowing Mark 6. 48.
; (yea even tormented, as Dives was in hell, for it is the same word; (...).
Luke 16. 23.
) and he comes unto them, and delivers them out of all their fear: but it
is long first; even the fourth watch of the night: he suffered them to toil
all the night, and came not till the dawning of the day; teaching us, in
tribulations and persecutions to be patient, and to plie our oars, still
waiting, and being assured, in the appointed time, he will awake, and turn
all into a calm; he has ever done so, and he ever will do so, etc. So much
for the comforts, that we gather from this first thing, that Christ is said to
sleep.

Secondly, let us observe the place, where the Evangelist 2. Place.
says, He slept, viz. in the hinder part of the ship Mark 4. 38. (...), in
p^ppi.
; or in the stern, which is the place for the Pilot, or Master, the Navarchos,
or Nauclerus; the Steereman, or Governor, who has the care to govern the
ship, that in sailing it run not on rocks or shelfs.

Which observation yields us a great comfort, 2. Comfort.
That Christ is our Pilot and Governor: Then need not the Passengers fear any
danger. How soever it is full of danger on the Sea, for the Stereman to sleep
in places of danger; yet no danger for Christ to sleep, for that he foreseeth
all danger. Therefore all care away, seeing he is at the Helm, and our
Steresman; though it please him sometime to sleep.

The Papists would rob the Church of this comfort, who would not have Christ
sleeping or waking to be in the Stern, but place the Pope there, put the
Rudder in his hand Clavus and gubernaculum.
, and invest him with absolute authority to govern the ship; every one must
plie their tacklings according to his whistle: and though he run them all
upon the rock, yet has he that unlimited and transcendent authority, that no
man may once question him, or say, why do thou thus? Oh dangerous, to pass
in that Vessel, wherein such ignorant and wicked Atheists, are made sole
Governors and Commanders. But happy that Church, wherein Christ is in the
Stern, and has the governing of the Helm, continually viewing of the
Compass, and sounding, so as it is not possible for that ship to miscarry.

Thirdly, how is he disposed there? Has he 3. Disposition
there a bed of down whereon to rest? No, the Evangelist says, he did but lay
his head on a pillow; Super cervical.
; yea and an hard one too (as some conceive) a wooden pillow, little better
than that of Jacobs, which was of stone Genesis 28. 11.
.

A sweet comfort also to consider, how 3. Comfort.
ready Christ is to help his in distress. The Church being called on,
answered, I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on Cant. 5. 3.
? Lo what a pain it is to rise out of the warm bed, and put on clothes.
Christ has not put off his seamelesse coat, and is in his warm bed, that he
had rather all should be much endangered, if not cast away, rather than he
would arise, and dress himself. No, no, he has but leaned his head on an
hard pillow, he is ready to help in any need, as David says, He is a
present help in trouble Psalm. 46. ^.
. He appeared unto John, walking in the midst of the seven golden Candlesticks
Rev. 1. 13.
, as ready to help any member of the Church, that stands in need of him. And
thus much be said of the first general part in their sailing, viz. their
great danger or jeopardie. Now follows to speak of their deliverance.

VERSE 25. And his disciples came to him, and awoke him, saying, Master, save
us, we perish.
COncerning deliverance out of this their Division.
great fear, and danger, (the second part in the story of their sailing) two
things are to be considered, viz. first, the procurement: and secondly, the
performance of it.

How deliverance was procured, the Evangelist expresses in this 25 verse, viz.
when they were in greatest danger, and extremest peril, as you have heard, the
disciples go to Christ, give themselves to prayer, and thereby procure it:
whereof I purpose first to speak generally, and then particularly. Method.


In general, from this example we learn, (according 1. Genesis doct. lit.
to the letter thereof) wherever we become, whatever we go about, to
exercise our selves in prayer. No duty more often commanded, more highly
commended, or abundantly rewarded. Wherefore David was given to prayer Psalm.
69. 13.
. Invocation of the name of God, is made in the Scriptures, the true note, or
mark of a Christian. When Saul had got letters from the High Priests to
persecute the Church, it is said by S. Luke; He received authority, to bind
all that call on the name of God Acts 9. 14.
. S. Paul, writing to the Church of Corinth, and describing the saithfull, he
calls them Saints, and such as call on the name of the Lord Jesus 1 Cor. 1. 2.
. On the other side, the Prophet David notes out the Atheist, that says in
his heart there is no God, by this mark, that such an one calls not on the
Lord Psalm. 14. 4.
.

By which it appears, that of many who desire Application.
to bear, and be known by the name of Christians, yet there are indeed very
few sound and true Christians. The world is full of Atheists, very poor in
heavenly graces, because they have not the spirit of invocation, or
supplication Zach. 12. 10.
, whereby to ask what they want Matthew. 7. 7.
. Oh it is the happiness of Christians, that they may in all places 1 Timothy 2.
8.
, and at all times 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17.
, in Gods houses and their own; by sea or land; within doors, or without; in
field, or bed; on mountains, or in dungeons; at midnight, as well as at
midday, lift up their hearts and hands 1 Timothy 2. 8.
, and call on God.

Oh, let us be ashamed of our negligence herein, Use.
both in Gods house, with the assembly of Saints, and in our own; and let us
more inure our selves herewith; let it be the first thing we do when we awake,
the last thing we do when we lie down to sleep; yea throughout the day,
whether we eat or drink, labor or rest, work or play, let our hearts be ever
disposed to prayer, and on every occasion lifted up; if not with words, yet
with devout sighs, and vehement desires; if no larger, yet in such short
wishes, as here and elsewhere, Lord save us, God be merciful, Christ bless
and prosper, Lord increase our faith. As Moses by familiar talking with God,
had his face to shine Exodus 34. 29.
: so assuredly, he cannot but be a good man, and have a shining soul and life
too, that talks much with God, and prays continually.

Secondly, hence let us learn, that times of 2. Genesis doct.
necessity, and great distress, are both fittest for prayer, and great
furtherers thereof. Yea this is a principal end, that God respects in
sending afflictions and perplexities, viz. to provoke the prayers of his
people, wherein he delights: So says the Lord, (when his people grew wanton,
and ran after their lovers) I will go, and return to my place, til they
acknowledge their offense, and seek my face; in their affliction, they will
seek me early Ose. 5. ul^.
. Let Jacob hear, that his fierce brother Esau comes out against him, and
400 men with him, threatening to smite him, and the mother with the children,
and then he will pray, yea and wrestle with God, and never let him go* till he
bless him Genesis 32. 6, 9, 26.
. Let the people of God be in danger at the Red Sea bank to be all destroyed,
and then Moses will cry Exodus 14. 15.
* Let Annah be barren, and Peninnah upbraid her, and then she will up to the
Temple, pray, weep, and power out her soul before the Lord 1 Samuel 1. 6, 15.
. Let Jerusalem be besieged, and Rabshekah rail, and blaspheme, and then
Ezekiah will up to the Temple, and spread the blasphemous letter before the
Lord 2 King. 19. 14.
: yea let him receive a message from the Lord, that he shall die, and not live,
and then he will turn his face to the wall, and pray, and weep sore Esaias 38.
3.
. Let a great Host of Moab, Ammon, and Mount Seir come against Judah, that they
know not what to do, and then King Iehoshaphat will proclaim a fast, and
pray, O Lord God, we know not what to do, but our eyes are unto thee 2 Cron.
20. 12.
. Let David come into extreme miseries, and out of the deeps he will cry unto
God Psalm. 130. 1.
. Few will when they go to Sea pray with S. Paul Acts 21. 5.
; (we read not that these disciples did) but let there arise a storm, which
mounteth up to heaven, and lets them go down again to the depths, that
their soul melts because of the trouble, and they are even at their wits
end, and then they will cry to the Lord in their trouble Psalm. 107. 28.
. Let the ship be even covered with waves, and then the disciples will go to
their Master Hic votis numen adorat, Brachiaque ad coelum, quod non videt,
irrita tollens, Poscit opem. Ovid. Discat navigare, qui nescit erare.
: Yea let Jonah be cast into the Sea, and be swallowed of a Whale, and then he
will cry to the Lord Jonah 2. 1.
. A strange thing, says one, that he that slept in the ship, should be awake
in the Whales belly; and he that fled from God on dry land, should fly to God
in the bottom of the sea Mira res, vigilat in Ceto, qui stertebat in navi.
.

Oh when men have all things according to their Application.
hearts desire, they seek not the Lord. Prosperity dulleth devotion in the
best, as David found by experience; In my prosperity I said, I shall never be
moved, but thou hiddest thy face, and I was troubled; then I cried to the Lord,
and made supplication to my God Ps. 30. 6, 7, 8.
. Oh to correct this dullness and negligence it is, that God many times takes
away good things from his people, and sends many evils, both general to the
Church and Commonwealth, as famine, pestilence, sword; and particular on our
families and persons, as sickness, ache, pain, death of friends, losses, and
crosses, and all because (as we say) God would be better acquainted with us,
and see us at his Court; for in misery he knows he shall hear of us; but
else let us alone, and we let him alone.

So much (in stead of much more) be said from the letter and history. Now let
us proceed to the mystery.

You have heard that this storm so endangering Mystery. Doct. mystic.
this ship, does represent persecutions and troubles, which in this world, do
infest the people of God. As then the disciples in this dangerous tempest went
to Christ, and by prayer to him, procured a calm: so when the Church of God is
persecuted, and in danger, all the disciples of Christ must go to him, by
prayer, for it. So does David injoyne; Pray for the peace of Jerusalem Psalm.
122. 6.
. Luther calls prayers, the Christians Canons Orationes sunt instrumenta
bellica, and bombardae Christianorum. Luth. loc. com. class. 3.
: and surely being well charged with faith and repentance, and fired with zeal
and fervencie of spirit, they shoot far, and pierce deep; yea it pierces
heaven, and overcommeth enemies on earth Penetrat coelu^ and hosts in terra
vinc^t fidelis oration. Origin.
.

As then Kings and Princes, when enemies approach, Use.
prepare their weapons, and armor, swords, and spears: When Christians hear
of wars, and rumors of wars, they must prepare themselves to prayer, muster
their petitions, and set them in battle Heb. verbum militare. Lorin. ut Job 6.
4.
array, as David says, Psalm. 5. 3. and not trust too much in earthly means,
as David says, Some trust in horses, and some in chariots, but we will trust
in the name of the Lord Psalm. 20. 7.
. And again, An horse is counted but a vain thing to save a man, neither is
any mighty man delivered by his much strength Psalm. 33. 17.
: and I will not trust in my bow, it is not my sword that can save me, but in
God we boast all the day long Psalm. 44. 7.
. The horse is prepared for the day of battle, but salvation is from the Lord
Prove. 21. ult.
. By all which, and many other places of Scripture, which might be alleged to
this purpose, the use of means is not condemned, but that they be not trusted
in, but be seconded with true and faithful prayer. David neglected not the
means, yet purposely penned a form of prayer for the people to use, when he
went forth to battle: The Lord hear thee in the day of trouble, the name of
the God of Jacob defend thee, send thee help from his Sanctuary, and
strengthen thee out of Sion Psalm. 20. 1, 2.
. Moses neglected not the means, when he sent forth Ioshuah with his Armies to
fight with Amalek, but himself went up to the top of the mountain to pray,
and did more there with his prayer, than all they with sword and spear. For
when he held up his hands, Israel prevailed; when he let them fall, Amalek
prevailed Exodus 17. 11.
. King Asa neglected not the means, when there came up an huge Army of
Ethiopians, even ten hundred thousands and three hundred Chariots; He went out
against them, and set the battle in array, and Asa cried to the Lord, and the
Lord heard his prayer, and discomfited them 2 Cro. 14. 9, 10.
. Yea the greatest and most glorious deliverances and victories, that ever the
Church received from enemies, were merely obtained by prayer without a blow
given Plus prae^ando, quam prae^^ando.
. Moses and the children of Israel crying to the Lord in their distress at the
Red Sea, God hardened Pharaohs heart to pursue them into the Red Sea, where he
and all his hosts were drowned Exodus 14. 23.
. Gedeon with three hundred men, only with trumpets and lamps in pitchers, but
sounding their trumpets, breaking their pitchers, and crying, The sword of the
Lord and of Gedeon, not only the huge Army of the Midianites ran, and cried,
and fled, but every man's sword was against his fellow, and they slew one
another Judge. 7. 21.
. When Samariah was in exceeding distress by siege, the Lord made the host of
the Syrians to hear a noise of a great host, in the fear whereof they arose,
and fled in the twilight, and left their tents, and horses, and all the Camp
as it was, and fled for their lives 2 Kings 7. 6.
. When Jerusalem was besieged, at the prayers of Esaias and Ezekiah, an Angel
was sent, who destroyed in one night an hundred fourscore and five thousand in
the camp of the Assirians 2 Kings 19. 35.
. When such a great Army came up against Iehoshaphat, he commanded fasting and
prayer, and his form of prayer is recorded, whereby they obtained, that their
enemies destroyed one another 2 Cron. 20. 23.
.

Oh the same God lives still, and is now as able Application.
and willing to help his people as ever: but his people neglect him, go not
unto him, but trust in their own means, want the spirit of supplication; like
Jonah, they are on sleep in this great storm; either pray not at all, or very
coldly. Where is that disciple, that feelingly and fervently, zealously and
faithfully, publicly and privately, at the least thrice a day, with Daniel, is
on knee for Jerusalem, helping devotion with abstinence and fasting, that so
they may cry mightily, and wrestle strongly, resolving as Jacob, never to let
the Lord go; and with the woman of Canaan, to take no nay or denial, but they
will awake him, he shall never be rid of them. Alas, how are these things out
of use? Where is watching, fasting, striving in prayer? How little are many
moved (being out of the storm, and present danger themselves) whether others
do sink or swim? but give themselves to riot and luxury, to feasting and
playing.

Wherefore God has sent me to you again, Use.
as this Scripture comes not to my hand by chance, so neither this passage,
wherewith to renew in his name, the charge I have often already given. There is
a great storm, and if ever you desire to see a calm, away (with his disciples
here) to Christ: What mean ye, oh sleepers, arise and call on him, and plie
him with your continual prayers; he looks for more earnestness than he has
yet found: Oh pray, pray, pray, for the peace of Jerusalem. Resolve with David,
One thing I have desired of the Lord, and that will I seek after; Psalm. 27. 4.
that the Lord will awake, and have mercy on Sion. So much be said of this
verse in general: Now let us view the words more particularly.

Wherein (not tying my self to tread precisely Sub-division.
in the steps of the former Analysis, though perhaps more Logical and exact)
for more plainness of teaching, I observe in this verse these four things,
viz. First, who procured this calm (the Disciples:) Secondly, of whom did they
procure it, of Christ; (They came to him.) Thirdly, the effect of their coming
to him; (They awoke him.) Lastly, how did they awaken him, by prayer, the form
which they used, being here expressed, (Lord, save us, we perish.) Of which in
order, for their Sense, Doctrines, and Uses.

And his disciples] (...). Discipuli cjus.
The word has been sufficiently 1. Part.
opened from the first verse of this story, (his disciples followed him.) I
will not now rehearse any thing was there said, but come to raise the Doctrines
from this place.

His disciples.] Here first we learn, whose prayers 1 Observe. 1. Doct.
are so powerful with God, for themselves, and others; not the prayers of
strangers, forreiners, and enemies, but of disciples, friends, and favorites,
that follow him: The Lord hears the prayers of Confirmation.
the righteous, and his ears are open to their cries u: He is nigh to such as
call on him faithfully: He will fulfill the desires of such as fear him; he
will hear their cry, and will save them, Psalm. 145. 18. It is the prayer of a
righteous man is so availeable, Iam. 5. 16. If any man be a worshipper of God,
and do his will, him God hears John 9. 31.
. Wherefore in the great calamity and distress of the Church, the Prophet
calls to the meek of the earth, to seek the Lord Zeph. 2. 3.
. It was Abraham the friend of God Iam. 2. 23.
, that prevailed so much with his prayer for the Sodomites Genesis 18 penult.
. It was his faithful servant Moses Heb. 3. 6.
, would not let him alone Exodus 32. 10.
, but stood up in the breach, and turned away Gods anger, that he could not
destroy the people, as he said Psalm. 106. 23.
. It was zealous Phinehas Numb. 25. 13.
, that prayed, and so the plague ceased Psalm. 106. 30.
. It was religious Ioshuah, who said, that he and his house would serve the
Lord, Josh. 24. 25. that by his prayer commanded the Sun and Moon to stand
in the Firmament Josh. 10. 12.
. It was fervent Elijah, `` Froenum coeli. August.
whose tongue was the bridle of heaven *, opening and shutting it by his prayer
Iam. 5. 17.
. It was holy Samuel, who by his prayer in time of wheat-harvest, obtained such
a strange thunder and rain 1 Samuel 12. 17.
. It was the Church, by prayers, obtained an Angel to be sent, who brake off
Peter's chains, made the Iron gate to open of it own accord, and delivered
Peter out of Prison, Acts 12. 7.
etc. But God hears not sinners John 9. 31.
; though such do multiply their prayers, he will not hear Esaias 1. 25.
; though such seek him early, they shall not find him, he will stand aloof,
and laugh at their calamity Prove. 1. 26.
: as their prayers turn to be sin unto them Psalm. 109. 7.
; so are they abominable unto God Prove. 28. 9.
. And no marvel: For how shall any call on him, in whom they have not believed
Romans 10. 14.
? No matter therefore whether the wicked pray or no; yea all their fasting,
praying, and crying, not worth a straw.

But oh ye meek, ye true disciples, ye that Use.
have your hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and bodies washed with
pure water Heb. 10. 22.
: ye that have clean hands, and a pure heart Psalm. 24. 4.
: ye are Gods favorites, pray for a calm; ye are the chariots and horsemen
of Israel 2 Kings 2. 12.
: stand in the gap, day and night, keep not silence Esaias 62. 6.
, and give the Lord no rest Ibid.
, till he have mercy on Sion.

Secondly, observe, that it is in the plural, not 2. Observe.
(disciple) but (disciples) not one, or two, but (as far as may be gathered)
even all of them. And great reason: For as the penitent thief said to Reason.
his fellow, they were all in the same condemnation Luke 23. 40.
: If the ship had sunk into the waves, they had all perished, Lord, save us,
we perish. It is otherwise in many of Gods Judgments upon the Land, as
pestilence, famine, sword: Some are more subject to the evil and misery of
some of these, than the other: The poor are most pinched with famine, many
rich men make great gain thereof; but the sword does chiefly feed on the rich:
It is the rich man's wealth, makes him a prey to the poor, hungry, ravenous
soldier. The rich in other Countries Application. 2. Doct.
are punished with sword, the poor in our Country, with famine and want. But
ye rich men know, that this is Gods judgment for your sins, as well as the
sins of the poor; and if not to the same, yet (without repentance) ye are
subject to greater condemnation. God has in store such Judgments, as may more
nearly touch you.

Wherefore, put your necks under Gods yoke; Use.
go to Christ by prayer for the poor, have compassion on them beyond your
power, be liberal unto them, eat no pleasant bread your selves, abstain from
feasting, that you may be better able to feed the hungry, and such as are
forced to fast.

Observe lastly, that the Disciples, not Peter, 3. Observe.
James, and John, though counted pillars Gal. 2. 9.
, and in many things preferred before the rest Matthew. 17. 1. Mar. 5. 37.
; yet all go to Christ to further the common good, and to help by prayers to
procure the common salvation. Matthew. 26. 37.
The godly poor man is sometimes out of heart to go to Christ and pray; and
the rich man despises his prayer, as Solomon says, The poor man's wisdom is
despised Eccles. 9. 16.
; but know, that with Christ there is no respect of persons Acts 10. 34.
: He has taught the poorest man that believes in him, as boldly to call God
his Father, as the rich: Yea, for their encouragement, David has said, God
forgets not the cry of the poor Psalm. 9. 12.
: he does not abhor, nor despise the low estate of the poor, nor hide his
face from him, but when he cries unto him, he hears Psalm. 22. 24.
; he will deliver the needy when he cries, the poor and him that has no
helper Psalm. 72. 12.
. Let them then with good comfort pray, and let not rich men despise, but
rather, Use.
by their merciful dealing toward them, provoke them to bless them Job 31.
20.
, and pray for them: for David says, The man is blessed, that considers the
poor and needy, the Lord will deliver him in the time of trouble Psalm. 41. 2.
. Therefore make you friends of the mammon of unrighteousness Luc. 16. 9.
, (says Christ to rich men.)

If they be Disciples, entreat them to go to Prevention.
Christ for you: Yea though you have never so great a measure of Knowledge,
Faith, Zeal, and Godliness your selves, yet may you reap benefit by the
poorest and meanest in the household of faith Gal. 6. 10.
. Yea S. Paul himself did often very instantly crave the prayers of all those
to whom he did write, whether great or small, poor or rich Romans 15. 30. Ephesians.
6. 18.
; and hoped to find much good from such prayers Philip. 1. 19. Philem. 22.
. So much for the first part, viz. the persons procuring this calm (his
Disciples.) Now secondly to whom go they? where do they secke it?

To him] That is, to Christ, their Lord and Master. 2. Part.
The Heathenish Mariners in Ionahs storm, did cry every man to his god Jonah
1. 5.
. In nothing were the Gentiles more sottish, than in this, the multitude of
gods and goddesses, and ascribing particular tutelar gods to particular places:
Babylon had Belus; Egypt, Isis; Athens had Minerva; and Ephesus, Diana: the
Caldeans had Baal; Sidonians, Ashteroth; Ammonites, Moloch, or Milcom;
Moabites, Chamos; Syrians, Rimmon; and the Philistims, Dagon. Yea the Elements
had their several gods, to rule over them: As the Heaven had Jupiter; the
Air, Juno; the Sea, Neptune; and Hell, Pluto. The times of the Year had also
their gods: As Maia and Flora of the Spring; Ceres, of Autumn. Pan was the god
of Shepherds; Aeolus of Winds; Apollo of Fruit; Bacchus of Wine. Smiths had
Vulcan; Physicians, Aesculapius; Soldiers, Mars; yea and Harlots had Venus.
Yea for every purpose, and occasion; yea every sickness, or disease, they had
a god to call upon. Alas, to what purpose should I fully discover the madness
of the Papists, who in this (if it were possible) outgoe the Gentiles, having
for every Country, Place, Calling, Creature, Disease, some Saint, or other, to
call upon? Our Disciples are better taught (Popery was not then hatched, nor
this point of Invocation known in the Church for 300 years after; for it was
300 years after Christ, that the Fathers used this Argument against the
Arrians, Christ is invocated, therefore Christ is God) they do not in this
storm call upon Aeolus, or Neptune; Saint Nicholas, or Christopher: no, nor
Noah, Moses, Jonah, or any other, who had been in danger of Seas, and waters
before; but they come to Christ the true and only Lord of Sea, and Land, and
all.

Whose example let us follow. To pray to any Use.
other, than the true God, has no commandment, commendation, promise, nor
warrantable example, in all the Scriptures of God. To pray to dead Saints, is a
dishonor to the living God; and as great offense to make a new, as to deny
the true God. God has commanded, Call on me in the day of thy trouble Psalm.
50. 15.
: Christ has taught us to pray, Our Father which art in heaven Matthew. 6. 9.
: David renounced all other, Whom have I in heaven, but thee Psalm. 73. 25.
? Who are Peter, or Paul? Samuel, or Moses? Gabriel, or Michael? or the Virgin
Mary her-selfe, though more excellent than they all? yet who are any or all of
these, that we should give them divine honor of Adoration, Invocation, or
Intercession See Turseline of the Lady of Lauretto, and Carolus Scribonius
amp^^theatr. Jesuit.
? Nay, howsoever the Papists do plead it as a matter of honor, and say, in
denying this, we dishonor the Saints: it is not so; we give to the blessed
mother Prevention.
of God, and all the glorified members of Jesus Christ, all honor bounded with
modesty and sobriety; and never any learned Protestant did with tongue, or
pen, out of Pulpit, or Press, once touch the hem of their garments, to deprive
them of the least reverence, which the word of Truth has taught us to give;
and specially consists in thankful commemoration, and careful imitation of
their renowned virtues Mr. Perk. Treat. of divine worship, T. 1. p. 702. and
Refor. Cath. p. 603. and 677.
: but to pray unto them in our wants, and necessities, is to give them such
honor as is due unto God: And if Olympias the Mother of Alexander the Great,
wrote to her son, when he styled himself, the son of Jupiter, not to do
it, for fear of procuring the envy and displeasure of Juno; I dare say, it is
a matter not only displeasing to God, but to the Angels and Saints themselves:
Did an Angel here on earth, refuse that John should bow the knee of his body
to him, and charge him, See thou do it not, I am but thy fellow servants,
worship God Rev. 22. 9.
; and will they be contented now that the knees of men's hearts be bowed, and
prayers powered out unto them? No, no, if it were possible for them to hear
such unlawful prayers of men, they would with both hands (as we say) put them
from them, and labor to purge themselves, Not unto us, Lord, not unto us, but
to thy Name, be such honor ascribed Psalm. 115. 1.
. Shall prayer, which one (of their best Pi^ed. in Job. cap. 16. verse. 18.
Writers) says, does comprehend the whole worship of Religion and Piety, shall
this be given to creatures? Oh keep your souls unspotted of such a sin:
when ye pray, pray as the Disciples here by their examples have taught you,
pray unto God, who only is able and willing, to hear and help you.

Thirdly, what do they, being come to Christ? 3. Part.
do they sit, lean, or lie down, and dispose themselves to sleep with him?
No, but as in the storm, the Ship-master awakened Jonah; so in this storm the
disciples awakened Christ: or, (as the word signifies) they raised him up
(...), suscitaverunt.
. Yea the word in many places is used, where mention is made of the
resurrection; as, Destroy this Temple, and in three days I will raise it up
John 2. 19.
: and, Many bodies of Saints which slept, arose Matthew. 27. 52.
: and, If Christ be risen from the dead, how say some among you, there is no
resurrection of the dead 1 Cor. 15. 12.
? In which, and many other places, and specially in that Chapter to the
Corinthians, the word of my Text is used, and not improperly: for what is deep,
fast and sound sleep, but the image, and brother of death? Now Christ was in a
fast or dead sleep (as we have heard) and therefore the Disciples are said, to
raise him, as it were, from the dead.

For the letter, it is probable, that they awakened Lit. Observe.
him very turbulently, and irreverently, for their fear was great, and faith
small: Their words (as we shall hear) bewrayed a great deal of passion; and
as death is of all fearefuls the most fearful to nature, so does it dispense
with ceremonies, and complements, and take away all respect of persons. What
are the clamours, vociferations, and cursitations of men in peril of drowning?
We need not inquire of Seneca, Virgil, Ovid, and other Heathen, for the
Psalmist witnesses, saying, They are even at their wits end, and cry to the
Lord in their trouble Psalm. 107. 27.
: and in Ionahs storm, the Mariners being afraid, cried every one to his god,
and cast out their wares Jonah 1. 5.
. Howsoever then, at other times, the Disciples carried themselves in words,
deeds, and gesture, humbly, dutifully, courteously, yet fear of death now made
them forget themselves, and offer violence with tongue and hand, they cried
with their tongues, and at least jogged him with their hands, never ceasing
till they had awakened and raised him. But I leave the letter. The word being
fully opened, in mystery, affords us two singular and useful instructions,
and specially for these times: the former from the Disciples awakening; the
latter from the Master awakened: in them importunity, in him opportunity.
They awaken him suddenly; he awakeneth seasonably: they awaken him violently;
he awakeneth voluntarily.

For the first:

From this Example of the Apostles we learn 2. Doct.
to be importunate with God in our prayers, and never give over till we do
awaken him, and that he do hear, arise, and help us: Christ is fast on
sleep, the disciples come unto him; and the less he seems to hear or
regard, the more do they cry, and never give over till they awaken him.

This does the Prophet require; Ye that make Confirmation.
mention of the Lord, keep not silence, and give him not rest, till he
establish and make Jerusalem a praise in the earth Esaias 62. 6, 7.
: Christ bids us ask, seek, knock Matthew. 7. 7.
; Yea and commends such as offered violence to the kingdom of God, and took
it by force Matthew. 11. 12.
. Where he speaks not of any corporal or natural, but of a spiritual
force; and the strength of the soul specially Illustration.
consists in two things (as the hands thereof:)

First, in Faith, which lays hold on all the promised 1. Faith.
mercies and goodness of God, and will not part with them, or let go; as Job
professed, Though the Lord should kill me, yet will I trust in him Job. 13. 15.
.

The second, is fervent Prayer, which (as it were) 2. Prayer.
striveth with God, breaks open the door of heavenly treasures, and
enricheth it self with what it wants: So the Apostle requires the Romans
to continue instant in prayer Romans 12. 12.
; Yea, that they would strive together with him in prayers to God for him Romans
15. 30.
.

Thus did Jacob, he wrestled with God, and would Examples.
not let go his hold, till the Lord blessed him, though he received a blow
which lamed him; yet he would have a blessing, though it cost him a limb Genesis
32. penult.
; he wept and made supplication, and by his strength had power with God Ose.
12. 3.
. Moses so encountered God with his prayers, that He entreated him to let him
alone Exodus 32. 10.
: And the woman of Syrophaenicia would take no nay, but in the end overcame and
received both commendation and reward; Oh woman, great is thy faith, be it unto
thee even as thou will Matthew. 15. 28.
. Dixeris, nisi accepero non recedam: prorsus accipies. Chrysostom.

If we make application, whatsoever our own Application.
estate be, yet the Church of God stands in need of our best prayers; our
brethren in France and Germany are under the fiery trial; how calm soever
our Sea be, there is a great storm in theirs, and the ship even covered with
waves, and Christ fast on sleep. Oh that he would arise, as David prayed, Let
God arise, and let his enemies be scattered, let them also that hate him fly
before him, as smoke is driven away, etc Psalm. 68. 1.
. Yea, oh that he would but awake Psalm. 44. 23.
, yea lift up his eyelids, and but look at his enemies, as sometimes he
looked upon the host of the Egyptians, through the fiery and cloudie pillar,
and then all the host of the Egyptians was troubled Exodus 14. 24.
. But alas no marvel that the Lord sleeps, and (as it were) void of sense
and care, suffer all to go to wrecke and ruin, seeing we do not awaken him
with our prayers: the most pray not at all; others, though saying often the
Lords prayer, or some other, yet know not what they ask; and the best pray
negligently and coldly, and if they come near to God with lips, yet the heart
is far off Esaias 29. 13.
. Their prayers are but the labor of lips, without fervencie of spirit,
earnest intention and contention of the soul; our bodies in Church, our minds
at home; Gods Altar is without fire, prayers without heat; tongue and heart are
strangers, the one knows not what the other is doing. Whereas he would have
his blessings (as it were) wrung out of his hands by spiritual violence: a
sluggish and drowsy prayer gets nothing Ignavis praecibus re^^gnat.
, it is no better than babbling Matthew. 6. 7.
.

Oh would you be glad to see a calm? Go to Use.
Christ by prayer; pray, pray, pray, for the peace of Jerusalem. Many cannot
otherwise help the Church, but none so poor that cannot this way, as I have
lately showed; and be bold suitors, God delights in an holy instancie and
importunity; he has taught it by the example of a man coming to borrow
bread of his friend at midnight Luke 11. 8.
: and by the parable of the wicked Judge, being overcome by the importunity of
the poor widow Luke 18. 1, 5.
; yea sometimes the Lord makes as though he did not hear, and does purposely
defer to help, because he would set an edge on our desire, and provoke us to
pray more instantly and fervently: So he suspended the Syrophaenicians suit, as
it were, to hold her long in his company, his ears being more delighted to
hear her redoubled obsecrations, than the sweetest instrument of Music; it
tried faith, won a soul, occasioned a miracle. Wherefore the Apostle requiteth
so often, not only that we pray, but that we pray continually 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17.
; and that we be instant Romans 12. 12.
; and labor in them Romans 15. 30.
; and that we watch in them Coloss. 4. 4.
. I^ ever we will awaken Christ by prayer, we must watch in them our selves,
a sluggish prayer does but ^ull him on sleep. And herein many come justly to
be taxed Reprehensio^.
and reproved, for either they pray of custom and fashion without any sense;
or no sooner have kneeled down and lifted up hands and eyes to heaven, but
forthwith if they go so far, (as if they were asleep, or in an heavy slumber)
they have forgotten before whom they have presented themselves, and what is the
thing they have in hand; or if for a while they hold out well, yet by and by
they will suffer Satan to carry away their minds and set them on other
things. The Disciples did not so here, and do thou think to awaken God when
thou call on him with yawning, half asleep, half waking? Or do thou
think to obtain any good blessing at Gods hands, by a cold, sluggish and
drowsy prayer? No, no, as the pra^er of faithful fervencie is an excellent
service to God, both exceeding pleasing and available to bring down many
blessings from the Lord, etc. So, an idle perfunctorie prayer is exceeding
displeasing and taking of his name in vain, and only mighty to pull down
curses. Oh pray then, but take ^e^d how you pray, be fervent in prayer, and put
up your supplications with sobs, sighs, groans, tears, and all earnest
intention of soul and body. Double, treble, yea multiply your prayers and
supplications for your selves, and for his people, vnc^ssan^ly importune him;
and as Moses, Nehemiah, and Daniel, urge his mercies, compassions, promises,
glory, blasphemy of enemies, etc. Oh this is the way to awake him; but cold
suitors prove cold speeders.

And because (though the spirit be willing, yet) Direction.
the flesh is weak Matthew. 26. 41.
; even Moses his hands grew weary Exodus 17. 12.
; as he had Aaron and Hur to help to stay them up; so quicken thy spirit by
fasting and meditation: and therein consider, both how happy thou art, if God
hear and grant thee thy blessing thou desire; and how exceeding miserable
and wretched thou art, if he deny thee. It is a true Proverb, That life is
sweet, and no marvel, for it is the greatest blessing unto man, and whereon
all earthly blessings have so far their dependence, as it ceasing, all they
also cease to be the Disciples: considering their life and all earthly
happiness was now at stake; if the storm cease, they shall arive at the haven
where they would be, and enjoy many comforts; but if the ship sink, they
drown, and then farewell life and all earthly good; this makes them come to
Christ, and in this needful time so importunately awaken him.

Secondly, observe in Christ awakened, opportunity 2. Doct.
in helping; though he slept soundly, and long, yet he awakeneth in good time,
to rebuke winds and seas; though he suffer great danger to be threatened, and
his disciples are exceedingly afraid, yet he suffers no hurt to be done, in
good time he awaketh and all is well. Which teaches us, that howsoever it
pleases God, many times to turn the deaf ear to the prayers of his
children, and to delay, and defer to help them, and let things come into
desperate extremity, (for the trial and exercise of their faith, hope,
patience, and godliness; and that his blessings, when they do come, may be
the more welcome, and thankfully received, and he the more honored, and his
glory seen) yet he never failed, nor will fail in his good time, to awake,
hear, and help.

He was on sleep, when his people were in such Examples.
distress at the Red Sea bank, that they thought on nothing but graves, and
where to be buried: but he was awake, when he looked on the host of the
Egyptians, out of the fiery and cloudy pillar; when the waters returned, and
drowned them all, there was not one of them le^t; and then his people praised
God on the dry land Exodus 14. 15, etc.
. He was asleep when Samaria was besieged, and there was so great a famine,
that an As^es head was sold for fourscore pieces of silver: but he was awake,
when he struck the Syrians with fear, and made them fly, and cry, and leave
such plenty in their camp, that a measure of fine flower was sold for a
shekel, and two measures of barley, for a shekel; then said the Lepers, This is
a day of good tidings, and do we hold our peace 2 King. 5. 25. 6. 16.
? God was asleep when Jerusalem was besieged, and Rabshekah so railed on the
living God, and those that trusted in him: but he was awake, when he sent an
Angel, who i^ one night destroyed an hundred, fourscore and five thousand of
them 2 King. 18. 19. 19. 35.
. He was on sleep, when there came such a multitude against Iehoshaphat and
Judah, that he confessed, We have no ^^^^t against this great company, neither
know we what to do? But he was awake, when they destroyed one another, and
Gods people in the valley of Berachah blessed God, saying, Praise ye the Lord,
for his mercy endures for ever 2 Chronicles. 20. 12. 26.
. He was asleep, when Haman obtained a Decree, that all the Jews should be
destroyed; oh then was Shus^an in perplexity: but he was awake, when by means
of Queen Hester, that Decree was made void, Haman and his sons hanged, many of
the people of the Land became Jews, and they celebrated days of feasting and
joy Esther. 3. 5, 6, 7, etc.
.

Oh then, let Gods people in all their distresses Use.
so plie God with their prayers, as yet with patience to wait his good leisure
for deliverance: all times and seasons are in his hands, and he knows best
when to help; only be assured, he will not oversleepe himself, but awake as
one out of sleep, and as a Giant refreshed with wine, he will smite his enemies
in the hinder parts, and put them to a perpetual shame. Psalm. 78. 65. Never
any trusted, and waited on him, and were ashamed. O Lord (say his people) we
have waited for thee, in the way of thy judgments Esaias 26. 8.
. And mark the issue; Lo, this is our God, we have waited for him, and he
has saved us Esaias 25. 9.
. Oh then, wait, wait on God, Even as the eyes of servants and handmaids, wait
upon the hands of their masters and mistresses, so in all distresses, let us
wait upon God, till he have mercy upon us Psalm 123. 3.
: For, blessed are all they that wait for him Esaias 30. 18.
.

And here give me leave to reprove a common Reprehension.
fault amongst men, who take upon them to prescribe the Lord when he shall
help; and if they be not heard by and by, and their hasty desires be not
satisfied, they grow impatient of delay, and say with the King of Isreal's
messenger, What should I wait for the Lord any longer 2 King. 6. ult.
? If he will sleep, let him sleep. If they have prayed once or twice, and be
not heard, they fling away in a cha^e, make shipwreck of patience, forfeit
their confidence in God, rely upon other means, yea seek to the Devil and his
instruments. Yea even Gods own children, do sometimes grow impatient, and do
wonderfully bewray their infirmity in this kind, not only murmuring inwardly
in their souls, if they lie long under some great affliction, and have powered
out their suits unto God, for ease, comfort, and deliverance; but also speaking
unadvisedly with their lips; Alas, I have many times called on God, and made
mine humble suit unto him for comfort, but I find none, the Lord seems to
hide his face from me, to turn the deaf ear: What would you have me to do?
I am clean out of heart, weary of praying; I fear me, the Lord is angry with
me.

Oh let us labor to strengthen our selves against Exhortation.
this weakness, in patience possess our souls Luke 21. 19.
: The vision is for an appointed time* though it tarry, wait for it, it will
surely come, and will not tarry Hab. 2. 3.
; Yet a little while, and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry.
Heb. 10. 37.

Jacob wrestled long, and was almost out of breath, Examples.
yea received a blow, whereon he halted all the days of his life; yet at last
received a blessing Genesis 32. 28.
. The woman of Canaan received many a check; yet at last obtained her desire,
and ^rought a miracle by the force of her prayer, saying to the ears and mouth
of her Redeemer, Ephata, be ye opened, so they were; and he said, Oh woman,
great is thy faith, be it unto thee even as thou will Matthew. 15. 28.
. The storm holds on, that they are in exceeding peril, and like all to be
lost and perish, but at last, and in good time, Christ awaketh. I say then with
David, Wait on the Lord, and he shall strengthen thine heart, wait I say on the
Lord Psalm. 27. ult.
. So I proceed to the last part, in the procuring of this calm, viz. their
prayer, in these words expressed.

Lord, save us, we perish.] In the history of Jonah 4. Part.
we read, that in the storm, the sea by no means could be calmed, or the
Mariners safe, till Jonah was cast into the sea Jonah 1. 12.
. Howsoever Jonah was a figure of Christ in his burial Matthew. 12. 40.
; yet not in his drowning. As Saint Paul said of the ship-men (seeking under a
color to escape) Except these abide in the ship, ye cannot be saved Acts 27.
31.
: so I say, Except Christ abide in the ship, they cannot be saved. Those Kings,
Princes and Governors, who upon the storm, go about to cast Christ, and his
Golpell, and those that profess it, over-boord, take the only course to ^uine
their state. Th^se Disciples were wiser than so, they lay not hold on Christ,
to cast him into the sea, but seek to awaken him by prayer, Lord, save us, we
perish. Whenever any storm arises in Church, Commonwealth, or soul, they
are safest, that cleave fastest to Christ, for he is the Savior of all, and
specially of them that believe 1 Timothy 4. 10.
.

Now let us in the first place, compare the three Evangelists compared.
Evangelists, who do record this story; wherein three things offer themselves
to be observed.

First, the form and manner of phrase is varied. Observe. 1.
Our Evangelist expresses it in the form of an humble prayer, Lord, save us,
we perish; but S. Mark lays it down in manner of an angry and pettish
expostulation, Master, carest thou not that we perish Mark 4. 38. (...);
Magister, non ^^^^ est ^^^^non ad ^^ pertinet?
? The same also that David used, Will the Lord cast off for ever? and will he
be favorable no more? Is his mercy clean gone for ever? does his promise
fail for evermore? Has he forgotten to be gracious? and will he shut up his
loving kindnesses in displeasure Psalm. 77. 7.
? Yea, and all the people of God; Up Lord, why sleep thou? awake, and be not
absent from us for ever Psalm. 44. 23.
: And again, Why withdrawest thou thine hand, why pluckest thou not thy right
hand out of thy bosom Psalm. 74. 12.
?

O Lord, how great is the weakness of Gods people! How great their boldness,
that being but worms, and dust and ashes, they dare so speak to the eternal
Majesty! even quarrel with him, that is able to destroy both body and soul.
David acknowledged, it was his infirmity Psalm. 77. 10.
: It was these disciples infirmity, it became them well to pray, but very
unseemely, ye^ and dangerous* to expostulare and contest with Christ. Let us
strive to follow them in that which is good, and leave them in that which is
evil.

Secondly, whereas our Evangelist has it but Observe. 2.
single, Lord, save us; Saint Luke expresses it with a double appellation, or
with ingemination of the title, Master, Master, which intends their
earnestness and fervencie in prayer.

Thirdly, they do greatly vary the title which Observe. 3.
they give him; yea the three Evangelists do use three several titles, which
(though the Latin and our English express not) are very significant and
emphaticall in their original proprieties; S. Marks title is, (...), which in
English signifies a Teacher of letters, manners, or any Art (...): do^eo.
; in relation whereunto, they were called disciples, scholars, or learners. A
reverend title, which they often gave him, and he assumed; Ye call me Master,
and say well, for so I am John 13. 13.
; and presses the use of it; the disciple is not above his Master Matthew. 10.
24.
. Saint Lukes title is, (...), which signifies in English a Defender, a
present Helper (...): sisto juxta (...), idem quod (...)
; such as in times of war, are sworn brethren, to live and die together,
commiles, succenturiatus; and in times of peace, Guardians of infants.
Shepherds have the same title, who are defenders of their flocks (...):
Sophoc. in Ajace.
; and Aristotle calls Magistrates so, who are to defend their subjects from
wrongs or hurts Aristot. polit. lib. 4. cap. 15.
. A sweet title this is; for how safe are they, whose defender the Lord is?

The title in the Text is, (...), which signifies power or might: Answerable
to that glorious Tetragrammaton, Jehovah, which the Septuagint constantly
translate thorowout the old Testament, in this word, an essential title, and
in the Hebrew, not given to any, but the true God; and this in the Greek is
the most common title Christ had, and by him acknowledged; Ye call me Lord,
and ye say well, for so I am John 14. 14.
.

The titles well considered, afford two weighty Arguments or Reasons, why they
pray to him, and he is to hear and help them. In that he is their Teacher and
Defender, shows his willingness: for will such an one suffer his Scholars
and Pupils to perish? In that he is Lord and Jehovah, he is able to deliver
them: So they pray unto him with Confidence, because he is their loving Master
and Defender: And with Reverence, because he is their Lord and God. In that he
is their Master, they pray in love; in that he is their Lord, they pray in
fear: He being their Master, they are not timidi, overfearefull: He being
their Lord, they are not tumidi, over-bold: but pray with love and reverence,
as David counsels, they rejoice with trembling. So much for the Observations
inlightning the Text; and arising from comparing of the Evangelists.

Now for our more orderly proceeding, note, in Division.
this their prayer, two parts, viz. First, a Petition, [ Lord, save us.]
Secondly, a Reason, taken from their great jeoperdie [ we perish] q. d. Lord
save us, for we are in danger now to be drowned. Of the Petition, first
generally, and then particularly.

The words are clear and plain for their sense. 1. Part. Sense.
Only by the way note in one word, that to save (in a strict sense) is properly
to deliver from the guilt and punishment of our sins, as the Apostle saich,
There is no other name whereby to be saved Acts 4. 12.
: and this is the Reason why Christ was called Jesus or Savior, because he
saves his people from their sins Matthew. 1. 21.
. But in a larger sense, it signifies to preserve from some bodily hurt; and
this appertains to Christ also, in which respect, he is called the Savior
of all men 1 Timothy 4. 10.
; that is, in regard of this present life, as Saint Ambrose expounds it
Quantum ad praesentem vitam. Ambros.
; For in him we live, move, and have our being Act. 17. 28.
; without whose good pleasure, not an hair can fall from our heads Matthew. 10.
30.
; yea, He saves both man and beast Psalm. 36. 6.
: Or, as our last Translators more fully express the sense, He preserves
both man and beast, and that is the sense of this place: Lord save us, Lord
preserve us from these raging waves which threaten imminent death unto us. So
much be said for opening the sense of th^^ their Petition.

Hence first in general, we learn, that affliction, 1. Genesis Doct.
distress, and perplexity, is the best schoolmaster or mistress of prayer
Necessitas, orand. magistra.
. Which thing the Prophet teaches from his own experience: Lord, introuble
have they visited thee, they powered out a prayer, when thy chastening was upon
them; like as a woman with child, that draws near the time of her
deliverie, is in pain, and cries out in her pangs, so have we been in thy
sight, O Lord Esaias 26. 16.
. And another Prophet says, In time of trouble they will say, Arise and save
us Ierem. 2. 27.
. Yea, God himself has said, In their afflictions they will seek me early
Ose. 5. ult.
. Wherefore David prays for his enemies good, in this form, Fill their faces
with shame, that they may seek thy name, O Lord Psalm. 83. 16.
. Let Moses see the people of God in great danger, and then he will cry to the
Lord Exodus 14. 15.
. Let Annah be barren, and Peninnah check her and pro voke her, and then she
will weep, and power out even her soul in prayer 1 Samuel 1. 6, 15.
. Let God turn away his face from David, and he will get unto his Lord right
humbly Psalm. 30. 8.
. Yea, if he come into the deepes, he will cry unto God Psalm. 130. 1.
: Let Jonah be cast into the sea, and devoured of a Whale, and he will pray out
of the fishes belly; and cry, by reason of his affliction Jonah 2. 1.
: Let the woman of Canaans daughter be grievously vexed with a Devil, and she
will pray to Christ, yea follow after him, and take no denial Matt. 15. 22, 27.
: Let there arise a storm, that the Disciples are all like to be drowned, and
then you shall hear their prayers, Lord, save us, etc. Let Pharaoh be plagued,
and if he cannot pray himself, he will entreat Moses and Aaron to do it for
him Exodus 8. 8.
.

And surely (amongst others) this is one singular benefit of affliction, that
it provokes prayer, than which, there is nothing more pleasing to God, or
profitable to our selves; yea this is not the least benefit, from the great
troubles which have befallen the Church and people of God, that God has
received many a sigh, sob, groan, tear, and prayer; which else he had not
known.

Well, if Affliction be the Mistress of Prayer, Use.
surely never were Gods people more taught to pray, than in these days; such
wars, and rumors of wars, troubles, distresses, perplexities on every
side; Oh pray for the peace of Jerusalem Psalm. 122. 6.
.

But alas, herein we are generally too cold and Application.
negligent; how are public humiliations and solemn assemblies, in fasting,
weeping, mourning, and confessing of sins laid aside, and as it were worn
out of date? How justly may God complain of us, as sometimes he did of his
own people; I called to fasting, weeping, mourning, baldness, and girding
with sackcloth: But behold joy and glad nesse, slaying oxen, and killing
sheep, eating flesh, and drinking wine: Let us eat and drink, for to morrow
we shall die Esaias 22. 12.
: Or who in private is so affected with the calamities of their brethren, as
feelingly and fervently to pray for them, in the words of my Text, Lord, save
them? No, no, in stead of fasting and praying, we feast and play, we wanton and
riot it still; we think our selves out of danger, in sure harbor, and are
therefore senseless of the miseries of our brethren, few as they ought do pray
for them; a sin which once God threatened, This is revealed in mine ears;
surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you till ye die, says the Lord
God of hoasts Esaias 22. 14.
. Oh arise and call upon God, in this troublesome time, that we perish not.

Secondly, hence we may learn, how powerful 2. Genesis Doct.
even a short prayer is with God, so it be fervent; yea therefore short prayers
commonly most powerful, because commonly most fervent Brevis eratio penetrat
Caelum.
: The counsel of Solomon is, Let thy words be few Eccles. 5. 1.
: The counsel of Jesus the son of Swach i^, Make not much babbling when thou
prayest Ecclus. 7. 14.
: Ye^, Jesus ^he Son of God, and wiser than Solomon, bids, When we pray, to
use no vain repetitions Matthew. 6. 7.
.

In all which, long prayers are not simply forbidden, Prevention.
discommended or disgraced, so they be with ferven^^ of spirit, and without
opinion of being heard for much babbling sake: A great part of the day at a
public fast was spent in prayers, and confession of sins N^he^. 9. 3.
: And though our Savior Christ many times were very brief yet he spent whole
nights in prayer Luke 6. 12.
: And a large Chapter is but one of his prayers John 17.
; therefore most sweet and powerful are the long prayers of Gods people, when
time place and occasion serve; but because even Moses his hands grew heavy
Exodus 17. 12.
; and though the spirit be never so wiling, the flesh is weak Matthew 26. 41.
, and quickly dulled and distracted, and no prayer is further heard, or
pleasing to God, than it is fervent; therefore the Scripture prayers, which
have most prevailed with God, are most short; and but as holy ejaculations:
Moses [ cried] but spoke never a word Exodus 14. 15.
: Annah powered out her soul, and wept sore, but spoke not 1 Sa^. 1. 15.
: The prayer of the Leper was, Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean
Matthew. 8. 2.
: The prayer of the blind men, O Lord, Son of David, have mercy on us Matthew.
20. 31.
: The prayer of Christ for himself; Father, if thou will, let this cup pass
from me; and again the same words Matt. 26. 39. 44.
; and for his enemies, Father forgive them, they know not what they do Luke
23. 34.
: The prayer of the Publican, God be merciful to me a sinner Luke 18. 13.
: The prayer of the father of the sick child, Lord help mine unbeleefe Mark
9. 24.
: The prayer of the penitent thief, Lord remember me when thou come into
thy Kingdom Luke 23. 42.
: The prayer of Saint Stephen for his persecutors, Lord lay not this sin to
their charge Acts 7. ult.
. The prayer of the Disciples here, because the time was short, death at hand,
place inconvenient, and distractions many, they beg all, in a few words, and
couch a great deal of devotion in a little room; Lord, save us, we perish.

All which I observe, for the special comfort of Use.
such as mourn in their souls, because of their want in this kind, and are
much assaulted with this temptation, that they cannot pray, and therefore
cannot be Gods children, because they have not Gods spirit. Indeed, the Spirit
of God is called the spirit of supplication Zach. 12. 10.
; and it is an excellent gift of the Spirit, and much to be desired, whereby a
man or woman, (when times, places, and occasions serve) are able to lay open
their wants, and (in Scripture phrase) to express their desires; but yet the
Apostle says, The Spirit does help our infirmities with sighs and groans
which cannot be expressed Romans 8. 26.
; yea if thou can say no more, but as thou have heard, Lord save us, Lord
have mercy, Lord remember, Lord help mine unbeleefe; If faithfully and
fervently, these are most powerful prayers with God: yet strive to increase in
this grace, for God may accept at the beginning, what he will not afterward be
content withal* yea, whosoever uses this gift aright, shall doubtless find
a gracious increase therein. And so much be said of the petition in general:
now let us view it more particularly.

It is short, and in most languages that I know, Particular observations.
has but three words, I say (in most) for such is the elegancie of the Hebrew
Language, affixing the Pronounes, that in it here are but two Those Hignann
Adoni.
; yet in Greek, Latin, and English, three (...). Domine, salva nos. Lord,
save us.
. Which three words contain so many virtues in this, and in all godly composed
prayers: The first notes the party, to whom all prayers are to be made, (
Lord.) The second, the blessing they crave, ( salvation.) The third, community
and love, ( us) Lord save us.

For the first, they pray to the Lord, not to the 1. Observe.
Lady: to change the Gender is Popish wickedness. A Reverend Bishop Dr. King
on Jon. Lect. 16. p. 214.
has truly observed, that it is a sufficient challenge to all the Papists,
that in so many prayers of both ancient and righteous Patriarcks, Prophets,
Judges, Kings, registered in the Book of God, and in an hundred and fifty
Psalms, an hundred whereof at least are prayers and supplications, and in all
the devout requests that the Apostles of Christ, and other his disciples, sent
into Heaven, (if they take the pen of a Writer, and note from the beginning of
Genesis to the end of the Revelation) they cannot find one directed to Cherub
or Seraphim, Gabriel or Raphael, Abraham or Moses, or John Baptist after his
death, or any other creature in Heaven, or Earth, save only to the Lord, and
his Anointed; yea, for above two hundred years after Christ, Intercession of
Saints was not heard of: Origin was the first that broached it Lord of Pless.
^on the Mass, lib. 3. ^^p. 13.
; not as the public doctrine of the Church, but as his own private conceit:
above three hundred, that Basil, Nyssen, and Nazianzen, gave some occasion of
prayer to the dead, by their Rhetorical speaking unto them: Yea till 500
years, Invocation of Saints was not received into the public Liturgy of the
Church: For it was after 400 years that S. Augustine said, We do not make
gods of Martyrs, they are named of the Priest, but no prayer is made unto them
August. de Civ. Del, lib. 22. cap. 10.
: And it is said, that Petrus Gnaphaeus, an Heretic, did first put Invocation
of Saints into the public prayers of the Church Niceph. lib. 15. cap. 28.
. See how new this corruption is, which the Church of England has godly
reformed, and in her approved Homilies Homil. concerning Prayer, 2. Part.
requires four things in the par^ie to whom we are to pray, viz. First, that
he understand whereof we stand in need: Secondly, that he hear our prayers:
Thirdly, that he be willing: And lastly, that he be able to help. Find these
in any, but in the true God only, and then we may pray unto them: otherwise,
we may pray as fondly as the Papists, who pray to the Virgin Mary (for
example) to pray to Christ for them: and then they pray to Christ, that he
would accept of Mary's prayers for them Sic ambulant imp^i in circuitu.
. Thus are men puckled, when they follow their own conceits, and leave the
light of Gods word. Oh, call on me, says God Psalm. 50. 15.
: and come to me, says Christ Matthew. 11. 28.
. So do the Disciples here, so do we ever, when we pray, Lord, save us.

Save] Nothing so pleasing to the Savior, as 2. Observe.
to come to him for life and salvation. He complained of his people, Yoe will
not come to me, that ye might have life John* 5. 40.
, yea being a faithful Creator 1 Pet. 4. ult.
, and Savior of all men 1 Timothy 4. 10.
, he is well pleased, that in times of danger, men should call on him for
bodily preservation, Lord (save) us*

But let us learn from this Example (if we desire Dict.
to be heard) to pray only for such things as are needful. Christ has taught
us to pray for bread, not gorgeous apparel, stately houses, great livings and
honors: for howsoever (according to several places, callings, and charges)
some men may pray for much more than others; yet if our desires be boundless,
and we proceed from necessaries, to crave wanton superfluities, we offend, and
as S. James says, Ye ask, and receive not because ye ask amiss, that ye
may consume it upon your lusts James 4. 3.
. Our learned Academick says, It is not lawful, nor does stand with a good
conscience, to seek for any more, than is sufficient for preservation of us
and ours Mr. Perk. T. ^. ^. 768.
. If any think him too strict, let him hearken what Saint Bernard says, Let
thy prayers which thou make for temporal matters, be restrained ever to
things necessary Sit oration, quae pro temporal* bus est, circa so as
necessitates restricta. Bern.
. If any yet think that devout and mortified Cloysterer, too strait laced, let
them hear what S. Augustine a Bishop says; If any man shall say, Lord
increase my riches, and give me so much as thou have given to such an one, and
such an one, I think that man in the Lords prayer will find no such direction
Domine, multiplica divitias mea^, puto ^^m non inve^^re. August. epist. 121.
. Jacob prayed but for bread to eat, and clothes to put on Genesis ^8. 20.
. Solomon prayed but for food conventent, and neither for riches, nor poverty
Prove 30. 7.
: Lepers to be made clean Match. 8. 2.
: blind men to see Mat. 20. penult.
: and the Disciples to be preserved in the storm: Christ heard them and was
well pleased.

Oh let us be moderate and wise in our desires. Use.
Indeed Christ his promises are very large and general; Whatsoever ye shall
ask my Father in my name, he will give it you John 16. 23.
. And again, If you shall ask any thing in my name, I will do it John 14. 14.
. But an ancient Father says, True prayer is a request of such things, as are
fit for God to give, and us to have Petitio decentium. Damasc.
. And another says, No man can ask in the name of the Savior, that which is
against salvation Non pet^^ur in nomine Salvatoris, quicquid pe^^tur contra
rationem sa^a^^s. Aug. Tract. 102. in Johan.
.

For our better direction therefore we must note, that if we will be heard, we
must only crave bona, and been, good things, and for good uses and purposes.
Good things are of two sorts, viz. absolute, Rules. 1.
or respective. Graces spiritual, and necessary for salvation, as Faith,
Repentance, Remission of sins, etc. are absolutely good, never evil to any,
and therefore we may absolutely ask them: but all corporal and earthly
blessings, as Health, Wealth, Honor, are not absolutely, but respectively
good, as it shall please God to sanctify them, and therefore are not
absolutely to be asked, but with condition, submitting our selves to Gods will
Mr. Perk. on L. Pr. in Tom. 1. p. 333.
; as the Leper did, Lord (if thou will) thou can make me clean Matthew. 8. 2.
: if such or such a blessing be for thy glory, and my good, grant it unto me.

And as we must ask good things, so to good 2.
uses and purposes; as Solomon begged wisdom, whereby he might go in and out
before the people 1 King. 3. 9.
. For the Minister of the word, to beg increase of knowledge, preservation of
health, liberty, that he may do God and his Church service: the Magistrate,
to ask understanding and courage, that he may the better execute Judgments
betwixt man and man: the man that asks increase of wealth, that he may more
cheerfully serve God, and be better able to help and releeve such as are in
want; this is to ask good things well, and to good purposes, and such may look
to receive what God knows to be indeed for their good: but to ask exquisite
knowledge and learning, because they would excel in Poisoning, Sorcery,
Witchcraft, and such like damnable Sciences; or wealth, that they may oppress
their neighbors, or compass their sinful desires; or health and strength of
body, to revenge wrongs, or devour wine and strong drink, and follow their
pleasures. These ask good things amiss: neither let such look to receive;
yea it is great mercy in God to deny In non dando, misericors. August. in Ps.
86. Misericordiae est, aliquando subtra^ere misericordiam. Bern. sermon. cont.
vitium Ingratitud.
: as a father in his love, denies a knife, or sharpe-edged tool to his
child, which he knows to be dangerous and hurtful to him. The Disciples
knew not of what spirit they were, that desired fire from heaven upon the
Samaritanes Luke 9 55.
: Peter wist not what he said, when he desired to have three Tabernacles built
on Mount Thabor Matthew. 17. 3. Mar. 9. 5.
. The Disciples that desired to sit one on the right hand, and the other on the
left hand of Christ, knew not what they asked Matthew. 20. 22.
. Whatsoever we ask, let us ask according to his will, and he hears us 1
John 5. 14.
; if not according to our will, yet to our profit, and as is best for us.

Here we see how earnest the Disciples were Mystery.
with Christ for the temporal good of their bodies, Lord, Lord, save us: How
much more earnest should we be with him, for the eternal good of our souls?
and importunately to beg those excellent gifts of Knowledge, Faith, Repentance,
Remission of sins, Sense of Gods love, Patience in adversity, Lowliness in
prosperity, Peace of conscience, Joy in the Holy Ghost: as Christ has
counseled, First seek the kingdom of God, and his righteousness Mat. 6.
penult.
; and as the Apostle counsels, Set your affections on, and seek those
things which are above Coloss. 3. 1, 2. (...).
. Was Christ well pleased with his Disciples that craved the saving of their
bodies? and is he not much more pleased we should call and cry unto him for the
salvation of our souls? seeing hence he has his glorious name, whereat every
knee must bow Philip. 2. 10.
, and is able perfectly to save such as come unto him Heb. 7. 25.
.

But herein our great dullness and negligence Application.
comes justly to be taxed. We are very sensible of our bodily, and senseless
altogether of our spirituali wants: if we be naked and cold, we are pinched
with it, and all our care is for fuel and apparel: if we be hungry, how
greedy we are for food? In this time of Famine, how the hungry poor run
from door to door, pitifully and importunatly begging bread? Whose heart does
not earne to see the ghastly countenances of poor prisoners in their chains,
and through their grates craving relief? How do such as have money, plie the
market for corn, and if they have it not in one, run to another, and strive
who shall be first served? How did the leprous, blind, and diseased flock to
Christ for cure? And if in these days there were a man known to cure all
diseases, how would they seek to him by Sea and Land, yea sell House and Land,
to get help? And if the life be in danger by fire or water, then what crying
is there, Lord save us? But alas, our souls are ready to starve, and we do
not hunger; are naked, and we care not for garments; sick and diseased, and we
seek not to the Physician: yea, we are in danger every moment to sink into
the pit of perdition, and for ever to be lost in hell and destruction, and yet
we cry not to Christ for help, Lord save us.

And the reason hereof is, because we do not Reason.
know our selves to be lost, and ready to perish; but with those of Laodicea,
say, we are rich, and increased with goods, and have need of nothing, and know
not, that we are wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked, Rev.
3. 17. That which caused the Disciples here to cry so earnestly to Christ to be
saved, was the sense of misery; they saw if he presently helped not, there was
no way but one with them, they were drowned every mothers child, they must all
presently perish: and certainly none can earnestly seek and crave salvation,
that do not feel themselves to be most miserable sinners, under the wrath of
God, utterly lost in themselves, and look every moment to be swallowed up of
death, hell, and condemnation. Christ came to seek and save that which is lost
Matthew. 18. 11.
; and was sent only to the lost sheep of the house of Israel Matthew. 15. 24.
; came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repent Matthew. 9. 13.
: i. such as in their own sense and feeling are miserable and lost sinners.

When Peter began to sink, he cried, Lord save Illustration.
me, and immediately Jesus stretched out his hand, and caught him Matthew. 14. 30.
. When the ship was covered with waves, then the Disciples cry, Lord save us,
and he rebuked the winds. Oh, it is not possible for any to be earnest with
Christ for salvation, till with Peter their souls begin to sink into Hell,
and the poor cockboat of their Consciences is even covered with the waves of
Gods displeasure. One deep calls on another, Ps. 42. 6. the deep of misery,
to the deep of mercy: De profundis clamavi, Ps. 130. 1. Alas, thousands of
Protestants who profess Christ to be their Savior, yet never tasted now sweet
the Lord is, nor ever were earnest with him for salvation, because they were
never thoroughly touched with the sense of their spiritual misery, to say with
David, I have gone astray like a sheep that is lost Psalm. 119. ult.
; and from my youth up thy terrors I have suffered with a troubled mind Psalm.
88. 15.
: Thou have vexed me with all thy storms, and all thy waters are gone over me,
etc. And never till then can any affectionately pray with David, O Lord, say to
my soul, I am thy salvation Psalm. 35. 3.
: And with the Disciples here, Lord, Jesus, save me.

Many do wonderfully brag and boast that Trial.
Christ is their Savior, shed his precious blood for them, and if at that
instant they should die, they were sure to be saved, and to go to heaven to
him. I would ask such a question (or rather desire them Quest.
to demand it of their own souls) Did thou ever see thy woeful misery, and
the wretched estate wherein thou art by reason of sin? Did thou ever see
what great need thou had of Gods favor, and of the blood of Christ? Have thy
sins ever mustred themselves against thee, which has made thine heart to
tremble with fear? Yea, have thou even bin at the brinke of hell, and with
sighs and tears entreated mercy and salvation? They answer, Answ.
(and I suppose truly) No, God be thanked, they were never so troubled or
disquieted, but have ever had merry and peaceable hearts, and have been ever
assured of Gods love, neither would they for all the world doubt of it; they
have heard Ministers preach much of distresses and perplexities of the soul,
but they know not what they mean.

Alas poor souls, how are these deceived? How Censure.
are they carried away with a strange presumption? What a dangerous lethargy
spiritual are they sick of Gravis^^me aegrotat, qui non se sentit aegrotare.
? Even of all men most to be pitied.

Oh know, the high way to grace is to know our Direction.
souls to be empty of grace: the high way to be saved, is to know our selves
in our selves to be lost and damned: never shall any have the benefit of one
drop of the blood of Christ, that (as for life and death) have not begged it.

Oh, see then what a blessing of God it is to be Conclusion.
faithfully told and reproved for sins, and to see our damnable estate in the
looking-glass of the Law, that so seeing our selves to be utterly lost and
undone, we may cry day and night unto God, with the Disciples here, Lord,
Jesus, save us.

So much for the blessing desired: the third and last word follows, for whom
they desire salvation.

Us.] It is not said that Peter came and prayed for Part. 3.
himself, Lord save me; and James for himself, Lord save me; and John for
himself, Lord save me, etc. as if they cared not though all the rest were
drowned, if they themselves escaped: but they pray in common, each one being as
desirous of his fellows safeguard, as of his own; which shows that they
prayed in love, Which (as the Apostle says) seeks not her own things, and
without which in preaching and praying, We are but as a sounding brass, and
tinkling Cymball 1 Cor. 13. 1.
. That which our Savior intended, Confirmation.
in that form of prayer which he has prescribed, teaching us to pray in the
Plural, Give (us) this day our daily bread, forgive (us) our trespasses, lead
not (us) into temptation, but deliver (us) from evil Matt. 6. 11, 12.
. I doubt not but in particular cases, we may make particular suit unto God for
our selves. As Prevention.
Jacob in his journey vowed, If God will be with me, and will keep me in this
way, and will give me bread to eat, and raiment to put on Genesis 28. 20.
. And David, Save (me) o God, for the waters are even entered into my soul
Psalm. 69. 1.
. And Peter when he was sinking into the sea, cried, Lord save (me Matthew. 14.
30.
.) Yea Christ himself prayed, Lord let this cup pass from me Luke 22. 42.
. But these were particular cases; but in common cases we must have common
hearts, yea though our case be particular, yet there may be others in our
condition, which we know not, and therefore we are so to pray for our selves,
as yet explicitly, or implicitly, we crave the like blessings to all such as
are in the like want with us.

Here then comes a common fault worthy to Reprehensio^.
be reproved, (for it marreth all such prayers, as The wild goord marred all
the mess of pottage 2 Kings 4. 40.
;) viz. We are strait laced, and full of love, but it is self-love, we wholly
love our selves, and seek our own good; what means else that common wicked
Proverb, Every man for himself, and God for us all? Or if they be ashamed to
profess thus much with mouth, yet they are not ashamed to wish it in their
hearts: yea they wish evil to others, so any good may thence redound to
themselves. How many wish a famine, if they have any corn to sell? Yea how few
but do greatly rejoice to hear of pestilence, sword, shipwreck, sedition, or
any manner of evil to befall their neighbors or brethren, so they reap
advantage from it? Which shows that in their hearts they do only desire
their own particular good, and (as we say) care not who hunger, so their
bellies be filled; who go naked, so they be clothed; who be poor and undone,
so they grow rich; who lie without door, so they lodge warm; who die, so they
live; who sink or swim, so they come safe to shore. So few pray, as lovingly
and heartily for others, as themselves, as our Example teaches us to do,
Lord, save us. So much for the petition.

We perish.] Extreme passion commonly causes Part. 2.
either silence, or (that which is next unto it) imperfect and defective
speech; whereunto God alluding says, I have sworn in my wrath, if they shall
enter into my rest Heb. 3. 11.
. The Disciples being in great fear, speak imperfectly (we perish) the
causall co^junction is wanting Ellipsis.
, it is in effect, q. d. otherwise, or else we perish: The original word
(...).
is of hard and harsh signification; in best signification it is to die, as, it
is expedient for us, that one die for the people John 11. 50.
; yea to die by some miserable means, as with hunger, I perish with hunger
Luke 15. 17.
; it is commonly translated, to destroy, as, he will truly destroy those
husbandmen Matthew. 21. 41.
; Let us not tempt Christ, as some of them also tempted, and were destroyed of
serpents 1 Cor. 10. 9.
: yea it signifies the destruction of hell, They shall be punished with
everlasting destruction 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9.
. In which respect Judas is called, The son of destruction John 17. 12.
; and the Angel of the bottomless pit is called in Hebrew Abaddon, and in
Greek Apollyon, i. a Destroyer Rev. 9. 11.
. Here it is meant of the losing, perishing, or destroying of the body by
waters; which we call drowning or choking in the waters. So much for the sense.

Hence first we learn, That it is an effectual 1. Doct. Confirmation.
motive of mercy in prayer, to declare unto God our misery. How often does
David (to this purpose) in his prayers lay open his miseries before God, as,
Save me, o God, for the waters are come in, even unto my soul, I sink in the
deep mire where is no standing. I am come into deep waters, where the floods
over flow me: I am weary of crying, my throat is dry, mine eyes fail while I
wait upon my God Ps. 69. 1, 2, etc.
. And again, Thou have cast off, and abhorred; thou have been wroth with
thine anointed, thou have made void the covenant of thy servant, and have cast
his crown to the ground: thou have broken down all his hedges, and brought
his strong holds to ruin; all that pass by spoil him, and he is a reproach
to his neighbors: thou have set up the right hand of his adversaries, and made
his enemies to rejoice; thou have turned the edge of his sword, and give him
not victory in battle Psalm. 88. 38.
. To this purpose also does he declare the misery of Gods Church; O God, the
Heathen are come into thine inheritance, thine holy Temple have they defiled,
and made Jerusalem an heap of stones; the dead bodies of thy servants have
they given to be meat to the fowls of the heaven, and the flesh of thy Saints
to the beasts of the earth: their blood have they shed like water, round about
Jerusalem, and there was no man to bury them Psalm. 79. 1.
. Yea, thus lamentably do all Gods people complain, Thou go not forth with
our armies; thou make us to turn our backs upon the enemy, they that hate
us spoil our goods; thou have given us like sheep appointed for the
slaughter; thou sellest thy people for naught, and take no money for them*
thou make us a reproach, derision, byword, and shaking of the head, Psalm.
44. 9, etc.
etc.

The Reason of this doctrine is, because God is Reason.
a most merciful God, and it is the nature of mercy to be exceedingly moved
with misery; Misericordia. Yea his mercy is called, a tender mercy Luke 1. 78.
(...): Viscera misericordiae.
, or bowels of mercy. Great is the compassion of a brother, as we see in
Joseph, a godly man, when he saw his brother Benjamin, he made haste and ^ought
where to weep, For (says the Text) his bowels did yearne upon his brother
Genesis 43. 30.
: Greater the compassion of a father toward his son, as we have lately had
an example, when the father saw his hungry, naked, lean, (though a prodigal
son;) yet he could not contain himself, But ran and met him, and fell on
his necks, and kissed him, and commanded his servants with all speed, to feed,
and cloth, and deck him Luke 15. 20.
: But greatest of all is the compassion of a mother toward her child. How the
woman of Canaan plied Christ with prayer for her daughter, and would receive
no* answer, but her cure Matthew. 15. 28.
: Yea, and Solomon in his wisdom discerned which was the true mother of the
child hereby; for when she heard the sentence pronounced, that it should be
divided, her bowels yearned on her son 1 Kings 3. 26.
. But the compassion of a brother, father, or mother, is cruelty, compared
with the compassion of God: God himself has said, Can a woman forget her
sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb?
Yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee Esaias 49. 15.
. Our Savior therefore uses an argument from the lesser to the greater,
saying, If ye that are evil, give good gifts to your children, how much more
shall your Father which is in heaven, give good things to them that ask him
Matthew. 7. 11.
? The Lord professed of himself, that his bowels were troubled for Ephraim his
dear son, and pleasant child Ier. 31. 20.
: Yea that his heart was even turned within him, and his repentings did roll
together Osay 11. 8.
. As if he had begotten mercy, he is called the father of it 2 Cor. 1. 3.
: Yea, as if there were no end thereof, he is called, The Father of mercies
(...). Pater misericordiarum.
: Yea whereas he is called the God of many things, as of Patience Romans 15. 5.
, Comfort Romans 15. 13, 33.
, Hope Ibid.
, Peace Ibid.
, etc: But Father, and in plural of none but this, as if he were nothing but
mercy.

Christ had compassion on the multitude, when Application.
he knew they were but hungry Matthew. 15. 32.
: He had compassion, when he saw them bring their sick unto him Matthew. 14. 14.
; and will he not have compassion, when life is in danger? Oh right dear and
precious in his sight is the death of his Saints Ps. 116. 15.
; He wept when his friend Lazarus was dead John 11. 35.
; and will he not prevent it in his disciples? Yes assuredly, if it be for his
glory, and their good: they do well therefore to go to Christ, but it is
enough to tell him what is their danger and misery: Lord, save us, we perish.

Is then the Church of God in danger, through Use.
cruel rage of bloody persecutors, so as it cannot in likelihood subsist? go
to Christ and pray for his people, Lord, save us, we perish: Art thou thy self
in danger, through hunger, thirst, by water, fire, sword, pestilence, etc. Go
to Christ, and say, Lord save me, I perish. So did David, I will cry unto God
most high, and he shall send from heaven, and save me, from such as would
swallow me ^p, Psalm. 57. 2.

Yea; and go to him with great comfort and confidence, Encouragement.
for he has been made like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful
and faithful high Priest Heb. 2. penult.
; yea, has been touched with the feeling of our infirmities; therefore let us
go bolaly to the throne of Grace Heb. 4. ult.
, and specially in danger of death.

Let us (with his Disciples here) go to him, who Examples.
has himself both suffered, and feared it; and has in nothing more declared
his goodness and greatness, love and power, than in delivering his servants
from it, when their lives have been for his glory; as his people, from rage of
enemies and Red sea Exodus 14. 13.
; Moses from the water Exodus 2. 3.
; Jonah out of the Whales belly Jonah 2. ult.
; the three Children out of the fiery furnace Dan. 3. 2^.
; Daniel out of the Lions den Dan. 6. 23.
; yea, Paul out of the mouth of the Lion 2 Timothy 4. 17.
. Oh the dangers that every where, by sea and land, at home and abroad, by day
and night, we are continually subject unto, and wherein we had long since
perished, if he had not mercifully by his good providence and powerful
protection of his good Angels preserved us! To him let us ever commend our
selves, Lord, save us, that we perish not.

But I hear some object against this Use, and Object.
say, Do not Gods people complain, For thy sake are we killed all the day
long, and as sheep appointed for the slaughter Psalm. 44. 22.
? Do they not complain, that the enemies prevailed, and gave the bodies and
flesh of his servants to be meat to the beasts of the field, and fowls of the
heaven, and shed their blood like water Psalm. 79. 2.
? And again, They break in pieces thy people, and afflict thine heritage;
they slay the widow and stranger, and murder the fatherless Psalm. 94* 5.
: The ungodly even for his own hearts lust does persecute the poor Psalm. 10.
8, 9.
.

Never might such complaints be more justly Application.
made, than in these days: wherefore it seems that Christ does not care,
though his people do perish; but as the careless shepherd said, That which
perishes, let it perish, Zach. 11. 9.

I answer, that sometimes God suffers great Sol.
havocke to be made of his Church and people for their sins, and gives the
dearly beloved of his soul into the hands of their enemies, Ierem. 12. 7. nor
will hear his best servants for them, Ezech. 14. 20. but casts them off, to
sword, pestilence, captivity, Ier. 15. 2. And then the enemy grows proud,
and blasphemeth, Who is the Lord, that he should deliver Jerusalem out of mine
hands Esaias 36. 20.
? And there is no help for them in God Psalm. 3. 3.
; and then, even David's feet had wel-nigh slipped Psalm. 73. 2.
: And the Prophet Habakkuk is wonderfully offended, and expostulateth with God,
Oh God, why do thou hold thy tongue, when the wicked devoureth the man that
is more righteous than he Hab. 1. 13.
? Yea then, such as are not sound at heart fall away, and say, It is in vain
to serve God; what profit is it, that we have kept his ordinance, and that we
have walked mournfully before the Lord of hoasts Malach. 3. 14.
? I say to all such enemies, Understand ye brutish among the people: He that
planted the ear, shall he not hear? he that formed the eye, shall he not see
Psalm. 94. 8, 9.
? He hears the sighs and groans, and sees the misery of his people; and
when he has sufficiently scourged his people, and accomplished his great work
upon Sion, and Jerusalem, he will burn the rod Esaias 10. 5.
; and Ashur shall pay for it, as he has threatened, I was wroth with my people,
and gave them into thine hand, but thou did show them no mercy, upon the
Ancients have thou very heavily laid the yoke Esaias 47. 6.
. Oh the persecuting enemies have an heavy day coming. And I say to all such
as fear God, Stand still, and see the salvation of God Exodus 14. 13.
. Never any father corrected his child with more unwillingnesse, than God does
afflict his people: his bowels yearne, He puts all their tears in his
bottell Psalm. 56. 8.
. And as he will preserve them, they shall never everlastingly perish; so
either their bodies shall not perish, but be preserved from sword of enemy
Psalm. 97. 10.
; or, if he give them for a prey, he will fill them with patience, comfort and
joy, and receive them to eternal happiness, so as they shall praise him, and
for ever confess, Thou have tried us as silver, thou broughtest us into the
net, thou layedst affliction upon our loins, thou have caused men to ride over
our heads, we went through fire and water; but thou have brought us into a
wealthy place Psalm. 66. 10, 11, 12.
. Rest assured, Most precious in the sight of God is the death of his Saints
Psalm. 116. 15.
. They may confidently pray, they may not perish; for he has numbered their
very hairs, Matthew. 10. 30. He keeps their very bones, so as not one can be
broken Psalm. 34. 20.
; much less any one shall die, but as it is for Gods glory, and their good.

Our second lesson is, That even the Godly are 2. Doct.
sometimes much afraid of bodily death. You see your example is plain. The
disciples thinking they should presently be drowned, cry out, we perish: so
did Peter (their mouth in that excellent confession of their faith Matthew. 16.
16.
;) seeing the wind boisterous, he was afraid, and when he began to sink, he
cried, Lord, save me Matthew. 14. 30.
. The Doctrine is sufficiently confirmed, and so I might leave it. But because
many of Gods children are herewith greatly troubled, and Satan assaulteth their
souls, suggesting that they have not faith nor true peace of conscience, nor
are in good estate with God, because they are so fearful to die; give me
leave a little to enlarge my self for their comfort; and for illustration of
this Doctrine, present unto you four glasses, and through which it is, that men
and women looking, Death is so fearful, or comfortable.

The first, is the glass of Nature; the second, of Fortune; the third, of the
Law; and the fourth, of the Gospel. In the three first, Death appears
fearful; only in the fourth, comfortable: Yea fearful in the glass of
Nature; more fearful in the glass of Fortune; and most fearful in the
glass of the Law. God would have all the wicked to behold Death in the three
first, that through fear of Death, they may repent of their sins, and fly
to Christ, who saves from it: and he would have the godly to behold Death in
the glass of the Gospel, that having found grace to believe, and repent, they
may die comfortably. But Satan (who seeks man's destruction) well knowing how
remarkable the sickness and deaths of men are, and what deep impressions the
last ends of the dead make in the minds of the living, labors to invert this
order. And whereas God would have his children to behold death in the glass of
the Gospel; he (as much as he can) hides that from their sight, and shuffleth
in the other before them, that he may terrify them with the dread and horror
of death, and (if it be possible) draw them into impatience, and to speak
unadvisedly; which the wicked hearing and seeing, are thereby animated in their
evil courses, saying, You see such and such an one, great professors and holy
men; yet you see how impatient in sickness, how fearful to die. And on the
other side, when the wicked are sick and ready to die (so much as he can) he
hides the three first glasses, and only presents the fourth; and if in the
time of health, they have heard any comfortable sentences, he will help their
memories to rehearse them, to the end they may lie patiently, and die
resolutely and cheerfully: then do such sinners boast, Lo, such a man,
though in his health a good fellow, a drunkard, a whore-master, gamester,
swearer, etc. yet he died like a lamb, wagged neither hand nor foot; I desire
to make no better end, which I hope I shall do, though I walk in his ways.
Oh see the juggling of Satan, where God does not over-master him! Be wise ye
that fear God; Do ye see a most wicked and profane liver, to die quietly
and well? condemn him not; sometimes a good death may follow a bad life: but
it is to be feared, Satan has abused him, and presented a wrong glass before
him; therefore say, I will not hazard mine estate upon so desperate a point; I
will not walk in his ways; I will live well, and then I shall die well: and
do you see such an one, as has lived godly and well, and approved himself to
the consciences of such as knew him, to be an honest man, fearing God, and
eschewing evil, yet lies, hardly, impatiently bearing his visitation, tossing,
tumbling, sweating, it may be, talking idly, and raving: Alas, this may befall
the best of Gods children, partly through the malice of Satan, and partly
through the weakness of flesh and blood, and strength of his disease. But let
not these things trouble thee. That of Saint Augustine is most sure, Non potest
male mori, qui been vixerit; He cannot die ill, that lives well. Yea, Thou art
thy self sick, and in danger of death, and thou art much troubled, to think
how soul and body must part; friends and all be left; thy body, which thou
have kept so delicately, clothed and fed so deliciously, must be laid in a
place of darkness and cold, become meat for worms, and see corruption: but
thou art more troubled, to think how thou must leave thine houses, lands,
offices, wealth and honor, thou know not to whom, (it may be to enemies)
leave a desolate widow, and fatherless children, to the mercy of the world,
thy self being cut off in the midst of thine age, and deprived of all thine
hopes: but thou art most troubled to think how Death came into the world, that
it is the wage of sin, the seal of Gods anger, malediction of the Law, and
portall of hell; thy mind can think of nothing else: so as now thou art even
distracted with fear, and would give all that ever thou have for life. Oh,
if thou be a penitent believer, suffer not Satan thus to abuse thee, say
unto him, Avoid Satan, thrust away these glasses from thee, let not thy mind
meditate on these things; call for the glass of the Gospel, wherein thou
shall see the sting of Death taken away; yea Death it self swallowed up in
victory; thou shall see the nature of it changed; being the end of sickness,
sorrow, sin, labor, and all misery; and the beginning of full happiness
and glory; thou shall see the Angels carrying souls into Abraham's bosom; thou
shall see the happiness of heaven, into which the soul (immediately upon
departure hence) enters; and such as all the wealth, glory, and comforts of
this life are but dung, in comparison of: there shall thou see God in his holy
habitation, a Father to the fatherless, and Husband to the widow; yea, there
shall thou see thine own mortal and corruptible body rise in glory. Oh behold
Death in this glass of the Gospel, and thou shall die most comfortably, and
even desire to be dissolved, and be with Christ. I beseech you mark well my
discourse of Death this day, and labor to remember (at the least) the
principal passages thereof; you know not how soon you may have occasion to make
use of it; It is appointed for all once to die: but when; this day, or to
morrow; this year, or the next; where; on sea, or land; at home, or abroad;
how; by fire, or water; ordinary sickness, or pestilence; naturally, or
violently, we know not: these things, if preserved by you, may stand you in
some stead in time of need. Wherefore what I have delivered in the gross, I
will now more particularly unfold, and from the holy Scriptures enlarge my.
Discourse severally.

The first glass, is the glass of Nature, I mean 1. Glass.
of Nature corrupted, for it is the wage of sin; i^ Adam had not sinned,
there had not been death. Through this, all the wise Gentiles, and Heathen, and
all that know not God, do behold it: and thus to look upon it, is fearful.
It is true, that many Heathen men have seemed very valorous, and have contemned
it; but it was rather rashness, and desperate madness, than true valor or
courage. The Prince of Philosophers himself has said, not only that Death is
fearful, but of all evils the fearefullest Arist. Eth^^* lib. 3 cap. 6.
. What need we their testimonies, when the Scripture it self is so clear? Job
calls it, The King of Terrors Job 18. 14.
. And the Apostle says, Without Christ, all men, through fear of death, are
subject to bondage Heb. 2. 15.
. Oh, it is the enemy of Nature, separater of soul and body, most loving
twins; depriver of all earthly comforts, which so sarre depend on life, as,
it ceasing, they also cease to be. David says, When men die, they must leave
their wealth and honor to others Psalm. 4^. ^^.
. God asked the fool, Whose shall these things be Luke ^2. 20.
? And Abraham gave Dives, begging but a drop of water, a cold answer, Son,
remember, thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things Luke 16. 25.
. Wherefore it is impossible for any man, utterly ignorant of Christ, and only
seeing Death through the glass of Nature, but he must needs fear, and either
die sullenly, or desperately.

The second glass wherein death is seen, I may 2. Glass.
(with reverence to Gods providence) call the glass of Fortune, (as the goods
of this world are called the goods of Fortune Bona fortunae.
) and in this glass, death appears more fearful than in the former.
Circumstances do greatly increase the fear of death: as if a man be young,
healthy, lusty, and in strength of nature, blood runs fresh in the veins,
and marrow in the bones: Quanto natura fortior* tanto dolor acerbior; The
sweeter the conjunction, the more bitter the separation. Also, if a man be in
high place of honor, or great hope of preferment: If a man be rich, and have
all things at his hearts desire, how fearful are such to die? Oh death, how
bitter is the remembrance of thee, to a man that lives at r^st in his
possessions, to the man that has nothing to vex him, that has prosper it i^
in all things Eccles. 41. 1.
? Oh death* how bitter is thy remembrance to him that with Peter thinks it is
good to be here Matthew. 17. 4.
; that has much to leave, and little to hope for? Again, a violent death more
fearful than that which is natural; and according to the means of violence,
and instruments of execution: fearful to die, by the hands of man; more
fearful to die, by the mouths of wild beasts; but of all most fearful to
die by raging fire and waters His Majesty's first speech after discovery of
gunpowder treason.
. Which thing an Heathen Poet has excellently expressed; I fear not death,
but drowning, a miserable kind of death Non lethum timco, genus est miserabile
lethi; Demite naufragium, mors mihi munus erit. Ovid. de tristib. El^g. 2.
. Again, to die suddenly, and specially when God shows some token of anger,
does wonderfully increase the fear of it. This made such a cry thorowout all
Egypt, when at midnight their firstborn were slain Exodus 12. 30.
. I do not judge such as die suddenly, and extraordinarily, by water or land.
The wise man has taught us not to judge of any man's estate Eccles. 9. 2.
before God, by outward things. God knows whose case it may be; I am sure it
has been the case of such, as the holy Scriptures assure, to have been
godly; as Eli, Jonathan, Josiah, Sampson. The Apostle says, Nothing can
separate the Saints from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus Romans 8. 35.
; not death, not manner of death. Sudden death to Gods children, is but like
the translation of Henoch and Elias, which was in a moment: yet let me say
again; (though we judge charitably of such) yet to be suddenly and unlooked
for surprised of death, with any note of divine anger, is both fearful to the
parties themselves, and others. For though we know we must die, and ought
always to be ready, yet who so prepared, (especially in times of health and
prosperity) but has many things to set in order? And seeing all depends
upon the last act, the whole life being but as a levelling and drawing, and
death as the discharge of the arrow; our mother Church has godly taught us, to
pray, if it be his blessed will, to deliver us from sudden death, and to give
us time of repentance, and preparation, with understanding, memory, hearing,
and speech, to the last breath Haec est illa (...), quam sibi suisque precari
solitus est Augustus Caesar. Sic de obitu ejus scribit Suetonius, cap. 99.
. Did not Lot know that his wife should die? Yes: but to him, and all that
shall hear the story, it is fearful, that she was suddenly turned into a
pillar of salt Genesis 19. 26.
. Aaron well knew that his sons must die: but to see two of them ( Nadab and
Abihu) consumed at once, by fire from heaven, it did strangely astonish him
Levit. 10. 3.
. Job knew so much too: but to hear, that all his children were suddenly
destroyed with the downfall of their eldest brothers house, wherein they were
feasting, made him rise and rent his clothes Job 1. 20. Scio me genuisse
mortalem. Anaxag^ras de obitu filij.
. Yea and David knew so much, and comforted himself after the death of
another, saying, I shall go to it, but it shall not come to me 2 Samuel 12. 23.
: But when he heard of the sudden death of his son Absolon, it made his heart
even turn, and ouer-turne within him, he never so bitterly lamented any thing
as that, Oh my son Absolon, my son, my son Absolon, would God I had died
for thee, O Absolon, my son, my son 2 Samuel 18. 33. Application.
.

Come we to our disciples. They see death, in the glass of Nature, and it is
fearful: they see it in the glass of their Fortune; they are now in middle
age, strong and lusty, in great hope of preferment by their Master, and
striving for supremacy Mar. 9. 34.
, and who shall sit on his right hand, and who on his left in his kingdom
Matthew. 20. 21.
; death comes upon them suddenly, robs them of all they now are, or hoped
to be, they have not leisure to set themselves, or houses in order, nor bid
wife and friends farewell; not leisure to swallow their spettle, nor say their
prayers, but shortly, and abruptly, for life: they are like to die by waters,
and become meat for the fishes - sperare sepulchrum; Et non equoreis piscibus
esse cibum. Ovid.
; and that by such a sudden and raging storm, as if heaven meant to destroy
them, so as now their fear is much increased, and they cry out, Lord, save us,
we perish.

The third is the glass of the Law, which represents 3. Glass.
death, as the wage and punishment of sin, the demonstration of Gods
displeasure, and the gate of hell; when all the curses and maledictions of God
come fully, and for ever, to be powered out. Oh in this, death appears most
fearful, and like that dreadful and terrible strong beast, which Daniel saw
in his Vision, which had great Iron teeth, and ten horns, and devoured, and
brake in pieces, and stamped the rest under feet Dan. 7. 7.
.

Good Lord, how greatly are the wicked, and Examples.
all guilty sinners affrighted at this sight of death? Saul being a wicked man,
having a guilty conscience, no sooner saw death at hand through this glass,
but he fell straightway all along upon the earth, was exceedingly afraid, and
there was no strength in him 1 Samuel 28. 20.
. When wicked Belshazzir an enemy of Gods people, and, at that time, he and his
Wives, Concubines, and Princes, carowsing in the Vessels of Gold and Silver,
which his father Nabuchodonezer had brought from the Temple of the Lord in
Jerusalem, and praised their gods of Gold, and Silver, Brass, Iron, Wood, and
Stone; no sooner cast his eye on death, through the glass of the Law, which
God set up on the wall, over against the Candlestick, but his countenance was
changed, his thoughts so troubled him, that the ioints of his loins were
loosed, and his knees smote one against another Dan. 5. 2, 3, etc.
; and nothing could comfort him, or still that raging storm. This was
signified by that dreadful manner of giving the Law on Mount Sinai, with such
darkness, thunder, lightning, and earthquake, that all the people fled Exodus
20. 18.
; and Moses himself confessed, I exceedingly fear, and quake Heb. 12. 21.
. We see, when wicked and ungodly men come to die, how they fare; either they
die sullenly, as Nabal, whose heart was dead as a stone 1 Samuel 25. 36.
; it being the righteous judgment of God upon them, that such as refused grace
in their life time, when he offered it, should in their sickness, neither have
grace, nor crave it, but die blockishly and senslesly.

The Lord knows, our times are full of such Application.
men and women, which, as David says, have hearts as fat as brawne Psalm. 119.
70.
; possessed with a spirit of slumber Esaias 29. 10.
; you might as well speak to the bed-sted as to them; talk with them of the
way of Redemption, Justification, and Salvation; alas how ignorant? Tell them
of Resurrection, and last Judgment; they have no apprehension. Reprove them
for their sins past; they know no such matter. Inform them in the doctrine
of Repentance, Contrition of heart, longing after the righteousness of Christ,
the happiness of heaven; they wonder, as if you were reading of Riddles to
them. You shall find no sound knowledge, no token of true repentance, no fruit
of lively faith, no testimony of a well-grounded hope, no sign of Christian
joy, as looking for a better life; nothing but dullness and deadness of
spirit, and all their desire is to live.

But others, being awakened out of their sins, their consciences accusing, and
they beholding death in the looking-glass of the Law; good Lord, how are they
affrighted? What tossing, sighing, groaning, sweating, compassed about with the
sorrows of hell, and he is overwhelmed with despair? Now are his sins set
before him, the sins of childhood, youth, and age; his swearing, riot,
uncleanness, oppression, contempt of Gods word, and general profaneness;
such as he made but a mock and sport of; but now they come in troops, and
appear so great, that he is swallowed up of dismaiednesse, and lets his
tongue be wray his despair, and utter blasphemy; and let a man labor to
comfort him, he still holds Cains conclusion, My sin is greater than can be
pardoned Genesis 4. 13.
. And thus as his life was full of sin, his death is full of sorrow; as in
his health he had no conscience, in his sickness he has no comfort; as in his
life he mocked Gods counsel, in his death God laugheth at his destruction
Prove. 1. 26.
; and he is in hell, whilst he lives; which to prevent, he could wish the
rocks and mountains to fall on him, and cover him Rev. 6. 16.
.

Yea, not only the wicked, and reprobate, but Amplificatio^.
even the elect, and most righteous, having but a glimpse of death, through this
glass, have been exceedingly daunted, and brought into most fearful fits.
Holy Job, a man (by Gods own testimony) that feared God, and eschewed evil,
and all the days of his life did wait for his change, Job 14. 14. could in
good measure bear the sudden and strange loss of all his substance, cattle,
servants, and children, and say, The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken,
blessed be the name of the Lord Job 1. 21.
: but let him be touched in his body, sick and sore from the crown of the
head to the soale of the foot Job 2. 7.
; let God withal write bitter things against him, and make him possess the
sins of his youth Job 13. 26.
; let him see death in the looking-glass of the Law; and then he enjoys
wearisome nights, and is full of tossings Job 7. 3, 4.
; yea will curse the day, and all the services of his birth Job 3. 3, etc.
. David (a man after Gods own heart Acts 13. 22.
) will wade through a world of troubles, and it is not the malice of Saul 1 Samuel
20. 30.
, hatred of the Philistims 1 Samuel 29.
, envy of the Princes Ibid.
, rebellion of Absalom 2 Samuel 15. 10.
, treachery of Achitophel 2 Samuel 16. 21.
; no threatening of Goliath 1 Samuel 17. 14.
, grapling with a Lion 1 Samuel 17. 34.
, fighting with a Bear Ibid.
; no hunger, cold, danger, can discourage him, but in all distress, he
comfort himself in his God 1 Samuel 30. 6.
: but let him see death in the looking-glass of the Law, and he will even
roar for the disquietnesse of his heart Psalm. 38. 8.
; his heart will be pained, the terrors of death fall on him, fearfulness and
trembling come upon him, and horror over whelme him, Psalm. 55. 4. yea the fear
of death does undo him: then will he make his bed to swim, and even water his
couch with tears Psalm. 6. 6.
; and then all his prayers are against death, Oh spare me, that I may recover
my strength Psalm. 39 ult.
: and, Oh my God, cut me not off in the midst of my days Psalm. 102. 24.
; Oh save me, for thy mercies sake, for in death there is no remembrance of
thee, and who will give thee thanks in the grave Psalm. 6. 5.
? Let King Ezekiah receive a message of death from God, and behold in the
glass of the Law, and he will turn his face to the wall, and weep bitterly,
chatter like a Crane or Swallow, mourn like a Dove, and complain that God
like a Lion, has broken all his bones, and all his prayer is for life, The
living, the living shall praise thee Esaias 38. 2, 13, 14, 19, etc.
. But in Christ himself we have an Example of all Examples for this purpose,
who (as Mediator) beholding death in the glass of the Law, and the inferior
reason, presenting it to the mind, not with all circumstances Dr. Field of the
Church, lib. 5 cap. 18.
, he began to fear Mar. 14. 33.
, his soul was exceeding sorrowful even to death; yea, the sorrows of death
compassed him about Psalm. 116. 3.
; that he fell into a dreadful agony Luke 22. 44.
; his thoughts were troubled, his spirits affrighted, his heart trembled, his
joints shook, his pores opened, and a sweat of drops like blood, burst through
and through his garments Luke 22. 45.
. Oh this was a grievous storm in his soul! And what does he? As his
disciples came to him, so he to his Father, and in a sweet and solitary place,
a Garden, an Oratorie, whither he had often resorted to pray John 18. 2.
, there he powers out his soul in an heavenly prayer Matthew. 26. 36. Luke 22.
39, etc.
, most commendable both for substance, and circumstance, with earnest
intention, for he did double and ingeminate the title often, Father, Father,
with wonderful fervencie of spirit, every word afforded a drop of blood; in
faith, he said, my Father; with humbleness, for he kneeled down; with
wonderful reverence, he fell down grovelling, as it were kneeling on his face,
and praying out of the dust; with great constancy, he prayed three times; with
submissive obedience, Not my will, but thine be done; and with great charity,
for ever and anon, he visited his Disciples, and gave them good counsel, and
comfort; and what was it he thus begged? Take, oh take away this cap: and he
was heard in that which he feared Heb. 5. 7.
, the storm was calmed, an Angel sent, and comforted him Luke 22. 43.
.

Oh man, see in thy Savior, what it is to be a Use.
sinner! If the righteous and dear Son of God, having no sin but by
imputation, was so affrighted with the terrors of death; how would death
distract, with the terrors of it, impenitent sinners, if God did open their
eyes, and let them see it, in the looking-glass of the Law, clothed with the
red robe of Gods fiery indignation, gaping with great Iron teeth, ready to
devour; having in the forehead written, Cursed is every one, that continues
not in all things written in the book of the law, to do them Deuteronomy. 27. ult.
, and having the keys of hell and the bottomless pit in his hand?

Thus we have seen death in the looking-glass Conclusion.
of Nature, and it appears fearful, for therein the body perishes. We
have seen it in the looking-glass of Fortune, and therein it appears more
fearful, for therein body and all the good things of this world perish. We
have lastly seen it in the looking-glass of the Law, and therein it appears
most fearful, for therein body and soul perish for ever.

The fourth and last glass, is the glass of the 4. Glass.
Gospel; wherein (through the death of Christ) the nature of it is changed; of
a foe, it is become a friend; and from a curse and punishment of sin, is
become a blessing; from the door of Hell, it is become the portall of Heaven.
Christ has spoiled principalities and powers, and triumphed openly over them
on the Cross Coloss. 2. 15.
; yea and has pursued Death into the grave, his Castle, and there conquered
him, the sorrows of death being loosed, whereof it was impossible that he
should be held Acts 2. 24.
; and so has performed what he anciently threatened, O death, I will be thy
plagues; oh grave, I will be thy destruction: Ose. 13. 14.
which made the Apostle (in the name of all the faithful) so to triumph: O
death, where is thy sting? o grave, where is thy victory? The sting of death is
sin, and the strength of sin is the law; but thanks be to God, who gives
victory through Jesus Christ our Lord 1 Cor. 15. 55.
. I am the resurrection and the life, he that believes in me, shall live
though he die John 11. 25.
: He that believes is passed from death to life, and shall not come into
judgment John 5. 24.
. Now then there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus Romans 8. 1.
: and, Blessed are the dead, that die in the Lord Rev. 14. 13.
. Lo these are the comforts of the Gospel against death, which all the
faithful have enjoyed from the beginning of the world, though more plentifully
revealed in these last days. And hence it is, that wherever death is beheld
through the glass of the Gospel, it is seen, and spoken of, with abundance
of joy and comfort: and as the nature, so the name of it is changed. God called
Abraham's death, a going to his fathers Genesis 15. 15.
; and the death of Isaak Genesis 35. 29.
, Jacob Genesis 49. 33.
, Aaron Numb. 20. 24.
, and Moses Deuteronomy. 32. 50.
, is called a gathering to their fathers. Ioshuah calls his dying, the going
the way of all the earth Josh. 23. 14.
. And David uses the same words 1 Kings 2. 2.
. Moses and Elias talking on Thabor of Christ's death, call it so too, they
talked of his departure Matthew. 17. 3.
. Yea Christ called it his departing out of this world to his Father John 13. 1.
; and Simeon prayed the Lord, to let him depart in peace Luke 2. 2^.
. It is but a taste Luke 9. 27.
, but a sight Luke 2. 26.
. Lazarus death is called a sleep, Ioh. 11. Paul calls his death, a loosing,
as out of prison ^hilip. 1. 23.
. S. Peter calls his, a laying down of his Tabernacle 2 Pet. 1. 14.
. Thus comfortably do the Scriptures phrase death, for the encouragement of
all mortal men, who must die: oh get into Christ and fear not death, no more
than thou would fear to lie down and sleep, or to put off an old garment,
or to go out of prison, or of a rotten Cottage, that thou may dwell in a
Palace, a Paradise. Oh, death is not now terrible, but desirable; as S. Paul
said, I desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ Phil. 1. 23.
. And again, We sigh, desiring to be clothed on, with our house, which is
from heaven 2 Cor. 5. 2.
. Oh welcome death, which to all Gods children (through Christ) is the end of
hunger, thirst, sorrow, care, sickness, ache, pain, temptations, sin, and all
evils; and the beginning of all good, without end Mors non terribilis sed
optabilis, laborum finis, and requici initium. Ambros.
. Whereof some of the learned Fathers have written most large and excellent
Treatises Scripsit S. Cyprianus tractatum de mortalitate, quem secutus est
Ambrosius. lib. de bono mortis.
.

If then, these Disciples had beheld death in the glass of the Gospel, and had
had a strong Faith, they would never have given it so harsh and comfortless
Application.
a title, as calling it a perishing; but (as you have heard) a sleeping, going,
and gathering to fathers, departing, laying down of Tabernacle, etc. and if
their Faith had been strong they would have said, as the three children did to
Nabuchadonozer, O King, our God, whom we serve, is able to deliver us Dan. 3.
1^.
. Winds and Seas, what mean ye to rage? Our Master, whom we serve, is able to
save us, whether he sleep or wake; but howsoever, we fear not death, be it
sudden, or looked for; violent, or natural; by sea, or land; by water, or
fire; for if we die, we shall go to heaven, and then shall we know misery no
more.

To conclude, these disciples call, and pray to Conclusion.
Christ for help, but withal they do their duties. The Evangelist says,
They did toil in rowing, in another storm Mark. 6. 48.
; and so doubtless did they in this. The heathen Mariners in Jonah, as they
did cry upon their gods, so they cast their wares into the sea to lighten the
ship, and did even dig and delve, or furrow the sea with their Ores, if
possibly they might have brought it to the land Jonah 1. 5, 13.
. But herein appears a great deal of our folly; that, as most pray
Application.
not at all; so many pray only, Lord, save us, and do nothing else: whereas
God would have every one in such a storm, to set to his hands to help to cast
out the lading of the ship, and lighten it. What is it that ladeth the ship of
the Church, and endangereth it in a storm? It is sin, which is heavier than
sand, or lead, or any ballast: It was too heavy for David to bear, Psalm. 38.
4. It made the Son of God sweat, Luke 22. 44. Yea made God himself
complain, That he was pressed as a Cart with sheaves, Amos 2. 13.

Oh Ministers, Magistrates, all Christian men and women, set to your hands;
Over the board with sin in your selves, and in others. Were it not madness
for Mariners in a storm to take in more lading? And surely no less madness
it is for men to cry unto God to cease punishing, but themselves cease not to
sin Genus dementi^ est nolle a malis qui^sc^re, and velle Deum a suaiusta
ultione cessare. Greger.
. What mean ye, mad people? The storm is great, the ship is overburthened,
and draws deep, every joint cracketh, and yet you will not lighten it, not
part with your sins, though all sink for it, etc. And thus much be said of
the procuring of the calm. It follows.

VERSE 26. And he said unto them, Why are ye fearful? o ye of little Faith!
CHrist being awakened by the importunity of his Disciples, presently applies
himself to deliver them out of danger. And their deliverance consists in a
double reprehension or increpation: for our Savior saw there was a double
storm; the one in the Sea, the other in the minds of his Disciples. As the Sea
did rage and endanger the destruction of their bodies; so Order of history.
their minds did rage, and there was a strange storm in their affections;
which threatened no less the destruction of their souls. Yea, the outward
storm had been a calm, if they had had a calm within: wherefore he stilleth
them both; but which in the first place, is a question. Our Evangelist is
plain, he first rebuked his Disciples. S. Mark and S. Luke are as plain,
That he first arose and rebuked the winds and the seas. It must not trouble
us, that such differences appear in the Evangelists. It may be, he rebuked his
Disciples twice Potest responderi, bis esse reprehensos discipulos. Barrad.
, both before he stilled the Sea, and after; both to declare how justly he was
offended, that they having heard so much Doctrine, and seen so many Miracles,
yet they had profited no better; and also to work a perfect cure in them, that
hereafter they might no more bewray such weakness. And this answers fully,
how one says, It was before; and two, That it was after; for indeed it was
both: and one Evangelist has that which another omitteth; a thing so usual as
needs no proof. But I rather incline to that of Chrysostom, That first he
rebuked his Disciples, and then the winds and seas; and that the other two
Evangelists did not precisely observe the order of the History Non servasse
ordinem temporis. Chrysostom. Homil. 28.
: not because our Evangelist says, [ then] he arose and rebuked the winds and
seas; as noting precisely the time to be after he had rebuked his Disciples
Argum. Iansenij, in Concord, Euang. cap. 30.
: For S. Luke has the same, for the other, [ then] he arose and rebuked the
winds and seas: but because Christ first labors to beget Faith, and then
works a miracle to increase and confirm it: there is no greater let of
miracles, than unbelief, as the Evangelist says, He did not many mighty
works there, because of their unbeleefe Matthew. 13. ult.
: and before he cured the possessed of a dambe spirit, he said to his father,
If thou can believe, all things are possible to him that believes Mark. 9.
23.
: and reproved Martha, before he raised her brother, Said I not, if thou
would believe, thou shall see the glory of God John 11. 40.
?

Christ is now about to work a glorious miracle: but the modicity of his
Disciples Faith, does (as it were) stand in his way, and hinder him Omnia
possibilia credenti, Mar. 9. 33 Omnia fier^ possunt credenti, Sir. Bez. P^scat.
: wherefore first he removes that, Why are ye fearful? By which order of
proceeding, our Savior teaches us, That God would have his people by Faith
Doct.
to rest on him, even when they are in the midst of their troubles. And herein
lies a great difference betwixt a worldling and a true believer; a mere
worldlings heart is as dead as a stone in troubles, and can have no comfort as
long as troubles continue. A Prince said, when the Prophet prophesied plenty of
victuals in Samaria, If the Lord would make windows in heaven, can this be? 2
Kings 7. 2. But the true believer in all distress does comfort himself in God
(as David did 1. Sam. 30. 6.
:) Though he kill me, I will trust in him, (says Job Job 13. 15.
.) When the children of Israel were in such distress at the Red Sea, this was
it Moses required, Stand still, and see the salvation of God Exodus 14. 13.
; lay aside their distrust and murmuring, rest on God; and then they should see
his salvation. And when there came so great an host against Judah, King
Iehoshaphat (being well advised by Gods Prophet) says to Judah, and all the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, Believe in the Lord your God, and ye shall be
established; believe his Prophets, so shall ye prosper 2. Chron. 20. 20.
: and then the enemies destroyed one another. And Hester, and her maids, and
people, must fast and pray, and encourage one another: for they shall not be
delivered, till they believe in God.

Here then is the reason why the storm so long Application.
continues, and there are such great troubles, and of such long continuance in
the Church of God, in general; and in many a man's person and state, in
particular; viz. They are immoderately fearful Division.
and out of heart, distrust Gods power and providence: wherefore God does still
proceed to correct their distrust, and when his people have learned in their
troubles to rest on him, then shall they see the salvation of God: then (and
never till then) God will send a calm. And so much be noted from the manner of
proceeding.

First, then, Christ reproves his disciples, and Genesis Observe.
that for two faults, viz. 1. For excess of fear, Why are ye fearful? 2.
For defect of Faith, O ye of little Faith! The former is reproved by way of
question; the latter by way of admiration. Their Faith was in the Positive very
little: their Fear in the Superlative very great. For the first, Why are ye
fearful? Away ye fearful unbeleevers; Ye, and ship perish together, etc.
He reproves them, but does not reject them Obiurgat, non ut deserat, sed ut
sanet. Tossan. in Euang.
. No, no, he is that loving Shepherd, that does seek up the wandering and lost
sheep, bears the tender lambs in his bosom, binds up that which was
broken, and strengthens that which was sick Ezech. 34. 16.
: That loving Savior, of whom it was prophesied, Abruised reed he shall not
break, and smoking flax he shall not quench Esaias 42. 1. Matthew. 12. 18.
: And that mighty God, whose strength is made perfect in weakness 2 Cor. 12.
9.
. But if his offend, he will rebuke them: Martha is reproved for her
worldliness; Martha, Martha, thou carest, and art troubled about many things
Luke 10. penult.
. And Peter, if he be too curiously inquisitive, must hear of it, If I will
have this man stay till I come, what is that to thee John 21. 22.
? Yea, if he give him ill counsel, he will be sharp with him, Get thee
behind me Satan Matthew. 16. 23.
. Yea let the Disciples be in never so great danger, he will first reprove
their fault, Why are ye fearful?

Thus we also should do, and so fulfill the Royal Application.
Law, which says, Thou shall not hate thy brother in thine heart, thou shall
in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him Levit. 19. 17
. Which Clemens Alexandrinus calls the Surgery of the soul, in Paedag.
lib. 1. cap. 8. And Saint Augustine, A spiritual alms, in Enchirid. But for
want of this true love, and a fruit of hatred it is, that if we see any evil in
our neighbor, either we flatter him, and say, All is well; or never rebuke,
saying, Why do thou so? or else with scorn, contemn, despise, and reject
him, never considering our selves, that we also may be tempted Gal 6. 1.
.

But mark how meekely, mildly, and lovingly 2. Genesis Obser.
he reproves them; not one word of any sharpnes, rigor, or asperitie; no nor
so much as affirm, This is your great sin, to be fearful: but as God asked
Jonah a question about his anger, Do thou well to be angry Jonah 4 4.
? So, he only asks them a question about their fear, Why are ye fearful?
intimating, their fear was excessive and causeless; and so the reproof
tended rather to comfort and encourage them: q. d. Be not so afraid, you have
no cause of such fear. Oh it is the gentle reproof, the mild and loving
objurgation and crimination which pierces deep; The Lords servant must be
gentle toward all 2 Timothy 2. 24.
. This is the reproof that David so much desired, Let the righteous smite me
friendly, and reprove me Psalm. 141. 5.
. And the Apostle bids us restore such an one, as is overtaken in a fault,
with the spirit of meekness Gal. 6. 1.
. But for want of love it comes to pass, we reprove not at all; or, with
such fierceness, gall, and bitterness, as tends not to restore, but harden
sinners Non stud^o sanan^i, sed exulcerand^, and probro aff^^iendi: Mol. in
Psalm.
.

Oh let us from this Example, learn to be gentle Use.
and meek toward poor and weak sinners; and if any be too fearful,
because themselves or the people of God are in any great danger, let us labor
to comfort them, to strengthen the weak hands, and comfort the feeble knees
Esaias 35. 3.
. Speak to the heart of Jerusalem Esaias 40 1.
; Fear not, thou worm Jacob (though thou be but a worm.) And again, Fear
not, ye men of Israel, I will help thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer Esaias 41.
10, 13, 14.
. So much for general observations.

Now more particularly, consider, what was it I. Particular Observe.
he reproved? [ Fearfulness:] not simply fear, for that is ingraffed in our
nature; neither did Christ go about to rob them of their affections, that they
should no more fear danger, than the mast of the ship Hoc esset humanitatem ex
ho^ane tollere. D. Ierom. Habet currus nost^r qua^uor rotas: amorem and
laetitiam, timorem and tristitiam. Bern. expervis, Sermon. 35.
; yea Christ himself had our affections, and namely, this of fear: but our
Savior reproves the excess of it, called fearfulness. The word in the
Original (...).
, is of harsh signification, both amongst profane Authors, as miserable (...)
Homer.
, weak (...) He^^od.
, and wicked (...). Him.
; and in the Scriptures, for such as shall die the second death Rev. 21. 8.
(...).
; such a fear, as God has not given his children the Spirit of 2 Timothy 1. 7.
(...)
; a fear, which makes men miserable, weak, and feeble in mind, wicked in
practice, to use any means to escape the evil they fear, the high way to
hell, and that timiditie which the wise Heathen have opposed to the virtue of
Fortitude Ar^st. Ethic. 3. 6.
, and therefore reproved, Why are ye fearful (...); quid timidi estis?
?

Wherefore, this reprehension must teach us, both Doct.
by divine and humane prayer, and all worldly wise means, to bridle and
restrain our passions, that they exceed not measure, nor we be transported
with the violence of them, to say or do that which is evil; but to remember
the Apostolic caution, Be angry, but sin not Ephesians. 4. 26.
: be merry, but sin not; be sorry, but sin not; be afraid, but sin not. If
you give way unto it, it is a most painful passion, yea (as Saint John says)
Such fear has torment 1 John 4. 18. (...), cruciatum habet, tormentum: August.
; and makes men bondslaves, Heb. 2. 15. Christ had passions, but blameless,
because his nature was most holy and pure. And therefore, as a glass of Simile.
snow-water, though never so much shaken, yet abides clear and pure; but the
glass of muddie water, though whilst it stands still, the mud sinder to the
bottom, and the top is clear; yet no sooner is shaken, but the mud arises,
and all is defiled: So, howsoever in times of peace, health, and prosperity,
our passions be moderate and calm, and seem clear; yet no sooner are
troubled, but they grow muddie, yea defile our selves, and all that come near:
the raging sea did not more cast up mire and dirt, than their troubled
affections, spiritual defilements: for which cause Christ here reproved them,
Why are ye fearful?

The second particular observation is, What was 2. Particular Observe.
the object of this fear? Was it God, or his judgments? No; they did fear a
temporal, not the eternal death; water, but not fire; sea, but not hell;
drowning, but not burning; a creature, not the Creator: they may truly say with
David, The terrors of death are fallen upon us, fearfulness and trembling are
come upon us, and horror has overwhelmed us Psalm. 55. 4, 5.
. Which our Savior reproves, Why are ye fearful?

And he teaches us, that Gods people should not Doct. lit.
immoderatly fear, no not any manner of death. A lesson which it behooves us
(in these days specially) to take out; for as the Apostle said, If the word
spoken by Angels, was sted fast, and every transgression, and disobedience,
received a just recompense of reward, how shall we escape, if we neglect so
great salvation Heb. 2. 3.
? So if these Disciples having heard and seen but a little, and being now in
such great peril, yet are reproved for immoderate fear; how much more shall
we be reproved, to whom the Gospel of Christ has been so clearly revealed,
who have seen so many works of Gods goodness, mercy, power, as the Passion,
Resurrection, and Ascension of Christ into heaven? Here is therefore a good
lesson for us, to labor that we be not immoderately afraid of death.

I say not, not afraid of death at all: for the best of Illustration.
Gods servants mentioned in holy Scripture, as Moses, David, Job, Eliah,
Ezekiah, and the rest have been. I may say of them all, as the Apostle says of
Eliah, they were subject to this passion, as well as we James 5. 17. (...).
. Therefore he does not say, Why are ye afraid? but, fearful; yea, as if the
word were not sufficient to express the measure of their co^sternation (which
yet is very significant, as you have heard) he adds thereunto an Adverb of
affirmation: So (...); quid (ita) timidi?
, q^d. Why are ye so exceedingly fearful, so fearful beyond bounds and
measure? This being that he reproved in them, and is reproveable in all his
disciples, viz. immoderate and excessive fear of death. Let us now see by what
means Gods children may moderate the fear of death in them, wherein I do
specially commend unto you these four things, viz. 1. A good cause: 2. An
honest life: 3. A strong faith: 4. Godly meditation on the good of Death.

First, a great means to suppress immoderate 1. A good cause.
fear of death, is to die (if not for, yet) in a good cause; Blessed is that
servant, whom his Master shall find well doing, Matthew. 24. 46. It is a true
saying, It is not the punishment, but the cause makes a Martyr. Christ has
not absolutely pronounced all blessed, that suffer persecution; but all such as
suffer persecution for righteousness sake Matthew. 5. 10.
. This was the joy of the Saints in old time, that they could truly say, Lord
for thy sake are we killed Psalm. 44. 22.
. This caused the holy Martyrs of Christ in this Land, in the days of Queen
Mary, so cheerfully to receive sentence of death, so joyfully to sing in their
prisons, dark and loathsome dungeons, so comfortably embrace faggots, kiss
stakes, clap hands in flaming fire; because all this was for a good cause, even
for Christ, the Gospel, and a good conscience sake: and the holy Ghost has
pronounced, Blessed are the dead, which die in the Lord Rev. 14. 13.
. This made them rejoice in death with joy unspeakable and glorious 1 Pet. 1. 8.
. This was Joseph's comfort in prison, that Examples.
he was falsely accused Genesis 39. 2. 20.
; And Daniels, that he was cast to the Lions for the matter of his God Dan. 6.
5.
. Therefore Saint Peter's charge is, Let none of you suffer as Use.
a murderer, or as a thief, or as an evil doer, or as a busie-bodie in other
men's matters; but if any suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but let
him glorify God in this behalf 1 Pet. 4. 15.
. But how great is the horror of malefactors? No doubt but it pierced Ahabs
soul, more than the arrow did his body, that this was the just judgment of
God upon him for his sin 1 Kings 22. 35.
. How fearful was death to all such whose carcasses God overthrew in the
wilderness, and destroyed them with fiery Serpents, and other fearful means
1 Cor. 10. 9.
? Who knows the unconceiveable dread and horror, which wicked men have in
their souls, in their prisons, deathbeds, or executions, when their own
consciences tell them, This misery is come upon me, for murder, theft,
adultery, riot, and such like wicked courses?

I do not deny, but such malefactors may die I. Caution.
sullenly, or desperately. Others may be deceived, and think they die in a
good cause, when they do not. So the ancient Donatists, and Arrians, and in
our times, the Priests and Jesuits think they die for Religion, and the true
Catholic cause, and deserve to be Canonized for Saints, whereas they suffer
deserved punishment for their rebellion and sedition: yea they would in death
be accounted Martyrs, before they have led the life of a Christian Aug. Epist.
61. and contra Cresconium, lib. 3. cap. 47.
: yet being thus abused and deceived by Satan, and God in his justice giving
them over into a reprobate sense, they may even astonish men, to behold their
seeming patience, joy, and Christian resolution: but yet this stands firm,
that no man suffering or dying for an evil cause, and his mind be rightly
informed, can die with comfort and peace, but with exceeding dread and horror,
such an one must needs be exceedingly fearful to die.

Yea, this that I have said, must also be understood 2. Caution.
with exception of Repentance. Many men justly suffer pressures and miseries,
tortures and Examples.
torments, for their sins and evil deeds; yet upon true repentance find
peace and comfort, in life and death. Moses died in the wilderness, and might
not enter into the promised Land, because he did not sanctify God at the
waters of Strife Deuteronomy. 34. 5.
; but repenting, he died with comfort. Josiah fighting rashly and without
warrant from God, was wounded to death; but repenting of his folly, he died
with comfort, and was gathered to his Fathers in peace 2 Chronicles. 34. 28.
. The thief on the Cross died justly for his sins; but repenting, he died
with comport, and went to Paradise Luke 23. 40. 43.
. Our Prodigal suffered hunger and misery justly, for his riotous and
luxurious dilapidating and wasting his goods; but repenting, he found comfort
Luke 15. 21, 22.
. Many a man comes to great misery, poverty, sickness, ache, imprisonment,
banishment, death, for his disordered life; yet truly repenting, finds peace
and comfort. But (these cases excepted) no man (that is rightly informed in his
mind, and continues impenitent) can but be exceedingly afraid to die:
wherefore, every one that would moderate the fear of death, must be sure to
live and die in a good cause.

The second means for moderation of the 2. An holy life.
fear of death, is to live an holy and sanctified life. The Apostle compares
death to some fierce and truculent beast or serpent, which kills all men that
grapple with it, with a poysonfull sting, and tells us, the sting of death is
sin 1 Cor. 15. 56.
. As a man then would not fear, but with great boldness encounter that
Serpent, when he knows the sting is gone: so may we boldly and comfortably
die, when we know the sting thereof is gone. Oh it is the guilt of sin,
makes men so fearful to die! But great is the peace they have that love thy
Law Psalm. 119. 165.
. Mark the upright, behold the just, the end of that man is peace: The
righteous are bold as Lions Prove. 28. 1.
. Oh such as here live in the fear of God, making conscience of their ways,
eschewing evil Job 1. 1.
, Walking in the Spirit Gal. 5. 16.
, Mortifying the flesh with affections and lusts Gal. 5. 24.
, having their conversation in heaven Philip. 3. 20.
, And ever beholding the face of God, through the perspective of holiness Heb.
12. 14.
, Setting their minds on those things which are above Coloss. 3. 2.
, Being passed from death to life John 5. 24.
, and already entered into the first degree of glorification, (sanctification
being glorification inchoate; and glorification, sanctification consummate:)
What comfort, joy, boldness, have such in sickness and death? How comfortable
to the living to visit such, and to hear and see their cheerfulness,
patience, prayers, praises, benedictions, valedictions! (if infirmity of flesh
and blood, or strength of disease do not hinder:) on the other side, such as
walk in their life time after the flesh Rom 8. 1.
, drink up iniquity like water, and are continually strengthening and adding
poison to the sting of death; How are they distracted with fear, if they see
that beast but gape upon them, or hiss at them? How comfortless to visit
such, see their impatience, observe their worldly mindedness, and hear their
words of discontent, discomfort, and distrust! if God have not laid on them the
spirit of slumber. Therefore let him that calls on the name of Christ, depart
from iniquity 2 Timothy 2. 19.
. And whosoever would, with comfort and boldness look for death, or Christ to
judgment, Let him deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and live
righteously, godly, and soberly, in this present world Titus 2. 12.
.

The third means of moderation, is by a lively 3. A steadfast Faith.
and steadfast faith: This is our victory, even faith 1 John 5. 4.
. How can that man be immoderately afraid to die, who does in his heart
steadfastly believe that Christ died for him, and has conquered Satan, death,
and hell for him, disarmed the strong man Satan, deprived Death of its sting,
that it cannot hurt, that the nature of it is changed, an end of all evil, the
beginning of all true good? It is not possible with the clear eye of Faith, to
behold death in the Crystallglasse of the Gospel, and to be immoderatly afraid
of it. Here then was the Disciples want: they had a good cause, they followed
their Master into the ship, they lived honestly ( Judas excepted;) but their
faith was weak, and therefore their fear so strong; Why are ye so fearful?
O ye of little faith! Wherefore, let all such as desire to moderate the fear
of death, pray for increase of Faith Luke 17. 5.
.

Oh see what an inestimable Pearl and Jewel Faith is, in that it does not
only justine us before God, and appropriate unto us all the happiness of
heaven through Christ; but is of so great use in this life, both in the times
of health and prosperity (as time and occasion serve) bringing forth most
worthy fruits in regard of God, and our neighbors; and specially in our
adversities and troubles. David confessed, he had perished in his troubles, if
it had not been for his Faith Psalm. 119.
: And the Apostle says, Through Faith the Saints of old stopped the mouths of
Lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, were
tortured, and accepted not deliverance, Heb. 11. 33. It is Faith that breeds
Patience 2 Thessalonians. 1. 3.
; and begets godly comfort and courage: he that believes does not make
haste Esaias 28. 16.
; that is, whereas the unbelieving, coming into any distress, any danger, or
perplexity, are distracted with care and fear, and make haste, running and
rushing into all manner of evil, and indirect means for relief and
deliverance, (as Saul, who for want of Faith, made too much haste to offer
sacrifice 1 Samuel 13. 9.
, and consult with a Witch 1 Samuel 28. 7.
:) Such as truly believe, will not do so, Though earth remove, and hills be
hurled into the midst of the sea Psalm. 46. 2.
. If God send famine, he is not so fearful; for he knows God feeds the
Birds of the air Matthew. 6. 26.
, and the young Ravens when they call Psalm. 147. 9.
; And whosoever fear him shall want nothing that is good Psalm. 34. 10.
. If God send pestilence, he is not so fearful; for he knows it is Gods
arrow to hit whom he will, and that, if his life be more for Gods glory, than
his death, A thousand shall fall on one hand, and ten thousand on the other,
yet it shall not come nigh him Psalm. 91. 7.
. If sword come, he will not be so fearful, Though he were compassed with ten
thousands of enemies round about Psalm. 3. 6.
; for he knows the wicked is but Gods sword Psalm. 7. 13.
; and that an hair cannot fall from his head, but according to the good will
and pleasure of his heavenly Father Matthew. 10. 30.
. If sickness and death come, he is not so fearful; For he knows, though
he die, yet shall he live John 11. 25.
; oh, of what singular use is faith in all our troubles?

But I hear some (as discomforted with this discourse) Object.
say, I thank God, my conscience does approve my cause and walking to be
honest, (humane frailties excepted:) yet I find my self often very ill
disposed, and fearful to die, which makes me doubt I have not faith.

I answer, Our Savior does not say, Because Answ.
his Disciples were so fearful, therefore they had no faith; but their faith
was little. Immoderate fear argues imbecillitie, but concludes not a
nullitie of faith. And for thy comfort know this, that even the best of Gods
children are subject to such fears; as David, The fear of death is fallen
upon me, Psalm. 55. 4. But though it exceed measure for a time, their faith will
keep them from despair, and in good time recover them, as David said, I will
not fear to go through the valley, of death, etc. Psalm. 23. 4. Oh pray then
for the increase of faith.

Whereunto, lastly, may be added godly meditation 4. Godly Meditation.
on such great blessings, as death (beheld in the looking-glass of the
Gospel) does bring to every true believer: as that the Body is presently
brought into a better condition, than ever it had in this life; for by death it
is both made insensible (and by that means freed from all the calamities of
this life) and cease to be an Active and Passive instrument of sin: the
Soul passes to life, rest, and glory, perfectly seeing and knowing God,
without intermission keeping an eternal Sabbath, and without cessation or
wearisomnesse, keeping turns with the Angels, praising Gods name for ever and
ever; in fullness, enjoying whatsoever may cause love and admiration, or
procure joy and contentation; even an universal collection of all joys,
blessings, and comforts, beyond all we have heard, seen, or can possibly
think. In regard whereof Solomon has pronounced, The day of death to be
better than the day of birth Eccles. 7. 3.
. And the Apostle desired to be dissolved and to be with Christ, which is best
of all Phil. 1. 23.
. And so much for the literal doctrine, Gods people must not immoderately
fear any manner of death, and how that is obtained.

Our second doctrine is from the mystery; the 2. Doct. mist.
ship representing the Church, and the storm persecution. Our Savior
reproving the disciples for their immoderate fear in this storm, does ^each
us, That Gods people should not immoderately fear, though the Church be in
never so great danger, distress, or perplexity. What greater evil threatened
to the Church, than by the Assyrian Monarch? Insomuch that God caused the
Prophet to call his son, Maher-shalalhash-baz, or make speed to the spoil
Esa. 8. 1.
: yet even then the Prophet bade the people not be afraid, nor say a
confederacy, a confederacy, but sanctify the Lord of hoasts, and let him be
your fear, and let him be your dread, and he shall be for a sanctuary etc
Esa. 8. 12, 13.
: not forbidding a moderate fear, and use of godly means; but immoderate
fear; and, for their security, making such Application.
leagues with Idolaters, and Gods professed enemies, as was forbidden.

Oh, great is the storm now, and the poor ship Use.
of the Church, in man's eye, in great peril: but be not so fearful, but
rest on God. The Church is in danger, beset with enemies, both powerful and
politic, for cruelty and mischief matchless; who have confederated, and
threaten her ruin. True: but has not Christ said, He will be with his Church
to the end of the world Matthew. 28. u^^.
: nay more, That the gates of hell shall not prevail against it Matthew. 16. 18.
. The ship is covered with waves, but shall not be drowned; the Church is
persecuted, but shall not be destroyed; God will in his good time rebuke winds
and seas, and send a comfortable calm. Mardochay believed comfort and
deliverance would come Hest. 4. 14.
, and it did come; and he that does not believe as he did, may worthily be
rebuked, in the words of my Text, Why are ye so fearful, O ye of little
faith? And so much be said of the first thing Christ reproved in his disciples,
viz. The excess of fear. The second follows, which is the defect of faith,
in these words.

O ye of little Faith!] Which reproof is laid 2. Part.
down in way of admiration: q. d. Oh that your ^aith should be so little, and
weak, having heard and seen what you have done! Out of which ^ater comes
meat, and out of this strong comes sweetness Judge. 14. 14.
, (that I may use Sampsons Riddle*) yea out of this reproof do flow comforts
abundantly to all godly minded ones, who mourn in their souls, because they
are subject to the same reproof, having but a little ^aith. For the further
comfort then, of all poor, weak, and feeble believers, suffer me, with your
patience, fully to open this point.

And mark his words: he says not, O ye of [ no] 1. Observe.
faith, for they all believed in him ( Judas excepted John 6. 64.
;) but, ye of [ little] faith. The widow of Zarephath had not a Cake, but an
handful of Meal in a barrel, and a little Oil in a Cruse 1 Kings 17. 12.
. That they followed him into the ship, and feared no danger; that in this
extreme danger they come to Christ, calling him Lord, Lord, and pray him to
save them; proves that they had some faith: but that they are so fearful,
and awaken him so turbulently, as if they were in greater security if he were
awake, or he less able to help them being on sleep, than awake; this was
poor and little faith, and our Savior reproves it with admiration, 2. Observe.
O ye of little faith! Not of little courage or valor; for these and all
other virtues grow from faith, as the Apostle says, Some through faith have
stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched the violence of fire, of weak have
been made strong, waxed valiant in fight, and have turned to flight armies of
Aliens Heb. 11. 34.
. No virtue so useful in dangers as faith: the Apostie calls it, our shield
Ephesians. ^. 16.
; and another faith, In all dangers and distresses we are to encounter withal
in this world, it is our victory 1 John 5.
; wherefore he wondreth they have so little of it: And as another Evangelist
expresses it, How is it, that ye have no faith Mar. 4. 40.
? that is, How is it that ye have no better, or greater measure of faith? Or
as S. Luke, vet in another phrase and form, Where is your faith Luke 8. 25.
? Or as the Greek Article intends, Where is that your faith (...); Vbi est
illa sides vesira? Toll. Comment. in locum.
? that measure and degree of faith, which you have showed to be in me? All
which tend to one purpose, viz. to declare the weakness, feebleness, and
modicitie of faith in this their great danger, when the strength of their faith
should specially have supported them. Object.


But some may object and say, That after this time the Apostles are said to
have no faith; therefore they ahd no faith now. So after his resurrection, it
is said, Christ appeared to the eleven as they sat at meat, and upbraided them
with their unbeleefe Mark. 16. 14. (...): Exprobravit m^r^dulitatem eorum.
. And to Thomas he said, Be not faithless, but believing John 20. 27. (...).
Ne si^^ m^cred^l^^, sed credens
.

I answer, That infidelity, incredulity, or unbeleefe, is twofold, viz.
absolute, and comparative. Answ.
Absolute unbeleefe, is, when the heart is void of every, even the least jot
and grain of true faith and belief; as where the Apostle demands, What part
has he that believes with an Infidel 2 Co^. 7. 15.
? Comparative infidelity is in relation, not with any true, but with a strong
measure of faith. And thus a weak, or little faith; a faith, which in the
hour of temptation is assaulted with doubtfulnesse, is comparatively called
faithlesnesse, and unbeleefe: such was their faith now, and after Christ's
resurrection for a time.

And now, if we make Application; Surely, if it Application.
bewrayed a small measure of says for them to be so fearful, when Christ
was, in humility, weakness, and infirmity, on sleep; and before they had
seen many most glorious miracles, which after this time he wrought for
confirmation of their faith; and before they saw his glory in his resurrection
from the dead, and his ascension into heaven, and the sending of the holy Ghost
upon them, according to his promise: How much less is our faith? yea how may
we justly think we have no faith, but are most worthy to be reproved for our
infidelity, if in any danger we exceed in fear, having seen all his
miracles, resurrection, and ascension, etc. in the glass of the Gospel? Was
their faith little, because he being on sleep, they did exceedingly fear
danger? And shall not our faith appear to be far less, if we so
exceedingly fear, seeing we know, he now sits at the right hand of God Romans
8. 34.
, having received all power and authority in heaven and earth Matthew. 28. 18.
, and never slumbreth nor sleeps Psalm. 121 4.
.

Oh then meditate on the promises, performances, Exhortation.
and power of God; the merit of Christ, mercy of God, his goodness and
greatness; who both will and can turn all to the best; that in greatest
perplexity and distress that can or may befall your selves, or any Gods
people, you may have the commendation given to Abraham, that contrary to hope,
he believed under hope Romans 4. 18.
, and may avoid this reproof, Why are ye fearful? O ye of little faith!

Here first we may learn, what great spiritual 1. Genesis Doct.
combats and conflicts Gods children in this world are subject unto. Our life
is a warfare on earth Job 7. 1.
; as a well-tried, and expert Warrior (keeping the terms of his own Art)
called it: and the Apostle, a wise and valiant Captain in Gods host, does not
only furnish every Christian soldier, from top to toe, with complete harness,
but also describes their enemies; We wrestle not with flesh and blood, but
against principalities and powers, against worldly governors, the princes of
the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickednesses, which are in high
places Ephesians. 6. 12.
. You see what enemies we have, and how exceedingly furnished, with strength in
their hands, and malice in their hearts, having all gainful advantages, both
from nature; they spirits, and we flesh; and from place; they being above, we
below, and far beneath them. In which combat of our souls, faith is our
principal armor, both of offense and defense; and therefore the Apostle
bids us, Resist Satan, being steadfast in the faith 1 Pet. 5. 9.
; to take the shield of faith Ephesians. 6. 16.
; and to fight the good fight of faith 1 Timothy 6. 12.
. Oh it is our faith, whereby we stand 2 Cor. 1. ult.
; and get victory 1 John 5.
. Wherefore there is nothing so much assaulted as our faith, yea and many times
is so exceedingly battered and shaken, and brought to so low an ebb, that even
the best of Gods children have thought they have had no faith, and (at least in
the exceeding weakness thereof) have made bitter complaints, My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me Psalm. 22. 1.
? and, will the Lord absent himself for ever? and will he show no more favor?
Is his mercy clean gone for ever? Does his promise fail for evermore? Has
God forgotten to be gracious? Does he shut up his mercies in his displeasure?
Lord, how long will thou hide thy self? for ever? and shall thy wrath burn
like fire Psalm. 89. 46.
? And, Oh wretched man, that I am Romans 7. penult.
! Lo these, these indeed are the grievous conflicts and foiles, which even the
chosen Captains of the Lords Armies have received: and if such Lions
themselves have roared, for the disquretnesse of their hearts; what have silly
Lambs experience of in their souls? No marvel, though they sigh, and mourn,
and complain, and be brought very low, as if they had no faith at all; but
their hearts were full of unbeleefe, doubtings, fears.

Oh let such know, to their comfort, that the very Use.
best of Gods children have had, and have, and shall have experience hereof,
and shall groan under the burden of the remainders of corruption, and lament
the sinful infirmities which cleave unto them, and cry out of fear, doubting,
and unbeleefe: yea know (because Regeneration is imperfect in this life) where
there is no doubting at all, no fear at all, no striving against unbeleefe,
there is no true comfort, no true faith, but a proud presumption.

For the illustration of this point, know first, That 1. Observe.
corruption is not seen or discerned by corruption, but by grace; as foul
things are discerned by the light, not by darkness; and sickness discerned by
health; none being more desperately sick, than he that feels it not; none in
so dangerous case, as they that see not the corruptions, and feel not the
wants of the soul, but are in that spiritual Lethargy, the Church of
Laodicea was, thinking she was rich, and increased in goods, and had need of
nothing; when (he was poor, and miserable, wretched, blind, and naked Rev.
3. 17.
The more therefore we feel our infidelity, distrust, rebellion, the better
our estate.

Secondly, man must be considered in a double 2. Observe.
estate, viz. as he is by nature; and as he is by grace. By nature, he is
altogether flesh; That which is borne of the flesh is flesh John 3. 6.
; he is wholly led by the flesh, he delights in nothing but the works of the
flesh, and all the works of the flesh are his; and if herein he continue, he
and they shall perish together. But in the estate of grace, though he live in
the flesh 2 Cor. 10. 3.
, he walks not after the flesh Romans 8. ^.
, he warreth not after the flesh 2 Cor. 10. 3.
; he is led by the spirit Romans 8. 14.
. Indeed the flesh does continually lust against the spirit, and many times
prevails, not only begetting evil motions, purposes, and desires, but as a
strong enemy, leading the child of God captive, to do that which he should
not, he would not Gal. 5. 17.
. But these motions, these actions, they are not his, they shall never be laid
to his charge. If Satan object them, he may renounce them, and say, Indeed
these are the motions and actions of the flesh, and we were sometime all one,
but now we are separate and divided; it only dwells as an inmate, but I do
not partake with her; never man and wife were more firmly divorced, than I and
my flesh: therefore if the flesh have played the harlot, and begot these brats,
cast them at her door, I will not own them, I will dash them in pieces
against the stones. Wherein you have the Apostle himself for a most excellent
president; Now, if I do that which I would not, it is no more I that do it,
but sin that dwells in me Romans 7. 20.
. If I should not have doubts and fears, and discern much evil in me, I
might then indeed justly doubt and fear, I were all flesh; but I do dislike
and detest them, and lay them to the fleshes charge; and even hereby I know
that I have received the Spirit, because it shows me the weakness of my
faith, and stirs up holy groans, sighs, and desires to Heaven, for the
increase of it.

I say again, let none of Gods children be too Use.
much dejected, or cast down, or grow out of heart with themselves, much less
call their estate with God into question, because the remnant of corruption,
like a bold, saucie inmate, dwells in them, and does continually vex and
disquiet them, disturb and trouble them, cross and hinder them in every good
purpose and thing, and still haling and pulling on to sin with incessant
importunity, and sometimes prevailing. The experience of this made the Apostle
so exclaim, Oh wretched man! With whom give thanks feelingly to God for
victory through Jesus Christ, for that he has delivered thee from the
dominion, bondage, and slaverie of sin, that it does not reign in thee: and
also keep a very watchful eye, and ever give thy flesh a sour look, keep it
under, and in subjection, make it not thy counsel Gal. 1. 16.
; be sure to make a covenant with eyes Job 31. 1.
, ears, and all the senses, they shall be strangers to it; forbid thy
strangers to be acquainted with it, and then (though sin and corrupt flesh be
such a shameless inmate, to say as Ruth did to Naomie, Whither thou go, I
will go; where thou dwell, I will dwell; where thou die, I will die, and
there will I be buried Ruth 1. 16, 17.
; nothing but death can quite part and sunder us) it shall not be able to hurt
us. Oh see what a sweet comfort the Gospel proposes to Gods children, even
from sense and feeling of their wants, and weakness of faith. Concerning
which, I will not say as our Savior did in another case, He that is able to
receive it, let him receive it Matthew. 19. 12.
; but I will even thrust it into the bosoms of weak and seeble Christians (if
any such be here present) by removing two such Objections, as are made against
it, and whereby, as with both hands, they even thrust it from them. The first
is this.

Oh, I could comfort my self many ways, if I 1. Objection. No sense of Faith.
had any faith, (though never so weak or small) but I cannot discern any at
all, but mine heart is full of infidelity and rebellion. I answer; Great Answ.
is the sense and assurance, which commonly believers have of their faith;
otherwise the Apostle would never have said, Prove your selves, whether you are
in the faith or not 2 Cor. 13. 5.
: yet two times must be excepted, viz. the time when God first gives it, and
the hour or time of some great temptation. Recount then the times which are
passed, and the years of old, yea remember the years of the right hand of the
most high, Psalm. 77. 10. Have thou at any time had the assurance and comfort of
faith? Be of good comfort, it will revive again; Heaviness may endure but for
a night, joy will come in the morning: 2 Cor. 4. 9.
(...), Thy faith may be cast down, but cannot be destroyed; Deliquium pati,
non penitus mori; may sownd, but cannot die. Or have thou never had the sense
of faith, but now desire it, and art heartily sorry thou feel it not? it
may be this grain of mustard seed is but now sown in the furrows of thine
heart; water it with Word, Sacraments, and Prayer, and doubt not but thou
shall, in good time, have the sense and comfort of it.

Oh, but I have no sense of Gods love; therefore 2. Objection. No sense of Gods
love.
I have no faith. I answer: Christ had no sense of Gods love, and yet believed,
when he prayed, Answer.
My God, my God, why have thou for saken me Psalm. 22. 1.
? How void was Job of the sense of Gods love, when he complained, God
accounted him as his enemy Job 13. 24.
; and made him as his butt to shoot at Job 16. 12.
? How far was David from despair, when he complained, Is his mercy clean
gone for ever Psalm. 77. 8, 10.
? No, no, that is but infirmity, (as he confessed) God changes not Numb. 23.
19.
; nor has any shadow of change James 1. 17.
; whom he loves, he loves to the end John 13. 4.
: his covenant is more sure, than that of the day and night Ierem. 33. 20.
. It is but thy trial; In a little wrath, I hid my face from thee, for a
moment, but with everlasting compassion have I embraced thee Esaias 54. 8.
. The Sun sets, and has a time to pass through the other Hemisphere; but
the next morning it rises again with greater comfort. God is a sure friend,
and many times intends most good, when he is least seen or felt. Wherefore
say, Oh my soul, believe thou have faith, though thou discern it not; and
presume God loves thee, though thou have no sense of it.

Our second lesson is; Afflictions are a great 2. Genesis Doct.
trial of faith, and commonly it does greatly abate in them. So S. Peter
says, The faithful went through many temptations, that the trial of their
faith, being found much more precious than gold that perishes 1 Pet. 1. 7.
. Thus God tried Abraham Genesis 22. 1.
, i. his faith; and Christ tried Philip John 6. 6.
, i. his faith: yea and many times the faith of Gods children shrinketh in
tribulations. David's faith was strong, when he said, The Lord is my light, and
my salvation, whom then shall I fear? The Lord is the strength of my life, of
whom shall I be afraid? Though an host should encampe against me, mine heart
shall not fear Psalm. 27. 1, 3.
: yet Saul so long pursued him in the wilderness, and brought him to so many
straits, that in the end, in weakness of faith, he said, I shall one day
perish by the hand of Saul 1 Samuel 27. 1.
. Peter's faith was strong, when there was no danger; he would die, rather than
deny Christ Ioh. 13. penult.
: but in the High Priests Hall, where was danger indeed, his faith was weak he
denied, and forsware him Matthew. 26. 72.
. Andrew, Simon Peter's brother, began well, There is a lad here has five
barley loaves, and two fishes: he held not out; no sooner cast his eye on such
a hungry multitude, but said, What are they among so many? Our Disciples were
bold men on the shore, and feared nothing; but in the storm* where is that
faith? Oh let us judge charitably of such, as (in times of temptation) have
bewrayed weakness; and prepare our selves, being ever suspicious of our
weakness, and praying God to increase our faith. And thus much be said in
general* Now let us more particularly view the word^.

O ye of little faith! (...)
] Faith being one of the graces of infusion, has it measures and degrees, (I
mean not one man compared with another, as Abraham, who was strong in faith
Romans 4. 20.
, compared with the father of the Daemoniack, Lord, help mine unbeleefe) but
in the same man, it may be strong at one time, and weak at another: and the
strength and weakness of it, is in both the parts of it, viz. Knowledge, and
Application; so as one man may be strong in Knowledge, and weak in
Application; and another may be weak in Knowledge, and yet strong in
Application.

What is the greatest, and least degree of faith, can hardly be determined by
the Scriptures. The strongest we read of, was that in Abraham, the father
Which is the greatest measure of Faith.
of all them that believe, whose faith is thus by the Holy Ghost commended;
Against hope, he believed in hope. And again, He was not weak in faith. And
again, Being strong in faith, he staggered not at the promise through
unbeleefe, but gave glory unto God, being fully persuaded, that what he had
promised, he was able also to perform Romans 4. 18, 19, 20.
. Lo, what an high commendation is here given to Abraham's faith, He believed
under hope, against hope; he was not weak, he was strong, he staggered not, he
was fully assured. This is that great faith expressed by the Metaphor of a ship
which comes into the Haven with full sails, and is called (...), or a full
assurance, Heb. 10. 22. (...) Lapid. in Romans 14. 5. Which great measure of
faith, he had not (nor any other ordinarily) at the first of his conversion,
but attained unto it, by great schooling, many trials, and great observation,
and experience of Gods mercy, power, goodness, and greatness. And this is the
measure we must all strive to attain unto. Oh happy that soul, that can say
truly with Job, I know that my Redeemer lives, whom I shall see Job 19. 25.
: and with the Apostle S. Paul, I am persuaded that nothing can separate us
from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord Romans 8. ult.
.

There is also a lesser degree of faith, which is called a weak, or little
faith (...)
, resembled to a bruised reed, smoking flax Esaias 42. 3. Mat. 12. 20.
, and a grain of mustard seed Matthew. 17. 20.
, which is the least of all seeds (that brings up such a stalk or tree.)
That it is very little, these Similies intend: but what is that least measure,
and Which is the least measure of Faith.
degree, which every one must have, that will be justified, and saved, is a
great question, but behooves us greatly to be resolved in. Learned Divines say,
it is a serious and constant desire (arising from an humbled and broken spirit)
to be reconciled unto God, and to have sins forgiven. Some seem to hold,
that full assurance is essential to every true faith; and therefore describe
it, To be a full persuasion of the heart, grounded upon the promises of God,
that whatsoever Christ has done for others, he has done for me. But alas, how
far was that true believing father from this, who prayed, Lord help mine
unbeleefe Mar. 9. 14.
. And many thousands of Gods children, who in the instant of their conversion,
or by their negligence, in the use of good means, or by falling into some
great sin, have so far abated the power and efficacy of their Faith, that
they cannot say, Christ died for them, that their sins are forgiven, and God
their Father in Jesus Christ. Oh such full assurance is only essential to a
strong faith. It may be a true faith, which has not that assurance, but is
rather in great combat with distrust, and despair. Mark then your description
of the least measure of faith; It is but a desire, yet a true and constant
desire; and a desire arising from an humbled and contrite spirit; such a spirit
as is cast down, and even broken, with sight of sin, sense of Gods anger,
and fear of punishment. And the object of this desire, is not so much life,
and salvation, (which Balaam, and every mere natural man desires) as
Remission of sins, and Reconciliation unto God, which no unbeleever cares
for.

The ground of this Assertion is, because the true Ground.
desire of any Grace, is as the bud of that Grace, and (in Gods esteem) the
Grace it self. So then, the desire of pardon, and reconciliation with God, is
as the bud of faith. For as the bud includes the blossom and fruit; and as in
the Spring time, with the warmth and nourishment of Sun and ground, the bud
does grow, blossom, knit, and hold fruit: so this true desire, how little
soever it seem to be to him that has it, or others, yet being nourished with
Word, Sacraments, and Prayer, it will grow stronger and stronger, like the
grain of Mustardseed.

But let us (I pray you) see, how the Scriptures will Confirmation.
warrant this comfortable description of a true faith, by the least measure of
it. David says, Lord, thou have heard the desire of the poor Psalm. 10. 17.
: then there is faith in the desire, for God hears no prayer that is not made
in faith Iam. 1. 6.
. And again, He will fulfill the desire of them that fear him Psalm. 145. 19.
. Christ has pronounced, Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after
righteousness Matthew. 5. 6.
. And again, To him that is athirst, I will give to drink of the well of life
freely Rev. 21. 6.
. Hereunto I subscribe, as unto the undoubted truth of God, and Tenet of our
Church, which has taught us thus to pray, O God, merciful Father, that
despisest not the sighing of a contrite heart, nor the desire of such as be
sorrowful. Whereupon I infer this comfort for the refreshing of any wearied
soul. Do thou see thy sins many, great, and grievous, whereby thou know
thou have offended God, and stand guilty, and liable to all his curses, and
punishments, in this life, and the life to come? Though in strength of faith
thou can not say, Christ has redeemed me from the curse of the Law, Christ
has by his obedience reconciled me unto God, and all my sins are forgiven;
only thou hopest thy sins are pardonable, and thou desire unfainedly, that
God would pardon them, and be reconciled, etc. Be of good comfort, here is the
bud and seed of faith, and in Gods acceptance, true faith, and thou shall have
thy desire. And for confirmation hereof, mark these two things.

First, the true desire of Grace, (as Faith and Repentance) Two Arguments
proving a godly desire of Grace, to be true Grace.
is a sanctified desire, a sanctified affection. Now where the Spirit of God
once begins to sanctify, he does sanctify throughout 1 Thessalonians. 5 23.
, the mind, memory, and will, as well as affections; and he that is
sanctified, does believe, and is justified Romans 8. 30.
.

Secondly, this holy desire is a plain evidence, 2
and fruit of the Spirit, which stirs up fighes and groans Romans 8. 25.
. These desires cannot proceed from the flesh; For that which is from the
flesh, is flesh John 3. 6.
; and being from the Spirit, it is an infallible argument, that Christ dwells
in us, as Saint John says, Hereby we know that Christ dwells in us, even by
his Spirit, which he has given us 1 John 4. 13.
. And, does Christ dwell in us? Then surely we have faith, For he dwells in
the heart by faith Ephesians. 3. 17.
. Oh then be of good comfort, humbled soul, these holy motions and desires may
assure thee, thou art truly sanctified, thou have the Spirit of God, thou have
a true faith, though very little, weak, and feeble.

But me thinks (upon the delivery of this doctrine) Object.
I see, both the Wicked to lift up head, and set up bristles, saying, Nay, if
good desires will serve the turn, we are well, and shall be saved, for I am
sure we have enough of them; and the Godly yet still to be of a deject
countenance, saying, Alas, what wicked man is there in the world, but has
sometimes good desires?

I answer, It is true that God sometimes bestows Answ.
common gifts on the Reprobate; and so, in the judgment of man, they go often
far in the way of salvation; but never any Reprobate, ever had, or shall
have, the least measure of justifying and saving faith; that is only of Gods
Elect Titus 1* 1.
, and of such as are ordained to salvation Acts 13. ult.
. And therefore all the fleshly desires of the Reprobate, may be discerned from
this true spiritual desire of the Elect.

First, by the continuance of it: for the desires of Notes of difference.
the Reprobate are but like a flash of lightning, sudden motions arising from
hearing of the Word, 1
or some heavy judgment of God that lies on them; as Herod heard John
Baptist gladly, and did many things; and had doubtless many good motions, but
all like the mornings dew Ose. 6. 5.
: if he be pleased with the dancing of a wanton Damsel, he will cut off the
Baptists head Matthew. 14. 9.
. When the plague is on Pharaoh, he will send for Moses and Aaron, and cry,
Pray, pray; but no sooner the plague removed, but he is worse than before Exodus
8. 15.
. But the true desire abides and increases, as the light unto a perfect day
Prove. 4. 18.
.

Again, true faith is of an active and operative 2
nature; according to the measure of it, it will work. He that has the true
desire of peace, and reconciliation with God, by the merits of Christ, it will
make him use the means, whereby the same is procured: he that does truly
desire forgiveness of sins, and Gods favor, will hate his sins, and
whatsoever he knows does offend God. The wicked cannot do so. Herod
reverenced John, and heard him gladly; but his heart was still set on Herodias,
and boiled in filthy incestuous lust Mark 6. 20.
. Balaam would fain die the death of the righteous Number. 23. 10.
; but cares not for their lives, nor will use the means, whereby such a
blessed death is procured, but his heart is still set upon the wages of
ungodliness 2 Pet. 2. 15.
. If then thou have but the forenamed desire; but thou feel it powerful
within thee, to work more and more an hatred of thy sins, and of all the
means and occasions thereof; and to use carefully the means, which God has
appointed for the increase of faith and holiness; assuredly thou have received
the good seed of faith into thy heart, and thou have the bud, which will in
good time blossom, knit, and bear. Thus that I have declared the least
measure of saving faith: let me, for their further comfort that have it, deduce
a few most sweet conclusions.

The first is this; The least and weakest true faith ^
does as perfectly justify, as the greatest and strongest. The poor weak
believing man, that prayed Christ to help his unbeleefe Mark 9. 24.
, was as perfectly justified, as Abraham, that was so strong in faith, that he
staggered not Romans 4. 20.
.

The Reason hereof is, because faith does not Reason.
justify in respect of it self, as it is a gift, or action, or virtue,
inherent in us; for then, as it is more or less, stronger or weaker, so should
we be more or less justified; but faith does justify, as it is the
instrument, whereby we apprehend and receive the object. The object or matter
of our justice is Christ, and Christ is not received more or less, according
to the measure or degree of faith; but Christ is either wholly received, or
refused: and he that has whole Christ, has his righteousness; which is so
perfect, ( being the righteousness of God Romans 3. 21.
) as cannot receive any augmentation or increase. So that justification
consists not in the strength and quantity, but in the truth and quality of
our faith. God has a touchstone to try our faith, 1 Pet. 1. 7. but not
weights to weigh with; regards the goodness, not greatness; heartinesse,
but not heaviness. The dim and weak sighted were as well cured by beholding
of the brazen Serpent, as the clear and strong John 3 24. Numb. 21. 9.
: the old, poor, sick, weak and palsy, trembling hand, may receive a
precious pearl, or a piece of gold, as well as the young, steddie, and strong.

Oh, what a comfort may this be to such as Use.
mourn and are grieved for the weakness of their faith; that howsoever God
may make a great difference, and they may discern a great disparitie betwixt
themselves and others, in regard of the graces of infusion, knowledge,
patience, zeal, wisdom: yet if their faith be true (though never so weak or
small) they are equal to the best, in the greatest blessings, of justification
and adoption.

This that I have said, is not for encouragement Prevention.
of the wicked, who turn the grace of God into wantonness Romans 6. 1.
; resting contented in the least measure, and presume of justification thereby;
(for even thereby it appears, that their faith is not true, because it does
not grow:) but this is spoken for the comfort of all such, as do carefully use
the means, and even hunger and thirst after the growth and increase of faith;
but are fearful and even out of heart with themselves, because they do
discern their faith to be so little and weak.

Secondly, the least true faith shall never fully 2 Confirmation.
nor finally be lost: this is Gods promise, I will put my fear into their
hearts, that they shall never depart from me, all the days of their life
Ierem. 32. 39.
. And Christ has promised, He that comes to me, shall never hunger; and he
that believes in me, shall never thirst John 6. 35.
. Christ prayed for Peter, that his faith should not fail Luke 22. 31.
. And so has he prayed for all those that believe in him John 17 21.
; and promised, that the gates of hell shall not prevail against them Matthew.
16. 18.
. And Saint John faith, He that is borne of God, does not commit sin,
neither can he, because he is borne of God, and his seed remains in him 1
John 3. 9.
. Hence it is, that he that once truly believes, is said to have eternal life
John 3. 36.
: To be passed from death to life John 5. 24.
: To be raised, and seated in heavenly places Ephesians. 2. 6.
: Yea, to be already glorified Romans 8. 30.
. From which, (and many such places of Scriptures, which might be alleged) we
do infallibly conclude, and it is the doctrine of the Church of England, and
of Orthodox Divines, even the conclusion of the whole late Reverend Synod at
Dort, against Papists, Arminians, and whosoever Heretics, that deny it; That
a true faith once had, is never fully, nor finally lost.

I do not deny, but all the graces of the Spirit Prevention.
are like to fire: if it be not nourished with fuel, but have water cast upon
it, a great fire may be exceedingly slaked, and great brands come to some few
embers, or sparks: So faith, through neglect of means, and falling into some
great sin, the Spirit of God may be grieved, the power, virtue, and efficacy
of faith, may be greatly cooled and abated, and the sense of saving grace lost.
A true believer may fall into a spiritual sownd, but cannot die; he may
demurre with himself, whether he be living or dead, yea, may pronounce
himself dead; but (as the Apostle pronounced of Eutichus, after his fall) life
is in him; his faith is as a spark of fire under an heap of ashes, and as sap
in the root of the tree in Winter time. It was Peter's case, whose fall did
wound, but not kill; weaken, but not utterly destroy his faith; upon his
Masters looking upon him, and hearing the Cock crow, his faith revived, He went
out, and wept bitterly for his sin.

Yea, true faith is so far from being utterly lost, Assertion.
that by the use of good means, it does out-grow the Mustard Seed, yea
out-grow Ionahs Gourd. Nichodemus, who was once so weak in the faith, that he
came to Jesus by night, for fear of the Jews John 3. 2.
; yet his faith so grew, that when Christ was crucified, and all the Disciples
fled, he went in boldly, and begged the body of Jesus, embalmed, and
honorably buried it John 19. 39.
. Peter so weak in faith, that at the voice of a silly Damsel, he denied his
Master Matthew. 26. 70.
: yet his faith so grew, that he boldly reproved the Princes to their faces,
for murdering the Lord of life Acts 3. 15.
. Thomas his faith was so weak, that he openly professed, he would not
believe that his Master was risen from death, unless he did see the print of
the nails, and put his hand into his side John 20. 25.
; but it did so grow, when Christ appeared again, and bade him see and feel,
that he said in a strong faith, Thou art my Lord and my God John 21. 18.
. Yea, it is many times seen in days of persecution, and of great trials,
that such as in peace and prosperity, have showed a strong faith and great
zeal, abundance of graces, have in adversity been humbled with great fear,
and bewrayed great weakness of faith: Whereas such as in times of peace have
showed small knowledge, little faith, and weak zeal; yet in time of
persecution, in the strength of knowledge, ^aith, and zeal, they have stood
out against the enemies, and have sealed the truth of God with their dearest
blood: wherein is fulfilled that of the blessed Virgin in her Song, He puts
down the mighty from their seats, and exalts the humble and meek; he
fills the hungry with good things, and the rich he sends empty away. Luke
1. 52.


And all this is, that such as are strong, and have Use 1.
greatest measure of graces, may not be proud and presumptuous, but carry a low
sail, think basely of themselves, and work out their salvation with fear
and trembling Philip. 2. 12.
; praying God, not to tempt them, above that which they shall be able 1 Cor.
10. 13.
.

And secondly, that such as are but weak in Use 2.
faith, may not be too much disheartened and dejected, seeing the Lord is able
to make them strong Romans 14. 4.
. Yea that we think charitably, and walk lovingly toward even the weakest
Semper been speremus de eo, in quo cernimus aliquid Dei. Calvin.
; and they that are strong, bear the infirmities of the weak, Rom* 15. 1. For
if trial came, the Lord knows whose says would be strong. But be of good
comfort, oh ye weak and tender ones; for if your faith be true, though never
so weak, it shall never be fully nor finally lost; yea if God have any great
service for you, he will furnish you accordingly, his power shall appear in
your weakness 2 Cor. 12. 9.
; and your bruised reed shall become as strong as the Oak in Bashan, so as no
storm or tempest shall be able to overthrow it.

Yea, here let us with wise eyes behold, and with Conclusion.
thankful hearts give glory unto God, who (as in the firmament, one star
differs from another) in his Church, furnishes his Saints with diversity of
gifts 1 Cor. 12. 11.
; giving to some a great measure of knowledge, faith, zeal; to others, but a
little of them; that such as have greatest measure, may be provoked to
thankfulness, and employ their gifts to the comfort of others; and the weak
may have cause both of humility and industry, striving to overtake such as
go before them; but none have cause to envy or despise another: though
through Satan's malice, and our weakness, it too often so fall out.

The third and last deduction, for the comfort of 3
weak believers, is; that God hears and accepts the prayers of the weakest
believers, and graciously helps them. It was prophesied of Christ, he should
not break the bruised reed nor quench the smoking fl^x Esaias 42. 3.
. Let the comparisons be well marked; and can the meekness of Christ, toward
poor sinners, be more lively expressed? How tender a plant is a reed? yea at
the strongest, how does it yield and bow with every puff of wind? but much
more when it is bruised, how easy a thing is it then to snap it asunder? How
weak is that spark of fire, which in fl^x does but cause smoke? Now, whereas
it is said, he will not break the one, nor quench the other, his meaning is, he
will no^ish and cherish them, strengthen the one, and kindle the other. Again,
He gives power to the faint, and to them that have no might he increases
strength Esaias 40. 29.
: Christ was sent to bind up the broken hearted Esaias 61. 1.
; The Lord upholdeth all that fall, and raises up all them that be bowed down
Psalm. 145. 14.
: Christ has called, Come to me, all ye that travel and are heavy laden,
and I will refresh you Matthew. 11. 28.
; has promised, that he will cast away none that come unto him John 6. 37.
; yea, that he will give them eternal life, and none shall be able to pluck
them out of his hand John 10. ^8.
.

Indeed, Christ gave great commendation to such Prevention.
as have had great faith; as to the Centurion, Verily I say unto you, that I
have not found so great faith, no, not in Israel Matthew. 8. 10.
: and to the woman of Canaan, he said, O woman, great is thy faith Matthew. 15.
28.
. But yet in all ages God has witnessed his loving acceptance of small and
weak faith, and of the first beginnings of Conversion.

How weak a faith was that in the Ninivites, Examples.
Who can tell, if God will return, and repent Jonah 3* ^.
? yet God did repent, and spare them. What a weak faith had the Leper, Lord,
if thou will, thou can make me clean: he received him, and did make him
clean Matthew. ^. ^.
. How weak that fathers faith, who could scarce tell, whether he believed or
no, and ceased to pray for his son, and prayed for himself, Lord help mine
unbeleefe Mark 9. 24.
; and he both helped his unbeleefe, and cured his son. Our Savior did but
hear a young man make profession of the practice of outward and civil
righteousness, All these I have observed from my youth; and the Text says, he
looked upon him, and loved him Mark 10. 22.
. And when he heard a Scribe utter but one good speech, That to love God with
all the heart, is above all sacrifices; he said unto him, that he was not far
from the kingdom of heaven Mark 12 34.
. Oh now should the Apostles faith have shone bright as a lamp, but the
tempest had almost blown it out, that it did but smoke; yet Christ quenches
it not* he reproves, but accepts of it; He arose, and rebuked the winds and
seas.

These, and many such Scriptures, both Positive Use.
and Exemplarie, of prophecy and promise, are written for the comfort of all
such as have but little, weak, and feeble faith: and we had need to have them
in remembrance; for Satan is very skillful in the Scriptures, and has them
ready to assault weak ones with all; as, Faith is the evidence of things
which are not seen Heb. 11. ^.
; And we are Gods house, if we hold fast the rejoicing of the hope, firm unto
the end Heb. 3. 6.
; and Faith is the anchor of the soul, both sure and steadfast Heb. 6. tenult.
. Does not S. James bid every one that prays, to pray in faith, without
wavering or doubting? How can thou think thou have faith, or make account
that ever God will hear thee, when thine heart is so full of wavering and
doubting? Oh quench this fiery dart, and say, Avoid Satan: it is true, thou
have presented unto me a strong faith (which I do strive after:) but the
Apostles had but a little weak faith, yet were not rejected: and Satan thou
shall never be able to quench that little spark, which God has kindled in my
soul; nor destroy that little grain of mustard seed, which is sown in the
furrows of mine heart.

Lastly note, that Christ said, His Disciples had but Observe.
[ little] faith: and surely (as yet) they had but little knowledge, little
honor, little wealth, and little of any thing that was esteemed and accounted
of in the world; being but poor Fishermen, Tole-gatherers, and men of mean
condition; as Amos a great Prophet, was before but an Herdman. God many times
brings greatest things to pass, by weakest means* Passing by the noble,
mighty, rich, and wise of the world, and choosing the foolish, weak, and base,
and despised things of the world 2 Cor. ^* 26.
, that no flesh may glory in it self. To which purpose S. Augustine has an
excellent saying Si eligeret Regem, di^^ret Re^, potestas mea; si Oratorem,
eloquentia mea; si Philosophum, sapien^^a mea electa est, etc. August. de
^erbis D^^^ni, Sermon. 59.
; If God had chosen Kings to be his Disciples, they would have said, We are
chosen for our power; If Orators, for our eloquence; I^ Philosophers, for our
wisdom; If Senators, for our dignity; If rich men, for our wealth Si eligeret
Regem, di^^ret Re^, potestas mea; si Oratorem, eloquentia mea; si Philosophum,
sapien^^a mea electa est, etc. August. de ^erbis D^^^ni, Sermon. 59.
. Wherefore he called Fishermen and Publicans, Follow me, you poor, ignorant,
and simple, you that have little, or nothing worthy esteem, or admiration in
your selves, that you may be all in me. Even so still the Lord many times
passes by such as are of great knowledge, learning, and wisdom; of high
degree, in Schools; of eminent Blood and Families, by birth; and calls far
meaner men in these respects, by whom he is most powerful in the ministry of
the Word. So for the Church of God, Christ told John's Disciples, The poor
receive the Gospel Matthew. 11. 5.
. And God has chosen the poor of the world, that they may be rich in faith,
and heirs of the Kingdom James 2. 5.
. This is it was intended in the parable: where the great men, that had their
Farms, Oxen, and Merchandise to follow, were rejected, and the poor, maimed,
halt, and blind, who lay in the Streets and Lanes of the City, and
Highways, and Hedges, were compelled to come in Matthew. 22. 2. Luke 14. 21.
etc.
. And this is it which the chief Priests and Pharisees objected to the
officers, Do any of the Rulers or Pharisees believe in him? But this people
that knows not the Law is cursed John 7. 48. Prevention.
. Indeed, it is not said, no wise, no noble, no mighty are chosen; for
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, David, Solomon, Nicodemus, Lazarus of Bethaniah,
Joseph of Arimathea, the two Centurions, the Proconsull, and many others; were
some of them noble, some wise, some mighty, etc. But (as Andrew said of the
loaves) What are these amongst so many John 6. 9.
? to the end, that we should not look upon Gods people and servants, with a
carnal eye, wherein they may seem base and contemptible; but behold them with
a spiritual eye, as they are in Christ, and so most glorious.

And thus much for the first part, in the performing of the calm, viz. The
reprehension of his disciples, for their excessive fear, and defective faith*
It follows.

Then he arose.] Christ having stilled the greater, 2. Part.
and more dangerous tempest, in the affections of his disciples, and settled
their souls in peace and tranquillity, patience, and comfort; he now
proceeds to still the roaring winds, and raging seas: which he does by
powerful and angry reprehension. Wherein two things are to be considered, viz.
Division.
A preparation [ then he arose*] Secondly, the reprehension it self, [ he
rebuked the winds, and seas.]

Then he arose.] That is, when by reprehension he 1. Part.
had decreased the fear, and increased the faith of Sense.
his disciples, and so prepared and fitted them to the fruitful sight of this
ensuing Miracle, [ then (...) ^unc.
] he arose. Which teaches us, That God is many times hindered from doing great
works, by the indisposition Doct. lit.
of his people* Christ could, as soon as ever he awaked, have start up and
rebuked the winds and seas: but his disciples were in extreme passion, which
(as the wise heathen man has truly said) destroieth judgment and
understanding Perit omne judicium, cum res transit in affectum. Scnec.
. As the eye, which is exceedingly troubled with humors and theumes, cannot
abide to look on the Sun, no more can a passionate and troubled mind behold
with content and comfort the great and glorious sworkes of God.

If then, we think it long ere God help us, or Use.
his people, let us not murmr, and have thoughts of Belial, concerning God,
and (as though he had cast off all care and loving affection) complain, That
he had forgotten to be merciful, and would for ever shut up his loving
kindness in displeasure, etc Psalm. 77. 7.
. But let us look into our selves, and know, that something is amiss in us;
we want Faith, Repentance, or Patience; which when the Lord has cured, then,
he will arise and help us.

He arose. (...) Surgens.
] Or, arising. To [arise] properly, does signify such a gesture, or motion of
the body, which has sat, or been laid; whereby it does prepare and address
it self to some other posirure, disposition, or actio^; as standing, walking,
running, etc. So Peter said to the Creeple, that was laid at the Beautiful
Gate of the Temple, to ask alms of them that entered into the Temple, In the
name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, rise up, and walk Acts 3. 6.
. So here it is taken properly. For (at the least) Christ had laid down his
head on a pillow, and reposed himself; but now he (arose.) I leave the letter.

To [arise] in Scriptures, is often used for preparation Sense mystic.
to some business, and does not intend any bodily sitting, or lying before, as
God called, Arise Jonah, and go to Ninivie Jonah 1. 2.
; And to Jeremy, Trusse up thy loins, arise, and speak unto them Ier. 1. 17.
; And to Ezechiel, Son of man, stand upon thy feet Ezech. 2. 3, 2.
. All which intend no more, but, go about that business, I have appointed you
unto. By figurative Translation, of that which is proper unto man, to God, he
is many times in Scriptures said, To sleep, and wake, Lie down, and rise up.
Where by (rising) is meant nothing else, but Gods preparing of himself, to
declare visibly his Mercy, or Justice; Love, or Anger; Greatness, or
Goodness; in the punishing of his enemies, or saving of his people. The Lord
thus promises his help, for the oppression of the poor, and deep sighing of
the needy, Now will I arise, and set him in safety, from him that puffs at
him Psalm. 12. 5.
. And elsewhere, with many more words to this purpose; Now will I arise (says
the Lord,) now will I be exalted, now will I lift up my self Esaias. 33. 10.
. Seeing then God is pleased thus to speak of himself, and in such a*
Metaphorical phrase to promise his help; his Church and people are bold, in
the same phrase, to crave his help; as, Arise, Lord, and let thine enemies be
scattered Psalm. 68. 1.
, arise, O God, and judge the earth Psalm. 82. ult.
; Arise, Lord, and save us Ierem. 2. 27.
. So much for the sense.

Here for instruction we learn, That howsoever Doct.
Christ may seem to sleep long, and then Satan and his instruments are busy,
and by God* great, but just permission, bring the Church of God in general,
and many Gods faithful servants in particular, into great extremity and
distress: yet in that needful and best time, when it shall be most for his
glory, and his peoples good, he will not fail to awake, arise, and help
them.

This is it which David so plainly teaches in the Confirmation.
Psalms, saying, He for sooke the Tabernacle of Shiloh; he delivered his
strength into captivity, and his beauty into the enemies hands: He gave his
people over to the sword, and was wroth with his inheritance: fire consumed
their young men, and their maidens were not given to marriage: their Priests
fell by the sword, and there were no widows to make lamentation. Oh what
havocke, enemies make of Gods Church and people, when God makes as though he
were on sleep, and regarded not. But mark what follows; when things were
brought to this desperate extremity, then the Lord awaked as one out of
sleep, and like a giant refreshed with wine, he smote his enemies on the
hinder parts, and put them to a perpetual shame Psalm. 78. 60.
.

The Lord seemed to sleep long, when his Church Examples.
and people sojourned in Egypt, four hundred years Genesis 15. 13.
. Oh then their enemies oppressed them, laid an iron yoke on their necks Deuteronomy.
28. 48.
, made them to tread in mire and clay Exodus 1. 11.
, gather stubble where they could find it Exodus 5. 12.
; and every day felt the lash of the whip, being not able to do what was
commanded Exodus 5. 14.
. Yea then they took crafty counsel how to destroy them, by the drowning of
all their male children Exodus 1. 10.
. But at the last the Lord awaked, and rose up to help them, met with Moses at
Horeb, and told him, I have seen, I have seen the affliction of my people
Exodus 3. 7.
; and then he brought out his people with joy, and his chosen with gladness
Psalm. 105. 43.
, and sent plague upon plague on their enemies, till he utterly destroyed them
in the Red Sea Exodus 24. 28.
. The Lord seemed to sleep long, when wicked Haman obtained a decrce, that all
the Jews should be destroyed. The Decree is written, sealed, published, and
day for execution appointed; but he was awakened, and raised up, with the
prayers and tears of his people; and then the King could not sleep, reads
in the Chronicle of Mordocaies fidelity, bethinketh how to honor and reward
him, makes Haman himself the instrument therein: Hester is promoted, Mordocat
honored, Haman and his sons hanged, the Decree disanulled, the people of the
Land slain by thousands, and the Jews have days of feasting and joy, for
their deliverance Hesth. 9. 22.
. The like might be showed in many other Examples. The doctrine is most true,
That howsoever God may seem for a time to sleep, and wholly to neglect the
estate of his people, and then they fall into great extremities; yet ever in
his good time, he has, and will awake, arise and help them.

Oh let Gods people trust in him, and awaken, Use.
and raise him up by Fasting, and Prayer, and sound Repentance. Yet know, that
he is not easily awakened and raised. When God, for the sins of his people,
does return to his place Ose. 5. ult.
, and as it were betaketh himself to his chamber and couch, it is no easy
thing to a waken him. It may cost many a heavy sigh, many a bitter tear, much
smiting of thigh, and knocking of breast. It will cost dear. Our mother Church
may be an Example, who found the truth of this Doctrine by woeful experience;
at whose door Christ knocking, and desiring to enter, she returning a
sluggish answer, I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on? but being
better advised, and arising to open unto him, he was gone: and as She was
hardly persuaded to arise and open to him; so was He as hardly persuaded to
arise and help her, but suffered her to run up and down in the streets to
seek him, and could not find him, yea to fall into the hands of cruel
watchmen, who did smite and wound her Cant. 5. 3.
. Oh see the bitter fuits of dallying, and late repentance! So his people
having provoked him, and calling to be delivered out of the hands of their
enemies, see what a cold answer he gives; Where are your gods? the rock
wherein ye trusted? that did eat the fat of your sacrifices, and drink the
wine of your drinkeofferings: let them rise up, and help you, and be your
protection Deuteronomy. 32. 37.
. Oh, poor is the help that Idols can give to their worshippers, having eyes,
but see not; ears, but hear not; feet, but walk not Ps. 115. 7.
. The Prophet bids the people, that would raise God, to give him no rest
Esaias 62. 7.
. Christ bids us ask, seek, knock Matthew. 7. 7.
, and commends spiritual violence Matthew. 11. 12.
. The Apostle requires a laboring, or striving in prayer Romans 15. 30.
; and the King of Ninivie commanded his people, to cry mightily unto God Jonah
3. 8.
. All which declare, that God helps not his people, till he be raised; he is
not raised but with violence, and (as it were) by being pricked under the
sides, (as the Hebrew word signifies Non excitatus nisi punctus and
extimulatus, juxta Hebrae^ vim verbi. Lorin. in Ps. T. 2. p. 625.
.)

Shall I conclude this point, with paralelling it Parallel.
with another? The people of God being persecuted, and much distressed by their
enemies, David penned that most excellent Psalm, the 68. wherein first he
directs them what to do in their woeful case, viz. (as the Disciples did
here) to go to Christ (for to him the Apostle applies that Psalm Ephesians. 4. 8.
.) And what must they entreat him to do? To arise: Arise Lord, and let thine
enemies be scattered. The Lord did arise, and went forth before his people,
made Kings with their Armies to ^lie, rebuked the company of spearemen, the
multitude of Bulls, and Calves of the people, and scattered them that delighted
in war. And what are Gods people taught to do then? Even to praise God, and
mutually provoke one another thereunto, Blessed be the Lord, even the God of
our salvation; he that is our God, is the God of salvation, and to him belong
the issues of death. Oh bless ye God in the Congregations, oh sing unto God,
ye kingdoms of the earth, oh sing praises to the Lord; even to him that
rides upon the heavens; the God of Israel is he that gives strength and power
unto his people, blessed be God. And is this all? No, but when they have
praised him for the good he has done, they are also directed to pray unto him,
to go forward, and perfect his good work begun; Strengthen, oh God, that
which thou have wrought for us, for thy Temples sake at Jerusalem; so shall
Kings bring presents unto thee.

Oh how fit that Comment, and this Theme, and Application.
both of them for this time! Many have been the troubles of Gods people for
these late years, in many parts of the Christian world, and Christ has slept
long; but lo, by the importunate prayers of his people, he is at last
awakened, his head is up from the pillow, he is risen, and has begun a
gracious calm. Though I cannot say with the Psalmist, Wars are ceased in all
the world Psalm. 46. 9.
; yet has he been mavelous, to break the bow, knap the spear asunder, and
create a glorious peace Esaias 4. penult.
, for so many thousands and millions, of his worthy servants in France, and to
give them the shadow of a great rock in that weary land Esaias 32. 2.
. Oh let the voice of gladness be heard in righteous men's dwellings Ps. 118.
15.
; and let God be praised in the congregations of his Saints; and let all men
pray the Lord to finish that good work he has begun, establish that peace in
all truth and sincerity, and give like comfort and breathing to all his
servants in Germany, and elsewhere. Yea be assured, now he is risen, he will
in his good time do some great work, and cause (if his people now praise and
pray) a great calm. I say then with Moses, Conclusion.
Stand still, fear not, and see the salvation of God Exodus 14. 13.
: and with the Prophet Zachary, Be silent, o all flesh, before the Lord, for
he is now raised up out of his holy habitation Zach ^. ult.
. So much for Preparation. The Reprehension follows.

He rebuked the wind, and the sea.] All the Evangelists 2. Part.
do use one and the same word (...).
, which in the native propriety does signify to reprehend, and chide, and
charge, yea charge strictly, even with threatenings and menaces; and accordingly
translated in some Latin Copies (...) est. Bez. in Mat. 12. 16. C^^^inatus
est. Sir* in Mat. 4. 39. Est inc^^patu^ dominorum ^^ serves, cum commina^^^^,
imperium. Castro in Proph. Nah. 1. 4.
: q. d. I charge you be still and calm, upon your peril be it, I will make
you rue it else. Which majesticall threatening intends three things, viz.
first, Authority to command: secondly, Power to punish, if he be not obeyed:
lastly, An acknowledgment of that power. For in vain it is to command, or
threaten, if the parties, or creatures, do not regard us. But as he had power
to command, and threaten, and punish; so winds, and seas, had eyes, and ears,
and heart, to see, hear, fear and obey: he no sooner commanded, and
threatened, but presently they obeyed, There was a great calm. Hear* ^ heaven,
and hearken, o earth, for the Lord speaks, Esaias 1. 2. If the Lord speak,
heaven and earth, and all creatures have ears to hear. O earth, earth, earth,
hear the word of the Lord, Ierem. 22. penult. I say again, let it be marked,
that Christ did not pray, entreat, and beseech, but with authority he
commanded, Peace, and be still; as if he were much provoked with their
impetuous insolency. And no marvel. What? Winds and seas not know their
Maker? What? Have they heretofore trembled, and fled at his presence, and do
they now rage and roar, and conspire to drown him? What high treason against
the Lord of heaven and earth is this? It is well they escape with a rebuke,
that he does not make them feel the power of his wrath, and give all
posterities occasion to say with the Prophet, What ailed thee, oh thou sea
Psalm. 114. 3.
? What did thou, Lake of Gennesareth, that the Lord was so angry, and
displeased with thee? What was thy transgression, o sea of Galile, for which
the Lord powered out upon thee, the furiousness of his wrath Hab. 3. 8.
? Oh let it be written, and let all posterities note the meeknesie and
gentleness of the Lord toward his creatures, who did no further punish such a
treasonable conspiracy against his life, but with a rebuke, Peace, and be
still Tace, obmut^sce.
.

Here, for our instruction, let us learn, what is Doct. lit.
the sovereign Regal authority of this great Lord Paramount, Christ Jesus,
over all creatures. He is the great King over all the world, though his
kingdom be not of this world John 18. 36.
. Ask of me (said God) and I will give thee the heathen for thine inheritance,
and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession Psalm. 2. 8.
. And again, I will set his hand in the sea, and his right hand in the rivers,
and I will make him my firstborn, higher than the kings of the earth Psalm.
89. 25.
. And again, He shall have dominion from sea to sea, and from the river to the
ends of the earth Psalm. 72. 8.
. Many Kings have had large and great Dominions, as Ahashuerosh, who reigned
from India to Aethiopia, over an hundred and seven and twenty Provinces Hest.
1. 1.
. Some Kings have so far doted, and been besotted with admiration of their
own sublimitie and excellency, as to forget themselves to be but Lords
Paravall, and in stomach have asked, Who is the Lord? and have answered
themselves with scorn and contempt, I know not the Lord Exodus 5. 2.
. But the sea will know none but the Lord. There was a great storm, when Jonah
was in the ship, and the Mariners thought to have mastered it, and with their
oars did dig and delve into the surges; but the sea wrought, and was
troublous Jonah 1. 13.
, and would have drowned them all, if they had not cast Jonah into it. For God
had given the sea a commission to fetch in that fugitive Prophet, and it would
execute it with effect. There was a great storm, when Paul was in the ship,
and they cast out both lading and tacklings, as if they would have bribed the
Sea to be still; but it would not, till it had broken the ship with violence of
waves Acts 27. 41.
. Some have been angry with the Sea. That great Persian Monarch, Xerxes, was
in as great a rage, as Hellespont it self, who threatened to be avenged for
breaking down of the Bridge which he had builded for the passage of his
numberless Army; yea he commanded three hundred stripes to be given it, and
so many fetters to be cast into it; and others with hot Irons, as it were to
set marks upon it: but Hellespont felt no hurt by all this, nor cared for the
Executioners words, The Lord has inflicted this punishment upon thee, for the
hurt thou have done him Herodot. lib. 7. Valerius l. ^* ^* 2. Iuve^al. sat. 10.
Orosius l. 2. c. 9. Diodor. Sic. Plut.
. Tush, Hellespont knew not his Lordship, but raged still; and if they had come
within it reach, would have drowned both him and his. Canutus a Danish King in
this Land, set his foot on the Sea shore, close by the Sea, whilst it was
flowing, and commanded it not to rise, and wet his feet or clothes; but the Sea
kept his course, rose, and wet both feet and thighs; whereupon the King
started away, and said, All men may know that the power of Kings is vain, and
mere vanity, and none worthy to have the name of King, but he that has all
things subject to his command and laws; and after this, never wore Crown on
his head, but set it on the head of a Crucifix at Winchester. Ex Huntington.
Fox Martyrolog. 1. Tom. p. 147.

But let the Lord, the great Jehovah come, who is of man invisible 1 Timothy 1. 17.
; and the Sea has eyes to see him withal: The Sea saw thee and fled, Jordan
was driven back Psalm. 114. 3.
. Let him rebuke, and the Sea has ears to hear: let him say, Peace, and be
still, and there is as sudden, and as great a calm, as there was a storm. Let
him be pleased to walk, and the Sea is as firm as a pavement Matthew. 14. 25.
* Let him be angry, and it has an heart to fear Psalm. 77. 1^.
; The waters saw thee, o God, and were afraid. No winds do so trouble it, as
the blasting of the breath of his nosthrils Psalm* 18. 15.
. Yea let Moses but take the rod of God in his hand, and the Sea divides Exodus
24. 26.
. Elijah with his cloak shall divide Jordan 2 King. 2* 8, 14.
; and if the spirit of Elijah rest upon Elishah, he shall do so too Ibid.
: and so long as Peter's faith holds, he shall walk on it Matthew. 14. 29.
; that as the evil spirit answered the sons of S^evah, Jesus I know, and
Paul I know, but who are ye Acts 19. 15.
? so the Sea may say, JESUS I know, and Elijah, Elisha, and Peter, and all the
servants of the most High God; but for Pharaoh, Xerxes, Canutus, and others,
who are ye? We regard not your rebukes, we fear not your threats.

Oh what can be more useful, than to speak, Use.
and hear, and meditate, on the omnipotent soveraigntie of Christ over all
creatures, and namely over that huge, boisterous, uncontrollable and fearful
Element? And therefore, how often in the holy Scriptures is there mention made
thereof? and specially of the drying up of the Red Sea, and Jordan, giving
passage to Gods people. God himself asked, Who shut up the Sea with doors?
Who set bars? and said, Hitherto shall thou come, and no further, and here
shall thou stay thy proud waves Job 38. 8, 11.
. And again, Fear ye not me (says the Lord) will ye not tremble at my
presence? who have placed the sand for the bound of the sea, by a perpetual
decree, that it cannot pass it; and though the waves toss themselves, yet can
they not prevail; though they roar, yet can they not pass over it Ierem. 5.
22.
. Holy David, as he was much given to devout meditation, and contemplation of
the Heavens, Sun, Moon, and Stars Psalm. 8. 3.
, Thunder, Lightning, Hail, Meteors: so very frequent in meditation of Gods
power and providence in the creation, and disposition, rule and government of
the Sea; as, He gathers the waters of the Sea together, as an heap, and
lays up the deep as in storehouses: Let all the earth fear the Lord, let
all the inhabitants of the world stand in awe of him Psalm. 33. 7.
. And again, It is God that stilleth the raging of the Sea, and the noise of
it waves Psalm. 65. 7.
. And again, I will meditate of all thy works, and talk of thy doings: thou
art the God that do wonders; the waters saw thee, o God, the waters saw thee,
and were afraid, the depths also were troubled Psalm. 77. 12.
. Again, O Lord God of Hosts, who is a strong Lord like unto thee? thou rulest
the raging of the Sea, and stillest the waves thereof when they arise Psalm 92.
penult.
. And many such like in the Psalms, and Prophets, whereof these are but a
taste.

And lest any Atheist should object (for the straitning of his dominion) that
Gods power is but over some few and small Lakes, as this was, (as if he were
but Vice Admiral of narrow Seas) note how Gods power has appeared on many
Seas, Streams, and Floods; yea when all the world was Sea at the first, by the
power of his word, they were gathered into one place, and the dry land appeared
Genesis 1. 9.
. Whereof David thus renders the praise unto God, Thou laiedst the foundation
of the earth, that it never should be removed at any time: thou coveredst it
with the deep as with a garment. The waters stood above the mountains; at thy
rebuke they fled (...) Septuag.
, at the voice of thy thunder they hasted away Psalm. 104. 7.
. Which also the blind Heathen groped after, acknowledging the work, though
ignorant of the Worker Quisquis fuit ille deorum: jussit and extendi campos.
Ovid. metam. 1.
. The waters of Egypt had experience of his power, when Moses lifting up the
rod of God upon them, all their rivers, and streams, and ponds, and pooles,
became blood Exodus 7. 19.
. The waters of the Red Sea also felt his power, when Moses lifting up the rod
of God, they were divided Exodus 14. 21.
; whereof David says, He rebuked the red sea, and it was dried up Psalm. 106. 9.
. The river of Jordan felt his power, when no sooner the Priests that bare the
Ark of God came to touch it, but (though it was at such a time of the year,
when Jordan did overflow it banks) the waters which came from above stood upon
an heap, the others failed and were cut off, so as the people passed on dry
land, right over against Jericho Josh. 3. 15.
. Whereof the Prophet demanded a reason in this glorying manner, What meant ye
rolling and roaring streams of Iordans flood to recoile backwardly Psalm. 114. 3.
? And now the Sea of Galile acknowledges his soveraigntie, when being rebuked,
there was a great calm.

Yea, that we may further extend and enlarge his dominion; know, that he has
all power and authority, in Heaven, Earth, Seas, and Hell it self. For
himself has said, I have the keys of death, and of hell Rev. 1. 18.
: and, All power and authority is given me in heaven and earth Matthew. 28. 18.
. And the Apostle says, Every knee must bow unto him, both of things in
heaven, earth, and under the earth, and every tongue must confess, that Jesus
Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father Philip. 2. 10, 11.
. As he here rebuked the winds and sea; so he rebuked his Disciples, who would
have had fire to come from heaven, and consume their enemies Luke 9. 55.
. Yea he straightly charged his Disciples not to make him known Luke 9. 21.
. He rebuked diseases also: he stood over Simon Peter's wives mother, having a
great Fever, and he rebuked the fever, and it left her Luke 4. 39. (...).
Imperavit f^bri.
. Yea often he rebuked Devils, sometimes to hold their peace Mar. 1. 24.
; and sometimes straightly charged them not to make him known Mar. 3. 12.
; and sometime, to come out of such as they possessed, which they did, so as
all the people were amazed: With authority and power he commands the
unclean spirits, and they come out Luke 4. 36.
. Yea, an whole Legion of Devils fell down prostrate before Christ, and
acknowledged his power over them, beseeching him, not to torment them, nor send
them out into the deep, but suffer them to enter into the herd of Swine Luke
8. 30, 31.
. Wherefore Michael striving with the Devil about the body of Moses, durst not
bring against him any railing accusation, but said, The Lord rebuke thee Jude
9. (...).
. Thus Heaven, and Earth, and Sea, Men, Diseases, yea Devils, and all
Creatures, must hear and tremble, when this most high and sovereign Lord
commands; as we shall further hear from the effect of this rebuke: There was
a great calm.

In the mean time, (for the use of that which we Use.
have already heard) what a sweet comfort and encouragement may this be to all
the true disciples of Christ, that where ever they become, they are within the
dominion and jurisdiction of Christ; Whither can I fly (says David) from thy
presence? Psalm. 139. 7. Of all sorts of offenders, God has no fugitives to
punish: Indeed, Jonah fled from the land, but God met him in a storm upon the
sea: and surely in his dominion, neither wind, water, fire, rain, hail, snow,
sickness, disease, ache, pain, nor Devil, can hurt or vex them, but
according to his good pleasure; ^or they are all but his servants* And if he
say to one go, he goes; to another come, and he comes. Let then the world
hate us, the Devil like a roaring Lion, seek to devour us; yea, if it were
possible, for heaven, earth, hell, and all creatures, to conspire our
destruction, yet can they do nothing against us, but what he will, and when
he rebukes, all shall be calm and still. And thus much for the Letter.

And rebuked the winds, and the sea.] For the Mystery: Sense mystic.
hereby is signified, that God in his good time will still the rage and fury of
persecutors against his Church. To which purpose the Prophet has an
Confirmation.
excellent saying, Woe to the multitude of many people, which make a noise,
like the noise of the seas, and to the rushing of Nations, that make a rushing,
like the rushing of mighty waters; the Nations shall rush, like the rushing of
many waters, but God shall rebuke them, and they shall fly far off, and be
like the rolling thing, or thistle-downe before the whirlewind Esaias 17. 12, 13.
. Oh see how easy a thing with God, to still all the enemies of his Church, be
they never so mighty or malicious* As he needed not Moses Rod, nor Eliahs
Cloak, nor Xerxes his Fetters, to still the Sea; only he spoke the word,
rebuked the winds, and seae, and there was a great calm; so, says the
Prophet, If the Lord do but rebuke the Nations, they fly far off, like
thistledowne, from the face of a whirlewind.

For the Illustration of which point, be pleased Illustration.
to observe, That, for the procuring a peaceable calm unto his Church, God
sometimes disableth great means; enableth small means; yea, sometimes works
without means.

For the first, because the Lord is jealous of his 1. Great means disabled.
own glory, and man is foolish and prone to rob him of it, both by trusting in
great means, and sacrificing to his own net A^ac. 1. 16.
; arrogating the praise and glory of the action: Therefore does God seldom do
any great thing, by great and eminent means, but pronounce a woe to such as
trust in them; as, Woe to them that go down into Egypt for help, and lean
upon horses, which trust in chariots, because they be many, and in horsemen,
because they be multiplied, but look not to the holy one of Israel, nor seek
after Jehovah Esaias 31. 1.
. When Israel upon just occasion, and approved of God, went to fight against
Benjamin; though the men of Israel were four hundred thousand* and the men of
Benjamin but six and twenty thousand and odd; yet the men of Israel received
two foiles, and lost forty thousand, til, in the end, they went up to the
house of the Lord, and there fasted and wept, and learned not to trust in the
multitude of an host, but in the Lord of hoasts, and then they prevailed Judge.
20. 26.
. Wherefore David from his own experience says godly, A King is not saved by
the multitude of an host; neither is any mighty man delivered by his much
strength; an horse is counted but a vain thing to save a man Psalm. 33. 15. 16.
. After whom, Solomon his son (a worthy graft of so Noble a stock, heir of
his Fathers Virtues, as well as of his Crown) led by the same Spirit, says in
like sort, The horse is prepared against the day of battle, but salvation is
from Ichovah Prove. 21. ult.
. And therefore let all Gods people look unto the Mountain, from whence
comes their help Psalm. 121. 1.
, in the needful time of trouble Psalm. 46.
; and say, in the name of our God, we will set up our banners; some put their
trust in chariots, and some in horses, but we will remember the name of the
Lord our God Psalm. 20. 5. 7.
.

Secondly, God enableth poor, weak, base, abject, 2. Enableth weak means.
and contemptible means, for the bringing of great and mighty things to
pass. When Gideon came at the first with a great army, to fight against the
Midianites, the Lord said unto him, This people, that are with thee, are too
many, for me to deliver the Midianites into their hands, lest Israel take to
himself glory over me, and say, mine hand has brought me salvation. But when
all were brought to 300. naked men, and without arms, only having trumpets,
pitchers and lamps; By these (says God) will I save you, and deliver the
Midianites into thine hands: and he did so Judge. 7. 2. 7.
. Upon this ground Jonathan persuaded his Armor-bearer, even them two, to set
upon a whole Garrison of the Philistims, There is no let to Jehovah, but that
he may save by many, or by few 1 Samuel 14* 7.
. That of the Prophet is most memorable, The Lord is his name, that
strengthens the spoiled against the strong, that distress it self should be
able to scale a Fort Amos 5. 9.
. And the Prophet Jeremy bids the Jews not to deceive themselves, because
they had a little prevailed against the Chaldeans, for if there were none left
but wounded men, and thrust through, yet should they rise, every man in his
tent, and burn the City with fire Ierem. 37. 10.
. Most commonly (if cause be good) victory goes with weakest side.

Thirdly, for the full manifestation of the glory 3. Works without means.
of his omnipotency, God many times works greatest things without means, so
as in the effecting thereof, nothing can be looked on, but God. In the
beginning, God gave light, before he made Sun; and made plants and herbs to
grow, before there was any rain: in the wilderness, fed his people, with
bread and flesh from heaven: in times of war, if God do but rise, his
enemies are scattered Psalm. 68 1.
; yea, if he do but look upon their hoasts, they are discomfited Exodus 14. 24.
. In the confidence whereof, King Asa (seeing himself oppressed with a
multitude of enemies, even above a thousand thousands of Ethiopians coming up
against him) he prayed to the Lord; Lord, it is nothing to thee, to help with
many, or no power 2 Chronicles. 14. 11.
. If he had said with many, or few, great, or small power, it would have been
plain; but to say, with many, or no power, bewrayed an excellent measure of
faith, that if God did but rebuke all such enemies, it was enough. The Prophet
gives this glory to God, that he creates peace Esaias 57. ^9* Hic digitus est
Dei.
. He is a good Carpenter, that having crooked and rough timber put into his
hands, can, with axe and plane, make it straight and smooth; but the Creator
can work, having no matter at all, to work upon; creating light out of
darkness; peace out of war; a great calm, out of a great storm, only by a
word of his mouth, he rebuked the winds and sea.

For further manifestation of Gods glory, and our consolation, seeing the
Scriptures speak expressly of Gods rebuking of Kings, Princes, Spearemen, and
persecutors of his Church and people Psalm. 105. 14. Esaias 17. 13. Psalm. 76. 6.
: let us search the Scriptures, that we may find out Gods manner herein. How
does God rebuke Kings, who are as boisterous and mighty winds, causing great
tempests of persecutions in the Sea of this world, (that when God does it, we
may give him the glory of it?) And that, God does, two ways, viz. Either
inwardly, or outwardly. Inwardly, I. By inclining to peace.
by working upon their hearts; or outwardly, by working upon their bodies and
estates. As God has the hearts of all men in his hands; so specially of Kings
and Princes: and does extraordinarily work upon them, either by inclining them
to peace; as we see in the example of Esau (who threatening to kill his brother
Jacob Genesis 27. 41.
; and Jacob exceedingly feared to hear that he came out with four hundred men
against him Genesis 32. 6.
) whose heart was so inclined to his brother, that when they met, he was so far
from killing, or offering the least wrong unto him in word or deed, that he
embraced him, fell on his neck and kissed him Genesis 33. 4.
; see, see, how inwardly God rebuked that boisterous wind, and there was a
great calm: or else, he inwardly does terrify them, so as they shall not dare
to do the evil which they would, and intended.

Thus God rebuked Abimelech, King of Gerar, in 2. By terrifying.
a dream by night; Thou art but a dead man, for the woman, which thou have
taken, for she is a man's wife Genesis 20. 3.
: whereupon he returned, to Abraham, his wife, and there was a great calm. So
Laban pursued Jacob, and his wives and children, blustering and stirring up a
great tempest: but God rebuked him, saying, Take heed that thou speak not to
Jacob, either good or bad Genesis 31. 24.
; whereupon followed a great calm. So the Kings of Canaan intending to destroy
the Israel of God, were rebuked with the report that came unto them, what God
had done for them, Drying up the Red Sea, and destroying the two Kings of the
Amorites, Og and Sehon: whereupon their hearts did melt, and there was no
courage in them, they grew very calm Josh. 2. 10. Exodus 15. 14.
. Yea Kings assembling with their armies, purposely to besiege Jerusalem, At
the very sight of it, they marvelled, and were troubled, and hasted away, fear
took hold on them, and pain, as on a woman in travel Psalm. 48. 4.
. Thus (when they will not otherwise be inclined to peace) God does cut off the
spirit of Princes, and is terrible to the Kings of the earth Psalm. 76. ult.
.

Or else God does rebuke them outwardly: and 2. Outwardly.
that, either in their persons, or powers: in their persons, either by
sickness, or death; By sickness, or 1. In person.
diseases. Thus God plagued Pharaoh, and his house 1. With sickness.
with great plagues, because of Sara, Abraham's wi^e; whereupon he restored her
to her husband, and there was a great calm Genesis 12. 17. 2. Death. 1. Natural.
. Or by death: and that is either natural, or violent. Natural: thus wicked
and Idolatrous Ahaz slept with his fathers: and then goaly King Hezekiah
reigned in his stead 2 Kings 16. ult.
, who was an hiding place from the wind, a covert from the tempest, as rivers
of water in a dry place, and as the shadow of a great rock in a weary land
Esa. 32. 2. Violent.
. Violent death, is either caused by themselves, or others. By themselves: thus
Saul killed himself, and then 1. By themselves.
there was a great calm 1 Samuel 31. 4.
. Or by others: thus that wicked King Amon, being slain by his servants, 2. By
others.
godly Josiah succeeded him, in whose days the Church had a blessed calm 2
Kings 21. ult.
. And thus, in all ages, by the miserable and wretched ends of cruel and
bloody persecutors, God has given peace to his Church. Or if God spare their
persons, he does 2. Their Powers.
often rebuke them in their powers; and that chiefly three ways: viz. By
diversion, dissipation, and destruction.

By diversion: thus when David was in greatest 1. Diversion.
danger of Saul, (for they had even compassed him round, to take him,) there
came a messenger and brought tidings to Saul, the Philistims had invaded his
land 1 Samuel 23. 27.
; whereupon he was forced presently to divert his forces; so David escaped.

Secondly, By dispersion: He does scatter the 2. Dispersion.
people that delight in war Psalm. 68. 30.
. Thus, God caused the Syrians besieging Samaria, to hear a noise of Horses
and Chariots, even of a great host; they arose, and fled 2 Kings 7. 6.
. When Gideon, and his three hundred blew with the trumpets, and brake their
pitchers, the huge host of the Midianites fled Judge. 7. 22.


Lastly, God many times rebukes persecuting 3. Destruction. 1. By Sea.
Princes, by marvellously destroying their powers: and that by sea, and land.
By sea: so David speaks of God breaking the ships of Tarshish with an East
wind Psalm. 48. 7.
. By land; either by themselves, or others; by others; So God sent an Angel,
who in one night destroyed 2. By Land.
an hundred fourscore and five thousand, in 1. By others.
the host of railing Rabshekah; whereby he was forced to return, and not so
much as shoot an arrow against the City 2 Kings 19. 32.
. Yea, rather then they should not be destroyed, the enemies of Gods Church
have destroyed one another, as in that great army which came 2. By themselves.
up against Iehoshaphat and Judah, The children of Moab and Ammon stood up
against the inhabitants of mount Seir, and thus they destroyed one another 2.
Chron. 20. 23.
.

The consideration, whereof, serves for these 1. Use.
uses. First, That seeing Christ has so many ways and means, whereby to
rebuke even the most potent, and puissant, mischievous and malicious enemies;
not to be distractedly fearful, though we see never so great conspiracies, or
the Church in likelihood to be in extreme peril and danger; but to commend us,
and others, to God in fasting and prayer; being assured that God can, and (in
his good time) will, rebuke the enemies of his people: They do but kick
against the prick, Act 9 5. Their own hurt is ever the greatest: Si stimulos
pugnis caedis, manibus plus doles, Plaut. Who ever tried their strength, in
lifting at the stone, and were not broken in pieces? Zach. 12. 3.

Secondly, That when we see such great comfort 2. Use.
and happiness to redound to the Church of God; partly, for that, Kings and
Princes, (who threaten destruction,) of Wolves, become Shepherds; of
persecutors, become Patrons; of destroiers, defenders; of murderers, nursing
fathers, and nursing mothers; or that, by natural, or violent death, God
cutteth off merciless Tyrants; or that, he does divert by unlooked for
occasions; dissipate by land or sea, with wind, weather, or other means; or
destroy, by fire, water, pestilence, famine, their powers and forces: Oh, in
all such cases, let the people of God give all the honor and glory hereof unto
Christ: for it is he that so rebukes the roaring winds, and raging seas. He
that has ears to hear, may hear him in this dialect, speaking to the winds
and seas, Peace, and be still.

Yea, howsoever it has pleased God, for a long Conclusion.
time, to suffer the wind to blow so loud and strong, as if it would rent the
mountains, and break the rocks in pieces 1 Kings 19. 11.
, or discover the channels of the sea Psalm. 18. 15.
; and suffer the sea to rage, as if it would not only toss with tempest Esa.
54. 11.
; but even swallow up in furges, the poor ship of his Church: Yet Christ at
last is awakened, he has begun to rebuke the winds and the sea, (blessed be
his name,) and if his people will believe and repent, they shall see his
salvation, and he will rebuke them more. And so much for his Reprehension. The
effects thereof follow.

And there was a great calm.] The effects of 3. Genesis Part. Division.
Christ his rebuking of the winds and sea, are two; the former the cause of the
latter: The former, in the winds and sea, ( There was a great calm:) The
latter in the disciples, who were hereby occasioned to wonder and proclaim,
What manner of man is this, that even the winds and the sea obey him? For the
first:

And there was a great calm.] Sweetly has David, 1. Part.
long since (as it were) commented on this story, saying, They that go down
into the sea in ships, and occupy their business in great waters, these see
the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep: For he commands and
raises the stormy wind, which lifts up the waves thereof. They mount up to
the heaven, they go down again to the depths, their soul is melted, because of
trouble. They reele to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man, and are at
their wits end. Then they cry to the Lord in their trouble, and he brings
them out of their distresses: he makes the storm a calm, so that the waves
thereof are still. Then are they glad, because they be quiet; so he brings
them to their desired haven. Oh, that men would therefore praise him, and
declare the wonderful works which he does for the children of men, etc Psalm.
107. 23.
. Now then, we are come to the joyful Catastrophe of this story: danger is
over, fear abated, faith increased, storm ceased: And there was a great calm.

Whereof first for the sense of the words. The Sense lit.
Hebrew word, in Munsters copy, does signify, To be still Shethikah, a radice
Shatha, in Kal. siluit. idem quod Shakat. Page
. I find the same word, both in the forecited place, in the Psalm, and is
translated, quiet; Then are they glad, because they be quiet Ci ^ishtokn, quia
siluerunt. Mont.
; and in the story of Jonah, where the Mariners asked Jonah, What shall we do
unto thee, that the sea may be calm unto us? or as the Hebrew signifies) that
the sea may be silent from us Jonah. 1. 11. Iishtok haiam, Silebit mare.
. And indeed, the word is very proper, if either we consider the nature of a
storm, wherein winds and waves do wonderfully roar Psalm. 46. 3.
, and lift up their voice Psalm. 93. 3. Kolam, vocem sua^.
, (as David unproperly calls it,) so as their noise is heard afar off; or
consider the context, for Christ bade the winds and sea, Peace, and be still:
and their obedience answers like an echo to the voice, and the winds and
seas were still. But the Greek word, (which all three Evangelists use, but no
where else in all the new Testament) is more significant (...)
; which (as some would have (...), Lac: quasi aer lactens. Eustath. fortasse
respiciens ad illud Homer. (...).
) is derived from such a Greek word, as signifies (milk) to note, that the
air was as white and clear, as that in the firmament, in the cleerest winters
night, which is called, The milkie way Via Lactea.
. But I rather subscribe to those, Henricus Stephanus, Scapula, Chemnitius,
Piscator, that derive it from such a theme in the Greek, as signifies, to
laugh, or look mavelous cheerfully, or merrily (...), a ridendo. (...),
Rideo. (...), quasi (...).
. The word then signifies, that there was, upon Christ his rebuking of the
winds, and the sea, not only a mavelous calmness, stillness, and
quietness, not so much wind stirring as would move a leaf, no rising, or
rolling, but sea, as smooth and even, as one might cast a die upon it, as we
say; but there was a wonderful serenitie, the heaven and sea did (as it were)
smile and laugh upon them, which before did so frown and threaten to drown
them.

Yet, as if the word, in it own native propriety, were not sufficient, here
is also another added, There was a [great] calm (...), tra^quillitas magna.
. It well beseemed the great God, to do a great miracle, and greatly to show
his power and authority, in turning a great tempest into a great calm Decet
magnum magna facere, Orig.
. Yea, as he is a great God above all gods Psalm. 95. 3.
; so he commonly does great things, for his glory, and his peoples good: so as
their enemies confess, the Lord does great things for them Psalm. 126. 2.
.

Yea, lastly, as there was a tranquillity, stillness, calmnesse, a great one;
so was it also sudden Non paulatim sedati sunt fluctus. Barrad. T. 2. lib. 5.
cap. 15. p. 319.
. And herein lies the greatest part of the miracle: for the winds (though
sometime blowing strongly, yet) by little and little falling; and sea (raging
extremely,) by little and little to grow calm, is no great wonder (being
commonly seen.) But that, no sooner the word of rebuke passed forth of Christ's
mouth, but the effect of it appeared, presently, there was a great calm; he
no sooner spoke the word, but it was done; lo, herein lies the miracle, and
matter of wonder. And so much be said for the opening of the sense of the
words. I now proceed to raise your doctrines. And first from the letter.

The first may be raised from the context: First, 1. Doct. lit.
A calm; then arose a great tempest; and now is made a great calm again.
Which represents unto us the mutabilitie, or changeable vicissitude of all
earthly, temporal, and sublunary things: as, summer, and winter; day, and
night; cold, and heat: so in men's bodies; health, and sickness; ease, and
pain: and in men's estates; wealth, and poverty; gain, and loss; honor, and
disgrace; and imprisonment; peace, and persecution; are oftentimes changed one
for another. The world is like the Moon Rev. 12. 1.
, ever variable: nothing continues in one stay Job. 14. 2.
; Vanity of vanities, all is vanity Eccles. 1. 2.
. And as it is in these earthly, and outward; so in heavenly, and inward
things, state, and condition. The best of Gods children in this life, are well
acquainted and exercised with changes, and alterations; storms, and calmes;
mirth, and mourning; laughing, and lamentation; singing, and sighing; do many
times change, and keep their turns, and seldom are of any long continuance.

Wherefore let not such as are in best condition, Use. 1.
presume with David, Tush, my mountain is so strong, it cannot be moved Psalm.
30. 6, 7.
: but let every one walk in humility, and prepare for crosses, afflictions,
and temptations.

And let such as are under the rod, not be too Use. 2.
much dejected, but in patience possess their souls, and wait upon God: after
a storm comes a calm; Heaviness may endure for a night, but joy comes in
the morning Psalm. 30. 5.
.

Our second lesson is, That even all, yea the most 2. Doct. lit.
senseless creatures, (man excepted) does hear, and obey the voice of God; and
are in their kinds (as it were) zealous of his glory. If we look up to heaven,
Confirmation.
we shall see thousand thousands, and ten thousand times ten thousand stand
before him Dan. 7. 10.
; even an innumerable company of most glorious Angels Heb. 12. 22.
, standing about his throne Esa. 6. 2.
, ready to do what he commands, most willingly, speedily, and faithfully
Psalm. 103. 20.
. Descend by the Firmament, and the Sun, which every morning comes as a
bridegroom forth of his chamber, and reioiceth as a giant to run his race
Psalm. 19. 6.
; yet at Gods command, it stood still Josh. 10. 13.
; yea went back 2 Kin. 20. 10, 11.
; and at Christ his passion, it ^id it face, as if then God performed what he
had threatened, I will cause the Sun to go down at noone, and I will darken
the earth in a clear day Amos 8. 9.
. And the very stars fought against Siserah Judge. 5. 20.
. God rained fire out of heaven to burn Sodom Genesis 19. 24.
; and Aarons sons Levit. 10. 2.
; and Captains with their fifties 2 King. 1. 10, 12.
; but the fire could not, would not so much as sindge an hair on the heads of
the three children Dan. 3. 27.
. Descend lower, by the Regions of the Air, and we shall see it is the
glorious God that makes the thunder Psalm. 29. 3.
. It is his voice, which makes the wilderness of Cades to shake, and Hindes
to calve Psalm. 29. 8.
. Lightnings are Gods arrows Psalm. 18. 14.
; and when the Lord calls for them, they answer, Here we are Job 38. 35.
. He is the father of the rain Job 38. 28.
. The clouds are his bottles Job 38. 37.
. He also brings the winds out of his treasures Psalm. 135. 7.
. Hail, Snow, Vapor, all fulfill his word Psalm. 148. 8.
. The earth trembles a^ his presence Psalm. 114. 7.
: Mount Sinai shakes, as if it would rent in sunder Exodus 20. 18.
; and opens to swallow up Core, Dathan, and Abiram Number. 16. 31.
. God sent Lions to tear the Samaritanes in pieces 2 Kings 17. 25.
; but they did not offer any violence to Daniel, being cast into their Den Dan.
6. 22.
. He did sting the rebellious Israelites with Serpents Number. 21. 6.
. He plagued Egypt with flies, and poor contemptible creatures Exodus 8. 6, 21.
. He prepared a worm to bite Ionahs gourd at the root, that it withered Jonah
4. 7.
. The Grasshoppers (when God sends them) are called a strong nation, mighty
people, and an huge army Joel 1. 6. 2. 2. 2. 25.
. The birds of the Air, at his command, feed his Prophet with bread and flesh
1 Kings 17. 6.
. He hisseth for the flies of Egypt, and bees of Assyria Esa. 7. 18, 19.
; Devoureth Herod with lice Acts 12. 23.
. Yea, he does sit above the water floods Psalm. 93. 4.
; and rules the Sea Psalm. 29. 3.
. At his pleasure the waters must stand on an heap, to let his people pass
Exodus 14. 22.
: and sometimes must overflow, and drown all creatures, in whose nosthrils is
the breath of life Genesis 7. 22.
. The river Jordan must open, and let Israel pass Josh. 3. 16.
: but the ancient river Kishon, with a violent stream, must sweep the
Canaanites away Judge. 5. 21.
. Fishes swim in Sea at his pleasure. He prepared a Whale to swallow Jonah
Jonah 1. ult.
; and the great sholes of Herrings fail not at such a day to be on such a
coast. He calls for a Famine, and destroys the provision of bread Psalm.
105. 16.
: and at another time, causes the clouds to drop down fatness Psalm. 132. 15.
, that the poor may be satisfied with bread Ibid.
. All diseases go and come at his pleasure, as the Centurion intended, in
Matthew. 8. He punishes disobedience with consumption and burning fever Levit.
26. 17.
; and when he rebuked it, Peter's wives mother was cured Luke 4. 39.
. He shuts up the womb Genesis 20. ult.
; and it is he that makes the barren to bear, and become a joyful mother of
children Psalm. 113. ult.
. He forms the light, and creates darkness, makes peace, and creates
evil, even the Lord does all these things Esa. 45. 7.
. Yea, this great King carries his Mace in Hell, the place of confusion; so as
the very Devils are subject, and obedient to him. He never threatened or
commanded unclean spirits to be gone, but they went: whereat the people
greatly wondered Mar. 1. 27.
. Yea, not only all creatures in Heaven, Firmament, Air, Earth, Sea, and Hell
are obedient, but in their kinds zealous. See the zeal of the Angels, who are
winged, and called Seraphims Esa. 6. 2.
, because they burn with a zeal of Gods glory Seraphim, a Saraph, in kal,
ussit, combussit.
, and are as a flaming fire, when he uses their ministry Psalm. 104. 4.
. See the zeal of the Frogs, though breeding, feeding, creeping and croaking
in marish grounds, and far from houses; yet being sent of God to plague
Pharaoh, they assaulted the Kings Palace, crept into his ovens and kneading
troughes, yea could not be kept out of the Kings bedchamber, nor his bed Exodus
8. 3, 4.
, no nor from off the Kings own person: as if they had said (as Iehu did 2
King. 10. 16.
) Come see the zeal that we have to plague the Tyrant that thus oppresses
Gods people. Oh see the zeal of the Sea: when God gave it commission to attach
his fugitive Prophet, it wrought and was troublous, it wrought and was
troublous Jonah 1. 13.
. The Mariners for their lives could not bring Jonah to shore: if they had not
cast him in, the Sea would have devoured them all. q. d. See the zeal we have
to the Lord of hosts, in pursuit of him, who is so disobediently fled from the
presence of his God. The Apostle calls the fire of hell, a zealous fire,
devouring the adversaries Heb. 10. 27. (...).
; which Dives found by woeful experience, when he complained that he was
tormented in that flame, and craved a drop of water to cool his tongue Luke
16. 24.
.

But woe, and alas, that man is excepted out of the Catalogue of obedient, and
zealous creatures! That man, endued with Reason, and show of Religion, that the
Lord of the creatures, should be set to school, to learn of the poor Pismire
Prove. 6. 6.
; that God should so call and command, and he either do nothing, but cast his
commandments behind his back Psalm. 50. 17.
, or do what he does, to halfes 1 Samuel 15. 15.
. Oh that man should give God such just cause to complain of him, I have
nourished, and exalted children, and they have rebelled against me Esaias 1. 2.
: And, I have called, and ye refused; I have stretched out mine hand, and no
man regarded; ye have set at naught all my counsels, and would none of my
reproof Prove. 1. 25.
. And, I have spread out mine hands all the day to a rebellious people Esaias 65.
2
. How did Christ complain of the Jews, Ye will not come unto me, that ye
may have life John 5. 40.
. And again, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and
stonest them that are sent unto thee; how often would I have gathered thy
children together, even as an hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and
ye would not Matthew. 23. 37.
. How did Steven at his death complain, Ye stiff-necked and uncircumcised in
heart and ears, ye do always resist the Holy Ghost; as your fathers did, so
do ye Acts 7. 51.
.

Oh that man, created after Gods image Genesis 1. 27.
, and little inferior to the Angels Psalm. 8. 5.
, should not only be compared to the beasts that perish Psalm. 49. ult.
; but have the dullest and rudest of them preferred before him: The Ox (says
God) knows his owner, and the Ass his masters crib, but Israel does not
know, my people do not understand Esaias 1. 3.
. Yea the Storck in the heaven, Turtle, Crane, and Swallow, know their
appointed times, but my people know not the judgment of the Lord Ierem. 8. 7.
. Oh let us now profit by this useful Doctrine.

First, let us learn ever to trust in him, how extremely 1. Use.
desperate soever things may be with us or Gods people: it is an easy thing
with him to remedy all. He needs not send Legions of Angels, no nor muster
troops of men, and arm them with sword and spear; he is the Lord of Hosts,
and there are not the meanest and weakest soldiers in all his band (not flies,
lice, worms excepted) but if Christ command them, they are armed with power,
to quell the pride of the greatest Monarchs, and Monarchies in the world.

The second Use is, that we fear this great God, 2. Use.
and commander of Sea and Land, who is able to cut us down, like grass; to
blow us away, like dust; to sweep us away, as dung. Oh that men should not
fear that mighty God, but dare to blaspheme his Name, being every where in the
midst of his Army, and he able to make the least dust to be our death, and the
basest creature we see, or with contempt do tread upon, to be our destruction!
This Use God himself presses, Hear now this, o foolish people, and without
understanding, which have eyes and see not, which have ears and hear not.
Fear ye not me, says the Lord? Or will ye not be afraid at my presence,
which have placed the sand for the bounds of the sea Ierem. 5. 21.
? And again, If I be your Lord, where is my fear Malach. 1. 6.
? The Sea saw God and fled. And David bids the earth to tremble at his
presence Psalm. 114. 3. 7.
. Shall Earth, and Sea, those vast and senseless creatures, so fear and
tremble, and shall not man, a worm of the earth, stand in awe?

The third and last Use is, that from the Example 3. Use.
of all creatures, in Heaven, Firmament, Air, Earth, Sea, and Hell, we learn
to obey the voice of Christ. This is it David so urges, To day, if ye will
hear his voice, harden not you hearts Psalm. 95. 7.
. Be doers of the word, and not hearers only James 1. 22.
. The Sea did roar in the storm. And, even now that it is still, it still
lifts up the voice. He that has ears to hear, may hear it call for
obedience. Habent miracula linguam, si intelligantur: factum verbi, verbum
nobis. August* in Johan. tract. 24. A learned man has an elegant fiction, of
the world calling on man, to serve and obey God, in these words; See how God
loved thee, that made me for thee; I serve thee, because I am made for thee,
that thou may serve him, that made both thee and me; me for thee, and thee
for himself Vide homo quomodo amavit te, qui propter te secit me; servio tibi,
quia factus sum propter te, ut servias illi, qui fecit, and me, and te; me
propter te, and te propter se. Hugo Cardm.
Oh man, if thou be disobedient, all creatures, even Devils will rise in
judgment, and condemn thee.

For the mystery. As by the storm, persecution; Mist.
so by the calm, the peace and tranquillity of the Church is represented: and
teaches,

First, that in despite of Satan, and all enemies 1. Doct. mist.
which he can raise, Gods people, in the end, shall have a calm, peace, and
quietness.

For illustration of which Doctrine, note, that the Illustration.
calm is twofold, viz. external, and internal. External is twofold, viz
general, or particular. General, concerning all, or many of Gods people: and
particular, in regard of some one, or few men's persons and estates.

For the general, see what gracious promises God 1. General.
has made to his Church; The gates of hell shall not prevail against it
Matthew. 16. 18.
. It is Gods house built upon a rock, though the rain descend, floods come,
winds blow, and beat upon it, yet it falls not Matthew 7. 25.
. This was typically represented in the bush which burned, but consumed not
Exodus 3. 2.
: In Noah's Arc, though the waters prevailed long, yet at last the Arc arrived
safely upon Mount Ararat Genesis 8 4.
; and the Dove returned with an Olive leaf in her mouth, an infallible token,
that the waters were abated from off the earth Genesis 8. 11.
. There has been a great tempest: but our ship has out-rid it Illiditur
fluctibus, non tamen alliditur scopulis. Stell.
, it lives; and now there is a great calm.

Which promises and types have in all ages been Examples.
verified. The children of Israel were greatly oppressed in Egypt, but could
not be destroyed; the more they afflicted them, the more they multiplied and
grew Exodus 1. 12.
: they endured a great tempest, and in the end God sent a great calm; when he
brought forth his people with joy, and his chosen, with gladness, there was
not one feeble person: and Egypt was glad, Psalm. 105. 37. The Church had a
great storm for 70 years in Babylon, when they sat by the rivers of Babylon,
and wept to remember Sion, Psalm. 137. 1. but in the end a great calm, when
they had leave to return, then were their mouths filled with laughter, and
their tongues with joy, Ps. 126. 1. The Church had a great storm in the days
of Ahashuerosh, when Haman had procured, they should all be destroyed, then was
fasting and mourning; but in the end a great calm, when Haman and his sons
were hanged, and the Jews had Purim. Great persecution in the days of the
Apostles Acts 8. 1.
; but in the end, God gave the Churches rest throughout Judea, Samaria, and
Galilee, and the word of God increased, and the number of disciples multiplied
in Jerusalem exceedingly Act. 9. 31. 6. 7.
. The Ecclesiastical story witnesses, that howsoever God has sometimes, yea
for a long time, exercised his Church and people, with hot, cruel, and bloody
persecutions: yet in the end, rebuking persecutors, by death, or otherwise, (as
you have heard) he has given his Church peace, and turned the tempest into a
great calm Alternant persecutio, and pax in ecclesia. Lorin.
.

For the outward estates of particular persons, we 2. Particular.
have gracious promises, I will not fail, nor forsake thee Joshua 1. 5.
. Which though particularly and personally made to Ioshuah; yet the Apostle
teaches every man how to make it his own by the application of faith Heb. 13.
5.
; Call on me in the day of thy trouble, and I will hear, and deliver thee, and
thou shall glorify me Ps. 50. 15.
. David says, Many are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers
out of all, Psalm. 34. 19. And the Apostle says, God is faithful, who will not
suffer his to be tempted above that they are able, but will with the temptation
make a way to escape, that they may be able to bear it 1 Cor. 10. 13.
. And Christ promised to turn his disciples sorrow into joy John 16. 20.
: which in all ages he has most graciously performed to his servants, yea
commonly in this life. As Joseph endured a great tempest, when his brethren
sold him, his impudent mistress falsely accused him, his master cast him in
prison, he endured hunger and cold, and the iron even entered into his soul
Psalm. 105. 18.
: but there came a great calm, when the King sent and delivered him, the
Prince of the people let him go free, made him ruler of his house Ps. 105. 20,
21.
; yea, set him over all the land of Egypt, and every one cried Abrech before
him Genesis 41. 43.
. Great was the tempest that godly Mordochai endured, when proud Haman so
despised, and intended mischief against him, having set up gallows, to hang
him thereon Hesth. 5. ult.
: but there came a great calm, when the King commanded Haman, to put on him
royal apparel, which the King uses to wear, and to set him on the horse,
the King used to ride on, and set the crown royal upon his head, and
proclaim before him, Thus shall it be done to the man, whom the King will
honor Hesth. 6. 11.
. Great was the tempest that David endured, in that long time that Saul
persecuted him, and by all means sought to take away his life, hunting him, as
a partridge upon the mountains 1 Samuel 26. 20.
; that he confesses, the floods of ungodliness made him afraid Psalm. 18. 4.
; and he said in his infirmity, I shall one day perish by the hand of Saul 1 Samuel 27. 1.
: but there came a great calm, when Saul being slain 1 Samuel 31. 3, 4.
, David was anointed King 2 Samuel 2. 4.
, and died full of days, riches, and honor 1 Chro. ult. 28.
. Job endured a great tempest, when he lost all his goods, children, and
health Job 1. 14.
: but there came a great calm, when all was restored double unto him again
Job ult. 10.
. Many a man has endured a great tempest of poverty, sickness, ache,
imprisonment, disgrace; and God has sent a great calm of wealth, health,
ease, liberty, honor. Oh that men would therefore praise the Lord, and declare
the wonders that he does for the children of men Psalm. 107. 15.
! What great and grievous conflicts, have the learned Bishops and Fathers in
their times, had with Heretics? Athanasius and Hilarie, with Arrius; Basil,
with Eunomius; Tertullian, with Hermogenes; Origin, with Celsus; Augustine,
with Faustus, Pelagius, Petilian; Cyprian, with Novatus: yet painfully rowing
with the Oars of Gods word, these Doctors overcame all those boisterous and
contrary winds and waves, and used it as a proverb, After weeping comes
laughter; and after banishment comes Paradise Post lachrymas risus; post
exilium Paradisus: dixerunt veteres.
. After a tempest, a calm.

Great also are the Internal tempests, whereof 2. Internal.
Gods children have experience in their souls, minds, and consciences: but
God has promised most gracious calmes; For a moment in mine anger have I
turned away, but with everlasting compassion have I embraced thee Esaias 54. 7.
. Heaviness may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning Psalm. 30. 5.
. They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy Psalm. 126. 5.
. Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted Matthew. 5. 5.
. Yea, the meek shall be refreshed with abundance of peace, Psalm. 37. 11.

And these promises God has in all ages most Examples.
graciously performed. David had a great tempest in soul, when he complained,
That all Gods waves had gone over him, and he had been vexed with all his
storms Psalm. 88. 7.
: Yea, he had suffered, from his youth up, the terrors of God with a troubled
mind Psalm. 88. 15.
. But there was a great calm, when he said, Now return to thy rest, O my
soul, the Lord has well rewarded thee Psalm. 116. 7, 8.
; and again, Thou have delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears,
and my feet from falling Ibid.
; awaked at midnight to sing praises Psalm. 119. 62.
, and called for his Lute and Harp to awake Psalm. 69. 30.
. Job had a great tempest in his soul, when he complained, God did write
bitter things against him Job 13. 26.
, made him possess the sins of his youth Ibid.
; and Gods terrors came in battle ray against him Job 6. 4.
; but he had a great calm, when he k(...) Redeemer lived Job 19. 25.
, and would trust in God, though he killed him Job 13. 15.
; and God gave him double all that he had Job 42. 10.
. There was as great a tempest in Ionahs soul, as in the sea, when he said, I
am cast out of thy sight Ion. 2. 4, 7.
, and his soul fainted within him Ibid.
: but he had a great calm, when the fish vomited out Jonah on the dry land,
and he paid his vows, and sacrificed unto God, the sacrifice of thanksgiving
Jonah 3. ult.
. Oh, many and great are the trials of Gods children in this kind, till the
Lord rebuke Satan: fearfulness, distrust, heaviness, etc. and then sweet are
the mercies and comforts, wherewith the Lord refreshes their souls.

Oh then, Art thou full of heaviness, mourning, Use.
and sorrow in thy soul, which makes thee as a Pelican, Owl in desert, and
Sparrow on house top alone Psalm. 102. 6, 7.
; thou minglest thy drink with tears Psalm. 80. 5.
; thy conscience does rage, in sight of sin, and sense of divine anger; say,
as David did, Oh, my soul, why art thou cast down? and why art thou so
disquieted within me? still trust in God Psalm. 42. ult.
; the storm will over, and God will send a gracious calm.

But mark, it was Christ that made this calm: Caution.
none can comfort and quiet the troubled and tempestuous mind and conscience,
but only Christ: till he rebuke, it will rage, foam, and fume still. Seek
not then thy peace from carnal means, as, merry company, pastime, play,
feasting, drinking, etc. For if any good come hereby, it is but as deceitful
Surgeons heal the skin, but leave corruption within. But say with David, I
will hearken what the Lord God will say, for he shall speak peace to his
people Psalm. 85. 8.
. For till he speak peace, there will be nothing but war and trouble. So
much for the first Doctine Mystical, with the Illustration and Use thereof.

Observe again, that as there was a sudden great 2. Doct. mist.
storm, so now there is as sudden and great a calm (...) Magnus motus, and
magna tranquillitas.
: which in the mystery affords us another lesson, viz. That according to the
measure of troubles, and persecutions, God sends peace and comforts; as David
says, According to the multitude Confirmation.
of the sorrows which I had in mine heart, thy comforts have refreshed my
soul Psalm. 94. 19.
. And Saint Paul says, As the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so also our
consolation abounds by Christ 2 Cor. 1. 5. Non aequatur consolatio
passionibus; sed exuberat, and long major est. Theoph.
. Hereof also Job had comfortable experience, to whom, after his patient
trial, the Lord restored double all he had Job 42. 10.
.

Now let us wind up what has been said, with Application.
Application to our selves. How great a storm and tempest has been in the
Christian world, and specially in Germany and France, who so ignorant, as
knows not? But behold what a great calm the Lord has made in France, wars
are hushed and gone Psalm. 46. 9.
, and Gods servants restored to their former privileges and liberties, in the
profession of the Gospel: and let us all heartily pray God to strengthen the
good work he has wrought Psalm. 68. 28.
, and to confirm it under the broad seal of Heaven, that it may remain
inviolable, and that the Jesuits (who are the beilowes of sedition) be never
able to raise such a tempest again: and let us also pray that Christ would
break the bow, knap the spear in sunder, and burn the chariots in the fire,
and grant to all Nations, unity, peace, and concord, and bid them be still Ps.
46. penult.
; and turn their swords and spears into mattocks and sythes Esaias 2. 4.
, or turn them against the common enemy, the Turk, who persecuteth and
blasphemeth the name of Christ and his Gospel. Amen.

Let us look home, what great storms and tempests have been in our Land,
through bloody persecution, and unnatural civil dissension, our fathers have
told us, and our Chronicles report to all posterity: but what a glorious calm
have we enjoyed, (for almost so many years, as his people endured captivity
Ierem. 25. 11.
) without either hostile invasion, or civil dissension, the Lord making fast
the bars of our gates, and so establishing peace in our borders, that there
is no crying nor complaining in our streets, no leading into captivity, it
being an harbor and sanctuary to the afflicted servants of God. The Lord
preserve our tranquillity, and rebuke them that would raise a storm. Amen.

VERSE 27. But the men marvelled, saying, What manner of man is this? that both
the winds and the sea obey him!
WE have heard what effect Christ his rebuke 2. Effects.
had in the winds and sea, those senseless Creatures.

Now let us see what effect it wrought in the men that heard and (...), being
endued with reason and understanding. The winds and sea obeyed, But the men [
admired:] being more excellent Creatures, it produced in them a more excellent
effect; which Montanus expresses by a discretive particle* [ a^] Division.
[ but] the men marvelled. Wherein two things are to be considered, viz.
Admiration, and Interrogation. And in their Interrogation, two things; first a
Subdivision.
Question [ What manner of man is this?] Secondly, a Reason of that question, [
Even the winds and sea obey him.] Their Admiration is the cause of the
Interrogation; for therefore they do mutually inquire, and search to know his
person; because they wonder to see his bare word, to produce such strange
effects. Of them in order. And first it is said, The men marvelled.] Who is
meant by [ men] in 1. Part. Sense.
this place, is much disputed, and the learned in their opinions much divided.
Some Origin. Beda. Drut^m^r. Tilm. Hilar. Canon. 8.
say the Mariners, and others at that time on the sea in other vessels; or that
from the shore, saw the tempest, and sudden calm; but not the Disciples.
Others Ierom. Dionys. Carth. Cajetan. Victor. Antioch. Toll. in Luc. 3. Annot.
52.
, by [ men] understand the disciples as well as others; and hereunto I
subscribe, as the truth. I do not deny, but many others, on sea and shore,
might see and marvel: but the Text speaks specially of such as heard Christ
rebuke the winds and sea, (for they demand, Who is this? that even the winds
and sea obey him,) which none but such as were in the ship with him, could do.
And, that the Disciples did marvel, seems to me very plain, from the other
Evangelists Mark 4. 40, 41. Luke 8. 25.
, who expressed it in one continued speech, he said unto them, Why are ye so
fear full? How is it, that ye have no faith? And they said one to another.
Whence it is plain, that such as were fearful, that were rebuked, even those
marvelled; and they were the Disciples (at least chiefly, if not only.) And
truly, no marvel to us, to hear that the Disciples marvelled (though some of
them fishermen, and well acquainted with tempests*) for it was a most
mavelous thing; and no miracle that Christ wrought, did more declare his
Divine Majesty than this Opus revera omni admiratione dignum. Chemnit* concord.
cap. 64.
. But yet for the further opening of the sense of the words, the word in
original, here translated [ marvell] has a double signification. First, very
1
earnestly and intently, both with outward and inward senses, to mark and
observe a thing (...): a (...), video: unde (...), quasi (...), visu digna,
invitant (...)tium oculos.
: and so it fitteth this present place, they did most intently with eyes of
body and mind, gaze upon the sea. They did observe it well in the storm, and
it behoved them, for they looked to be drowned with every wave; but they never
so observed it, as now it is calm. So the common people said of other of
Christ's miracles, Doubtless, we have seen strange things to day Luke 5. 26.
.

Secondly, it signifies to honor, reverence, and 2.
fear the person or thing, wherein we discern any strangeness; and the more
strangeness, the more reverence and fear: so the learned Septuagint translate
those places of respecting, or regarding of the persons of the mighty, and
aged, in this word (...). Deuteronomy. 10. 17 2 Chronicles. 19. 7. 28. 50.
. As also, where Naaman the Syrian is said to be an honorable man (...). 2
King. 5. 1.
. Which phrase is also retained in the New Testament, and translated, the
having of men's persons in admiration Jude 16. (...) Graecis idem est quod
observantia, cultuque prosequi, suspicere magni facere, in pretio habere.
Budaeus, and Auctor Graeci These.
. And in this sense also, the Disciples may here well be said to marvel: for
this miracle procured in them a great deal of reverend awe, honor and respect
unto Christ. The other Evangelists say, They did exceedingly fear; and all
say, They did ask one another, What manner of man is this? q. d. How glorious,
honorable, and powerful this man? whom even the winds and seas do obey? And
thus some will, that Christ himself marvelled at the Centurions faith Matthew.
8. 10. (...), miratus est.
; he honored, regarded, and respected (not his nobility, power, wealth, but)
his faith Non nobilitatem, potentiam, opes, sed fidem. Orig.
. The word being thus opened, as signifying that the Disciples did very
intently behold and mark this great work, and honor Christ the Worker; hence
first from the Letter we learn:

That Gods works in the world are to be marvelled Doct. Lit.
at, observed, and his great name to be glorified for them. This is the maine
end of al his works, he does all for him self Prove. 16. 4.
. Thus David, with a divine eye, could see Gods glory, in the heavens, Sun,
Moon, Stars, Thunder, Lightning, Rain, Winds, Seas; yea, there is not the
basest and most contemptible creature in the world, but beheld with a
spiritual eye, does declare the glory of the Creator, and would make a godly
man exclaim with holy David, O Lord, our governor, how excellent is thy name
in all the world Psalm. 8. 1. ult.
! Yea, so great in the greatest, as not lesser in the least Ita magnus in
maximis, ut non minor in minimis. August. cont. Faust. Manich. lib. 21. c. 5.
. Saint Basil convinced the bragging of Eunomius, boasting of his knowledge,
with a few questions, concerning the poor Emmet Epist. 168. quae est ad Eunom.
Tom. 2. fol. 121.
; as, whether it did breath; how breed; how long live; whether it had an heart,
liver, bones, muscles, arteries? But why do I wonder at her body? how much
more may we marvel at her endowments? She is very quick and nimble in her
path, see her diligence; she lays up in Summer against Winter, see her
providence; if any of her fellows be over-loaded, she helps to bear the
burden, see her charity; if her heap and nest be stirred, she first
gathers in her young, see her natural affection; she bears a greater
burden than her self, see her strength; she keeps a right path, see her
order; Oh, is God so mavelous in this poor insectrodden under foot! (that
God has set man to school to learn of her Prove. 6. 6.
,) how much more in the Heaven, Firmament, Air, Earth, Sea, and those great
creatures therein, Behemoth, Leviathan? So as every where, by sea and land, in
field and house, by day and night, if we had wise hearts, and clear eyes, we
might see, and marvel at Gods works, and say, Oh what a glorious Creator is
this! Oh what a wonderful Governor is this!

But alas, as God complained of old, of his people, Application.
O foolish people, and without understanding, which have eyes and see not,
ears and hear not Ierem. 5. 21.
; so we are a foolish, blind, and deaf people. It may be, if we saw the
Unicorn, or Behemoth in the wilderness, which are the chief of the ways of
God Job 40. 10.
: if we could dive into the sea, and see how the fishes measure out their
particular habitations Thalassi-metrae. Ambros.
, and keep their perfect paths; if we could see what pastime the huge Whale
makes in the deep Psalm. 104. 26.
; making it to boil like a pot of ointment Job 41. 31.
; the little Remora, but half a foot long, to be able to stay the greatest
ship under sail Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 32. cap 1.
; or if we saw the strange motion, and specially of some seas; or the strange
and hidden Sympathies, and Antipathies, discerned to be betwixt sensitive,
vegetative, yea insensible things; it may be we would marvel a little. But at
the motion, virtue, or Eclips of Sun or Moon, different glory, situation,
position, aspect, or influence of Stars, Thunder, Lightning, Rain, Snow,
Hail; the diligence and art of the Be; the admirable structure and frame of
his own body Psalm. 139. 14.
; who marvelleth? Because these things are ordinarily seen, we marvel not at
them, God is not honored for them: though indeed, God is mavelous in all his
works, and sought out of them that love him Psalm. 86. 10.
.

Oh, let us, from this Example, learn to marvel, Conclusion.
and praise God for his great works, lest we become subject to that fearful
imprecation of David, Because they regard not the works of the Lord, nor the
operation of his hands, destroy them, and doc not build them up Psalm. 28. 5.
. But specially, when God does any great work, contrary to the course and
order of nature established; either to declare his mercy in saving his, or his
justice in punishing his enemies; these are for all men (that come to the
knowledge of them) to marvel; as the drying up of the Red Sea Psalm. 106. 9.
; dividing of Jordan Joshua 3 16.
; feeding his people with Manna and Quails from heaven Exodus 16. 13.
; giving fountains of water out of the rock Exodus 17. 7.
; preserving the three children in the fiery furnace Dan. 3. 27.
; and Daniel in the Lions den Dan. 6. 22.
: On the other side, consuming Sodom and Gomorrah Genesis 19. 24.
; and Aarons sons with fire from heaven Levit. 10. 2.
; causing the earth to open, and swallow up Core, Dathan and Abiram Numb. 16.
31.
; plagued Pharaoh and all Egypt, with Flies, Frogs, Lice Exodus 8. 3.
; and destroyed Herod with Worms Acts 12. 23.
. These and many such are registered in the Book of God, that when men hear or
read the same, they may marvel, and say, What a merciful, or just God is
this? who as he can arm all creatures, to take vengeance on the wicked, so
also preserve his, though as lambs in midst of wolves; and his Church a poor
ship in midst of Pirates, and riding out all tempests. Oh, how mavelous is God
in the subsistence of his Church!

The Doctrine mystical is, That God can turn Doct. mystic.
all such things as the Devil or wicked men devise against him, or his people,
to his glory, and his Churches good. Yea the greater is the assault and evil
intended, the greater is his glory from deliverance. No sooner is Christ on
sleep, but the winds roar, and sea rages; now Satan bestirreth himself to
drown ship and passengers; to break off the work of Redemption by Christ,
and utterly to destroy the poor and weak believing Apostles: But see how
contrary the issue is to his expectation; though the Apostles be troubled, and
fear, yet Christ awaketh, rebukes the winds and sea; Christ is glorified, and
the Disciples faith confirmed. When Christ his hour was come, how did Satan
bestirre himself, to have him put to death? How did he tempt Judas to betray
him John 13. 27.
, the Jews to prefer Barabas before him Matthew. 27. 26.
, Pilate to condemn him John 19. 16.
; Soldiers to execute him Luke 23. 33.
? But see how he was confounded! for even herein Gods Council took effect,
for by death, he destroyed him that had the power of death, that is, the Devil
Heb. 2. 14.
; turned the cross into a chariot of triumph, spoiled Principalities and
Powers, and openly triumphed over them upon the cross Coloss. 2. 5.
. That which Satan intended for Christ his greatest shame, to crucify him
betwixt two thieves, was his greatest glory; the Cross being as his Throne,
and some, on his right hand, absolved, some, on his left, condemned. When
Christ was buried, then Satan no less bestirred himself to keep him there,
provoking the chief Priests and Pharisees to move Pilate, to make the
Sepulcher sure: and so it was; for besides the great stone which Joseph rolled
to the door of the Sepulcher, it was also sealed, and a watch set to keep it
Matthew. 27. ult.
. But herein the malice and subtlety of Satan and his limbs were confounded;
for the surer that the Sepulcher was made, the greater was the truth and glory
of his Resurrection; yea such as were set to watch, did publish it, Matthew. 28.
11. So, the greater is the power, and the more violent the assaults, which
enemies make against the Church of Christ, the greater is Gods glory in their
deliverance; which the people confess in the Psalms, If the Lord had not
been on our side, now may Israel say, if the Lord had not been on our side,
when men rose up against us, they had even swallowed us up quick, when they
were so wrathfully displeased at us, the waters had overwhelmed us, the deep
waters of the proud had even gone over our soul. But praised be the Lord, who
has not given us for a prey to their teeth: Our soul is escaped, even as a
bird out of the snare of the fowler, the snare is broken, and we are delivered
Psalm. 124. 1. etc.
. The greater the danger of Gods people at the Red Sea, the greater their
deliverance: the greater the evil by Jesuits intended against the Protestants
in France, the more glorious their peace: the greater mischief intended by the
Gunpowder treason, and the nearer to execution, the more mavelous our
deliverance: in all which cases, the Church is taught to praise God, and say,
The Lord has done mavelous things; with his own right hand, and with his
holy arm, has he gotten himself the victory Psalm. 118. 15.
.

Oh trust in God, be the storm, and threatened Use.
hurt to the Church, never so great, for all shall work for good Romans 8. 28.
; There is no wisdom, counsel, or strength against the Lord Prove. 21. penult.
: But he will turn the rage of man to his praise Psalm 50. 22.
. When all that see and hear, shall marvel, and say with reverend awe, Who is
this?

What manner of man is this (...); qualis est hic?
?] The Greek 2. Part.
word is very emphaticall, and of greater signification, than another, which is
thus translated; (...) qualis. For though this be often used in the New
Testament; yet ever translated, what, and which, (one place only excepted 1
Pet. 1. 11.
.) Neither are they derived from the same root; for (...) is from (...); but
(...), from (...) pavimentum, as if it were written, (...), pro (...), cujas:
as if they had fully expressed the word thus, What Countryman is this? Which
question bewrays their ignorance, tends to the begetting of knowledge, and
is an effect of their admiration, (which may thus be described, according to
the rules of Philosophy) Admiration is a painful suspension of the mind,
proceeding from the knowledge of some great effects, whereof the causes are
unknown. I call it a painful suspension, because all men naturally desire
knowledge (...). Arist. Metaph. lib. 1. cap. 1.
; and the more generously minded any are, the more painful it is for them to
be ignorant. Some say, that Aristotle (the Prince and touchstone of
Philosophers Princeps and lydius lapis Philosophorum.
) was so grieved, that he could not find out the cause of the ebbing and
flowing of the Sea, that he died on it Caelius Rodiginus antiq. lect. lib. 29.
cap. 8. (...). Justin. Mart. ad Graecos cohort. page 34.
: yea, some say, that he cast himself into the Sea, saying, Seeing I cannot
comprehend thee, thou shall comprehend me Quoniam ego non possum capere te, tu
capies me.
: but the other seems more probable Ke^kerm. Systh. Log. plenior. in T. 1.
c^ll. 1164.
. Now admiration proceeding from ignorance of causes, does wonderfully provoke
to the study of causes, that so they may be eased of that sorrow, pain, and
grief: whereupon, admiration is said to be the soul and life of Philosophy
(...) Arist. supercitato loco.
. And Pythagoras, being demanded, what was the end of Philosophy, answered, To
marvel at nothing Nihil admirari.
: intending that herein, a learned Philosopher, knowing the causes of things,
did not marvel; whereas an ignorant rustic does marvel at his own shadow.
As in Philosophy; so, much more in Divinity, ignorance is a painful thing to
the godly disposed; and therefore, the more they admire the word and works of
God, the more they enquire and search into the causes thereof: as the Disciples
here, marvelling, said one to another, What manner of man is this? Whose
question intends three things, viz.

First, That Christ is true man; having a true soul 1
and body, in regard of their substance, and their essential properties; as,
in the soul, will, understanding; in body, true dimensions, as length, breadth,
thickness; yea, taking also the general, and blameless weaknesses and
infirmities, of both, as ignorance of some things, fear, sorrow,
wearisomenesse, hunger, thirst, sleep, ache, pain, sickness; such as
accompany the general nature of man, and are not repugnant to the perfection
of science and grace, as was more largely showed from his being on sleep.

This is it, was anciently promised, The seed of the woman shall break the
Serpents head Genesis 3. 15.
; And, In thy seed shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed Genesis 12. 3.
; And afterward prophesied, A Virgin shall conceive, and bear a Son Esaias 7.
14.
; A Child is borne, a Son is given Esaias 9. 6.
; A woman shall compass a man Ierem. 31. 22.
. Which promises and prophesies have bin most truly fulfilled, (as this day
does witness to the Christian Churches Sermon in the Queere, on Christmas day
morning, 1622.
) For the fullness of time being come, God sent his Son, made of a woman Gal.
4. 4.
; The word was made flesh, John 1. 14.

Oh what a sweet comfort is this to us miserable Use.
sinners, that our blessed Savior and Redeemer is not a stranger to our
nature, but took upon him the form of a servant Philip. 2. 7.
; did partake, with his, in flesh and blood Heb. 2. 14.
; became that prophesied Shiloh Genesis 49. 10. Pet. Galat. de occultis Cathol.
verit. lib. 5. cap. 4.
; wrapped in the Tunicle skin, or Secundine; our kinsman, (as Job calls him
Job 19. 25. Goel.
.) If the Baptist did so spring for joy in his mothers womb, when Mary the
Mother of Christ saluted his Mother Luke 1. 41.
; and if the Angels did so rejoice and sing at the birth of Christ Luke 2. 14.
; what cause have we to rejoice and sing? yea our very souls to spring for
joy, that we do celebrate this Festivitie in commemoration of our Saviors
birth?

Yea, that our comfort may be full, he has not Amplificatio.
only taken upon him our nature, but our infirmities also, that he might become
a merciful and compassionate High Priest Heb. 2. 14.
; So as we may boldly go to the Throne of grace, and be assured, we shall
find mercy and grace, to help in time of need Heb. 4. ult.
.

The second thing avouched by the propriety of 2
the word, in this question, (as you have heard in opening the sense of it) is,
That this true man is a stranger Alienigena.
; they ask whence he is (...); cujas.
? whereunto Christ returns a perfect answer, He descended from heaven John
3. 13.
. Saint Paul says, He is the Lord from heaven 1 Cor. 15. 47.
. Not that he brought his humanity from heaven, which passed through the
Virgins womb, as water through a conduit, (as diverse Heretics have dreamed
Marcionites, Gno^lici, Manichaei, and Valentiniani.
;) for he was made of a woman and had the materials of his body from the
blessed Virgin: but he had not his beginning here on earth, as men have; but
God came down from heaven De Coelo dicitur, respectu divinae personae.
; and was manifested in the flesh 1 Timothy 3. ult.
: and as he came, so here he lived, but as a stranger, not having where to be
borne, or buried; or whilst he lived, whereon to rest his head Matthew. 8. 20.
. And as quickly was he gone again: he did but sojourne, or (as the word
signifies John 1. 14. (...) quod in tabernaculis habitare significat.
) pitch his Tent among us, for the space of 33 years; which compared with
eternity, or long lives of the Patriarchs, is nothing. He was but as a
Traveller; which, as for a nights lodging only, turned in unto us Ierom. 14. 8.
: and as a stranger he was used; for his own would not receive him John 1. 11.
, but did lade him with all wrongs and injuries, prefer a murderer before
him Acts 3. 14.
, and most disgracefully crucify him, betwixt two notorious malefactors Luke
23. 33.
. But it shall suffice only to touch these things.

The third and last is more largely to be handled 3.
(as most fitting the Text, the day, and the ensuing service of this day
Communion.
, whereunto with some few words to that purpose, I would prepare you) and is
this, This man is a strange man, wonderfully qualified. For they propound the
question, in way of admiration, What manner of man is this? q. d. Oh what a
wonderful man is this? And well might they so marvel, and demand, for there
was never such a man on earth, before, or since, or shall be. The Church says,
Her beloved is the chiefest of ten thousand Cant. 5. 10. Electus ex millibus.
; a finite number being put for an infinite. All the thousands and millions of
glorious Angels in heaven, or men on earth, cannot afford such another. He is
the only Standard Bearer (as the word signifies. ^ Heb. dagul, Vexillarius est
e myriade. Trem.
) He is anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows Psalm. 45. 7.
. He received not the spirit by measure John 3. 34.
. In him were hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge Coloss. 2. 3.
; yea all that fullness of the Godhead dwelt in him bodily Coloss. 2. 9.
; that they may well marvel, What manner of man is this? For Christ has said
of himself, he is a wonder Esaias 8. 18.
; and the Prophet makes this one of his glorious titles, He shall be called
wonderful Esaias 9. 6.
. And never any creature so answerable to his name, as Christ to this. For what
he was, said, did, suffered, ordained, was all most mavelous. Let us retaile
these things. For wherein can I more edify you, than by provoking you to
marvel, which is the whetstone of knowledge?

And first, let us consider his person, and it will 1. His person.
make us marvel, yea, be astonished with marvelling. He that is true God from
everlasting, in time became true man; not ceasing to be what he was before, but
beginning to be, what he was not before; assuming true manhood, to subsist in
the word by hypostaticall or personal union; neither nullifying the Deity,
nor deifying the Humanity, but reserving the essential properties of each
nature several and distinct, without mixture or confusion (...). Sic Council.
Genesis Ephesians. and Calcedon. contra haeret. Nestor. and Eutych. decrev.
The Apostle says, This is a great mystery, and to be much marvelled at, God
manifested in the flesh 1 Timothy 3. ult.
The word made flesh John 1. 14.
. Manhood assumed into personal union with Godhead; that so Godhead and
Manhood make the person of one Redeemer, as soul and body do one man; that
seeing as God he could not die, (which God has threatened Genesis 2. 17.
) and as man, not overcome death; being God and man, he could both suffer and
overcome; the one suffered, and the other enabled Anselm. Cur Deus home, lib.
2. cap 18. This is the kiss the Church anciently so desired. Foelix osculum,
in quo no^ os ori ^^primitur, sed Deus homini unitur. Bern. in Cant. sermon. 2.
. By reason of which union, and (as I may call it) association of diverse
natures, a kind of mutual commutation there is, whereby those concrete
Titles, God and Man (when we speak of Christ) do take interchangeably one
another room, and in the Concrete it is most holy and true, which in the
Abstract were horrible and hellish blasphemy to affirm. We cannot say, the
Humanity made the world, or Deity suffered: but we may truly say, the man
Christ made the world, and the God Christ suffered Ea quae humanae sunt
naturae, non possunt de divina, in abstracto praedicari. Aquin. sunt. 3. part.
quaest. 16.
. The Apostle says, The Jews did crucify the Lord of glory Acts 2. 15.
, 1 Cor. 2. 8. and that God has purchased his Church with his blood Acts 20.
28.
: and Christ being on earth said, at the same instant, The Son of man was in
heaven John 3. 13.
. Where you see a bloody death is attributed to God, and Lord of glory; and
ubiquitie to manhood, which humane nature admits not. Therefore by God, and
Lord of glory, we must understand the whole person of Christ, who died, and
shed his blood, but not in that nature, for which he is called God, and Lord of
glory: and in the other place, by Son of man, we understand the person of
Christ, who was in heaven, as well as on earth, though not in that nature
(...), secundum aliud. Dr. Fi^ld de Eccles. lib. 5. cap. 13. Bez. in Ioh. 3.
13. Sicut in Trinitate, est alius and alius, non aliud; ita in Christo, aliud
and aliud, non alius.
, for which he is called, the son of man. Yea, without this caution, the
Fathers who were both sound in the faith, and unanimous in defense thereof,
will seem to be both corrupt, and contrary. For Theodoret disputes with great
earnestness, that God cannot be said to suffer; but he meant in the Abstract,
against Apollinarius, who held the Deity to be passible. And Cyrill is as
earnest, saying, Whosoever does deny very God to have suffered death, does
forsake the faith; but he means, in the flesh, and not in that substance, for
which the title God is given him. But why do I go about to express and make
clear such a mystery, as is unconceiveable. The strength of faith appears
in those things, wherein our wits and capacities are weak, and therefore I
must leave you reverendly and religiously, to marvel at the person of your
Redeemer, and say, What manner of man is this? who is truly God-Man, and
Man-God Hook. Eccles. polit. lib. 5. parag. 52. page 108.
. And so I proceed to speak of his humane nature, wherein he is more familiar
unto us, yet therein most mavelous also. And first,

His conception is mavelous: which was not 2. Conception.
according to the course of nature, and by carnal copulation, (as Ebion
blasphemed August. de Haeres. cap. 10.
) but as the holy Gospel teaches, and we profess to believe, he was conceived
by the Holy Ghost Luke 1. 35.
; that as he was God of his Father, without mother; so he might become man, of
his mother without father; and so be a Priest for ever, after the order of
Melchizedech Psalm. 110. 4.
, who is said, to be without father and mother Heb. 7. 3.
.

And this coming of the Holy Ghost upon the Virgin, effected a threefold work.

First, the fashioning of the body, of a part of Mary's 1.
substance, that so he might be the true son of Adam, Abraham, and David,
according to the flesh; and also, the creating and infusing of the soul into
the body; which at the first was organized, and fit to receive it (which other
bodies are not.)

Secondly, the sanctification of that matter, that 2.
it had not the least stain, or blemish of any original sin, uncleanness,
contagion, or corruption.

Thirdly, the union of the Godhead and Manhood. 3. Ludolph. de concept. Salvat.
in 1. part. fol. 8. col. 4.
All which were wrought at the same instant of time. Of all which, the personal
union is most mavelous, That, as in the Trinity, three persons are united in
essence; so in Christ, three several and distinct substances, viz. Deity,
Soul, and Flesh, are united in one person. And therefore the humanity of
Christ his soul and body, did not make a person, (as in other men) but so
soon as they were, they did subsist in the person of the Word. So were there
at once two great unions, admirably singular, and singularly admirable, viz. 1.
Manhood and Godhead. 2. Motherhood and Maidenhood Mirabilia singulariter, and
singularia mirabiliter, Deus and homo, matter and virgo. Bern. sermon. 3. in
vigil. nativit.
. But because the womb is a dark shop, wherein every man is marvellously and
fearfully made Psalm. 139.
; much more was Christ; the Virgins womb being called the shop of miracles
Officina miraculorum. Damasc. sermon. 1. de nativit.
. Neither did it want mystery, that the Holy Ghost is said to overshadow her.
We will also believe with our hearts, what we cannot fully comprehend with our
minds, much less express with our tongues. We will also religiously marvel
at this, and say, What manner of man is this? that was even conceived by the
Holy Ghost? and proceed to that was more visible, and patulous, viz.

His birth] S. John says, He saw a great wonder 3. Birth.
in heaven, a woman clothed with the Sun, and the Moon under her feet, and
upon her head a crown of twelve stars, and she was with child, and cried
traveling in birth Rev. 12. 1.
. He may well call it a wonder, a great wonder; it is the wonder of wonders,
and comprehends many wonders. What! the inhabiter of eternity Esaias 57. 15.
, subject to time, and after certain months in the womb (as this day) borne
into the world Luke 2. 11.
! The everlasting Father Esaias 9. 6.
, a young child! The Word John 1. 1.
, an Infant which cannot speak! Wisdom it self Prove. 8. 12.
, not know good from evil Esaias 7. 16.
! He that bears up all things by his omnipotency Heb. 1. 3.
, borne in the arms of a woman! He that is invisible in his own nature, whom
no man ever saw, nor can see 1 Timothy 6. 16.
; now to be seen of any in our nature, even of the country Shepherds Luke 2.
17. Invisibilis in suis, visibilis in nostris. Leo sermon. 2. de nativit.
! He that has heaven for his throne, and the earth his footstool Esaias 66. 1.
; borne in the stable of a common Inn, and laid in a cratch Luke 2. 7.
! He that fills heaven and earth too Ierem. 5. 22.
, find no room in an Inn! He that has girt the sea sand, himself wrapped
in swaddling clothes Luke 7.
! He that opens his hands, and feeds every living creature Psalm. 145. 16.
; does he suck the breasts Luke 11. 17.
? He that is David's Lord Matthew. 22. penult.
, is he become David's son Ibid.
? He that was before Abraham John 8. penult.
, is he so long after him in the flesh, and descended from his loins Genesis 22.
18.
? He that is the Lord of all Romans 10. 12.
, is he become a servant unto all Philip. 2. 7.
? Whereas man in the nonage of the world was made after the Image of God Genesis
1. 26.
; now, in the dotage of it, will God be made after the similitude of sinful
man Romans 8. 3. Sicut in principio factus es^^ homo. Aug. de temp. hom. 13.
? He that made woman of Adams rib Genesis 2. 22.
; will he now be made of a woman Gal. 4. 4.
? and shall his mother be a Virgin? Well said God, when he prophesied, that the
Lord will create a new thing in the earth, a woman shall compass a man Ierem.
31. 22.
. He may well call it a new thing, for there was never such a thing before, nor
since; and he may well call it a Creation Chi barah Jehovah kodashah; Creavit
Dominus novum.
. Yea, some Divines hold the work of Incarnation, when God was made like man,
to be greater than the work of Creation, when man was made like God Francisc.
Mayro, illuminat. Doct. Paris. sermon. de Annunciat.
. I am sure, the greatest miracles, that every eye saw, may be seen of the
spiritual man, in the birth of Christ. The Sun in the Firmament has been
seen to stand Josh. 10. 13.
, to be retrograde, and go back diverse degrees 2 King. 20. 11.
, to be eclipsed, or darkened, at a plenilune Matthew. 27. 45.
; and these were great miracles. But in the birth of Christ, thou shall see the
Sun of righteousness Malach. 4. 2.
come down from heaven, and the most glorious Son of God empty himself,
and descend from the bosom of his Father into the womb of a Virgin Philip. 2.
7. (...) Exinanivit sese.
. Moses saw the viriditie of a bush, burning with fire, preserved Exodus 3. 2.
; and in Christ's birth, we may see the virginity of a mother preserved, Esaias
7. 14. Aarons dry rod did blossom, and bear fruit Numb. 17. 8.
: and in the birth of Christ, we may see the withered stock of Iesse flourish,
and bear fruit Esaias 11. 1.
: Manna fell out of the clouds Exodus 16. 13.
: Christ came from the bosom of his Father John 1. 18.
. Elijah was taken up into heaven 2 Kings 2. 11.
; but a greater than he came now down from heaven John 3. 13.
. The consideration whereof, made that learned and devout Father to break out
into admiration, O Lord, I do not admire the stature of the world, the
stabilitie of the earth, waxing and waning of the Moon, perpetual motion of
the Sun Non mundi ^ujus staturam admiror, non terrae stabilitatem. Cypr.
sermon. 3. de Nativitate. ``Deum in utero Virginis, omnipotentem in cun^bulis.
: but I wonder to see God in the womb, the omnipotent in the cradle``: These
things do astonish me, and make me say with Abacuck, I have considered thy
works, and was afraid Hab. 3. 2.
. With whom let us marvel, and say with these Disciples, What manner of man is
this? who (as this day) was borne of a pure Virgin. Surely, this is a new and
strange thing indeed, which Jehovah himself has created, and it is mavelous
in our eyes. Oh rejoice in this day, which the Lord has made Ps. 118. 24.
: yea, rejoice in this day, wherein the Lord was made. Rejoice great
grandfather Adam, for (as this day) thy wife Evah has brought forth the
promised seed, which shall bruise the serpents head Genesis 3. 15.
. Rejoice grandfather Abraham, This is the day, thou so longedst to see John 8.
56.
. Now is thy seed borne, in which, all nations of the earth shall be blessed
Genesis 22. 18.
. Rejoice father David, this day thy Lord is become thy son Matthew. 22. 45.
, which shall sit upon thy throne Psalm. 132. 11.
. Rejoice all ye Prophets, for God has fulfilled what he has spoken by your
mouths Luke 1. 70.
. Rejoice ye men, for the Son of God is now made man Gal. 4. 4.
. Rejoice ye women, for a woman is become the mother of God, and all
generations shall call her blessed Luke 1. 48.
. Rejoice ye Virgins, for a Virgin has conceived and borne a son Esaias 7. 14.
. Rejoice ye children, for the Son of God is become a child Esaias 9. 6.
. Rejoice ye that sit in darkness, for the day spring from on high has
visited Luk 1. 78.
; yea, the Sun of righteousness is risen unto you Malach. 4. 2.
. Rejoice, ye that hunger, for the bread of life is come from heaven John 6.
41.
. Rejoice, ye that mourn, for the consolation of Israel is come Luke 2. 25.
. Rejoice, ye that are sick in your souls, the Physician is come Matthew. 9.
12.
. Rejoice ye sinners, for a Savior is borne Luke 2. 11.
. Let all that fear the Lord rejoice, and sing, Glory be to God on high. And
so much for his birth.

He has many and most glorious, high and honorable 4. Titles.
titles given him; as, Jesus, Christ, Son of the most high, Lord of glory,
Emanuel, Wonderful, Counselor, Mighty God, everlasting Father, Prince of
peace, Angel of Covenant, Redeemer, Way, Truth, Life, Resurrection, Peace,
First and last, First begotten of the dead, First fruits of them that sleep,
Prince of the Kings of the earth, Bright morning star, Amen, Faithful and
true witness, The beginning of the Creation of God, Prince of Life, The true
Light, Good Shepherd, Vine, Door, Lamb of God, Only begotten Son of the
Father, Image of the invisible God, second Adam, Son of Man, The true God,
Great God, Mighty God, The only God, God over all, King, Everlasting Priest,
Doctor, Reconciliation for the sins of the world, Mediator, Advocate,
Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, Redemption, Our Master, Prophet,
Servant of God, Our hope, Our brother, Bread of life, Rock, Stone cut out of
the mountains without hands, End of the Law, Spouse, and Head of the Church,
Chief corner stone, Righteous branch, Seed of Abraham, Son of David, King of
glory, Lord of all, the Righteous one, Hope of glory, Heir of all things,
Judge of quick and dead, The Priest after the order of Melchizedech, The
consolation of Israel. Who does not marvel at these things, and say, What
manner of man is this; to whom so many glorious and honorable titles are given?

When he was but a child of twelve years of 5. Disputation in the Temple.
age, and lost in Jerusalem, after three days, his Parents found him in the
Temple, sitting in the midst of the Doctors, hearing them, and asking them
questions, and all that heard him were astonished at his understanding and
answers, and his Parents were amazed Luke 2. 46. Ad ostendendumse hominem,
humiliter audiebat: ad probandum se Deum, sublimiter respondebat. Chrysostom.
. And when ye hear the story, will ye not marvel, and say, What manner of
child is this; that disputed so learnedly with the Doctors?

When he was baptized of his servant in Jordan, 6. Baptism.
the heavens were opened, God the Father pronounced, This is that my welbeloved
Son, in whom I am well pleased; and the Holy Ghost descended in the likeness
of a Dove, and rested upon him Matthew. 3. 16, 17.
. And do you not marvel what manner of man he is, at whose Baptism such
strange things happened?

When Peter in the name of himself, and the rest 7. Offices.
of the Apostles, did make that excellent confession of faith, which Christ so
commended, he said, Thou art the Christ, or that Christ Matthew. 16. 16. (...).
. Christ is a Greek word, and answers to the Hebrew Messiah, as is expounded
in the Gospel, We have found the Messiah, which is, by interpretation, the
Christ John 1. 41.
. And both do signify in English, Anointed: and yet S. Peter at another time
spoke more fully, Thou art the Christ, or anointed of God Luke 9. 20. (...).
. Three sorts of persons were Legally anointed with Material oil, viz. Kings,
as Saul 1 Samuel 10. 1.
; Priests, as Aaron Levit. 8. 12.
; and Prophets, as Elisha 1 Kings 19. 16.
: and these were Christ's of God, for that he did set them apart, and furnish
them with gifts for those functions (whereof that external anointing was the
Symbol) which God acknowledged, Touch not mine anointed Psalm. 105. 25.
; and whereof David made conscience, though Saul was a wicked man, and he was
much tempted thereunto (when opportunity was offered:) yet he repelled the
temptation, saying to Abishai, Who can stretch his hand against the Lords
anointed, and be guiltless 1 Samuel 26. 9.
? Yea, his heart did smite him, for coming so near him, as, to cut off the
lap of his garment 1 Samuel 24. 5.
. But never any one before, or since, The Christ, or, That Christ, but the
blessed Son of the Virgin: who only received all fullness of grace; and in
whom only all those offices did meet and concur.

They have doubled in diverse, who were his types, as David was both a King and
a Prophet; Melchizedeck, a King and Priest; and Samuel, a Priest and Prophet:
but all three, never, but in him alone, and therefore, worthily styled, That
Christ, or Anointed of God; That King and Prince of all the Kings of the earth,
to whose Scepter, Lore, and Law, all must stoop in obedience; and all shall
be destroyed, that will not have him to reign over them Luc. 19. 27.
: That great Prophet, to whose doctrine all must hearken Deuteronomy. 18. 19.
: That High Priest, who only, and once for all, has offered the propitiatory
sacrifice Heb. 7. penult.
, for the sins of the Elect. Do you hear these things, and do you not
marvel, and say, What manner of man is this? who only discharges such great
offices.

Again, whilst he was here on earth, he took 8. Transfiguration.
three of his beloved disciples, and led them up to the top of Mount Thabor,
and there was transfigured before them, his face did shine as the Sun, his
raiment was white as the light, and as snow, so as no Fuller on earth can white
them; and there appeared Moses and Elias talking with him, and there was also a
bright cloud, and there was heard the voice of God the Father, giving to his
Son honor and glory, from that excellent glory 2 Pet. 1. 17.
; saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear him. With
which voice and sight, the disciples, that heard and saw, and specially S.
Peter, was so ravished, that he forgot himself, and the redemption of the
Elect, by the death of Christ at Jerusalem, and desired no other heaven, but to
abide there, though without a Tent Matthew. 17. 2. Mar. 9. 2. Luke 9. 28.
. Oh, marvel you also, and say, What manner of man is this?

Again, whilst he was here on earth, what excellent 9. Doctrine.
doctrine did he preach and deliver? pronouncing, the poor in spirit, the
meek, such as mourn, and hunger, and thirst after righteousness, and suffer
persecution for righteousness sake, Blessed Matthew. 5* 3, 4.
; requiring every disciple of his, to deny himself, take up the cross and
follow him Matthew. 16. 24.
; to love our enemies, bless them that curse us Matthew. 5. 44.
, overcome evil with good Romans 12. ult.
; If we be smitten on one cheek to turn the other Matthew. 5. 39.
; yet promising great reward in heaven Matthew. 5. 12.
; calling all to him that travel and are heavy laden Matthew. 11. 28.
; promising he will not cast away any that come unto him John 6. 37.
; that he will not break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax
Matthew. 12. 20.
; that whosoever believes in him shall not perish, but have everlasting life
John 3. 16.
; yea, he is passed from death to life, and shall not come into judgment John
5. 24.
; that he knows his sheep, and will give unto them everlasting life John 10.
27, 28.
; that of all those his Father has given him, he will not lose one, but raise
him up at the last day John 6. 39.
; that such as for his sake, forsake father, mother, brother, sister, goods,
houses, or lands, shall in this world receive an hundred fold more, and in the
world to come, everlasting life Matt. 19. penult.
; that such as now follow him in the regeneration, shall sit upon thrones
Matthew. 19. 28.
; that such as for his sake hunger and thirst, shall sit at his Table, and eat
and drink with him in his kingdom Luke 22. 30.
; such doctrine, for matter and manner of deliverie, as the Church truly said,
Honey and milk were under his tongue Cant. 4. 11.
, and his lips were full of grace Psalm. 45. 2.
. Yea, all the Synagogue wondered at the gracious words which proceeded out of
his mouth Luke 4. 22.
. A woman could not contain her self, when she heard him, but pronounced,
Blessed is the womb that bare thee, Luke 11. 27. His very enemies were
astonished, and said, Never man spoke like him John 7. 46.
. And the rude multitude marvelled, and questioned amongst themselves, What
thing is this? What new doctrine is this Mark 1. 27.
, and whence has this man this wisdom? Is not this the Carpenters son? from
whence then has this man all these things Matthew. 13. 55.
? And will not you also (when ye read in the Gospel) marvel and say, What
manner of man is this; that has preached such new, true, holy, humble,
heavenly, charitable, and comfortable doctrine?

As was his doctrine, so was his life and conversation 10. Conversation.
most holy: for he never did sin 1 Pet. 2. 22.
; nor knew sin 2 Cor. 5. ult.
; his very enemies could not rebuke him of sin John 8. 46.
: He came not to break, but to fulfill the Law Matthew. 5. 17.
; And, he fulfilled all righteousness indeed Matthew. 3. 15.
; His righteousness far exceeded the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees Matthew. 5. 20.
; For it was the righteousness of God Romans 3. 21.
. Now was that fulfilled, though he lay among pots, yet had he silver wings,
and his feathers like gold, Psalm. 68. 13. He did converse with sinners Matthew.
9. 11.
; and yet was separated from them Heb. 7. 26.
; he touched pitch Eccles. 13. 1.
, and yet was not defiled Luke 7. 39.
. As he was most holy; so, most meek: he did not strive nor cry, nor lift up
his voice in the streets Matthew. 12.
: most patient; being led as a sheep to the slaughter, and as a lamb dumb
before the shearer, he opened not his mouth: most humble; he did not ride into
Jerusalem like an earthly Emperor, in Skarlet, Purple, glistering roabes,
cloth of gold, not mounted on a lusty Palfrey, with stately saddle, and
Princely trappings, attended on with great troops and guard, in soft garments,
and with chains of gold; but he rode on an Ass used to the yoke, a poor,
base, contemptible, and ridiculous beast; in his poor seamelesse coat: and in
stead of any rich saddle, sat upon some poor garments, that his Disciples had
spread under him; attended by a few fishermen, and others of base quality in
the world; yet all the City was moved, and said, who is this Matthew. 21. 5. 10.
? And when you hear these things, will ye not also marvel, and say, What
manner of man is this? so holy, harmless, meek, patient, and humble.

Again, How glorious were his miracles, in 11. Miracles.
the eyes of the beholders, which he wrought? Giving sight to the blind,
hearing to the deaf, speech to the dumb, strength to the lame, cleansing
Lepers, casting out devils, raising the dead Matthew. 11. 5.
; Rebuking Fevers Luke 4. 39.
; healing all manner of sicknesses and diseases Matthew. 4. 23, 24.
; rebuking winds and seas; whereat the beholders were astonished. And when you
hear it, will not ye also marvel and say, What manner of man is this? for even
the winds and the sea obey him.

How mavelous also in the Sacraments, which 12. Sacraments.
he has ordained and instituted, for the use of his new Testaments Church? Did
the Jews so marvel at their Passover, when but the blood of a Lamb was
shed, saying, What mean you by this service? Exodus 12. 26. And will not you
marvel at the Sacrament of the body and blood of the Son of God? Did they at
the Type; and will not you at the Truth? Did they at the shadow; and will not
you at the body? Oh marvel, inquire, and I will inform you. I purpose not to
sound the Trumpet to war, and perplex your minds with intricate questions,
and fruitless disputes, which are endless about this subject. Christ ordained
them for the comfort of our souls, and not for the exercise of our curious and
subtle wits; to seal up a sweet union with Christ, and communion one with
another, not to occasion division and contention: yet, through Satan's malice,
and our weakness, it is come to pass, that in nothing are Christians more
divided, nor have more bitter conflicts, than about these things. I will
briefly lay down the positive truth, according to the Scriptures, and the
Tenet of our Church, and labor to prepare you to the worthy receiving thereof.
And first, let me provoke you to admire the love of Christ, and his desire of
our salvation; who not contented to speak unto our ears, in his word, does
add Sacraments, as the seals thereof, for confirmation of our faith; and let
us see with our eyes, what we hear with our ears, the Sacraments being a
visible word Quid aliud sunt Sacramenta, nisi quaedamquasi verba visibilia?
August. tom. 6. contr. Paust. Manich. l. 19. c. 16.
; yea, whereas the Word conveyeth grace to the heart, but by the one sense of
hearing; the Sacrament of the Lords Supper conveyeth grace, by seeing,
handling, tasting; that as David says, We may see and taste, how good the Lord
is Psalm. 34. 8.
; and with the Apostle, That which we have heard, and seen and handled 1 John
1. 1.
. These Sacraments (properly so called) are but two; as ours, and the other
Reformed Churches do truly teach: I say (properly so called) because the
Greek word, Mystery, (by some translated Sacrament) is of larger extent in
the Scriptures (...): Sacramentum. Ephesians. 1. 9. 3. 3. 5. 32. Coloss. 1. 27. 1 Timothy 3. 16.
; and the Fathers in their writings, call all Articles, which are peculiar to
the Christian faith, and all duties of Religion, containing that, which sense,
or natural reason cannot of it self discern, [ Sacraments;] but none are
properly called Sacraments, but such as have these three things, viz. First, an
outward and visible sign: Secondly, an inward and invisible grace: Thirdly,
the word of Institution Sacramenta constant, verbo, signis, and significatis.
Confess. Helvet. cap. 19. and Trisag. l. 1. c. 85. Accedit verbum ad elementum,
and fit Sacramentum. Aug. Sermon. de Cataclysmo. tom. 9. coll. 987. and in Johan.
Tract. 80. coll. 445.
: all which do only concur in the New Testament, in two, viz. Baptism, and
the Lords Supper Aug. de Doctrina Christiana, lib. 3. cap. 9. tom. 3. ^oll. 50.
A. Articles of Religion 25.
: both instituted of Christ, both having outward signs; in Baptism [ Water;]
in the Lords Supper [ Bread and Wine;] and both of them one and the same
invisible grace; Christ being the invisible grace, represented and exhibited in
the Sacraments, both of the Old and New Testament; For they did eat the same
spiritual meat, and drink the same spiritual drink, that we do 1 Cor. 10.
3.
. Yet have the Sacraments some things peculiar to themselves; for by Baptism
we once receive Christ, to new birth, and Regeneration; but in the Eucharist,
we receive Christ to continual nourishment of that spiritual life we
received in Baptism; and therefore that but once, as we are but once borne;
this often, as our bodies are often fed.

The outward Elements in the Lords Supper, are Elements.
but few, and poor to the eye of flesh and blood: common and ordinary bread;
and wine, (in some Countries, as common as bread, and in all places of the
known world, to be had;) bread made of grain, and wine without mixture of
water, (a great corruption, though ancient (...). Justin. Mart. Apolog. pro
Christian. 2. page 97.
:) and these continuing in their natural substance to the end; though the
Papists in their metaphysicall faith, believe, Christ to be present, I will not
say really, (for that our learned Divines acknowledge Hooker. Eccl. Polit. lib.
5. parag. 67. page 176. Doctor Airie on Philip. 1. 23. Lect. 19. page 225.
; and in candide construction, as [ Reall] is synonimall with truth and verity
Spiritually, and therefore truly and really.
, I will not deny, it may be warily and soberly used;) but corporally, and that
by Transubstantiation, of the substance of bread and wine, into the very flesh
and blood of Christ, so as, after words of Consecration, there remain not the
substance of bread and wine, but only the Accidents, color, and taste. No, no,
the words of Consecration do not change the nature or substance of the signs,
(which once destroyed, the Sacrament cease) but changes the quality, in
separating them from a common, to an holy use. S. Paul, to make that out of
question, does in one Chapter, after the Consecration, thrice call it Bread 1
Cor. 11.
. Neither, indeed, is there any need that there should be such a change, as if
Christ could not feed us, or our souls be nourished, without orall
manducation: for did the woman, by her faith, find such good, in touching but
the hemme of Christ's garment Matthew. 9. 20.
? and shall not we much more, from this holy Sacrament, of his own ordinance
and institution? Oh let me eat, and it suffices. Dispute thou of the manner, I
will believe.

But these outward signs and Elements being Use.
consecrated by the word and prayer, are of most wonderful spiritual use, and
efficacy, to every believing and worthy receiver; which to express, (and that
they may not be basely esteemed of, as common and ordinary things) the
Scriptures do commonly ennoble (as others, so) this Sacrament, with giving to
the sign, the name it self of the grace signified; This is my body Matthew. 26.
; And, This is my blood of the New Testament 26. 28.
: And the Apostle says, The bread which we break, is it not the Communion of
the body of Christ? And the cup of blessing, which we bless, is it not the
Communion of the blood of Christ 1 Cor. 10. 16.
? The Ancient Fathers also have exceedingly magnified this Sacrament, As that
Christ dies again in this mystery Gregor.
; the Priest holds Christ betwixt his hands Chrysostom.
; the bread, over which thanks is given, is the body of the Lord Iren.
. Which figurative speeches are warrantable by the Word. And they gave
hyperbolical and excessive praise to this Sacrament, in most thankful and godly
minds, to stir up godly care and devotion in the Receivers; but did not
foresee how thereby they occasioned many heretical Conclusions, and
Idolatrous adoration, whereof we having lamentable experience, it behooves us
warily to use their phrases; not thinking it sufficient, that from Scriptures,
and Fathers, such phrases may be used for truth; but cautelously, and with
exposition, lest we harden the wilful Heretic, or scandalize the weak
believer. For as we must take heed, that we make them not idle signs, we must
also take heed, we make them not Idol signs: they are but signs still; and
though grace be conveyed by them, yet it may be separated from them; so as all
that receive the grace of Sacraments, do not receive grace by the Sacraments
Hooker. Eccles. Polit. lib. 5.
. Though they be holy, honorable, and glorious vessels, for the conveyance of
Christ, and all his blessings and graces; yet they are not physical vessels
and instruments, as a nutritive power and virtue is in bread and drink; or
tied to them by inevitable necessity, as if God were tied to give Christ and
eternal life to all such as do the work, and receive the outward Element.
They are only moral instruments and vessels; to the fruitful use whereof, is
required something also in the Receiver: For as the Word profits not them, in
whom it is not mixed by faith Heb. 4. 2.
; no more does this Sacrament profit such as receive it not by faith: yea, many
do eat and drink unworthily, to their own condemnation 1 Cor. 11. 29.
: but God is tied by covenant and promise, to convey and exhibit the invisible
grace, to all that do faithfully, duly, and devoutly receive the visible and
holy Sacrament.

Oh then prepare your selves to the receiving of Use.
this holy Sacrament: prepare not the teeth and belly, but the heart Creed and
manducasti. August.
; for it is not the food for teeth, but mind Non cibus dentis, sed mentis est.
; and let Faith work. When you see but the least grain of mustard seed cast
into the ground, though there it seem to rot, yet you believe 1. Faith.
it will become a great tree for birds to build in. If you see a cunning
workman take, though a rugged and crooked tree in hand, you believe he will
do some exquisite and curious work. Will you thus rely on Art and Nature; and
not rely on God the Author of both (...): Absurdu^ ^st, credere naturae, de
naturalibus; and arti, de artificialibus; Deo autem non credere de divinis.
Justin. Mar^. Quaest. and Respon. numb. 32. page 214.
? You will not believe, how your souls can be fed and nourished by bread and
wine, unless he acquaint you with his ways, and lay open the secret of his
skill before you. Where God does speak such things as are for height and
sublimitie of matter; or promise such graces, by such means, as for secrecy
of performance, we are not able to reach unto, it behooves Gods children to
submit themselves in the simplicity of faith, and not curiously dispute; which
commonly chilleth the warmth of zeal and devotion, and so distracteth the
minds of men, that they know not what to believe: Examine your selves therefore
whether ye be in the faith 2 Cor. 13. 5.
.

Examine your selves, whether you have unfainedly 2. Repentance.
repented of your sins; which appears by a perfect hatred and detestation
of them, and all of the means and occasions leading unto them, with a resolute
purpose of mind, for ever to avoid them, and to become obedient unto God. The
people of God were commanded to eat the Passover with bitter herbs Exodus 12.
8. gual merorim, cum amaris.
; which word I find elsewhere used to express the bitter sorrow of heart
Lament 3. 15.
; and verily, he shall never worthily eat of our Passover Christ 1 Cor. 5. 7.
, in the Sacrament, whose soul is not filled with bitter sorrow for his
sins, for which Christ Jesus suffered the torments of death, and shed his
precious blood, whereof that Sacrament puts him in remembrance. What is it?
but even a despising of the blood of Christ, and the accounting of it, as an
unholy thing, for a man to receive, having a purpose to continue in his sin,
and (at the most) but hanging down his head like a bulrush for a day Esaias 58.
5.
. Wherefore, purge your hearts ye sinners, and cleanse your hands James 4. 8.
; Wash them in innocence, and then come to his Table Psalm. 43. 4.
. As the Pharesies would not eat before they had washed Matthew. 15. 20.
; eat not before thy conscience be purged from dead works, to serve the living
God. Heb. 9. 14.
.

Examine your selves, whether ye be in love and 3. Love.
charity, and whether, where offenses have been given, there be a free
forgiveness, and all good means of reconciliation used, that so it may be
indeed, as it is called, a Communion, whereby all the members, being knit
together in the bond of love, may partake in one Sacrament, and have a sweet
fellowship one with another, and with Christ their Head. This Sacrament must be
eaten with the unleavened bread of sincerity and charity, 1 Cor. 5. 8.
Exhortation.


If by examination, you find your selves thus in 1. Come.
some measure (but truly) prepared, then Wisdom calls to you, as to her
guests, Come eat of my bread, and drink of my wine Prove. 9. 5.
; and also sends forth her servants, calling and inviting, All things are
ready, come to the Supper Luke 14. 17.
; and beware of idle excuses, left thou also hear the same doom denounced
against thee, Not one of those that were bid, shall taste of my Supper.

Oh come, come whilst you may; these (if ever Application.
any) are the happy days of the Son of Man, wherein Christ, in his Word,
truly preached, and Sacraments sincerely administered, is even crucified in our
sight* Gal. 3. 1.
* Oh happy days, when we may so safely feast together at Gods Table, and our
own; but let us fear, lest Christ beholding our negligence, and offended with
our frivolous excuses, say, as sometimes he did to his own people, for the
like faults, The days come, in which you shall desire to see one of the days
of the Son of Man, and shall not see it Luke 17. 22.
. Come then, come I say, whilst ye may, and thank God, that ye may come, and
go safely; and pray for them that feign would, and cannot.

Come, but come not alone, bring your company, 2. Not alone.
say one to another, Come let us go up to the Mountain, the house of the Lord
Esaias 2 3.
: say with Ioshuah, I and mine house will serve the Lord Josh. 24. 15.
. Bring those with thee to Gods House, who are with thee in thine own house
Adduc ^os ad domum Dei tecum, qui sunt in domo tuatecum. August.
. Your own good Example, who have charge of families, is full of power; and
the more eminent ye are in state and degree, the more inducing is your good
Example. The Reason why the Lord has prepared, his table spread, his servants
invite, and so few guests come, is, because so few of the chief come, and they
come alone, neither care they, whether wives, children, or servants come at
all, or no. Oh come, bring yours with you, and come often; yea, the oftener, the
more welcome to Gods Table. This the Apostle intended, when he said, As [
often] as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup 1 Cor. 11. 26.
; Enjoining all such as live in a visible Church, so often, as the custom of
the Church is to administer it, and he has no lawful impediment to hinder
him, (as absence from home, sickness) so often to receive it; if he do not,
it is a great neglect, if not contempt, of the holy Ordinance of God. And how
just were it, in time of sickness and adversity, such an one should be weak in
faith, and void of comfort, seeing he neglected the means, when he might have
enjoyed them?

Give me leave then, to reprove a common fault, Reprehensio^.
even in this renowned Mother Church, where the holy Sacrament (at least every
month) is religiously and reverendly administered, how few are there that come,
for all our calling? As if to receive the Sacrament, were but a thing
arbitrarie; once a year, at Easter, may suffice; thrice a year, a largis; to
what purpose oftener? Thus in Paradise, with eating of the forbidden fruit, we
surfetted, have quite lost our appetite, and loath heavenly food, as the
Israelites did the Manna Numb. 11. 6.
. But let me tell you, the only way to recover our appetite, is, to come and
eat; none have less stomach, than such as eat least; none more, than they that
eat most. They that make their meat their God, the more they eat, the less
appetite: but they that make God their meat, the more they eat the more they
hunger. This appears from the worthy examples of the Saints in Ancient times.
It appears from Saint Augustine, That some faithful did receive every day,
and make the Lords Supper their daily bread Panem quotidia ^um: August. a^
verbis Dom^^^, Ser. 2^. and Ho^. 2.
; which though he neither reprehend, nor commend; yet he earnestly exhorted all
to receive every Lords day Quotidie Eucharistiae communionem percipere, nec
laud^, nec reprehendo; omnibus tamen Dominicis diebus communicandum suadeo and
hortor. August. Tom. 3. lib. de dogmatibus Ecclesiast. cap. 52. col. 205.
: and our Church has godly appointed, a special exhortation to be read, when
people are negligent in this kind.

But me thinks, I hear some say: Indeed, my departure, and seldom coming,
does not proceed from neglect and contempt, but the reverend respect I have to
that heavenly and holy Sacrament, fearing that if I should so often receive, I
O ectb.
should not receive it with that care, conscience, and preparation, that is
meet. I answer; If thine own Sol.
heart condemn thee not, neither do I, Go in peace Ille honorando, non audet
quotidie sumere; and ille honorando, non audet ullo die praetermittere. Aug.
Tom. 2. epist. 118. col. 558.
. The reverend respect that the Centurion had to Christ, made him refuse to
entertain him, I am not worthy thou should come under my roof Matthew. 8. 8.
. But Zacheus his reverend respect of Christ, made him come down hastily, and
receive him joyfully Luke 19. 6.
. See the contrary effects of the same affect, and both approved of Christ.
Some out of reverence come to every Sacrament, and some out of reverence come
seldom; Charity hops the best of all 1 Cor. 13. 7.
. But take heed Satan tempt you not 1 Cor. 7. 5.
: and take heed that your own consciences condemn you not; if they do, God
is greater than they 1 John 3. 20.
, and he is not mocked Gal. 6. 7.
.

But now Communicants being prepared, and In time of receiving.
come to the Lords Table, what is more to be done? Our Church godly prescribes
in a very short rule, Lift up your hearts; though knee be on ground, let* the
heart be in heaven; and the mind intently exercised in comparing the signs
and spiritual things together. When we see bread and wine, which are for full
refection of our bodies; let us think what a perfect Savior we have. When we
see them set apart for this use; let us think, how Christ the Son of God
became man for our sakes, and salvation. When we see the bread and wine blessed
and consecrated, and (as it were) made fit for so holy and heavenly an use; let
us think, how Christ his humanity, being united personally to the Word,
received all fullness of grace, for the work of Redemption. When we see the
bread broken, and wine powered out; let us think of the bitter passion of
Christ, the renting of his holy body, and shedding of his most precious blood
for our sins. When the Minister offreth these, let us think how lovingly God
offreth his Son to be our Savior. And as the Receiver, takes, eats, and
drinks the bread and wine, and it turns into his substance: so by the hand
of faith, we must receive, and apply Christ unto us, to dwell in our hearts,
who has given himself for us.

Lastly, let God have most hearty thanks and praise, for all his mercies,
represented and exhibited to us in his holy Ordinances, in regard whereof, the
Greeks call it, an Eucharist. Thus from a marvelling Text, I have taken
occasion to provoke you to marvel at the institution of this day, and at the
service of this day. I desire that God may have the glory of all, and that ye
would say one to another, Doubtless, we have heard, and seen, and received
strange things to day, and the Lord make us thankful. Amen.

His Passion, most mavelous; to say nothing of his 13. Passion.
hunger, thirst, wearisomnesse, dangers, persecution, derision; his whole life
being a continual passion; yet can you read and hear of his Agony, how
without any violent exercise, or bodily pain, in an open Garden, in a fresh
air, in the moist dew, and prostrate on the cold earth, yet was in such an
Agony, that his sweat was like drops of blood, trickling down to the ground
Luke 22. 44.
; And do ye not marvel? Himself did marvel; Is there any sorrow like my
sorrow, wherewith the Lord has afflicted me in the day of his fierce anger
Lament. 1. 12.
? Do you read and hear of the desperate and insolent behavior of wicked
men, preferring a notorious murderer before the innocent Son of God Matthew.
27. 21.
, crying out to have him crucified Matthew. 27. 22.
, and let his blood be on them and their children Matthew. 27. 25.
; crowning that head with thorns Matthew. 27. 29.
, which is higher than the heavens; spitting in that face Matthew. 27. 30.
, which the Angels do delight to behold; nailing those hands to the Cross
Mar. 15. 24.
, which made heaven and earth; piercing those feet Psalm. 22. 6.
, which have walked on the sea Matthew. 14. 25.
, but never stood in the way of sinners; yea pierced that heart with a spear
John 19. 34. August. sermon. de not. Dom. Bern. bomil. 2. super missus est.
, which devised all good for man; And do ye not marvel? Do you read, that
the fountain of living water thirsts, the light of the world put out; Truth,
oppressed by false witnesses; Discipline, scourged; He that bears up all
things, faint under the Cross; He that is Judge of quick and dead, judged by
a mortal man; Justice, condemned; Foundation, hanged on a Tree; Salvation,
wounded; and Life, killed; and do ye not marvel? But alas, these were
lamentable things, and in the eye and wisdom of flesh and blood, base and
contemptible. Behold then such things, as are full of glory and majesty. The
Sun ashamed of their doings, pulled in his beams, covered it face Math. 27.
45. 51. 54.
, and refused to give light, to such a work of darkness: The earth trembled
Math. 27. 45. 51. 54.
, as not able to bear the weight of such a sin: The veil of the Temple rent
asunder, from the top to the bottom Math. 27. 45. 51. 54.
, in detestation of such wickedness. The Centurion confesses truly, This was
the Son of God Math. 27. 45. 51. 54.
. Pilat, whose hands were embrewed with his blood, writes his inscription, and
publishes his glory to Hebrews, Greeks, and Latins, This is Jesus of
Nazareth, King of the Jews John 19. 19, 22.
: And will you not marvel at it? Yea, open the eyes of your minds, and you
shall see the benefits hereof. He was apprehended, that we might escape;
scourged, that we might be spared; bound, that we might be loosed; disgraced,
that we might be honored; wearied with the burden of the Cross, that we
might be eased of the burden of the Curse; fainted, that we might be
refreshed; thirsted, that we might be satisfied; wounded, that we might be
healed; humbled to the Cross, that we might be exalted to Thrones; died
amongst Thieves, that we may live amongst Angels; condemned, that we may be
justified; killed, that we may live: And do ye not marvel, and say, What
manner of man is this?

Moreover, when Christ was truly dead, and buried, 14. Resurrection.
and all made sure, (as they thought,) the wicked triumph, and rejoice, and his
Disciples full of sadness, and sorrow, Luke 24. 17. lo, he that had power to
lay down his life, had also power to take it up again, Ioh. 10. 18. He
loosed the sorrows of death, whereof it was impossible for him to be holden,
Acts 2. 24. having thoroughly conquered death, even in the grave, it strongest
hold, fortress, or castle. It was not the great sealed stone could keep him
in, Matthew. 27. ult. but Sampson-like, carries on his shoulders the brazen
gates, Judge. 16. 3. and declared himself mightily to be the Son of God, by
his rising from the dead, Romans 1. 4. Death and Grave confess their weakness,
and his dominion; they are weary of their prey, and hasten with the Whale to
cast up this Jonah: they are oppressed with an intolerable burden, and have
swallowed so bitter a morsel, as they would feign be rid of; the earth is in
travel till it be rid of him.

Moreover, after that he had been conversant 15. Ascension
with his Disciples, for the space of forty days after his resurrection, and
had instructed them concerning his kingdom Acts 1. 3.
, he was received up into glory, from the top of Mount Olivet, in the sight of
his Apostles, he ascended into heaven Luke 24. 51.
; that is, his humane Nature, by the power and virtue of his Godhead, was truly
and locally translated from earth into the highest heavens of the blessed;
where he is said, to sit on the right hand of God Mar. 16. penult
, to make continual intercession for his Elect Romans 8. 34.
; from whence he sent the Holy Ghost in likeness of cloven tongues of fire
within ten days Acts 2. 3.
, (according to his promise Acts 1. 5.
) from whence, he powers out his spirit on all flesh Ephesians. 4. 8.
; (and specially on such as he has called to the work of the Ministry Ephesians.
4. 11.
) does gather and protect his Church, bridle and confound his enemies, and at
the appointed time Acts 17. 31.
, shall come from thence in his own glory, and the glory of his Father, and of
the holy Angels Mar. 13. 26.
, to judge both the quick and dead Acts 10. 42.
, when all his Saints shall be gathered from the four corners of the world
Mar. 13. 27.
, shall meet him in the air, and be with him in happiness for ever 1 Thessalonians.
4. penul.
, whose kingdom shall have no end Esaias 9. 7.
.

Oh most mavelous Redeemer! Oh most glorious Conclusion.
mysteries of the Gospel! How are we bound for ever to that good God, who has
revealed them by his word and Spirit unto us! How poor, and simple, beggarly,
base, and contemptible, are all the Religions in the world, compared with this?
What is Moses, and all the Legal service and worship? though ordained of God;
yet the time of Reformation being come Hebr. 9. 10.
, the Apostle calls them, weak and beggarly elements Gal. 4. 9.
. What is that Impostor Mahomet with his Alcaron, though a Religion so
generally received and professed, how carnal, filthy, and obscene? What are
his best promises, but such as a godly mind would despise and abhor? How
many great Kingdoms do worship Sun, Moon, Stars, yea foure-footed beasts,
and creeping things Romans 1. 23.
? And some worship the Devil himself. How, in Popery, are poor people
deprived of the Scriptures, nusled in ignorance, and implicit faith? taught to
believe lying Legends, counterfeit miracles; fed with old wives fables, and
abused with cosening tricks of deceitful men? Oh stand fast in the faith;
marvel, and praise God, who has made known the Savior, and the way of
salvation unto you.

You have marvelled at many things, but I pray Observe.
you forget not that which is the burden of all, What manner of (Man?) It is
(Man) yea true (Man) that is so mavelous, in birth, life, doctrine, death,
resurrection, ascension. Oh how highly has God exalted humane nature Excelsum
locum habet humana natura; quod hominibus, in vero homine, Deus apparuit.
August. de vera Religione, cap. 16.
! Some love their flesh, for the beauty of it; and some, for the comely shape
and proportion; some, for the strength. Here is the ground of true love, to
love it, because in Christ, it is the flesh of God; and herein exalted above
the nature of Angels Heb. 2. 16.
. It was a great honor was given to man at the Creation, when he was made
after Gods Image Genesis 1. 26.
; but it is a far greater honor given in Redemption, God himself becoming
man Gal. 4. 4.
; flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bone. Oh Christian, acknowledge thy
dignity, and do not defile, with a lewd conversation, what God has so highly
honored Agnosce, o Christian, dignitatem tuam. Leoserm. 1. in nativit. Dom.
.

But me thinks, I hear some object, this is a Object.
matter of offense, that Christ was a man, yea a weak and poor man. I answer:
Indeed, it is Sol.
true; if we behold him with a carnal eye, and look upon no more but his bare
humanity, and wrapped up in great infirmity, it is a matter of offense; and
therefore Christ has pronounced, Blessed is he, whosoever shall not be
offended in me Matthew. 11. 6.
. The Prophet foretold, he should be a stone to stumble at, and a rock of
offense Esaias 8. 14.
. And the Apostle says, We preach Christ a stumbling block to the Jews, and
foolishness to the Gentiles 1 Cor. 1. 23.
. But, whosoever well observes the Gospel, shall see, in the great wisdom of God,
glory and shame, power and weakness, majesty and infirmity so twisted and
mingled together, that if the one trouble and offend, the other may comfort and
content. He was borne; but it was of a Virgin Esaias 7. 14. Matthew. 1. 23.
. He was borne in a stable, and laid in a manger; but the Angels proclaimed him
Luke 2. 11, 12.
. Herod sought to kill him; but Kings came from the East to adore him Matthew. 2.
2.
. He was baptized of his serva^t; but his Father gave testimony Matthew. 3. 16,
17.
, and the Holy Ghost descended from heaven, in likeness of a Dove, and rested
upon him Herodes persequitur, sed adorant Magi: baptizatur a servo, sed vox
desuper Dei intonantis auditur. Hieronym. in Ephesians. cap. 3.
. He was hungry in the Wilderness; but rebuked Satan Matthew. 4. 2, 10.
. He sat on Jacobs Well weary, but told the woman of Samaria, that came to
draw water, all that ever she did John 4. 6, 29.
. He wept for Lazarus; but bade him come forth of the grave, and he did so John
11. 35, 45.
. He did spit on the ground, and made clay; but with it he cured a man that had
been borne blind John 9. 6.
. He hanged on Cross betwixt two thieves; but the Sun was darkened, and the
earth trembled Matt. 27. 38, 45.
. He slept; but rebuked the wind and sea. Remember your question, What manner
of man is this? A man; but an extraordinary man. Remember your answer, This
man is the Son of God; and that does the reason of the question show, which
comes now to be considered, viz.

That even the winds, and the sea obey him] In 2. Part.
which words, the Reason, both of their Admiration and Interrogation (as the
cause and effect) is rendered. To which purpose, the words in the Original
Sense.
are very significant. For first, there is a double particle, which in the
former place is augmentative, translated, even, etiam: as elsewhere also, With
authority commands he, even the unclean spirits, Mar. 1. 27. Imperat etiam
spiritibus impuris.
and they do obey him. q. d. What manner of man is this, that not only men,
women, children, birds, beasts; but even the very unclean spirits, and even
winds and sea obey him? The word in the Hebrew copy, translated [ obey] does
also signify, to hearken diligently, to intend earnestly, and to obey readily
and perfectly iishamgnu, a radice shamang, exaudivit, attendit, obtemperavit.
S. P.
. The Greek word also signifies no less (...), ex (...) and (...), Ausculto,
subausculto.
, that winds, and seas, did hear, intend, and speedily and faithfully obey the
voice of Christ.

Here then is represented unto us, the sovereign Doct.
dignity, power, and authority, that Christ has over all creatures, and
which all creatures (though never so sturdie, rebellious, or senseless) do
acknowledge. It is a Doctrine I have already handled; but suffer me, suffer me
willingly, I beseech you, to enlarge my meditations, and ampliate my discourse.
What sweeter Argument can I handle, or you hear? What Subject does not delight
to speak of the majesty, dominion, power, wealth and glory of his King? And
can I speak of any Argument, more pleasing and delightful, than of his
kingdom, majesty, dominion, glory? seeing all these he has for our good. Oh
that my tongue were as the pen of a ready writer, to indite his honor Psalm.
45. 1.
; yea, that I had the tongue of an Angel, to speak of the glory of thy
kingdom, and to talk of thy power, to make known to the sons of men thy
mighty acts, and the glorious majesty of thy kingdom; Thy kingdom is an
everlasting kingdom, and thy dominion endures throughout all generations Psalm.
145. 11.
. Yea, I should have an hand to write, and a tongue to speak, if (with
Solomon) I had an heart as large as the sand 1 King. 4. 29.
; for of the abundance thereof, both hand does write, and tongue does speak
Matthew. 12. 34.
. Oh that I could say with the Apostle, Mine heart is enlarged, and my mouth
opened: but alas I am straightened in mine own bowels 2 Cor. 6. 12.
. Oh that I had the spirit of David, when he penned that most excellent,
curious, Alphabetical, and Encomiasticall Psalm Psalm. 145.
. How did he abound in zeal, when he said, I will extol thee, my God, o King,
and I will bless thy name for ever and ever. Every day will I bless thee, and
praise thy name for ever and ever. Great is the Lord, and greatly to be
praised, there is no end of his greatness. One generation shall praise thy
works to another, and declare thy mighty acts. They shall abundantly utter the
memorial of thy goodness. Oh that I had the spirit of S. Augustine, when he
wrote upon that Psalm, (wherein, if ever, he exceeded himself Tractat hunt
Psalmum Augustinus, si quem alium, egregre. Lorin.
) Shall Christ, in such a famous miracle, set forth his glorious majesty, and
dominion; and shall we think and speak so little of it? We must be content
here to wish and desire; hereafter we shall enjoy: here to serve God according
to the weakness of the flesh; hereafter according to the perfection of spirit:
here to praise God in briefes, and semibriefes; hereafter in larges and longs:
here but to tune our Harps and instruments, when ever and anon a string
breaks, or starteth, and causes an harsh jarre; sweet shall be the music in
the Quire of heaven, when Angels and Saints shall, without wearisomnesse or
end, praise him, whose glory and dominion has no end. As there is no end of
his greatness, number of his wisdom, nor measure of his bounty Non finis
magnitudinis, numerus sapientiae, nec mensura benignitatis. August. Soliloquijs
cap. 21. Tom. 9. col. 773.
: so shall there be no end, number, or measure of our praise. But now, alas,
our spirit is strait; wit, dull; speech, dumb Spiritus arctus, ingenium hebes,
and serno mutus est. Hill.
; that we may justly complain with the Apostle, when we take even the best
duty in hand, To will is present with me, but how to perform that which is
good, I find not Romans 7. 18.
. As Christ said of his Disciples, it is most true in the best of us, Though
spirit be willing, flesh is weak Mar. 14. 38.
. Wherein this is our comfort, that we serve so good a Master, as accepts of
that we have; and so there be a willing mind, it is accepted 2 Cor. 8. 12.
. Let me then express my willingness, striking once again upon the same
string for a close, but varying in the descant, from that you have heard
already.

Herein, Lord Jesus, lead me with thy good spirit; as A Prayer.
thou art the King of Majesty, as well as of mercy, untie my stammering
tongue, that thy name may be glorified by thy weakest creature; and a worm of
the earth may speak wisely of thy Majesty, who art King of Kings, Prince of
the Kings of the earth, and have on thine head so many Crowns, yea the winds
and seas obey thee. Amen.

First, let us see, how this great King of heaven Doct. lit.
has commanded all creatures, to serve for the temporal good of his children,
according to his gracious promise, They that fear the Lord, shall want nothing
that is good Psalm. 34. 9.
: they that seek the Lord and his kingdom, shall have all earthly things,
even cast upon them Matt. 6. penult.
. Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth Matthew. 5. 5.
. Being Christ's, all is theirs 1 Cor. 3. ult.
. All will help, nothing hurt them. Do they want bread, or flesh? The clouds
shall rain it Exodus 16. 12.
. Do they want water? The rock shall be a fountain Exodus 17. 6.
. Do they want apparel? Sheep with fleece and skin shall clothe them Genesis 3.
21.
Do they want gold or silver? God has laid it up in veins of the earth for
them Job 28. 1.
. Do they want Pearls, and Jewels? The rivers and streams shall afford them.
Are they heavyhearted? The Vine shall glad them with wine Psalm. 104. 15.
. Have they cause of mirth and feasting? Oil shall make their faces to shine
Ibid.
. Are waters cast out of the Dragons mouth? The earth shall swallow them up
Rev. 12. penult.
. Do winds and waves roar, and threaten to drown? If Christ do but bid, be
still, they are calm, and obey him. A point of Doctrine, which one of the
Ancient Fathers has abundantly confirmed, and illustrated by positive and
exemplarie Scriptures Chrysostom. Tom. 5. homil. Nemo laeditur nisi a seipso.
, if I would enlarge it.

Oh let us thankfully admire, and extol the mercy Use.
and goodness of God, who is so bountiful, in the donation of good,
condonation of the evil of guilt, and preservation from the evil of
punishment; that has saved us from so many, and so great evils of body,
soul, estate, by water, and land, and has given us all good things abundantly
to enjoy 1 Timothy 6. 17.
, pertaining to life and godliness; sends us daily manifold comforts from
Heaven, Air, Earth, Sea, Sun, Moon, Stars, Light, Birds, Beasts, Fishes,
Fruits, Herbs. And if he have so liberally provided for us in the wilderness;
what inestimable good things are provided for us in our own Country? If so
great things in the prison; what in the Palace Si tanta in carcere, quid in
palatio? Aug. soliloqu.
? If such a calm in this world; what in heaven? If such variety of comfort in
this vale of tears, and in Christ his absence; what at the mariage-feast? Oh
when your tables are richly Use.
furnished with variety of good things from air, earth, sea; praise him, whom
winds and sea obey, and let your hearts be lifted up, to meditate on those
future and inestimable good things prepared in heaven, for them that love him.

Our Doctrine from the Mystery is, That all creatures, 1. Doct. mist.
at Christ his command, are ready to serve his Church and people, though never
so contrary to their nature. If the Lord rebuke; the winds will not blow, nor
waters flow, nor fire burn, nor hungry Lions devour, nor Sun move. If all
things were not thus at command, it were impossible for the poor Church of
Christ to subsist on earth, to endure such cruel conspiracies, and bloody
persecutions of mighty Tyrants; for his poor little flock, to dwell in the
midst of so many ravening Wolves; for this little Cock-boat to ride out such
grievous storms and tempests: but our God, who was then in the ship, and
rebuked winds and sea, and they obeyed, he is now in heaven, and does
whatsoever he will Psalm. 115. 3.
; and he has promised to be with his, to the ends of the world Matthew. 28. ult.
; and that the gates of hell shall not prevail against them Matthew. 16. 18.
.

And therefore, if in times of trouble and distress, Use. 1.
when it pleases Christ to scourge, and fan his Church, we be too weak in
faith, and too strong in fear, and bewray pusillanimity and cowardice; let us
with David ingenuously confess, This is our infirmity Psalm. 77. 10.
; not regarding the Scriptures, nor the power of God Matthew. 22. 29.
. Let us be ashamed of it, and learn more steadfastly to trust in the Lord; as
David counsels, Let the house of Israel trust in the Lord, he is their
helper and defender: O house of Aaron trust in the Lord, he is their helper and
defender; ye that fear the Lord, trust in the Lord, he is their helper and
defender: he will bless the house of Israel, he will bless the house of
Aaron; he will bless them that fear the Lord, both small and great Psalm.
115. 9, 10.
.

Yea, let this Doctrine be remembered, and it will Use 2.
wonderfully comfort, and strengthen our faith in the resurrection. For as
winds and sea obeyed Christ now; at the last day, earth and sea shall hear and
obey the voice of Christ, and yield up all the dead which they have received
(...) Divinae authoritati nihil immorigerum. Just. Mart. quaest. and Respon.
numb. 33.
. Marvel not at this, for the hour is coming, in the which all that are in
the graves, shall hear the voice of Christ, and shall come forth John 5. 28.
. Whereof he has given us assurance, in the raising of Lazarus, Rulers
daughter, and widows son, only with his word, Lazarus come forth, Damsel
arise, Young Man arise. This was of old most lively represented to the Prophet
in vision; he was carried by the Spirit of the Lord, and set down in the
midst of a valley, which was full of dead men's bones, and very dry; and he
was commanded to prophecy upon those bones, which he did, saying, Oh ye dry
bones, hear ye the word of the Lord; and immediately there was a noise, and
behold a shaking, and the bones came together, bone to his bone, and sinews,
and flesh, and skin, came upon them, and covered them Ezech. 37. 1, 2.
. This (as one of the Ancient Fathers says) was a most lively picture of the
Resurrection of the dead, which shall at the end of the world be effected, by
the omnipotent voice of the Son of Man (...) Justin. Mart. Quaest. and Resp.
ad Orthodox. quaest. 45. August. de Genesi ad lit. lib. 10. cap. 5.
. Yea, scarce any of the Fathers have written of the Resurrection, but have
made singular use of that Vision. If at any time then our faith shall stagger
at that Article, which (as a Divine says) is so far above, though not
contrary, to natural Reason Perkins on the Creed.
: let us strengthen our faith with that excellent Vision. Yea, this was also
represented to Saint John in vision, The sea gave up the dead which were in it,
and death and hell gave up the dead which were in them Revel. 20. 13.
. No matter then, where we die, by sea or land; or where we be buried, in
earth or water; these are all but Gods Gaolors, and shall faithfully bring
forth all such as have been committed unto them, at that general Assizes. If
thy faith stagger, let it rest upon the omnipotent power of Christ Nulla
difficultas impediet, quominus and terrae, and aquis, and igni, imperet, ut
quod videtur abillis consumptum, reddant. Pet. Bulling. Trecens. in Apoc. ^ol.
612.
; and for ever remember what you have heard from this story, Christ rebuked
the winds and the sea, and they obeyed him. And therefore say, I will lay me
down, and take my rest, for the Lord sustaineth me Psalm. 4. ult.
: I know my Redeemer lives, and I shall rise again Job 19. 25.
.

Our second lesson, from mystery, is, That the 2. Doct. mist.
maine and principal end of all Gods word and works, is, that from
consideration thereof, man may be provoked to admire, and set forth the praise
and glory of Christ, What manner of man is this, that has done such things?
The Lord has made all things for himself (says the Wiseman Prove. 16. 4.
.) And the perpetual exercise of the glorified Saints in heaven, is, day and
night to praise Christ for the great work of Redemption: Thou wast slain, and
have redeemed us unto God by thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and
people, and nation; and made us Kings and Priests unto God Revel. 5. 9, 10.
.

Here then is an infallible touchstone, whereby Use.
to try all Doctrines: and I would to God, with charity and sobriety, all
the matters in question, betwixt the Papists and us, were, with meekness,
brought to this touchstone. Those Doctrines are ever soundest, which do give
glory to Christ, and provoke men to admire and praise him, What manner of man
is he! But whatsoever Doctrine, how plausible soever, (yea such Doctrines are
most pleasing to our corrupt nature) which does sooth up man in his own
free will, works, and righteousness, to make him strout it, and pride
himself, and say, What manner of man am I, that have this power, and have done
these and these works! it is earthly, carnal, and sensual. Hear thou then
any doctrine delivered, which thou art not able fully to examine for the truth
of it, nor to unty the knots of intricate questions? Yet ask, Does this
Doctrine advance the glory of Christ? It is good then. Does it make man proud
and haughty in himself? It is naught then. And I need not any other Argument
to make me reject it. As the most points of Popery do: as their doctrine of
Free Will, works of righteousness meritorious, of congruitie, or condignitie,
obedience to Councels, Auricular Confession, Penance, and works of
satisfaction, the Propitiatory Sacrifice of the Mass, mediation of Angels and
Saints, Popes Pardons, and Indulgencies, Purgatory, etc. all draw from Christ,
to admire themselves, or the Pope. This rule our Savior himself has given,
He that speaks of himself, seeks his own glory; but he that seeks the
glory of him that sent him, he is true, and there is no unrighteousness in him
John 7. 18.
. Saint Paul examined his doctrine by this touchstone, and found it current.
Do I now persuade men or God? Do I seek to please men? Then I were not the
servant of Christ. And therefore confidently pronounced, If an Angel from
heaven shall preach otherwise, let him be accursed Gal. 1. 8, 9, 10.
. What doctrine soever does rob Christ of his glory, and draw away the hearts
and minds of men from marvelling, and praising of him (as most points of Popery
do Haec nota est Antichristi. Aug. tom. 9. in Johan. tract. 29 coll. 246. B.
) it is accursed, and woe to them that preach and believe it.

We are now (at the last) come safely to shore, Conclusion.
blessed be Christ our Pilot, who has brought us through the tempest, to the
haven where we would be, and has visibly commented from heaven, and confirmed
the truth of that has been delivered, in the present state of his Church. All
I am, or have; what I have delivered, and you have received, I dedicate to his
glory. And let every thing that has breath, in all the parts of his Dominions,
praise the Lord. He also bring us, l and all his, through all the storms and
tempests of this world; that in the end, (in despite of Satan, and all
contrary winds and waves) we may sa^^^y arrive at the blessed haven of eternal
happiness. To him, with the Father, and the holy Spirit, of us, and his whole
Church, even of all the Angels and Saints in heaven, most gloriously triumphant;
and all Christians, men, women, and children on earth militant, be rendered (as
is most due) all Honor, Glory, Majesty, Wisdom Thanks, and Dominion* ^^
ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS

