MIRRHA THE Mother of Adonis: OR, Lusts Prodegies.

By William Barksted.

Horrace. Nansicetur enim pretium, nomenque Poetae.

Whereunto are added certain Eglogs.

By L.M.

LONDON Printed by E. A. for John Bache, and are to be sold at his shop in the
Pope's Head Palace, nere the Royal Exchange. 1607.

To his belooued; the Author.
PRaise where so er't be found, if it be due,
Shall no vain color need to set it forth:
Why should I idely then extol the worth,
Which here (dear friend) I find belong to you.
And if I er'd, full well the learned knew,
How wide, amiss my mark I taken had,
Since they distinguish can the good from bad.
And through the varnish well discern the hew
Be glad therefore, this makes for you, and know,
When wiser Readers, here shall fix their sight,
For virtues sake, they will do virtue right.
So shall thou not (Friend) unrewarded go,
Then boldly on, good fortune to thy Muse,
Should all condemn, thou can as well excuse.
I.W

To his Loving friend and Kinsman: W. B.
THamis nere heard a Song equal to this,
Although the Swan that owed this present qui^
sung to that Echo, her own Epitaph
As proud to die, and render up her wing
To Venus Swan, who does more pleasing sing,
Produce thy work and tell the powerful tale.
Of naked Cupid, and his mothers will
My self I do confine from Helicon,
As loath to see the other Muses nine,
So imodestlie eye shoot, and gaze upon
Their newborn envy: this tenth Muse of thine,
Which in my self I do in thee admire,
As Aesops Satire the refulgent fire,
Which may me burn, (I mean with amorous flame^
In reading, as the kissing that did him.
And happy Mirrha that he rips thy shame,
Since he so queintly does express thy sin,
Many would write, but see men's works so rar^,
That of their own they instantly despair.
Robert Glouer.

To his esteemed friend. W. B.
NOt for our friendship, or for hope of gain
Does my pen run so swiftly in thy praise:
Court-seruile flattery I do disdain,
"Envy like Treason, still it self betraies.
This work Detractions sting, does disinherit:
He that gives thee all praise, gives but thy merit.
Jews Machin.

To his respected friend. W. B.
POet, nor art thou without due desert,
styled by that name:
Though folly smile, and envy frown,
to hear the same.
Yet those who read thy work with due respect,
Will place thee with the worthiest of that sect.
Then let not ignorance, nor envy move thee
Thou have done well, they do not that reprove thee:
Yet some (true worth nere wants an opposite)
will Carpers be:
Grieve not at this, not virtues self can escape
their obloquie,
But give the raynes unto these baser spirits,
Whose Judgments cannot parallel thy merrits,
Such fools (to seem judicious) take in hand,
To censure what they do not understand.
Yet cannot they detract, or wrong thy worth,
maugre their spite:
For thou do chaunt incestuous Myrrha forth,
with such delight,
And with such goulde^ phrase gild' store her crime
That what is most diabolical, seems divine.
and who so but begins the same to read
Each powerful line, attracts him to proceed.
Then since he best deserves the Palm to wear,
Who wins the same:
Do thou alone enjoy those sweets, which bear
thy Mirrhas name.
And ever wear in memory of her,
an anademe of odoriferous Mirrhe,
and let Apollo, think it no dispraise,
To wear thy Mirrhe, and join it with his bays
William Bagnall.

MIRRHA, The Mother of Adonis.
I Sing the ruin of a beauteous Maid,
White as my paper, or loves fairest Dove.
shine bright Apollo, Muse be not affraide,
Although thou chauntest of unnatural love.
Great is my quill, to bring forth such a birth,
as shall abash the Virgins of our earth.
smoke Goulden censors upon Paphos shrine,
drink deep Lenae^s to this work of mine.
Cupid to Thracia went to hear a Song
of Orpheus, to whom even Tigers came,
And left their savage Nature, if there long
they did with hi^ sweet Melody remain.
Wolves lost their preyes, and by signs praid hi^ ^in^
Beasts left the Lion, and chose him their King.
Cecropian Apes did on his music wait,
Yet of them all, not one could immitate.
It Is said when Orpheus dyed, he did descend
To the infernal, so the Furies boast:
Where now they give him leave his eyes to bend
without all fear, on her whom he once lost,
By a regardant look, but it is not so:
Jove not reserved such music for below,
But placed him amongst celestial stars,
To keep the Scorpion, Lion, Bear from Iars
For ever since the fall of Phaeton,
that then displaced, them they were at strife
For their degrees, till his alluring Tone.
who though in death has the office of his life.
Though more divinely: and where he attracts,
More glorious bodies to admire his acts.
Fair stranger shape of creature, and of beast,
With his concordant tunes, placed them in rest.
The Dittie was (and Cupid lent an ear)
Upon the death of his Euridice:
Which still he sung, as if his former fear,
Of loosing her was now, or else would be.
The Echo beat the noise up to the Spheres,
And to his passionate song, Gods bent their ears.
It was a sign, he was new come from hell,
Their tunes so sad, he immitates so well.
Such passion it did strike upon the earth,
that Daphnes root groaned for Apollo's wrong:
Hermophrodite wept s^ewers and wished his birth
had never bin, or that he more had clung
To Salmacis, and Clitie grieved in vainet
Leueothoes wrong, the occasion of her baine,
my wilful eye (this should the burden be)
Has robbed me of, twice slain Euridice.
Cicnus still proud though he confuted be,
for Phaetons loss, would needs afresh complain^
Thinking therewith to singe as sweet as he,
but pittiles he sung and dyed in vain.
Echo was pleased with voice resounding brim
as proud to loose her shape to answer him.
Hither resorted more then well could hear,
but on my Muse, and speak what chansed there
Amongst the rest of Vesta-vowed Girls,
came ^irrha (whose thoughts no guile then knew
Like a bright diamond circled with pearls,
whose radiant eye dealt luster to the hew
Of all the dames: whose face so far above
though the rest (beauteous all) unwounded made love, love
for never since Spiches was made a star
did he see nature excel art so far.
He cha^g'd his shape, his wings he often has torn,
and like a hunter to this nymph he came:
With gold tipped Iauelin and a bugle Horn,
such as they bear to make the Lion tame:
First did he kiss her hand, which then did melt
with love's impression, Cupid the like felt:
Stroke dumb, he stood in an unwonted guise,
such magic beawtie carries in her eyes.
At length (quoth he) should I not say I love,
I should both Cupid and his Mother wrong:
By thee fair Maid a power far above,
My heart is the true index of my ^ongue.
And by my naked words you may discover,
I am not traded like a common Lover.
Rare objects, rare amazements bred, it is true:
And their effects are tried in me by you.
My barren brain, can bless me with no store
Of able Epithits, so what praise I give
Makes not you ritcher though it makes me poore^
therefore in vain against the stream I strive,
Th'ore curious painter, meaning to excel,
Often marres the work, the which before was well,
And he shall dazeled be, and tired soon,
That leuelleth his shafts to hit the Moon.
With this, she turned her blushing head aside,
and veiled her face with lawne, not half so white
That even the blending roses were espied
despite the clouds, that hid them in despite
^he threw her thin breath through the lawne, and said
Leave gentle youth, do not thus snare a maid
I came to Orpheus Song, good then forbear,
It is his tune, not yours can charm mine ear.
Let Orpheus learn (quoth he) of thee to sing,
Bid him charm men Mirrha as thou can do:
Let him tame Man, that is the Lions King,
And lay him prostrate at his feet below,
As thou can do: nor Orpheus nor the spheres
Have Tones like thee, to ravish mortal ears.
Yea, were this Thracian Harper Judge to tell,
(As thee) he would swear he sung not half so well.
Nor dying Swans, nor Phoebus when he love's,
equals thy voice (though he in music courts)
and as the God whose voice the firm earth moves
making the terrors of the great, hi^ sports,
Whose first word struck into the Chaos light:
so if that contrary thou take delight,
at thy word, darkness would or'e-cloude the ayr^
and the fairest day give place to thee more fair
Fame has resing'd her lasting Trump to thee,
as to the worthyer, then thy fame display:
Tell Venus thou art fairer far then she,
For thine own worth becomes thee best to say,
Time will stand still, the sun in motion stay,
Sirens be mute to hear thee speak of Mirrha,
Thy voice, if heard in the low shades should b^
Would a third time fetch back Euridice.
Give ear eternal wonder to a swain,
It Was writ in stars that I should see that face:
And seeing love, and in that love be slain,
if beauty pity not my wretched case.
Fortune and love, the stars and powers divine,
Have all be traide me to those eyes of thine.
O prove not then more crueller the^ they,
Loves shaftes and fates wheels, who has power to stay
Stay there (quoth she) give back those powers their own
or not impose their powerful force on me:
Have I the least word or the least glance thrown
To make you attribute what is destiny
Unto my beauty: if love and fate you wound,
Throw vows to the^, their altars are soon found,
Would thou have me pity before they do?
Love's blind, and fortun's deaf, so am I too.
I know not love, sure it is a subtle thing,
I, by these blushes that thy charms have raisd
T'allay more quiet* tell loves little king,
I serve a Mistres he himself has praisd
Though he envy, a rare and sacred flower,
Whom he had will to wrong, but never power.
Now Cupid hangs the head, and melts in shame,
for she did utter Vestas holy name.
And as you see a woman teeming young,
bearing the growing burden of her wo^^b:
Missing the dainty she has looked for long,
falls straight in passionate sickness pale and dumb
(for seeing she has lost it) will not tell,
for what she in this forced passion fell.
So when his hopes were lost, he would not say,
what was the cause, but this to her did lay.
Virgin beware that fire within thy breast,
to Vesta dedicate do not expire:
as she must wary be that is the best
to keep it, it is known no lasting fire.
The fuel cold fruitelesse Virginity,
which if zeal blow not violent, will so one die:
This stricts a virgins life, and who but knows,
that love and chastity, were ever foes.
And if ere love assail those virgins forts,
those Iuory bulwarks that defend your heart:
Though he be king of sportes he never sports,
when as he wounds, but plays the Tirants part
And so much more he will triu^ph our thee,
by how much thou contents his deity:
I know you to be chaste, but yet fair Maid,
if ere you love you will find what I have said.
Sir (quoth she) when I love you shall be mine:
but know the time, when you shall claim me yours
When as the fire extinct as Vestaes shrine:
and Venus leaves to haunt the Papheon bowres,
When men are perfect friends Tigers at peace,
Discord in heaven, and powers divine do cease,
when Fortune sleeps and the north star does move
when Turtles leave to mourn their mates, i will love
Ere this was ended, Orpheus song was done,
And all the Virgins fell into their ranks,
Each took their leave of him, so did the sun,
who now was poasting to the western bancke*
and the wild beasts, who^ he had made more tame,
seemed to depart with reverence at his name.
Each one gave place to Mirrha as their duty,
She being preferred in state, first as in beauty.
Now Cupid of her his last leave does take,
so have I seen a soul and body part:
He begs a chaste kiss for her mothers sake,
and vow^s she shall be sovereign of his heart,
But whether he disembling did it, or twa's fate,
(As extream'st love, turns to the direst hate)
Being repulst, but this kiss did inspire,
her breast with an infernal and unnamed desire.
Night like a masque was entered heavens great hall
with thousand torches vshering the way:
The complements of parting were done all,
and homewards Orpheus chaunteth many alay;
Venus had sent her coach, drawn by a Dove,
For little Cupid the great God of love.
and this has sprung (as men have sayen of yore)
For Mirrhas sake he vowed to love no more.
Black as my inck now must my verse commence
You blushing girls, and parents siluer-gray:
As far as Trace from us, so far from hence
go, that you may not hear me say,
A daughter did with an adulterous head,
And heavy lust, press down her fathers bed,
such Songs as these more fit the Tartars cares,
had Orpheus sung it, beasts had poured out tears*
Unhallowed lust, for loves lies drowned in poison
in what black ornament shall I attire thee?
Since I must write of thy so sad confusion,
shall I say Cupid with his brand did fire thee?
Accuse the Fates, or thee shall I accuse?
Mirrha weeps yet, only say this my Muse:
wise destiny, true love, and mortal thought,
would nere confirm this, the furies brought this
She loves her Father, Daughter nere loved so,
for as her mother loved so loved she him:
Thirsting in fire those softer sweetes to know,
Amidst whose waves, Venus in pride does swim
So young she was, yet that her father kissed her.
Which she so duly looks for he nere mist her,
Yet could he have conceived as he did after
those kisses relish much unlike a daughter.
Give to her gold of Ophire Indian shells,
Cloth her with Tirian purple skin of beast:
Perfume her ways with choice Arabian smells,
Present her with the Phoenix in her nest,
Delight her ear with song of poets rare,
All these with Cyneas might naught compare,
"The comfort of the mind being taken away,
" Nectar not pleases, nor Ambrosia.
The feast of Bacchus at this present time,
Was by the giddie Menades intended*
There Mirrha daunc'd, and Orpheu^ sung in rim^
crowned with green thirses, now ye (...) yu^hes ended
with praise to Bacchus all depart with spright,
unto their feasts, feasts that devour the night.
for lo, the stars, in travail in the sky,
brought forth their brightness to each waking ey^
High midnight came, and she to bedward hies,
pretending rest, to beguile natures rest:
Anon the gloomy gallerie she spies,
toward her chamber, and she first that blessed,
Her care-fild eyes, her farhers picture was
Armed but the face, although it dumb, alas,
she asked and if he called, seeing no reply,
she answered for her father, and said I.
Daughter (quoth she) why art thou thus alone?
Let Doves so mourn girl, yt has lost their mates
Thine is to come, then prithee cease thy moan,
Care should not dwell with great and high estates.
Let her that needs and is not fair at all,
Repine at fortune, love shall be thy thrall,
winged as he is, and armed thou shall see,
(I have the power to give) and give him thee.
Father (quoth she) and spoke with smaller voice,
Nature has made me yours, yours I must be*
You choose my choice, for in you lies my choice,
Hereat she starts as what not fears the guilty?
Thinking the shadow knew her double sense,
and blushing, in strange fear departs thence.
blaming her self, for uttering her black fault
to him who armed stood against her assault.
Anon she spies many a you^hfull Lord,
In several Tables, each in several guise,
Whose pictures they had sent with one accord,
To show their manly features to her eyes,
Whose dumb'd perswasiue images were placed,
To see if any in her looks were graced:
But here in vain, their fair assayes do prove
for had they spoke they could not win her love.
Over her Mothers shape a veil she drew,
and weeping, said: may I nere see thee more:
Poor abused image, do not turn thy hew,
to see so foul an object thee before?
Did thou but know, what is sprung from out thy womb
thy shap cold speak, whilst you thy self stodst du^be
Art would claim Nature in thy heavy woes,
thy shape have limbs, thy limbs be stiff as those.
Anon she leapt on it with ardent heat,
and full of tears, yet falls upon her back:
Wishing even in that grief the lustful feate,
Were now pe^form'd (women often longings lack
^own sunck the down, and with so deep impresse
that had Hermaphroditus bin there he might ges
Salmacis were aganie his prostitute,
or one more far, then to deny her suite.
A strange conceit, had now possessed her brain,
nie equal to her lust, thought innocent:
She gave up to desire, and leapes amain,
From the bruisd bed, with bloody framed intent
To hang her self O, me most woeful theme.
She now espide an hie and sturdie beam:
Many staue lived to an vnpittied death,
who might have dyed sometimes with famed breath
Yet does she think what terror death would be
and on her heart, imprints his Character:
Feign would she die, yet first would pleased be
with damned lust, which death could not deter
O sin (says she) thou must be Natures slave,
In spite of Fate, go to a pleasing grave.
When I have sinned, send Jove a thunder stroke
and spare thy chosen tree, the harmless Oak.
She thinks again, and sees nor time nor place,
to quench the thirstines of her parched blood:
Time still ran on, with an auerted face,
and nothing but her passions did her good.
This thought confoundes her, and she is resoul'd
In deaths bleake azure arms to be inuoul'd.
Fates, you are women, save your modesties:
she will kill her self, you need but close her eyes
and like as when some sudden ecstasy,
^ seisth the nature of a sickly man,
When he is discernd to swoune, strait by and by
Folk by his ^elpe confusedly have ran,
and seeking with their art to fetch him back:
To many throng, that he the air does lack,
^o Mirrha's thoughts confusedly did stound her,
some adding comfort, whilst the rest confound her
^ike to a fountains head, so showed her head,
from whence since passion first took hold of her
^wo springs did run* through each flowr-fil'd mead
and at her lips staid, where she wished Cynir
Would so have done: her face with tears run ore,
^ike Hebaes Nectar showed, spilt on heavens flore.
^or as the blomes in May the dew drops bears,
(...) Mirrha's cheeks looked sprinkled with her tears
Her hair, that with such diligence was used
To be kemb'd up and did like clouds appear
Where many spangles, star-like were infused,
To attend the luster of so bright ^haire,
Whose beams like bright Arachnes web co^pos^
Taught Pallas a new envy, now unloosed,
hiding her face, yet making it seem rarer,
as blazing Commets train makes the star faire^
Despair that teacherh holy ones to die,
when as affliction ministers her part:
Had breathing now in Mirrha, and well nie,
Like Venus, made her graspe a flaming heart.
Cupid was borne at Etna, a hot sprite,
Whose violence takes edge off from delight.
For men deep loving, often themselves so waste*
that proffered dainties, they want power to tast^
Digress no farthe^ least thou prove obsceane,
but tell by this how Nurse had broke the door,
And trembling both through age and fear,
Forgot the natural sense she had before
Yet with her outcries from the shades of death,
^ald Mirrhas spright, who with unwilling breath
reenters flesh, scorning to give it grace,
with wonted beauty that adorned her face.
^he took the haltar, and held up her chin,
chasing her temples with a violent heat:
Making her soul return with torments in,
^as it went out, being come unto retrait,
Nurse heau'd her trembling body on the bed,
Where sinking as in grave, she seemed dead:
Chaste had my verse bin, blessed Mirrhas hap,
if here my pen could write thy Epitaph.
When having gotten open her heavy eyes,
life-mocking death, with a fresh crimson hew,
she thus be spoke: if there be sorceries,
Philters, inchauntments, any furi^ new
That can inspire with irrelegious fire,
The breast of mortal, that untamed desire
Possesses me, and all my bodies merit,
Shows like a fair house, haunted with a spirit.
The four and twenty winds are not so fierce,
as what does blow the fuel in my breast:
Not the soft oil, Appollo did disperse,
on Phaitons brow, to keep his sun-beam'd (...)
From face of heavenly fires, could ought preuai^
Against raging bra^ds which my poor heart (...)
scorched with material flames, we soon do (...)
and to purge sins, we embrace purgatory.
But this a heat that nor in life or death,
can render any humor but despair:
Nor can it with the short cut of my breath,
Take hence my shame, that shall survive mine heir
Nor can the act (after it is done) content
But brings with it eternal punishment,
lesseneth the pleasure of the world to come,
gives the judge leave, and strikes the guilty dumb
The iealious nurse, did apprehend her strait,
yet would extract the quintessence of all:
And therefore child (quoth she) use no deceit,
but tell me freely whence these tears do fall
I am thy nurse, and from my aged breast
Thou had thy second being, tell the rest.
I do conjure thee, by these silver hairs,
which are grown white, the sooner in their cares
If any orped witch of Thessalie,
have power upon thee, gentle-girle relate:
Or if thou have profaned some die^^,
we shall some misticke fires propogate.
To atone with them or if with barbarous hand
devoy'd of thy first chastity thou stand;
Unfold to me griefs uttered find redress:
fires vndescern'd burn the more pitiless.
Or if the sun of beauty shoot at thee
his fiery shafts, O tell me and the rather,
Because thy confidence shall answered be,
With this my child I Will hide it from thy father
As does a dying man hold fast what so he grasp
so she her fervent arms bout her Nurse claspe
and nuzzels once more twixt those dugs her fa^^
whilst ore those Islands flow salt tears apace*
That word of father was like Persey's shield,
to make the poor maid stone, now nurse does threat
Unless she will in gentle manner yield,
she would to morrow show how in a heat
She would have made away her desperate life,
and she must tell the man that forced that strife
within her breast through fear she thus did frame
and made her tongue the trumpet of her shame.
Her voice half stopped with sighs (O fatal voice)
pronounced these words, yet did the acce^ts fail:
How blessed is my mother in her choice,
How fully she with nature did prevail.
This said, her blushing face sinkes in her shroud
like Cinthia muffel'd in an envious cloud.
When lo, the dying taper in his toombe,
gave darkness to it self and to the room.
Now had she time to wail, and well she might,
Guilty of sorrow, there might you have seen:
As glow worms add a tincture (...) the night,
Glimmering in pallid fire, upon some green,
mixed with the dew, so did her eyes appear,
Each goulden glance joined with a dewy tear,
often shut her eyes, like stars that portend ill,
with bloody deluge, they their orbs did fill.
The Nurse amated with the latter words,
whose aged hairs stood up like silver wire:
Knew speech was vain, where will the scope affords
and whi^pering softly, says child thy desire
I Will put into thy arms, sleep, seize thy head,
It Is now nights noone, all but the stars seem dead,
Our vanities like fireworks will ascend,
Until they break, uncertain where to end,
Never did mortal with a vicious thought,
wish to bring vices Embrion to aforme:
But still the prince of darkness to them brought
occasions fore-locke, which they ^ff have torn.
Sin like a Cedar shadows all our good:
Whilst virtues bounded like a narrow flood.
As see now, how the occasion of misfortune;
Mirrha's much abus'd-mother did importune.
Now came the time, of Ceres sacred rite,
and Mysteries, when all wives young and old
Clothed in vailes, all of transparent white,
Kneel to her, and to the Attick priest unfold,
The firstlings of the fiel'd wreathed gilded corn,
Chaplets of dill, plucked in a blushing morn,
And many such, nor may they husbands see,
In nine days, till they end their mystery.
Now nurse was double diligent, watching her time
and told old Cyniras a lonely maid
Sighed for him: and still with cupps of wine
betwixt each word his pallat she assaide.
Heated with wines, he had the Nurse repaide,
and bring to him the Maid that was so fair.
Bacchus and Venus, Wine and frolic lust,
are sworn to blood, and keep together must.
Mirrha no sooner heard this glad reply,
but as a poor bird long time in a snare,
Ready for fammine and her woe to die,
whom an unskillful fouler unaware
has guiuen freedom, to her food does have,
so Mirrha thought each hour an age was past:
In her strict torment; but being escaped away,
her woes forgot, she thinks upon her prey.
And as she did ascend those stairs to lust,
in the midway, she heard her father speak:
And n^re lay partridge closer to the dust,
at sound of the Faulccons bell, then she too weak
To encounter or resist: and fears are such,
in love by love, that they enccrease love much.
Love like to Monarkes, has his state hie reared
who ever will be loved, where they are feared.
To a hundred several passions she does yield,
and as we see in Autumn of the year
Some gallant oak stand ready to be feld,
upon whose ribs a hundred wounds appear
Forced by the brawnie arms of Hynds vnlithe,
who works a passage to the weeping pith:
Uncertain (though wind shaken) where to fall:
so stood her mind doutful of rest at al.
Nurse opes the door, and brings her to the be^
the darkness of the night abated shame:
And leaves her that must leave her maiden head
to the begetter of his own defame,
With faultring hams having got twixt the sheets*
In fearful lust this Prodegiae meets,
He begs a kiss, then blushed she as he spoke it,
yet he must give it, she wants power to take it.
Now trembling lay she by her fathers side,
like silly dove within the Eagles gripe:
Nor does she use soft shrikes as does a bride,
(I mean a maid) when as the fruit so ripe
Of maidenhead, is forced from their womb,
Her fathers arms to her was as a tomb.
she dead in pleasure, durst not show her voice,
least Cyniras should know this fair foul choic^
But when that Cupid once had whetted her,
she twines her lilly stalks about his neck:
So clings young Iuie bout the aged oak there,
Venus smil^, but frowning Juno checks.
Their stolen delight, no nuptial tapers shone,
No Virgin belt untied, but all undone,
the Athenian God, kindled no hallowed fires,
dark was the night, suiting to their desires.
The morrow came, toyled with wakes and lust,
she leaves her father, when as the rising Sun
Covering the eastern Pines and mountain dust,
spyed Mirrha from her couch of sin to run.
Then blushed he first, and backward would ha fled
And ever since in's rising he is still red,
Nere Turkas was at sick blood more estranged,
then Mirrha when her chastity was changed.
Often would she lean against her fathers knees,
and tie his garter in a true love's knot:
And then vndoo't again, as to show she
were undone, yet he conceived it not*
And woman like that, keep not secrets long,
she showed her love in du^b shows with out tung,
her lust she knew (yet hardly it concealde)
like Fayries Treasur's vanished if revealed.
A third night came, darker then shores below,
when Cyniras (father of fearful lust)
Willing to see the soul that did bestow
So many pleasures on him (Jove is just)
Did reach a ^ap^^, whose confusiue light,
Struck like a blasting at that horrid sight,
The light f^ll from him loathing his defame,
things senceles often are mo^'d, when men not shame
At length with bloody eye fixed on her,
out of an Iuorie scabberd hanging by:
He drew a monumental Semiter,
^hinking with death that both their (...)
But night that often befriended her with sin,
^n her black womb too, did her freedom (...)*
For through the dark she slipped, and (...)
to mourn his Fa^e, not execute his (...).
Sped with her lust, and flying thence apace,
in fears and trembling, fear does give us eyes:
For saftie to the Gods, she lifts her face,
and her claspt hands to what she now not see's,
^oues browe was dark, Boetes had amain
Driven his Oxen to the lower plain.
Phebae fled heaven, her face no tincture bears,
Because she saw a deed, worthy her tears.
The morning came, where yet the fatal print
of Mirrha lay upon the pillow: Cynix he
Clogged with distress, a fathers curse did hint,
upon that place of foul inchastiti^,
the sight of what we loath, breeds loathing more
and virtue once renounced ingenders store,
Leave we him touz'd in care, for worldly we,
love to leave great men in their misery.
Seven winters nights, she fled before the Moon
(who knew the unchaste act she had enforced)
Through Arabie, in fear she posteth soon,
To odorous Panchaia, whose confines diuorc'd
Her fathers land* here grew all choicest fumes:
That to Jove's temples often men presumes:
and on his altars them accumulate,
and how they first sprung, here thereof the Fate.
Hebae now banished from the A^therian boule
upon a feast day among the Gods above,
Where it was made lawful, all without control,
might freely drink it chanced the Queen of love
Whether she longed, or envied Hebaes star,
(Women are envious, where they long for nectar)
forced her to skinke so much, the juice ran ore,
so that Jove's drink washed the defiled flore.
With this he stormed, that is Priests from altars fly
straight banished Hebae and the world did think
To a second Chaos they should turned be,
the clouds for fear wept ou^ the immortal drink
and on Panchaia there this Nectar f^ll,
Made rich the adjacent lands with odorous smell,
and such rare spices to the shoares are given,
as Jove would think no Nectar were in heaven.
There was a Satire rough and barbarous,
pleasing his pallat at a trembling spring:
Under a Beech with bows frondiferous,
though he had seen a nymph or rarer thing
Then flesh and blood for in the calmed stream*
He saw her eyes like stars, whose rays did gleam^
Boue Phoebus far, and so amazed stood,
as if she had bin Goddess of that flood*
and as you see a man that has bin long
Possessed with a fury of the shades:
after some prayers and many a sacred song,
with blessed signs, the evil spirit vades,
so fell his rudeness from him, and her shine,
Made all his earthie parts pure and divine.
O potent love, great is thy power be fallen,
That makes the wise mad, and the mad man calm
Thus he begins, fairer then Venus far,
If Venus be, or if she be it is thee:
Lovely as Lillies, brighter then the star
that is to earth the mornings Mercury:
Softer then Roses, sweeter breathed then they,
blush't boue Aurora, better clothed then May.
lipt like a cherrie, but of rarer taste,
Divine as Dian, and as fully chaste.
Pardon my rude tongue, if I chance to err,
as Hermes self might err being the God
of Eloquence: for your bright eye does bear
all earthly blessings in a fair abode,
Excuse me if I trip, I mean your weal,
Error's no error, where it is done with zeal.
Love like material fires is made to flame:
When it is suppressed* with fanning Fires first came
With this, the Maid (so took) hung down her head
wondering that such a shape had such a tongue:
able to steal her love, had she not fled,
and from his ardent gripes, her body wrung.
Flying like Phebae after stricken dear:
and as he followed she fled more for fear.
Z^phire came forth, to dally with her hair,
while the poor Satire cried stay maid so fair
But he on sudden like a subtle Snake,
rould in a heap, shootes forth himself at length:
and to his vigorous arms greedy does take,
his yiedling prey, won with his words not strength
To be a woman, is by nature given,
But to be constant, is a star, which heaven
Has sealed on their sex forehead as a sign,
That constancy in women is divine.
Thou did deceive me Mirrha, when I said,
thou flew'st for fear, thou gave me cause to fear
and I might justly have this against thee laid,
thou wents^ t'auide by paths that were so nere
Who begin, ill most often end in ill,
and she that does her first pure youth so spill
In lawles lust though made a wife to one,
Remains like wax for each impression.
But see the goodness of the Deities,
who still with grace preuents our ill presage,
This grove was hallowed to no Hiadres,
but chaste Diana, who with violent rage
Discending from her tower of Christalline,
To keep the place still sacred and divine:
against her rites, brought with her thereupon
white Poplar from the banckes of Acheron:
Then wi^h a charm, that did her face eclips,
And made her crescent quak, the juice she powers
Upon the Satirs face, and profane lips,
which quickly over all his body showers,
Her borrowed power of art being finished:
(Derived from Phoebus as her light) she said,
Nine-times the holy time, which spok will clear,
all profane matter, and this spoke she there.
Sleep Poplar sleep, that was the Satirs name,
who had bin long a king within these woods,
Since thou my sacred Grove, began to profane:
a sleep seize on thee, still as stigian floods,
by Stix I vow the partial destenies,
Did they conspire, should nere unclasp thine eyes.
haning thus said, the Satire vanished so,
as men's prospect that from a mirror go.
I think (quoth she) accursed is this place,
for here the man, for whom I sorrow now,
Heedelesse Acteon with immodest face,
saw all our naked and did ouer-vewe:
As men rich iuells do, thinking there lies
yet some rare virtue hidden from their eyes:
And even there quoth she and then did point,
reuen'gd, I saw his hounds tear joint from joint.
But since says she, thou as a King did reign,
and art a Trophey too of Dians power:
Thus much the Goddess of the floods does deign wood
to change thy shape, into a vertick flower.
Then thrice three words, thrice striking charmed
The ground did crannie, and there out of hand,
appeared green Poplar, younger then before,
which bowed the head and dyan did adore.
The pa^efac'd Mirrha sat like guilty spright,
fore the infernal judge, yet did not see
Diana great, for dull are mortals sight,
(and all invisible is chastity)
But heard a voice as she was vanishing,
saying defild maid, do wonder at this thing*
O Mirrha (...) my crescents beauty change,
thou shall be turned into a shape as strange.
With this the verdant new sprung Poplar plant
(moved with the wind) seemd to bow down the head
as cheering Mirrha, who did comfort want
being amazed at what Diana said,
Having recouer'd sense, she flies the place,
For fear of Phebaes coming to the chase:
to Saba land she hies, where all affraide,
my muse shall sing the downfall of the Maid.
Then first hung down Poplar his heavy brain,
for Mirrha's loss, whose love brought him that blew
and for he once in woods a King did reign,
a crown he still wear^s, richly wrought with
and yellow eke, as figures both of love,
Which Venus dropped down him from above.
Bacchus does love him, for in feasts of wine,
^he wears a poplar Garland mixed with vine.
The leaden God of sleep, on his juice feed,
the virtues of him, sundry do declare^
His sudden taste a heaviness does breed,
and drownes in rest, senses oppressed with care,
^n places far remote, he loves to grow,
and eke by rivers that run thick and slow,
where drowsilie this woodish demie God,
with every gale of wind his head does nod.
Now to proceed after a small repose,
that the accursed seed began swell her womb,
when her dry brain, no more tears could expose
she weayting for a sad and heavy dombe.
For often men offending, still do fear,
Though Jove be far off, yet his judgments ner^
down would she sit, and so unfold her moane^
that Echo sight hirs and forgot her own
Distressed twixt the teadiousnesse of life,
and trembling fear of death, she thus began:
For when we cease to be the crimes are rife,
which youth committed, and before us then.
For aged memory does clasp't contain,
Those shapes of sin, which hot blood held as vai^^
O cursed Fates quoth she* that brought to passe^
this prodegie twixt me and Cyniras.
O leave to leap for joy, thou pretty child,
to Hear of Cyniras, or i will leave rather:
To speak of him, whose bed I have defilde,
and made him prove thy Grandsire and thy father
Was ^ predestined to select no other,
But fated for the sister and the Mother.
of thee my babe, heaven here has been sinister
the child shall call his grandsire, son his mother sister
Often do two Roses grow out from one stem,
and one of them is full blown fore the other,
So fares it now with thee my virgin iem,
whom nature would call son but shame says brother
Shall I not blush when thou art ripe, to gather
The circumstances of who was thy Father,
yes sure I shall, yet shame forgets all shame,
I Will charge thy father of a heavenly name.
But oh, I fear me least some Prodegie,
the heavens agree, that I to light should bring:
to fright even the iron age, that chastity
might take example by my suffering.
That I a monster-mother should be made,
If so, O over equal Gods, let Mirrha fade
into some shape, worthy your high device,
Pity to me, would make Jove seem unwise.
Alter O Gods, death that is due to birth,
nor let the dead repine, that I should see
Eliziums blessed shades, nor the men of earth
annoided be with my impuritie,
Let them enjoy the fields, and learned Songs,
Of hye brow'd Orphens, let the v^flesht thronges
that have deserved this, and much more be glad,
my stars, my double life, and fate, are sad.
You wearyed race of Danans unblessed girls,
In vain leave off your vnwomb'd tubs to fill,
and with your tears that staynd ye Indyan pearls,
Weep out or Mirrha, and ere night you will
at my sad story orebrim with your tears,
Your whirle-poole vessels, which so many years
returned no interest, if you well deplore,
you will drown in tears, or labor so no more.
Conclude my fate, quick you eternal counsel*
or else I fear the nere-erturned dead
Clad in the fearful shapes of night and hell,
will rise before the general day be spread;
and hurrie me in flesh to Acheron,
To taste hels torture both in soul and bone:
Then blast me thunderer in righteous ire,
and I like Semele will meet thy fire.
The Gods to her last wish was tractable.
her tongue percullist twice was as she spoke:
air was her voice, and Mirrha now notable,
to thank the Gods, her joints in s^nder brake.
Leaves were her locks, of golden hair bereaved,
her arms long boughs, deem and be not deceived
tree began she be, yet twixt her thing so staid,
you could not say she was or tree or maid.
First grew her hair up like the Summer Corn,
or as a blazing star, whose streams rise upward
and being changd, fell leaves, that up were borne,
by the rude winds, yet had you but have heard
You Would swear, a sigh for Mirrha's transmigration
Had been decreed by all the windy nation.
and every Autumn, since a thing most rare,
The falling leaves, resemble Mirrha's hair.
To bark her yuorie skin polisht congeald,
each blew-rig'd current into melting sap,
Her nails to bolssome fair, and what revealed
with accents sad, the babe yet in her lap.
Her fingers twigs, her bright eyes turned to gum,
Buried on earth, and her own self the toombe.
her senses gone, yet this sense did she win,
to aye relent, the horror of her sin.
For even as from a guilty man, that is pleading for remorse
tears follow tears, as hoping to preualie,
So from this tree, (though now a senseless course)
flow precious tears, as seems she does bewail
In death, with ever living tears, the act fore-done
These Pius drops, made densiue by the sun,
are kept for holy uses, and the Mir,
That so distilles, does bear the name of her.
The misbegotten babie, swells the tree,
and loathing the defiled womb sought vent:
Th^se panges that mothers have felt she,
and solemn sighs had issue, as they*d rent,
and spoil the shape, she newly had assumed,
But words within the close bark were inhumbd
Yet wept it out, as it to water would,
Or seemed it mocked Pactolus waves of gold.
Till chaste Lucina, whom the Poets give,
The mid-wiues power in producing creatures,
by whose change we last die, and first do live,
(be they not violent each) she that gives features
Form or takes away, makes foul or fair,
Di^cending from her Sphere next to our air:
with arm^s yspred, upon the melting mir,
brought divine comfort down from heaven with her
Few words she spoke, but every syllable,
of power to comfort the afflicted Ghostes:
Or any other senseless thing make able,
do be^ter deeds then those Alcides boastes,
the tree straight craynes, and springs forth the child
who the first minut, though his countenance smild
cried out a maine, our first propheticke breath,
shows our first hour, is mother to our death.
The water Nymphs then caught him tenderly,
who laid him straight on the enameled bank^s,
and bathed him with his mothers tears, whereby
they made him fairer, and in merry prankes
The Ladies call a convocation there,
Some praise his nose, his lips* his eye, his ear,
Some his straight fingers, whilst a fist does swear
his verry breath yet smells of the mirre.
Another wishes, oh for such a face!
Nor can I blame her though she did wish so:
For sure, were I a wench, t'had bin my case,
for nature here, made both her joy and woe,
And spite that (but herself) commends none,
Of force must say, this was a rarer one
Then either nature did, or ere shall make,
whose life holds up her age, whose deathe's her wrack
Eyes like two stars fallen from their proper spears
as if they scorned the beaten paths of heaven:
Or envying of beauty of the bears,
shown firmer here, and brighter then the seaue^
Such was he as was Cupid wont to be
In pictures lim'd, and that they may agree,
furnish the babe with wings and quiver light,
or from loves God, take wings, and quier quite.
Naught may compare with Time in his swift race
the babe ere while feels now youths hot alarms
And as in years, so beauteous grew his face,
that he is fit again for Ladies arms:
Nor Cupid now could wound more dames the^ he
That Venus who Captives all, is not free
From her own power, she love's Adonis mild,
That Mars does storm, and wish he were no child
Nor Paphos, Amathus nor fishie Guide,
delights she now to haunt, nor Etna now
Burns more then her, she roans the wood so wide
after her game, that to his game does bow.
And will not hear or see, for eyes and ears,
If they her hear or see, their use forbeares
Yet she persues, and leaves her power un even
on heaven and earth, she loves him more the^ heaven
Often would she say, and bathe those words in tears
oh thou fair boy would God thou loudst like me
but sure thou art not flesh, it well appears,
thou we^^ the stubborn issue of (...),
So hard thou art, then she a sigh would fet,
and wish that Vulcan had not made his net,
For boy sterous Mars, she would fayner have bin sped
with this choice flower, claspt in her iron bed.
She Would nere have blushed, the^ she does make a vow
though all the Gods of both worlds had the^ seen
She raveth that she ever loved til now,
that she might worthily ha bin loves Queen.
well, well (quoth she) thou have revenged the spite
which from my accursed Sons bow did fowly light
On thy fair Mother, O immortal boy,
Though thou be fair, it is I that should be coy.
But stay my Muse in thine own confines keep,
and wage not war with so dear loved a neighbor
But having sung thy day song, rest and fleepe
preserve thy small fame and his greater favor:
His song was worthy merit ( Shakspeare he)
sung the fair blossom, thou the withered tree
Laurel is due to him, his art and wit
has purchased it, Cypres thy brow will fit.
FINIS.
THREE Eglogs, The first is of Menalcas and Daphnis: The other two is of Apollo
and Hyacinth.

By Jews Machin.

MENALCAS Daphnis.
IN Summer time, before the Sun did rise,
Dull la^ie sleep, had quite forsook mine eyes
Then up I start my self, I did array,
And walked the fields before the break of day,
Then all the world, was quiet, still and hushed:
Aurora strait appears, but O she blushed
To see her goulden hairs in flames hang down,
Whose shining brightness lasc'd her sky gown
Then Phoebus from the east mounted the sky,
whose burning lusture puts Aurora by.
When he first rises, then we may behold,
His shining face, drawn in a Coach of gold.
I laid me down, upon the dewie gra^^e,
Shaded with trees to view all those that pass,
When lo I espied a pair coming that way,
And down they sat them meaning there to stay.
Then on my breast I crept till I came nere them,
Lovers speak softly, (yet I chaunc'd to hear 'em
A shepherd one was, a fair Nymph the other,
With face as beautiful as Cupids Mother,
Two roses in her cheeks, yellowe her have,
Nature had done them right, a well shaped pair,
To me they did appear: then still I sat,
and lent mine ^are unto their amarous chat,
O tell me dear, what may the reason be,
That thou of late have left thy flock and me?
Once thou did love me, and I love thee still,
O do not thou repay my good with^ll.
But women like to fortune still are fickle,
Their constancy like glass, hollow and brittle.
Yet some there are on this earth to be found,
Whose faith was never shaken but still sound,
and one amongst those few, I hope thou art,
Whose kind reply can heal my wounded heart
Then she with modest grace to him replide,
Thy suite fair Shepherd I nere yet denide.
Thy long wished presence is as dear to me,
as ere my smiles have bin a joy to thee.
No coy disdain, nor yet no proud ambition,
Has kept me from thee but to escape suspicion.
Did I absent my self now being alone?
Lets leave all greefes, and cast away all moan.
Then did the sun cast glances at her eyes,
Supposing them two stars fallen from the skies:
She winckt, and durst not look on Phoebus rays,
mean while the shepherd wc her whit hand plays
But see what chanced, as he had caught his bliss,
Meaning to venture for a pleasing kiss.
and as he reached to kiss her, he did see
Come flying twixt a laboring honey be,
Which made them both to start, the Be supposes
Her rosiat cheeks to be two budding roses,
and sucking there upon her pleasing skin,
Finding no sweetness he thrust out his sting:
and pricked her cheek, the blood did there display
Which being done the Be did have away:
The Nymph in this small smart was well contented
But of the Shepherd, it was sore lamented,
O cursed be, first thou did stop my joy,
But secondly far greater thine annoy.
First hinder me of that should do me good,
and next to shed her undefiled blood.
This grant you Gods, that e^erie honey Be,
May want a sting for this wrong done to me.
But she replide, O do, not grieve sweet heart,
The sight of thee, makes me forget all smart.
Then freely come, and tire thy self with kisses,
which are to Lovers their celestial blisses,
Then did he nibble on her red soft lips
and draws her heart out with his amorous sipp*
His spirrit melted when those sweetes he tasted:
and in loves flames their very souls are wasted.
With youthful humors now they gin to play,
H^e'd see her Garters, but she cries away.
Let me go forward and then i will retire,
Now by my flock I swear i will reach no higher,
She then believed him, and seemde not loath:
Flesh is so frail, that he has broke his oath.
Nay then (she said) I pray ye let me go:
I shall grow angry, wherefore do you so.
He seeing her to frown, forsook his pleasure,
Hoping for more joy at a fitter leisure:
Fie, fie (quoth she) and are you not ashamde?
If any should have seen I had bin blamde.
This place is common some may chance come by
And see us on the grass thus redely lie.
Then go with me, into you pleasant Grove,
Where I will make a Garland for my love,
There shall we find sweet Violets and prim-Roses
all pleasing sents, that pleasant wood incloses.
April did weep with joy, whose moderat showers
Imborders all that grass with fragrant flowers.
There we may sit in private, kiss and toy,
Farthest from sight, is Lovers greatest joy.
Content (quoth she) then let us both go thither
My lappefull of those odorous flowers i will gather
And with them for my love i will make a wreath,
Then on thy lips, my lips shall sweetly breath.
Thus arm in arm, they walked into the Grove,
Then up I start, mine eyes at them did roue.
But in they were, for I had lost their sight,
And sure they were together with delight.
The sun was darkened, and did hide his face,
Being ashamed, he mist the Shepherds place:
Then back I came, thinking upon these twain,
wishing for such a Nymph, I were a Swain.
L: M

Finis.
Apollo Hyacinth.
APollo weary, let his courses breath,
Whilst he descended to this earth beneath:
armed wi^h his bow* and shafts he walked the woods
To hear the muttering of the shallowe floods:
The little birds did sing on every bryer,
making the green bowed trees their musicks quier
And with sweet notes, these harmless fingers strove
To chaunt an Anthem to the Gods above.
Phoebus was ravished, hearing of this noise,
Vowing he would forsake his heavenly joys
To live on earth, if no more harm were found
Then did appear upon that pleasant ground.
But he did after find this faulce worlds pleasure,
Joy for a minut, trouble without measure.
Thus wandering up and down without this grove
He spyed a boy, that after game did roue,
His bow was in his hand, shafts by his side,
His curled hair did all his shoulders hide.
A well shapt face he had, pleasing to view,
a fine straight body, and a heart most true,
Apollo staide and gaz dvppon his face,
Supposing him mortal of Jove's race.
and that blind archer, that does wound all hearts
Had now quite overcome the God of arts,
For he did dote upon this lovely youth,
Whose heart was all composde of melting ruth,
and seeing Phoebus come, the boy did stay him,
He said youth; will you walk, heed not denay him
But went along together hand in hand:
and Zephire with calm wind their faces fand,
Then Phoebus said, fair youth what make you here
Knide courteous stranger for to kill the dear?
To hear the birds to sing, the waters glide:
Tumbling in curls along a green bank side,
More sweet content in harmless woods is found
Then in great Cities there does sin abound.
But here husnt quiet keeps us company,
Free from all cares, and bad society:
Here grows hie grass lets sit and make it flat,
and so beguile swift time with pleasing chat:
So hand in hand, they sat them on the ground,
Where little birds did make hermonious sound,
But Phoebus heart did pant and leap with joy,
When he beheld that sweet delicious boy.
His eyes did sparkle love his heart flamde fire,
To see this sweet boy smile, is his desire.
Then with an ardent gripe his hand he crushed,
and then he kissed him, and the boy then blushed,
That blushing color, so became his face
That Phoebus kissed again, and thought it grace
To touch his lips, such pleasure Phoebus felt,
That in an amarous deaw his heart did melt.
and thus he dallied with his amorous kisses,
Forgetting of the world, that his light misses.
More joy he had, when this day did approach,
Then in his shining Crown or burning Coach,
Wearied with toying* they left off their play,
and conquering night, had now overcome the day
Casting her sable curtains ore the sky,
Then said the boy, I to my rest must hie.
and I said Phoebus, must into the Sea,
To sport with Thetio still the break of day.
Tomorrow when my Charriot's in the the west,
Then meet me hear, for that is my times of rest.
I will quoth Hyacinth till then farewell,
The parting of true friends all pains excel.
Phoebus turned coward, and was quite disharted,
at last he came and kissed him, and so parted.
Apollo Hyacinth
GRim night being past, the morning star appeard
and bright Aurora had the welking cleard,
Then Phoebus drawn forth by his fiery teame,
Gilded the hills, the fields and watrie stream:
so swiftly flew his steeds, through scorching flames
as if he ran for the Olimpicke games.
But it was not so, Apollo made that have,
Longing till he his Hyacinth embraced:
And H^acinth sweet youth the time respected,
Gods love by mortals should not be neglected
There sat he down, by a clear running brook
And like Narcissus doteth with each look.
He castes upon himself* there had he dyed,
But that bright Phoebus did his beauty hide.
In over darkened clouds to stop his self loved erro^
No shape he saw in natures watrie Mirror.
And now Appollo wayuing toward the west,
Vnteam'd his fiery st^edes, and let them rest
Whilst he descended on this ball of earth,
To spor^e with Hyacinth strange unknown mirth
For which the Gods were angry, and decreed
They would remove the cause, the boy must bleed.
Now Phoebus for to see his love did have him,
Then Hyacinth came running and embraced him:
More joy had Phoebus in this Spartane lad,
Then heaven borne love in Phrigian Ganimed:
His love to Daphne (that chaste beauteous nymph)
Was not so great, as to his Hyacinth.
All Female pleasures, which he did adore,
Are dull to those of his male paramore.
and having past some hours in delight,
They would go walk to Delpho's ere that night
Should dark the world for they went to see:
The sport there made by the lands peasatrie.
And being come to a fair spacious plain,
There might they see each nymph had got a swain
Some dancing after pipes, others were running
at barley break, and with their homely cunning,
Sought to delight themselves, and those stood by
Others for nimble footing there did try,
who best deserved the werth: some threw at length
The heavy sledge, and therein showed the^r strength
Which pleased Appollo best, then he would prove
His strength in it, and threw it far above,
The expectation of the standers by,
For through the clouds the sledge did seem to fly
and Hyacinth being eager for to throw,
Ran to the place, ere that it fell below
Upon the earth, and falling on firm ground
against his face the heavy sledge rebounds,
and struck him to the earth the God did sound,
When he beh^ld that fatal deadly wound,
But being revived, he hollowed in his ear,
To call back life, O Hyacinth my dear;
Leave me not thus, I will court destiny,
For to revoke thee doom, thou shall not die.
Greef would not help, in gore there lay his brain
And so Apollo's Hyacinth was slain.
But yet the God still wept upon his wound,
till with his tears there spru^g from out the ground,
A flower where his bleeding corpse lay dead,
Shapt like a Lilly, but this flower was red.
The people wondered when they saw this done,
But then he showed him self bright like the Sun
Which filled them all with fear, they kneeling said
Tell us thy will, and it shall be obeyed.
Then build a statel^ Temple ore this flower,
And dedicate it to his matchless power.
That kept my heart in th^al that lovely boy,
Beauty of mankind, and Apollo's joy,
And every year to make a solemn feast,
In honor of my friend but now deceased.
And for my part, i will walkein shadow groves,
Consort with Virgins ghosts, slain by fales loves
No more i will touch my Violl or my Lute,
Nor speak to Gods or men (true grief is mute)
So he departed, wringing of his hands,
And they to do those things that he commands.
The Gods for missing of their won^ed light,
Sent Mercury to know of him if night
Should still possess the world: he made reply,
Three days for Phaiton did I leave the sky.
But Hyacinth was dearer, for his wrack,
Six days the world shall mourn in solemn black
But Hermes vfde such cunning, he did force
Phoebus again, to take his wonted course:
And so to heaven, he went with Mercury,
Whose tongue had power to ore rule destiny:
Yet since the earth had robbed him of his friend,
He vowed this curse until the world should end.
Half of the year, his beams should comfort shine
The rest to rain and frost he would resign,
And that because his sorrow here had birth,
Trouble and grief, should still possess the earth.
Jews Machin.

FINIS.

