A TREATISE OF THE DIVINE ESSENCE AND ATTRIBVTES.

BY THOMAS IACKSON Doctor in Divinity, Chaplain to his Majesty in ordinary,
and Vicar of S. Nicolas Church in the Town of Newcastle upon Tyne.

The first part.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for John Clarke, and are to be sold at his shop under
St. Peter's Church in Cornhill. 1628.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND TRVLY noble WILLIAM Earl of Penbrooke, Lord high
Steward of his Majesty's Household, Knight of the most noble Order of the
Ga^ter, and Chancellor of the University of Oxon; The blessings of this life,
and of the life to come be multiplied.
HAd the consciousnesse of my weakness left any place for expectation that my
poor Labors should have found such benign accepta^ce with men of higher
place and judgment, as by the report of Honorable personages, and mine own
late experience of your noble favors, some of them I now perceive have found
with your Honor, these present papers had come to crave your patronage in a
better dress than now they do. Besides the consciousnesse of my inabilities
to please the acurate judgments of this age, want of opportunities for these
many years to give my self that contentment, which I was once bold to promise
unto my self, had almost deterred me from publishing any part of my former
labors, which were not popular, and for the Pulpit, of which rank this
present Treatise is not. The subject or matter of it is Academicall, and was
conceived in that famous Nurserie of all good literature, which for these many
years has flourished, and many more may it flourish under your Honorable
patronage. If either these, or other of my Labors of the like argument, which
took their first being from the benignity of that soil, may find acceptance
with your Lordship, I shall need no other Apology for publishing them beside
my unfaigned desire to leave the Christian world a testimony of that high
esteem which I have ever made of your Honorable favors to that renowned
University, and of my thankfulness for my particular interest in your general
goodness. If this manifestation of my weakness may occasion other Academickes
to show their strength in this and like Arguments, it shall be a great part of
my joy and comfort to see better fruits of your Lordships favor brought forth
by others, than I can present unto you. But if these may find that acceptance
which I most desire, your Lordship will happily be deemed by some, to patronize
not my weakness only, but mine errors. It is not so unusual, nor so much for
me to be censured for an Arminian, as it will be for your Lordship to be
thought to patronize Arminianisme. To give your Lordship that satisfaction
therefore in this point, which I am not bound to give unto others; If the man
which most mislikes the Arminian or Lutheran doctrine in the points most
controverted through reformed Churches, will but agree with me in these two,
That the Almighty Creator has a true freedom in doing good; and Adams
offspring a true freedom of doing evil; I shall not dissent from him in any
other points controverted, unless it be in this one, that there needs to be no
other controversy at all between the Arminians and their opposites in point
of Gods Providence and Predestination. In all other particulars, save only so
far as they are reducible to these two, I have not yet the learning or
understanding to conceive, what contradiction there is or can be, between men
not willing to contend about words. But if any in opposition to Arminius, will
maintain that all things were so decreed by God before the Creation of the
world; that nothing since the Creation could have fallen out otherwise than it
has done, or that nothing can be amended what is amiss, I must crave pardon
of every good Christian to oppugn his opinion, not as an error only in
Divinity, but as an ignorance which involveth enmity to the sweet disposition
of the All-seeing and unerring Providence; as a forerunner of ruin to most
flourishing States and Kingdoms where it grows common, or comes to full
height. For supplanting or preventing the growth of such opinions, I make bold
to crave your Lordships patronage. Thus with my continual prayers for your
Lordships health, with all increase of honor and happiness, I humbly take my
leave.

From my Study in Newcastle upon Tine. November 20. 1627. Your Lordships in all
duty and observance, THOMAS IACKSON.

THE CONTENTS OF THE SEVERAL Chapters in this ensuing TREATISE.
SECTION I. OF the one absolutely infinite, and incomprehensible Essence in
general.
Chapter. Folio. 1 How far we may seek to express what by light of nature
or other ways may be conceived concerning the incomprehensible Essence, or his
Attributes. 3 2 Containing two philosophical Maxims which lead us to the
acknowledgement of one infinite and incomprehensible Essence. 9 3 Of infinity
in Being, or of absolute infinity: and the right definition of it by the
ancient Philosophers. 20 4 There is no plurality of perfections in the infinite
Essence, albeit the perfection of all things be in him. Of the absolute
identity of the Divine Essence and Attributes. 31
SECTION II. OF the several branches of absolute infinity; or of the
infinity of the Divine Attributes, as they are severally apprehended by us.
Chapter. Folio. 5 Of Divine Immensity, or of that branch of absolute infinity,
whereof infinity in magnitude, or space imaginary is the shadow. 42 6 Of
Eternity, or of that branch of absolute infinity, whereof successive duration
or the imaginary infinity of time, is the model. 62 7 Of the infinity of
Divine Power. 83 8 Of the infinity of Divine Wisdom. That it is as impossible
for any thing to fall out without Gods knowledge, as to have existence without
his power or essential presence. 90 9 Of Divine Immutability. 115 10 Of the
eternal and immutable Decree. 120 11 Of transcendentall goodness: and of the
infinity of it in the Divine nature. 128 12 Of the infinity and immutability
of Divine goodness communicative, or as it is the pattern of moral goodness
in the creature. 132 13 In what sense, or how Gods infinite will is said to be
the rule of goodness. 147 14 Of Gods infinite love to Mankind. 157 15 What
the Church of England does teach concerning the extent of Gods love: of the
distinction of singula generum, and genera singulorum: of the distinction of
voluntas signi, and voluntas beneplaciti. 166
SECTION III. THat Gods good will and pleasure is never frustrated, albeit his
unspeakeable love take no effect in many to whom it is unfeignedly tendered.
Chapter. Folio. 16 In what sense God may be said to have done all that he
could for his Vineyard, or for such as perish. 182 17 The truth and ardency of
Gods love unto such as perish, testified by our Savior, and by S. Paul. 195 18
Want of consideration, or ignorance of Gods unfeigned love to such as perish, a
principal means or occasion why so many perish. 200 19 How God of a most
loving Father becomes a severe inexorable Judge. 207 20 Whilst God of a loving
Father becomes a severe Judge, there is no change or alteration at all in God,
but only in men and in their actions. Gods will is always exactly fulfilled
even in such as go most against it. How it may stand with the Justice of God
to punish transgressions temporal, with torments everlasting. 213 21 How
Anger, Love, Compassion, Mercy, or other affections are in the Divine Nature.
226
A TREATISE OF THE DIVINE ESSENCE AND ATTRIBVTES.
SECTION I.
Of the one absolutely infinite, and incomprehensible Essence in general.
THe original of Atheism, of errors, or misperswasions, concerning the
Being, or Attributes of the Divine Nature, being in a former Treatise at large
discussed; the next enquiries, which exact Method would in this Argument make,
are, First, how this truth of Gods being, most certainly known, by internal
experience unto some, may by force of speculative Argument be made manifest
unto others. Secondly, how his nature and attributes may be fitliest resembled.

My first resolution professed in the beginning of the discussing of the
original of Atheism, as yet restraines me for adventuring too far in the
former. For whilst I view the progress which I have purposed; to debate this
point, upon my first entry into that Paradise of contemplation, (within whose
territories I now encampe) by syllogisticall force of argument, seems to me
as great an oversight, as to entertain an enemy, more desperate then potent,
with a pitched battle, when as all his forts might, by constant prosequution
of advantages gotten, be orderly taken, each after other, without possibility
of any great loss, or apparent danger. Now the Atheists chief strength lying
in a preconceived impossibility of a Creation and Resurrection, the conquest of
the whole truth will easily be compassed, after those weak holds be (as in
due time they shall be) utterly demolished. Or in case, after their overthrow,
he be of force to bid us battle, we shall be most willing to try our intended
quarrel with him by dint of argument, in the Article of the last Judgment. In
the mean time, we may, without danger of his check, proceed upon those
advantages, which the grounds of nature give us.

CHAP. I.
How far we may seek to express what by light of Nature, or otherwise, may
be conceived concerning the incomprehensible Essence, or his Attributes.
FIrst, if every particular man, or body generable, have precedent causes of
their beings; their whole generations must of necessity have some cause:
otherwise all should not be of one kind or nature. Now this progress from
effects unto their causes, or betwixt causes subordinate, cannot be infinite:
but as all progressive motion supposes some rest or stay, whence it
proceeds, so must this progress, whereof I speak, take beginning from some
cause, which has no cause of its being. And this is that incomprehensible
Essence, which we seek.

2 But whereunto shall we liken him? Things compared always agree in some one
kind, or have (at least) a common measure. Is then this cause of causes
contained in any predicamentall rank of being? Or can our conceit of any
thing therein contained, be truly fitted unto him? Or may his infinite and
incomprehensible nature be rightly molded within the circumference of man's
shallow brain? One thing it is to represent the infinite Essence, another to
illustrate this truth, that he cannot be represented. Though nothing can
exactly resemble him, yet some things there be which better notify how far
he is beyond all resemblance or comparison, then others can do. By variety of
such resemblances as his works afford, may our admiration of his
incomprehensiblenesse be raised higher and higher, and with our admiration
thus raised, will our longing after his presence still be enlarged. The nature
of things finite and limited, no Philosopher can so exactly express, as
Painters may their outward lineaments. But as some sensible objects, besides
their proper shape or character, imprint a kind of dislike or pleasance in
creatures sensitive: so have our purest and most exact conceits intellectual
certain symptomaticall impressions annexed, which inwardly affect us; though
we cannot outwardly so express them, as they may imprint the like affection in
others. Hence it is that the more right resemblances we make to our selves of
any thing, the greater will be the symptomaticall impression of the latent
truth; some part or shadow whereof appears in every thing, whereto it can
truly be compared. And though we cannot in this life come to a clear view of
that nature, which we most desire to see; yet is it a work worthy our pains,
to erect our thoughts, by variety of resemblances (made with due observance of
decorum) unto an horizon more ample then ordinary; in whose skirts or edges,
we may behold some scattered rays of that glorious light, which is utterly
set unto men, whose thoughts soar not without the circumference of this
visible world; for all we see with ou^ bodily eyes, is but an hemisphere of
midnight darkness, to the habitation of Saints, and seat o^ bliss.

3 The rule of decorum in all resemblances of things amiable or glorious is,
that as well the simple terms of comparison be sightly and handsome, as the
proportion between them exact. Supposing the ods of valorous strength between
Ajax and ordinary Trojanes, to have been as great, as Homer would have us
believe it was; the manner of this Champions retreat, being overcharged with
the multitude of his Enemies, could not more exquisitely be resembled, than by
a company of children, driving an hungry hard-skinned Ass with bats or staves
out of a corne-field or meadow. The Ass cannot, by such weaklings, be driven
so hard, but he will feed as he goes; nor could Ajax be charged so fiercely by
his impotent foes, but that he fought still as he fled. The proportion is
approved, as most exact, by a Nec dictis erit ullus bonos, si cum actus ab urbe
Daunius hostili Teucris urgentibus heroes,
Vix pugna absistit, simili^ dicetur Asello,
Qu^m pueri laeto pascentem pinguia in agro
Ordea stipitibus duris detrudere tendunt,
Instantes, quatiuntque sudes per terga, per armos.
Ille autem campo vix cedere, and inter eundum
Saepe hic atque illic avidis insistere malis:
Omnia convenient, rerumque, simillima imago est.
Credo equidem, sed turpe pecus, nec Turnus Asellum,
Turnus avia atavisque pote^s dignabitur heroes.
Aptius hanc speciem referat Leo, quem neque tergae
Ira dare, aut virtus patitur, neque sufficit unus
Tendere tot contra, telisque obstare sequentum.
Hieron. Vida Poet. lib. 2.

teacher of Poetry that was his Arts Master, who notwithstanding, with the same
breath disallows the invention, as no way applyable unto Turnus, at least in
the courtly censure of those times wherein Virgil wrote. Be the congruity
between the terms never so exquisite or pleasant; the Ass notwithstanding is
no amiable creature, nor can wisdom or valor, for his many base properties
willingly brook comparison with him in any. More fitly (as this Author
thinks) might Turnus his heroical spirit have been paralleld by a Lion,
which though unable to sustain the fierce pursuit of many hunters, yet cannot
be enforced to any other march, then Passant gardant.

4 But we must allow the Poet (whose chief art is to please his Readers
appetite with pleasant sauces, more then with solid meats,) to be more dainty
and curious in this kind, than it is requisite the School-divine or
Philosopher should be: albeit neither of them need much to fear, lest their
discourses be too comely, so solidity of truth be the ground of their
comeliness. No courtly Poet is more observant of the former rule of decorum in
their comparisons, than the holy Prophets are. Thus has the Lord spoken unto
me (says Esaias, cap. 31. verse. 4.) Like as the Lion, and the young Lion
roaring on his prey, when a multitude of shepherds is called forth against him,
he will not be afraid of their voice, nor abase himself for the noise of
them: so shall the Lord of hosts come down to fight for mount Sion, and for
the hill thereof. Saint Et hic quidem omnium morbus est trium generum quae
proposui: and eorum scilicet qui secundum corpus de Deo sapiunt, and eorum qui
secundum spiritualem creaturam sicuti est anima; and eorum qui neque secundum
corpus, neque secundu^ spirituale^ creatura^, et tamen de Deo falsa existimant:
eo remotiores a vero, quo id quod sapiunt, nec in corpore reperitur, nec in
facto and condito spiritu, nec in ipso creatore. Qui enim opinatur Deum (verbi
gratia) candidum vel rutilum, fallitur; sed tamen haec inventantur in corpore.
Rursum, qui opinatur Deum nunc obliviscentem, nunc recordante^, vel si quid
hujusmodi est; nihilominus in errore est: sed tamen haec inveniuntur in animo.
Qui autem putant ejus esse potentiae Deum, ut seipsum ipse genuerit: eo plus
errant, quod non solum Deus ita non est, sed nec spiritualis nec corporalis
creatura. Nulla enim res omnino est, quae seipsum gignat ut sit. Aug. de
Trinit. lib. 1. cap. 1.
Austin has noted three sorts of errors in setting forth the divine nature: of
which, two go upon false grounds, the other is altogether groundless. Some
(says he) there be that seek to measure things spiritual by the best
knowledge which they have gotten (by sense or art) of things bodily. Others do
fit the Deity with the nature and properties of the humane soul, and from this
false ground frame many deceiptfull and crooked rules, whilst they endeavor
to draw the picture or image of the immutable Essence. A third sort there be,
which by too much straining to transcend every mutable creature, patch up such
conceits, as cannot possibly hang together, either upon created or increated
natures, and these rove further from the truth then do the former. As (to use
his instance) He which thinks God to be bright or yellow, is much deceived;
yet his error wants not a cloak, in as much as these colors have some being
(from God) in bodies. His error again is as great, that thinks God sometimes
forgets, and sometimes calls things forgotten to mind; yet this vicissitude of
memory and oblivion, has place in the humane soul, which in many things is
like the Creator. But he which makes the Divine nature so powerful, as to
produce or beget it self, quite misseth not the mark only, but the Butt, and
shoots (as it were) out of the field: for nothing possible can possibly give it
self being or existence.

5 But though in no wise we may avouch such gross impossibilities of him, to
whom nothing is impossible; yet must we often use fictions or suppositions of
things scarce possible, to last so long till we have molded conceits of the
Essence and Attributes incomprehensible, more lively and semblable, then can be
taken either from the humane soul alone, or from bodies natural. To maintain
it as a Philosophical truth, that God is the soul of this universe, is an
impious error In the 5. Book, Section 3.
before condemned, as a grand seminary of Idolatry. Yet by imagining the humane
soul to be as really existent in every place, whereto the cogitations of it
can reach, as it is in our bodies, or rather to exercise the same motive power
over the greatest bodily substance in this world, that it does over our
fingers, able to weild the Heavens or Elements with as great facility and
speed, as we do our thoughts or breath: We may, by this fiction, gain a more
true model or shadow of Gods infinite efficacy, then any one created substance
can furnish us withal. But whilst we thus, by imagination, transfuse our
conceits of the best life and motion, which we know, into this great Sphere,
which we see, or (which suit better to the immutable and infinite essence) into
bodies abstract or mathematical: we must make such a compound as Tacitus would
have made of two noble Romans: Demptis utriusque vitiis solae virtutes
misceantur: The imperfections of both being sifted from them, their perfections
only must be ingredients in this compound. Yet may we not think, that the
divine nature, which we seek to express by them, consists of perfections
infinite, so united or compounded. We must yet use a further extraction of our
conceits, ere we apply them to his incomprehensible nature.

CHAP. 2.
Containing two philosophical Maxims which lead us to the acknowledgement of
one infinite and incompre^ensible Essence.
Unto every Student that with observance ordinary will survey any
Philosophical tract of causes, 1
two maine springs or fountains do in a manner discover themselves: which
were they as well opened and drawn, as some others of less consequence are,
we might baptize most Atheists in the one, and confirm good Christians in the
other. The natural current of the one directly caries us to an independent
cause; from whose illimited essence and nature, the later affords us an ocular
or visible derivation of those general attributes, whereof faith infused
gives us the true taste and relish. The former we may draw to this head,
[Whatsoever has limits or bounds of being, has some distinct cause or author
of being.] As impossible it is, any thing should take limits of being, as
beginning of being from it self. For beginning of being is one especial limit
of being.

2 This Maxim is simply convertible, [Whatsoever has cause of being has also
limits of being.] because it has beginning of being: for [Omnis causa est
principium, and omne causatum est principiatum,] Every cause is the active
beginning or beginner of being, and an active beginning essentially includes a
beginning passive, as fashionable to it, as the mark or impression is to the
stamp. Or in plainer English, thus; Where there is a beginning or beginner,
there is somewhat begun. Where the cause is prae^xistent in time, the
distinction or limits of things caused or begun, are as easily seen as the
diverse surfaces of bodies severed in place. But where the cause has only
precedence of nature and not of time, (as it falls out in things caused by
concomitance or resultance,) the limits or confines of their being seem
confounded, or as hardly distinguishable as the diverse surfaces of two bodies
glued together. Yet as we rightly gather that if the bodies be of several
kinds, each has its proper surface, though the point of distinction be
invisible to our eyes: so whatsoever we conceive to have dependence upon
another, we necessarily conceive it to have proper limits of being, or at
least a distinct beginning of being from the other, though as it were ingrafted
in it. But whether we conceive effects and causes distinctly as they are in
nature, or in gross, so long as we acknowledge them (this or that way
conceived) to be finite and limited, we must acknowledge some cause of their
limitation, which (as we suppose) cannot be distinct from the cause of their
being.

3 Why men in these days are not Giants, why Giants, in former, were but men,
are two Problems which the mere naturalist could easily assoyle by this
reason, for substance one and the same. The vigor of causes productive or
conservative of vegetables, of man especially, from which he receives
nutrition and augmentation, is less now then it has been at least before the
Flood; though but finite and limited, when it was greatest. Why vegetables of
greatest vigor, ingrosse not the properties of others less vigorous, but rest
contented with a greater numericall measure of their own specificall virtues;
is, by the former reason as plain. For in that they have not their being from
themselves, they can take no more then is given; nor can the natures whence
they are propagated, convey them a better title of being, then themselves have.
This as the seal communicates his fashion to the wax, so does the limited
force or virtue of causes, always imprint bounds and limits upon their
effects. If further it be demanded, why the Elements having the opportunity of
mutual vicinity, to wreake their natural enmities or hostilities, do not
each trespass more grievously upon other; as why the restless or raging water
swallows not up the dull earth, which cannot fly from any wrong or violence
offered; or why the Heavens, having so great a prerogative by height of place,
largeness of compass, and indefatigable motion, do not dispossess the higher
Elements of their seat? The naturalist would plead the warrant of Natures
Charter, which had set them their distinct bounds and limits by an everlasting
undispensable law. Yet is nature in his language always an internal or
essential part of some bodies, within which it is necessarily confined. As the
nature of the Heavens has not so much as liberty of egresse into neighbor
Elements, nor the proper forms of these, (upon what exigence or assaults
soever made against them in their territories,) so much as right of removal or
flitting into lower Elements. Or, in case it be pretended that these particular
natures, have a nature more general for their president; yet this, whether one
above the rest, or an aggregation only of all the rest, is still confined to
this visible world, and both so hidebound with the utmost sphere, that they
cannot grow greater or enlarge their strength. So that nature taken in what
sense the Naturalist lists, cannot be said so properly to set bounds or limits
to bodies natural, as to be bounded or limited in them. Or to speak more
properly, Nature her self did not make, but is that very domestique law, by
which they are bounded, and therefore, in no case, can dispense with it. And in
that she is a law, (for the most part, but not absolutely indispensable) she
necessarily supposes a Lawgiver; who, if he have no Law set him by any
superior (as we must of necessity come in fine to some one in this kind
supreme) he can have no such limits or bounds, as he has set to nature, and
things natural. He neither is any part of this visible frame, which we see,
nor can he be enclosed within the utmost sphere. And thus by following the
issue of the former fountain, we are arived in the latter, which fully
discovered, opens it self into a boundless Ocean. Whatsoever has no cause of
being can have no limits or bounds of being.

4 And Being, may be limited or illimited two ways: Either for number of
kinds and natures contained in it, or for quantity and intensive perfection of
every several kind. Of things visible, we see the most perfect are but
perfect in some one kind, they possess not the entire perfection of others;
and that perfection, whereof they have the just propriety, is not actually
infinite, (...) finite and limited. Whatsoever thus is, it was as possible for
it not to have been, and is as possible for it not to be, as to be but of this
or that kind, not all that is, or has being. Even those substances which we
call immortal, as the heaven of heavens, with all their inhabitants, be they
Angels or Archangels, Principalities or Thrones, enjoy the perpetual tenor of
their actual existence, not from their essence, but from the decree of their
Maker. Manent cuncta non quia aeterna sunt, sed quia defenduntur cura regentis.
Immortalia tutore non egent, haec conservat artifex, fragilitatem materiae vi
sua vincens. Seneca Epist. 58. All things continue in being, not because they
are eternal, but because they are defended by the providence of their
Governor. Things immortal need no guardian or protector. But the maker of all
things preserves these things (which we see continue in being) overmatching
the frailty of the matter by his power. In this man's philosophy nothing which
is made, can be by nature immortal, though many things be perpetually
preserved from perishing. Nothing which is immortal, can be made. He grossly
erred, if he were of the same opinion with some others of the Mittamus animum
ad illa quae aeterna sunt. Miremur in sublimi volitantes rerum on niu^ formas*
Deumque inter illa versantem, and providentem, quemadmodum quae immortalia
facere non potuit, quia materia prohibebat, defendat a morte, ac ratione vitium
corporis vincat. Senec. ib. Whether for thus saying he fall under the censure
of Muretus in his annotations upon this place, I refer it to the judicious
Reader. Impie stulta veterum opinio, Deum voluisse quidem a primo omnia
immortalia facere, sed non potuisse, propter materiae vitium. Quasi non, ut
caetera omnia, ita materiam condiderit, ac procrearit Deus. Recte Lacta^^tius,
Idem materiae fictor est, q^i and rerum materia constantium.
Ancient, that God had a desire to make things immortal, but could not by
reason of the frailty or untowardlinesse of the matter. But that things made
out of the matter, or made at all, could be immortal by nature, he rightly
affirmed. For to be immortal in his language, is to be without beginning,
without dependence. And what so is, has an eternal necessity of existence.
Absolute necessity of existence, or impossibility of nonexistence, or of not
being always what it is, and as it is, implies an absolute necessity of being
or of existence infinite; which cannot reside save only in the totality or
absolute fullness of all being possible. The greatest fullness of finite
existence conceiveable, cannot reach beyond al possibility of nonexistence,
nor can possibility of nonexistence, and perpetual actual existence, be
indissolubly wedded in any finite nature, save only by his infinite power, who
essentially is, or whose essence is to exist, or to be the inexhaustible
fountain of all being. The necessary supposall, or acknowledgement of such an
infinite or essentially existent power, cannot more strongly or more
perspicuously be inferred, than by the reduction of known effects unto their
causes, and of these causative entities (whose number and ranks are finite)
into one prime essence, whence al of them are derived; it self being
underivable from any cause, or essence conceivable. In that this prime essence
has no cause of being, it can have no beginning of being. And yet is beginning
of being, the first and prime limit of being, without whose precedence, other
bounds or limits of being, cannot follow.

5 If that which Philosophers suppose to be the root of incorruption in the
heavens, can brook no limits of duration, but must be imagined without end or
beginning; why should it content it self with limits of extension? seeing
duration is but a kind of extension, seeing motion, magnitude, and time, by
their rules in other cases, hold exact proportion. Things caused (as induction
manifests) are always limited and molded in their proper causes. Nor are
there two causes (much less two causalities,) one of their being, another of
their limitation or restraint to this or that set kind of being. For
whatsoever gives being to any thing, gives it the beginning of being. As
Sophroniscus was the true cause why Socrates was in that age wherein he lived,
not before or after; why he was a man not a beast, an Athenian, not a
Barbarian. Quicquid dat formam, dat omnia consequentia formam: whatsoever gives
form of being to any thing, gives all the appurtenances to the form: is a
Physical Maxim which supposes another Metaphysicall, Quicquid dat esse, dat
proprietates esse: That which gives being unto any thing, gives likewise the
properties of such being as it has. Now limits of being, are essential
properties of that essence or being, wherein they are found. And distinct bounds
or limits are included in the distinct form of being, which every thing has
from its cause. Actual essence or existence it self, is distributed to every
thing that has cause of being, as it were sealed up in its proper form or
kind of being. It is as possible to put a new fashion upon nothing, as for any
thing that is, to take limits or set form of being from nothing. That which
has nothing to give it being, can have nothing to give it limits or bounds of
being. And as no entity can take its being, or beginning of being from it
self; so neither can it take bounds or limits from it self, but must have
them from some other. The prime essence or first cause of all things that are,
as it has no precedent cause of existence, nor can it be cause of existence to
it self; so neither can it have any cause of limits without it self, nor can
it be any cause of limits to it self. It remains then, that it must be an
essence illimited, and thus to be without bounds or limits, is the formal
effect or consequence of being it self, or of that which truly is, without any
cause precedent to give it being, or make it what it is.

6 So essentially is the conceit of being without bounds or limits, included
in our conceit of being without cause precedent, that if we should, by way of
supposition, give any imaginary entity leave to take beginning or possession of
being from it self, without the warrant of any cause precedent to appoint or
measure it out some distinct portion or form of being: thus much being once by
imagination granted, we could not (by any imagination possible) debar this
entity from absolute necessity of being for ever after whatsoever it listed to
be, or from being all things, rather than any one thing.

Of the Heathens, many did hold an uncreated Chaos praeexistent to the frame of
this Universe: and Philosophers, to this day, maintain an ingenerable matter,
which actually is not any body, but indifferent to be made every body. Let us
but suppose; First the one, or other of them to be as Homogeneall in it self,
as the air or water: Secondly, to be able to actuate, or Proteus-like to
transform it self into a better state than now it has, without the help of
any agent or efficient; and then, as it could have no cause, so can there be
no reason given, to restrain it from taking all bodily perfection possible to
it self. And if it be true, which some teach, that this prime matter has
neither proper quantity nor quality, what should hinder it to take both without
measure, supposing it might be its one carver of those endowments? Or imagine
there were such a vacuity, where the world now is, as we Christians believe
there was before it was made, and only one of Democritus casual Atoms, or
some mere possibility or appetite of the matter, left free, venire in vacuum,
to give it self full and perfect act without curb or restraint of any
superior power or sharer to cry half mine with it, or make claim to the
nature of any actual entity lost; it being supposed to be able to take any one
nature upon it, what should either hinder or further it, to assume the nature
of earth, rather than of water, or of these two, rather than of any other
Element, or of any simple bodies, rather than of mixed or compounded substances,
or of bodily substances, rather than spiritual, or of all these, rather than
of their metaphysicall eminences, and perfections? Or whilst we imagine it,
without cause of existence or beginning, no reason imaginable could confine it
to any set place of residence or extension: no cause could be alleged why it
should take possession of the center, rather than of the circumference of this
Universe, as now it stands, or of both these rather than of the whole sphere,
or of the whole sphere rather than of all extensive space imaginable. Only the
very supposition of taking beginning though without cause, does put a limit to
its duration; because this kind of beginning, being but imaginary, depends
upon our imagination, as upon its true cause. And yet even thus considered, me
thinks it should extend its existence both ways, and draw a circular duration
to the instant where it begins. Or (not imagining the beginning) let us
imagine it only to have true present being without any cause precedent to push
it forward, or superior guide to appoint it a set course; and it is not within
the compass of imagination, why the duration of it should not reach as far
the one way as the other. as far beyond all imagination of time past, as of
time to come, why it should not comprehend all duration imaginable by way of
present possession, or supereminent permanency, without admission of any
deflux, division, or succession, for continuation of its existence.

7 If it be objected, that any thing may follow from supposition or
imagination of impossibilities, the reply is easy. The objection is either
false, or true in a sense, which no way impeacheth, but rather approves that
kind of arguing. True it is, there is almost nothing in nature so impossible,
as it may not be the possible consequent of some impossibility supposed or
granted: but of every particular impossibility supposed or imagined, the
possible Qui scholas regu^t, ia id nobis exploratu^ reliqueru^t: tale esse
conditionalis propositionis naturam sive conditionem, ut existente falso quod
antecedit, and etiam quod subsequitur, possit remanere vera conditionalis.
Pasq. c. 1. ad Ro^. fol. 65 Though it were impossible for an Angel from heaven
to preach any other Gospel than Paul had preached, and impossible likewise for
any Angel of heaven to be accursed, yet S. Paul's conditional proposition was
true; If an Angel from heaven should preach any other Gospel, he should be
accursed. In like manner this supposition or conditional [If any thing could
take beginning from it self, it should be infinite] is true: although both
these positions be false; First, that any thing can take beginning from it
self: Secondly, that any thing which has beginning can be infinite. And this
only is absolutely true, That which truly is without all beginning, is
absolutely infinite.
consequences are not infinite; neither such nor so many as we list to make
them; they are determinate by nature. Now we cannot conceive it to be in nature
more impossible for a mere logical possibility, really and truly to take
beginning of actual being only from it self, then it is for that which is
supposed and imagined thus to take beginning, to be restrained either to any
determinat kind or part of being, or to be confined to any set place or
residence. Or if any mislike these imaginary models, let him (now he has
give^ us leave to make them, and vouchsafed to look upon them) utterly cancel
or deface them. The everlasting edifice to whose erection they are destinated,
is this; Such as we cannot co^ceive that not to be, which we conceive to take
beginning of being from it self without any cause precedent; such of necessity
must we conceive and believe him to be indeed, who neither took beginning
from himself, nor had it given by any, but is the beginning of being, the sole
maker of all things that be, being himself without beginning, without
dependence o^ any cause, without subordination to any guide, to appoint his
kind, to limit his place, or prescribe his time of being. He is in all these,
and whatsoever branch or portion of being imaginable, truly and really
infinite, the quintessence or excellency of all perfections (whether numericall
or specifical) incident to al sorts or degrees of Beings numerable.

CHAP. 1.
Of infinity in Being, or of absolute infinity: and the right definition of
it by the ancient Philosophers.
1 WEre the question proposed in formal terms [An inter nihil and aliquid
detur medium,] Whether something or nothing may admit a mean or middle nature:
few answerers in the Schools would make choice of the affirmative: If any did,
he might easily be thus opposed: Every mean betwixt two is either by
participation of both extremes, (as lukewarm is neither hot nor cold, but a
mixture of both;) or a mean by abnegation, as being capable of neither. So a
stone, though in it be not blind, yet cannot see; and is therefore such a
mean as we now speak of, (i) medium abnegationis, betwixt sight and
blindness. That which is not (so is nothing) can communicate no kind of being
(for it has none,) unto any thing; therefore it is impossible there should be
any mean of participation betwixt nothing and something. And to find a mean
betwixt them, by abnegation, that is, any thing which is neither something nor
nothing, is as hard, as to assign a space or vacancy between a line and the
point that terminates it. What name soever we propose, unless it have some
degree or portion of entity answering to it, we may justly say, it is just
nothing. These reasons notwithstanding though they firmly hold in secular
disputes of predicamentall or numerable Entities, yet the infinite Essence
comes not within the lists of this division. Is he then a mean between
something and nothing, rather an excellency too transcendent, to be
comprehended under the name of something, or of any thing; for this were to
make him a Idem absolutum, quod et Deum dicimus, non cadit in numero cum omni
alio, ut quod Deus and coelum, sint plura, aut duo, aut alia, and diversa;
sicut nec coelum est idem absolutum, ut coelum quod est aliud a terra. Et quia
idem absolutum est actu omnis formae formabilis forma, non potest forma esse
extra idem. Quo enim res est eadem sibiipsi, forma agit, quod autem est
allerialias est, quia non est idem absolutum, hoc est omnis formae forma. Est
igitur idem absolutum, principium, medium, and finis, omnis formae, and actus
absolutus omnis potentiae. Cusan. de Genes. dialog. page 128.
numerable part of being. On the other side, we should avouch as much under our
hand, as the fool said in his heart, if we did comprehend him under the other
extreme. To say there is no God, or that God is nothing, are speeches
altogether equivolent, both equally false, and alike blasphemous. Fully
contradictory to their falsehood, and in direct opposition to their blasphemy,
we may more safely say and think, that God is one, yet no one thing. And if we
avouch him to be all, our meaning is, he is a great deal more than all things.
The Latin ens, which universally taken, directly answers to our English every
thing, or any thing; (as Lib. de ente and uno.
Mirandula well observes) faciem concreti habet, it bears the face or image of
a concrete. And every concrete takes its name from that nature, whereof it
participates; which nature, notwithstanding by reason of its simple, pure, and
perfect essence, cannot brook the same name which it bestows on others.
Nothing is truly termed hot, or white, but from participation of heat or
whiteness; yet to say heat is hot, or whiteness white, is a speech as
improper and unnatural, as it would be to style the Kings Majesty, Lord
President, chief Justice of some Court, or with some other inferior title,
merely dependent on supreme Majesty. Heat then is that from which things are
called, as by participation of it, they truly are, hot; Whiteness, that, from
whose particiration, things are termed white. This shall we speak of God, so
we speak of him as best befits his supreme Majesty, that he is no one thing,
but rather one, from whose most pure and perfect being, all things are said to
be, what they are. That man is one thing, and the earth another, that any
thing is said to be, what it is, includes a participation of his being, whose
proper name is Ex. 3. 14.
I am: whose essence is the very quintessence, the incomprehensible and
indiminishable fullness of that, without which, we can neither affirm or deny
ought of that which is (...) the only foundation of every thing, that can be
named alone, the only bond of all things that can be combined or linckt
together. Say Cum primum ingressus Academiam sueris, occurret tibi Parmenides,
qui unicum demonstrabit Deum essererum omnium ideas, id est, exemplaria
rationesque eminentissime continentem vel producentem. Occurret Melissus et
Zeno, qui solum Deum revera esse demonstrent, caetera vero videri. Marcil.
Ficin. Epist. 8. page 866.
we then not only, that He is one, but that he only is: And that in him the
eminent totality or perfection of every thing, to whom this title, Is, can be
imparted, is contained. Angels and immortal spirits are, but they are not
Being it self, that is, they are what they are, by participation of his
Essence, who only is, who alone comprehends all things.

2 Of the greatest Angel which he has created, or of the most noble
intelligent Spirit which the Philosophers imagined, were he present, or did we
know the place of his residence, we might without wrong say, This Angel, or
yonder Intelligence; or speak of either, as of a numerable part, though a
principal one of this Universe. For though his nature be much more perfect
then ours is, and he according to the perfection of his nature, much more
excellent then his fellow Angels are: his perfections nevertheless have their
bounds and limits, not incapable of these demonstrative signs, This, Here, or
Yonder, etc. He neither contains the specificall perfection of our nature, nor
the numericall of his Fellows, within the measure of his perfection. In his
kind then he is most perfect, yet is he not that perfection which he has in
him, but the receptacle of it; And if he have perfection only in him, without
being himself perfection, Quid habet quod non accepit? All he has must be
participated or borrowed from perfection it self. And of his borrowed
perfections, one neither properly is another, nor are all or any of them, what
he is. His power is not the same that his wisdom is; his wisdom is not his
goodness, nor his goodness his life. Satan and his Angels have life, though
they have lost their goodness; and their power to practice, is less than
their wit to plot mischief and villainy. The best, the wisest, or mightiest of
those immortal Spirits, which kept their stations, is not able, either by his
mere power to give being to things that are not, or life to livelesse
creatures; his wisdom cannot inspire wisdom into creatures endued with
life; his goodness is no fountain whence grace may be derived into the heart
of man. But when we say God is one, or God only is, in this indivisible unity,
we include all multiplicity. Nor can we say more of him in fewer words than
Seneca has done; Est totum quod vides, and totum quod non vides: He is the
absolute totality of all and every part of being or perfection, which we see in
things visible, or conceive in substances invisible.

3 By the same analogy of speech that we say a statue, or picture, though made
after life, is, no true man; we are bound to say, and think, that no creature
(the best of which is but the image of God; his being, at the best, but
participated) truly is. It is their chief grace to be true shadows of true
being. O^ as it is usual with Divines to enstyle Christ, the true Samuel,
David himself, the right Solomon, the only Sampson: not that they think the
stories of those men's lives, were only feigned legends for good example, (or
that no such persons had ever truly been,) but because they did foreshadow one
far more excellent, than themselves, in whom that was really and fully
exhibited, which was only prefigured in them. So we say God alone Is, because
the totality and fullness of that being is in him, whose representation is in
his creatures. Thus much is included in all those sacred passages, wherein he
says of himself, I am He, I am God, and there is none besides. Thus much many
comments yet extant in the Ancient Philosophy of the Heathens, being compared
with these texts, would fully inform us.

4 The Stoics appropriate the name of essence unto God, and unto the matter,
which they foolishly conceive to be coeternall with him, Vide Senecam Ep. 58.
and Muretu^ in annot.
able to overmatch the benignity of his active power, by its passive
untowardlinesse. How ever, they held nothing worthy the title of Essence, which
was not (...) independently everlastingly. Plotines Philosophy was more divine,
unless perhaps he gave too much to his Demoniacall or Angelical spirits, as
many others, not conceiving any creation but out of the matter praeexistent,
seem to allot a kind of independent Being to immateriall substances. An error
easy to have been checked, had the favorers of it been put in mind, that
these their demigods by necessary consequence of this opinion, must have been
acknowledged infinite in Being. Whereas the true notion of such infinity, by
the apparent grounds of true Philosophy, is only proper, only possible unto
One; because it entirely includes all that can be; and, All, absolutely
excludes all plurality. From this principle rightly sounded, did Plato deny
things sensible truly to be, or (as Seneca paraphrases upon his Text) they make
a show only, or put on a countenance of being for a time, being incapable of
the stability or solidity of true being. So far was this divine Philosopher
from their herefie, which acknowledged an independent being in immateriall
substances, that (to the Aristotelicall Christian his shame) Dijs a se factis
promisit Deus non factus immortalitatem; quod impossible est, se dixit esse
facturum. Sic enim eum locutum narrat Plato, etc. vide Aug. lib. 22. de civ.
Dei cap. 26. Et Solum in 4. senten. distin. 43. q. 1. art. 2. Et Platoriem
ipsum in Times. p. 41
he derives their immortality, not from the immaterialitie or excellency of
their nature, but from the special grant or Charter of their Maker; as if
dissolution or final expiration were due to them as they are creatures; albeit
the execution of it were everlastingly differed from their first creation.
These terms of being, is, or are, etc. which are so common to al things, that
without them, we can neither make enquiry after any thing, nor distinguish it
from nothing, are attributed by the same Philosopher to this eternal Maker of
all things, after such an eminent and sovereign manner, as may not be
communicated to any other. So the name of Poet (to use Secundum ex his quae
sunt, ponit Plato, quod eminet et exuperat omnia. Hoc ait per excellentiam
esse, ut Poeta co^muniter dicitur: omnibus enim versus facientibus hoc nomen
est: Sed iam apud Graecos in unius notam cessit. Homeru^ intelligas cum
audieris Poetam. Quid ergo hoc est? Deus scilicet mayor ac, potentior cunctis.
Seneca ep. 58. Quid per Ideas intelligat. Plato, vide ibid. et apud Muretum in
annotat.
Seneca his comment upon Plato his dialect) absolutely or demonstratively
taken, was Homers peculiar title throughout Greece, albeit the name of Poet was
common in that time to all versifiers. The Poet Homer was a tautology amongst
the Graecians, but Poet Aeschylus, or Poet Euripides none. A greater tautology
or solaecisme it had been in Platoes Divinity, to have said of God, as we do
of our selves or of Angels, he is something, every thing, or the most excellent
thing. Enough it was to have said he is One, or. He is All, although he should
have hit his or the Anoient Philosophers meaning best, that had said, he is,
(...), He that is. Or as the Apostle comments upon Gods name revealed to Moses,
He which was, is, and which is to come, (...).

5 Parmenides much more ancient then Plato, did not deny (unless Simplicius
one of Aristotle's followers double with us) all distinction, either numericall
or specificall, or more general, between the visible or intelligible parts of
this Universe. Any member of which division, being granted, multitude and
division would necessarily follow. (...)] This is the chiefest name of the
eternal and most blessed God, so called of his Essence, being, or existence,
which is, simply one, Deuteronomy 6. 4. The force of this, name, the holy Ghost
opens He that is, that was, and that will be, or is to come, Rev. 1. 48. and
4. 8. and 11. 17. and 16. 5. And the form of the Hebrew name implies so much,
Je being a sign of the time to come, Ieheveh, he will be, H^, of the time
present, Hoveh, he that is; and Vah of the time past, Havah, he was. It
imports that God is, and has his being of himself from before all worlds:
[Isa. 44. 6.] that he gives being or existence unto all things, and in him all
are and do consist, [Acts 17. 25] That he gives being unto his word,
effecting whatsoever he has spoken, whether promises, [Exod. 6. 3. Esaias 45.
2, 3.] or threatenings, [Ezek. 5. 17. and 7. 27] It is in effect the same that
Ehieh, I will be, or I am, as God calls himself, Exodus 3. 14. Of this the
Gentiles named the greatest God Jove and Jupiter, that is, Iah-Father, of the
shorter name Iah, mentioned Psalm. 68. 5. And Varro the learnest of the Romans,
thought Jove to be the God of the Jews. August. lib. 1. de consen. Euan. cap.
22. Hereof also in Greek writers he is called Iao Diodor. Sicul lib. 2. cap.
5. Clem. Alexand. Strom. lib. 5. Macrob. lib. 1. Saturnal. cap. 18. But in the
Greek tongue the name Jehovah cannot rightly be pronounced, and for it the
Greek Bibles have Lord, which the new Testament follows, as Mark 12. 29.
from Deuteronomy. 6. 4. and elsewhere usually; and the Hebrew Text sometime puts
Adonai Lord, or Elobim God, for Ievovah, as Psalm 57. 10. compared with Psalm
108. 4. 2. Chron. 25. 24. with 2 Kings 14. 14. Ainsworth upon Psalm. 83. 19.
But how many or great soever, the parts of multitude were, in his opinion,
they truly were not, in respect of that unity, whence they had their
original. That speech of this sage Philosopher, Omnia unum sunt, which
Aristotle, in the first entry into his new Philosophy, stumbles at as a
Paradoxe, was an orthodoxall principle of true Divintie. Parmenides meant the
same that Plato did, (perhaps better) although he expressed his meaning in a
poetical manner, more apt to be mistaken, though rightly taken, more
magnificent and much apter to occasion admiration. The speech it self will
naturally bear this construction, Multitude of things visible, is but the
multiplied shadow of invisible independent unity: things sensible, or by
imagination numerable, are but so many several representations of his
incomprehensible being, who is one; not as one is part of multitude, yet most
truly One, because indivisible and unmultipliable, as wanting nothing, as most
entirely possessing all that can accrue by multiplication: most truly One,
because He only is, and unto his being naught can be added, naught detracted
from it, by the increase or diminution of other beings. Or in Parmenides
meaning, He so is, that if al things numerable should lose that being which
they have, or be annihilated, all might be found again in him, and be restored
with Jobs restitution, to their wonted estate, without diminution of his
sovereign being. For whatsoever now is, heretofore has bin, or can be extant,
besides Him; has a more excellent manner of being, treasured up in his
eternal and infinite Essence, than may with safety be committed to its own
charge or custody.

6 Happy had it been for Aristotle himself, and not amiss for us, if he had
employed his extraordinary talent of wit, in setting forth that infinite
treasure of wisdom, whence he received it; or spent his days in conte^plation
of that unity, whence al things whereof he wrote, had their beginning, rather
tha^ in decyphering their several natures and perfections, altogether omitting
the essential references, or dependencies, which they had from him; unless
this mirror of nature, had bin of their number, who infatuated (as the Apostle
speaks) by divine wisdom, became vain in their imaginatio^s; he might have
perceived his own definition of such infinity as he imagined in the
divisibility of Magnitude or succession of time, to have been (as Plato
speaks of Time it self) but a moveable image of that true and solid infinity,
whose definition, being well assigned by others, was censoriously rejected by
him; or such a floating shadow of it swimming in his brain, as the Sun or
Stars imprint in a swift running stream. A perfect definition should be so
fitted to the entire nature of the thing defined, or to the thing it self
absolutely considered, as the bark is to the tree, or other visible surfaces
to the bodies which they environ: To express some particular properties or
branches, much less some references or considerations of it, is not enough.
The question then being absolutely proposed Quid est infinitum? What is
infinity? or what is it to be infinite? The definitive and satisfactory answer
must be such, as shall express not the nature of infinity in succession only
or in division, not in this or that respect only, or according to some
particular abstraction or consideration; but the nature of infinity simply and
absolutely considered. That only is absolutely and properly infinite, which is
infinite not according to one conceit or kind of infinity, but that which is
infinite in Being. This was that infinity which the Ancients well defined, when
they said, Infinitum est extra quod nihil est: Infinity is that without which
nothing is, or can be. For as infinity in longitude, includes all length
conceiveable, and infinity in solid magnitudes, all dimensions imaginable; so
must infinite being include all Being possible; and it is impossible for any
thing to be without or besides that, wherein all being possible is contained.
Thus did these ancient Heathens feel after and seek, and in a manner find,
that Lord under the notion of unum and infinitum, in whom, as S. Paul says,
(Act. 17. 28.) we live, and move, and have our being. His words will bear or
rather presuppose that improvement, which is necessarily included in the
Ancients definition of absolute infinity, It is impossible that any thing
living should have life, that any thing moveable should move, that life or
motion should have the least degree of being, save only in Him, who only is.
For as the same Apostle there says, verse. 25. He gives to all, life and
breath, and all things. The very first beginnings, the first and last degrees
of such being as they have. Aristotle then came far short of the truth in
saying, Infinitum est extra quod semper aliquid est, That is infinite, which
never has so much, but it is always getting more. The truth is, Aristotle did
not, could not deny the definition assigned by the Ancients, to be a true and
perfect definition of absolute infinity, or of infinity in being. Wherein then,
or upon what grounds did he dissent from them? Either in that he did not
acknowledge any such absolute infinity or infinite being, as the Ancients
believed; or else did suppose, that they held this visible world or some bodily
magnitude to be so actually and absolutely infinite, as the former definition
does import. Concerning this latter sort of infinity, whatsoever the ancient
Philosophers did, we Christians do not dissent from Aristotle: for we deny any
bodily magnitude actually infinite. But that there is an absolute infinity, or
an Essence actually and absolutely infinite, may be necessarily inferred from
those branches of that infinity which consists not in act, but in possibility,
or succession, which Aristotle rightly acknowledged, and well defined. For,
whence should all the parts of this visible world possibly get any new portion
of time, any succession or addition to their present being or duration, which
now they have not; save only from his infinite and inexhaustible store, who,
before all times, had so much of being in every kind, as he could not possibly
either get any more, or lose a dram of what he had; albeit through every
moment of duration divisible, he furnished all things, that are (as he could
do more) with as much perfection, as they are capable of, that is, all of them
with perfection or being in it self finite, but in some of them without limit
of duration. But are all things in him? or such only as include perfection? or
shall we say perfections are in him, rather than in the things themselves? And
if so, whether shall we say he is one perfection, or all perfections?

CHAP. 4.
There is no plurality of perfections in the infinite Essence, albeit the
perfection of all things be in Him. Of the absolute identity of the Divine
Essence and Attributes.
1 HE argued like himself that said, We must either allow the Gods to have
bodies, or deny them sense; because sense is never found without a body. What
was it then in his Philosophy, which framed the organs of bodily sense? a body
already organized and endued with sense? or a spirit (virtus formatrix) which
rather is in the body, than is a body it self? And if this spirit frame the
organs by its own skill, Epicurus should in reason have afforded it both sense
and reason in greater measure than he had himself; who, out of the same
matter, could not make so much as one hair white or black; much less the
most exquisit instruments of sense. But if this spirit, by which, in
Philosophers opinions, our bodies are produced, work not by art, but is only
set on work by the supreme Artificer; seeing he can make it to do more without
sense and reason, tha^ Epicurus could do, by all his art or philosophical
skill: we must needs grant sense (and reason) to be in Him, yet such, or in
such a sort, as befits his Majesty, not such as Vide Lactant. lib. 1. de ira
Dei. Et Betuleum in com.
Epicurus took delight in. Our argument is grounded on the Psalmists
Philosophy. Understand ye brutish among the people, and ye fools when will
ye be wise? He that planted the ear shall he not hear? He that formed the
eyes, shall he not see? He that chastises the Heathen, shall not he correct?
He that teaches man knowledge, shall not he know? Psalm. 94. 8, 9, 10. Yet as
we say that He only is, and all things numerable are but mere shadows of
His being; so we must hold, that hearing, sight, and reason are in him,
according to their idaeall patterns or perfections, not according to those
imperfect pictures, which communicated to men and beasts, distinguish them from
vegetables or livelesse creatures; whose perfections likewise are in him. But
some things perhaps there be, which have no portion of perfection, as the prime
matter, or some like dead or dull mass. For how shall that, which is but a
body, be in him that has no body? That Maxim, Idem est non esse, and non
apparere, is not so true in matters of civil proof or allegation, as the
other stem of the same root, Idem est non esse and non operari, is in nature.
To be without efficacy or operation, or to serve unto no use, is all one, as
not to be at all. Or, rather, so to be, has the same proportion to simple
non-being, as nihil agere, to otiosum esse. To be without use or operation is
more remote from true being, and worse in nature, than simply not to be. If any
such things there be, how should we say they are in God, in whom is nothing but
perfection? Yet of things without proper use or operation, there might be some
peculiar end best known to their Maker; if it were but to commend the
perfection which other creatures borrow from him, and to stir up our
thankfulness, that we neither are such dull masses our selves, nor are
troubled with harboring or supporting them. But even these, if any such there
were, could not be existent or extra causas, unless they truly were in Him.
What is it then for all things that are, or their perfections to be in Him?

2 For all things to be in Him, is no more then that He alone can produce them
without seed or matter precedent. All things, not extant only, but possible,
are in his wisdom, as the Edifice is in the Artificers head: all things
again are in his power, as strength or force to move our limbs, is in our
sinews or motive faculty. The perfections of all things are truly said to be
in Him, in as much as whatsoever is, or can be done by their efficacy or
virtue, He alone can do without them. He could feed all the beasts of the
field without grass, heal every disease, without herb, metal, or other
matter of medicine, by his sole word, not uttered by breathing, or any other
kind of motion; not distinct from his life or essence. He is life it self;
yet is not his life supported by any corporeal mass, or praeexistent nature,
nor clothed with such sense as ours is: for sense, in as much as it cannot be
without a corporeal organ, is an imperfect kind of knowledge. Pain he cannot
feel as we do, because that tends to destruction, which is the period of
imperfection: yet what soever pain any sensible or material object can
inflict upon us, He alone can inflict the same in an higher degree. The measure
of pain, likewise, which we feel by sense, He knows much better without sense
or feeling of it. But when we say all things are in Him, after a more
excellent manner, than they are or can be in themselves: We must not conceit
a multitude or diversity of excellencies in his Essence, answering to the
several natures of things created: We must not imagine one excellency suitable
to elementary bodies, another to mixed, a third to vegetables, a fourth to
sense, etc. one to the humane nature, another to the Angelical. And if Tertium
genus est eoru^ quae proprie sunt: innumerabilia haec sunt, sed extra nostrum
posita conspectu^. Qua sunt, interrogas? Propria Platonis suppellex est. Ideas
vo^at, ex quibus quaecunque videmus, omnia fiunt, and ad quas cuncta formantur.
Hae immortales, immutabiles, inviolabiles sunt. Quid sit Idea, id est, quid
Platoni esse videatur, audi. Idea est eoru^ quae natura fiu^t exemplar
ae^ernum. Sword^. ep. ^8. Plato in Timaeo ait Ideas nunquam fieri, semper esse:
corporea autem omnia nunquam esse, semper fieri. Vide Cusan. Dialog. de Genesi,
quomodo idem, identificando, pluralitatem producit.
Plato meant there were as many several Idaea's eternally extant, whether in
the first cause of things, or without Him, as there were substances
specifically distinct one from another; his opinion may neither be followed,
nor approved by any Christian. In all these, Divine Excellency, as one face in
many glasses of different frame, is diversely represented, being in it self
more truly one than any other entity, that is termed one, or then any bond of
union between things united. Of natures extant, some, to our capacity,
represent Him better, some worse; not the meanest or basest, but is in some
sort like Him; not the most excellent creature that is, not all the
excellencies of all, can so fully represent his nature, as an Apes shadow does
a Man's body. But what in other cases would seem most strange, infinite variety
best sets forth the admirable excellency of his indivisible unity.

3 Touching the question proposed, Whether he were one excellency or all
excellencies? whether he were one perfection, or all perfections, Respondent
ultima primis. The answer is in a manner given in the beginning of this
Discourse. Though he that says God is all perfections, excepts none, yet he
includes only perfections numerable and participated: And to say He were only
one perfection, implies only perfection limited, and therefore perfection
borrowed, not independent. Or admitting there be a mean between all, or some
perfections, and one perfection, which may fitly be expressed by all
perfection: yet he that should thus say [God is the universal unity or
totality of perfection] had need to distinguish acurately of universality and
totality, and define Universal ante rem* more exquisitely than the Platonickes
do; that he may acquit his meaning, from suspicion of such totality, or
universality, as arises not only by aggregation of parts, but whose extent is
no more than equal to all its parts. For every other universal or whole, is
fully equalized by all the parts taken together; whereas the Divine Nature
infinitely exceeds all particular natures or perfections possible, though in
number they could be infinite. It is then (if any man list so to speak) such a
totality or universality, as cannot be augmented, much less made up by
multiplication of any other perfection, though prosecuted in infinitum; neither
diminishable or exhaustible by multiplicity or division of particulars derived
from it. But whether we consider this His infinite Essence in it self, or, as
it eminently contains all things possible; the incomprehensibility of it is in
both respects more fully intimated (expressed it cannot be) by indefinite forms
of speech; than by addition of any definite terms, whether of singularity,
universality, or totality. He speaks more fully and more safely, that says,
God is being it self, or perfection it self; than he that says, he is the
only being, or all being, the only perfection, or all perfection, the
totality of being and of perfection. So all plurality be excluded, we express
his being and perfection best, by leaving them, as they truly are, without all
quantity.

4 That all plurality, not only of Idaeall perfections answering to the
natures of things numerable or created, but of internal perfections, whose
different titles necessarily breed plurality of conceits in us; must be
excluded from the true, orthodoxall intellectual apprehension of the illimited
Essence, may from the former maine principle be thus evinced. In that He is
without beginning, without end, without all cause of being, without dependence;
we cannot imagine, or at least our understanding must correct our imaginations,
if they shall suggest, his power to be as the stem, wisdom, goodness, and
other like atributes, as branches growing from his being or essence, as from
the Root. For if his Being or Essence be absolutely independent, it is
absolutely illimited; and being such, what could limit or restrain it from
being life, from being power, from being wisdom, from being goodness, from
being infinitely, whatsoever any thing that has being is? Deus vero
multipliciter dicitur, magnus, bonus, sapiens, ^eatus, verus, and quicquid
aliud non indigne Dei videtur. Sed eadem magnitudo ejus est, quae sapientia:
non enim mole magnus est, sed virtute. Et eadem bonitas quae sapientia, and
magnitudo, and eadem veritas, quae illa omnia. Et non est ibi aliud beatum
esse, and aliud magnum, aut sapientem, aut verum, aut bonum esse, aut omnino
ipsum esse. Nec quoniam Trinitas est, ideo triplex putandus est: al^oqui minor
erit, Pater solus, aut Filius s^lus, quam simul Pater and Filius* August. de
Trinitate lib. 6. cap. 7.
He that affirms any of these attributes to be what another is not, or divine
Essence not to be identically what all those are, must grant as well the
Attributes, as the Essence to be finite and limited. If power in God have a
being distinct from wisdom, and wisdom another being distinct from
goodness, one must needs want so much of infinite being, as another has of
proper being distinct from it, and, at the best, they can be but infinite
secundum quid, or in their rank. Again if any of them be, what Essence
identically is not; Essence cannot be infinite, because wisdom, power and
being have their several beings distinct from it. And the nearer these come
(whether severally or jointly considered) to the nature of true infinity, the
more naked and impotent they leave their mother-Essence, if we once grant
Essence and them to be distinct, as Parents and children, or as root and
branch, or to what use should powerless Essence serve? to support these
branches of infinity? this it could not do without infinite power. And those
branches, if they need a root or supportance, their being must needs be
dependent, and therefore limited.

5 From the former definition of absolute infinity, [Infinitum est extra quod
nihil est] We may conclude, that unless all power, unless all wisdom,
unless all goodness, unless all that truly is, or can possibly be supposed
to have true being, be identically contained in Gods Essence; He could not be
absolutely infinite or illimited in being. Whatsoever is incapable of limit, is
incapable of division or numericall difference: For wheresoever it can be truly
said, This is one, and that another, or This is, and is not That, each has
distinct limits. But seeing our imagination or fantasy is divisible, and our
purest intellectual conceits of infinity, but finite; we cannot think of God
as infinite in power, infinite in wisdom and in Essence; but we must frame a
conceit of power distinct from our conceit of Essence, and a conceit of
wisdom distinct from both. And this plurality of conceits in us, usually
brings forth a conceit of plurality betwixt his Essence, and his Attributes;
unless our understandings be vigilant and attentive to correct our fantasies,
by this following, and the like known Philosophical truth. As we cannot
contemplate incorporeal substances without imagination of some corporeal
form, and yet the understanding constantly denies them to be like their
pictures presented to it by the fantasy, or to have any such corporeal form
as it does paint them in: so in this case, notwithstanding the plurality of our
imperfect conceits, or multiplicity of perfections imagined by us, in our
contemplations of the Godhead; we must steadfastly believe, and acknowledge,
that He infinitely is, what all these several representations intimate: not by
composition, or mixture of perfections severally infinite, but by indivisible
unity of independent and illimited Being. And as it is a maxim most infallible
in natural philosophy [Vis unita fortior] Force, otherwise the same, is
always greater united, than being scattered or diffused: so is the
metaphysicall extract of it, more eminently true in Divinity. The indivisible
unity of illimited being or perfection, is, in every respect imaginable, more
excellent and sovereign than all infinite perfections, by imagination possibly
could be, so they were, though never so strictly, but united. From this
fundamental truth of Gods absolute infinity by indivisible unity, we may
infer, He is powerful above all conceit of infinite power, rooted in the
same Essence with infinite wisdom, and partaker of all her fruits, but not
identically the same with her. Wise He is, beyond all conceit of infinite
wisdom, though sworn confederate with infinite power, or linked with it, or
with other perfectio^s, in any other bond, but not in absolute identitie. Good
likewise He is above all possible conceit of infinite goodness, though
indissol^bly matched with all other perfections that can be conceived, unless
they be conceived (as we must believe in Him they are) different only in name
or man's conceit, but indivisibly agreeing with it in the internal unity and
identity of nature and Essence. Lastly, the immensity of his Majesty, and
infinity of duration, common to his Essence and all his Attributes, infinitely
exceed all conceit of infinite succession or extension, whose parts cannot be
actually and indivisibly the same, one with another, or with the whole.

This is the bottomless and boundless Ocean of admiration, wherein
contemplative wits may bathe themselves with great delight, but whereinto they
cannot dive, without great danger; That the totality of every conceiveable
excellency and perfection, should be contained, after a manner far more
excellent in unity indivisible, then if their natures, which they hold thus in
common, were laid out in several, without any bounds prescribed, besides
infinities proper to each kind.

6 But seeing our imaginations have a more sensible apprehension of greatness,
expressed under the notion of totality or divisible infinity, then under the
conceit of indivisible unity; and seeing every whole, seems much greater,
when it is resolved into parts, (as a mile by land, whose several quarters or
less portions, are distinctly represented to our eyes, seems much longer than
two miles by water, whose level surface affords no distinct representation of
parts, or diversity of aspect) it will be very behoovefull to unfold some
principal branches of being or perfection, whose infinity or totality is
eminently contained in the unity of infinite Being. For being thus sorted by
imagination into their several ranks, like so many numbers in a table ready
for addition, the understanding may with admiration guess at the product, like
an Arithmetician, which had gone so far in Geometrical progression, that he
could not number the last and complete sum; yet acknowledges that the
progress in nature, can admit no end or limit. Or though we could thus proceed
by addition or multiplication of perfections in infinitum, we were still to
allow the understanding to use the improovement of the former rule, Vis unita
fortior: Or to admit the Platonickes conceit, concerning the masculine force
of unity in respect of pluralities effeminate weakness, to be in this point
more Orthodoxall than in any.

SECTION II.
Of the several branches of absolute infinity; or of the infinity of the
Divine Attributes, as they are severally apprehended by us.
CHAP. 5.
Of Divine Immensity, or of that branch of absolute infinity, whereof infinity
in magnitude, or space imaginary is the shadow.
ORder of nature leads us first to explicate two branches of perfection
infinite, 1
that answer unto a kind of infinity, so frequent and obvious to our thoughts,
that our imaginations will hardly suffer it to be severed from those subjects,
which our understandings by light of reason may, and by the eye of faith, must
confess to be finite, to wit, time and place. The cause of this difficulty
in abstraction, was signified In the 5. Book. Section 2.
before to be this. No event there is observed by sense, but is husked in the
circumstance of place and time, whence it is, that these two accompany many
Phantasmes, after they be winnowed from all the rest, into the closet of the
understa^ding. The conceit of mathematical or metaphysicall space, is so
naturally annexed to our imagination of time and place physical; that albeit
reason, as well as Scripture demonstrate the world to be, for Physical
magnitude, finite; yet our fantasies cannot be curbed from running into
imaginary local distance, beyond the utmost surface of this goodly visible
work of God, yea beyond the heaven of heavens. The Philosopher, which thought
all place or local distance to be contained within the utmost sphere, it
being contained in nothing else (for extra coelum nihil est, was his saying)
might in congruity have granted, a like termination, or circumscription of
succession or time; unto which notwithstanding our imaginations will not easily
subscribe. For though our understanding often refute their error, which deny the
beginning of Time; yet our senses still nurse an imaginary successive duration
much longer before the creation of this visible world, than the continuation of
it has been. And (which is much to be admired) some Schoole-braines have
been so puzzled in passing this unsoundable gulf, as to suspect that God,
which is now in every place of the world created by Him, was as truly in these
imaginary distances of place and time, before the creation was attempted. Thus
have they made place commensurable to his immensitie, and succession, or time
coequall to his eternity. But what could they answer us, if we should demand,
whether this duration, or local distance, wherein they imagine God to have
been before the Creation, were created by Him, or not? whether they were truly
something, or merely nothing? If they held them to be merely nothing, they
should have told us, that they had a real imagination of an infinite space,
which really was not: and therefore could not be truly termed imaginary
space before the world was created. For it is one thing to imagine an infinite
space, and another to avouch there was an infinite imaginary space before they
could have any imagination of it. He that made the world and all that is in
it, is not much beholding to those men, for building him an infinite Castle,
not in the Air (which had no being before the Creation) but in that which
neither the^ was, nor since has had any being, save only in the vanishing
imaginations of men which have perished. For if this imaginary space were any
more tha^ a mere imagination, it was surely created by God. Had then this
imaginary space another space or distance-locall, or this imaginary time or
successive duration, another duration, wherein to be produced? or do they make
this imaginary time or place fully commensurable to eternity or immensity? If
God from eternity had been in any other infinity besides himself, he could
not be said to be incomprehensible. By this imaginary space no realty can be
truly meant besides God himself, whom the Axioma hic proponit R. David. Tu
reples omnem locum, and comprehendis, and nullo loco comprehenderis, nec ullus
te locus complecti, and contineri potest. Hinc Haebraei etia^ Deum indigitant
vocabulo (...) locum, quum dicunt, Benedictus locus (...) Cujus appellationis
R. Elias in Tisbite adfert auplice^ rationem. Quia Deus instar loci omnia com
plectitur, ip se autem a nullo comprehenditur. Qui aute^ hodie contendant Deu^
esse corpus coelo inclusum, minus recte sentiunt, quam Iudaeorum Rabbini.
Dolendum est ista contraria errata hodie defendi. Quida^ disputant et asserunt
corpus Christi esse utique: et tamen negant esse spiritum praesertim immensum
and infinitum. Alij negantes Deum esse spiritum simplicem, faciunt corporeum,
and loco circumser^^^nt* C^ppen in Psalm 139. ver. 7^ Quo ibo a spiritu tuo.
Hebrews enstyle by the name of place; to wit, infinite.

2 But what shall we answer unto these or the like captious demands of the
Atheist: If the world, if time, if place, which now are, had not been from
everlasting? where was your God when these were not, some where, or no where?
If no where, He and Nothing might be fellow residents. In respect of eternity
or immensity, no creature, no positive essence, no numerable part of this
Universe is so like unto Him, as this negation of all things, which we describe
by the name of Nothing. It has no beginning or end of days. Nothing or the
negation of all things, as it is the object of our positive conceit, is more
like unto Him than any one thing, in that no distinct or proper place of
residence can be assigned to nothing, or to the negation of all things: Yet
most unlike him, in that it is truly and absolutely no where, not in it self.
Non entis, non est actio, non est qualitas, non conditio, That which is not can
have no capacity to accept any condition of being, it can have no right or
title to be termed it self. We may truly say some objective conceits are
nothing: but we cannot rightly conceive, that nothing should have any degree or
kind of being; and want of being is the worst kind of barrenness that can be
imagined. We cannot imagine it should bring forth any degree or rank of being.
It cannot be mother to that which possibly may be; it cannot be nurse to that
which is. But of God we cannot absolutely say, He was no where, before the
world was made; we must use this limitation [Hee was no where save in
Himself:] But such and so in Himself, that He was more than all things,
longer than time, greater than place, more infinite than capacity it self,
incapable of circumscription or commensurability, able to limit time and place,
(or whatsoever we conceive to be by succession or addition infinite,) by his
essential presence, or coexistence more than penetrative; being so in both, in
all things that are, as nothing possibly could have beginning, or continuance
of being, unless He were in them, as the center of their supportance; yet so
as they cannot environ or encompasse him. The absolute infinity of his being
includes an absolute impossibility of his being only in things, that are, or
may be, though by his power those may be in number, by succession, infinite.

3 Had the evaporations of proud phantasticke melancholy, eclipsed the luster
of his glorious presence, in that late prodigious Questionists brain, which
would bring us out of the sunshine of the Gospel into old Egyptian
darkness: For as some well conjecture, this error of enclosing God in the
heavens, and excluding his essential presence from this inferior world, was
first brought forth in Egypt, but so ill taken, as it could not be propagated
to many nations; entertained by few Philosophers of better sort, Aristotle or
the Author of the Book de mundo ad Alexandrum, excepted; from whose opinion
Verstius did herein dissent, that he held God to be everywhere by his power,
and immediate providence: His error notwithstanding, is exceeding gross and
unsufferable, in that he makes his infinite power, wisdom, and goodness, in
whose sweet harmony Divine Providence especially consists, but as Agents or
Ambassadors to his infinite Majesty: as if his infinite Majesty only were full
compere to his Essence, unfitting to be employed abroad, or to keep residence
any where, save in the Court of Heaven. Or if his power and wisdom be joint
assessors with his Essence in the heavens, and yet reach withal unto the
earth, unto every thing within this Canopy, which is spread betwixt us and his
glorious presence: His power, his wisdom, etc. may in some sort be held more
infinite than his Essence, as being in many places where it is not. But for God
to be everywhere here on earth, or in the region under the earth, by his
wisdom, by his power, or by his goodness, is perhaps in his language no
more, than that the effects of these Attributes are every where, that all
things as well in earth as in heaven, are essentially subject to that eternal
Law, which he has appointed them; that every creature does as constantly
fulfill his will, and obey his power, in his absence, as if it were penetrated
by his presence; that the eye of his knowledge pierces every corner of the
world, and sees the secrets of men's hearts, as clearly, as if it were resident
in their centers. And in part, unto this purpose, some great Schoolmen
distinguish the manner of Gods being in all things, by his essence, by his
power, by his presence. Let us take it as possible to supposition or
imagination, (what by the habit of Christian faith, we are fully persuaded to
be in it self impossible) what by light of reason might be demonstrated to
imply a manifest contradiction to any well-setled understanding, viz. [That
infinite Essence or Being it self should not be everywhere essentially
present, or that infinite power should not be able to reach every possible
effect:] yet should al things that are, be present to him, whose name, whose
best description is [I am.] Nothing could be done or said without his presence,
that is, without his perfect notice. And in this sense perhaps it has been
rightly avouched by some good Authors, whose meaning has been much mistaken,
or wilfully perverted by others, That all things as well future as past, are
alike present to Him, who was every where (before there was any distinction of
times;) because nothing can be said or done, without his perfect knowledge or
just notice. Nothing can be begun, continued, or finished, without his express
warrant or intuitive permission. He has a vigilant eye over all things that
are, or possibly can be. Or taking it again as not impossible to imagination,
that divine knowledge were not so truly infinite as we believe it is; yet
admitting his power to be truly infinite, nothing could be done, said, or
intended, without its concourse, operation, or assistance. So that he might be
everywhere by his infinite power, albeit his knowledge were not infinite; or
everywhere by his infinite knowledge, albeit his power were but finite. But by
the infallible consequence of these indemonstrable principles, it will
necessarily follow, That his Essence, being as was showed before, truly
infinite, nor world, nor time, nor place, nor power, nor wisdom, nor any
thing possible can be where it is not, it must needs be, where any thing is, or
possibly may be. He is in every center of bodily or material substances, in
every point imaginable of this visible Universe, as an essential root, whence
all and every part of what is besides him spring, without waste or diffusion of
his substance, without nutriment or sustentation from any other root or
element. The conservation of immaterial or illocall substances, is from the
benefit of his essential presence. Materials are daily made and renewed by
the transient efficacy of his creative power.

4 Do we make these collections only, or does not the Scripture teach this
Philosophy also? Am I a God at hand, says the Lord, and not a God far off?
Ier. 23. 23. Nothing is, nothing can be without the reach of his power, his
omnipotency cannot be confined within the places that are: for his hand has
made them all, not as Prisons to enclose his Essence, not as manicles to hinder
the exercise of his mighty arm. Can any hide himself in secret places, that
I shall not see him? says the Lord, Ibid. verse. 24. This is a formal demand
of our assent unto the infinity of his knowledge. These are two special, but
not the only ways of his being every where, which the Scripture teaches: for
there follows a third, which after the manner of our understanding, is the
root or foundation of all the rest; that indeed, from which the two former
branches are most necessarily inferred, Do not I fill heaven and earth? says
the Lord. Does He fill heaven and earth by his power, or by his knowledge
only? Nay, but most properly and in the first place by his essential
presence. For his Essence is infinitely powerful, infinitely wise.

His filling the earth as well as heaven, by his essential presence, cannot be
denied but from one of these two reasons following.

Either, That his Essence is altogether incapable of intimate coexistence, with
such gross and base creatures, as the parts of this inferior world:

Or else, Because it is his will, to abstract or withhold his essential
presence from them.

To affirm the former part, to wit, That his nature is incapable of intimate
coexistence with any nature created by Him, is to deny his omnipotency; as all,
by necessary consequence, do, which grant not the immensity of his Essence.
For what can withstand or withdraw his Essence from piercing the earth, as well
as heaven? Not the hardness of it, not the loathsomeness of the vile bodies
contained in it. If either of these qualitites, or ought besides, could deny
the admission of his essential presence, he were not omnipotent, because not
able to place his Essence in that local space, in which, were it filled with
more subtle or more glorious bodies, it might as well reside, as in the
heavens. Suppose he should (as no doubt he is able) annihilate the earth, and
create a new heaven in the space wherein it now is, or demolish his present
heavenly seat, or turn it into a baser mass then this earth is; were it not
possible for him to be in this new heaven by his essential presence, or
should he be neither in it, nor in the new earth? If he could not be here, he
were in this respect more impotent than the Angels, who can change their
mansions when they mislike them.

5 Shall we then take the latter part of the former division, and say, It is
his will and pleasure to withdraw his Essence from this lower room of his own
Edifice, whiles it remains so ill garnished, as now it is? If he have made
heaven his habitation by choice, not by necessity of his immensity, with which
all places, as we contend, must necessarily be filled; he might relinquish it
by the like free choice of some other mansion, which he could make for himself
as pleasant and beautiful: yea, He might by the like freedom of will, come
and dwell with us here on earth. So that in conclusion, he which admits Gods
will to be free, but denies the absolute immensity of his Essence, makes him
capable of local motion or migration from place to place. And such motion
necessarily includes mutability, which is altogether incompatible with
infinity. Reason grounded on Scripture, will warrant us to conclude from the
former principle, that he which has no cause of being, can have no limits of
being, no bounds beyond which it cannot be. Essence or being illimited cannot
possibly be distinguished by severalties of internal perfections, though
united: much less can it be distinguished or limited by any place, whether
real or imaginary. In that he is the authorlesse Author of all being, it is
altogether as impossible for Him not to be in every thing that is, as it is
for any thing to be without Him. The indivisible unity of his infinite Essence
is the center and supporter of all things, the conservation of place, and that
which holds things divisible from resolving into nothing.

6 Dominus ipse est Deus in coelo sursum and in terra deorsum: The Lord (says
Moses) he is God in heaven above, and in the earth below, Deuteronomy. 4. 39. yet
says Solomon, 1 King. 8. 27. Behold the heavens, and the heavens of heavens
are not able to contain thee. May we say then, He is as truly without the
heavens, as he is in them? or that he is where nothing is with Him? surely, he
was when nothing was, and then he was where nothing was besides himself. Or
peradventure before the creation of all things numerable, there neither was
when nor where, but only an incomprehensible perfection of indivisible
immensity and eternity; which would still be the same, though neither heaven
nor earth, nor any thing in them should any more be. We may not so place him
without the heavens, as to cloth him with any imaginary space, or give the
check to his immensity by any parallel distance local. But he is said to be
without the heavens, in as much as his infinite Essence cannot be contained in
them, but necessarily contains them. He is so without them, or if you will,
beyond them, that albeit a thousand more Worlds were stowed by His powerful
hand each above other, and all above this; He should by virtue of His infinite
Essence, not by free choice of will, or mutation of place, be as intimately
coexistent to every part of them, as He now is to any part of this Heaven and
Earth which we see. This attribute of Divine immensitie was acknowledged, and
excellently expressed by many of the Ancient Philosophers, but most pithily by
some of the Ancient Fathers. Before all things, says Ante omnia enim Deus erat
solus, ipse sibi and mundus and locus, and omnia. Solus autem, quia nihil aliud
extrinsecus praeter illum. Caeterum ne tunc quidem solus: habebat enim secum
quam habebat in semetipso, rationem sua^ scilicet. Tertul. adversus Praxean.
cap. 5.
Tertullian, God was alone, and he was to himself, world, place, and all
things. The manner of his coexistence with the world, De confusione linguarum.
Philo the Jew well expressed: God fills all things, yet is contained in
none, containing all. The vicinity of His Essence preserves their Essences
more truly than the symbolizing qualities of their natural places do. And
even this efficacy of symbolizing or preserving qualities, flows as
immediately from his essential presence, as the passive aptitude of bodies
preserved by them, does. The more the places are through which bodies natural
swiftly move, the less properly they are in them. In analogy to this condition
of natural bodies, the more capable man is of all knowledge, the more liable
his capacity is to distraction, as consisting rather in united perfections,
than in firm and indivisible unity of perfection. And therefore it is often
said of most pregnant wits, qui ubique est, nusquam est, He that is every
where, is no where. Or he that ingageth himself to all courses of life, goes
through with none. But of God, who is perfection it self, not by aggregation,
but by absolute unity of Essence; that of Saint Bernard is most admirably
verified, Nusquam est, and ^bique est, He is no where, because no place
whether real or imaginary can comprehend or contain him: He is every where,
because no body, no space, or spiritual substance can exclude his presence, or
avoid the penetration of his Essence. But Saint Gregory's Character of Gods
ubiquitary presence and immensity, is more lively and full. Deus est intra
omnia non inclusus, extra omnia non exclusus, supra omnia non elatus; God is
within all things, yet not shut up, or enclosed in them; he is without all
things, yet not excluded from them; he is above all things, yet not elevated
or exalted by them; he is below all things, yet not burdened or depressed by
them. Greg. in Psalm. 139.

7 Anselmus notwithstanding (had not long custom or general consent
prescribed too strongly against him) would have reformed this kind of speech,
Deus est in omni loco, God is in every place, by changing one particle, Deus
est cum omni loco, God is with every place. This Criticisme of his, though well
approved by some good writers; whilst they dispute against such as say God was
every where, before any place was, yet (in my opinion) the use of it, were it
as common as the other, which he sought by this to correct, would co^ceale much
matter of admiration, (which the description of immensity used by Saint Bernard
and others promptly suggests) if not occasion or suggest an erroneous
imagination of coextension in the Divine Essence. The bodies which are
contained in places, are truly said to be with the places which contain them,
and the places with them; and we may distributively aver, that every body is
with every place, and every bodily substance is with its mathematical
dimen^ions, in the same place with it. But so to be in every place, in every
least part of every body, as not to be contained in any or all of them, though
we should multiply them in infinitu^, does exclude all conceit or coextension
with the^, and much better notify the indivisible unity of Gods immensity,
and the inco^prehensiblenes of his essential presence, than if we should say
he were with every place. But as no Characters of the incomprehensible Essences
ubiquitary presence do so well befit it, as these that intimate more to our
cogitations than we can in words express: So of this kind I have found none,
from which I have received so full instruction, or reaped the like fruits of
admiration, as from that of Trismegist, Deus est sphaera, cujus Centrum est
ubique, cujus peripheria nusquam, God is a sphere, whose Center is everywhere,
whose circumference is no where. Not the least particle of this universal
Globe or sphere, but is supported by the indivisible unity of his Essence, as
by an internal Center. And yet neither the utmost circumference of this
visible world, nor any circumference conceiveable, can so circumscribe or
comprehend his essential presence, that it might be said, thus far it
reaches and no further. For albeit he would crown the convexity of these
Heavens with others, so much higher and more spacious, than these Heavens, as
these are than the Earth, and continue this course unto the worlds end: yet all
should be comprehended in his Essence; it could not be comprehended in any.
Their circumference should still be somewhere, whereas his Essence, though
still enlarging (by this supposed daily exercise of his power) the bounds of
its actual coexistence with these new creatures, is in it self altogether
boundless. Omnipotency it self, cannot pitch a circumference to it, because
nothing can be, but it must be in it, which only truly is, and cannot be
contained in any thing imaginable. In that all things are contained in him, he
is rightly resembled by a sphere, which is of al figures the most capacious. In
that all things cannot comprehend him, He is rightly resembled by a sphere
whose circumference is no where.

8 Two points notwithstanding in the former resemblance seem difficult to men's
conceits; but more difficult it is fully to express what may rightly be
conceived concerning them. The former difficulty is, how a Center should be
conceived to be every where: The second, how the indivisibility of Gods
presence in every place, should be compared unto a Center. To the former it
may be said, That as the divine Essence by reason of its absolute infinity,
has an absolute necessity of coexistence with space or magnitude infinite: so
were it possible there should be (as some Divines hold it possible there may
be) a magnitude or material sphere actually infinite; this magnitude could
have no set point for its Center, but of every point designable in it, we
might avouch this is the Center as well as that. Every point should have the
negative properties of a sphericall Center; there could be no inequality
between the distances of several points from the circumference of that which
is infinite, and has no bounds of magnitude. To the second difficulty it may
be said, The manner of divine presence or coexistence to every place or
parcel of bodies visible, is rightly compared unto a Center, in that it has
no diversity of parts, but is indivisibly present to all and every part of
things divisible. His presence again is herein like to magnitude actually
infinite, in that it can have no circumference. But whether the divine Essence
may have as perfect actual coexistence to every point or Center, as it has to
every least portion of magnitudes divisible, cannot so clearly be inferred
from the indivisibility of divine immensity, because the indivisibility of
Centers or points, and of spiritual substances are Heterogeneall, and
Heterogenealls are oft-times assymmetrall, that is, not exactly commensurable.
Hence the most subtle Schoolmen or metaphysicall Divines, as well ancient as
modern, resolve it as a point irresoluble by humane wit, whether a
mathematical point or Center can be the complete and definitive place of an
Angel, albeit they hold the Angelical natures to be as truly indivisible,
as points or Centers are. But it is one thing for an immateriall or spiritual
Essence to have true coexistence with every Center, another to be confined to a
Center, or to have a definitive place or coexistence in it. And whatsoever may
be thought of Angels; of the Divine Essence we may say, that he is as
properly in every Center as in every place, seting we acknowledge Him to be
alike incomprehensibly and indivisibly in both. The manner of his
indivisibility we conceive by his coexistence to a Center. His
incomprehensiblenesse, by his coexistence to all spaces or places imaginable,
without coextension to any, without comprehension in all. We may in no case
imagine, that there is more of God, or that God is more fully in a great space
than in a little; in the whole world, than in a man or little world. For this
once granted, an Asses head should participate the essential presence of the
Deity in greater measure than a man's heart does. But in what respects God is
said to be more specially present in one place than in another, or to be
present with some, and absent from others: hereafter.

9 The absolute perfection of this Attribute, in whose right apprehension or
conceit many other divine perfections, according to our manner of conceiving
them, are as it were couched or lodged, may best be gathered by opposition to
the imperfections of bodies or material magnitudes. A body though of
Homogeneall nature, suppose a Pole or stone fixed in the earth, environed above
with water and the air, can have no coexistence with these diverse bodies,
otherwise than according to the diversity of its own parts: that part of it
which has coexistence with the air, can have no coexistence with the earth or
water. Far otherwise it is in God, whose absolute infinity in that it is not
composed of parts, but consists in perfect unity, cannot be coexistent to any
place after any other manner than He is coexistent to all, that is, by
indivisible unity or identity, Wheresoever He is (and He is every where,) He
is unity it self, infinity it self, immensity it self, perfection it self,
power it self. All these branches of quantity, in which we seek to ingrasse so
many sorts of infinities, thereby to express or resemble His incomprehensible
nature, do flow from participation of his infinite presence. Unless He were
infinity or immensity it self, there could be no magnitude, no measure
quantitative, by whose multiplication we could in any sort gather or guess
what immensitie or infinity meant. That imaginary infinity which we conceive
by succession or composition of parts (for their several extensions finite,
though in number infinite) is but a transient raye or beam of that actual and
stable infiniteness, which He possesses in perfect unity, without any
imaginary diversity of parts united. Had his immensity any diversity of parts,
there should be more power in many parts, than in one, or few: unto the full
exercise of his whole power or force, there should be a concurrence of all
parts required: and this concurrence of parts in number infinite, would perhaps
be impossible. Infinitum transire non potest. At the least, were divine power
so lodged in divine immensitie, as strength or power is in our bodily
faculties, it could not be so omnipotent, as we believe it is. Our strength or
force is always increased by unition or co^traction of several parts; His
power can receive no increase seeing his immensity excludes al division, and
does not so properly include, but rather properly is, Unity it self.

10 The Prophets and other holy men in their patheticall expressions sometime
speak of God as far absent, because his powerful presence is not manifested
in such sort as they could wish. Oh that thou would rend the Heavens (says
the Prophet Esa. c. 64. 1.) that thou would come down, that the mountains
might flow down at thy presence: As when the melting fire burns, the fire
causes the waters to boil: to make thy name known to thine adversaries, that
the Nations may tremble at thy presence. When thou did terrible things
which we looked not for, thou came down, the mountains flowed down at thy
presence. But to indoctrinate us, that this description of his powerful
presence did include no dogmaticall assertion of his local descent, no denial
of his being everywhere, or filling every place by his essential presence: the
same Prophet elsewhere pictures out his immensity to us under the shape of a
Giant able to squeze the whole Globe of Heaven, Earth and waters; Who has
measured the waters in the hollow of his hand? and meted out heaven with his
span, and comprehended the dust of the earth in his three fingers (after such a
manner as men take up dust or sand) and weighed the mountains in scales, and
the hills in a balance? Esaias 40. 12. Behold the Nations are as a drop of a
Bucket, and are counted as the small dust of the Balance. Behold, he takes up
the Isles as a very little thing. All Nations before him are as nothing, and
they are accounted to him less than nothing and vanity, verse. 15. 17. Thus he
linketh his essential presence with his power and knowledge. Why say thou O
Jacob, and speak O Israel; My way is hid from the Lord, and my Judgment is
passed over from my God? Have thou not known? have thou not heard, that the
everlasting God, the Lord, the Creator of the ends of the Earth faints not,
neither is weary? there is no searching of his understanding. verse. 27, 28.
Yet Job in his anguish had almost said as Jacob did; O that I knew where I
might find him! that I might come even to his seat! I would know the words
which he would answer me and understand what he would say unto me. Behold, I go
forward but he is not there, and backward but I cannot perceive him: On the
left hand where he does work, but I cannot behold him: he hides himself on
the right hand, that I cannot see him. Job 23. 3, 5, 8, 9. But though he might
hide himself from Job, yet could not Job hide himself or his ways from him:
for so he confesses in the next words, He knows the way which I take, verse.
10. Whither shall I go (says the Psalmist) from thy Spirit? or whither shall
I fly from thy presence? If I ascend up into Heaven, thou art there: if I make
my bed in Hell, behold thou art there. If I take the wings of the morning and
dwell in the uttermost parts of the Sea; even there shall thy hand lead me, and
thy right hand shall hold me, etc. Psalm. 139. verse. 7, 8, 9, 10. Thou have
possessed my reins; thou have covered me in my mothers womb. These and the like
strains of other godly men, argue a sympathy of Gods essential presence, not
only invironing their bodies, but penetrating their souls, and diffused
through their hearts. His coexistence with all, his essential presence or
inhabitation in all, is the same, although the worldly minded take no notice of
it. And when it is said, that he beholds or knows the ungodly afar off,
this language fitly expresses their conceit of him, and of his essence. They
consider not, that he is always near unto them, always about them, always
within them, but in heaven only, whither their thoughts seldom ascend. And
according to their misconceit of him, so it happens to them, they imagine him
to be far distant from them, and his help and succor in their distress
comes slowly to them, as if it had too far to go.

CHAP. 6.
Of Eternity, or of that branch of absolute infinity, whereof successive
duration or the imaginary infinity of time, is the model.
1 WHatsoever has been, or rightly may be conceived of divine immensity, will
in proportion as well suit unto eternity. And unto this Divine Attribute is
that of Tertullian as applyable: [Ante omnia Deus erat solus, and erat sibi
tempus, mundus, and omnia:] Before all things were, God was, and he was unto
himself time, the world, and all things else. We cannot properly say, He was
in time before he made the world. For as Saint Augustine acutely collects, if
he which always is, and was, and is to come, had always been in time; he
could not have been before all times, nor could he be, as we believe he is, as
truly before all times future, as before all times past. His eternity then, is
the inexhaustible fountain or infinite Ocean, from which time or duration
successive (in what finite substances soever they be seated,) with all their
several branches or appurtenances, do perpetually flow; and unto eternity,
they have if not the same proportion, yet the same references, the same
dependances on it, which finite and created magnitudes have to Divine
immensity. Vide Tertul. in Apologet. cap. 48*
As there was from all eternity a possibility for us to be before we were; so
our actual being or existence, whilst it lasts, is composed of a capacity
to be what we are, and of the actuation or filling of this capacity. Life
(sensitive especially) is but the motion or progress of this capacity toward
that which fills it, or as it were a continual sucking in of present
existence, or continuation of actual being, from somewhat praeexistent.
Unless the vegetables, by which our life is continued, had existence before
they become our nutriment, they could not possibly nourish us, or continue us
in that estate of being which we have. Nor could these Vegetables themselves
exist, unless they did draw their existence or continuation of their being,
from that which did every way exist before them; and unto which they do by
motion or continuation of their being approach. So that future times, and all
things contained in time it self, presuppose a fountain of life, as truly
praeexistent to their future terminations or motions, as it was to their
beginnings. That description of time [tempus edax rerum,] as if it were the
devourer of all things which are subject to alteration, did relish more of
poetical wit, than of any metaphysicall truth. For if time did devour al
things which are brought forth in time, what is it that could possibly nourish
them, or continue their being from their beginning to their end? whilst the
time appointed for them lasts, they cannot possibly be consumed or perish.
Nothing there is that does or can desire its own destruction, nor long after
the presence or fruition of that, which does devour or destroy it. All things
naturally desire the continuation of such being, as they have; which
notwithstanding things temporal cannot have, but from the continuation or
fruition of time. Time then it is not, but their own motions or endeavors to
enjoy or entertain time approaching, which does waste or consume things
temporal. We naturally seek to catch time, and it is the nature of time,
though continually caught, not to be held by us. This nimblenesse of time, is
so like unto the swift progress of motion, that some acknowledge no difference
at all between them. Whereas in true Philosophy, the length of time passing by
us, is only notified by motion. Motion in true observation goes one way, and
drives time another, as the stream which runs Eastward, turns the Wheel
Westward. Our actual being or existence slides from us with time, and our
capacity of being, continuing still the same, runs on still, being always
internally moved with desire of actuation or replenishment. And this
replenishment cannot otherwise be gotten, than by gaining a new coexistence
with time approaching, whose office, designed by Eternity, it is to repair the
ruins which motions present or past have wrought in our corruptible
substances. The best of our life, the very being of things generable (as A
rebus generalibus si abstuleris ipsum erit; cum in perpetua acquisitione
versentur, subito non esse contingit. Rebus autem, quae non sunt tale, si ipsum
erit adjunxeris, accidit a se^e ipsius esse labi. Manifestum enim ex hoc
fuerit, ipsum esse non esse illis innatum, si fiat ex eo quod futurum sit, and
factum fuerit, and sit in posterum faciendum. Videtur enim in rebus generabi
libus id potissimum eisentia esse, scilicet tractus quidam ab ipso esse ex
generationis initio, quousque ad temporis extrema perveniat, quando non sit
ulterius, idque ipsum quod dicitur, est in eis existete, ac si quis quicqua^ ex
hoc ductu circumcidat, vita comminui. Qua propter and esse diminui, and
universo quide^ esse eiusmodi oportet, quousque sic erit. Quam^^rem ad ipsum
esse futurum natura festinat, neque vult qui^scere, quippe cum esse sibi
hauriat dum ali^d quiddam atque aliud agit, moveturque in orbem quodam essentia
desiderio. Plot. Emead. 3. page 328.
Plotinus excellently observes) is but as a continual draught or receipt of
being from the inexhaustible fountain of life. Nature, says he, (meaning the
nature of things generable) hastens unto that being which is to come, nor can
it rest, seeing it draws or suckes in that being which it has by doing now
this and now that, being moved as it were in a circle with desire of Essence or
of Being what it is. Nor are we men, or any creatures (specially generable)
permitted to draw or suck so much of our proper being from the fountain of
Eternity, at once, or in any one point of time, as we list. We have our
portions of life or selfe-fruition distributed piece-meale and sparingly unto
us, lest too much put into our hands at once, might make us prodigal of the
whole stock. As may yonglings by their parents too much bounty toward them,
whilst their experience is small, overthrow themselves and their posterity.
And nimblest wits, for the most part, run through largest fortunes in least
time; usually shortning their days by taking up pleasures (due in their
season) beforehand, seeking as it were to enjoy the fruits of many years
duration all at once. Whereas fruition of delights and pleasures should be
measured by the capacity of our estate or condition; as wise men fit their
expenses according to the tenor of their revennues.

2 Albeit the constant motion of the Sun and Moon be appointed by the
Creator as a common standard for the measuring of all times: yet every thing
temporal, or endowed with duration measurable by the motion of the heavens,
has its proper time, which in all of them is no other than a participation of
eternity. And he should define the several branches of time most exactly,
that could number or decipher the several actuatio^s, draughts or
replenishments, which are derived from the infinite fountain of life and
being, to fill the capacities, or satiate the internal desires of things
temporal. And albeit the motion of the heavens be constant and uniforme; yet
the duration of things temporal or sublunary (though measured by their
constant motion) is capable of internal contraction and dilatation. Some
things have a kind of a double duration, and run a course of time as it were
indented. Life, albeit in it self most sweet, yet in us is often charged with
so See Ecclesiasticus 41. 2.
great a measure of sour occurrences, that were it at all or most times, as
some whiles it is, the fruition of it could not quite the pains we are put to
in preserving it. And the worse our estate is, the longer it seems to be
such, because vital existence or duration, through distraction of mind, or
vehement motion, seems divided into more parts, then without such impulsions
it could take notice of. In grief or pain we strive to thrust time present
apace from us, that some other may come better attended. In delight or pleasure
we seek to arrest it, and wish to have our joyful moments fixed, or to have
them still to return and go, so that we might prolong our days by living
the same times over and over again, as men often walk longer in pleasant
gardens, then in vast fields, by often resuming the same short walks. Were it
possible for us to stay those grateful parcels of time, till new ones come
with like supply; the current of pleasure, thus damnd up, would swell; and our
fruition of such imperfect existence as we have, would be much more perfect and
entire. But seeing the pleasure of borrowed life, is to the identity of being,
but as water to the pipe, through which it runs; all the remedy we have
against welcome times departing from us, is to regain the like, and make up the
unity of our existence of selfe-fruition by equivalency. The gluts or gushes of
pleasure, may at one time be much greater than at another, yet still
transient, never consistent. The fruition of them cannot possibly be entire:
begotten and dying in every moment; they are, and they are not in a manner,
both at once; so that we lose them as we gain them.

3 The Angelical natures, albeit they account not the continuation of their
duration, nor number the portions of their participation of eternity, by the
motion of the heavens, as being not fed with expectance of that time or
succession, whose opportunites we watchfully attend: yet their desires (more
fervent by much then we have any) to continue what they are, witness they have
not all that in present possession, which is allotted to their complete duration.
Nothing, being the foundation as well of angelical excelle^cies, as of our
mediocrities, makes them incapable of that entire selfe-fruition, which is
essential to him which made the^ of nothing, being made of none. He, as he is
of himself without beginning, so is he entirely in himself, and can acquire
nothing by succession. He desires not his own duration, which none can give him,
nor needs he to desire it, because it is always entirely and indivisibly
present, without possility of addition. For how should Essence it self, or
infinity of being, get ought to morrow, which to day it has not; or lose ought
to day which yesterday it had. The first branch of impossibility which we can
conceive as incident to him, that is thus truly infinite, is, not all times to
contain within himself all fullness of joy, however possible. He is life it
self, and therefore life truly infinite. And infinite life, being infinitely
sweet, contains joy truly infinite; altogether incapable of any addition or
diminution. As in a body infinite (could any such be) there could be no middle
or extremes; so neither can infinite life admit any parts, as being indivisible
into duration subsequent and precedent. Natures, capable of these differences,
have always the one accomplished by the other. Time coming (as we said
before) repaires the losses of time going, and perfects or supports things
natural by successive continuance of present being. But perfection it self
can no more be perfected, than whiteness can be dyed white. Life, or Essence
infinite, excludes vacuity, or capacity of resumed acts to fill up the measure
of actual existence, or fruition of being. In that he is (...),
All-sufficient, he can want nothing; and to him that can want nothing, all must
be present. We must then conceive of the Divine Essence, as infinite, not only
in life, but in the degrees or acts of life: which in the eternal cannot be
many, but only take the denomination of plurality, from things decreed. As He
is said Everlasting with reference to the perpetuity of succession, which still
supposes his interminate existence, as present to the whole and every part of
it. Consider him in himself, and He is every way indivisibly infinite, and
interminable; not only because He had no beginning, nor shall have ending:
For so might time or motion be held interminable, could the Heavens have been
created from Everlasting; whose revolutions nevertheless or successive parts
of motion, should have been truly numerable, and therefore terminable; whence
whatsoever had been contained within their circuit, should still have gotten
somewhat which before it had not, either addition of duration, or (which is all
one) continuance of their first existence, or some new Acts of life, of sense,
or reason. But unto Essence infinite, none of these can accrue. If they could,
as yet he should not be, nor ever could He be actually eternal, but
everlastingly only by succession. For Eternity, as Boethius has well defined
it, is the entire or total possession of interminable life, all at once or
together. Howbeit these terms of total fruition or possession, may seem to
include some parts, though not in the life possessed, yet in the possession of
it; which (I take it) was far from this good Authors meaning. What meant he
then to use such terms? only to exclude succession, which has a totality of
Being, but not altogether, or all at once. As the next hour, and whatsoever
shall have successive duration in it, shall be wholly and fully existent; but
so as one part shall go before, another come after. So is not that duration
which is interminable. But in what sense totality is attributed to essence or
duration infinite, will better appear in the issue of these explications. This
definition of Boethius, though conceived in such terms as might minister
occasion of wrangling in subtle disputes; does notwithstanding imprint a more
lively character or notion of the Everliving God his infinite happiness, than
Aquinas definition does, though very artificial: [Aeternitas est duratio
manens, uniformis, sine principio, and fine, mensura carens,] Eternity, is a
duration uniforme, and permanent, without beginning or end, incapable of
measure.

4 But Ac si quis aeternitatem ita descripserit, scilicet vitam jam infinitam
ex eo quod sit universa; nihilque amittat, cum nihil vel praeterierit, vel sit
futurum; alioquin jam tota no^ esset: is profecto proxime ad definitionem ejus
accedet. Quod enim deinceps subditur, scilicet tota^ esse, nihilque amittere,
expositio quaedam est ejus quod dicebatur, scilicet (vita jam infinita) Plotin.
Emead. 3. lib. 7. cap. 4. p. 329.
Plotin (in mine opinion) gives a more deep and full apprehension of it in
fewer terms; [Aeternitas est vita infinita] Eternity is infinity of life.
And such we gather it to be, because it is the university or totality of life,
and can lose nothing, in that nothing of it is past, nothing to come. He adds
withal, that these terms of Being, All, whole, or losing nothing, are added
only for explication of that, which is sufficiently contained in these words,
Infinite life. In the same Treatise he excellently observes, when we say, That
is Eternal, which always is: (as the Greek (...) verbatim signifies) this Non
aliud quiddam est ens, aliud vero semperens, sicut neque aliud est Philosophus,
aliud vero Philosophus verus. Verumtamen quia nonnulli Philosophiam simulant
adjunction est Philosophus verus. Sic and enti ipsum semper and ipsi semper
adjungitur Ens, adeo ut dicatur (...).i. semper ens, unde dicitur (...).i.
aevum. Qua propter sic accipiendum est ipsum semper cum ente, ut vere ens nobis
significet. Plotin. Emead. 3. lib. 7. cap. 4 p. 329.
always, is added for declaration sake, and yet being assumed to express the
uncorruptiblenesse, or indeficiency of that which is Eternal; it breeds a
wandering imagination of plurality or indivisibility of duration. The best
medicine, by his prescription, for purging our brains of this erroneous fancy,
were to enstyle Eternity only with the name of Entity or Being. But as being
is a name sufficient to express Essence, and Essence it self, or essence
independent a full expression of Eternity: yet because some Philosophers
comprise generation, or the being of things generable under the name of
Essence, it was behooveful for our better instruction, to say, that is
Eternal, which always is, and cannot cease to be. Whereas in true
Philosophical contemplation, it is not one thing, truly to be, and always to
Be. There is no greater difference betwixt these two, than to be a Philosopher,
and to be a true Philosopher. Now there can be no truth in saying, he is a
Philosopher, who is no true Philosopher, for [ens and verum convertuntur] The
Entity of every thing necessarily includes the truth of every thing.
Notwithstanding because some do counterfeit Philosophy, or falsely usurp the
name of Philosophers; we give the title with an addition to such as well deserve
it, and enstyle them, by way of difference from the others, true Philosophers.
And in like manner, when we say, That is eternal, which always is; we seek
to notify no more by this universal note, Always, then that it has a true
and no counterfeit, no second-hand or dependent Being.

Another secondary and subordinate use of the universal sign, always, added
to entity, is, to intimate the interminable, indistinguishable and
indivivisible power, which needs nothing besides that which it actually and
for the present has. Now it has All, that is or can be, in that it truly Is:
for true entity is absolute totality, and unto totalitie, nothing is wanting.
But that which is in time comprehended, how perfect or total soever it may be
in its kind, besides other wants, always needs somewhat to come, never fully
besped of time. On the contrary, that which so is, as it needs no after being,
and cannot be brought within the lists of time, either determinate, or in
succession infinite, but now has whatsoever is expedient to be had: this is
that, which our notion of Eternity hunteth after. That which thus is, has not
its Essence or Being delivered unto it enwrapt in quantity, but is precedent to
all quantity or mensuration. Far otherwise have things generable their being,
as it were spun out from divisibility. The very first being which they have
supposes quantity, and as much as is cut off from the draught or extension of
their duration, so much they lose of their being or perfection.

5 Ignorance of this Plotinicall Philosophy has much perplexed some Logi^ians,
questioning whether Socrates in the instant of his dissolution or corruption,
be a man, or corpse, or both. To be both implies a contradiction; these two
negative propositions being simply convertible, No corpse can be a man, no man
can be a corpse. And yet there is as much reason, that he should in this
instant be both as either. For true resolution we are to say, He was a man,
and shall be a corpse, or he cease to be the one, and begins to be the other.
But the Being or existence of both being mensurable by time, must needs be
divisible, and for this reason, not comprehensible by an instant which is
indivisible. But Plotins conclusion is, whilst we seek to fit that which
truly is, with any portion of measure or degree of quantity, the life of it
being thus divided by us, loses its indivisible nature; We must then leave it
(as it is) indivisible, as well in life or operation, as in Essence, and yet
infinite in both.

Of time, no part truly is, but the present, which is never the same: and as
one questioned (in that age wherein the Art of Navigation was imperfect)
whether Navigators were to be reckoned amongst the dead or the living: So it is
more doubtful then determinable, whether time participate more of being, or of
not being; yet as is time, such is the nature of things brought forth in time.
But Eternity (being the duration of Him who only Is, being made of none, but
Maker of all things, and the dispenser of Time it self into its portions) as
Ad 7. Plotin. lib. Ennead. 3.
Ficinus describes it, is as a fixed instant or permanent Center, which needs
no succession for supply; all sufficient to support it self, and all things
else. The same Writer not unfitly compares Eternity to a Center in a Circle;
and time to the points or extremities of the lines in the Circumference,
always so moving about the Center, that were it an eye, it might view them all
at once. Yet must we not hold Eternity to be indivisible, after the same manner
that points or Centers are. These are indivisible, because they want the
perfection of that quantity, whose parts they couple. Eternity is indivisible
by positive infinite, as containing all the parts or perfections possible of
succession in a more eminent manner, then they can be contained in time it
self, which (as Plato wittily observes) is a moveable image of Eternity. This
difference betwixt the indivisibility of an instant or moment, and Eternity,
may perhaps make the solution of that seeming contradiction less difficult
then it is to some great Schoolemens apprehensions: [Petrus in aeternitate
agrotat, Et, Petrus in aeternitate no^ aegrotat.] Peter is sick in eternity,
Peter is not sick in eternity. This affirmation and denial, in one and the
same indivisible instant or limited portion of time, would inferrean
indivisible contradiction, which in eternity they do not. And yet is Eternity
more indivisible than an instant, but indivisible after another manner.

6 But I know not how it comes to pass, that the true shadow of perfection it
self, is oft-times more apparent in things most imperfect. Natures more
perfect (by a borrowed perfection) hold the mean between them; Out of both we
may spell more than we can put together, for right expressing the nature of
perfection it self. The prime matter, though of things created most imperfect,
is of creatures sublunary, most like unto the Creator, in being ingenerable and
incorruptible; in that it is the Alpha whence all things generable spring, and
the Omega into which they are resolved: Yet is the prime matter most contrary
to its Maker, in that wherein it does resemble Him. It is in a sort or manner,
all things generable, but perfectly nothing, as wanting the true unity of
Entity, or determinate Being. The Creator or Essence it self, is the
incomprehensible perfection of all things, without participation of their
imperfections. The Earth again is like the Eternal Founder in permanency and
immobility, but this it has from its natural dullness; whereas the perfection
of this shadow is in Him from the infinite vigor of his vitality. The swift
motions of the Heavens, or motion as swift as we may imagine, is as a middle
term of proportion between the Earths immobility, and the supermotion, or more
then infinite mobility of the Deity, which we term the infinite vigor of
his vitality. Instants in this are most like Eternity, in that an infinite
number of them added together, yields no increase of quantity: Nor does
Eternity receive addition from succession infinite, which most unlike it in
being divisible, does yet better express the positive infinity of it, than
instants can do. Eternity again, is like a fixed Center, because indivisibly
immutable; yet withal most like a circle. And Trismegists description of the
Deity, commutatis commutandis, as well exemplifies the Eternity, as the
immensity of his nature. Eternity is a circular duration, whose instants are,
always, whose terminations or extremities never were, never shall be: It is
coexistent to every parcel of time, but not circumscriptible by any:
succession infinite cannot be coequall to it. For albeit the motion of the
Heavens, or other notifications of duration divisible, should continue the
same, without interruption or End: yet every period and draught of time, we can
imagine, shall still fall within Eternity, now totally existent; and which has
been, is, and ever will be unto every minute or scrupe of time, that has
been, is, or shall be, alike everlastingly coexistent, not by acquisition of
any new successive parts, but by indivisible and interminable unity.

7 We cannot perhaps properly say, that God shall be after all times or
durations to come; for duration must flow from His Everlasting Being without
end. And what can be after that which has no end? And here we suppose, that
albeit time or duration successive had their actual beginning with the
creatures: yet there shall be, or may be, if not a time, yet some duration
successively infinite. And that only is after this manner, infinite, unto
which somewhat of the same kind may still be added. Thus, as in the continued
and divisible quantities, [non datur minimum.] There is no fraction so little,
but may be less; and as in numbers [non datur maximum] There is no number so
great, but it may be made greater by addition: so in successive duration [non
datur ultimum.] It may be truly said to last for ever, because it can have no
last portion. But howsoever we cannot properly, or without exposing our speech
to captious exceptions, say, that eternity shall be after all time or duration
successive; (seeing this may seem to import, that duration or succession shall
finally cease:) yet that eternity (being duration, actually, interminably and
indivisibly, not successively, infinite) now is, and ever was, as infinitely
praeexistent or precedent to all ages, or successions coming toward us, one
way; as it is and was to the worlds nativity, or the first out-going of time,
the other way. This is a point which we must believe, if we rightly believe God
to be Eternal, or know what Eternity is. A point, which would to God they had
seriously and in heart considered, which have had Gods eternal decree and the
awards of it, most frequently in their mouths and pens. And he is no Christian
that would deny whatsoever is by God decreed, was so decreed before all worlds:
So is he no Christian Philosopher, much less a true Christian Divine, that
shall refer or retract the tenor of this speech [Before all worlds] to that
only which is past, before the world began. Whatsoever can be more properly
said or conceived to be past, then to be yet to come, or to be in every moment
of time designable, can have no property of Eternity. For that only is
Eternal, which always is, and so always is, that it has precedence or
praeexistence infinite to all successions, which way soever we look upon
them, or take their beginning, whether backwards or forwards. It was a great
oversight (or rather want of insight into the nature of this great Sphere or
visible world) in Lactantius, (otherwise a learned Christian) not only to deny
there were any Antipodes, but to censure the Philosophers (which had gone
before him) of gross ignorance or infatuation, for avouching this truth, now
manifested to meaner Scholars, or more illiterate Christians, than any which
Lactantius taught. A greater ignorance it would be in us which acknowledge this
truth, to say these Antipodes were under the earth, and the inhabitants of
Europe and Africa only above it; or that the Heavens were as far under our
Antipodes, as they are above us. For whosoever walks on the earth, whether in
this Region or that, whether at the half or full Antipodes, is above the
earth. And every part of the Heavens unto which the looks of men are erected,
as well the Nadir as the Zenith, as well the South pole as the North Pole is
above the earth. And as the Heavens are every way above the Earth, so is
Eternity every way before all worlds, before all times. As we believe this
visible world and all things in it, had a beginning; so we expect it shall have
an end: Now the eye of Eternal Providence looks through the world, through
all the several ages, successions, or durations in the world; as well from the
last end to their first beginning, as from their first beginning to their last
end. There is no period of time to us imaginable, which is not so environed by
Eternity, as the Earth or Center is with the Heavens; save only that the
Heavens are finite, and Eternity infinite. So that the Heavens though far every
way, are no way infinitely above the Earth; whereas Eternity or Gods eternal
decree, are every way infinitely before all worlds, before all times. In this
sense, were it possible, the world might have been created, or motions
continued from everlasting; the Eternal, notwithstanding, should have been
everlastingly before them. For that period of motion which must terminate the
next million of years, shall have coexistence with Eternity now existent;
whose infinity does not grow with succession, nor extend it self with motion;
but stands immovable with times present, being eternally before times future,
as well in respect of any set draught or point, whence we imagine time future to
come toward us, as in respect of the first revolution of the Heavens, whence
time took beginning. Or, to speak as we think, it is impossible to conceive
any duration to be without beginning and ending; without conceiving it
circular, and altogether void of succession. Notwithstanding, if any list to
imagine time both ways everlasting; the continuity of it may be best conceived
by the uninterrupted flux of an instant; and the stability of eternity, by the
retraction of such a perpetual flux into one durable o^ permanent instant.

8 O^, not to suffer the remembrance of childish sports altogether to pass
without any use or observation, if not for composing some greatest
controversies amongst learned men, yet for facilitating contemplation in one of
the greatest difficulties, that Philosophy, whether sacred or humane, affords
to the conceit of the most curious. The difficulty is, how eternity being
permanent and indivisible, should have coexistence with succession or motion.
We have seen a Top turn so swiftly upon the same center, in a manner, that it
seemed rather to sleep or rest, than to move. And whilst it thus swiftly
moved, any bright mark or conspicuous spot, how little soever, seemed to be
turned into an entire and permanent circle. Seeing motion thus swift, may be
procured by a weak arm, it will be no hard supposal to conceit that a mover
of strength and vigor infinite, should be able to move a body in a moment.
Admit then the highest visible sphere should be moved about in a moment; all
the several parts of successive motion, which now it has, would be contracted
into perfect unity: which whether it should be called a cessation from motion,
or a vigorous rest, or a supermotion, actually containing in it parts of motion
successively infinite, were not so easy to determine. If thus it were moved
about in an instant, the nature of it supposed to be incorruptible, and the
mover immortal, remaining still in the same strength and mind; he would not
move it more slowly this day or year, than he did the former. This supposition
admitted, there should be not only parts successively infinite of one
revolution, but revolutions successively infinite in one and the same instant.
Or to speak more properly; As these revolutions should not properly be termed
motion, but rather the product of motions infinitely swift, united or made up
into a vigorous permanency: so should not the duration of one or of all these
revolutions be accounted as an instant or portion of time, but a kind of
eternity or duration indivisibly permanent. The motion of the eight sphere
supposed to be such as has been said, that is motion infinitely swift, or not
divisible by succession; the Sun moving successively as now it does, should
have local coexistence to every star in the eight Sphere, to every point of
the Eclipticke circle wherein it moves, at one and the self same instant, or
in every least parcel of time. Every Star in the eighth sphere, every point
should be converted into a permanent circle; and so in one circle there should
be circles for number infinite, as many circles as there be points or
divisibilities in the Ecliptique circle. Thus in Him that is eternal, are
Beings infinite, and in Eternity are actually contained durations in succession
infinite. The former supposition admitted, we could not say that the inferior
Orbs, moving as now they do, did move after the eighth Sphere, but that the
times of their motion were eminently contained in it. For the eighth Sphere
being moved in an instant, should lose the divisibility of time, and the nature
of motion, with all the properties that accompany them, not by defect, (as if
it no way comprised them,) but by swallowing up time or division successively
or potentially infinite, into an actual permanency. By this supposition of
passive motion made infinitely swift, by the strength of the mover, and
improved into a kind of actual indivisible permanency, we may conceive of the
first Movers Eternity, as Mathematicians conceive the true nature of a Sphere,
by imagining it to be produced by the motion of a semicircle upon the Axis. For
let the Eternal be but thus imagined to be an intellectual sphere, capable
of momentary motion or revolution throughout this world; and the indivisible
coexistence of his infinity, to every part of time and place, will be very
conceivable. Yet as Mathematicians persuade not themselves, their figures are
produced by motion, but rightly conceive their nature to be such without any
production, as if they were so produced: so let eternal duration be esteemed
more indivisible, than the unity of motion conceived as infinitely swift, yet
not made indivisible by such swiftness of motion, but indivisible only of it
self, and by the infinite vigor of his vital essence, wherein all the
perfection of motion or rest, are (if I may so speak) indivisibly tempered, or
(lest I should be mistaken) eminently contained. The same proportion which
motion contracted into stability has unto succession, has divine Essence to
all other Essences, eminently containing all, no one kind formally. This
divine Essence, whose essential property we conceive Eternity to be, is truly
the totality of being; De hac duplice totalitate, vide Marsil. Ficinum ad 7.
Plotin. lib. Enneadis. 3.
a totality not aggregated of parts, but rather (as Plotine intimates)
producing all other parts or kinds of being. Eternity likewise is a totality
of duration, not aggregated of parts, nor capable of access or addition; but
rather a totality from which all durations or successions flow, without
resolution or diminution of its infinite integrity. As if a body should cast
many shadows of diverse shapes in a running stream, the shadows vanish and
are repaired in every moment, without any diminution of the body.

CHAP. 7.
Of the infinity of Divine Power.
1 THe circumstances of time and place are presupposed, the one as spectator,
the other as stage to all things, which wanting place or time, or being it
self, present themselves anew in their proper shape and form. But of things so
presented, operation or power in their kind is the native and immediate
property. Nothing that has any proper seat or existence numerable in this
spacious Amphitheatre, but is fitted for acting some part or other useful for
the maintenance of the whole. Now all operation or power, which (according to
the variety of things created) is manifold and diverse, does give but such a
shadow of that infinite power, which is eminently contained in the union of
infinite Essence, as time and place did of his immensity and eternity. The
force and virtue of some things may perhaps more properly be termed strength or
power passive, then operation. Howbeit even in the earth and earthly bodies, by
nature most dull, there is a power or strength to sustain waights laid upon
them; a power to resist contrary impulsions, which perhaps essentially includes
an active force or operation; a power of swaying to the center, which is no
more passive than active, but a mean betwixt both. Even in the dullest body
that is, there is a secret force or slow activity to assimilate other things to
themselves, or to preserve symbolizing natures. In bodies less gross and more
unapt to resist violence offered, as in the winds, vapors, or exhalations, or
in the spirits or influences which guide our bodies, we may perceive an active
force or power motive fully answerable to the greatest passive strength or
resistance. Other Elements or mixed bodies, are endued with an operative power
of producing the like, or destroying contraries. Celestial bodies, the Sun
especially, have a productive force to bring forth plants out of their roots,
to nourish and continue life in all things. It is perhaps impossible, for any
thing, that has not being of it self, to receive infinity of being in any
kind from another, though infinite. Impossible for the fire, because the
substance of it is finite, to be infinitely hot; but were it such, it would be
infinite in operation.

2 As the Author or first setter forth of all things operative, who alone truly
is, surpasses all conceit of any distinct or numerable branch of being: so is
his power more eminently infinite in every kind, than all the united powers of
several natures, each supposed infinitely operative in its own kind, and for
number likewise infinite, can be conceived to be. Now what was generally
observed before, that things by nature most imperfect, do oftentimes best
shadow divine perfections, has place again in this particular. Gods infinite
power is clearliest manifested in creatures which seem least powerful. Where
wast thou (said God to Cap. 38. verse. 4, 5, 6.
Job) when I laid the foundations of the Earth? declare if thou have
understanding. Who has laid the measures thereof, if thou know? Or who has
stretched the line upon it? Whereupon are the foundations thereof fastened? or
who laid the corner stone thereof? The excellent majesty of this speech,
sufficiently testifies it was uttered by God himself, though taken from his
mouth, by the pen of man. But setting aside the majesticke phrase or
resemblance, far surmounting all resemblance all observance of poetical
decorum; What cleerer fountain of deeper admiration, can the eye of man's
understanding look into, then this, that not only every corner stone in the
world with its full burden, but all the mighty buildings or erections, which
are seen upon the whole surface of the earth; yea the whole earth it self,
with all the mountains and rocks upon it, with all the metalls or massy
substance that are within it, should be borne up by that which is less than
any corner stone, by that which indeed is no body or substance, not so much as
a mere angle or corner. Yet so it has pleased Him, by whose wisdom the
foundations of the earth were laid; to make that little point or indivisible
Center; which is farthest removed from our sight, the most conspicuous place
and seat of that indivisible power which is infinite. Let Mathematicians
imagine what rules or reasons of equipendence they list, their last resolution
of all supportance into the Center, must suppose the same truth which the
Egyptian Magicians confessed, [Hic digitus Dei est] The finger of God is here.
Impossible it were for that, which in it self is matter of nothing,
impregnably to support all things supportable; unless it were supported by the
finger of God. And yet if we conceive of Him, as Isaias describes Him, all the
strength and power that is manifested in the supportance of the whole earth,
and all therein, is not the strength of his little finger. Yea though we
should imagine, that as the weight of solids amounts according to their mass
or quantity: so the sustentative force, which is chambered up in the Center,
should be multiplied according to the several portions or divisibilities of
magnitude successively immensurable: yet this imagination of force so
multiplied, it being divisible, could not equalize that true and real conceit
of force divine, which arises from consideration, that it is indivisibly
seated, throughout immensity. To uphold earths innumerable much weightier and
massier than this is, which borne by him, bears all things; would be no
burden to his power sustentative: (so from the effects, his power, though in
it self one, must receive from us plurality of denominations.) And yet fully
commensurable to this power sustentative, is his active strength or power
motive. He that spans the Heavens with his fist, could toss this Universe with
greater ease, than a Giant does a Tennis Ball, throughout the boundless Courts
of immensity. Rocks of Adamant would sooner dissolve with the least fillep of
his finger, than bubbles of water with the breath of Canons.

3 Our admiration of this his active power, which we conceive as
incomprehensible, and altogether incapable of increase, may be raised by
calculating the imaginary degrees of active powers increase in creatures
divisible, as well in quantity, as operation. Though Powder converted into
smoke, be the common mother of all force, which issues from the terrible
mouth of the Gunne: yet the Canon sends forth his bullet (though more apt to
resist external motion) with greater violence than the Sachar: and every
Ordinance exceeds other in force of battery, according to the quantity of the
charge or length of barrel. But were it possible for the same quantity of
steel or iron, to be as speedily converted into such a fiery vapor, as
gunpowder is; the blow would be ten times more irresistible then any, that
Gunpowder out of the same close concavity, can make. The reason is plain; the
more solid or massy the substance to be dissolved, is, the greater quantity
would it yield of fire, or other rarer substance, into which it were dissolved.
And the greater the quantity, the more violent is the contraction of it into
the same narrow room: and the more violent the contraction is, the more
vehement is the eruption, and the ejaculation swifter. Thus from vapors
rarefied or generated in greater quantity, than the concavities of the earth,
wherein they are imprisoned without vent, is naturally capable of; do
Earthquakes become so terrible: These and the like experiments bring forth this
general rule, The active strength of bodies multiplieth, according to the
manner of contraction or close unition of parts concurring to the impulsion or
eruption: So does the active force or vigor of motion, always increase,
according to the degrees of celerity which it accumulates. Now though the most
active and powerful essence cannot be encompassed with walls of brass, nor
chambred up in vaults of steel, albeit much wider than the heavens; yet does
it every where more strictly gird it self with strength then the least or
weakest body can be girt. For what bonds can we prescribe so strict, so close
or firm, as is the bond of indivisible unity, which cannot possibly burst or
admit eruption, wherein notwithstanding infinite power does as entirely and
totally encampe it self, as in immensity. How incomparably then does His
active strength exceed all conceit or comparison? The vehemence of his motive
power, whose infinite Essence swallows up the infinite degrees of succession
in a fixed instant, and of motion in vigorous rest; cannot be expressed by
motion so swift and strong, as would bear level from the Sun setting in the
West, to the Moon rising in the East. To cast the fixed Stars down to the
Center, or hoyse the Earth up to the Heavens, within the twinkling of an eye,
or to send both in a moment beyond the extremities of this visible world, into
the womb of vacuity whence they issued, would not strain his power motive.
For, all this we suppose to be less then to bring nothing unto something, or
something to such perfection, as some of his creatures enjoy. Howbeit even such
as take the fullest measure of perfection from his immensity, must derive their
pedigree by the mothers side, from mere nothing or vacuity. Homo, says S.
Austine, terrae filius, nihili nepos; Man is the son of the earth, and the
grandchilde of nothing. And when he shall come unto the height of his glory, he
cannot forget, he must remember, that the worm was his sister, and the
creeping thing the son of his mother. To produce as many worlds out of
nothing, as the Sun each year does Herbs or Plants out of the moistened
Earth, would breed no cumbrance to his power or force productive. To maintain,
repair, or continue all these in the same state, whilst he makes as many more,
would neither exhaust nor hinder his conservative virtue. Multiplicity or
variety greater than we can imagine of works most wonderful, all managed at
one and the same time, could work no distraction in his thoughts, no
defatigation in his Essence. From the unity of these and the like branches of
power, all in him most eminently infinite, does the attribute of Omnipotency
take its denomination, whose contents, so far as they concern the
strengthening of our faith, shall hereafter be unfoulded.

CHAP. 8.
Of the infinity of Divine Wisdom. That it is as impossible for any thing to
fall out without Gods knowledge, as to have existence without his power or
essential presence.
1 But power in every kind thus eminently infinite, could not be so
omnipotent, as we must believe it; did it not in this absolute unity of all
variety possess other branches of being, according to the like eminency or
infinity of perfection. Strength or power, if merely natural or destitute of
correspondent wisdom, to comprehend, manage, and direct it, might bring forth
effects in their kind truly infinite, whose ill forecast or untowardly
combinations, nevertheless, would in the issue argue lamentable impotency,
rather then omnipotency. And hard it would be to give instance almost in any
subject, wherein a double portion of wit matched with half the strength, would
not effect more, or more to the purpose, then a triple portion of strength,
with half so much wit. Archimedes did not come so far short of Polyphemus in
strength or bulk of body, as the wonderful works wrought by his Mathematical
skill, did exceed any that the Giant could attempt.

2 Every choice is better or worse accordingly as it more or less participates
of true wisdom: And most unwise should that choice justly be esteemed, which
would not give wisdom pre-eminence to power. Knowledge then, might wise men
choose their own endowments, would be desired in greater measure then
strength. Wisdom, says the Wiseman, is the beginning of the ways of God.
And shall not that branch of being, by which all things were made, by which
every created essence has its bounds and limits, be possessed by Him, (who gave
them being and set them bounds,) without all bounds or limits! above all
measure? Yes, whatsoever branch of being we could rightly desire or make
choice of before others: the inexhaustible fountain of being has not chosen,
but is naturally possessed of, as the better. And therefore if we may so speak,
though both be absolutely infinite; his wisdom is greater then his power, to
which it serves as guide or guardian. And as the excellency of the Artificers
skill often recompenses the defect of stuff or matter: so the infinity of
wisdom or knowledge seems, in a manner, to evacuate the necessity of power
or force distinct from it. Howbeit I will not in this place, or in our native
dialect, enter that nice dispute, which some Schoolmen have done; Whether Gods
Essence and Knowledge be formally his Power. But whilst we conceive Power and
Wisdom as two attributes formally distinct, (at least, to ordinary
conceits,) we may conceive Wisdom to be the father, and Power the mother of
all his works of wonder. As for Philo and other Platonicks that make Knowledge
the mother of all Gods works, it is probable they dreamed of a created
Knowledge, or perhaps under these terms, they cover some transformed Notion of
the second person in Trinity, who is the Wisdom of the Father, by whom also
he created all things: who as he is the only begotten Son from eternity, so
is he likewise a joint Parent of all things created in time by the Father; as
Eve was in some sort Adams daughter, and yet a true mother of all that call him
father. But here we speak not of that wisdom of God, which is personal; but
of the wisdom of the Godhead, as it is essentially and indivisibly infinite
in the whole Trinity.

3 Wisdom, as all agree, is the excellency of knowledge, from which it
differs not, save only in the dignity or usefulness of matters known, or in
the more perfect manner of knowing them. Though no man be wise without much
knowledge, yet a man may know many things, and not be very wise. But if we
speak of Knowledge divine, not as restrained in our conceit to this or that
particular, but simply, as it comprehends all things, the name of Wisdom in
every respect best befits it: for though many things known by him, whilst
compared with others more notable, seem base and contemptible; yet not the
meanest, but may be an object of divine contemplation to a Christian, that
considers not the mere matter or form, or physical properties, but the
Creators power, or skill manifested in it. How much more may the vilest
creatures, whilst he looks upon his own work in it, and the use whereto he
appointed it, be rightly reputed excellent? He knows as much of every
Creature, as can be known of it, and much more than man possibly can know: and
thus he knows not only all things that are, but all that possibly may be.
This argues wisdom truly infinite; whose right conceit must be framed by
those broken conceits which we have of the model of it.

4 Of wisdom then or useful knowledge, the parts or offices are two: The one
steadfastly to propose a right end: The other, to make and prosequute a right
choice of means for effecting it. Humane wisdom is oft-times blind in both,
and usually lame in the latter. Neither can we clearly discern true good from
apparent; nor do our consultions always carry eaven, to the mistaken marks
whereat we aim; but be the end proposed good or bad, so it be much affected,
the less choice of means is lest, the more eagerly we apply our selves unto
their use, and strive as it were, to strain out success by close embracing
them. And for this reason, ignorance or want of reason to forecast variety of
means for bringing about our much desired ends, is the mother of self-will
and impatience. For what is self-will, if a man should define it, but a stiff
adherence to some one or few particular means, neither only nor chiefly
necessary to the maine point? And wits conscious of their own weakness, for
conquering what they eagerly desire, presently call in power, wrath, or
violence, as partial or mercenary seconds to assist them. Whereas he that out
of fertility of invention, can furnish himself beforehand with store of likely
means for accomplishing his purpose, cannot much esteem the loss or
miscariage of some one or two. Howbeit, as man's wit in this case is but finite,
so his patience cannot be complete. Even the wisest will be moved to wrath or
violence, or other foul play, if the game whereat he shoots be fair and good,
and most of his strings already broken. Nor can he be absolutely secure of good
success, so long as the issue is subject to contingency, and may fall without
the Horizon of his foresight and contrivance. But wisdom infinite does
completely arm the Omnipotent Majesty (if I may so speak) with infinite
patience and long-suffering, toward such as every minute of their lives
violently thwart and cross some or other particular means, which he had
ordained for his glory and their good. He is light, says the Apostle, and in
him is no darkness. He distinguishes the fruits of light from fruits of
darkness, before they are, even before he gave them possibility of being. As
impossible it is for his will to decline from that which he discernes to be
truly good, as for his infinite Essence to shrink in being. Many things may
(as every thing that is evil does) fall out against his will, but nothing
without his knowledge, or besides his expectation. That which in its own
nature (as being made such by his unalterable decree) is absolutely contingent,
is not casual in respect of his providence or eternal wisdom. In that he
fully comprehends the number of all means possible, and can mix the several
possibilities of their miscariage, in what degree or proportion he list: he
may, and oft-times does, inevitably forecast the full accomplishment of his
proposed ends, by multiplicity of means, in themselves not inevitable, but
contingent. So that, success is only necessary to the last, yet not
absolutely necessary unto it. All the necessity it has is ofttimes gotten by
casual miscariage of the possibilities bestowed upon the former: as if he
ordained the apprehension of a Traitor, or of a Malefactor, by an hundred
means, all by the immutable decree alike possible, and equally probable; if
ninety and nine do miss, the hundredth and last, by the rules of Eternal
Wisdom, must of necessity take. But in that it was possible for the former to
have taken, success falls to this last, not by absolute necessity, but as it
were by lot; for it might have been prevented by the former, by supposall
only of whose miscariage it is now necessary. And yet success it self, or
the accomplishment of the end proposed by infinite wisdom, was absolutely
necessary and immutable.

5 There is a fallacy, though the simplest one that ever was set to catch any
wise man, wherein many excellent wits of these latter ages, with some of the
former, have been pitifully entangled. The snare, wherein it were not possible
for any besides themselves to catch them, they thus frame or set, Whatsoever
God has decreed, must of necessity come to pass: But God has decreed every
thing that is: Therefore every thing that is, comes to pass of necessity. All
things are necessary at least in respect of Gods decree. The extract or
corrallary whereof, in brief, is this: It is impossible for ought, that is
not, to be: for ought that has been, not to have been, for ought that is,
not to be; impossible for ought to be hereafter, that shall not be. But if it
be (as here I suppose) very consonant to infinite wisdom; altogether
necessary to infinite goodness; and no way impossible for infinite power, to
decree contingency as well as necessity; or that some effects should be as
truly contingent, as others are necessary; a conclusion quite contradictory to
that late inferred, will be the only lawful issue of the former Maxim, or
major proposition matched with a minor of our choosing. Let the major
proposition stand as it did before, [Whatsoever God has decreed must of
necessity come to passe] with this additionall, Nothing can come to pass
otherwise than God has decreed it shall or may come to pass. The minor
proposition, which (if our choice may stand) shall be consort to the major, is
this, But God has decreed contingency as well as necessity, or, that some
effects should be as truly contingent, as others are necessary; Therefore of
necessity there must be contingency, or effects contingent. The immediate
consequence whereof is this, There is an absolute necessity, that some things
which have not been, might have been; That some things which have been,
might not have been. That some things which are not, might be; That some
things which are, might not be: That some things which shall not be hereafter,
might be; That some things which shall be hereafter, might not be. But as ill
weeds grow apace, so the late mentioned error once conceived, was quickly
delivered of a second, which derived the infallible certainty of Gods
foreknowing things future, from an infallible necessity (as they conceived it)
laid upon them (before they had being) by his immutable decree. But every wise
decree presupposes wisdom, and wisdom essentially includes knowledge:
shall we then grant that Gods Knowledge is antecedent, and his foreknowledge
consequent to his decrees? or shall we say he did inevitably decree the
obliquity of Jewish blasphemy against his Son, because he did most certainly
foreknow it, or, that he did therefore certainly foreknow it, because he had
irresistibly decreed it? Most certain it is, that he did as perfectly foresee
or foreknow all the obliquities of their malice and blasphemy against Christ,
as he did their very acts or doings: if those could be distinguished from their
acts or doings. Briefly, to admit the former conclusion; That the Eternal
foreknowes all things, because he decrees them; or, that they are absolutely
necessary in respect of his decree; were to imprison his infinite wisdom, in
his selfe-fettered power; to restrain the Eternal Majesty from using such
liberty in his everlasting decrees, as some earthly Monarchs usurp in causes
temporal or civil: For, Papae nunquam ligat sibi manus; The Pope (as they
say) never tyeth his own hands, by any Grant or Patents: which is a fault in
him; only because he is otherwise very faulty, and unsufficient to support or
weild so high a prerogative with upright constancy. But, in that Holy and
mighty One, the reservation of such liberty (as anon we intimate) is a point of
high perfection.

6 That to be able to decree an absolute contingency as well as necessity, is
an essential branch of Omnipotency or power infinite, shall (by the assistance
of this Power) be clearly demonstrated in the Article of Creation. That God did
omnipotently decree a contingency in humane actions, that the execution of this
decree is a necessary consequent of his communicative goodness, (a consequent
so necessary, that unless this be granted, we cannot acknowledge him to be
truly good, much less infinitely good,) shall (by the favor of this his
Goodness) be fully declared in the Treatise of man's fall, and of sins
entrance into the World by it. That which in this place we take as granted,
is, That Gods wisdom is no less infinite than his power; that he perfectly
foreknowes, whatsoever by his omnipotency can be done; that his power and
wisdom are fully commensurable to his immensity and eternity; that all these
rules following, are exactly parallel in true Divinity.

Gods Presence is not circumscriptible by the coexistence of his creatures; He
is in every one of them as a Center, and all of them are in Him as in a
circumference capable not of them only but of all that possibly can be; only
incapable of Circumscription or Equality.

His Eternity is more than commensurable to time or any duration of created
Entities: It is in every duration as a permanent instant; and all durations are
contained in it, as a fluent instant in a set time, or as noonetide in the
whole day.

His Power likewise may not be confined to effects that are, have been, or
shall be: the production of every thing out of nothing, argues it to be truly
infinite; and yet the production of all, is to the infinity of it, not so much
as a beam of light which is strained through a needles eye, is to the body of
the Sun, or to all the light diffused throughout the world.

Least of all may his infinite wisdom be comprehended within those effects
which by his power have been produced, or which it now does or hereafter shall
produce. But look how far his immensity exceeds all real or complete space,
or his Eternity succession, or the duration of things created, or his Power all
things already reduced from possibility to actual existence; so far does his
infinite Wisdom surmount the most exact knowledge that can be imagined of
all things already ereated and their actions. Nothing that is, could have borne
any part in the world, without the light or direction of his Knowledge: and yet
that measure of his Knowledge which can be gathered from the full harmony of
this Universe, is less in respect of it absolutely considered, then skill to
number digits, is to the entire or exact knowledge of all proportions or other
arithmeticall rules or affections, that can arise from their multiplications or
divisions. The causes, properties, and hidden virtues of each thing created,
are better known to Him, than so much of them as we see or perceive by any
other sense, is to us: and yet He knows whatsoever by infinite power possibly
might have been, but now is not, whatsoever hereafter may be, though it never
shall be; as perfectly as he does the things which at this instant are,
heretofore have been, or hereafter must be.

7 The subject wherein this his incomprehensible wisdom exhibits the most
lively and surest apprehensions, for drawing our hearts after it in admiration;
is the harmony or mixture of contingency with necessity. And this, most
conspicuous in moderating the free thoughts of Men or Angels, and ordaining
them to the certain and necessary accomplishment of his glory. The contingent
means which by his permission and donation, these creatures may use for
attaining their several ends, or private good, may be successively infinite.
And yet, albeit the utmost possibilities of their varieties and inco^stancies,
were reduced to act, the ends notwithstanding, which his infinite wisdom has
forecast in their creation, should by any course of many thousands, which they
may take, be as inevitably brought to pass, as if no choice or freedom had
been left them; or as if every succeeding thought had been drawn on by the
former, and al linked to that which he first inspired, or by his irresistible
power produced, with indissoluble chains of Adamantine Fate. We would esteem
it great wisdom or cunning (to use S. Austines illustratio^) in a Fowler to be
able to catch again all the Birds, which he had formerly caught, after he had
permitted every one of them to take wings and fly which way they listed. God
has nets every where spread, for catching such as his wisdom suffers to fly
farthest from him, or most to decline the ways which in his goodness he had
appointed for the^: and (which is most of all to be admired) the very freedom
or variety of men's thoughts, so they be permitted to employ them according to
their own liking, becomes their most inevitable, and most inextricable snare.
For all their thoughts are actually numbered in his infinite wisdom, and the
award of every thought determinately measured, or defined by his Eternal
Decree. So far is freedom of choice or contingency from being incompatible
with the immutability of Gods will, that without this infinite variety of
choice or freedom of thought in man and Angels, we cannot rightly conceive
him to be as infinitely wise, as his decree is immutable.

8 Free it was for me to have thought or done somewhat in every minute of the
last year, whereby the whole frame of my cogitations or actions for this year
following might have been altered: and yet should God have been as true and
principal a cause of this alteration, and of every thought and deed thus
altered; as he is of those that de facto are past, or of that which I now
think or do. Nor should his will or pleasure (as some object) depend on mine,
but mine though contingently free, necessarily subject unto his. For unto every
cogitation possible to man or Angel, he has everlastingly decreed a
proportionate end: to every antecedent possible, a correspondent consequent;
which needs no other cause or means to produce it, but only the reducing of
possibility (granted by his decree) into Act. For what way soever (of many
equally possible) man's will does incline, Gods decree is a like necessary cause
of all the good or evil that befalls him for it. Did we that which we do not,
but might do; many things would inevitably follow, which now do not. Nor do
the things, which at this instant befall me, come to pass, because he
absolutely decreed them, and none but them (as we say) in the first place; But
because he decreed them as the inevitable consequents of some things, which
he knew I would do, which notwithstanding he both knew and had decreed, that
I might not have done. For whatsoever I should have done and have let undone,
there was a real possibility to have done it; though not inhaerent in me, yet
entitled unto me in particular by Gods Decree; until some demerit of mine or
my forefathers, did cut off the entaile, and interrupt the successful
influence. For here I will not dispute, how far the sins of Parents may
prejudice their Children; but these terms should, or might, being referred to
matters of duty; are as infallible signs in Divinity, as in Grammar, of a
potentiall, what we should have done or might have done, was possible for us to
have done, by that decree whence all power and possibility, not merely
logical, is derived. So then, both that which might befall me if I did
otherwise, and that which now befalls me doing as I do, flow alike immediately
from the absolute necessity of his eternal decree: whose incomprehensible
wisdom herein appears most admirable; that though the variety in this kind
were infinite, yet should it comprehend all; not one thing could fall without
the actual circumference of it.

9 The general reason, why most Christian writers are more able and apt both
to conceive right, and to speak more consequently to what they rightly
conceive, concerning other branches of divine absolute infiniteness, than
concerning his infinite knowledge, is, because all creatures without exception,
are true participants of Gods other Attributes, besides his wisdom or
knowledge. For even the meanest creature, the worm or gnat, has a portion of
that being, of that power, of that duration, which in him are infinite: and
that portion of these attributes which they have, or that quantity of being
which they have, is a participation of his immensity. But of his knowledge or
wisdom, men and Angels (the manner of whose knowledge is to men for the most
part unknown) are of all his creatures the only participants. And (as has
been observed before) those rules are always the most clear and certain, and
most easily gathered; which are gathered from an uniforme identity of
particulars, in variety of subjects. Those universal rules (on the contrary)
are hardly gathered, or (without accurate observation) are less certain,
which can be experienced only in some one or fewer subjects. Another special
reason why we do not conceive so magnificently or so orthodoxally of Gods
knowledge, as were fitting; is, because we want fit terms to express them
in. For seeing words are taken as the proper vesture of our thoughts and
conceits; and seeing most men are apt to conceive or judge rather according to
the vesture or outward appearance of things, than according to the inward
truth: it is almost impossible for us not to transform the manner of Gods
knowledge or decrees, into the similitude of our own conceits, conjectures,
or resolutions; so long as we put no other vesture or expressions upon Gods
decree or knowledge, than were fitted for our own. To salve this
inconvenience, or to prevent the occasion of this error, Quomodo est
praescius, dum nulla nisi quae futura sunt, praescia^tur? Et scimus quia Deo
futurum nihil est, ante cujus oculos praeterita nulla sunt, praesentia non
transeunt, futura non veniunt: quippe quia omne quod nobis fuit and erit, in
ejus prospectu praesto est, and omne quod praesens est, scire potest potius
quam praescire. Greg. lib. 20. in Job. cap. 24. Et paulo post, In illo, nec
praeterita, nec futura reperiri quaeunt, sed cuncta mutabilia immutabiliter
durant; and quae in seipsis simul existere non possunt, illi simul omnia
assistunt, nihilque in illo praeterit quod transit: quia in aeternitate ejus
modo quodam incomprehensibili, cuncta volumina saeculorum transeuntia manent,
currentia stant. Vide Petrum Damianum in ep. 4. de omnipotentia, and Ludovicum
Ballaster Hierologiae, cap. 3.
Saint Gregory moves this doubt: How we can say there is any praescience or
foreknowledge in God, seeing only those things can be properly said to be
foreknowne, which are to come: whereas we know, that nothing is future unto
God, before whose eye, no things are past; things present do not pass by Him,
things future do not come, upon Him. Whatsoever has been to us, is yet in
his view; and whatsoever is present, may rather be said to be known than
foreknowne. To the same purpose Saint Austine would have Gods knowledge of
things which are to come, to be termed rather science than praescience or
foresight; seeing all things are present to God. But these two great lights of
the Latin Church, with some others that follow these for their guides, have
not in this argument expressed themselves so clearly or so accurately as that
their expressions can pass without question or exception in the Schools. We
may not say (nor did Saint Austine or Saint Gregory, as I presume, think) that
God does not see or know a distinction between times past, present, or to
come, more clearly than we do. If then he distinguish times present from
times past or future, how is it said by St. Gregory; that nothing to him is
future, nothing past? If these differences of time or of succession be real;
the Eternal knows these differences much better than we do. And if he know a
difference between things present, past, and to come; to be present, past, or
to come, is not all one in respect of his Eternal knowledge. If God, as all
grant, be before all worlds; his knowledge being coeternall to his being, must
needs be before all worlds. And Saint Austine himself grants a scientia a
science or knowledge in God most infallible, of all things that have been,
are, or shall be; before they are, were, or could be; for they could not be
coeternall to him, who is before all worlds, the beginning of the world it
self, and of all things in it. Now all knowledge of things not yet present,
but to come, is foreknowledge: to determine or decree things future, is to
predetermine or foredecree them. And seeing God from Eternity has both known
and decreed the things that then were not; he is said to have foreknowne and
foredecreed them. So then God foreknowes, and man foreknowes; God has decreed,
and man has decreed. But the difference between the manner of their
foreknowing and decreeing, being not oft-times well expressed by learned writers
or teachers, and seldom duly considered by their Readers or hearers; the
identity of words wherewith we express our own foreknowledge and Gods
foreknowledge, begets a similitude of conceit, or will hardly suffer us
rightly to conceive the true difference between the nature and manner of
humane wisdom, and wisdom divine. And this has been the fertile nursery
of many errors in this Argument, which now and hereafter we shall endeavor to
displant: imitating the Heralds, who are often enforced to give the same Coat
to diverse parties; but always with some difference, remarkable to such as are
conversant in the mysteries of their Art.

10 Our knowledge of things to come is many ways imperfect; (and foreknowledge
only) because the duration neither of our knowledge, nor of our selves, as yet
can reach unto that point of time, wherein things so known, get first
existence. We look on them as on things afar off, which we expected to meet;
for as things past resemble moueables going from us, so things future seem to
come upon us. And whiles they get being, which before they had not; we get
continuance of being, and of knowledge, which before we had not; that is, we
gain a real coexistence with them: For if the days, or thread of our life
should be cut off before the things foreknowne by us come to pass, or get
actual being; we could not possibly have coexistence with them. Such being or
duration as they have, is too short the one way, and our existence too short
the other way, to make up this knot or bond of mutual relation, which we call
coexistence: There must be on our part, a continuatio^ or lengthning of that
existence which we have; and on their part, a growth into that actual being,
which whilst they are merely future, they have not; before we and they can
be truly said to exist together. Now if we shall mold the manner of Gods
foreknowledge of things future in our own conceit or foreknowledge of them,
we shall erroneously collect; that, seeing we cannot infallibly foreknow
future Contingents, so neither could they be infallibly fore-knowne by God; if
to him or in respect of his decree, they were contingents, and not necessarily
predetermined.

And some there be, which push our pronenesse to this error forward, by
another; not distinguishing between contingency and uncertainty, they argue
thus;

That which is in it self uncertain, cannot certainly be known:

Every future contingent is in it self uncertain: Ergo, it is not possible,
that a future contingent should certainly be known.

But they consider not that there is a twofold uncertainty: one formally
relative: another only denominative or fundamental. That which is relatively
uncertain, cannot be certainly known; for so it should be certain to him,
to whom it is uncertain. But a future contingent, as it is contingent, does
not necessarily or formally include this relative uncertainty; although it
usually be in part the foundation or Cofounder of it. For relative uncertainty,
or that uncertainty which is so termed with relation unto knowledge, results
partly from the nature of the object, suppose a future Contingent or Event
mutable; partly and more principally, from the imperfection of the knowledge,
in respect of which it is said uncertain. But the same effect or event, which
is in part the foundation of uncertaintie, with respect to finite or unperfect
knowledge, may be the distinct and proper object of knowledge in it self
infallible, or of knowledge infinite. Now if we grant, that there is any
knowledge in it self infallible, we cannot imagine that any thing possible
(yet is every future Contingent, though we consider it as contingently future,
possible) should be uncertain unto such knowledge. We should again consider,
that the Eternal Providence, does neither know or foreknow Contingents future,
by interposed or expiring Acts; but by interminable and Eternal Knowledge, in
which there is no succession, nothing future, nothing past. And without the
interposition of some determining or expiring Acts, there can be no error in
men; no man erres while he is in the search of truth, or whilst he suspends
his Judgment. Take then away the imperfection of our knowledge or judgment,
whilst it is in suspense; which is ignorance, rather than error; and it
better resembles divine knowledge, than our actual resolutions or
determinations do.

11 The best knowledge which we can have of things contingent, is but
conjecturall: and of things merely casual, we cannot have so much as a true
conjecturall knowledge; for, those things we term casual, which are without
the reach or sphere of our forecast or conjecture. And hence it is, that the
actual exhibition of any event, whether casual or contingent, does always
actuate, increase, or perfect our knowledge. The true reason why we cannot
certainly foreknow events contingent, is because our Essence and Knowledge are
but finite: so that things contingent are not so contained in us, that if we
could perfectly know our selves, we might perfectly know them. But in the
Divine Essence all real effects, all events possible, whether necessary,
casual, or contingent, are eminently contained, the perfect knowledge of his
own Essence, necessarily includes the perfect knowledge not only of all
things that have been, are, or shall be, but of all things that might have
been, or possibly may be. For as Gods Essence is present in every place, as it
were an ubiquitary center; so is his Eternity or infinite duration indivisibly
coexistent to every part of succession; and yet withal is round about it. He
it is, that drives things future upon us, being from Eternity as well beyond
them, as on this side of them. Though he should create other creatures without
the circumference of this world, they should be all within his presence,
without which, it is impossible ought besides him, should have any existence:
yet should he not properly gain any new existence in them, but only take a
denomination of coexistence with them; because they have existence in Him,
which before they had not. Thus, admitting the branches of Contingency or
indifferent possibilities never reduced to act, to be in our apprehension
numberless; yet whenever any thing comes to pass, which might not have
been, it cannot fall without the sphere of Gods actual knowledge, which is
fully commensurable to Eternity and Immensity; and therefore is not only
coexistent to every successive act, but does environ whole succession. And
whether of such things as possibly may be, more or fewer be reduced to act;
nothing accrewes to Eternal Knowledge, no new act can be produced in it, by
the casual event; but only that which was eternally known, having now gotten
actual coexistence with Eternity, bestows this extrinsecall denomination upon
the Eternal Creator, It was foreknowne from eternity; that is, in plain
language, known, when it was not, by Him that more properly always
indivisibly, is, then was before it. And being such, his knowledge of things,
which, in respect of us are only future and foreknowne, does as truly
resemble, or rather contain our knowledge of things past or present, as of
things to come. Now for us to apprehend a thing past, under the nature of a
thing contingent, is not impossible. And though we certainly know it to be
already past, yet this certainty of our knowledge, does not persuade us, that
it came to pass certainly, or inevitably; but is very compatible with our
conceit of its contingency or casual production, whilst it was present. Our
knowledge of such things past or present, is necessary; but the event it self
is not therefore necessary, nor to be termed necessary in respect of our
knowledge. Much less may we say, either that contingent effects are necessary,
or that no effects are not necessary, in respect of Gods decree or
foreknowledge of them. For if we believe that Gods foreknowledge of all events
to come, be they of what kind they possibly may be, is more clear and more
infallible than our best knowledge of things past or present; the necessary
infallibility of his knowledge, can neither add any degree of necessity to the
nature of the events foreknowne, nor take one jo^ of contingency from them. God
should not be absolutely infinite either in Essence or in Knowledge, if the
absolute infallibility of his foreknowledge, or the impossibility of his not
erring in his predictions, were in it self grounded upon, or to be inferred by
us, from the absolute necessity of the event, rather than from the absolute
infinity of his wisdom. For those effects which being otherwise in their
nature contingent, it is in our power (by Gods permission, by circumspection
and forecast) to alter by laying a necessity upon them, which before they had
not; we are able (after this necessity laid upon them by our selves) infallibly
to foreknow and foretell, albeit our knowledge still remain but finite. Now,
that some events, which are to day, in themselves and by Gods decree, truly
contingent, may by our industry and circumspection, become to morrow truly
necessary, no intelligent Christian Divine will (I hope) deny; or if any do
deny it, we shall be able (by Gods assistance) positively to demonstrate the
truth of this our assertion, and withal demonstrate the dangerous
inconveniences of the contradictory opinion, in the Treatise of Divine
providence. In the mean time, to finish this principal stem of Divine
providence, to wit, his infinite Wisdom; and the dependence which things
temporal have upon his eternal knowledge: Succession we imagine as a scrole
containing several columns of contingency or indifferent possibilities; of
which only so many, or so much of any, as in revolution of time, take ink,
and are unfoulded, become visible to Men and Angels. But the Almighty looks
on all things, as well from that end of time which is to come, as from that
which is past: his infinite and eternal wisdom, does not only encompasse
all things that come to pass, as the Circumference does the Center; but
penetrates the whole scrole of succession from end to end and from corner to
corner, more clearly then the Suns brightness does the perspicuous or purified
Air. Those Columns of mere possibilities never actuated, which his finger
from Eternity has drawn in Characters secret and invisible to his Creatures,
are alike distinct and legible to his glorious eye, as those others whose first
draught, being as secretly and invisibly fashioned by him, man or other second
causes by his concourse, fill with actual or sensible existence; as the
Embroyderer does the Drawers obscure pattern, with conspicuous branches of
silk, gold, or silver.

12 But lest we may be thought to read the Ancients with no greater reverence,
than we do some modern Writers from whom we freely dissent, without any
impulsion of envy or vainglory, let us for conclusion of this long discourse, a
little reflect upon the testimonies before avouched out of S. Austine, and out
of S. Gregory. The truth then at which these two learned Fathers aimed, and
which, in the charitable construction of such as read them with reverence, they
did not miss, may be fully comprised in these observations following, which
are but necessary extracts of what has hitherto been delivered. Whereas S.
Gregory says, Unto God nothing is past, nothing to come; the true construction
of his meaning is, that in Gods knowledge of things past, present, or to come,
there is nihil futurum, nihil praeteritum, no such difference of time or
duration, as we express by these words, future or past: for it always is, and
so perfectly always is, that nothing can be added to it by succession or
variety of events, be they necessary, casual, or contingent. But as his
Eternal knowledge of all things, does not make all things, which he knows, to
be eternal (no not in respect of his Eternal Decree or Knowledge, for he
eternally decrees and knows things temporal and mutable:) so neither does the
immutable or absolute certainty of his knowledge, make all things so known by
him, to be immutable or absolutely necessary, either in themselves or in
respect of his Eternal Knowledge. Only this we are bound to believe, and this
is all that we may in this argument safely say: [Gods Knowledge of things
mutable and unnecessary, is absolutely necessary, because absolutely infinite.]
Again, it is most true which S. Gregory says; that things future do not come
upon God as they do upon us; that things present do not pass him, or from
him, as they do from us. Whilst things present pass from us, we likewise
pass from them: for we continually lose that portion of duration or
coexistence which we had with them; always gaining, whilst our glass is in
running, a new ^rit or link of coexiste^ce with that which is next to come.
Nothing, in this sense, can pass by God or from God, because He always is,
and the manner of his duration is indivisible: He cannot lose any existence by
antiquity, nor gain any new portion of duration, by everlasting continuance.
Times passing exonerate themselves into the Ocean of his infinite duration,
without enlarging it; times coming incessantly flow from it, without
diminution of it. Times future again, are said to come upon us, or to meet us;
because our duration or existence cannot reach to future things, whilst they
are future: the very Angels are not of so long standing or duration to day, as
they shall be to morrow: unless things future did come toward them, and as
it were meet them, they should have no coexistence with them. In this sense,
times future cannot be said to come upon God, because he always is, and exists
every way before them. His duration is yesterday, to day, to morrow, the same
for ever; and every way the same without addition of quantity, without
alteration of nature or quality: and in it are all things that are. So much of
being as things future can be said to have, they have it in him and from him:
so much of being as there remains of things past, remains in Him, and things
present, even presence it self, cannot for a moment subsist, without Him.

CHAP. 9.
Of Divine Immutability.
1 WIth these stemmes of Divine perfection hitherto expressed, another presents
it self to our contemplation, which some Schoolmen have molded in the same
conceit with Eternity; of which, others conceive it to be the offspring. Us
it suffices, that the true explication of the former, confirms the truth of
this attribute, whose brief explication we now seek. And perhaps, if I should
speak properly, the Knowledge of it, is the Offspring of our right knowledge
of the former. The attribute it self, whose truth in former disputes has
been supposed, is Divine Immutability; which may be thus demonstrated.

2 All mutation supposes a defect or imperfection, either in respect of the
term, whence, or into which, the change is made; and therefore can have no
place in absolute or abstract perfection, or in Essence infinite. More
particularly, all mutation or change, is either in essence, in quantity, in
place, or in quality; under which we comprehend all vital endeavors, all acts
of the Will or Understanding. In essence or nature, it is impossible the
totality and fountain of Essence should admit any change, as impossible for
him which has no author of being, not to be always what he is; as for that
which now is not, to take his being to it self: unto infinite perfection (for
such he is) what can accrue? On the other side, nothing can fall from it, but
must fall into him; seeing, He is in being infinite. And in that he fills
every place by his essential presence, it is impossible he should move from
place to place, or be carried by any circular motion, being indivisibly and
totally in every space that can be imagined. And as his Immensitie could not be
intended or contracted by extension of new magnitudes, or by diminution or
annihilation of the old; so neither can his Eternity, be shortened or lenghtned
by continuation of succession, or expiration of time or motion. Power, in like
sort, truly infinite, can admit no intension or remission, in endeavors; but
moves all things without motion, and works all things without labor or
toil inherent: For all things are made, and brought to nothing, by his sole
will or word. Nor speaks he ought, which from Eternity he has not spoken;
albeit succeding ages have still new messengers of his eternal will and Word,
All flesh is as grass, and all the glory of man as the power of the grass;
the grass withers, and the flower thereof falls away. But the word of the
Lord endures for ever. And yet this was that word of the Gospel, which seemed
then first to be preached unto them.

3 All the difficulty wherewith flesh and blood in this article are usually
assaulted, or seem to themselves to be beset, is, how his will or counsel
should be eternally immutable, and yet everlastingly free: but supposing, what
we often promise, and once for all (by his assistance) shall undoubtedly prove;
that absolute contingency or possibilities aequipendent betwixt many effects,
may as truly be the object of his Eternal decree, as necessity in other works
of nature: I see not what appearance of difficulty can present it self, to
such, as bear the two former principles before mentioned level in their
minds and thoughts; the one, that God is absolute infinite in Being: the
other, that He is absolutely perfect, according to all the branches of Being
or perfection by us conceiveable; or, more than all these, Perfection it self.
Now in things that have any better portion of Being, wherein they can truly
delight; it is, to our apprehension, a degree or portion of perfection to have
an immutable state of such Being; an imperfection, to be subject to alteration
or change. But, whether their estate be mutable or immutable, it is a greater
perfection to be free in their operations, than to be restrained to some one or
few particulars, without any choice or variety of subjects, wherein they may
exercise their operative faculties. Brutish, or merely sensitive creatures
have a delectable kind of Being, whose continuance they desire; but without
all variety of choice, or desire of any better being, although the best being
they have be subject to alteration or change. Men are free in their operations;
but mutable and subject to alteration, as well in their nature, as in their
operations, or in the objects of their freedom; and yet are more excellent
than the visible Heavens, which are not obnoxious to alteration or corruption.
So that, if the Heavens, or other incorruptible substances, had their freedom
of choice, which men have; they would be more perfect and excellent creatures
than man is: Or, if man were as immortal as they are, he would be incomparably
more perfect than they can be, without the freedom of choice or will, which
(as we now suppose) is the inseparable consequent, or companion of reason or
intellectual knowledge. But, though freedom be in it self a great
perfection; yet to be free to do evil, is a branch of imperfection, which
springs from the mutability of the creatures freedom. And this their
mutability, though in it self an imperfection, yet is an imperfection
necessarily praerequired, or praesupposed to the perfection of the creature.
For no creature can be truly perfect by nature, but by the will and pleasure
of the Creator. And it is his will and pleasure, to make them mutable, before
they be immutably happy. But the Creator of all things, in that He is
absolutely perfect, even Perfection it self, is essentially immutable,
essentially free, and immutably happy; because infinitely good. Yet if we
compare these attributes amongst themselves, immutability is the ground or
supporter, not the Crown or perfection of freedom, but freedom rather the
perfection of immutabilitie. Yet were freedom in it self, how perfect and
complete soever it were, no absolute perfection, unless it were immutably
wedded unto goodness. Absolute immutability and absolute freedom, may very
well stand together, even in our conceits; so they be rightly joined, or
sorted. To be freely immutable, implies a contradiction; if not unto the nature
of immutability, yet unto the nature of absolute perfection, or to our true
conceit of infinite Being. To be freely immutable, is a branch of imperfection
or impotency; which might put al those perfections, which are contained in that
nature which is no otherwise than freely immutable, upon the hazard. If the
divine Essence were freely immutable, or free in respect of his immutability,
whether of nature or goodness; it were possible for him to put off these two
attributes, and to eloath himself with mutability, which is always charged
with possibility of doing amiss. But to be immutably free, is no point of
imperfection; but rather the period of perfection; and necessarily inferres
this perfection (which we call freedom) to be as unchangeable as the
Attributes of power, of wisdom, of eternity, or goodness are. The excellency
of his nature and Essence necessarily includes an Eternal liberty or freedom
in the exercise of his omnipotent power, and in the influence or communication
of his goodness; Free it is for him, from Everlasting to Everlasting,
omnipotently to decree as well a mutability in the actions of some things
created, as a necessity or immutability in the course or operation of nature
inanimate: That the course of man's life, or the final doom awarded to every
man (though that must be awarded unto all according to the diversity of their
courses,) should be immutable; because they are foreset by an immutable
omnipotent Decree; has no more color of truth, than to say the Omnipotent
Creator, must needs be black because he made the Crows and Ebony black; or
white, because he made the Snow and Swannes white; or green and yellow,
because he made the Gold yellow, and the Popinjayes green: Or that he should
be of all colors, because the Rainbow is his creature. Let us believe then,
that He is everlastingly and immutably free, to make creatures of what kind it
pleases Him, that he has printed a resemblance of his freedom in the
mutability of this inferior world, and has left a model of his immutability
in the celestial and immortal substances. But the more immutable He is, the
more irresistible we conceive his power to be: or the greater his wisdom is,
the less preventable the contrivances of it are: the worse it would be with
such as have to deal with Him, were not his goodness (which is the rule of
his Eternal Decree) immutably as great, as He himself, or his other
Attributes are.

CHAP. 10.
Of the eternal and immutable Decree.
1 FRom all, or most of the former speculations, concerning the several
branches of the divine Attributes or perfections, somewhat may be gathered, not
unusefull for rectifying or bettering our apprehensions of Gods absolute and
omnipotent decree. A point, though in all ages most difficult, yet in this age
become so common, and so far extended, that no Divine can adventure upon any
other service profitable for the present estate of Christ's Militant Church, but
he shall be enforced either to make his passage through it, or come so nigh
unto it, that he must, in good manners, do homage unto it. That this Decree
is for its tenor, immutable, (if we take it in the abstract, or as it is in
God) is clear from the attribute last handled; that the same Decree, is
irresistible in its executions, or that the things decreed are inevitable, is
evident from the attribute of Gods infinite Power or Omnipotency. That this
immutable irresistible Decree, is Eternal, or before all Times, no man
questions. Yet is it not agreed upon by all, either what a Decree is, or what
it is to be Eternal. All least the most part do not perfectly bear in mind,
the true importances of an Eternal Decree. To this purpose have the former
speculations concerning Eternity, and Gods infinite wisdom been praemised;
Lest, by the incogitant use of these and the like Scripture Phrases, [God
foreknowes or has decreed all things from Eternity;] that slumber might creep
upon the unvigilant or unattentive Reader; with whose dreams many deceived,
have thought and spoken of Gods Decree or predetermination of things to come,
as of Acts already irrevocably finished and accomplished; And by a consequent
error, resolve that it is as impossible, for any thing to be otherwise than it
is, will be, or has been; as it is to recall that again, which is already
past. In which conceit, though they do not expressly speak or think it,
they necessarily involve thus much [That God by his Eternal and powerful
Decree, did set the course of nature a going with an irresistible and
unretractible swingde; and since only looks upon it, with an awful eye, as
Masters sometimes watch their servants, whether they go the way they are
commanded.] But it is a rule in Divinity, not contradicted, (for ought I know)
by any Christian, that there is altogether as great need and use of power and
wisdom infinite, to manage the world, as there was at first to make it, Pater
meus operatur adhuc (says the Ioh. 5. 17.
Wisdom of God) et ego operor. My Father works hitherto, and I work. And
as he cease not to work, so does he never cease to decree. Omnia Ephesians. 1.
11.
operatur secundum consilium voluntatis suae. He works all things according
to the counsel of his Will. So that albeit the Counsel of his Will, by which
he works, be Eternal; yet all things are not yet wrought by it. Shall we
say then, he has not decreed whatsoever does or shall befall us? Yes, in this
sense we may, [He does not now first begin to decree the^:] but in as much as
his Decrees have no end, we should remember withal, that he now decrees
them. And it were much safer for every man in particular to look on Gods
Decree concerning himself, as present or coexistent to his whole course of
life; rather than on it, as it was before the world, or in Adam: for so we
shall think of it, as of an Act past and finished, which has denounced
sentence upon us, more irrevocable than the Laws of the Medes and Persians.
Howbeit even these laws, whiles they were in making, suppose that Liberty in
their Makers, which they utterly took from them being once enacted.

2 Gods Decrees are like theirs, in that they are in themselves unalterable:
but not in that they make some evils, which befall others, inevitable; or some
casual inconveniences, unamendable. No wisdom, but that which is infinite,
and an Eternal Law in it self, foreseeing all things that possibly can be,
has just warrant to make Decrees for men everlastingly immutable. Too strict
obligement unto Laws positive, or Decrees unalterable, deprives both Lawgivers
and others of their native Liberty and opportunity of doing good. Were the
Popes wisdom and integrity parallel to that supereminent dignity, which he
challenges; it were not amiss for the body whereof he is the lawful head,
if he exercised the same power over his Grants or Acts, that he does over his
breath: always reserving a liberty to send them forth, or call them in, to
enlarge, contract, or invert them, according to exigences or occasions present.
To alter his opinion of men, as they do theirs in points of useful doctrine,
or their demeanours in matters of life; curbing him this year, whom he
privileged the last year; now punishing where he lately rewarded; and,
shortly after, rewarding where now he punishes; would argue no mutability of
mind, or unsettled fickle disposition, but rather immovable constancy; if so in
all these changes he truly observed the rule of Justice, which because it is
always one and the same, and never varies, must needs afford different
measures to different deserts, and fit contrary dispositions with contrary
recompenses. But seeing Princes and Governors, are made of the same corrupted
mold with those, whom they govern; oft-times exposed by height of place to
greater blasts of mutabilitie, and inconstancy, than their inferiors; Public
Laws have been sought out by most Nations, to run like a straight line,
betwixt two distorted and crooked ones; and to be as a firm, or bar,
between the tumultuous and raging passions of Princes and subjects, which
every foot (as we say) would fall foul were they not thus fended off, one from
the other. Upon this consideration many Conquerours have been content to
sheathe up a great part of their illimited power (retayning some competent
prerogatives to themselves and their successors) in public Edicts or Laws,
not altogether so unalterable as the Laws of the Medes and Persians: yet less
subject to change, then Lords purposes, or Princes pleasures: and every Act
whereto they pass their consent, restraines them of some former liberty, and
abates somewhat of their present greatness; to whose length or continnance (as
Theopompus observed) much by this means, is added; and it were better to live
an hundred years, (as he said) with ingenuous health and strength, then to
swagger it for twenty, with gyantly force, or Athleticall constitution. And
albeit the Law (which is a common looking glass to direct the Prince in
commanding, and the subject in obeying) may sometimes lay out authority, and
sometimes obedience, or inflict punishment one while, and dispense rewards
another while, in measure greater or less, than a wise and just Arbitrator,
chosen for these particular purposes, would allow of; yet has it been thought
fittest for all parts, rather to brook these interposed mischiefs, then to be
perpetually subject to the former inconveniences of the Papacy; if the Popes
(such as they are) or other Princes should practice according to the Canonists
rule, Papa nunquam ligat sibi manus, The Pope never ties his own hands.

3 But the unerrable rule of everlasting Justice, who from eternity decrees,
whatsoever may be, and foresees whatsoever will be, (because Heaven and Earth
may sooner pass than his words or acts) passes no act to the prejudice of his
absolute and eternal power of Jurisdiction. What grant or promise soever he
make, cannot bind the exercise of his everlasting liberty, for a moment of
time: they last no longer than durante beneplacito: seeing gracious Equity, and
only it, is his everlasting pleasure. He ever was, ever is, and ever shall be,
alike indifferent and free to recompense every man according to his present
ways. And in that, he always searches the very heart and secret thoughts,
and never cease to decree; his one and indivisibly everlasting decree,
without any variety or shadow of change in it self; fits all the changes,
several dispositions, and contingent actions of Men and Angels, as exactly, as
if he did conceive, and shape a new Law, for every one of them; and they are
conceived and brought forth, as well befitting them as the skin does the body,
which nature has enwrapped in it. No man living (I take it) will avouch any
absolute necessity from all Eternity, that God should inevitably decree the
deposition of Elies line from the Priesthood, or his two sons destructions by
the Philistims: For this were to bereave him of his absolute and eternal
liberty. I demand then, whether within the compass of time, or in eternity, as
praeexistent to Elies days, he past any act that could restrain his eternal
liberty of honoring Elies families, as well as any others in their time? To
say, He did, were impiety; because it charge the Almighty with impotent
immutability. What shall we say then? The deposition of his race, the sudden
death and destruction of his sons, were not at all absolutely necessary, but
necessary only upon supposed miscariage of the possible means and
opportunities, which he had given them for honoring him. And that eternal
decree, [They that dishonor me, them will I dishonor,] as coexistent to the
full measure of this their transgression, by it shapes their punishment.

4 To think of Gods eternal decree with admiration void of danger; we must
conceive it, as the immediate Axis or Center, upon which every successive or
contingent act revolves: and yet withal, that, wherein the whole frame of
succession or contingency is fully comprehended, as an unconstant movable
Sphere in a far greater quiescent, or rather in such a one (as in the
description of Eternity was imagined) which has drawn all the successive
parts of motion, into an indivisible unity of duration permanent. Every part of
the larger Sphere (this, swallowing up motion, in vigorous rest) should have
coexistence local with all and every part of the next moveable Sphere under
it, move it as slowly and swiftly, as the latitude of successive motion can
admit. Whilst we thus conceive of Gods eternal decree, and of his
foreknowledge, (included in our conceit of it) according to the Analogy of
what we must believe, concerning the manner of his ubiquitary presence or
immensity: we shall have no occasion to suspect, that his necessary
foreknowledge of what we do, should lay a necessity upon our actions, or take
away all possibility of doing otherwise. Rather, we may by this supposall,
believe that as probable, and perceive in part the manner how it is so, which
shall by Gods assistance be demonstrated to be de facto most true. As, first,
that the Omnipotent does eternally decree an absolute contingency in most
humane acts: Secondly, that this eternal act or decree (which we thus conceive
to be throughout the whole succession of time, in every place indivisibly
coexistent to each humane thought or action) does not only perpetually support
our faculties, but withal uncessantly inspire them with contingency in their
choice: that is, it so moves them, as they may without let or encumbrance,
move themselves more ways then one: And yet, even whilst it so moves them, it
withal inevitably effects the proportioned consequents, which from everlasting
were foreordained to the choices, which we make, be they good or bad; or
according to the several degrees of good or evil done by us, or of our
affections or desires to do them.

CHAP. 11.
Of transcendentall goodness: and of the infinity of it in the Divine nature.
1 IF in assigning reasons of Maxims or proverbiall speeches, we might not
be thought to fetch light beyond the Sun; we should say, Life unto things
living is therefore sweet, because it is a principal stem of being, as
sweetness likewise is of goodness. However, we may resolve this Physical
Axiom, into a Metaphysicall: Omne ens qua ens est bonum; Unto every thing, its
own proper being is good. Poison, though noisome to man, to the Aspe is
pleasant, so is venom to the Toad, and the Adder delights in his sting. In
things inanimate, there should be no reluctance of contrary or hostile
qualities, unless each had a kind of grateful right or interest in their
own being, and were taught by nature to fight for it, as men do for their
lives or goods. This is that goodness which we call entitative or
transcendentall. A goodness equally, alike truly communicated to al things
that are, from his goodness who only is; but not participated equally, or
according to equality, by all. For as the least vessel that is filled to the
brimme, is as full as the greatest that can be, and yet the quantity of liquor
contained in them equally full, is most unequal: So, albeit the entitative
being of the Fly, Ant, or Worm, be unto them as good as man's being is to man:
(For even the Ant or Fly being vexed, or Worms trod upon, will bewray their
spleen, and labor as it were to right themselves for the loss or prejudice
which they suffer in their Entitative goodness, by doing harms to their
tormentors) yet is man's being simply much better than the being of Ants or
Worms. And much worse were that Man, than any Beast, that with Gryllus in the
Poet, would like to change his humane nature, for a brutish. This excess of
entitative goodness, by which one creature excels another, accreweth partly
from the excellency of the specificall Nature of Entity which it accompanies;
as there is more Entitative goodness is being a Man than in being a Lion; and
more in being a Lion, than in being some inferior ignoble Beast: it partly
accreweth according to the greater or lesser measure, wherein several
creatures enjoy their specificall Nature. Men though by nature equal, are not
equally happy, either in body or mind. Bodily life in it self is sweet, and
is so apprehended by most; yet is loathsome to some; who (as we say) do not
enjoy themselves, as none of us fully do. Sensitive appetites may be in some
measure satisfied by course, not all at once. The complete fruition of
goodness incident to one, defeats another (though capable of greater pleasure)
for the time, of what it most desires. Venture non habet aures, The Belly
pinched with hunger must be satisfied with meat, so must the thirsty throat be
with drink, before the ears can suck in the pleasant sound of music, or
the eye feed it self with fresh colors or proportions. Too much pampering
bodily senses, starves the mind; and deep contemplation feeds the mind, but
pines the body Of making many Books (says Eccles. 12 12.
Solomon) there is no end; and much study is a weariness of the flesh The more
Knowledge we get, the greater capacity we leave unsatisfied; so that we can
never seize upon the entire possession of our own selves: and contemplation
(as the wise King speaks) were vanity, did we use the pleasures of it any
otherwise, tha^ as pledges or earnest of a better life to come. And albeit man,
in this life, could possess himself as entirely as the Angels do their
Angelical Natures, yet could not his entitative goodness or felicity, be so
great as theirs is; because the proper patrimony which he possesses, is
neither so ample nor so fruitful. God alone is infinite, in being infinitely
perfect; and he alone, infinitely enjoyes his entire being, or perfection. The
tenure of his infinite joy or happiness, is infinitely firm, infinitely
secured of being always what it is; never wanting so much as a moment of time,
to enlarge or perfect it by continuance, incapable of any enlargement or
increase for the present. But this entitative or transcendentall goodness, is
not that which we now seek; whereto notwithstanding it may lead us. For even
amongst visible creatures, the better every one is in its kind, or according to
its entitative perfection, the more good it does to others. The truest measure
of their internal or proper excellencies, is their beneficial use or service
in this great Universe, whereof they are parts. What Creature is there almost
in this whole visible Sphere, but specially in this inferior part, which is
not beholden to the Sun; from whose comfortable heat, Nothing (as the Psa.
19. 9.
Psalmist speaks) can be hid? It is, at least of livelesse or mere bodies,
in it self, the best and fairest; and far the best to others. And God (as it
seems) for this purpose, sends forth this his most conspicuous and goodly
messenger, every morning like a bridegroom bedeckt with light and comeliness,
to invite our eyes to look up unto the Hills whence comes our Help: upon
whose tops he has pitched his glorious Throne, at whose right hand is fullness
of pleasures everlasting. And from the boundless Ocean of his internal or
transcendent joy and happiness, sweet streams of perpetual joy and comfort,
more uncessantly issue, than light from the Sun, to refresh this vale of
misery. That of men the chief inhabitants of this great Vale, many are not so
happy as they might be, the chief causes are; that, either they do not
firmly believe the internal happiness of their Creator, to be absolutely
infinite, as his other attributes are; or else consider not in their hearts,
that the absolute infinity of this his internal happiness, is an essential
cause of goodness (in it kind, infinite) unto all others, so far as they
are capable of it; and capable of it all reasonable creatures, by creation,
are: none but themselves can make them incapable of happiness, at least, in
succession or duration, infinite. Goodness is the nature of God; and it is the
nature of goodness to communicate it self unto others, unto all that are not
over grown with evil: of which goodness it self can be no cause or author.

CHAP. 12.
Of the infinity and immutability of Divine goodness communicative, or as it
is the pattern of moral goodness in the creature.
1 THe father of Epicures, will have more than his sons, to consent with him,
that imbecility and indigence, are the usual parents of Pity, Bounty,
Kindness, or other like branches of communicative humane goodness. Whilst we
ned not others help, we little think in what need they stand of ours. The
Prince in his jollity, can hardly compassionate the beggars misery: nor knows
the Beggar how to bemone decayed Nobles: whose condition is more miserable than
his own, though so it seems not unto him; who would think he had fully
conquered want, were he but furnished with such supplies of meat, drink, and
clothing, as these have always ready at hand. That sympathy, which in
livelesse or reasonlesse creatures, naturally flows from similitude of
internal qualities, seldom breaks forth in men; but either from experimental
remembrance of what lately has, or from apprehension of what shortly may
befall themselves: sight of the like afflictions in others, as we have lately
felt, revives the phantasmes or affections which were companions of our
mourning; and by so pitying of our own former plight, we pity them.

2 But albeit Epicurus observation may seem in a manner universal, whilst
applied to its proper subject, Man in his corrupt state; yet when he transcends
a genere ad genus, from our corruptible nature to the divine nature, which is
immortal; his inference is of the same stamp with those fools inductions,
that concluded in their hearts, There was no God. The divine nature (says he)
is not penetrable by mercy or pity: Why so? Will you hear a bruit make
Enthymems? Because these find no entrance into the hearts of men, but through
some breach of defect or indigence. It is well this slowbellyed evil beast,
could grant man's nature not to be altogether so bad or cruel, as want might
not tame it, and make it gentle and kind. But would not bruit qeasts, so they
might speak, disclaim his conclusion; that true felicity, or fullness of all
contentment possible, should make the divine nature worse, than want and misery
does the humane? Surely, there is somewhat else amiss in that, which is made
better by defect. Nor could wealth and honor make the mighty unmindefull of
others, but by making them first forget themselves. The externalls whereon our
desires fasten, so captivate the humane soul, that she cannot do as she
would, or as nature teaches her; but these strings being cut, she follows her
native sway. And in a good sense it was most true, which a Master of a better
sect, than Epicurus founded, has taught; Nemo sponte malus.

3 Lust in old Age, Pride in Beggars, and shifting in men overflowing with
wealth, seem to transcend the nature of sins, and are monsters in corrupted
nature; because, not begotten by temptations, they in a manner beget
themselves: yet scarce shall we find an old man so prone to Lust, a rich man
so delighted in shuffling, an Epicure so addicted to his pleasure, or any at
all so ill affected either in himself or toward other; that being asked, would
not profess his desire to deserve well of others, to be liberal, to be
upright, compassionate, just and bountiful. For though continuance in bad
custom, induce in a sort, another nature; yet can it not transport any man so
far beyond himself, or miscarry his thoughts so much, but he shall feel
some secret impulsions unto goodness, and some retractions from evil. But as
Quod plerosque in emendabiles facit, omnium aliarum artium peccata, artificibus
pudori sunt offenduntque: errantem in vita peccata delectant. Non gaudet
navigio Gubernator everso, non gaudet egro Medicus elato, non gaudet Orator, si
patroniculpareus cecidit. At contra, omnibus crimen suum voluptati est.
Laetatur ille Adulterio, in quod irritatus est ipsa difficultate: laetatur ille
circumscriptione furt^que nec ante illi culpa, quam culpae fortuna displicuit.
Id prava consuetudine evenit. Alioqui ut scias, subesse animis, etiam in
pessima abductis, boni sensum, nec ignorari turpe, sed negligi, omnes peccata
dissimulant, and quamvis feliciter cesserint, fructu illorum utuntur, ipsa
subducunt. At bona conscientia prodire vult, and conspici. Ipsa nequitia
tenebras timet. Eleganter itaque ab Epicuro dictum pute, Potest nocenti
contingere ut lateat, latendi fides non potest. Aut si hoc modo melius hunc
explicari posse juditas sensum: Ideo non prodest latere peccantibus, quia
latendi etiam si facultatem habent, fiduciam non habent. Ita est, tuta scelera
esse possent: secura non possunt, Seneca Epist. 97.
Seneca well observes, It is no marvel that we do not amend what we know to
be amiss in ourselves; seeing errors in every other mystery or profession,
make the professor ashamed: Only such as err in matter of life and manners
are delighted with their errors. The Mariner takes no delight to see his
vessel overturned, nor the Physician in sending his Patient before his time
unto his grave. The Orator rejoices not when his Clyent is through his error
overthrown. Contrariwise, every criminous person is delighted with his crime.
One solaceth himself in Adultery, and takes courage to prosecute his desires
from the very difficulty of accomplishing the^. Another delights in
overreaching others, and in theft; never displeased with his faultiness,
until it prove unfortunate. All are apt to dissemble their faults, being
content when they fall out fortunately, to reap the fruit of them, whilst
they subduct the faults of them; but, a good conscience delights to set it
self forth and to have notice taken of it, whereas naughtiness is afraid of
darkness it self. And as Epicurus elegantly says, A malefactor may have the
hap, but not the assurance to be undiscovered. But (as this Author replies)
what availes it him not to have his naughtiness discovered, without hope or
assurance that it shall not be discovered. His conclusion is, Naughtines may be
safe, but it can never be secure.

4 The reason why their naughtiness an never be warranted with security, is;
because conscience in men most vicious, still bears evidence against them,
that they live not as she would have them. For (as Seneca in the same place
well observes) though bad custom may work a delight in naughtiness, yet even
in minds drencht in the very dreggs of filthiness, there still remains a
sense of goodness: nor is it so much our want of knowledge, as of our right
estimate of what we know to be naught, which makes naughtiness to be so
little abhorred. The mind of man, in that it is endued with reason, has the
rules of Equity imprinted in it; which it always seeks to instampe upon the
inferior faculties of the soul. But this divine light of reason, has as small
force to kindle the love of virtue in hearts overgrowne with sensual desires,
as the Sun in a mist, has to set moist stuff on fire. The unsettled
affections of youth, sometimes admit the impression of these ideall characters,
in actual retired speculations; so will the water take the same shape from the
seal, which the wax does, but hold it no longer than the seal is held upon
it. The heart, which maturity of years has hardened with vast desires, will as
hardly be wrought into a new form, as the stone, which cannot take any other
shape, but only by losing some of its mass or substance; yet if those vast
desires be cut off, or their hopes of supplies from externalls interecepted;
the soul, thus freed, becomes more fashionable unto reason. Affability, which
is as the superficial draught of reason endeavoring to stamp the heart with
real and solid kindness; is as natural (...) Epicure, as to another man, so
long as the exercise of it is not prejudicial to his belly. And the less his
desires were to satisfy it, the larger would the extension of his bowels of
compassion be toward his brethren, or poor neighbors; some drops of
kindness may distill from him in the overflow of plenty or store sufficient
to feed both eye and appetite. But in the days of scarcity, he suckes in
cruelty as wine, and feeds upon the needy as upon delicates: Were there no
more sweet morsels in the market then would serve one man; not one of this
crew, but would cut them out of his Fathers throat, rather than suffer his own
weasand to be defeated of its intemperate expectations. Indigence then, though
Epicurus could not see so much, is, upon different occasions, the mother as
well of cruelty and oppression, as of bounty or pity.

2 From doing to all, as we would be done unto by any, nothing does hinder us
so much (if ought befides do hinder us at all) as our conceipted or opinative
want of somewhat, which either for the present we do, or hereafter may stand
in need off, for satisfying the variety or unconstant longings of our unknown
desires. How well soever they may speak or protest, experience schools us;
not to trust any that fix their expectations upon great matters, or have one
eye always upon their private ends, but with this limitation; if the premises
they now make shall not cross their opportunities, when matters come to trial.
But if we know a man of means, more than competent for maintaining that
estate wherein his constant resolution has pitched content, one otherwise of
temperate desires, and composed affections, able to discern what is fitting
betwixt man and man; we think him a fit rule for directing others, a pattern
whereto would all conform themselves, nothing should go amiss in Church or
Common weal. No man that conceives his own cause to be just and good, but
would commend it to his arbi^rement before another. For* internal moderation
mixed with outward competency, is the only supporter of true constancy. Yet
cannot this mixture, in any created Essence be so firm or permanent, but
possibilities or opportunities of satisfying some internal latent capacities,
by external proffers, may dissolve it. For finite existence has possibility
of nonexistence to control it, and possibility of nonexistence includes
possibility of being otherwise than it is. And therefore it is never impossible
to finite being either to lose it self, or change his properties. A more
particular root of this contingency, or unconstancy in reasonable creatures or
intelligent, is the infinite capacity of their conceits or desires; within
whose compass their finite motions may become excentricke and irregular, as it
were a star fixed in too wide a sphere. The desires of collapsed Angels,
were once tuned by their Creator in as perfect harmony as any creatures could
be: They had all co^petency that could be desired, whether of internal
faculties, or of objects to content the^. Howbeit, whilst the chief Ringleader
of this rebellious Rout, sought to satisfy this infinity of his desire; not
by participation of his joyful presence, who was infinitely good; but by
affecting that greatness and Majesty infinite, which he was enabled to
conceive, but whereof his nature was more uncaple than a whirry of an
Argoes-eyes sail; his capacities did overcope. And his intemperate longings,
while he was in travel of this prodigious birth, has imprinted that ugly
shape upon him, which now he bears. He is become the monstrous brood of his
own monstrous and deformed desires; his mouth opening too wide to swallow that
which is incomprehensible, could never since be shut; his ravenous appetite
cannot be satisfied. Like the grave he feeds on rottenness, and by
continual gnawing and devouring that which cannot satiate, he continually
increases his unquenchable hunger. His will is wedded unto mischief, and
affects nothing but that which is by nature evil; and amongst evils that
most greedily and uncessantly, which is most contrary to infinite goodness. The
first man by this monsters impulsion, reaching too high for that which he
could not compass, did put himself from off the appointed Center of his rest
and revolutions; and since continues irregular and unconstant in all his
motions, thoughts, and actions. In him, in our selves, in the whole nature
(besides that part which has firm union with the infinite Essence) we find
the Maxim infallibly verified, Mota facilius moventur. By our first Parents
needless yielding to one temptation, we are not able to resist any; Our
resolutions to follow that which we acknowledge to be good, or our adhaerence
unto that infinite goodness, from which he divorced his will; can never in this
life be so firm and strong, but the allurements to contrary evils, may be
so great or so cunningly proposed by the great Tempter, that, without especial
grace we cannot resist their attractions. Since our internal harmony betwixt
soul and body; and mutual correspondency of each faculty with other, was
dissolved, no externalls can consort with us. Just competency seems too
little, all of us being as easily led by abundance, as driven by want, to do
evil. And, which is worst of all, our earnest attempts to do that which is
good and right, draws iniquity after them; and whiles we take too hasty, or
unweildy aim at our own welfare, others harms fall under our level.

6 That which most improoveth the force of temptations, whether suggested by
want or indigence, or by other occasions or opportunities; is the inequality,
partly of our natural propensions, partly of means which minister their
several contentments or annoyances. Wealth, in some men, gets the start of
Wit, and overswayes them (otherwise not much mis-inclined) unto such vanities,
as usually are neither bredd nor nursed, but by abundance. Others wits
overreach their revenues; and imboldens them to stretch their projects or
inventions beyond the rules of right and equity. Some men's bodies overgrow
their souls; and these are easily impelled to act any boisterous mischief:
Others being impotent of body, strive so much the more to furnish their minds
with subtle inventions or commodious experience: and by making too much use of
the common Proverb, [Hee that is weak had need to be wily,] are easily
tempted to practice unlawful policy, with delight; as the only preservative
against contempt, or as an instrument of revenge upon such as they hate or
fear. And it would go much against the course of common experience, if that
wiliness which has weakness for its foundation, should not be often enforced
to cover or shelter it self with craft and fraud. To love our own wills, is
an impotency natural unto all. And we love them the better, at least more
strongly, when we perceive them set on that which in it self is good. Whence
it is that our desires of doing many things which are good and commendable,
often draw us to use means not so commendable, for their accomplishment. Many,
out of an extraordinary good will unto the poor, think it no robbery to
cozen the rich; or to dispense with public Laws, for gratifying some private
friend, whose welfare in conscience they are bound to tender. Unto these, and
many like enormities, the infinite Capacity of finite Existence gave first
possibility of being, and the inequality of our internal propensions, which
can never fitly match or hold just proportion with external occurrences, gives
life and improvement.

7 But in the incomprehensible Sphere, which has Vbiquity for its Center, and
Omnipotency for its Axis; whose numberless lines are all possible perfections,
measurelesse; there is no place for exorbitancie. One branch of Being, cannot
mis-sway or over-toppe another; all being so great and firm, as none can be
greater or firmer; being not united, but possessed in such perfect unity, as
prevents all possibility of distraction or division. Shall we say then, he
possesses all things that possibly he can desire to have? Or rather, he
always infinitely is, without all possibility of not being, whatsoever
possibly can be. And though being infinite, he can do all things; yet can he
not desire to perfect himself, or to be greater or better than he is. In that
he neither can fear the impayrement, nor wish the enlargement of his own
estate; all outward employments of his power are for the good of his creatures.
His will to have them when they were not, was but the influence or working of
his essential goodness; which is so abundantly sufficient to his infinite
being, that the overflowing of it is the fountain of all things besides, which
are good. Nothing besides him could possibly have been, unless he were in
power and in being, infinite. And unless his infinite being had been
infinitely good, nothing besides him, should actually have been, or been
endowed with such being, as all things that actually are, have from him. The
proper being of every thing, which actually is, or at least the continuance or
amendment of such being, is infinitely desired by all, as being the stamp or
impression of his infinite goodness, which is alike truly, though not equally,
or in the same measure communicated to all things that are. The Entity of every
thing is good to it self, and most desired.

8 And though these first assurances of his goodness and loving kindness, be
usually requited on man's part with unkindnesse and despite: yet the greatness
of his Majesty, never swayes him to sudden revenge. Quite contrary to the
corrupt nature of man, (whose goodness usually is ill-thriven by his
over-growing greatness:) the unresistible strength of his Almighty power, is the
unmovable pillar of moderation and merciful forbearance. The greatest potency
of man being but finite, the higher it grows, the apter it is to be overtopt
with jealous impotency. The greatest Monarch that is, may be prevented by
others, (of whose power he is jealous) in the exercise of his power or
authority over him; unless he carefully watch his time, and fit seasons, or
take opportunity when it is offered, for accomplishing his projects. But of
God, says the Wiseman, Wisd. 12. 18. Thou mustring thy power judge with
equity, and orderest, or governest us with great favor; for thou may use
power when thou will. And his will is to use it, when men will not believe that
he is of full power to do what he will; as the same Wiseman expresses, verse.
17. But more full unto our present purpose, are the sayings of the same
Wiseman, verse. 15, 16. For so much then as thou art righteous thy self, thou
orderest all things righteously; thinking it not agreeable with thy power to
condemn him that has not deserved to be punished. For thy power is the
beginning of righteousness, and because thou art the Lord of all, it makes
thee to be gracious to all. Though this Author be not, yet this passage in him,
is canonical, and fully consonant to Gods own words to Jonah, Chap. 4. 10,
11. Then said the Lord, thou have had pity on the Gourd, for the which thou
have not labored, neither made it to grow, which came up in a night, and
perished in a night: And should not I spare Nineveh that great City, wherein
are more than sixscore thousand persons, that cannot discern between their
right hand and their left hand, and also much cattle? Amongst great men* many
oppress their tenants: but what Lord would spoil his proper inheritance,
whereto no other can be entitled; or eat out the heart of that ground which
he cannot alienate or demise? What Architect would deface his own work,
unless the image of his unskilfulnesse (whereof the Creator cannot be
impeached) be so apparent in it, as he cannot but blush to behold it? Or who
would leave a goodly foundation bare or naked, unless he be unable to rear it
up without injustice? Now seeing the Entitative Good of proper being, is the
foundation of that true happiness which flows from more special
participation of Gods presence; wheresoever he has laid the one, it is to all
that rightly consider his Wisdom, Truth, and Goodness, an assured pledge of
his will and pleasure to finish it with the other. As his nature is immutable,
so are his gifts without repentance. The current of his joyful beneficence,
can admit no intermission, much less admixture of any evil. Sorrow, woe, and
misery, must seek some other Original; they have no hidden vent, or secret
issue from the Ocean of Joy and Happiness.

9 As the fountain of bodily light cannot send forth darkness, but uniformly
diffuseth light; and light only throughout this visible Sphere: so cannot the
infinite Ocean of true felicity, send forth any influence, but such as is apt
to cherish the seeds of joy and happiness; wherewith every creature capable of
them, was sown in its first creation. And, as it is the property of light
propagated or diffused from the Sun, to make such bodies as are capable of
its penetration (as Glasses, Crystal, Pearl, etc.) secondary fountains of
light to others: so does the influence of divine goodness, inspire all that
are conformable to his will, with desire of doing to others as he has done to
them; that is, of being secondary authors or instruments of good to all. But
such as wilfully strive against the stream of his overflowing goodness, or
boysterously counterblast the sweet and placide spirations of celestial
influence, become creators of their own woe, and raise unto themselves those
storms wherein they perish. Yet so essential it is unto this infinite
Fountain of goodness, however provoked, to send forth only streams of life;
and such is the virtue of the streams which issue from him, that as well the
evil and miseries which miscreants procure unto themselves, as their
mischievous intentions toward others, infallibly occasion increase of joy and
happiness unto all that give free passage unto their current. And this current
of life, which issues from this infinite Ocean, never dryes up, is never
wasted by diffusion: The more it is dammed or quarved by opposition of the
sons of darkness, the more plentifully it overflowes the sons of light.
All the good which one refuses or puts from the^, returns in full measure
to the other.

But if the miseries which wicked spirits, or their conforts, either suffer
themselves, or intend to others, work good to those that receive the influence
of infinite goodness; might he not without prejudice, or imputation, inspire
these castawayes with such mischievous thoughts, or at least intend their woe
and misery, as these are occasions or means of others happiness, or of his
glory? We are indeed forbid to do evil that good may ensue; but if it be
his will to have reprobates do or suffer evil for the good of his chosen,
shall not both be good, as willed by him, whose will (in that he has
absolute dominion over all his creatures) is the rule of goodness?

CHAP. 13.
In what sense, or how Gods infinite will is said to be the rule of goodness.
1 BAd was the doctrine, and worse the application or use, Sunt qui scribunt,
Anaxarchum sophis^am consolandi ejus causa accersi^um, ad eum venisse, quumque
cubantem atque suspirantem offendisset, arridentem dixisse, ignorare ipsum cur
veteres sapientes Iustitiam Iovi assidentem fecerint: nimirum quia quicquid a
Jove decernitur, id just factum esse censeri debent. Opportere igitur, quae a
magno Rege fierent, justa existimari; primum quidem ab ipso Rege, deinde a
caeteris mortalibus. Atque hoc quidem dicto non nihil solatii Alexandro
attulisse. Ego vero majoris errati quam prioris autorem Alexandro Anaxarchum
fuisse censeo, si illam viri sapientis sententiam esse statuit. Arrian. de
expedit. Alex. lib. 4.
which Anaxarchus would have gathered from some Hieroglyphicall devices of
Antiquity; wherein Justice was painted as Jupiters assistant in his Regiment.
Hereby, says this Sophister unto Alexander, (then bitterly lamenting the death
of his dearest Friend Clytus, whom he had newly slain in his temelent rage)
your Majesty is given to understa^d, that the decrees of great Monarchs, who
are a kind of Gods on earth, must be reputed Oracles of Justice, and their
practices may not be reputed unjust either by themselves, or by others. But
this sophistical inversion of these Ancients meaning, was too palpable to
please either the wiser or honester sort of Heathen, though living in those
corrupt times. For albeit many of them conceived of Jupiter, as of a great
King, subject to rage and passion, yet all of them held Justice for an upright,
mild and virtuous Lady; ready always to mitigate, never to ratify his
rigorous decrees; always tempering his wrath with equity. The true Jehovah, as
he needs no sweet-tongued consort to moderate his anger, as Abigail did
David's; so has he no use of such Sophisters as Anaxarchus, to justify the
equity of his decrees, by his Omnipotent Sovereignty or absolute dominion over
all his creatures.

2 To derogate ought from his power, who is able to destroy both soul and body
in hell fire, I know is dangerous; and to compare the prerogatives of most
absolute earthly Princes with his, would be more odious. Yet this comparison I
may safely make: Quanto superior est Deus homine, tam mea malitia est ^nferior
bonitate eius, ut qualitate ita etiam quantitate. Anselm. in meditat. cap. 8.
He does not more infinitely exceed the most impotent wretch on earth in power
and greatness, than he does the greatest Monarch the world has, or ever had,
in Mercy, Justice, and Loving-kindnesse; nor is his will the rule of Goodness,
because the designs thereof are backed by infinite power; but because holiness
does so rule his power, and moderate his will, that the one cannot enjoyne, or
the other exact any thing not most consonant to the eternal or abstract
patterns of equity. His will revealed does sufficiently warrant all our
actions, because we know, that he wills nothing but what is just and good; but
this no way hinders, but rather supposes Justice and Goodness to be more
essential objects of his will, than they are of ours. And therefore when it is
said [Things are good because God wills them] this illative infers only the
cause of our knowledge, not of the goodness which we know: and the logical
resolution of this vulgar Dialect, would be this, We know this or that to be
good, because Gods will revealed commends it for such. But his will revealed
commends it for such, because it was in it nature good; for unless such it had
bin, he had not willed it. These principles though unquestionable to such as
fetch their Divinity from the Fountain, will perhaps in the judgment of
others that never taste it but in trenches, be liable to these exceptio^s.

3 If the goodness of every thing presuppose its being, and nothing can be
without Gods will, what ca^ be good (we speak in order of nature, not of time)
before God wills it? Of being or goodness actually existent in any creature,
it is most true, neither can be without some precedent Act of Gods will. But as
there is a logical possibility presupposed to the working of the Almighty
power: so is there a goodness objective precedent in order of nature, to the
Act or exercise of his will. And unto some things considered as logically
possible; this goodness objective is so essentially annexed; that if it be
his will to give them actual being, they must of necessity be actually good;
nor can he that can do all things, will their contraries. He might, had it
pleased him, have taken life and existence from all mankind, when he preserved
Noah and his Family. But to reserve them men, and no reasonable creatures, was
no object of power omnipotent; much less does his omnipotency enable him to
work ought contradictory to his own nature or essential goodness. As is the
man, so is his strength, and as is the nature of the willer, such are the
objects of his will. Simile gaudet simili. To long after such meats as feed
diseasefull humors, is natural to every disease. And our nature being
corrupted, whets our appetites to such things as are agreeable to the
praedominant corruption wherewith it is tainted, not to the purity wherein it
was created. To will only that which is consonant to his nature, is so much
more essential to God, than unto us, by how much his nature is more simple
than ours is. And seeing it is essential purity, altogether incapable of
corruption, his will cannot pitch but on that which is pure and holy. Whence
the prime rule of all goodness, without himself, is consonancy to his
essential purity and Justice. For as much as thou art righteous thy self thou
orderest all things righteously, thinking it not agreeable to thy power to
condemn him that has not deserved to be punished. Wisdom 12. 15. He loves
truth and sincere dealing, because he himself is true and just. That veracity
which is coeternall to his Essence, includes an everlasting enmity unto
treachery, fraud, and perjury; his immortally spotless and unchangeable
purity, cannot approve of lust and intemperancy, or condemn chastity in any
person, at any time. Nor could he have given a Law, as some lawless Lawgivers
have done, for the authorizing of promiscuous or preposterous lust. To
legitimate violence, or entitle oppression unto the inheritance bequeath^d to
conscionable and upright dealing, is without the prerogative of omnipotency; it
cannot be ratified by any Parliament of the Trinity blessed for ever. The
practice, or countenance of these and the like, are evil; not in us only, to
whom they are forbidden; but so evil in themselves, that the Almighty could
not but forbid and condemn the^, as professed enemies to his most sacred Majesty.

4 To square great men's actions to the dictates of reason or nature, given in
their good days, or to bring their wills within compass of any constant Law;
seems greater violence, than if we should seek to fashion their bodies by
handsome well proportioned garments, but much too strait. And yet we see by
daily experience, that such as are most impatient of regulation or restraint,
are most importunate to have their own unruly wills, the rules of their
inferiors minds and consciences. To do otherwise than they would have them,
though they allege the dictates both of reason and Gods word, will admit no
appeal from the censure of peevishness or perverseness. But for them to set
constant patterns of that morality or good behavior, whose defects in
inferiors they either punish or make advantage of; is reputed a kind of
Pedantisme, or Mechanical servitude. To request such performances, seems as
harsh, as if we should entreat them to set us copies, or songs, or take pains
in teaching us some honest trade. And seeing inferiors are secretly blinded
with this pride of heart; which breaks forth more violently in superiors;
most of both ranks, measure Gods will by their own. But if we will condemn
this impatience of restraint, as a fault in our selves, we must of necessity
acquit the Almighty from the like. The infinite greatness of his Majesty,
cannot wrest his most holy will from strict observance of such rules of
Righteousness as he sets us to follow. That integrity wherewith our first
nature was clothed, was but the Image of his Holiness. And he that requires
us to be holy, as He is holy, or perfect as our Heavenly Father is perfect;
exacts not of us, that we should be as holy and perfect as He is, in any
point of his imitable perfections. Every part of that holiness which becomes
Saints, is in the best of them, but as the material form in an house built of
untowardly stuff, by unskilful hands: but in Him, according to the exactest
Mathematical or Idaeall form, that the cunningest Architect has in his head.
The best examples of goodness, we can conceive, are but as dead pictures of
those everliving ones, which He expresses in his works. All his decrees
concerning man, are not in themselves only, but to man's eyes that look not on
them a squint, so straight and just, that he will refer the trial unto the
deliberate and sober thoughts of his Enemies. Is not my way equal? Are not
your ways unequal? Ezekiel. 18. 25.

5 This may instruct us, that those patterns of Holiness or perfections which
we are bound to imitate in Him, are not to be taken from his bare
Commandment, or revelation of his will, but from the objects of his will
revealed, or from the eternal practices which he has exhibited; as so many
express or manifest proofs, that his will is always Holy and Just: albeit
we cannot always so expressly discern the manner how it is just and holy in
some particular Commandments; but must implicitly believe it to be such in
them, because it is so eminently and apparently holy and just in those
perfections, whereof our general duties are the imperfect representations. Of
all his moral commandments, not one there is, whose sincere practice does not
in part make us truly like him; and we are bound to be conformable to his will
revealed, that we may be comfortable to his nature; without conformity
whereunto, we cannot participate of his happiness; For, Happiness is the
immediate consequent of his nature. The antecedent of Lactantius Argument. [Qui
nos irasci jubet, is utique irascitur,].i. He that bids us be angry, is
certainly angry himself,] is not so certain or authentic, and the inference
is somewhat doubtful. But out of all question, he that bids us unfaignedly
bless our persecutors, does unfaignedly tender his blessings to such as
persecute Him in his members. He that seriously exhorts us to be merciful and
kind to all, shows kindness to the most unkind. That charity which he has
enjoined every man toward all (his greatest enemies not excepted) though we
consider it in the most charitably minded Martyrs, in whose death it seemed to
shine, were but as weak sparkles, or vanishing smoke, of those infinite and
eternal flames of love, which burst out in him toward such, as have deserved
worse at his hands, than any Tyrant of his tormented servants. That truth and
fidelity, which he exacts of us, the faithfulness of Abraham himself; is but
a little map, or narrow surface of that infinite soliditie of truth, whereon
his promises are founded. Between the chastity and temperance of purest
virgins, and his eternal purity, there is the like true correspondency; but
not so great, as there is betwixt the dross and corpulency, and the refined or
sublimated spirits of the same bodies. Or could that rule which is the
fulfilling of the whole Law and the Prophets, Do unto every man as we would be
done unto; be exactly fulfilled by us; it would be but a slender, though a true
model or representation of his eternal equity. He that honors me, him will
I honor. For in this, and the like, he expects no more than the inward
affection of mortal hearts, or praises of man whose breath is in his nostrils,
being ready out of his goodness, to recompense these silly services, with
glory, love and happiness everlasting. But does he intend thus well to all, or
destruction unto some, as it is a means of bliss to those whom he loves? If
so he did, we might be exempt from that negative precept, of not doing evil
that good might ensue. For the only reason why we are bound not to do so, is
because in so doing we should become unlike our heavenly Father, and not be
perfect as he is perfect. But as he turns the voluntary evils of some, to the
good of others; so may we, and ought to consecrate such forfeitures, as
legally fall into our hands to pious uses; or better the states of such as
tender public welfare, by others deserved harms.

6 Be it then granted, (which is the root of all objections against these
resolutions) that Gods glory must as well appear in the punishment of the
Reprobate, as in the beatifying of the Elect; the consequence will be quite
contrary to that which their objections would hence infer; For, if the
foundation of Gods glory, be as sure in the one case, as in the other; the
manner of his dealing with both must be alike perfect, and alike behovefull for
us to follow. Sine bonitate (says Seneca) nulla majestas, Goodness is the
foundation of glory. Now, were it true, that he did intend evil to some,
before they had committed any (though not as evil to them, but as a means of
others good) or absolutely ordained them to eternal inevitable misery, for the
advancement of his own glory; we should not sin, but rather imitate the
perfection of our heavenly Father, in robbing Judas to pay Peter, or in feeding
the hungry, such especially as be of the household of Faith, with the spoils of
ungodly rich men, or unbeleevers. More warrantable it were to guess at the
perfection of his Justice toward the wicked, and of his bounty toward the
godly, by the commendable shadow or imitatio^ of it in earthly gods. To procure
the common good without intention of harm to any, and with admission of as few
private mischiefs as may be, is the chief praise of great Statesmen. And it
is the glory of Princes, to encourage all men unto virtuous courses by good
example, gracious exhortations, and unpartiall distribution of public honors
or commodities: and yet withal to inflict disgrace upon haughty contemners of
those gracious allurements; and to be stern in execution of Justice (without
favor) upon notorious transgressors of wholesome Laws. Yet not to use
severity without sorrow, nor draw blood but by way of medicine; for preserving
of their Crowns and dignities, for maintenance of public peace, or for
preventing the like diseases in other particular members of the same body.
Magistrates that would mind these matters, more than raising themselves, their
friends, or posterity, more than life it self, which they owe unto their
Country; should exhibit us a true model, though (God wot) but a slender one
of our heavenly Fathers wisdom and loving kindness: first in drawing men to
repentance, by gracious promises, and unfaigned proposalls of inestimable
rewards for their service: Secondly, in making the wicked and obstinate
despisers of his infinite goodness, serve to the manifestation of his endless
glory, and confirmation of those that love him in the immortal state of
happiness. These prints of his Fatherly care and Justice, are yet fresh to be
seen in his proceedings with ungratious Cain. And the Lord said unto Cain, why
art thou wroth? and why is thy countenance fallen? if thou do well, shall thou
not be accepted? and if thou do not well, sin lies at the door: And unto
thee shall be his desire, and thou shall rule over him, Genesis 4. ver. 6, 7.
Severe punishment for doing evil, without precedent loving instructions, or
good encouragement to do well, is the natural offspring of unnaturalness.
It bears no shadow of that justice or equity, whose glorious pattern shines
most brightly in our heavenly Father.

CHAP. 14.
Of God infinite love to mankind.
1 IF the Apostles authority could not persuade us to believe, his reasons
would enforce us to grant, that the issues of blessing and cursing from one and
the same mouth, are contrary to the course of nature, and argue the nature of
man, (in whom alone this discord is found) to be much out of tune. Out of the
same mouth proceeds blessing and cursing, my brethren, these things ought not
so to be. Iam. 3. 10. For nature in other things gives you a better example.
Does a fountain send forth at the same place, sweet water and bitter? Can the
Figtree, my brethren, bear Olive berries? either a Vine figs? etc. These and
the like fountains of natural truth, are as open to us, as they were to him,
and we should much wrong both this Ambassador of Christ, and Gods image in our
selves, if we did believe them only for his authority, and not for their own
native perspicuity. The best use of Apostolique^authority, in these
allegations, is to warrant our use of the like, though in matters divine: not
one of his instances but holds as truly in God, as in man; not one but
receives a necessary increase of strength, from the indivisible unity of the
divine Essence. For a Fig Tree to bear Olive berries, is less impossible,
than for the tree of life to bring forth death. To cause the Vine bring forth
Figs, were not so hard a point of husbandry, as to derive cursednesse or misery
from the fountain of bliss. For a Spring to send forth water sweet and
bitter, fresh and salt, at one and the same place, is more compatible with any
reasonable conceit, than for hate or harmefull intentions to have any issue
from pure love. But God is love: yea, love is his Essence as Creator. In that
he is the Author of being, he is the Author of goodness to all things that
are, (Being, unto every thing in its own proper being, is good) and goodness
in an intelligent Don^r, is always the fruit of Love. Hence says the Wiseman,
of him that is wisest of all, of him that can neither deceive nor be deceived:
He hates nothing that he has made. For even their being, and that goodness
which accompanies it, is an undoubted pledge of his love. If to bless God the
maker, and to curse men which are made after his similitude, argue (in the
Apostles supposall) a dissolution of that internal harmony, which should be in
the humane nature: to hate some, and love others of his best creatures, all
being made after his own image; would necessarily infer a greater distraction
in the indivisible Essence, besides the contradiction which it implies to
infinite goodness. To love the works of his own hands, is more essential to
him, that made all things out of mere love, than it is unto the fire to burn
matter combustible: and if his love be, as he is, truly infinite, it must
extend to all, seeing all are less than infinite.

2 Love, were it perfect in us, would perfectly fulfill Gods Law, and make up a
complete body or System of moral goodness. Now the most absolute perfection of
that love, whereof the humane nature (though uncorrupted) could be capable,
would be but an imperfect shadow of our heavenly Fathers most perfect love;
which has the same proportion to his goodness, that love in us (were it as
perfect as it possibly might be) should have to our moral goodness. That is,
it is his complete communicative goodness. And though these two in him be
rather different names, than diverse attributes, yet we love his goodness
better, whiles it is attired with the name of Love. For, of men that do us
equal good turns, we love them best, whom we conceive to love us most: and
loving kindness seems good and lovely, even in the eyes of such as reap no
profit from it, besides the sight of it. The very exercise of it in others,
excites our weak inclinations to the like: and our inclinations moved, stir up
a speculative assent or secret verdict of conscience, to approve that truth
which we cannot follow in the practice: Beatius est dare, quam accipere: It is
a more blessed thing to give, than to receive. No man measures that which we
call a good nature (as of men some are better natured than others) either by
the means it has to benefit, or by the benefits bestowed; but by the fervency
of unfaigned good will, and hearty desires of doing good to all. This is that
wherein (especially when it is helped by grace) we most resemble the divine
nature, which is infinitely better than the humane nature (though taken at the
best) not only in respect of his ability to do good, but of his good will to do
the best that may be. And this his good will exceeds ours, not intensively
only, but extensively. For we are bound to imitate him as well in the extension
of our unfaigned good will toward all, as in the fervency of our desires to do
the best good we can to some, because his loving kindness to man is both ways
infinitely perfect, Thus says the Lord, Let not the wise man glory in his
wisdom, nor the strong man glory in his strength, neither the rich man glory
in his riches: But let him that glories, glory in this, that he understands,
and knows me; that I am the Lord which exercise loving kindness, judgment,
and righteousness in the earth: for in these things I delight, says the Lord.
Ier. 9. 23, 24. The first then and most native issue of infinite goodness, is
the exercise of bounty or loving kindness, which flows from it, without
matter or motive to incite it. This is that which gave being, and with being,
some portion of goodness unto all things that are; it alters the name, but not
the nature in the current. To prevent others with good turns before they can
expect or deserve them, is the highest point of bounty, whereto the ability of
man can reach. But God gave us that we most desire, proper being, with the
appurtenances, before we could desire it; for it is the foundation of all
desire. From Bounty or loving kindness, or from that Goodness whence they
spring, Mercy and Compassion differ only in the extrinsecall denomination taken
from different objects. Compassion is good will toward others, provoked from
notice of their misery: and Mercy is but an excess of Bounty, not estranged
from ill deservers, in distress; so long as the exercise of it breeds no
harm to such as are more capable of bountiful love and favor. This
incompossibility between the exercise of Mercy and bounty toward particulars
ill deserving, and the preservation of common good, occasioneth the
interposition of Justice punitive; whose exercise is in a sort, unnatural to
the Father of mercy. For he does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children
of men. Lamen. 3. 33. Nothing in good men can provoke it toward offenders, but
the good of others deserving either better or not so ill, which might grow
worse by evil doers impunity. To take pleasure in the pain or torture of
notorious malefactors, is a note of inhumanity: their just punishment is only
so far justly pleasant, as it procures either our own, or others welfare; or
avoydance of those grievances, which they more justly suffer, than we or
others of the same society, should do. The more kind and loving men by nature
are, the more unwilling they are to punish, unless it be for these respects.
How greatly then does it go against his nature, who is loving kindness it
self, to punish the works of his own hands; Man especially, who is more
dear unto him, than any child can be unto his Father, for he is the Father of
all mankind? For it is he that made us, and not we our selves; not those whom
we call Fathers of our flesh, for even they likewise were made by Him. Hence he
says, Call no man Father on earth, for one is your Father which is in Heaven,
Mat. 23. ver. 9. Is the title his peculiar, more than the realty answering to
it? Is he more willing to be called the only Father of all the sons of men,
than to do the kind office of a Father to them? No, like as a Father pittieth
his own children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him, For he knows our
frame, he remembers we are but dust. Psalm. 103. 13, 14. It seems this
Psalmist either was or had a most kind and loving Father, and hence
illustrates the kindness of his Heavenly Father, by the best model of
kindness which he knew. But if God truly be a father of all mankind, he
certainly exceeds all other fathers as far in fatherly kindness, as he does
men in any branch of goodness or perfection. This is the first foundation of
our Faith, laid by his only Son: Ad multiplicandum quippe sanctorum
sapientiam proficit, quod postulata tarde percipiunt, ut ex dilatione crescat
desiderium, ex desiderio intellectus augeatur. Intellectus vero cum intenditur,
ejus in Deum ardentior affectus aperitur. Affectus autem ad promeranda
coelestia tanto fit capax, quanto fuerit expectando longanimis. Greg. lib. 20.
moral. in Job ca. 24.
Ask and it shall be given unto you, seek and ye shall find, knock and it
shall be opened unto you. For every one that asks, receives, and he that
seeks, finds, and to him that knocks it shall be opened. Or what man is
there of you, whom if his son ask bread, will he give him a stone? Or if he
ask a fish, will he give him a serpent, Math. 7^ verse. 7, 8, 9, 10. Every
Father that heard Him, would have been ready to have answered no; yet none so
ready or careful as they should be, to give or provide best things for their
children, because all besides him are evil Fathers. If ye then being evil
know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more shall your Father
which is in Heaven, give good things to them that ask him, ver. 11. He is
then so much more willing to give good things to his children, as he is better
or greater than other Parents. His love to all men, seeing all are his sons,
by a more peculiar reference than Abraham was Adams, or Isaac Abraham's, is
infinitely greater than any Parents bear to the fruits of their bodies.
Mortal fathers love children when they have them; but love to themselves, or
want of means to immortalize their own persons, makes them desire to have
children. The only wise immortal God (who is all-sufficient to all, most to
himself, unacquainted with want of whatsoever can be desired) out of the
abundance of his free bounty and mere loving kindness, did first desire our
being; and having given it us, does much more love us, after we are instamped
with his Image. For he sowes not wheat, to reap tares; nor did he inspire man
with the breath of life, that he might bring forth death.

3 The Heathens conceived this title of Father, as too narrow for fully
comprehending all references of loving kindness betwixt their great Jupiter
and other Demigods or men.

Jupiter omnipotens regum rex ipse* Deusque
Progenitor, genitrixque Deum, Deus unus, and omnis.
And another Poet Orpheus. Vide Apul. in lib. de mundo. (...) Forcatulli lib.
5. p. 703.
,

Jupiter and mas est and nescia faemina mortis. And because the affection of
mothers, especially to their young and tender Ones, is most tender: the true
Almighty has deigned to exemplify his tender mercy and compassion toward
Israel, as David did Ionathans love toward him; far surpassing the love of
women, yea of mothers to their children. Sion had said, the Lord has forsaken
me, and my God has forgotten me. But her Lord replies, Can a woman forget her
sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb?
yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee, Esaias 49. ver. 15. And if his
love could sufficiently be expressed by these dearest references amongst men,
whose natural affection toward their tender brood (in respect of meaner
creatures) is much abated by wrong use of reason (as many mothers by greatness
of place, or curiosity of education, are less compassionate toward their
children, then other silly women are) he has chosen the most affectionate
female amongst reasonlesse creatures, to blazon his tender care and loving
protection over ill-deserving children: How often would I have gathered thy
children together, even as a Hen gathers her chickens under her wings! Math.
23. ver. 37. Finally, as he gives much more to our being, than our earthly
Parents, whom we suppose to give us being; so all the sweet fruits or comforts
of love, whether of fathers and mothers toward their children, of husbands
toward their wives, or of brethren to brethren, sisters to sisters, or one
friend to another (their sinfulness only excepted) are but distillations or
infusions of his infinite love to our nature. To witness this truth unto us,
the son of God was made both father, and brother and husband to our nature,
etc. Every reference or kind office, whereof reasonable creatures are mutually
capable, every other creature (though void of reason, so not void of love and
natural affection) may express some part of our heavenly Fathers loving
kindness: but the love of all, though infinitely increased in every
particular, and afterward made up in one, could no way equalize his love
toward every particular soul created by him. Fear of death or other danger,
has such joint interest with love, (as well in the heart of man, as in other
creatures) that, albeit they would do more for their young ones than they do,
if they could, yet they do not usually so much as they might: not so much for
their model of wit or strength, as God for his part though infinite in wisdom
and power does for the sons of men. He that fears none, but is feared of
al, he that needs no Counselor, but has the heart of Prince and Counselor in
his hand, makes protestation in his serious grief, that he has done all for
his unfruitful vineyard that he could, as much as possibly could be done for
it. Or, if his serious protestations cannot deserve credit with deceitful man,
his solemn oath is witness of greater love than has been mentioned, of
greater than the heart of man is able to conceive, even toward such as all
their life time have hated Him. As I live says the Lord, I will not the death
of him that dies.

If besides the authority of these and infinite more sacred texts most
perspicuous in themselves, the interpretation of the Church, be required for
establishing of the doctrine delivered; the whole ancient Church some pieces of
Saint Austine only excepted, which may be counterpoyzed with other parts of
the same Fathers writings, is ready to give joint verdict for us. And whether
the restrictions which some reformed Churches have endeavored to lay upon Gods
promises, be compatible with the doctrine of the English Church, comes in the
next place to be examined.

CHAP. 15.
What the Church of England does teach concerning the extent of Gods love: of
the distinction of singula generum, and genera singulorum: of the distinction
of voluntas signi, and voluntas beneplaciti.
1WHat middle course soever the Church of England does hold, or may take for
compromising contentions between some other reformed Churches in points of
Election and Reprobation, of free will or man's ability, before the state of
regeneration: She does not in her public and authorized doctrine come short of
any Church this day extant, in the extent of Gods unspeakable love to mankind.
No national Council, though assembled for that purpose, could fit their
doctrine more expressly to meet with all the late restrictions of Gods love,
than the Church our mother, even from the beginning of reformation, has done;
as if she had then foreseen a necessity of declaring her judgment in this
point, for preventing schisms or distraction in opinions amongst her sons.
First, she injoynes us to beseech God to have mercy upon all men. This was the
practice of the Ancient Church, which in her opinion, needed no reformation. A
practice enjoined by 1 Timothy 2. 1
S. Paul, I exhort or desire first of all, that supplications, prayers,
intercessions, and giving thanks be made for all men. If any man shall seek
to lay that restraint upon this place, which S. Austine somewhere does, as if
the word [all men] did import only genera singulorum [all sorts of men,] not,
singula generum, [every particular man:] the scanning of the words following,
the sifting of the matter contained in both, with the reason of the
exhortation, and other real circumstances, will shake off this or other like
restriction, with greater ease than it can be laid upon it. We are commanded
to pray for no more* than them, whose salvation we are unfainedly to desire,
otherwise our prayers were hypocritical. Are we then to desire the salvation
of some men only, as they are dispersed here and there, throughout all
nations, sorts, or conditions of men, or for every man of what condition
soever, of what sort or nation soever he be? The Apostle exhorts us to pray for
Kings (not excepting the most malignant enemies which the Christians then had)
and for all that be in authority. And if we must pray for all that are in
authority, with fervency of desire, that they may come unto the knowledge of
the truth; then questionless, we are to desire, we are to pray for the
salvation of all and every one, which are under authority. God is no accepter
of persons; nor will the Omnipotent permit us so to respect the persons of the
mighty in our prayers, as that we should pray that all and every one of them
might become Peers of the heavenly Jerusalem, and but some choice or selected
ones of the meaner sort might be admitted into the same society. We must pray
then for high and low, rich and poor, without excepting any, either in
particular or indefinitely. The reason why our prayers for all men must be
universal, is, because we are bound to desire the spiritual good of all men;
not as they fall under our indefinite, but under our uniuersall consideration.
The reason again, why we are bound to desire the spiritual good of all men
universally considered, is, because we must be perfect as our heavenly Father
is perfect. Unto this universal desire, we must add our best endeavors that
saving truth may be imparted unto all; because it is our heavenly Fathers will,
his unfaigned will, that all should come to the knowledge of truth.

2 Both parts of this inference [as first, that it is our duty to pray for all
sorts of men, and for every man of what sort soever: And secondly, that we are
therefore to pray thus universally, because it is Gods will, not only that we
should thus pray, but that all without exception should come unto the truth and
be saved] are expressly included in the prayers appointed by the Church of
England to be used upon the most solemn day of devotions. The Collects or
Prayers are in number three. The first, Almighty God we beseech thee graciously
to behold this thy family for the which our Lord Jesus Christ was contented to
be betrayed, and given up into the hands of wicked men, and to suffer death
upon the Cross, etc. The tenor of this petition, if we respect only the
form, is indefinite not universal: but every Logician knows, and every Divine
should consider, that the necessity of the matter, whether in prayers or
propositions, will stretch the indefinite form wherewith it is instamped, as
far as an absolute universal. That the form of this petition is in the
intention of the Church of England, to be as far extended as we have said
(that is) [to all and every one of the congregation present] the prayer
following puts out of question. For in that we are taught to pray for the
whole Church, and for every member of it. Almighty and everlasting God, by
whose spirit the whole body of the Church is governed and sanctified: receive
our supplications and prayers, which we offer before thee for all estates of
men in thy holy Congregation; that every member of the same, in his vocation
and ministry, may truly and godly serve thee. etc. If here it be excepted,
that albeit this prayer be conceived in terms formally universal, yet is the
universal form of it to be no further extended, than its proper matter or
subject; and that (as will be alleged) is the mystical live-body of Christ,
whose extent, or the number of whose members, is to us unknown: the third and
last prayer will clearly quit this exception, and free both the former
petitions, from these or the like restrictions. For in the last prayer we are
taught to pray for all and every one which are out of the Church, that they may
be brought into the Church, and be made partakers with us of Gods mercy, and
the common salvation. Merciful God, who have made all men, and hate nothing
that thou have made, nor would the death of a sinner, but rather that he
should be converted and live: have mercy upon all Jews, Turks, Infidells, and
heretics, and take from them all ignorance, hardness of heart; and contempt
of thy Word* And so fetch them home, blessed Lord, to thy flock, that they may
be saved among the remnant of the true Israelites, and be made one fold, under
one shepherd Jesus Christ our Lord. If God therefore will not the death of any
Jew, Turk or Infidel, because of nothing he made them men: we may safely
conclude that he wills not the death of any, but the life of all, whom of men
or infidells, he has made Christians; to whom he has vouchsafed the ordinary
means of salvation, and daily invites, by his messengers, to embrace them. He
which made all things without invitation, out of mere love, made nothing
hateful; nor is it possible that the unerring fountain of truth and love,
should cast his dislike, much less fix his hatred upon any thing that was not
first in it nature odious. Nothing can make the creature hateful or odious to
the Creator, besides its hatred or enmity of that love, by which it was
created, and by which he sought the restoration of it when it was lost. Nor is
it every degree of man's hatred or enmity unto God, but a full measure of it,
which utterly exempts man from his love; as that reverend Hooper in his Preface
to the ten Commandments. See Parag. 8 of this chapter.
Bishop and glorious Martyr, one of the first Reformers of the Religion professed
in this Land, observes.

3 If with these authorized devotions we compare the doctrine of our Church in
the public catechism, what can be more clear, then that as God the Father
does love all mankind, without exception; so the Son of God did redeem not
some only of all sorts, but all mankind universally taken: First we are
taught to beleve in God the Father who made us and all the world. Now, if the
Church our mother have in the former prayers truly taught us, that God hates
nothing which he has made; this will bring forth another truth: viz. That
either there be some men which are not of Gods making; or else that he hates
no man (not Esau) as he is a man, but as a sinner, but as an enemy or contemner
of his goodness. And consequently to this branch or corollary of this former
truth, we are in the same Catechism, in the very next place taught to believe
in God the Son who has redeemed us and all mankind. And if all mankind were
redeemed by him, than all of this kind were unfeignedly loved; none were hated
by him. And though in the same place, we are taught to believe in the holy
Ghost as in the sanctifier of all that are sanctified, yet this we are taught
with this caveat, that he does sanctify all the elect people of God, not all
mankind. All then are not sanctified by God the holy Ghost, which are redeemed
by God the Son, nor does God the Father bestow all his spiritual blessings
upon all whom he does unfeignedly love, or on whom he has bestowed the
blessing of Baptism as the seal or pledge of their redemption. All these
inferences are so clear, that the consideration of them makes us doubt,
whether such amongst us, as teach the contrary to any of these, have at any
time subscribed unto the book of Common prayers, or whether they had read it
before they did subscribe unto it or contradict it. That this universal extent
of Gods love, and of the redemption wrought by Christ, is a fundamental
principle, whereon many serious and fruitful exhortations in the book of
Homilies are immediately grounded, shall (by Gods assistance) appear in the
Article concerning Christ. For a concludent proof that God does unfeignedly
will, not genera singulorum, all sorts of men only; but singula generum, every
one of all sorts to be saved; take it briefly thus: All they which are saved,
and all they which are not saved, make up both parts of the former distinction
or division to the full. But God will have all to be saved which are saved; he
likewise wills the salvation of all such, as are not saved, that is, of such
as dye: therefore he wills the salvation of every one of all sorts. That God
does will the salvation of all that are saved, no man ever questioned; that God
did will not the life, but death of such as dyed, the Jews (Gods own people)
did sometimes more then question: and to prevent the like querulous murmurings
of misbeliefe in others, he once for all interposed his solemn oath; As I live
says the Lord, I will not the death of him that dies, but rather that he
should repent and live. None then can be saved whom God would not have saved;
many are not saved, whom God would have saved.

4 But how, or by what Will does he will that they should be saved that are not
saved? Does he will their salvation by his revealed, not by his secret will?
Does he give signification only of his good will toward them, whereas his
good will and pleasure, is not finally to do them any real good? This I take
to be the meaning of voluntas signi, and beneplaciti. But, it being granted,
that God does will the salvation of all men, by his revealed will, or voluntate
signi; This alone will sufficiently infer our intended conclusion [That he
truly wills the salvation of all, without the exemption of any.] Upon such as
contradict this doctrine, it lies upon them to prove not the negative only,
that God does not will the salvation of all by his secret will; but this
positive particular, that God does nill or unwill the salvation of some by his
secret will, whose salvation he wills by his revealed will. Now if it be
answered, that he does by his secret will or good pleasure, unwill or nill the
salvation of the same parties to whom he wills salvation by his will revealed
or signified; they must (without remedy) acknowledge the one or the other
member of this division: as, either [that there be two wills in God of as
different inclinations ad extra, as the reasonable and sensitive appetite are
in man:] or [that there is a manifest contradiction in the object of one and
the same Divine Will.] That, All men should be saved, and that some men should
not be saved, implies as formal a contradiction, as to say, [All men are
living creatures, some men are no living creatures.] Now that all men should
be living creatures, and that some men should not be living creatures, falls
not within the object of Omnipotency. And if the will of God, be at truly
undivided in it self, as the omnipotent power is: it is no less impossible
that the salvation of all, and the non-salvation of some should be the object,
or true parts of the object of one and the same divine will undivided in it
self, than that the actual salvation of all, and the actual and final
condemnation of some, or the non-salvation of all, should be really effected by
the omnipotent power. Whether this divine will be clearly revealed, or in part
revealed, and in part reserved or secret in respect of us, all is one; so this
will in it self and in its nature, be but one, and undivided. The
manifestation or reservation of it, or whatsoever other references it may have
to us, can neither increase nor abate the former contradiction in the object.
Or if voluntas signi, be not essentially the same with voluntas beneplaciti,
there is a manifest contradiction or contrariety betwixt them: If the salvation
of all be the object of the one, and the non-salvation or reprobation of
others, be the object of the other.

5 Yet do we not (like rigorous Critiques) so much intend the utter banishment
of this distinction out of the confines of Divinity, as the confinement of it
to its proper seat and place. Rightly confined or limited, it may bear faith
and allegiance to the truth, and open some passages for clearing some branches
of it: But permitted to use that extent of liberty which has been given to it
by some, it will make way for canonization (...) ^^esuiticall perjuries, for
deification of mental evasions or reservations. Let us compare Jesuitical
practices with that pattern, which is the necessary resultance of some men's
interpretation of Gods oath in this case. Were this interrogatory put to any
Jesuitical Assassinat, imagine a powder-plotter; [Doe you will or intend the
ruin of the King or State, or do you know of any such project or intendment?]
there is none of this crew so mischievously minded, but would be ready to
swear unto this negative [As the Lord lives, and as I hope for life and
salvation by him, I neither intend the ruin of King or State, nor do I know
of any conspiracy against him.] And yet in case the event should evidently
discover his protestation to be most false; yet would he rest persuaded, that
this or the like mental evasion or reservation [I neither intended the ruin
of King or State, so they would become Roman Catholics; nor did I know of
any conspiracy against them, with mind or purpose to reveal it unto them,]
may be a preservative more than sufficient, a sovereign Antidote against the
sin of perjury, which he had swallowed or harbored in his breast; specially
if the concealment of his treason, make for the good of the Church. To put the
like interrogatory unto the Almighty Judge, concerning the ruin or welfare of
men, no Magistrate, no authority of earth has any power. Yet he, to free
himself from that foul aspersion, which the Jews had cast upon him (as if
such as perished in their sins, had therefore perished, because it was his
will and pleasure they should not live but dye,) has interposed his often
mentioned voluntary oath; As I live, I will not the death of him that dies, but
rather that he should live. Shall it here be enough to make answer for him,
interpretando, by interpreting his meaning to be this? I do not will the death
of him that dies, so he will repent, which I know he cannot do: nor do I will
his non-repentance, with purpose to make this part of my will known to him;
however, according to my secret and reserved will, I have resolved never to
grant him the means, without which he cannot possibly repent; whereas without
repentance he cannot live but must dye. But, did Gods oath give men no better
assurance than this interpretation of it does, I see no reason (yet heartily
wish, that others might see more) why any man should so much blame the
Jesuits, for secret evasions or mental reservations in matter of oath. For
the performance of our oaths in the best manner that we are capable of, is but
an observance of a particular branch of that general precept, Be ye perfect as
your heavenly Father is perfect. Who then can justly challenge the Jesuit of
imperfection or falsehood, much less of perjury, for secret evasions or mental
reservations, when his life is called in question; if once it be granted, that
the God of truth, in matter of oath concerning the eternal life or death of
more men than the Jesuits have to deal with, does use the like?

6 In matters then determined by Divine Oath, the distinction of voluntas signi
and beneplaciti, can have no place; specially in their doctrine who make the
bare entity or personal being of men, the immediate object of the immutable
decree concerning life and death everlasting. For the entity or personal being
of man, is so indivisible, that an universal negation, and a particular
affirmation of the same thing, [to wit, Salvation] falling upon man, as man, or
upon the personal being of men, draws to the strictest point of
contradiction. Far ever be it from us to think, that God should swear unto
this universal negative, I will not the death of the man that dies; and yet
believe withal, that he wills the death of some men that dye, as they are men,
or as they are the sons of Adam: that he should by his secret or reserved
will, recall any part of his will declared by oath; that he should proclaim
an universal pardon to all the sons of Adam under the seal of his oath, and
yet exempt many from all possibility of receiving any benefit by it.

7 Shall we then conclude that the former distinction has no use at all in
Divinity? Or if this conclusion be too rigorous, let us see in what cases it
may have place, or to what particulars it may be confined. First, it has
place in matters of threatening, or of plagues not denounced by oath. Thus God,
by his Prophet Jonas, did signify his will to have Nineveh destroyed at forty
days end; this was voluntas signi; and he truly intended what he signified:
yet was it his voluntas beneplaciti, his good will and pleasure at the very
same time, that the Ninevites should repent and live. And by their repentance,
his good will and pleasure was fulfilled in their safety. But in this case
there was no contrariety between Gods will declared or signified.i. [voluntas
signi] and his good will and pleasure,.i. [voluntas beneplaciti]; no
contradiction in the object of his will however considered, for that was not
one and the same, but much different, in respect of Gods will signified by
Jonas; and of his good will and pleasure, which, not signified by him, was
fulfilled. One and the same immutable will or decree of God did from eternity
award two doomes, much different, unto Ninevch; taking it as it stood affected
when Jonas threatened destruction unto it, or as it should continue so affected;
and taking it as it proved, upon the judgment threatened. All the alteration
was in Nineveh, none in Gods will or decree: and Nineveh being altered to the
better, the self same rule of Justice, does not deal with it after the self
same manner. The doom or sentence could not be the same without some
alteration in the Judge, who is unalterable. And in that he is unalterably
Just and Good, his doom or award, was of necessity to alter, as the object of
it altered. Deus saepe mutat sententiam, nunquam consilium. Gods unchangeable
will or counsel does often change his doom or sentence. The same rule holds
thus far true in matter of blessing or promise not confirmed by oath: upon
the parties alteration unto worse, unto whom the promise is made, the blessing
promised may be revoked, without any alteration of Gods will or counsel. Yet
may we not say, that the death or destruction of any to whom God promises
life, is so truly the object of his good will and pleasure, as the life and
salvation of them is, unto whom he threatens destruction. The same distinction
is of good use in some extraordinary cases, or as applied to men after they
have made up the full measure of their iniquity, and are cut off from all
possibility of repentance. Thus God willed Pharaoh to let his people go out of
Egypt, and signified this his will unto him by Moses and Aaron, in mighty
signs and wonders. This was voluntas signi, only, not voluntas beneplaciti.
For though it were his good will and pleasure, that his people should depart
out of Egypt; yet was it no branch of this his good will and pleasure, that
Pharaoh should now repent or be willing to let them go. Rather it was his
good will and pleasure (specially after the seventh plague) to have the heart
of Pharaoh hardened. And yet after his heart was so hardened, that it could not
repent, God so punished him, as if it had been free and possible for him to
repent, and grant a friendly pass unto his people. But Pharaohs case was
extraordinary; his punishment so exemplary, as not to be drawn into example.
For as our Apostle intimates, it was an argument of Gods great mercy and long
suffering, to permit Pharaoh to live any longer on earth, after he was become a
vessel of wrath destinated to everlasting punishment in hell. The reason why
God thus plagued Pharaoh, for not doing that which now he could not do (all
possibility of amendment being taken from him) was to teach all generations
following, by his fearful end, to beware of his desperate beginnings, of
struggling with God, or of persecuting them, whose patronage he had in
peculiar manner undertaken. And here again, there is no contradiction between
these two proposition [God from all eternity did will the death of Pharaoh; God
from all eternity did not will the death, but rather the life of Pharaoh. For
albeit Pharaoh continued one and the same man, from his birth unto his death,
yet did he not all this time continue one and the same object of Gods immutable
will and eternal decree. This object did alter as Pharaohs dispositions or
affections toward God or his neighbors altered. There is no contrariety, much
less any contradiction, between these [God unfaignedly loves all men; God
does not love, but hate the Reprobate, although they be men, yea the greatest
part of men.] For here the object of his love and hate is not the same; he
loves all men unfaignedly as they are men, or as men which have not made up the
full measure of iniquity: but having made up that, or having their souls
betroathed unto wickedness, he hates them. His hate of them as Reprobates; is
no less necessary or usual, than his love of them as men. But though he
necessarily bates them being once become Reprobates, or having made up the full
measure of iniquity: yet was there no necessity laid upon them by his eternal
decree, to make up such a measure of iniquity.

8 How these deductions will consort with some modern Catechismes I do not
know: sure I am they are consonant to the opinion of that learned Bishop and
blessed Martyr in his Preface to his expositions of the ten Commandments; a
fit Catechism for a Bishop to make. Every man is called in the Scripture,
wicked, and the enemy of God; for the privation and lack of faith and love,
that he owes to God. Et impii vocantur, qui non omnino sunt pii; that is, They
are called wicked that in all things honor not God, believe not in God, and
observe not his Commandments as they should do; which we cannot do by reason
of this natural infirmity, or hatred of the flesh, as Paul calls it, against
God. In this sense takes Paul this word, wicked. So must we interpret St. Paul
and take his words; or else no man should be damned. Now we know that Paul
himself, St. John, and Christ damneth the contemners of God, or such as
willingly continue in sin, and will not repent. Those the Scripture excludes
from the general promise of grace. Thou see by the places before rehearsed,
that though we cannot believe in God as undoubtedly as is required, by reason
of this our natural sickness and disease, yet for Christ's sake in the
judgment of God we are accounted as faithful believers, for whose sake this
natural disease and sickness is pardoned, by what name soever S. Paul calls
the natural infirmity, or original sin in man. And this imperfection or
natural sickness taken of Adam, excludes not the person from the promise of
God in Christ, except we transgress the limits and bounds of this original
sin by our own folly and malice; and either of a contempt or hate of Gods
word, we fall into sin, and transform our selves into the image of the
devil. Then we exclude by this means our selves from the promises and merits
of Christ, who only received our infirmities, and original disease, and not
the contempt of him, and his Law.

SECTION III. That Gods good will and pleasure is never frustrated, albeit his
unspeakeable love take no effect in many to whom it is unfeignedly tendered.
CHAP. 16.
In what sense God may be said to have done all that he could for his Vineyard,
or for such as perish.
1 TO found both parts of a contradiction in truth, falls not within the Sphere
of omnipotency, and we may with consent of al Divines, maintain it to be
impossible. The true original as well of our aptness to conceive difficulties
in the points proposed, as our ignorance in assoyling them, is because we
extend not this Maxim so far as it naturally would reach; and the reason why
we extend it not so far, is our pronenesse to extend our own power to the
utmost, and, for the most part farther then justice or true goodness can
accompany it. It is our nature to be humorous, and the nature of humor to be
unconstant. Fortunes character may be every son of Adams Motto: Tantum
constans in levitate, Only constant in unconstancy. And being such, nothing
can imply any constant contradiction to our nature; nothing that is truly and
constantly the same, but will one time or other contradict our changeable and
inconstant humors. And these enraged with contradiction, do, (Tyrant-like)
arm power, without just trial or examination, without either respect or
reverence, against whatsoever contradicts them. The right use of power in
creatures merely sensitive, is to satiate their appetites of sense: for
nothing has power to move it self, but what is sensitive: and, all power,
whether of body or mind, was bestowed on man for the execution of his will, or
accomplishing his desire of good: but, since his will, by his fall, became
irregular, and his desires corrupt; his power is become like a common officer,
or undercommander to all his unruly appetites, domineering by turn or
succession; all other inclinations being under the command of it. So the wise
man has charactered the resolution of voluptuous men, cap. 1. 6. Come on
therefore, let us enjoy the good things that are present, and let us speedily
use the creatures like as in youth. And ver. 11. Let our strength be the Law of
justice; for that which is feeble is found to be nothing worth. Even in such as
are by most esteemed good men and sober, those notions of truth and equity
which are natural and implanted, are so weak and ill taken; that, rather than
upstart carnal appetites or desires which custom countenanceth, should be
enraged through their reluctance, they presently yield their consents to such
proposalls, as (were they resolute, firm and constant) would as offensively
contradict them, as punishment or pain does our sense of pleasure. Unto such
proposalls we often yield, as are impossible to be approved by Equity; to whom
we usually profess our dearest love and allegiance, with promises to frame our
lives by her rules. But love in us (whether one simple and indivisible quality,
or an aggregation or cluster of diverse inclinations, all rooted in one Center,)
is not alike set on diverse objects. Hence, when it comes to opposition between
sense and reason, between our selves, our private friends, and common equity,
it divides it self unequally. The particular inconveniences whereto we are
daily exposed, by the inordinate love of the world, and the flesh, are
infinite; all may be reduced to these two originalls: First, it blindes our
judgments, and makes our intentions seem upright and just to our partial
desires, or at least not incompatible with the rules of equity; when as, to
impartial judgments, they are palpably unjust. Secondly, having blinded our
judgments, it forthwith abuses our power or authority; to effect whatsoever
is not, for the present, apprehended for a gross and evident wrong. So that
nothing whereon our love or liking is for the present mainly set, seems any
way impossible unto us; unless it be altogether without the compass of our
power: And, through the variousnesse of our humerous disposition, that, which
we cannot like or admit to day, will be allowed of to morrow. But though there
be none that does good, no not one, yet some there be do less evil than
others. And seeing those amongst us, whose love to equity is more strong and
constant than their neighbors, are always drawn with greater difficulty to
dispense with truth or approve unjustice; the consequence necessarily amounting
from this experimented truth, is, That [if any man's judgment in matters of
equity and justice were infallible, and his love to justice and known equity
altogether constant and invincible, it would be impossible for him to
transgress in judgment.] Thus as well the strength of unconstant humorous
desires, as the faintness of love or equity (both which most men may
experience in themselves) as the contrary virtues, which they may observe in
some few jointly conspire to rectify our conceit of God, in whom the Ideall
perfection, of the ones integrity and constancy, is without all mixture of the
others vice or humorous impotency.

2 The first rule for right extending the former Maxim [To make both parts of
a contradiction true, is no part of the object of power omnipotent] would be
this; Many effects which are very possible to power alone considered, or as it
has the mastery over weak inclinations unto equity, necessarily imply a
direct and manifest contradiction unto some Divine Attributes, no less
infinite or immutable than Almighty power. Hence it follows, that many effects
or designs, which seem possible to the humane nature, may be impossible or
most incongruous to the Divine. It is more shameful then impossible for rich
men to lie and cozen, or for Magistrates to oppress and wrong their inferiors;
albeit the ones riches or others power, were infinitely increased, without
internal increase of their fidelity. But to him that is eternally true and
just, yea eternal truth and justice, it is as impossible to speak an untruth,
or do wrong, as for truth to be a lie, or justice to be unjust. Many things
then are possible to mere power, which are impossible to it, as linkt with
truth or love; and many things again possible to it, as linkt with these,
which yet directly contradict the eternal pattern of justice or goodness;
and are by consequent impossible to the Almighty, who is no less just and
good, then powerful. Many Pirates by Sea, or Robbers by Land, might they enjoy
but half the power and authority for a Month, whereof ordinary Princes by
inheritance are possessed; would do their companions and friends more good, and
work their enemies greater spoil in this short space, than any Monarch can
do in his whole reign, which holds it a point of Majesty to moderate his
actions by that Princely rule; Princeps id potest quod jure potest, Princes can
do no more than they can do justly. In this sense, I think we may truly say,
all before Christ were thieves and robbers, or in respect of him very unjust;
not Abraham, David, Ezekiah, Josias, not one of the Prophets, might they have
but half that power and authority committed to them over Angels for a night,
which the Son of God from everlasting had, without robbery; but would have
thought it very possible to have removed the Roman Army with as great terror,
loss and disgrace, as the Angel of the Lord sometimes had done the Assyrians,
from Ierusalems-siege; whose fatal destruction, God incarnate clearly
foreseeing, bewailed with tears, but would not, but could not prevent. For to
the King of everlasting righteousness, that only was possible, which was
justly possible. And though he were a Father to Israel, and the Prince of
peace, yet he approves a most bloody and merciless war, before an unjust
peace, and disgraceful to Eternal Majesty; for so the Prophet had said in
his name, before, There is no peace unto the wicked; to such as stubbornely
abandon the ways of peace, and wilfully neglect saving health, so often and
lovingly tendered unto them; Hos salus ipsa servare non potuit, and shall
infinite power save them, whom infinite salvation cannot save?

3 To have smitten the men of Sodom with blindness, before lust had entered in
at their eyes; had been a work as easy to Almighty power, as blinding them
in the attempt or prosecution of lust conceived. But that contradiction which
the prevention of this sin, did not imply unto Gods power, it did (all
circumstances considered) necessarily imply unto his Justice; by whose
immutable and eternal rules, they were left unguarded against these foul
temptions, for wilful contempt of his goodness, for abusing his long
suffering and loving kindness. But did it imply any contradictio^ to his
goodness or loving kindness, to have prevented the Sodomites former contempt
or abuse of them? Out of question it did, unto his eternal equity; for all his
ways are mercy and truth. And these Sodomites wilfulness presupposed, the
eternal rule of his goodness and loving kindness, had appointed justice to
debar them, as now they are, from reaping those fruits, whereof his
goodness, as they were men, had made them capable. The principle whence the
just proof of these seeming paradoxes, as also the right explication of all
difficulties in this argument, must be derived, is a School Maxim borrowed
from orthodoxall antiquity, now not much used, but of much use in true
Divinity, and for this reason to be more fully insisted upon, in the Treatise
of man's first estate. The Maxim it self is briefly thus; It is impossible for
man or other created substance, to be absolutely impeccable from his creation.
Only He that is infinite in being, is infinitely good; and infinite goodness
only implies an absolute impossibility of being bad. As God only essentially
is, so he only is essentially and immutably good; all things besides him are
or sometimes were subject to mutability, as well in Essence as in their state
and condition. Power omnipotent could not from the first Creation, have pared
off all mutabilitie from man's moral goodness, without perishing the only
possible root of his eternal and immutable happiness. To decline to evil,
implies no contradiction to Being simply, but only to omnipotent being: it is
so possible to all Creatures, that without this possibility, it were (as we
shall afterward prove) impossible for them to be truly like their Creator, for
a moment in that attribute, whose participation is the only assurance of their
eternal weal. If God either by his omnipotent power, or infinite wisdom,
had necessarily (though without any violence) restrained this possibility in
man, of declining from good to evil, man had forthwith ceased to have been
truly and inherently good, and ceasing to be such, had utterly lost all
possibilities of that estate, whose pledge or earnest he received in his
creation. Gods goodness is his happiness. And his participative goodness is
the foundation of man's happiness. So that not Gods justice only, but that
loving kindness whereby he created man, and appointed him as heir apparent
of life eternal, did remove all necessity from his will, because the
imposition of necessity (whether laid upon him by power or wisdom infinite)
had utterly extinguished that goodness wherein it was only possible for the
creature to express the Creators goodness manifested in his creation. Now
that was not Gods essential or immutable goodness, for that is
incommunicable. All the goodness man is capable of, does but express Gods
goodness communicative. It is the stamp of it communicated. As God then did
communicate his goodness to his creatures, not by necessity but freely, so
could not the creature be truly good (that is like his God) by necessity but
freely. Nor was it possible for him to have been either confirmed in such
goodness as he had, or translated to everlasting happiness; but by continuing
freely good for some space, or less evil, than by the liberty which God by
his immutable law had given him in his creation, he possibly might have been.
Continuing good, though but for a while, without necessity, the riches of Gods
free bounty, had been continually increased toward him, and had finally
established him in everlasting bliss by confirmation of him in true goodness,
or by investing him with immortality. Since his fall we are not usually
capable of mercy or of the increase of his bounty; much less of these
everlasting fruits whereof blessings temporal are the pledges; but by free
abstinence from some evils, unto whose practices, the possibility of our
corrupted nature might be improved. And albeit we do not always that which is
in its nature evil, yet we can do nothing well, but even the good which we do
we do it naughtily: yet unless we do both less evil, and the good which we
do less naughtily than we possibly might do, God still diminishes the riches
of his bounty toward us; and by inhibiting the sweet influence of his gracious
providence, suffers us to fall from one wickedness to another, being prone to
run headlong into all, if once the reins of our unruly appetites, be given
into our unweildie hands. Far be it from any son of Adam to think he is
able without Gods love and favor to withdraw himself from the extremities of
mischief, much less to do such good as may make him capable of well-doing.
So strong is our love to sinful pleasures, since our first parents gave the
reins unto our appetite, that none can recall themselves or repent, without
the attractions of infinite love. And yet many whom this infinite love does
daily embrace, because they apprehend not it, are never brought by the
attractions of it to true repentance. Despisest thou the riches of his
goodness, says the Apostle, Romans 2. 4. his forbearance and long suffering,
not knowing that the goodness of God leads thee to repentance? Of whom
speaks he thus? of such only as truly repent, and by patient continuance in
well-doing, seek for glory, honor, and immortality? nay, but, of them who for
hardness of heart, cannot repent; but treasure up wrath against the day of
wrath, and the revelation of the righteous judgment of God.

4 Were the riches of his bounty therefore fained, or did he only profer, but
not purpose to draw them unto repentance, which repented not? this is no part
of our heavenly Fathers perfection, no fruit of that wisdom which is from
above, but a point of earthly policy devoid of honesty; a mere trick of
wordly wit, to whose practice nothing but weakness and impotence to accomplish
great desires, can mis-incline man's corrupted nature. But does it not argue the
like impotency, though no such want of integrity in God, not to effect what he
wills more ardently and more unfainedly, than man can do the increase or
continuance of his welfare, or avoidance of endless misery? No; it being
supposed (as we have said) that man is not capable of endless joys, unless
he will be wrought by mere love, without the impulsions of unresistible power,
unfaignedly to love him that has prepared them for him; the same infinite love
which continually draws him unto repentance, was in congruity to leave him a
possibility not to be drawn by it. For coactive penitency, would have
frustrated the end to which repentance is but a mean subordinate. The
employment or exercise of Gods almighty power to make men repent against their
wills, or before they were wrought to a willingness by the sweet attractions of
his infinite love, or by threatenings of judgments not infinite or
irresistible, would be like the endeavors of a loving Father, more strong than
circumspect, who out of pity to his son, whom he sees ready to be choked with
water, should strangle him by violent haling him to the shore. Most men by
ascribing that unto Gods power which is the peculiar and essential effect of
his love, do finally miss of that good, which both infallibly conspire to
pour, without measure, upon all such as take right and orderly hold of them.
How shall we then fasten our faith to them aright? we are to believe, that
Gods infinite power shall effect without control or check of any thing in
heaven or earth, all things possible for their endless good, that truly love
him; but constraines no man's will to love him, being always armed against
wilful neglectors of his unfaigned love. No man would argue his love to be
less than infinite, because not able to produce the effects of infinite power:
and as little reason we have to think, that power, though infinite, should
be the true immediate parent of love, which never springs in any reasonable
creature, but from the seeds of love or lovelines sown in the humane soul,
though they do not always prosper. Constraint, because it is the proper and
immediate effect of power, is a companion fit for lust; whose satisfaction
breeds rather a loathing of the parties constrained, than any good will or
purpose to reward them for being unwilling, unloving, or impatient passives;
nothing but true unforced love, can yield contentment unto love. Needy man, to
whom benevolences though wrested are ever grateful, cannot be induced to love
the parties from whom they are wrested. For, Non tantum ingratum sed invisum
est beneficium superbe datum: Good offices whilst they are presented by pride,
are not only ungrateful but odious. But God who gives to all men liberally,
and upbraideth no man; as he esteems no gifts (howsoever given) so he always
detests the niggardly backwardness, and loves the cheerfulness of the giver.

5 From these discussions the truth of the former rule, with the right solution
of the maine problem proposed, may be illustrated, by examples of diverse
kinds in subjects known and familiar. Be the charge never so great, so the
exonerations be well nigh equal, the incoms are less than if their charge were
little, and their exonerations none. Or, be a man's revenues never so large, so
his necessary expenses be no less, he shall not be able to do as much for
his friend in some real kindness, as he whose estate is not half so great,
if so his annual expenses be ten times less. In like case, though man's love
to his dearest friend, be (in respect of Gods love to us) but faint, and his
power but small; yet because his love to justice is much less, or rather his
partiality greater, he oft-times effects that for his temporal good, which
God though infinite in power, does not effect for those whom he infinitely
loves. For the bequests or grants made unto man by his infinite love, must
undergo the examination of justice and equity. What are alike infinite,
before they pass the irrevocable seal of infinite power, one of these cannot
attempt, much less absolutely bring ought to pass, without the others
consent. Infinite love cannot oversway, either Gods incomprehensible wisdom
to devise, or his omnipotency to practice means for man's salvation, which
contradict the unchangeable rules of infinite equity. His love is as truly
indivisible, as infinite; and is for this reason more indissolubly linkt unto
the unchangeable rules of his own justice or equity, than unto mankind, whose
goodness in his best estate, was but mutable; nor are any of Adams posterity
so capable of that infinite mercy, wherewith God embraces them, as Gods
Justice and Majesty are of his infinite Love. These being as He is absolutely
immutable, are throughout eternity immutably loved of him, who indivisibly is
Majesty, Justice, Love, immutable.

CHAP. 17.
The truth and ardency of Gods love unto such as perish, testified by our
Savior, and by S. Paul.
1 THese are no Paradoxes, but plain truth; without whose acknowledgement, we
shall hardly find any true sense or good meaning in Gods protestations of
sorrow for his peoples plagues, or in his expostulations of their
unthankfulness, or in his kind invitations of them to repentance, which never
repent, or in his tender profers of salvation to those which perish. I have
spread out my hands all the day long unto a rebellious people, which walks in
a way that was not good, after their own thoughts, etc. Isay 65. 2. His
infinite power expects their conversion, as the Mariner does the turning of the
Tide; but may not transport them into the land of Promise, until his
Loving-kindnesse have converted them. The unremovable rules of eternal equity,
will not suffer him to stretch out his hands any farther than he does, toward
the sons of men; and when the measure of their iniquity is accomplished, his
infinite Justice will not suffer him to stretch them out so far any longer.
Albeit he cannot then without unfaigned sorrow, withdraw them from those to
whom in love unfaigned he has stretched them out. Thus Ierusalems iniquity
come to the full did fill our Redeemers heart with woe, and his eyes with
tears. If thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things
which belong unto thy peace; but now they are hid from thine eyes: Luke 19. 42.
Did he speak this as man, or does not the Spirit say the same? He that spoke
this, spoke nothing but words of spirit and life, nothing but the words of God,
if we may believe that he meant as he has spoken. I have not spoken (says
Ioh. 12. 49, 50.
He) of my self, but the Father which sent me, he gave me a commandment,
what I should say, and what I should speak: whatsoever I speak therefore,
even as the Father said unto me so I speak. His bowels of compassion were
freely extended toward the^, from that exact conformity which his spotless
and blessed soul held with Gods infinite love; and yet restrained again by
that conformity, which it as exactly held with the eternal rules of Gods
infinite justice or equity: and from these different motions or distractions,
thus occasioned from that indissoluble unio^ of his divisible soul, with these
two different attributes of the indivisible nature, were his tears squeezed
out. He wept then as man, not as God; and yet in this humane passion, did
visibly act that part which God before his incarnation had penned, as a
sensible memorial of his unconceivable love. O that my people had hearkened
unto me: and Israel had walked in my ways; I should soon have subdued their
enemies, and turned my hand against their adversaries. The haters of the Lord
should have submitted themselves unto him but their time should have endured
for ever. He should have fed them also with the finest wheat, and with honey
out of the Rock should I have satisfied thee. Psalm. 81. verse. 13, 14, 15, 16.
Wheat and Honey, here promised, were Emblemes of better blessings purposed
toward them. And thus avouching this his purpose, under no character of
courtly complement, but in the form of legal assurance; his words are
undoubted tokens of unfeigned love and desire unquenchable of their welfare,
that did not prosper. Israel might have said, as Jerusalem afterward did of
her sorrow; Was there ever any love like unto this love wherewith the Lord
embraced me in the days of my youth. Notwithstanding this excessive fervency
of His loving kindness (whose will is infinite) laid no necessity upon their
wills to whom he wished all this good. They had a liberty left them by eternal
equity, to refuse it. He out of the wishes of his bounty as he protests, was
ready to pour out his best blessings according to the immensity of his loving
kindness, so Israel would open his mouth wide to receive them. But my people
(says he) would not hearken unto my voice; and Israel would none of me; so I
gave them up unto their own hearts lust; and they walked in their own
counsels. Psalm. 81. verse. 11, 12.

2 Lord, who had sinned, the heathen people or their forefathers in like manner
as Israel did, that in times past thou sufferedst them all to walk in their
own ways? Acts 14. 16. They that observe lying vanities forsake their own
mercy, says the Prophet Jonah. 2. 8. Never had thou given them up to their
own hearts lust, to treasure up wrath against the day of wrath, had they not
despised the riches of thy bounty; whose current, nevertheless was not
altogether diverted from their posterity. To them thou leftest not thy self
without a witness, in that thou did good, and gave them rain from heaven
in fruitful seasons, filling their hearts with food and gladness. To all
nations even in the time of darkness, when they were strangers from thee;
these and the like temporal and sensible blessings, were unquestionable
earnests of thy everlasting love, since more fully manifested; For thou so
lovedst the world (not Israel only) that thou gave thine only begotten son,
to the end that who so believed in him, should not perish but have everlasting
life. What further argument of Gods infinite love, could flesh and blood
desire; tha^ the Son of Gods voluntary suffering that, in our flesh, by his
Fathers appointment, which, unto flesh and blood seems most distasteful? That
this love was unfaignedly tendered to all, at least, that have heard or
hereafter may hear of it, without exception; what demonstration from the
effect, can be more certain, what consequence more infallible, tha^ the
inference of this truth is from a sacred truth received by all good Christians,
viz. [Al such as have heard Gods love in Christ proclaimed and not believed in
it, shall in the day of Judgment appear guilty of greater sins, than their
forefathers could be endited of; and undergo more bitter death, than any
corruption drawn from Adam, if Christ had never suffered, could have bred.] I
shall no way wrong the Apostle in unfolding his exhortations to the Athenians
thus far; but they rather offer the spirit by which he spoke, some kind of
violence, that would contract his meaning shorter. The times of this ignorance
(before Christ's death) God winked at, but now commands all men every where to
repent; Because he has appointed a day, in the which he will judge the world
in righteousness, by that man whom he has ordained, whereof he has given
assurance unto all men, in that he has raised him from the dead, Acts 17. 30,
31.

3 Why all men in the world have not heard of Gods infinite love thus
manifested, many causes may hereafter be assigned, all grounded upon Gods
infinite Justice or Mercy. Of Christ's death many which heard not might have
heard; many which are not, might have bin partakers; save only for their free
and voluntary progress from evil to worse, or wilful refusal of Gods loving
kindness daily proffered to them in such pledges, as they were well content to
swallow; foolishly esteeming these good in themselves, being good only as they
plight the truth of Gods love to them, which he manifested in the death of his
Son. With this manifestation of his love, many again out of mere mercy have
not been acquainted; lest the sight of the medicine might have caused their
discase to rage, and make their case more lamentably desperate.

CHAP. 18.
Want of consideration, or ignorance of Gods unfeigned love to such as perish,
a principal means or occasion why so many perish.
1 But if the most part of men, as we cannot deny, do finally perish, what
shall it avail to revive this doctrine of Gods infinite love to all; by whose
fruitless issue, he rather is made an infinite looser, than men any gainers? As
for God, he has from eternity infallibly forecast the entire redemption, of
his infinite love, which unto us may seem utterly cast away. And of men, if
many dye, whom he would have live (for his will is, that all should be saved,
and come to the knowledge of the truth) the fault is their own, or their
instructers; that seek not the prevention of their miscariage; by acquainting
them with this celestial fountain of saving truth; whose taste we labor to
exhibit unto all, because the want of it, in observation of the heathen, is
the first spring of humane misery Heu primae scelerum causae mortalibus agris
Naturam nescire De^m. Silius Italicus. lib. 4. de be^^o pun^^^.
. Or, in language more plain, or pertinent to the argument proposed, most men
reap no benefit from Gods unspeakeable love; because not considering it to be
his nature, they do not believe it to be as he is, truly infinite, unfeignedly
extended to all that call him Maker. But had the doctrines, which those divine
Oracles [God is love, and would have all men to be saued] naturally afford,
been for these forty years last past, as generally taught, and their right
use continually pressed, with as great zeal and fervency, as the doctrine and
uses of Gods absolute decree, for electing some, and reprobating most, in that
space have been, the plentiful increase of Gods glory, and his peoples
comfort throughout this land, might have wrought such astonishment to our
adversaries, as would have put their malicious mouths to silence. Who would not
be willing to be saved, if he were fully persuaded, that God did will his
salvation in particular; because he protests he wills not the death of any,
but the repentance of all, that all might live? Or were the particulars of this
doctrine, unto whose generality, every loyal member of the Church of England
has subscribed, generally taught and believed; all would unfeignedly endeavor
with fervent alacrity to be truly happy, because none could suspect himself
to be excluded from his unfeigned and fervent love, who is true happiness.
Whose love and goodness is so great, that he cannot pass any act, whereby
any of his creatures should be debarred either from being like him in love and
goodness; or being such, from being like him in true happiness: But alas,
while the world is borne in hand, that the Creator oft-times dispenses the
blessings of this life, not as undoubted pledges of a better, but deals with
most men, as man does with beasts, feeding them fattest which are appointed
first to be slain: the magnificent praises of his bounty secretly nurseth
such a misperswasion in most men of his goodness; (at least toward them) as
the Epigramm^tist had of a professed Benefactor, that showed him (as he
thought) little kindness in great Benevolence.

Munera magna quidem misit, sed misit in hamo,
Et Piscatorem piscis amare potest?
Great gifts he sent, but under his gifts,
there covered lay an hook,
And by the fish to be beloved,
can th'cunning Fisher look.
2 The frequency of sinister respects in dispensing of secular dignities or
benevolences, makes such as are truly kind, to be either unregarded, or
mistrusted by such as stand in need of their kindness. And as fishes in
beaten waters, will nibble at the bait, although they suspect the hook: so the
world has learned the wit to take good turns, and not to be taken by them; as
suspecting them to be proffered in cunning rather than in true kindness: and
cunning, where it is discovered or suspected, is usually requited with craft;
love only has just title unto love. The most part indeed are so worldly wise,
that none but fools will easily trust them; howbeit our natural mistrust of
others, makes all of us a great deal worse than we would be. And as if we
thought it a sin or point of uncharitableness, to prove other men's
conjectures, that measure our dispositions by their own, altogether false; we
fit our demeanours to their misdeemings of us, and resolve rather to do amiss;
than they should think amiss. Howbeit even in this perfidious and faithless
age, the old saying is, not quite out of date: Ipsa fides habita obligat fide^.
Many would be more trusty than they are; and do much better by us than they
do, would we wholly commit our selves to their trust and kindness. Now,
though by man's goodness or badness, God can neither become worse nor better in
himself; yet the riches of his bounty, or communication of his goodness, are
still multiplied toward those that steadfastly believe him to be such as he
is: One, whom all are bound to love; because he is so kind and loving; one
whom all may safely trust, because his loving kindness is so utterly void of
partiality, being armed with power and justice infinite. Thy righteousness is
like the great mountains, thy judgments are like the great deep; O Lord thou
preservest man and beast. How excellent is thy loving kindness, O God!
therefore the children of men put their trust under the shadow of thy wings.
Psalm. 36. ver. 6, 7. This especially should move all to admire his loving
kindness, that he loved all without any other motive than his own mere
goodness or loving kindness, either to incline his will or stir up his
power to give them a being like his own: We love him (says Saint John)
because he loved us first. Do all then whom he unfeignedly loves, love him
unfeignedly? Would God they did: for so (as his will is) all should be saved.
Did then the Apostle mean that his love to us, is no true cause of our love to
him? yes; yet not simply as it is in him, but as being unfeignedly in him it is
truly apprehended by us. Ingenuous love is never lawfully begotten, or fully
conceived but from an apprehension of true loveliness in the object; and
nothing can be more lovely then love it self, when it is firmly apprehended
or undoubtedly known.

3 Though secret consciousnesse of our own unlovelinesse, in the state of
nature, makes us oft-times too mistrustfull of others love: Yet unto our nature
unregenerate and overgrowne with corruption, it is almost impossible, not to
love them whose love to us we assuredly know to be unfaigned; unless their
behavior be very loathsome. Howbeit even so we love their persons, though not
their presence, wherewith again we willingly dispense, if it may gratify us
in other things, which we much desire. That which makes the worlds condemnation
so just, that infinite mercy may not dispense with it, is men's dull
backwardness to love him, of whose glorious beauty, the most glorious, most
admired creatures are but fleeting shadows, no true pictures. Him of whose
infinite love and unfeigned preventions in unrecompensable benefits, all the
pleasures we take in health, the joy of strength, the sweetness of life it
self; and whatsoever in it is good and lovely, are infallible pledges, and yet
his intention in free bestowing them is to bind himself (more strictly than
man is bound by receiving the just price of what he bargains for) to instate
us in the incomprehensible joys of endless life.

He requires nothing at our hand, but that we may be more capable of his
loving kindness, by drawing still nearer and nearer to him, with all our
hearts, with all our souls, and with all our strength; of whose least portion
he is sole maker and preserver; of all whose motions he is sole author and
guide. From participation of his favor or presence, whatsoever is good in
them, is undoubtedly capable of increase. The services wherein the eternal
King requires demonstration of this our love, are not so hard, as those which
we willingly perform to corruptible men, not invested with any shadow of his
loveliness, nor seasoned with any tincture of his loving kindness; to men,
that cannot be so beneficial as loving to their friends, nor half so loving
as they are lovely, though their loveliness come far short of their
greatness. Far otherwise it is with him, whose Greatness and Majesty are
truly infinite: he is as glorious and lovely as great, as loving as lovely,
and yet withal no less beneficial than loving to those which love him, and
do his will.

4 This unfaigned love of him, raised from belief of his loving kindness toward
us, is as the first conception or plantation of true happiness, to which once
truly planted, whatsoever in this life can befall us, Romans 8. 28.
serves as nutriment. Diligentibus Deum omnia operantur in bonum. We know that
all things work together for good, to them that love God, to them who are
called according to his purpose.

As this Article of his goodness and love is to be pressed before any other, so
the first and most natural deduction, that can be made from this or any other
sacred principle; and that which every one when he first comes to enjoy the
use of reason, should be taught to make by heart, is this: He that gave me
life endued with sense, and beautified my sense with reason, before I could
desire one or other of them, or know what being meant; has doubtless a
purpose to give me with them, whatsoever good things my heart, my sense or
reason can desire; even life or being as far surpassing all goodness, flesh
and blood can conceive or desire, as this present life, I now enjoy, does my
former not being, or my desirelesse want of being what now I am. These are
principles, which elsewhere (by Gods assistance) shall be more at large
extended: yet would I have the Reader ever to remember, that the infinite love,
wherewith God sought us when we were not, by which he found out a beginning for
mankind, fitted as a foundation for endless life, can never be indissolubly
betrothed unto the bare being which he bestowed upon us. The final contract
betwixt him and us, necessarily presupposes a bond or link of mutual love.
There is no means possible for us to be made better or happier than we are,
but by unfaigned loving him, which out of love has made us what we are. Nor
are we what we are, because he is, or from his Essence only, but because he
was loving to us. And after our love to him enclasped with his unspeakable and
unchangeable love to us, whose apprehension must beget it; the faith by which
it is begotten in us, assures our souls of all the good means the infinity
of goodness may vouchsafe to grant, the infinity of wisdom can contrive, or
power omnipotent is able to practice; for attaining the end whereto his
infinite love from all Eternities does ordain us. And who could desire better
encouragement or assurance more strong then this, for the recompense of all his
labors? or if all this cannot suffice to allure us, he has set fear behind
us to impell us unto goodness; or rather before us, to turn us back from
evil.

CHAP. 19.
How God of a most loving Father becomes a severe inexorable Judge.
1 But if God as we have said be love, shall not his love be like his nature,
altogether unchangeable? How then shall he punish his beloved Creatures, or
have anger, hate, or jealousy, any place or seat in the Omnipotent Majesty?
Can these consort with infinite mercy? Many Philosophers have freed God from
anger, making him Author only of grace, and favor toward men. And I could
wish their heresies had been better refuted than they are, or at least, that
men would be better persuaded of such refutation, as Lactantius has bestowed
upon them, albeit I will not bind my self to stand to his decision of this
point, but rather illustrate by instance or experiment, how extreme severity
may stand with the fervency of fatherly unfaigned love.

2 Few men's hearts would have served them to have dealt with their own bowels
as Torquatus did with his. Howbeit in all that mighty people amongst whom he
lived, I am persuaded but a few had taken the like care and pains to train up
their children in the most commendable qualities of that age. Not one would
have adventured his own person further, to have rescued his son from the
enemy, or justified him in any honorable quarrel. In these and the like
points, he had, and, upon just occasion, Meroveo certe auget probitatis famam
atque justitiae necatus filius, justissimas utique ob causas, ne quis ipsi
diritatem in alienos falso exprobet liberos, vel in suos inauditam saevitiam
nullis fultam rationibus: quales nec Posthumous Tiburtus, nec T. Manlius
Torquatus olim habuere. Foreatulus de Gallorum Imperio and Philosophia. lib. 5.
Et Paulo post. Posthumus Dictator, quia Aulus filius injustus praesidiis
egressus hosts fuderat, victorem audacem caedi securi jussit: at Torquatus
itidem Latino bello, Cos. filium a Metio Tusculanorum Duce provocatum, and
forte detractandae pugnae pudore incensum, ac spolia referentem, mactari a
lictore mandavit: jure forsitan, cum, test Paulo Iurisconsulto, parentibus
Romany antiquior esset disciplina militaris charitate liberorum. At qui Gelaor
Merovei filius in patrem contumax, in cives procax, in omnes superbus and
injurius, pudicis matronis vim intulerat, p^tres and maritos terrnerat,
ceciderat foederatos ac amicos Franci nominis lacessierat. Cumque ex
amicissimis aulicis quispiam objecisset Meroveo Lucium Gellium Censorem
Romanum, qui filio novercam solicitanti, and praeter^^ parricidium meditanti,
ac propemodum convicto, ignovisset, and in reatu constitutum absolvi
diligentissime curasset: Ille, inquit, boni patru functus est officio, ego boni
Ducis: qui debellare hosts didici, and socios honorifice tractare, eorumque
ulcisci injurias.
would further have manifested, as much unfeigned love, as any father could unto
his son; more than the imbecility of sex would suffer a tender hearted
mother, to make proof of. Does then the adjudging of this his own son to
death, rightly argue he loved him less than other parents did their children,
whose worse deserts they would not have sentenced so severely? No: it rather
proves love and care of martial discipline, and hate to partiality in
administration of civil Justice, to have been much greater in him, than in
other parents of his time. The more just and equal the law he transgressed
was, or might have been (as for illustration sake we will suppose it to have
been a law most equal and just) the more it commends his impartial severity,
that would not suffer the violation of it go unpunished in his dearest son;
whom the more desirous he was to make like himself in religious observance of
Martial Discipline, and practice of Justice toward the enemy; the readier he
was to do justice upon him for doing the contrary. That excessive love, which
he bare unto his person, whilst his hopeful beginnings did seem to promise
an accomplishment of those martial virtues, whose first draught he himself
had well expressed; turns into extreme severity and indignation, after he
proves transgressor of those fundamental rules, by which he had taken his
direction; and unto whose observance his desire of posterity was destinated. So
it falls out by the unalterable course of nature, or rather by a Law more
transcendent and immutable than nature it self, that a less love being
chained (by references of subordination between the objects loved) with a
greater, cannot dislinke it self without some deeper touch of displeasure,
than if the bond or reference had been none. The nearer the reference, or the
stricter the bond; the more violent will the rupture be, and the dissociation
more unpleasant: As there is no enmity to the enmity of brethren, if the knot
of brotherly kindness once fully untie: The reason is, because our love to our
brethren, is nearest united with the love of our selves, unto which all other
love is in some sort subordinate. True affection is always most displeased,
where it is most defeated; where most is deservedly expected and least
performed. Now as partiality toward our selves, and indulgence to our
inordinate desires, oft-times begets desire of revenge upon unnatural or
unkind brethren: so does the constant and unpartiall love of equity and
wholesome Laws, naturally bring forth just severity toward presumptuous
neglecters of them whose persons we love no less, than they do that would
plead with tears for their impunity. Toward them, unto whom we would give
real proof of more tender and true affection, than their partial abetters
do, could we win them, by these or other warrantable means, to link their
love with ours, or to love that best which most deserves love. As Seleucus
loved his son (for saving the one of whose eyes, (both being forfait by the
law) he was contented to lose one of his own) more dearly than most princely
mothers do their children, for he loved him as himself, yet could not dispense
either with himself, or his son, because he loved the public law, and
common good, that might accrue by this singular example of Justice; better than
either, better than both.

3 For every man to love himself best, is in our judgment no breach, but
rather a foundation of charity. Alaw to whose performance every man is bound
in matters of necessity concerning this life, or in whatsoever may concern the
life to come; though not in cases of secular honor or preferment, wherein
Proximus quisque sibi, must (by the law of conscience, and fundamental rule of
Christianity) give place to Detur digniori. But nothing can be so worthy of
love or honor as God; who will we, nill we, does and must enjoy this liberty
or privilege of loving himself best. And if he love himself better than he
does any creature, he must love equity and justice better than he does any man;
for he himself is equity it self, the eternal pattern as well of Justice as
of Mercy; he cannot be unjustly merciful toward those men, whom he loves more
dearly than any man does himself. And in as much as goodness it self is the
essential object of his will, he loves nothing absolutely and irrevocably, but
that which is absolutely and immutably good. So was not man in his first
creation, much less is he such in his collapsed estate; and yet Gods love (so
super infinite is it) extends it self unto our nature so collapsed and
polluted with corruption, which he infinitely hates. This his love, which
knows no limit in it self, is limited in its effects toward men, by the
correspondency which they hold or lose with that absolute goodness, or with
those eternal rules of equity, justice, or mercy, in which his will is to have
man made like him. Such as have been either in re or spe, though not as they
should be, yet such as either infinite loving kindness can vouchsafe to
accept, to cherish, or encourage to go forward as they have begun; or
infinite mercy to tolerate in expectation of their repentance, or aversion
from their wonted courses: these, if once they finally dissolve the
correspondency, which they held with Mercy, or burst the link which they had
in Gods love, (with reference to that goodness, whereto the riches of his
bounty daily inviteth them) his displeasure toward them kindles according to
the measure of his former mercies or loving kindness. If being illuminated by
his Spirit, they finally associate themselves to the sons of darkness, or
having put on Christ in baptism, they resume their swinish habit, and make a
sport of wallowing in the mire; the sweet fountains of joy and comfort, which
were opened to them as they were Gods creatures, not incapable of his infinite
mercy, prove floods of woe and misery to them as they are sworn servants of
sin and corruption: For, hate to filthiness and uncleanness, is essentially
and formally included in Gods love of absolute goodness, righteousness and
true holiness. And the displeasure or indignation which he bears to these,
must needs seize on their persons that have covered themselves with them, as
with a garment; and to whose souls they stick more closely than their skins
do to their bodies, or their flesh unto their bones.

CHAP. 20.
Whilst God of a loving Father becomes a severe Judge, their is no change or
alteration at all in God, but only in men and in their actions. Gods will is
always exactly fulfilled even in such as go most against it. How it may stand
with the Justice of God to punish transgressions temporal, with tormens
everlasting.
1THe sum of all is this; love was the Mother of all his works, and (if I
may so speak) the fertility of his power and Essence. And seeing it is his
nature as Creator, and cannot change: no part of our nature (seeing every part
was created by him) can be utterly excluded from all fruits of his love;
until the sinister use of that contingencie wherewith he endued it, or the
improvement of inclinations naturally bent unto evil, come to that height as
to imply a contradiction for infinite justice or equity to vouchsafe them any
favor. Whether natural inclinations unto evil, may be thus far improved
in the children by their forefathers or no, is disputable; but in another
place. Concerning Infants (save only) so far as neglect of duties to be
performed to them, may concern their Elders, seeing the Scripture in this
point is silent, I have no mind here or elsewhere to dispute. If faith they
have, or such holiness as becomes Saints; neither are begotten by our
writing or preaching, nor is the written word the rule of theirs as of all
others faith that are of years. And unto them only that can hear or read,
or have the use of reason, I write and speak this, as well for their comfort
and encouragement to follow goodness, or for their terror, lest they follow
evil. Love, much greater than any creature owes or performs, or is capable
of, either in respect of himself, or in others, is the essential and sole
fruit of Gods antecedent will, whether concerning our nature as it was in the
first man, or now is in the several persons derived from him. And of this love
every particular faculty of soul or body is a pledge undoubted; all, are as so
many ties or handles to draw us unto him, from whom we are separated only by
dissimilitude; our very natures being otherwise linkt to his being, with bonds
of strictest reference or dependency. On the contrary, Wrath and Severity are
the proper effects of his consequent will, that is, they are the infallible
consequents of our neglecting and despising his will revealed for our good, or
sweet promises of saving health. The full explication and necessary use of this
distinction, has taken up its place, in the Articles of Creation, or Divine
Providence. Thus much of it may serve our present turn. That Gods absolute will
was to have man capable of Heaven and Hell, of joys and miseries immortal.
That this absolute will whose possible objects are two, is in the first place
set on man's eternal and everlasting joy, more fervently than man can conceive;
yet not so, as to contradict it self by frustrating the contrary possibility,
which unto man it had appointed. That Gods anger never kindles, but out of the
ashes of his flaming love despised. Nor does the turning of tender love and
compassion, into severity and wrath, presuppose or argue any change or turning
in the Father of lights and everlasting mercy; it is wholly seated in men's
irregular deviation from that course which by the appointment of his antecedent
will they should and might have taken (whereto his fatherly kindness did still
invite them) unto whose crooked ways, which they do, but should not follow;
from which the same infinite goodness does still allure them by every
temporal blessing, and deter them by every cross and plague that does
befall them.

2 This bodily Sun, which we see, never changes with the Moon, his light,
his heat are still the same; yet one and the same heat in the spring time,
refreshes our bodies here in this Land; but scortcheth such as, brought up in
this clime, journey in the sands of Affricke. His beams reflected on bodies
solid, but of corruptible and changeable nature, often inflame matter capable
of combustion. But (as some Philosophers think) would not annoy us (unless by
too much light) were we in that aethereall or celestial region wherein it
moves. At least, were our bodies of the like substance with the heavens; the
vicinity of it would rather comfort than torment us. Thus is the Father of
lights a refreshing flame of unquenchable love, to such as are drawn by love
to be like him in purity of life, but a consuming fire to such as he beholds
a far off; to such as run from him by making themselves most unlike unto him.
No sons of Adam there be, which in some measure or other had not some taste
or participation of his bounty. And the measure of his wrath is but equal to
the riches of his bounty despised. To whom this infinite treasure of his bounty
has been most liberally opened, it proves in the end a storehouse of wrath
and torments, unless it finally draw them to repentance: According to the
height of that exaltation whereunto his antecedent will had designed them,
shall the degrees of their depression be in hell for not being exalted by it.
Nor does any man in that lake of torments, suffer pains more against his will,
than he had done many things against the will of his righteous Judge daily
leading him to repenttnce. The flames of hell take their scantling from the
flames of Gods love neglected; they may not, they cannot exceed the measure of
this neglect. Or to knit up this point with evidence of sacred truth; God
always proportioneth his plagues or punishments in just equality to men's
sins. And the only rule for measuring sin or transgression right, must be
taken from the degrees of man's opposition to Gods delight or pleasure in his
salvation. Not so much as a dram of his delight or pleasure can be abated,
not a scruple of his will, but must finally be accomplished. The measure of his
delight in man's repentance or salvation, shall beee exactly satisfied and
fulfilled. Man's repentance he loves as he is infinite in mercy and in bounty:
man's punishment he does not love at all in it self, yet does he punish as he
is infinitely just, or as he infinitely loves justice. This is but the
extract of Wisdoms speech, Prove. 1. verse. 24. Because I have called, and ye
refused, I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded: But ye have set at
naught all my counsel, and would none of my reproof: I also will laugh at
your calamity, I will mock when your fear comes, When your fear comes as
desolation, and your destruction comes as a whirlewind; when distress and
anguish comes upon you: Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer;
they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me: For that they hated
knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord. They would none of my
counsel: they despised all my reproof. Therefore shall they eat of the fruit
of their own way, and be filled with their own devices. For the turning away
of the simple shall slay them, and the prosperity of fools shall destroy them.
But who so harkeneth unto me, shall dwell safely, and be quiet from fear of
evil.

And it were to be wished, that some modern Divines, would better explicate
than they do a school tenet, held by many, concerning Gods punishing sinners
in the life to come, citra condignum, that is, less than they deserve. For by
how much their punishment is less than the rule of divine Justice exacts: so
much of that delight or good pleasure which God should have reaped from their
salvation, may seem by this remission to be diminished. But this point I leave
to the judicious Readers consideration, who may inform himself from the Quod
in fine versus 9. dicitur, Mesericordia ejus s^per omnia opera ejus, hoc,
inquit Calv. neque absurdum, neque durum videri debet. Nam cum pec^ata nostra
totum mundum involvant Dei maledictione, vbique locus est misericordiae Dei ut
brutis etiam animalibus subveniat. Hunc locum tractat Zanchius de natura Dei.
l. 4. c. 4. q. 4 Quam magna sit Dei misericordia* i. Deus de justitia sua
multum semper remittit. It reprobri cum postea puniuntur non pro meritis
puniuntur [Haec Zanchij sententia] in igitur remittit illis propter
satisfactionem Christi, an sine ulla satisfactione? [Verba Coppen.] Notandum
hic in Diabolis and reprobis condemnatis, post hanc vitam non videri quaerenda
misericordiae divinae vestigia. Coppen in Psalm. 145. 9. videtur Zanchij
expositio contradicere lac. c. 2. v. 13 Damnatio (...) ei qui non praestitit
miseris ordiam.
Expositors of that sacred Maxim. His mercy is above all his works. Psalm. 145.
9.

3 To think God should punish sin unless it were truly against his will, or
any sin more deeply than it is against his will and pleasure, is one of those
three gross transformations of the divine nature, which Saint Augustine
refutes. For thus to do is neither incident to the divine nature, nor to any
other imaginable. Most of us, are by nature choleric, and often take offense
where none is given, and almost always greater than is justly given; But to be
offended with any thing, that goes not against their present wills, is a way
wardnesse of men, whereof the humane nature is incapable. To punish any, which
do not contradict their wills, is an injustice scarce incident to the
inhabitants of Hell. It is the mutability of our wills or multiplicity of
humors, which makes us so hard to be pleased. Our minds (at lest our
affections) are set upon one thing fasting, upon another full; on this to day,
on that to morrow; on sweet meats in health, on sour in sickness; on
kindness in mirth, on cruelty in anger; and because each has his several
inconstant motions, we cannot hold consort long together, without crossing or
thwarring. But no man ever offended by merrily consorting with his brother
disposed to mirth; nor by consenting to wreake his will, whilst he was in
rage. No man ever punished his servant for doing that which for the present he
would have him do; nor do the Devils themselves vex the wicked (till Gods
justice overtake them) but the godly; because the one does what they would, the
other what they would not have him do; neither could displease them, were it
not their wicked will to have all as bad and miserable as themselves. Could the
damned by their suffering, either ease these tormentors, of pain, or abate
their malice; they would be less displeased at them, and less displeased,
torment them less. And, whom then have they made the subject of their
thoughts, or did they rather dream than think on God, that sometimes write as
if it were not as much against Gods will to have men dye, as it is against man's
will to suffer death. For they suffer death, not because God delights in it,
but that Gods will may be fulfilled in their suffering or passion, according to
the measure it has been neglected or opposed, by their actions.

4 But though the rule of justice be exactly observed in proportioning their
pains to the degrees or fervency of his love neglected; yet seeing the
continuance of their neglect was but temporal, how stands it with his justice
to make their pains eternal? The doubt were pertinent, if the immortal
happiness, whereunto the riches of Gods bounty, did daily lead them during
their pilgrimage on earth, whereof they had sweet promises and full assurance,
had not farther exceeded all the pleasures of this mortal life, for whose
purchase, they morgaged their hopes of immortality, than the pains of hell do
these grievances or corrections, which caused them murmr against their
heavenly Father. In this sense we may maintain what Mirandula in another does:
that no man is everlastingly punished for temporal offenses as committed
against God. How then? Man wilfully exchanging his everlasting inheritance for
momentany and transient pleasures, becomes the Author of his own woe, and
reapes the fruit of his rash For I reckon, that the sufferings of this present
time, are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in
us. Romans 8. 18.
bargains, and so makes up that measure of Gods glory and pleasure, by his
eternal sufferings, which he might and would not do, by eternal
participation of his joyful presence. Quod si Christo salus nostra tam chara
fuit, and tam charo constitit, quid est quare nostram ipsi salutem tantopere
negligamus? Quibus supplicijs, and qua ignominia sempiterna non sumus digni,
modicum laborem prore obtinenda tam praetiosa recusantes? Quomodo nos
effugie^^us (inquit Paulus) si tantum neglexerimus salutem? Acosta con. 3. de
circumcisione.
And it is more than just, (for it is justice tempered with abundant mercy)
that they should suffer everlasting pains, who not twice, or thrice, or seven
times only, but more than seventy times seven times, have wilfully refused to
accomplish Gods eternal pleasure by accepting the sweet profers of their
eternal joy. In every moment of this life, we have a pledge of his bounty to
assure us of a better inheritance, the very first neglect whereof, might in
justice condemn us to everlasting bondage. The often and perpetual neglect,
turns flames of eternal love into an eternal consuming fire. For if love and
mercy be his property as he is Creator and preserver of all mankind: his
love (as was said before) must needs be more indissolubly set on those
attributes than on man. The end of his love to man, is to make him happy by
being like him in the love of goodness: Now the more he loves him with
reference to this end, or the oftener he pardons him for neglecting or refusing
the means that draw unto it; the greater is his wrath against impenitency, or
final contempt of his loving mercy. This is his Isa. 42. 14 I have long time
holden my peace, I have been still and refrained my self: now will I cry like
a travailing woman, I will destroy and devour at once.
most dear and tender attribute, which being foully wronged will not suffer
justice to sleep.

Patientia laesa sit furor. Long restraint of anger upon just and frequent
provocations, makes the out-bursting of it, though unseemely and violent, seem
not altogether unjust nor immoderate. Albeit the form and manner of
proceeding, which humane patience much abused, usually observes in taking
revenge, cannot in exact justice be warranted or approved: yet this excess of
anger, or delinquency in the form, is so tempered with matter of equity, that
it makes those actions of patient men much abused, seem excusable, which in
others would be intolerable. The ideall perfection of this rule of equity,
thus often corrupted by humane passions, is in the Divine Nature, without
mixture of such passion or perturbation, as is pictured out to the terror of
the ungodly in the prophetical characters or descriptions of his anger. Et
excitatus est tanquam dormiens Dominus, etc. Then the Lord awaked as one out of
sleep, and like a mighty man that shouteth by reason of wine: Psalm. 78. 65.
Although he be a Father to all, and seem to wink at his sons enormities:
yet when he awakes, he has a curse in store, for such as abuse his patience,
and make a mock of his threatenings; more bitter than that which Noah bestowed
on Cham. To attribute patience to him, and to deny him wrath and indignation;
were, in Lactantius his judgment, to enrich his goodness, by robbing his
Majesty. Ex his apparet vanas esse rations Philosophorum, qui Deum putant sine
ira: and inter caeteras lauds ejus id ponunt, quod est contra ipsa^
majestatem. Regnum hoc imperiumque terrenum, nisi metus custodiat, solvitur.
Aufer iram Regi, non modo nemo parebit, sed etiem de fastigio praecipitabitur.
Imo vero cuilibet humili eripe hunc affectum, quis eum non spoliabit? quis non
deridebit? Lactantius cap. 23. de ira Dei. p. 477.
The reasons of those Philosophers are apparently vain, which think that God
cannot be angry. For even earthly Empire or Sovereignty, forthwith dissolves,
unless it be held together by fear. Take anger from a King, and in stead of
obedience, he shall be thrown headlong from the height of dignity. Yea take
anger from a man of meaner rank, and he shall become a prey to all, a
laughing stock to all.

5 I am not ignorant what censures pass upon this Author for his incommodious
speeches in this argument of Gods wrath or anger. His words, I must confess,
sound somewhat harsh, to ears accustomed to the harmony of refined
Scholastique Dialect. Yet Hactenus mihi magna contentio suit cum Lactantio, dum
humanis rationibus, divinam iram ex humana metiretur fragilitate. Iam autem,
quia dicit iram Dei sicut ipsum etiam Deum, eternam, nihil habeo quod repugnem.
Nam ex syncrisi divinae atque humanae irae intelligas, ipsum de divina long
aliter quam de humana loqui: neque esse accidens quod in Deum non cadit, sed
proprium, quia ira Dei a justitia Dei nihil differt. Iustitia vero Dei exeterna
lage manet, contra quam si quis deliquerit, vindictam nimirum illius Dei
sentiet, apud quem nullus vel temporum vel locorum terminus est. Betuleius in
Com. in cap. 21. Lactant. de ira Dei.
Betuleius, a man too learned, and too well seen in Lactantius, to let gross
faults pass without espiall, and too ingenuous to spare his censure upon errors
espied; after long quaerulous debatements, chides himself friends with his
Author: whose meaning in conclusion he acknowledges to be Orthodoxall and
good; albeit his characters of divine wrath in the premises, may seem better
to fit the fragility of humane peevishness, than the Majesty of the Almighty
Judge. His phrase (perhaps) might be excused in part, by the security of those
times wherein he wrote; his fault (if any fault it were not to speak precisely
in an age more precise for maintaining the elegancy or life of style, than the
right use or logical propriety of words) is too common to most Writers yet,
and consists only in appropriating that to the Divine Nature, which is
attributed to it only by extrinsecall denomination. But leaving his phrase
(about which perhaps he himself would not have wrangled) his argument holds
thus far true: God is more deeply displeased with sin, than man is, though
his displeasure be not clothed with such passions, as man's anger is: and yet
the motions of the creatures appointed to execute his wrath, are more furious
than any man's passions in extremest fury can be. What man's voice is like his
thunder? What Tyrants frowns like to a lowering sky, breathing out storms of
fire and brimstone? Yet are the most terrible sounds, which the creatures can
present, but as so many echoes of his angry voice; the most dreadful
spectacles that Heaven or Earth, or the intermediate Elements can afford, but
copies of his irefull countenance. Howbe it this change or alteration in the
creature proceeds from him without any internal passion or alteration. Immotus
movet: He moves all things, being himself immovable.

6 But as Lactantius may be so far justified, as we have said, so perhaps he
is inexcusable in avouching anger to be as natural to GOD, as mercy, love,
and favor are. To him that duly considers his infinite goodness, it may
seem impossible that he should be moved by us, or by any thing in us, to
mercy; seeing, as Deus ex se sumil seminarium miserendi, quod judicat and
condemnat nos, eum quodammodo cogimus, ut long aliter de cord ipsius
miseratio quam animadver. sio procedere videatur. Bernard. Ser. 5. in natal.
Dom.
Saint Bernard well observes, he has the seminary of mercy in himself, and
cannot take the seeds of it from any other. The fruits of it, we may, by ill
deserving, so hinder, that they shall never take nor prosper in our selves; but
to punish or condemn us, we in a sort constrain him. And though he be the
Author as well of punishment as of compassion, yet the manner how these two
opposite attributes, in respect of us proceed from him, is much different; the
one is natural to him, and much better than any natural comfort unto us; the
other is in a sort to him unnatural, and most unnatural and unpleasant unto
us: for as S. Vide Hierom. in cap. 1. Mich. vide Riberam in 1. Mich. number. 5. Et
in 4. Mal. number. 4.
Jerome says, God when he punishes, does in a manner, relinquish his nature,
and therefore when he proceeds to punishment, he is said to go out of his
place, and to work alienum opus, a strange or uncouth work. The wicked and
reprobate, after this life, shall always see and feel his anger: But though
they see him thus, immediately, they do not see his nature so immediately as
the Elect shall do, to whom he shows himself in love; this is his proper
visage, the live-character of his native countenance. The manifestation of his
anger in what part of the world soever, or in what manner soever made, is a
veil or vizard put between him and the Reprobate, lest they should see the
light of his countenance and be made whole. Hence, in the sentence of
condemnation, it shall be said, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting
fire. From his essential presence they cannot, but from the light of his
countenance or joyful presence, they must of necessity depart. For were it
possible for them to behold it, no torments could take hold of them; the reflex
of it upon whom soever it lights, creates joy; the fruition of it, is that
happiness which we seek. To conclude: Lactantius rightly inferres, It were
impossible sin should not be odious to him, to whom goodness is pleasant and
delightful. Now his dispeasure at sin, is the true cause of all displeasant
motions or alterations in the creatures. His error, albeit we take him at the
worst, was not great: and as it may easily be committed by others, so it may as
quickly be rectified, if we say, that Anger and Hate are by consequent, or
upon supposall of sin, as necessary to the Divine Nature, as Love and Mercy,
but not so natural. But how either Love or Anger, both of them being either
formally passions, or indissolubly linkt with passions, may be rightly
conceived to be in God, is a point worth explication.

CHAP. 21.
How Anger, Love, Compassion, Mercy, or other affections are in the Divine
Nature.
NO affection or operation that essentially includes imperfection, can properly
be attributed to perfection it self. But if the imperfection be only
accidental, that is, such as may be severed from the affection; the affection
after such separation made, may without meaphor (in some Schoolemens judgment)
be ascribed to God. Hence the same Schoolmen will have distributive justice to
be in him, after a more peculiar manner than commutative justice is; because
commutative justice (as they allege) essentially includes rationem dati, and
accepti; somewhat mutually given and taken. Mercy likewise is (in their
judgments) more properly in God, than anger or revenge; because it may be
abstracted from compassion, which is an imperfection annexed, but not essential
to the relief of others misery, wherein mercy (as they contend) formally
consists. It suffices us, that such affections or moral qualities as in us
formally and essentially include imperfection, may be contained in the Divine
Essence; though not formally, yet eminently, and most truly, as we suppose
anger is. For in this point we rather approve of De Ira Dei, cap. 21.
Lactantius his Divinity, than of Quotiens impetu opus est non irascitur, sed
exurgit, and in quantum putavit opus esse concitatur remittiturque non aliter
quam quae tormentis exprimuntur tela, in potestate mittentis sunt, in quantum
torque antur. Sen. lib. 1. de ira. cap. 9. Ita aut ira non est, aut inutilis
est. Ibid.
Seneca's Philosophy. He that bids us be angry and sin not, seeks not the
utter extirpation, but the moderation of anger, Qui ergo irasci nos jubet, ipse
utique irascitur; He that bids us be angry, is doubtless upon just occasion
angry himself. Nor should we sin, if we were angry only as he is angry; or at
those things only that displease him, so far as they are displeasing to him;
And were we as much inclined to mercy and loving kindness as we are to anger,
the motions of the one would argue as great passion as the motions of the
other. But seeing Dum ergo ad verba mutabilitatis nostrae descenditur, ex iis
quibusdam gradibus factis ascendet qui petest ad incommunicabilitatem Dei, ut
rideat sine zelo zelantem, sine ira irascentem, sine dolor and penitentia,
penitentems, sine misero cord, mis^ricordem, sine praevisionibus praescientem.
Gregmoral. lib. 20. in 30. cap. Job.
Gods mercy which is proposed unto us for a pattern, is (if I may so speak)
more real and trnly affectionate in him than his anger, the difficulty how
either should be in him is the same, or not much different: How can there be
true compassion without passion, without motion or mutation? In many men it is
observable; that the better use they have of reason, the less they participate
of affection: and to carry those matters with moderation, which others can
neither accomplish nor affect without excess of passion or perturbation, is a
perfection peculiar to good education, much and choice experience or true
learning. And thus by proportion they argue, that God who is infinitely wise,
must be as utterly void of passion, though he be truly said merciful in
respect of the event. The conclusion is truer than the reason assigned. And in
most men whom the world accounts wise or subtle, reason does not so much
moderate as devour affections of that rank we treat of. The cunningest heads
have commonly most deceitful or unmercifull hearts: and want of passion often
argues want of religion, if not abundance of habituated atheism or irreligio^.
Every man's passions are for the most part moderate in matters which he either
least affects or minds the most. Perpetual minding, especially of worldly
matters, coucheth the affections in an equal habit or constant temper; which
is not easily moved, unless it be directly or strongly thwarted. Desires once
stifned with hope of advantage by close solicitation, secret carriage, or
cunning contrivance; take small notice of violent oppositions which apparently
either overshoot, or come short of the game they lie in wait for. But even such
moderate politiques, if their nets be once discovered and the prey caught from
them, fall into Achitophels passion. Indignation and mercy, because
incompatible with such means as serve best to politic ends, are held the
companions of fools. And unto the world so they seem, because they are the
proper passions of reason thoroughly apprehending the true worth of matters
spiritual. For though gravity or good education may decently figure the
outward motions; yet is it impossible not to be vehemently moved, at the
miscariage of those things, which we most esteem. And the wiser we are in
matters spiritual, the higher we esteem the promulgation of religion, the
good of Gods Church, and promotion of his glory. The better experience we have
of his goodness; the more we pity their case which as yet never tasted it: the
more compassionate we are to all that are in that misery whence we are
redeemed. Did we esteem these or other duties of spiritual life, as they
deserve: the extremest fits of passion, which any worldly wise man can be cast
into, would seem but as light flashes to those flames of zeal and indignation
which the very sight of this misguided world, would forthwith kindle in our
breasts. It is not then Gods infinite wisdom which swallows up all passion, or
exempts him from those affections which essentially include perturbation; for
so the most zealous and compassionate should be most unlike him in heavenly
wisdom. But as the swift motion of the heaven, better expresses his
immobility or vigorous rest, then the dull stability of the earth. So does the
vehemence of zeal, of indignation, or other passions of the godly (so the
motives be weighty and just) exhibit a more lively resemblance of his
immutability or want of passion, then the Stoicall apathy, or worldings
insensibility in matters spiritual can do.

2 How we should in godly passions be likest GOD in whom is no passion; or how
those virtues or affections which are formally in us, should be eminently in
him; cannot by my barren imagination be better illustrated, then by comparing
the circle in some properties with other figures. A circle, in some men's
definitive language, is but a circular line; and to any man's sense (as in some
respects (perhaps) reason must acknowledge) it is rather one line, then a
comprehension of different lines, or a multitude of sides enclosed in angles.
And from the unity of it perhaps it is, that many flexible bodies, as wands or
small rods of iron, brass, etc. which presently break if you press them into
angles, or seek to frame them into any other figure, will be drawn without
danger into a circular form. Notwithstanding some infallible mathematical
rules there be expressed in terms which in strict property of speech (or
univocally) agree only to figures consisting of sides and angles; whose truth
and use, reason experienceth to be most eminently true in the Circle. Take a
Quadrangle ten yards in length, and four in breadth, another eight yards in
length, and six in breadth, a third seven yards every way: The circumference of
all three is equal 28. yards; so is not the superficial quantity, but of the
first 40. yards, of the second 48. of the third 49. The same induction alike
sensible in other many-sided figures, affoords this general unquestionable
rule; Inter figuras (...), ordinator (...) est capacior.
Among figures of the same kind, whose circumference is equal, that whose
sides are most equal, are most capacious. Yet frame a five-angled figure whose
whole circumference is but 28. yards, though the sides be not equal, the
superficial quantity of it will be greater, then the superficial quantity of
the former square: and yet a sixe-angled figure of the same circumference,
though the sides be unequal, will be more capacious then that. And still the
more you increase the number of angles, though without any increase of the
circumference, the greater will the capacity or superficial quantity of the
figures be, specially if the sides be not unequal. From this evident induction
arises a second tried rule in the Mathematique. Inter figuras (...)
Heterogeneas terminatior est capacior.
Amongst figures of diverse kinds, whose circumferences are equal, that which
has most angles, is always most capacious. The circle which to our sense
seems neither to have sides, nor angles; by a double title grounded on both
the former rules, has the pre-eminence for capacity of all other figures. It
is more uniforme than any other, or rather the abstract or pattern of
uniformity in figures, admitting neither difference of ranckes, or sorts, as
triangles, quadrangles, or other many-sided figures do: nor of inequality
between its own internal parts or lines: neither can one circle be more
capacious then another of the same circumference: nor can any line in the same
circle be longer then another that is drawn from one part of the
circumference, to another, through the same center. It is then in this respect
more capacious then any other figure, because it is most uniforme. The sides of
other figures may be exactly equal, but the distance of every part of their
circumference from the center, cannot admit such equality, as every part of the
circles circumference does. The circle again is more capacious then any other
figure, because more full of angles. for the angles which it no where has
univocally, formally, or conspicuous to sense; reason apprehends it to have
every where eminently. For as the Philosopher tells us, it is (...), a
totangle, and so has the prerogative or royalty, though not the propriety of
the second Rule. It is more capacious than any other figure, not only because
it is more ordinate or uniforme, but withal, because it has more angles than
any other figures can have; even as many as can be imagined, it being a
totangle.

3 This analogy between sides and angles as they are found in the circle and
in other figures, me thinks well expresses that analogy which School
Divines assign between wisdom, science, love, hatred, goodness, desire,
etc. as they are found in God and in man. For no one name or title of any
affection can be univocally attributed to the Creator and to the creature: and
yet the rules of equity, of mercy, of Justice, of patience, of anger, of love,
which we are commanded to follow, though not without passion or affection, are
most truly observed by him: yea their truth in him is infinitely eminent: so
far must we be from conceiting him to be without ardent love, without true
and unfaigned good will to us, without wrath burning like fire to consume his
adversaries, because he is without all passion. He is most loving, yet never
moved with love, because he is eternally wholly love; He is most compassionate,
yet never moved with compassion, because he is eternally wholly compassion; He
is most jealous of his glory and a revenger of iniquity most severe; yet never
moved with jealousy, yet never passionate in revenge; because to such as
provoke his punitive justice, he is eternally severity and revenge it self.
Again, how the indivisible Essence should be wholly love, and wholly
displeasure, wholly mercy, and wholly severity, I cannot better illustrate then
by the circle, the true emblem of his eternity, which is as truly (...) as
(...), as well all sides, as all angles. And being such, the sides and angles
cannot be distinguished in it: but the sides are angles, and the angles sides;
at least they are, if not essentially, yet penetratively the same. The circle
likewise is as truly (...) and (...), of equal sides and equal angles, as
(...) and (...) a totangle or totilater; and did it not contiaine multiplicitie
of sides, as well as of angles in most exact and eminent uniformity, it could
not have the full prerogative of the former rules. Nor could the indivisible
essence either be so great or excellent in himself, or a moderator of all
things so powerful and just, as we believe he is; unless he did eminently
contain the perfections of all things possible as well as of any one.

4 Some Philosophers have placed the humane nature, as a line diameter or
aequilibrium in this visible sphere; making man the measure of all things, as
participating all other natures: much what after the same manner that mixed
bodies contain the force and virtues of the elements. And man's nature, til it
was corrupt, did (without doubt) include such an eminent uniformity to all
things created, as the eye does unto colors. As he was then the true image of
God for his essence; so did he in this property, bear a true shadow of the
divine prerogative, whose essence, though, for number or greatness of
perfections contained in it, altogether measurelesse, is the most true and
exquisite measure of all things that are, or possibly can be: All the
conditions or properties of measure assigned by the Philosopher are as truly
contained in the incomprehensible essence, as sides or angles in the circle,
but far more eminently. A measure it is, not appliable to measurables, for
kind or quantity much different, according to diversity of parts, which it
has none, for it is immutably, eternally and indivisibly the same: and unto it
the nature, essence, quality, and quantity of all things, are actually applied,
in that they have actual being. It is impossible the immutable Creator should
be fitted to any thing created; but in that he is immutable, and yet eminently
contains all things in his indivisible essence, he eternally and immutably
fits all the possible varieties whereof contingency it self is capable. Being
all things else, he is fitness it self in a most eminent and excellent
manner: the present disposition of every thing, either, whiles it first begins
to be, or continues the same, or whiles it is in the change or motion (whether
from good to evil, or from evil to good, from evil to worse, or from good to
better) is more exquisitely fitted in it own kind, by eternal, immutable and
incomparable fitness; then it could be by any other measure, which the Creator
himself could create with it, or devise for it, after the alteration or change
were accomplished. In that he is indivisibly One, and yet eminently All, See
Esaias 66. 14, 15, 16.
he is immutable, contrariety it self unto contraries: Ezekiel. 7. 4.
Arithmeticall equality it self to things equal, Geometrically equal to
things unequal; Deuteronomy. 7. 9, 10.
according to every degree of their unequal capacities, in what sort soever.
And as of his other attributes one truly and really is another, so in respect
of man, his measure is his judgment or retribution whether of rewards or
punishments, not the rule only by which he rewards or punishes. Unto man in
his first creation, and whiles he continued as he created him, he was and would
have continued bounty it self; unto man yet as he is his creature, he is love
it self: and unto man made by his own folly an impotent wretched and miserable
creature, he is so entyrely mercy and compassion if self, that were there a
distinct god of love, or a goddess of mercy, or two infinite living abstracts
of mere love, and mere mercy; they could not be so loving and merciful unto
man touched with the sense of his own miseries, nor solicit him so seriously
and perpetually unto repentance as he does, who is entirely infinite mercy, but
not mercy only. Unto the truly penitent he is so truly and entirely
gratiousnesse it self, that if there were a Trinity of such abstract Graces,
as the Poets have feigned, they could be but a figure or picture of his solid
and infinite gratiousnesse. Unto the elect and thoroughly sanctified, he is so
truly and entirely felicity and salvation it self; that if the Heathen
goddesses, Felicitas and Salus, or Platoes Idea of true happiness might be
inspired with life and sense; Qui quotidie contemnit Deum, etiam quotidie
judicatur, non manifesto sed occulto judicio, non aperto sed tamen certo:
occultiora saepe sunt certiora manifestioribus Coppen. in Psalm. 7.
they could not communicate half that happiness to any one man (though they
would choose his heart for their closet, or actuate his reasonable soul as it
does the sensitive) that is imparted by him to al his chosen, who is entirely
infinite happiness, but not happiness only. For unto the impenitent and
despisers of his bounty, of his love, his mercy, grace, and salvation; he is
justice, indignation, and severity it self. Nemesis her self were she enabled
with spirit, life and power much greater then the Heathens ascribed unto her,
and permitted to rage without control of any superior law; should not be
able with all the assistance the Furies could afford her, Etiam Dei (...) est
ipsius (...) Coppen. ibid.
to render vengeance unto Satan and his wicked Angles, in such full and
exquisite measure as the just Judge will do in that last dreadful day. Then
shall he truly appear to be, as our Apostle speaks, All in All: the infinite
abstract of all those powers which the heathens adored for gods, as authors
either of good or of evil: Then shall he fully appear to be mercy, goodness,
grace and felicity; Nemesis, pav^r, and terror it self; the indivisible, and
incomprehensible Idea of all things which in this life our love did seek
after, or our fear naturally labored to avoid: The only loadstone whereto
our love, our desire in our creation were directed, was his goodness and
loving kindness. And fear was implanted in our nature as an Helm or Rudder
to divert us from his immutable justice or indignation; which are as rocks
immovable, against whom whosoever shall carelessely or presumptuously run,
must everlastingly perish without redemption.

FINIS.
A TREATISE OF THE DIVINE ESSENCE AND ATTRIBVTES.

THE SECOND PART.

CONTAINING The Attribute of Omnipotency, of Creation and Providence, etc.

BY THOMAS IACKSON Doctor in Divinity, Chaplain to his Majesty in ordinary,
and Vicar of S. Nicolas Church in the Town of Newcastle upon Tyne.

LONDON, Printed for JOHN CLARKE, and are to be sold at his shop under St.
Peter's Church in Cornehill. 1629.

THE CONTENTS OF THE SEVERAL Chapters in this ensuing TREATISE.
SECTION I. OF the Attribute of Omnipotency, and creative power.
Chap. Folio. 1 The Title of Almighty is not personal to the Father, but
essntiall to the Godhead. 1 2 Of Omnipotency, and of its object: of possibility
and of impossibility. 4 3 This visible world did witness the invisible power
and unity of the Godhead unto the Ancient Heathens. 15 4 The first objection of
the Atheist, Of nothing, nothing can be made. Of the doubtful sense of this
natural, how far it is true, and how far it is false. 19 5 By what manner of
induction or enumeration of particulars, universal rules or Maxims must be
framed and supported. That no induction can be brought to prove the
Naturalists Maxim, Of nothing, nothing can be made. 25 6 The second objection
of the Naturalist: [Every agent praesupposeth a patient or passive subject to
work upon] cannot be proved by any induction. The contradictorie to this
Maxim proved by sufficient induction. 31 7 Showing by reasons philosophical,
that as well the physical matter of bodies sublunary, as the celestial bodies
which work upon it, were of necessity to have a beginning of their Being and
Duration. 45 8 Discussing the second general proposed, Whether the making
something of nothing rightly argue a power Omnipotent. 57
SECT. II. OF Divine Providence in general: and how Contingency, and necessity
in things created are subject unto it.
Chapter. Folio. 9 Of the perpetual dependence which all things created have
on the Almighty Creator, both for their being and their operations. 65 10 The
usual and daily operations of natural causes with their several events or
successes, are as immediately ascribed to the Creator by the Prophets, as the
first Creation of all things, with the reasons why they are so ascribed. 80 11
Containing the sum of what we are to believe in this Article of Creation, and
of the duties whereto it binds us: with an introduction to the Article of His
Providence. 87 12 Though nothing can fall out otherwise then God has decreed:
yet God has decreed that many things may fall out otherwise than they do. 98
13 Contingency is absolutely possible, and part of the object of Omnipotency,
as formal a part, as necessity is. 102 14 The former conclusion proved by the
consent of all the Ancients, whether Christians or Heathens, which did dislike
the error of the Stoickes. 109 15 The principal conclusions, which are held
by the favorers of absolute necessity, may be more clearly justified, and
acquitted from all inconveniences, by admitting a mixed possibility or
contingency in humane actions. 118 16 The former contingency in humane actions
or mutual possibility of obtaining reward or incurring punishment, proved by
the infallibile rule of faith, and by the tenor of Gods Covenant with his
people. 126 17 That Gods will is always done, albeit many particulars which
God wills, be not done, and many done which he wills should not be done.
137 18 Of the distinction of Gods will into Antecedent and Consequent. Of the
explication and use of it. 146 19 Of the diverse acceptions or importances of
Fate, especially among the Heathen writers. 151 20 Of the affinity or alliance
which Fates had to necessity, to Fortune or chance, in the opinion of Heathen
writers. 160 21 Of the proper subject and nature of Fate. 169 22 The opposite
opinions of the Stoics and Epicures. In what sense it is true, that all things
are necessary in respect of Gods decree. 179 23 Of the degrees of necessity,
and of the original of inevitable or absolute necessity. 184
SECT. III. OF the manifestation of Divine Providence in the remarkable
erection, declination and periods of Kingdoms: in overruling policy, and
disposing the success of humane undertakings.
Chapter. Folio. 24 Of the contrary Fates or awards whereof David's temporal
kingdom was capable: and of its devolution from Gods antecedent to his
consequent Will. 194 25 Of the sudden and strange erection of the Macedonian
Empire, and the manifestation of Gods special providence in Alexanders
expedition and success. 213 26 Of the erection of the Chaldean Empire, and of
the sudden destruction of it by the Persian, with the remarkable documents of
Gods special providence in raising up the Persian by the ruin of the Chaldean
Monarchy. 224 27 Of Gods special providence in raising and ruinating the Roman
Empire. 259 28 Why God is called the Lord of Hosts, or the Lord mighty in
Battle. Of his special providence in managing Wars. 288 29 Of Gods
special providence in making unexpected peace, and raising unexpected war.
314 30 Of Gods special providence in defeating cunning plots and conspiracies,
and in accomplishing extraordinary matters by means ordinary. 320
SECT. IV. OF Gods special Providence in suiting punishments unto the nature
and quality of offenses committed by men.
Chapter. Folio. 31 Of the rule of retaliation or counterpassion. And how
forcible punishments inflicted by this rule without any purpose of man, are to
quicken the ingraffed notion of the Deity, and to bring forth an
acknowledgement of Divine Providence and Justice. 343 32 Of the Geometrical
proportion or form of distributive justice; which the supreme Judge sometimes
observes in doing to great Princes as they have done to others. 349 33 How the
former law of retaliation has been executed upon Princes, according to
Arithmeticall proportion, or according to the rule of commutative justice. 359
24 The sins of parents visited upon their children, according to the rule of
retaliation. 365 35 Grosser sins visited upon Gods Saints according to the
former rule of Counterpassion. 369 36 Of sins visited or punished according
to the circumstance of time or place wherein they were committed. 376 37 What
manner of sins they be which usually provoke Gods judgments according to the
rule of counterpassion. And of the frequency of this kind of punishment
foresignified by Gods Prophets. 387 38 The conclusion of this Treatise, with
the relation of Gods remarkable judgments manifested in Hungary. 398
A TREATISE OF THE Divine Essence and Attributes: THE SECOND PART, Containing
the Attribute of Omnipotency, of Creation and Providence, etc.
J believe in God the Father Almighty.
SECTION I.
Of the Attribute of Omnipotency, and creative power.
CHAP. 1.
The Title of Almighty is not personal to the Father, but essential to the
Godhead.
IN further explication of this Article, it is added in the NICENE CREED, I
believe in one God the Father Almighty. This title of Almighty or Omnipotency,
is not given to the Son, or to the Holy Ghost, nor are either of them
expressly enstyled by the name of God, in the Creed. The omission of the title
of God, and of the Attribute Almighty, (which is proper to the Godhead) when
the persons of the Son and of the Holy Ghost with their several offices are
described; may administer this scruple to men, not much conversant in these
great mysteries, [Whether the Father only be God, or only Almighty, or the
only God Almighty, in such sort as the Son and holy Ghost are not.] To say
the Father only is God, or the Father only is Almighty, were to wrong the
Son and Holy Ghost; to both whose Persons these titles are due: and our Faith
in this point of the Trinity, above all others, must be uniforme and
unpartiall, without respect of Persons. And for the better instruction of such
as did not fully apprehend the right meaning of the Apostolic Creed, this
uniformitie of our Faith is expressly taught by Athanasius. Such as the Father
is, such is the Son, and such is the holy Ghost: the Father is God, the Son
is God, and the holy Ghost is God: the Father is Almighty, the Son is
Almighty, and the holy Ghost Almighty: yet shall we often read in Scriptures,
and in Writers Orthodoxal, even in Athanasius himself, [that the Father is the
only God.] So says the Son of God, John 17. verse. 3. This is life eternal,
that they may know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have
sent. Does Christ therefore deny himself to be the only true God? or rather
is it a part of our belief, and of our Saviors meaning in that place, that
we must know not only God the Father, but Jesus Christ also, whom he has
sent, to be the only true God? And though it be not in that place expressed,
yet it is necessarily employed in other Scriptures, that the holy Ghost is the
only true God. No Christian may question this Proposition, (Pater est solus
Deus) The Father is the only God: nor this, (Filius est solus Deus) The Son
is the only God: nor this third, (Spiritus sanctus est solus Deus) The holy
Ghost is the only God. The Father likewise is the only Almighty, the Son
likewise is the only Almighty, and the holy Ghost the only Almighty: on
whom our Faith is jointly and uniformly set. This uniformitie of our Faith has
for its object, the unity of nature in the Trinity. But to say (Solus Pater
est Deus, solus Pater est omnipotens) The Father only is God, or the Father
only is Almighty; The Son only is God, or the Son only is Almighty; The
holy Ghost only is Almighty: were more then heresy, gross infidelity. For
every one of these speeches include a denial both of the coequalitie of their
persons, and of the unity of their nature. Of the ground of this distinction,
or of the difference between these several Propositions (Solus Pater est
Deus, Pater est solus Deus) The Father only is God, and the Father is the
only God, etc. by the assistance of this blessed Trinity we shall discuss,
after we have proved the Son to be truly God, and the holy Ghost likewise to
be truly God, in the several Articles which concern their persons and
offices. Now the same Arguments, which proves the Son to be truly God, and
the holy Ghost likewise to be truly God, will likewise prove the Son to be
the only God, the only Almighty. The point next in view, and first to be
handled, is the meaning of this Attribute Almighty, and how it agrees to the
Godhead or divine nature as it is presupposed one and the same in the three
Persons.

CHAP. 2.
Of Omnipotency, and of its object: of possibility and of impossibility.
Nothing shall be unpossible unto God, says the Angel to the blessed Virgin,
doubting or moving this question, How shall I (instantly) conceive and bear a
son, seeing I know not a man? That the accomplishing of that, which the
Angel had said, was possible to God, the event did prove. But that nothing
should be impossible unto God, can neither be proved by any event, nor will it
necessarily follow, at least the necessity of its consequence is not so clear
from the words uttered by the Angel, which admit of some restriction. For, to
be God, or to be equal with God, is something, more then mere nothing. Is it
then possible for God to make a God every way equal unto himself? The Son
of God, who was conceived by the holy Ghost, and borne of the blessed Virgin,
was equal with God, yet not so made, but so begotten from all eternity. He
is more then (...), and is not comprehended under the former Proposition. For
being God from all eternity, it was impossible he should be made. Must then
the Angels speech, or the Article of Omnipotency be restrained to things
possible? or is God said to be omnipotent only in this respect, that he is
able to do all things, that are possible to be done? In respect of whom then
shall they be counted possible? In respect of God himself, or in respect of
Men or Angels? Or with reference to Angelical or humane knowledge only? or
in respect of knowledge divine? To be able only to do all things, that man or
Angels can do, or can conceive may be done, does not exequiate or fill our
conceit of power and wisdom truly infinite: it is much less than the full
extent, or contents of Omnipotency: which certainly contains power and
wisdom much greater than can be comprehended by man or Angel. Again, to say
that God can do all things, that are possible for him to do, or may be
effected by his infinite power and wisdom, is to say the same thing twice,
and yet to leave the true notion of Omnipotency unexpressed.

Were the question propounded, what things can be seen or heard; What things
cannot be seen or heard: a man should be little wiser by this answer, Things
visible only can be seen; Things invisible cannot be seen: Things audible
only can be heard; Things inaudible cannot be heard. For if one which knows
no Latin, nor the derivation of English words from it, should further ask
what it is to be visible, what it is to be invisible; or what is the meaning or
signification of audible and inaudible? the answer would be, That is visible,
which can be seen; that is invisible, which cannot be seen: that is audible,
which may be heard; that inaudible, which cannot be heard. So that he which
formerly knew the signification of these words, or their form in Latin
(whence they are derived,) should learn nothing by this answer, which for
real sense is but idem per idem, a diversity of words, without any difference
in the thing signified by them. Again, though these two Propositions be
convertible, [1. Every object of sight is visible, and whatsoever is visible is
the object of sight: 2. Every object of hearing is audible, and whatsoever is
audible is the object of hearing;] yet is not visibilitie the true and proper
object of sight nor audibilitie of hearing. To be visible, or invisible; to be
audible, or inaudible, are terms relative. And every relation or relative
term supposes a ground or root, whence it arises or results; which in nature
has precedence of it: now it is the root or ground from which the relation
results, which is the proper object of every faculty whether it be passive as
our senses are, or active, as our understanding is.

2. This relation or relative term, to be visible or audible, results from the
impression, which the proper object of sight or hearing make upon these two
senses, or at least from the aptitude which they have to imprint their proper
shape or form upon these senses. The object of sight, which is color or
light, cannot found the relation of audibilitie, because neither light nor
color have any aptitude to imprint their form upon the ear; nor can the
relation of visibilitie result from sounds, which are the proper object of
hearing, because sounds have no aptness or power to make any sensitive
impression upon the eye. Sounds then are the proper object of hearing, and the
ground or root, whence bodies take the denomination of being audible. Light or
color is the proper object of sight, and the ground or root whence bodies in
which light or color is found, receive the relative denomination of being
visible. Unto the question then, [What things may be seen, what things may not
be seen; what things may be heard, or may not be heard,] the true and only
Philosophical answer is, Those things only can be seen, which are endowed
with colors, or participate of light; those things which have no color or
participation of light cannot be seen. Those bodies only which are apt to
make or give sound, can be heard; those which can yield no sound, cannot be
heard. If it should further be demanded, why sounds only are audible, when as
neither colors nor other qualities can be audible, or become the object of
hearing? The only way to assoyle this question would be to instruct him that
makes it, in the manner how sounds are produced, how they are carried by the
air unto the ear, how they are there entertained by the air, which the ear
or organ of hearing continually harbors within it self for their
entertainment. He that should see the fabric of the ear, and take the use
of its several parts (of the anvile and the hammer especially) into serious
consideration, would cease to enquire why sounds are audible rather then
colors, and begin to admire the inexpressible skill of the Artificer, which
framed this live-eccho in all more perfect sensitive creatures. No marvel if
the ear perceive sounds, seeing the use or exercise of this sense is a
continual imitation of the production of sounds. And as no creature
understands the expressions of our rational internal notions, save that only
which is endowed with the like internal notions of reasons; so neither could
the ear or sense of hearing perceive sounds, unless it had a continual
internal sound within it self. He again that should view the several
humors of the eye, the Chrystalline especially, would never move question, why
colors should make that impression upon the eye, which they do not upon the
ear.

3 The point questioned in this part of Divinity, or concerning the meaning of
this Attribute [Omnipotencie] comes to this issue. Whether power infinite and
omnipotent have any object whereunto it is, or may be so immediately terminated,
as sight or the visive faculty is unto light or colors, or as the faculty of
hearing is to sounds, whence the relation or relative denomination of
possibility does so result, as visibilitie does from the sight or visive
faculty, as it respects colors. If infinite power presuppose any other
object pre-existent to possibility, as light and colors are to visibilitie,
this object must needs be either privative or positive: Something or mere
nothing. If we shall say this object is a positive entitie, either it was from
Eternity without dependence on his Almighty power, and so it should be, as
that power is, infinite. Or if we say this supposed object were from him, or by
him, or had dependence on his power; then certainly it was possible, and
therefore cannot be precedent to all possibility. Whence it may seem
concluded, that Gods infinite power or Omnipotency is the only foundation of
possibility, and by consequence cannot possibly have any object, whereto it is
or can be terminated, or so fitted, as the visive faculty or sight is to light
or colors. Howbeit in truth the former reasons only conclude, that the object
of Omnipotency can be no positive entitie, nor the privation or negation of
any determinate being. But that the same Omnipotent power may have an object
purely negative, or including a total negation of all things numerable, though
their number were potentially infinite, the former reasons or the like cannot
enforce us to deny. All things are said to be possible unto God, because by his
omnipotent power, he can make all things not out of positive possibilities or
Entities possible, but of mere nothing, that is, without any positive Entitie
pre-existent, to serve either as matter, agent, or instrument. What? shall we
say then, that things not possible only, but impossible, may be done or made
by power Omnipotent? Or may we say that impossibility is either something, or
at least (as some have taught) a degree or part of non esse, or of nothing? But
how can that which is not, have any degrees or parts? Or, admit we might
conceive things impossible or, impossibilities to be degrees or parts of
nothing, yet so conceived, we must needs conceive them to have the same
negative conditions or properties, which are attributed to non esse, to simple
not being, or to nothing, that is, they might be such objects of infinite
power, as non esse, or not being is. Yet he that made all things that are, of
nothing and can resolve them into nothing again, does never attempt or profer
to resolve them into impossibilities, nor did he make any thing of
impossibles. Whether then impossibility or impossibles be something or
nothing, how is it possible they should so resist the power Omnipotent, which
can do all things, as that nothing can be made of them? Lastly, if
impossibilities can be no objects of Gods power, then things possible or
possibilities, must be the only object of it, and so we shall fall into the
former circle, that God can do those things only that are possible, and those
things only are possible which God can do.

4 Here the Schools acutely distinguish between possibility relative and
absolute. Certe non est per ectus and pulcher mundus, nisi omne quod sit
palehru^, sit aliqua bonitas quae velit; and omne quod scibil^, sit sapientia
quae sciat; and quod possibile, potentia quae possit. Na qua aliquid possibile
non potuit, aut scibile ignoravit, aut pulchru^ nol it, vel invidet, maneum and
imperfectum exierit opificium: ipsum vero pulchrum, aut scibile, nemo definit
ad bonitatem volentis, aut scientiam scientis. Sed pulchrum est, quod rei cui
accidit ad propriam bonitatem obtinendam, perfectionem adijcit; and scibile,
quod in sese habet principium, unde sciri pos^it: igitur neque possibile, quod
simpliciter dicitur and non ad aliquid, definiri debet ad potentiam: sed
simpliciter possible, est illud, quo facto and posito, nulla repugnantia fit,
aut contradictio. Tune enim res per sese fuerit impossibilis, cum in ipsa est
(ut ita dicamus) impossibilitas. Externum vero quiddam fuerit, si ob idsolum
dicatur impossibilis, quod non sit causa quae possit facere. Oportet igitur sit
in rebus causa aliqua, quae possit quidquid in sese repugnantiam nullam
continet. At vero fieri ex nihilo non est simpliciter impossible, sed
impossible cuidam virtuti fin^^ae, puta naturali; qua virtute esse aliam
superiorem, and potentiorem, non est impossible. Vallesius de sacr. Philosoph.
page 20.
Possibility relative being the first draught or capacity of all being or
perfection limited, must needs be founded upon Omnipotency: nothing is
relatively possible, but by reference to, or by denomination from this Almighty
power. Absolute possibility they conceive ad modum objecti, as it were an
object that does terminate Omnipotent power, not positively as colors do
sight, but privatively as darkness does sight; or as an empty sphere without
which Omnipotency it self does never work. This absolute possibility, or
possibility merely Logical, which is presupposed to relative possibility, as
light or color is to visibilitie, cannot otherwise be notified or expressed
than by this negative, of not implying contradiction. But here the former
difficulty concerning impossibilities meets with us in another shape. For it
will be again demanded, whether contradiction be any thing or nothing? or how
it should come to oppose Gods Almighty power, more then either non esse,
simple not being, or all things that are possibly can do? Can it be less
then nothing? That is impossible; rather it is, if not so much more, yet so
much worse then nothing, as that it cannot possibly bear the true form or
character of any thing; and for this reason can be no object of power
Omnipotent. Under that notion which we have of Omnipotency or infinite
Being, Truth it self, and Unity it self or Identitie, are as essentially
included, as Entitie or Being it self. It is no impotency in God, but rather
the prerogative of his Omnipotency, that he cannot weaken his power by
division, nor admit any mixture of imbecilitie, that he cannot deny or
contradict himself. In that he is infinitely true, or infinite Truth it
self, the ratification or approbation of contradictions, is more incompatible
with his nature or Essence, than falsehood is with truth, than weakness with
power, than malice with goodness. There is no falsehood unless it include some
degrees or seeds of contradiction: as all Truth is the offspring of unity or
Identitie. In conclusion, as all things which are or possibly may be, can be no
more then participations of his Being, who is Being it self: so they must by
an eternal Law, whenever they begin to be, bear a true though an imperfect
resemblance of his unity, of his Identitie, of his veracitie, as well as of
his power which is omnipotently true, omnipotently just.

5 In answer to the last difficulty proposed, it must be said that
impossibility is neither any positive Entitie, nor is it any part or branch of
non esse, or of nothing. For in respect of him who is All, more then all
things, there can be no absolute non esse. He calls things that are not as
if they were, that is, he can by his sole wrod make all things which yet are
not, which yet have not been, to have true being. He can make any thing of
nothing. That then which we call impossibility, must not be derived from non
esse, nor from falsehood, which is finally resolved into contradiction. So that
the rule of contradiction is the Test, by which impossibilities, as well as
falsehood must be discovered: and it is more to be impossible then to be
false. From what fountain then does impossibility spring? From absolute and
Omnipotent power, or from the infinity of the Divine nature? But seeing in him
all power and being is contained, seeing the very possibility of limited being
takes its beginning from him, the possibility of weakening his power, the
possibility of contradicting or opposing himself, must by the eternal Law be
excluded from the object of Omnipotency. As we say, two negatives make an
affirmative, so to be unable to dis-enable it self, is no imperfection, no
impotencie; but the greatest perfection, the highest degree of power whereof any
nature is capable, because the impossibility of dis-enabling or weakening
himself is a positive branch of the prerogative of Omnipotency. 2. It is not
so true an argument of power in men to be illimited by law, or to be able to
do what they list, as to be willing to do nothing, but that which is lawful
and just: unless man's will be a law to his power, and goodness a law unto his
will, how absolute and illimited soever his power may be in respect of other
men, or of any coactive law which they can make to restrain it, it may quickly
come to make an end of it self. And the end or cessation of power absolute is
the worst kind of limit that can be set unto it.

The power of the Persian kings, was sometimes so absolute and so illimited,
that Cambyses having no possitive law to curb his will, fell in love with his
own sister. And yet so natural is the notion of man's subjection unto some
law, even unto men of corrupt minds, that this lawless King consulted his
Judges, whether his desire to enjoy the love of his sister, might be
countenanced by law. The effect of these Sages answer, was, that they knew no
law in special, which might warrant the brother to marry the sister, but they
had found a transcendent law, by which the Kings of Persia might do what they
list. By the like prerogative of this transcendent law; another King, upon her
request did delegate his absolute power unto his Queen for a day. And she by
delegation of this power, having liberty to do what she list, did use it to
the destruction of him that gave it her: for she cut off his head, before she
surrendered it. It is then a branch of the Almighties prerogative, that his
omnipotent power cannot for a moment be delegated or bequeathed to any other;
that as he can do whatsoever he will, so nothing can be done or willed by him,
which may derogate from the endless exercise of his infinite Majesty, power,
truth, or goodness.

The use of this doctrine concerning the prerogative of Omnipotency, and the
absolute impossibility of doing any thing that may derogate from it, is in
general this. As no opinion in the judgment of Philosophers can be convinced
of absurdity, until it be resolved into a contradiction either unto it self,
or unto some principle of nature from which it pretends some Original title of
Truth: so the only rule for the discovering impiety of opinions in Divinity,
or for co^vincing their Authors of heresy or infidelity, is by manifesting
their repugnancie or contradictio^ to some one or other divine Attribute, or to
some special promise or asseveration made by the Almighty in Scriptures, and
whosoever denies or contradicts any part of Gods word, does contradict the
divine truth or veracitie which no man has any temptation either to deny or
contradict, but from some doubt or denial of his Omnipotency. Of such
opinions as either contradict this Article of Omnipotency, or falsely pretend
some colorable title of truth from it, we shall have occasion to speak in
the particular Articles, against which these Errors are conceived, or whose
truth they prejudice. Having hitherto declared the object and meaning of this
Arcle, we are in the next place to prove the truth of it against the Atheist.

CHAP. 3.
This visible world did witness the invisible power and unity of the Godhead
unto the Ancient Heathens.
LEst any man should misconceive the 1.
former title of Almighty to be but as a fair promising frontispice to an
unresponsible work, we have the fabric of this Universe, the whole world it
self and all things in it, produced as witnesses of the Almighty fathers
alsufficiencie for effecting whatsoever either this grand Attribute of
Omnipotency, or any other Article of this Creed may promise or intimate unto
us. For when we profess our belief, that there is a father Almighty, who
made the heaven and earth, we must believe not only that he made both, but
that he which so made them both, is both able and willing to effect all things
for us, for which we have his promise; even things which neither eye has
seen nor ear has heard; things which cannot possibly enter into the heart of
man, by any bodily sense. To this purpose the Nicene Creed expresses this
article more fully. I believe in one God the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven
and earth, and of all things visible and invisible. He that has already made
many things to us invisible, ca^ prepare those things for us, which neither eye
has seen nor ear has heard. The inspection of this great visible sphere,
did convince the understandings of such as had no other book, besides this
great book of nature, to instruct them; the understandings of men altogether
unacquainted with Moses writings, that the Author of this great Book, was the
only God, the only invisible power, which deserved this sovereign title. For
though it be probable that Plato had read Moses his history, and his Law;
there is no probability, that either Orpheus or Pythagoras, both far more
ancient then Plato, had read or seen them, or could understand the language
wherein they were in their times only extant: Yet Justin. Martyr one of the
most ancient Christian writers, Justin martyr. De Monarchia Dei.
produces the testimony of Pythagoras, (an heathen Philosopher against the
Heathen) as a Second to Orpheus for confirmation of that truth, which we
Christians in this Article believe.

(...)
(...).
Let him that says, I am a God, win homage by his deed,
And lay a world like this to pawn, before I give him creed.
2. Now albeit neither Orpheus nor Pythagoras were Canonical writers, though
their joint authority be not infallible, yet the holy Ghost a teaer most
infallible, has declared the reasons which they used, to be most infallible by
the testimony of two Canonical writers. The first is that of the Psalmist,
Psalm. 96. 4, 5. The Lord is great and greatly to be praised: he is to be feared
above all gods. For all the gods of the Nations are Idols, or gods no-gods: but
the Lord made the heavens. The Prophet Jeremy is more express and more
peremptory. chap. 10. verse. 10, 11, 12. But the Lord is the true God, he is
the living God and an everlasting King: at his wrath the earth shall tremble,
and the Nations shall not be able to abide his indignation. Thus shall ye say
unto them, The gods that have not made the heavens, and the earth, even they
shall perish from the earth, and from under those heavens. He has made the
earth by his power, he has established the world by his wisdom, and has
stretched out the heavens by his discretion.

3. The consonancie between the live oracles of God and the dictates of reason
in heathen men, afford us this Aphorism, that it is not nature her self
(which is never otherwise than negatively, or at the most Privatively opposed
to the goodness of God) but the corruption of nature, which is always
contrary to the good Spirit of God, whereby men are seduced unto Atheism. And
seeing this corruption of nature whereof Atheism is the symptom, is the only
disease of the soul; the disease and the symptom cannot more kindly be cured
then by reviving the strength of nature. The receipt for reviving and
strengthening nature must be compounded of these two Truths, both evident by
light of reason not eclipsed by interposition of corrupt affections or
malignant habits, or freed from these by illumination of the spirit. The first
truth is, that this visible world did not make it self, but had a maker which
gave it beginning and continuation of being: The two main principles contained
in the Article of Creation
the second, that the making of this visible world does evince the maker of it
to be Omnipotent, and able to effect whatsoever he has promised. But before
the former truth can have its operation upon the humane soul which is
misaffected; the objections of the Atheists must be removed. All his
objections may be reduced to these two, ex nihilo nihil fit; of nothing nothing
can be made: whence seeing we acknowledge Creation, either to be a making of
all things of nothing, or (at least) to suppose that some things are made of
mere nothing: the truth which we Christians in this Article believe, may seem
directly to contradict a Philosophical truth or principle in nature. This
first objection is seconded by another. To create or to make something of
nothing is to be active: or thus, Creation supposes an agent, and every agent
presupposes a patient. Now if there were any patient, or passive power
praeexiste^t to the Act of creation, this passive power or patient wherein it
lodges was not created, but must have a being from Eternity. From the
difficulty included in this last objection, some philosophers did conceive an
unfashioned or confused mass, coeuall to the Eternity of divine power, which
they acknowledged to be the Artificer or framer of this great work, into that
uniformitie or beauty of several forms which now it bears. The first
objection admits a double sense or doubtful construction, and has no truth in
respect of the Almighty maker, save only in the impertinent sense. The second
objection universally taken, is false.

CHAP. 4.
The first objection of the Atheist, Of nothing, nothing can be made. Of the
doubtful sense of this natural, how far it is true, and how far it is false.
WHen it is said by the naturalist, that 1.
nothing can be made of nothing, or that every thing which is made is made of
something: this particle ex or of, has not always the same importance: and in
the multiplicitie of its significations or importances, the naturalist either
hood winks himself, or takes opportunity to hide his error; or at least
makes advantage of the doubtful phrase against such as seek to resell him.
When we speak of natural bodies or sublunary substances, this particle of,
usually denotes the proper and immediate Matter whereof every such body is
made. Thus we say the Elements are mutually made one of another, or of the
Matter which is common to them all; mixed bodies are made of the Elements
wrought or compacted into one Mass; vegetables and living substances endued
with sense, are made of mixed bodies, as of their immediate and proper matter.
Sometimes the same particle of or that speech (this body is made of that) does
not denote the immediate and proper matter whereof it is made, but yet imports
that that part of the bodily substance, which was in the one, becomes an
ingredie^t in the other which is made of it. So of water, wine was made by
miracle John 2. yet not made of water as of its immediate or proper matter, not
so as vapors are made of moisture, ordistilled waters of fume or smoke: for
so, that great work had been no true miracle, had included no creation, but a
generation only. Now it is impossible unto nature to generate wine of water,
without the ingredient of any other Element. It cannot be made by generation
otherwise then of the juice or sap of the Vine, which is not a simple Element,
but the Expression of a body perfectly mixed. Howbeit in this miraculous
conversion of water into wine, some part of the corporeal substance of water
did remain as an ingredient in the wine. There was not an utter annihilation
of the water, and a new production of wine in the same place, where water had
been, but a true and miraculous Transubstantiation of water into wine. And De
verbo, creare, ego ita censeo, creare duplex esse, alterum and praecipuum, ex
nihilo facere: alterum sine materiae dispositione facere. Nam substantia non
videtur aliter fieri posse, quam generatione, aut creatione. Generatio vero non
est nisi in materia disposita: quae igitur sine materiae dispositione est,
creatio vocari debet. Qua propter sive ex nihilo omnia, sive ex nihilo quaeda^,
quaedam ex materia non disposita, sed jubendo fee^^ omnium est Deus effector
and creator. Vallesius. c. 2. p. 22.
thus we must grant that Trees and vegetables were on the third day made, not
immediately of nothing, That fishes and beasts were made, the one of the bodily
substance of the earth, the other of the bodily substance of the waters,
neither immediately made of nothing, albeit both were made, not by generation,
but by creation, that is, not of any bodily matter, naturally disposed to bring
forth or receive that form, which by the creators hand, was instamped upon
them. For in true Philosophy, That which Philosophers call the matter of all
things generable, was not the first sublunary substance, which was produced;
nor was it comproduced or concreated with them, but created in them after they
were made. God had gathered the waters into one place, and the dry land into
another, before either of them had power to conceive or become the common
mothers of vegetable and living things. Thus were the heaven, and the earth
first made, and the waters divided by the firmament, whereas the earth did not
become the Matter or common mother of things vegetable, before the third day,
Of this Argument see Erastus in the beginning of his first Tome against
Paracelsus.
wherein God said, Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding seed,
and the fruit tree, yielding fruit after his kind, whose seed is in it self,
upon the earth; and it was so. Genesis 1. 11. Nor did the waters become the common
Matter or mother of fishes, before the fifth day, Let the waters bring forth
abundantly the moving creature that has life, etc. Now this production of
herbs or plants out of the earth, of fish and foul out of the substance of
the water, was not a mere conservation or actuation of that power, which the
earth and waters had before; but the Creation of a new power in them, the
continuation of which power, is part of that, which we call the passive power
of the matter. Nor had the fishes or whales, which God created, this passive
power in themselves from their first creation, but received it from that
blessing of God, ver. 22. Be fruitful and multiply, and fill the waters in the
seas, and let foul multiply in the earth. Nor did the earth become the Common
mother of vegetables, as of herbs, grass, trees, etc. and of more perfect
livings creatures, at the same time. It received power to bring forth the one
upon the third day; not enabled to bring forth the other, until the fifth day;
God said, Let the earth bring forth the living creature after his kind,
cattle, and creeping thing, and beast of the earth. So that all these and man
himself were not immediately made of nothing, though immediately made by God
himself: for they were made by him of the substance of the earth, which was
visible and praeexistent to their making, though not made of it as of the
matter. But when it is said, in the first of Genesis, [God in the beginning
made the heaven and earth,] it cannot be supposed or imported, that he made
them of any visible or invisible substance praeexistent: and if he made them
or their common mass of no substance praeexistent, here was something made of
nothing: but how of nothing? or what does this particle import? not that
nothing should remain as an ingredient in the first mass, or as if it had the
like precedence to it, as the earth had to living things: the Almighty did not
so turn nothing into something, as our Savior did water into wine. To say any
thing could be made of nothing in this sense, or according to the former
importances of the particle of, does indeed imply an evident contradiction; for
so nothing should be something, and simple not being should have a true being.
To make nothing to be something, falls not within the object of power
Omnipotent; it can be no part of the Almighty makers work. As Ciphers cannot
be multiplied into numbers, by any skill in Arithmetique, though supposed
infinite; so neither can nothing be converted into something, nor become an
ingredient in bodies created by any power, though infinite. As the Omnipotent
Creator is one unity it self, so every thing which he makes must have its
unity or Identitie, it cannot consist of contradictories.

2. When then it is said, that all things were made of nothing, or that
creation supposes some things to be immediately made of nothing, this particle
of can only import terminum a quo, the term only of the Action, not any
matter or subject: and yet the term thus imported, can be no positive
Entitie, but a mere negation of any positive Entitie precedent. To make the
heavens and earth of nothing, is in real value no more, then to make them not
of any matter or Entitie praeexistent, whether visible or invisible, on which
their Maker did exercise his efficient power or efficacy; but to give them
such being, as they then first began to have, that is, a corporeal being or
existence, by the mere efficacy or virtue of his word. As, suppose the Sun
should in a moment be suffered to transmit his light into a close vault of
stone; we might truly say, this heavenly body, did make light of darkness
tanquam ex termino, in that it made light to be there, where was no light at
all before, but mere darkness. And thus to make light out of darkness, does
no way argue, that it turned darkness into light, or that darkness did
remain as an ingredient in the light made. After this manner, did the Amightie
make the heaven and earth of nothing, that is, he made the corporeal mass or
substance, out of which all things visible were made, where no limited
substance, whether visible or invisible, was before; and by the same
efficiencie, by which this mass was made, he made place or spatiousnesse
quantitative, which had no being at all before; he did not turn
indivisibilitie into spatiousnes, or mere vacuitie into fulness: fulness and
spatiousnesse were the resultance of that mass which was first made, without
any Entitie or ingredient praeexistent. To make something of nothing in this
sense, implies no contradiction; there is no impossibility, that the heaven
and earth should be thus made, but this will not suffice to refute the Atheist
or infidel. For many things are possible which are not probable, and many
things probable which are not necessary. The next question then is, what
necessity there is in the infallible rules of nature and reason, that the
Heavens and the earth, should be made of nothing. Against the probability
only of Moses his history of the first creation, the Atheist will yet oppose
this general induction, That all bodily substances that begin to be what
before they were not, that all things which we see made, are always made by
some efficient cause, not out of mere nothing, but of some imperfect being
praexistent. To examine then the general rule pretended to amount from this
general induction, s or what truth there is in that philosophical maxim, ex
nihilo nihil fit, is the next point.

CHAP. 5.
By what manner of induction or enumeration of particulars, universal rules or
Maxims must be framed and supported. That no induction can be brought to
prove the Naturalists Maxim, Of nothing, nothing can be made.
1 TO frame a general rule or principle in any faculty, Art, or science,
there is no other means possible besides induction, or a sufficient
enumeration of particular experiments to support it. The particulars, from
which this sufficiency must amount, may be in some subjects fewer, in others
more. How many soever the particular instances or alleged experiments be; the
number of the^ will not suffice to support an universal rule, unless they
erect our understandings to a clear view of the same reason, not only in all
the particulars instanced in, but in all that can be brought of the same kind.
Unless there be a clear resultance of the same reason in all, the induction
fails, and the rule which is grounded on it, must needs fall. For this cause,
universal rules are easily framed in the Mathematiques, or in other Arts,
whose subjects are more abstract, or not charged with multiplicitie of
considerations or ingredients; from whose least variation, whether by addition
or subtraction, whether by further commixture or dissolution, the cause or
reason of truth so varies, that the rule which constantly holds in a great many
like particulars, will not hold in all, because they are not absolutely or
every way alike.

He which seriously observes the manner, how right angles are framed will
without difficulty yield his assent unto this universal rule, That all right
angles are equal, because he sees there is one and the same reason of
absolute equality in all that can be imagined. And this negative rule, will, by
the same inspection, win our assent without more ado, that if any two angles
be unequal, the one of them (at least) can be no right angle. The
consideration likewise of a few particulars, will suffice to make up these
universal never-failing rules.

1. First, that the greater any circle is, the greater always will the angle
of the semicircle be.

2. The second, that the angle of the least semicircle which can be imagined,
is greater then the most capacious acute-angle that can be made by the
concurrence of two right lines. And yet it will as clearly appear from the
inspection of the same particulars, from which the former rules do amount, that
the angle of the greatest semicircle imaginable, cannot possibly be so
capacious, as every right angle is. The consideration of the former rules,
specially of the first and third, will clearly manifest, that the quantity
contained in these angles, how little soever they be, is divisible into
infinite indeterminate parts, or divisible into such parts, without possible
end or limitation of division. But albeit the difference of quantity between a
right angle and the angle of a semicircle, be potentially infinite, or
infinitely divisible, according to parts or portions in determinate; yet will
it not hence follow, that the one angle is as great again as the other,
according to the scale of any distinct or determinate quantity, or expressible
portions. And this observation in Mathematical quantity, would quickly check
or discover the weakness of many calculatory Arguments or inductions ofttimes
used by great Divines in matters moral or civil. As for example, that every
sin deserves punishment infinite, because every sin is an offense
committed against an infinite Being or Majesty. And the greater, or more
sovereign the Majesty is, which we offend; the greater always will the
offense be, and meritorious of greater punishment. Yet all this only proves,
an infinity of indeterminate degrees in every offense against the divine
Majesty, by which it exceedes all offenses of the same kind committed only
against man: it no way inferres an infinite excess or ods of actual
determinate punishment, See the first part of the Divine Essence and
Attributes, chap. 20. page 219. 220.
or ill deserts. For this reason, we have derived the just award of
everlasting supernatural pains, unto temporary and transeunt (bodily or
natural) pleasures, from the contempt of Gods infinite goodness, which
destinates no creatures unto everlasting death, but such as he had made capable
of everlasting joys; nor were any of them infallibly destinated unto
everlasting death, until they had by voluntary transgression, or continuance
in despising of the riches of his goodness, made themselves incapable of the
bliss to which he had destinated them.

2 But to return unto the force or efficacy of induction: that (we say) is
neither so clear, nor so facile in matters physical or moral, as it is in
the Mathematiques. Now, the reason, why perfect inductions are so difficultly
made, in matters natural, is, because the subject of natural Philosophy is
not so simple or uncompounded, as Mathematical bodies or figures are: and yet
are natural bodies subject to greater variety of circumstances, more
obnoxious to alteration by occurrences external, then abstract lines, or
motionlesse figures, or bodies are. The cunningest Alchymist (albeit he could
exactly temper his furnace to all the several degrees of heat, that any
fuel, of what kind soever, could afford) cannot by any fire, or by any
degree of heat, which issues from it, hatch the most imperfect bird that
flies: yet if he should hence infer, that no birds could be hatched by any
kind of heat, daily experience would convince his assertion of falsehood, and
his induction, although it consisted of ten thousand instances or experiments
taken from the heat of the forge, or furnace, to be altogether lame. A man
mighty try the like conclusion of hatching birds, in all the sands, that this
Island affords, upon the eggs of all the fowls that breed in it, or about it,
and find their barrenness and unaptnesse for bringing forth any flying
Creature, to be as great, as it is for bringing forth wheat or other corn.
And I am persuaded the compost of this our soil is an unapt to bring forth the
former effects, as our sands are. Yet if any man should hence make this
general induction, that no sand or See Macrobius in his relation of Augustus
his Apophthegmes.
compost could perform this midwifery to the conception of any fowls; his
error might be confuted by the Ostriches, which have been hatched in the
sands of Arabia; and by some compost in Egypt, which performs that office
unto young chickens, which brood-hens do with us. No man in his time, or since
he died, has been either more accurate or more industrious in observing the
external causes of sickness and health, then Hippocrates was. And, no
question, but he was as careful to take his observations or frame his general
rules, from multitude of experiences, as any Philosopher or Physician has
been. Notwithstanding Vide Septalium in Hippoc. de aere, aquis and locis.
his observation concerning the nature and qualities of winds, and the
dependence of men's health or sickness upon them, are farther out of date in
France, then an Almanacke made the last year for the meridian of London, would
be this year for the meridian of Mexico. The same winds, which in his
Country, or in Countries wherein he made his observations, were most
healthful; are most noisome in some parts of France. The diversity of the
soil, whence winds in several regions arise or pass through, makes one and
the same wind (in respect of the point or quarter of heaven from whence it
comes,) to produce quite contrary effects in several religions, or situations.
The East wind may, in some regions, dispose men's bodies to the Iaundice, and
yet purify men's blood in other places not far distant for latitude. So may
the South Wind, in some regions, taint men's bodies with consumptions, coughs,
or other infirmities, and yet be healthful, in other regions not much distant
for longitude.

Let then the mere Naturalist tire himself, and his Reader, by long
inductions, or with multitude of experiments in agents and subjects natural,
for supporting his general rule, ex nihilo nihil fit, [Every thing is made of
something] yet his observation, will reach no farther then to Agents or
efficients, visible, or limited. Albeit his experiments in this kind were
infinite; this inference nevertheless [No visible agent can make any thing of
nothing, therefore nothing can be made of nothing by an invisible or
supernatural Agent] would be more disjoynted then this following; No heat of
fire or of the Sun in what degree soever, can hatch liue-creatures, ergo the
heat of the Dam cannot hatch her young ones. The difference between visible
agents, may be much greater, then the difference between the heat or warmth
of diverse bodies. No earthly bodies can produce heat in others, but either by
heat inherent in themselves or by motion, yet this will not conclude, that no
celestial body (the Sun for example) can produce heat in bodies sublunary,
unless it self be inherently hot, or at least not without motion. It is more
then probable, that the Sun is not formally or inherently hot, and yet
although it should stand still, (as once it did) in its sphere above our
horizon, it would heat and warm us no less then now it does, whilst it
moves. For conclusion; to make any perfect inductio^ sufficient to support an
universal rule, from earthly bodies, which shall conclude bodies Celestial,
or from agents sublunarie or uisible, which shall as uniformely hold true in an
agent invisible and supercoelestiall, is more difficult then to twist ropes of
loose sand. That which the Naturalist should prove, if he would be an
Atheist or infidel in grain, or oppose the truth of Scriptures with
probability, is, that there is no invisible or spiritual Agent. And this is
the point whereat the second objection aims: there can be no agent without a
patient, no exercise of Art, or power, without some matter or subject to work
upon.

CHAP. 6.
The second objection of the Naturalist: [Every agent praesupposeth a patient
or passive subject to work upon] cannot be proved by any induction. The
contradictorie to this Maxim proved by sufficient induction.
1 ACtus agentium sunt in patiente been disposito. The efficacy of every Agent
(says the Philosopher) is in the patient fitly disposed to receive it. And
elsewhere he determines it as a positive truth, that every action is in the
patient, not in the Agent. And this his position, may be ratified by perfect
induction or experiments inpregnable: for every action is an operation, and
every operation is so necessarily annexed unto the effect produced, that where
the one is, the other needs must be; and every effect is in the patient, or at
least is the patient. The softning of wax, the hardening of clay, the revivall
of vegetables of several kinds, are all actions proceeding from one and the
same actual force, or unvariable influence of the Sun. The reason, why the
active force is but one and the same, and why the actions or operations are
many and much different, is, because the active force, is in the Agent, whereas
the action or operation is in the patient, and is diversely multiplied according
to the diversity and multitude of the patients. We shall not need to question
the universal truth of the former Maxim, That every action is in the patient,
as some have done. For it holds as true in Divinity as in Philosophy, and most
apparent in the subject whereof we treat. Creation it self is an action, a
real action, yet not really in the Creator, but in the Creature only. For no
real attribute, can be in the Creator, which was not in him from Eternity;
the Creature only gets beginning of Being by Creation, which before it had
not. If then there can be no agencie without an action, and every action be in
the patient, the cause is concluded, that every agent though Omnipotent
supposes a patient.

2. But it is one thing to suppose or require, another to praesuppose or
praerequire patie^t; one thing to require or suppose a patient, another to
require or suppose a matter or subject to work upon. We are then to
distinguish of Patients, and betwixt the works wrought or effected by agents.
A Patient is usually taken for the matter or subject on which the Agent does
exercise his active force, or out of which it produces its work. Every finite
agent, as well natural as artificial does praerequire and presuppose such a
kind of patient, that is, some real matter or subject, whereon to work. But
this kind of patient is no just compere, no full correlative to an agent
universally taken. The relalatio^ betwixt an agent and Patient taken in this
sense, is neither so formal or necessary, as it is (inter agens and actum)
between the Agent, and that which is acted, between the efficient and the
effect, or between the worker and his work. God we grant could be no actual
agent, much less an Omnipotent actual agent, without some Act or work
produced by him. As there could be no Creature without a Creator, so could
there be no Creator without a Creature. But that which the Naturalist is to
prove, is, that the work of Creation presupposes some matter or subject for
the Creator to work upon. To manifest the impperfection of his inductions to
this purpose, and to clear our contradictorie assertion, we are to
distinguish or explicate the several works, which are or can be wrought.

3. Three sorts of works the mere Naturalist grants. 1. Merely natural. 2.
Merely artificial. 3. Partly natural, partly artificial. Works of the last
rank, (for instance) are Physical medicines, or all such works as Nature of
her own accord, does not attempt or undertake, but only as she is set a
working by Art. Nature makes no physical doses, but only affords the simples,
of which they are compounded by the Apothecarie: who notwithstanding cannot
compound them without the ministry or operation of Nature. The Physician may
allot the several quantity of every ingredient, besides the proportion
betwixt them; but the mixture must be immediately effected by heat, or other
natural qualities. So likewise must the extraction or expression of many
simples be wrought by Nature, but at the appointment or direction of the
Physician. Nature does not attempt the making of Bell-metall, much less of
Bells; and yet she affords all the ingredients to the Bell-founder, who cannot
mix them by any art, or skill, without the heat of the fire, or other
operations of Nature, set on work or directed by him. Works merely natural
comprehend all sorts of bodies generable, whether the elements, or bodies mixed.
The generation of every such body presupposes a mutation or alteration of
qualities in the matter, before it become capable of a new form or nature.
Every alteration of quality wrought in any sublunary body (whether it be a
praeviall disposition or introduction to a new form or nature; or whether it
be accomplished without generation of any new substance) is the proper effect
or work of the agent, which causes it. So is every artificial work or
form, the effect or work of the Artificer. So that Art has its proper
effects as well as Nature, and every artificial effect or work supposes an
efficiencie or agencie in the Art or Artist: yet does not the exercise of this
active force or efficiencie, either presuppose or require any such passive
alteration of quality in the matter or subject, whereon it works, as Nature
requires in her patients. Every Statue or Image of wood, is the effect of the
Statuarie, or a work of the Art of Imagery; yet do not these works, being
merely artificial, either suppose, or necessarily require any alteration of
quality in stone and wood. The Statuary produces no natural effect or
quality, which was not in the stone before, but only makes that visible and
apparent to the eye, which was formerly hidden or enveyled in the stone. Every
Letter of the Decalogue was in the Tables of stone, before they were engraven,
either by the finger of God or by Moses, and became legible only by their Art
or skill of ingraving; yet not made legible by any addition of substance, of
quantity, or quality, but by mere abscision of quantitative parts. And this
abscision, from which visible characters, or terminate figures result, whether
in wood or stone, is the proper effect of the Carver or Ingraver. Both these
inductions following, universally taken, are false, (though both true in their
proper subject:) [1. No Statuary, or Carver, or other like Artificer can
produce his proper work, without some abscision or variation of quantity in
the subject, whereon he works: therefore Nature cannot produce her proper
effects, without some alteration of quantity in the matter or subject wherein
she works. 2. Natural agents or efficients never produce their proper
effects, but by working some alteration or quality in the Matter: therefore no
Artificer can produce the proper works of his Art, without the like alteration
of quality in the subject whereon he works.] Nor will it follow, that
because effects merely artificial may be wrought without any alteration of
quality, therefore mixed effects, or works partly natural, partly
artificial, as compounded Medicines or Bell-metall, can be so wrought. Least
of all can it be inferred, that because Art as well as Nature supposes a
subject praeexistent whereon to work; therefore the Agent supernatural, or
the Efficient superartificiall, always presupposes some matter or subject
praeexistent, out of which, or in which he produces his proper work. The
reason why the former Inductions fail, is because the Agents or Efficients are
of a different rank or kind. And the Vide Arist lib. 1. Poster. Analyt. cap.
prohibition holds as true in point of induction as of demonstration, Non licet
transcendere a genere ad genus. He that will demonstrate any conclusion, must
not rove from one kind of subject to another. And the reason why in thus
roving he shall certainly fail of his intended conclusion, is, because the
principles whence the intended conclusion must be inferred, cannot be gathered
but by induction, and no induction can prove any general Maxim, unless it
consist of particulars of the same kind. A philosophical maxim cannot be
gathered from Inductions merely Mathematical, nor mathematical principles
from experiments philosophical. Nor can Artificial Maxims or conclusions
(especially negative) be gathered from experiments natural, nor Maxims
natural from observations in subjects merely Artificial. Least of all can
any theological maxims, be ratified from experiments merely natural,
artificial, or mathematical; but only by inductions, or reasons abstract and
metaphysicall, that is, such as hold true in all Arts or sciences whatsoever.
The only certain rule, which all the former inductions can afford, is this:
There can be no real effect, whether artificial, natural, or supernatural,
without an efficient: Nothing which now is not, or sometimes was not, could
possibly be made without some agent or maker: between every natural Agent
and its patient, between every Artificer and his work, there always results
a mutual relation of efficient and effect. But this rule will not abide the
turning: Between every efficient and its proper effect, there always results
a mutual relation of agent and patient; if by this term patient we
understand a matter or subject praeexistent to the exercise of the agents
efficiencie.

4 The usual division of Agents into artificial, natural, and supernatural,
supposes a threefold diversity in their objects, betwixt which there is this
proportion, As nature always affords art a complete natural subject to
work upon: so the supernatural agent, or supreme efficient, exhibits that
imperfect substance or matter unto nature, which she brings unto perfection.
Nature does so unto Art, as it is done to her by a benefactor supernatural.
Unto this observation upon the former division, we can add no more, nor can
any more be required, besides a just proof that there is an agent
supernatural, which sometimes had no matter at all to work upon, but made
even Nature her self, and the passive capacity or subject whereon she
works, of no work or matter praeexistent. The matter it self, and nature it
self, are the immediate effects of his active force or efficiencie. Now to
beat the Naturalist at his own weapon, we are to make proof of this
assertion by full induction, and strength of reason grounded upon experiments
in every subject wherein the Naturalist can instance. First, it is universally
true of all the works as well of Nature, as of Art, which now are perfect, and
sometimes were not so, that they did not make themselves, but had
(respectively) their several makers or efficient causes, which brought them
unto that perfect estate and condition which now they have. The most perfect
works of nature cannot put themselves into a perfect artificial form, without
the help of some Artificer. Stones do not naturally grow into Statues, nor
trees into the pictures or Images of men or birds: Brass and Copper, with
other metalls conceived in the bowels of the earth, do not either by
themselves, or by the help of natural causes which produce them, cast or mould
themselves into Guns or Bullets. The Earth and Water do not work themselves
into the live-substance of plants or vegetables, but are first wrought, and (as
it were) kneaded together by the heat of the Sun; first altered, and then
incorporated into the substance of such trees, by the vegetative faculty, which
is actually resident and praeexistent in the trees or plants, which are
nourished by them. There is no sublunarie substance which did not take
beginning, either entirely and together, or piece-meale and successively. The
elementall bodies of the air and water, were not totally the same a thousand
years ago, that now they are: both continue the same they were by
equivalencie of succeeding parts, or daily addition by new generation. Now
successive generation supposes an end or destruction of that that was, and a
beginning of that which succeedes in its place; and the beginning of every
thing, supposes a beginner or cause efficient, to give it being. The race or
continuation of more perfect sublunary substances, as of vegetables and moving
creatures, remains the same, not by equivalency of succeeding parts, but by a
total production of distinct individualls. And every distinct individual tree
or living creature, has its immediate and proper efficient, as well as its
material cause, nothing can give it self a distinct numericall being.

5 What is the reason then, why the works of nature, which are perfected in
their kind by their proper efficients (as trees come to full growth) cannot
transform themselves into bodies artificial without the work of the
Artificer? What is the reason why the imperfect mass, wherein the seeds of
nature are contained, cannot grow up into a perfect or complete body natural,
without the efficiencie of some other in the same kind already complete?
Fortes creantur fortibus. Nature makes nothing perfect, but by the help of some
Agent formerly made perfect: Does the perfection of bodies artificial by an
indispensable Law of necessity, require a perfect work of nature praeexistent
to the operation of Art: and does this perfect work of nature, be it brass,
wood, or stone, by a like indispensable Law of necessity, require an imperfect
mass or matter praeexistent to the natural Agents or efficients, which mould
or kneade it into its perfect or specificall form? And shall not this
imperfect mass, with all its several Elements or ingredients that can be
required to the perfection of any natural body, more necessarily require some
precedent efficient cause of its imperfect being or existence? This cannot be
conceived; for if these imperfect substances, whereof any natural body is
made, could either give beginning of being to themselves, or have it from no
cause efficient, they should be in this respect much more perfect, than the
more perfect works of nature, in that they either make themselves, or have no
maker.

Upon this principle of nature, or from this impossibility in nature [That any
visible work whether natural or artificial, should either give it self being
or have its being from no cause precedent] did See Tully Lib. de natura Deorum.
Tully rightly argue, that as a man coming into an house, wherein were no live
creatures save Rats and Mice, could not conceive that either the house did make
it self, or had no other maker besides these Rats and Mice, which were found
in it: So neither can it be imagined, that this visible sphere wherein the
works of Art and Nature, are daily seen, and do daily begin to be and
expire; could either make it self, or have being of it self, without
beginning, without a Maker super-artificiall, or an efficient supernatural.
Every part of this Universe considered alone, is a work of nature, but the
exquisite harmony between them, is a work more then Artificial. All that
nature can add to art, or art to nature, is but a shadow of that great
Artificers skill, which composed the several works of nature into so
excellent a form, and tuneth their discording qualities, into such exact
harmony. The induction of Tully is more briefly, but more pithily and
expressly gathered by our Apostle Heb. 3. ver. 4. Every house is builded by
some man, but he that built all things is God. But if every house be built by
some man, how is God said to build all things? shall every builder of an house
be a God? No: but whatsoever man does build, God does likewise build. For
except the Lord does build the house, they labor in vain, that are builders
of it. Psalm. 127. 1. Better it were to be idle or to do nothing, then either
to be laborious in building houses, or watchful in guarding Cities strongly
built, unless the Lord do afford not only his concurrence, but his blessing
to the labors of the one, and to the watchfulness of the other. But in this
argument we may expatiate without impeachment of digression from the matter,
or of diversion from our aim, in the following Treatise of divine providence.

6. This present Treatise requires an induction, sufficient to prove that every
visible or sublunarie substance, as well the common matter whereof all such
things are made, as the several forms, which are produced out of it, have an
efficient cause precedent to their making or production. For the several
forms, or bodies generable which are constituted by them, the induction is as
clear to every man's sense or understanding, as any mathematical induction can
be. The naturalist is neither able nor disposed to except against the
universalitie of it, or to instance in any sublunarie body, which has not a
true efficient cause, or an agent precedent; from whose efficacy its physical
or essential form, was either made, or did result. The question only
remains about the efficiencie or production of the prime or common matter.
Seeing it is the mother of generation, we will not vex the Naturalist by
demanding a generative cause efficient of its being, but that it must have
some cause efficient, we shall enforce him to grant from a general Maxim
most in request with men of his profession. The Maxim is [That the
philosophical progress from effects to their causes, or from inferior to
superior causes, is not like Arithmeticall or geometrical progressions; it
cannot be infinite.] We must at length come to one supreme cause efficient,
which in that it is supreme, is a cause of causes, but no effect, and being no
effect, nor cause subordinate to any other Agent, it can have no limit of
Being, it can admit no restraint in working. Whatsoever we can conceive as
possible to have limited Being, or beginning of such Being, must have both
from it and by it. Now if the perfect works of nature, bodies sublunarie of
what kind soever, suppose a possibility physical included in the prime and
common matter, before they have actual Being; if it imply no contradiction for
them to have beginning of Being, it will imply no contradiction, that the
prime matter it self or imperfect mass, whereof they are made, should have a
beginning of its imperfect being; That Physical being which it has, does
presuppose a logical possibility of being, as it is; that is, no
contradiction, for it sometimes to be, and sometimes not to have been. This
supreme cause or agent which (as we suppose,) did reduce the logical
possibility of the prime matter of sublunary bodies into Act, cannot be the
heavens, or any part of the host of heaven, neither the sun, moon nor stars.
For, albeit the Sun be the efficient cause, by which most works of nature in
this sublunarie part of the world, are brought to perfection: yet is it no
cause at all of that imperfect mass or part of nature, on which it works.
Unless it had some matter to work upon, it could produce no real or solid
effect by its influence, light or motion, how ever assisted with the influence
of other stars or planets. Yet must this prime matter, have some cause;
otherwise it should be more perfect than the bodily substances, which are made
of it. For they all stand in need, both of this prime matter, as a cause in it
kind concurrent to their production, and of the efficiencie of the Sun or
other celestial Agents to work or fashion the materials or Ingredients, of
which they are made. If either this common matter of sublunary substances, or
the Sun which works upon it, had no superior cause to limit their being or
distinguish their offices; both of them should be infinite in Being; both
infinite in operation. Now if the matter were infinite in being: the Sun or
other celestial Agents, could have no being but in it, or from it. For if
the Sun were infinite in operation, the matter it self could be nothing at
all; no part of nature, unless it were a work or effect of the Sun.
Infinity in being excludes all possibility of other Being save in it and
from it. And infinity in operation, supposes all things that are limited,
whether in being or operation, to be its works, or resultances of its
illimited efficacy.

CHAP. 7.
Showing by reasons philosophical, that as well the physical matter of bodies
sublunary, as the celestial bodies which work upon it, were of necessity to
have a beginning of their Being and Duration.
1 FOr further demonstration, that as well the Sun, which is the efficient
general, as the prime matter which is the common mother of bodies sublunary,
had a beginning of being, there can be no mean either more forcible or more
plausible, then another Maxim much embraced and insisted upon by the great
Philosopher, to wit, that as well the efficient as the material cause derive
the necessity of their causalitie from the end or final cause, unto which
they are destinated. The Sun does not run its daily course from East to
West, or make its annual progress from North to South, to get it self heat,
or for the increase of its native force or vigor, by change of Climates; but
for the propagation of vegetables, for the continuance of life and health in
more perfect sublunary substances. If then we can demonstrate, that those
vegetables or more perfect sublunarie bodies, for whose continual propagation,
for the continuance of whose life and welfare the Sun becomes so
indefatigable in its course, had a true beginning of being, that the
propagation is not infinitely circular: the cause will be concluded, that as
well the common matter, whereof they are made, as the Sun it self which
produces them, had a beginning of being and operation from the same supreme
cause, which appointed the Sun thus to dispense its heat and influence, for
the relief and comfort of this inferior world. To prove that these sublunarie
more perfect bodies, as vegetables, etc, had a beginning of being or
propagation; no Argument can be more effectual to the Naturalist, or others
that will take it into serious consideration; than the discussion of that
problem, which Plutarch has propounded, Whether the Egg were before the Hen,
or the Hen before the Egg. The state of the question will be the same in all
more perfect vegetables, or living Creatures, which usually grow from an
imperfect or weak estate to a more perfect and stronger: [Whether the Acorne
were before the Oak, or the Oak before the Acorne. Whether the Lion had
precedencie of nature to the Lions whelp, or the Lions whelp unto the Lion. The
induction may be for either part most complete, in respect of all times and of
all places, if with the Naturalist we imagine the world to have been without
beginning, or without ending. No Naturalist can ever instance in any more
perfect feathered foul, which was not first covered with a shell, or contained
in some more imperfect filme; in any Bull which was not first a Calfe; in any
Lion, which was not first a whelp; in any Oak, which did not first spring from
an Acorne: unless he instance in painted Trees, in brazen Bulls, or
artificial Lions. Of live natural substances it is universally true, (Omnia
ortus habent, suaque certa incrementa) All have their beginning, all their
certain increase or augmentation. The induction again is for the other party
as complete and perfect. There never was a true Acorne, which did not
presuppose an Oak; nor a Lions whelp which did not presuppose a Lion to beget
it, and a Lioness to bring it forth. Now every productive cause, every
live-substance, which produces another by proper causalitie or efficiencie,
has always precedencie of nature and of time, in respect of that which is
produced by it. The Lion is in order of nature and of time, before his whelp,
and yet is every Lion wherein the Naturalist can instance, a whelp before it be
a Lion; so is the Oak, in order of nature and of time, before the Acorne, and
yet cannot the Naturalist instance in any Oak, which was not an Acorne or
plant before it grew to be an Oak. If then either the race of Lions, or the
propagation of Oaks, had no beginning; it would inevitably follow, that Oaks
had been perpetually before Acornes, and Acornes perpetually before Oaks;
That Lions whelps from eternity had precedence or prioritie of time of Lions,
and Lions the like precedencie or prioritie of time of their whelps. And if
they had bin mutually each before other from eternity, according to prioritie
of time and nature, they must have been mutually each after other. How the
Naturalist will be able to digest this circular revolution of prioritie and
posterioritie, in respect of the same individual natures, or what he will say
to these following inconveniences, I cannot tell, but desire to know: Every
whole or perfect Fish, which the Naturalist has heard or read of, had
beginning of its individual Being from Spawne. This induction is most
complete and perfect in the School of Nature, most irrefragable by the
supposition of the Naturalist with whom we dispute. Every Fish has a
beginning from Spawne, and that which has a beginning from Spawne, has a
beginning of its being. No Fish or Spawne is or has been immortal, or
without beginning. Now if it be universally true, that every particular Fish
has its beginning, it implies an evident contradiction, to say that the race
of Fishes, which consist only of particular Fishes, was without beginning.
There must in every race of Fishes be some first Fishes, or first Spawnes,
before which there was none of the same kind, from which this mutual
propagation did take its beginning. And though this propagation be without end,
yet could it not be without beginning, unless we would grant that fishes are
not only of an incorruptible nature, but of a nature infinite or eternal. If
there were no beginning of this mutual propagation, it would be demanded
whether the number of fishes or Lions that shall be (granting what the
Naturalists suppose, that this propagation shall be endless) can ever be as
great, as the number of those Fishes and Lions that have been? Or whether the
number of those that have been, may not be conceived to be more infinite, or
in another sort infinite, than the number of those that shall be. That the
number of Fishes, or Lions, which, from this time forward, may be, (suppose the
world were never to end) can be no otherwise infinite then potentially or
successively only, or by addition, because there shall never be any last Lion,
or fish, etc. after which there shall be no more, the Naturalist will not
deny. For those Lions or fishes, which from this point of time shall be, have
as yet no actual being, nor have they before this time had any such being.
Whence it is clear, that their number can never be actually infinite, but
infinite only by addition, as continuate quantity is by division. Ego certe
hac in re laudo Aristotelem, quod cum impossibilitatem (ut ita dixerim)
aeternorum motuum, and corporum, non praeviderit, maluit ab Eterno esse
pulchra^ hanc mundi faciem, quam aliquando ex aeterna deformitate emersisse.
Oportuit vero ipsum aternitate^ illam temporis meditari; reperisset siquidem,
ut neque in corpore, neque in loco (haec enim ille demonstravit) ita neque in
tempore infinitatem esse potuisse: si quidem est etiam tempus quantum, ut and
corpus, and locus. Si igitur omnia quanta finita, tempus quoque totum finitvm
est, and erit. Quare fact us est aliquando (...) ex nihilo. Vallesusde sacra
philosoph. page 18.
But if fishes have been produced from Spawne, and Spawne from fishes, without
any beginning of time, we must of necessity grant, that there have been
Fishes, Lions, Oaks, etc. propagated each from other, for number actually
infinite: for every Fish, which could produce Spawn, had actual being before
it could yield Spawne, and every Spawne whereof any fish is made, has actual
being before any Fish can be made of it. Whence if this propagation had been
without beginning, their number must needs be actually infinite, so infinite
that there could have been no more than have been, that there can be no more
than now are. That only is actually infinite, unto which nothing of the same
kind can be added. If this mutual propagation had been from eternity, the
number of things propagated should have been actually infinite in every point
of time imaginable. It is impossible that any thing should be actually infinite
from eternity, and not be alike actually infinite throughout every part of
time; as infinite yesterday as to day, or as it shall be to morrow. It is
again impossible, that any thing should be actually infinite in any part of
time, or by any succession of time, which was not infinite from eternity, and
before all times. If we shall suffer our imaginations of mutual propagations,
to rove backward without an imagination or acknowledgement of some first
beginning to stay or limit them, our souls shall find as little rest (with
less security) as Noah's Dove did, whilst the earth was overflowed with
water, if she had not returned to the Arc. Unless we thus pitch upon a first
beginning of time and all things temporal, we shall not only make shipwreck
of faith, but drench our immortal souls in a bottomless lake or poole of
absurdities, even in nature.

2 The conclusion arising from these premises, is, that albeit natural reason
or discourse could never have found out that which Moses has written,
concerning the particular manner of the worlds creation; as that it, and all
things in it, all the several originals of propagation, were created in six
days: yet Moses his narrations can only give satisfaction to such Problemes,
as men by light of nature may propose or cast, but can never, without the light
of Gods word, be able to assoyle. By so much of this light as Moses in the
first Chapter of Genesis holds out unto us, we may easily free our selves from
perpetual wandering in that inextricable maze of mutual or circular
precedencie, between things generable, and their generative efficients, which
the Naturalist can never avoid, until with us he grant, that which the
Aristor. nono mataphysicorum, cap. 8. Manifestu^ est, quod actus prior potentia
est. Dico autem non solum illa potentia determinata quae dicitur principium
transmutatorium in alio, prout aliud est, sed prorsus omni motivo, et Statorio
principio. Et 12 Metaphys. cap. 7, Quare vita, and aevum continuum, and
aeternum Deo inest. Hoc enim est Deus Quicunque vero (ut Pythagorici, et
Speusippus putant) optimum and pulcherrimum non esse in principio, eo quod
plantarum quoque ac animali u^ principia, causae quidem sunt: bonum vero, and
perfectum in ijs esse, quae ex his sunt, non recte putant. Sperma namque ex
alijs prioribus perfectis est, neque Sperma primum est, sed quod perfectum est:
veluti hominem dicere quispiam possit priorem spermate esse, non illum, qui eo
generatur, sed alium, ex quo ipsum Sperma est. Quod itaque est quaedam aeterna,
immobilisque substantia, and a sensibilibus separata, constat ex dictis.
Philosopher by the light of Nature did indefinitely teach (Actus prior est
potentia,) That which has perfect being, is simply and absolutely before that
which proceeds from it, or is brought to perfection by it. Thus Moses tells
us, Genesis 1. verse. 11. That there was an earth, before there was any grass,
that out of this earth was brought forth herb yielding seed; and fruit trees
yielding fruit with seed in them, before there was any propagation by seed. So
he tells us again, verse. 21. That God created great Whales, and every living
creature ^at moves in the waters after their kind, before there was any
Spawne of fishes or seed of fowls: For so it follows in the 22. ver. That
God blessed them, (after he had made them) saying, Be fruitful and multiply,
and fill the waters and the Seas, and let foul multiply on the earth. And it
was this blessing upon fish and foul (thus created at once, that is, made
perfect in their kind, not by growth or succession, but by present operation
of his Omnipotent power) which gave first beginning to the natural propagation
of Fishes and Fowls by Seed or Spawne. Again, in as much as the greatest
Whales or other creatures most perfect in their kind, though produced in a
moment, did presuppose a possibility of their being, and in their most perfect
actual being include more than a possibility of not being, a necessary
inclination to return unto the matter or mass out of which they were made.
This being which they have, presupposes an infinite and pure act, which every
way has precedencie of them, as having no cause at all of his being, but is
being it self, without possibility of not being. The manner or method which
Moses observed in the Creation, was this: He made the Heaven and Earth and
first mass, of mere nothing, that is, without any mass or subject visible or
invisible praeexistent, whereon to work. That imperfect mass of this great
Sphere, now distinguished into its several parts, and, within six days,
adorned and beautified in every part beyond all skill of Art, was the first
effect or prime work in order of time or nature of his all sufficient active
power or efficiencie. Out of this mass he made all things visible in their
kind, not by means or efficiencie natural, but by the same supernatural or
Omnipotent power, by which he made the first mass out of nothing. In the prime
and Cardinal works of the six days, the Almighty did proceed, though by
supernatural efficiencie, in that order or method, which Nature, by his
appointment, since has followed. Man which is the most perfect visible
creature, was the last made, and next before him, the beasts of the field,
which are next in perfection to him: Next before them, the fowls of the Air
and fishes of the Sea; and immediately before them, the Sun, the Moon, and
the Stars. But in the several fountains or roots of propagation by seed, he
baganne the contrary way. He first made man perfect, before he gave him the
power of propagation. So did he make every living creature actually perfect in
his kind, before he gave them power to increase and multiply by natural seed
or inchoation of now being.

3. It is a conceit groundless, either in Philosophy or Divinity, which some
late Divines as well of the Romish as of Reformed Churches, not without fair
pretense of Saint Augustines Divus Augustinus censet omnia esse creata simul
eodem momento, seu in eodem nunc; illam vero partitionem Dierum, non
significare parts temporis, sed distinctionem, and gradus quosdam naturae
verum: atque factum esse hominem ex terra, non actu praeexistente, sed
existente potentia in ipso, velut quivis dicitur nostrum, vere factus ex
quatuor Elementis, tametsi nulla terra, aut aqua erat actu id ex quo facti
sumus, sed semen and sanguis. Itaque ut unico intuitu tota facies, and ejus
omnes parts, inspeculo exprimuntur, ita unica Iussione Dei, constitisse totam
hanc corpoream molem, and in ea refulsisse illum divinitatis fulgorem, quem
vocamus naturam. Caeterum quia non omnes sancti hoc ita intelligunt, alia
responsione est opus. Vallefius de sacra Philos. cap. 1. page 22. Neque vero
hoc ullam arguit primae causae debilitatem. Non enim eam causam naturalem
ponimus, q^aeque faciat semper quantum potest, sed liberam and sapientissimam,
quae facit ut maxim expedit, atque omnia pulcherrin^a and concinna, in nnmero,
pondere, and ^^c^sura. Quapropter verba illa capitis 18. Ecclesiastici, Qui
vivit in aeternum creavit omnia simul, ego ita interpretor; Creata esse omnia
intra illam hebdomadam, perfectumque esse mundum, ita ut nulla ejus pars
princeps, quaeque a creatione habitura esset initium, deesset. Nam ut initio
capitis secundi dicitur, perfecti sunt caeli and terra, and omnis ornatus
eorum, complevitque Deus dic sexta opus suum. Valles cap 1. page 45.
Authority, have taught, that all things were created at once, or in one day,
by the Almighty maker: that the mention of Gods six days work, is
interserted by Moses, only for distinction sake, or in respect of our
incapacitie to conceive distinctly of Gods works. But if all things had been
made in this sense, at once, that is, upon one day: no reason could be given
why Gods commendation of something which he made, should be omitted, and
expressed upon the making of others; or why the commendation of his works,
should have been oftener expressed than once, if the productio^ or finishing of
al things which he made, had been momentarie, or in the compass of one day.
Now in the first part of Moses his history [In the beginning God made the
heaven and the earth] we do not read, that God saw it was good. What is the
reason? because as yet they were not perfected in their kind; but destinated
only unto more perfection. Of the light which was created the first day (says
Moses) God saw that it was good. But so he says not of the second days work,
which was the separation or division between the waters which are above the
firmament, and the waters beneath it. What does this omission of the divine
approbation intimate unto us? thus much, if no more, That the second days
work did not bring the waters to that perfection and use whereunto they were
destinated. But of the third days work, in which the earth was severed from
the waters, under the firmament, and enabled by his creative power, to bring
forth Herbs and other Vegetables, God (says Moses) saw that it was good. And
so it is likewise said of the fourth days work, in which the Sun and Moon
and the Stars were made; and so likewise of the fifth, wherein the water was
authorized to bring forth fowls and fishes perfect in their kind: and lastly
of the sixth day, wherein man was made, it is said, that God saw all that he had
made, and it was exceeding good. To explicate every days work in particular,
would require a larger Treatise, then we project our intended Commentaries upon
the Apostles Creed, shall be. Of such Evangelical mysteries, as the History
of the sixth days work and the seventh days rest, did by way of Emblem,
portend or foreshadow, we shall have occasion to treat, when we come unto
the Son of Gods consecration unto his everlasting Priesthood; or of the Son
of man's residing three days and three nights, in the womb of the earth: which
speech of our Savior, cannot be verified either of three natural days, or
of three artificial days and nights, but has a peculiar reference to three
of those evenings and mornings, which Moses mentions in the history of the
Creation. The task for the present undertaken, was to show the Si facta omnino
non sunt (viz. corpora coelestia) fit ut sint per sese ab aeterno, et esse
proprio existentia. Quapropter nullum illorum ab alio pend^at, aut alio
posterius sit, sed per sese sint, and operentur ab aeterna (cum operatio
procedat a cujusque rei natura, and proprio esse:) quare nulla illis prior
causa sit, (si enim haec effecta ab alio non sunt, non sit ulla eorum causa)
quapropter mundus hic universas, neque unus erit, neque totus, neque perfectus,
cum non pendcat totus ab unica virtute and causa, neque causae omnes in unam
omnium primam, referantur: sed sint multae mundi parts, a quibus non
procedatur ad ullam aliam superiorem, and priorem, hoc vera fieri non potest.
Nam ant illae parts habent aliquam naturam sive essentiam communem, aut omnino
habent nihil commune. Ex adeo diversis, ut nihil commune dicatur de illis,
nulla ratione potest constari unum: Nam neque ordo esse ^otest inter omnino
diversa. Ordo enim secundum aliquid commune est, dicimus enim inter Petrum and
Franciscum ordinem quendam esse. Si concedis parts illas mun^i habere aliqu^^
essentiam communem; constat, quandoquidem non sunt omnino cadem, habere as
aliquid commune and aliquid diversum. Est autem quod commune unum: quae diversa
multa. Illud ergo commune prius erit illis omnibus diversis: si quidem ex co
constant haec: non ergo (...) parts, suo quaeque ordine primae causae, sed
pend^bant illae omnes ab aliquo (...) causa, a qua daeta erat eis communis illa
essentia. Vallesius de sacra Philosophia* page 16.
possibility of the Creation, or making all things of nothing, and that there
is a necessity in nature, that things generable should have a beginning, that
the propagation of living Creatures, could not be from Eternity, not before
all times imaginable. And if sublunarie substances, or vegetables had a
beginning: Not the Elements only whereof they are made, but the Heavens
themselves, the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, by whose influence they are
produced, must have their beginning too; because the end of their being, of
their operation, of continuance in their course or order, is for the continual
propagation of vegetables, and living bodies. I may conclude this first point,
with that acute collection of Justin Martyr, (...)] If there were no Sun,
there could be no use of the eye, and if there were no eye, there should be no
use of the great eye of this world, at least of its light. But in as much, as
the Sun is necessary for the eye, and the eye for the Sun, there is a
necessity that both of the^ should have a beginning of Being. For that which
has no beginning of being, cannot have its being for any other sake, besides
it own. Nor can we truly say, that it is for its own sake. And this Authors
reason for this assertion, is most judiciously acute. (...), praeter causam
enim est cujus cansa non est, so the Latin translator. The Authors full meaning
is, That which has no efficient cause to give its beginning of being, can
have no final cause of its being, or rather no cause at all, whether final,
formal, or material. But is it self the cause of causes, the prime efficient,
by which all things are what they are, and the last end or final cause, for
which they are.

CHAP. 8.
Discussing the second general proposed, Whether the making something of
nothing rightly argue a power Omnipotent.
1 THe discussion of the second general Principle, See Chapter 3. 3.
might well have had its admission into Divinity denied, had not some School
Divines, by disputing whether there can be any isntrumental cause of Creation,
given it a colorable pretense for intruding it self. Their meaning may in
more civil language be thus expressed; [Whether the power of creating may by
omnipotency be delegated to any agent, not omnipotent.] That Omnipotency it
self cannot be delegated, all agree. Now if the production of spiritual grace
in the heart of man be, a true and proper effect of creative power; they who
teach that the Sacraments of the Gospel do confer grace ex opere operato,
that is, by their proper efficacy; are engaged to make proof, that the power
of creation may be delegated, by the Almighty Father, either to the consecrated
Sacramentary Elements, or to the Priest which consecrates them. But leaving the
discussion of this Question (in the explication of whose terms or meaning, the
favorers or maintainers of it, do not agree) (...) proper place (...) our
present question is, Whether ability to create substances visible or invisible,
does necessarily infer it to be Omnipotent. Spiritual grace, all grant, is
no substance. But here again, the Schoolmen have troubled themselves and
their Readers, with a question, if not more curious, yet as unnecessary as the
former; as whether this visible world, or at least some part of it, might not
have been created immediately by Angels, as by Gods instrumets. The Question
(perhaps) might be more pertinent and more distinct, were it framed thus;
[Whether to make any visible or invisible substance of nothing, or without any
matter pretedent, which should remain, as an ingredient in the substance made,
do rightly infer the immediate maker to be Omnipotent.] That any cause
efficient of substance, which has been created, or hereafter may be created,
could be enabled to create or make any other substance, without any entity
praexistent, whereof it should be made, is an hypothesis or supposall, which
has no other ground either in Philosophy or Divinity; besides the uncertain
grounds, from which some have attempted to prove, that creation is a
prerogative of the one Omnipotent, which cannot be delegated to any other. This
truth some labor to prove from this Maxim, Inter (...) and non ens infinita
distantia est: [Betweene something, between any thing which truly is, and
mere nothing, there is an infinite distance or disparity.] Now this breach of
disparity or distance infinite (which they conceive) between something and
nothing, cannot be fully made up save only by power truly inf^nite, whence it
may seem concluded, that it is impossible for any thing to be made of nothing;
save only by power in it self Omnipotent, or absolutely: infinite. The
conclusion it self, or the last proposition in the inference, I verily believe
to be most true; but the mean to infer it, or manner of inferring it, is not
so certain, as the conclusion is sound. The Argument is b^t calculatory. And
this kind of argument is deceitful, unless the degrees of proportion whether
between the disparity o^ cong^^ity of terms compared, be determinate and
certain. The degrees of disparity, between something and nothing, cannot be
more in number or more infinite, than are the entitive degrees of any created
substance. And these are not actually or absolutely infinite, nor can the
disparity betwixt something and nothing, betwixt nothing and the most excellent
eventure that is, be so great or so absolutely infinite, as is the disparity
betwixt the most excellent creature that is or can be, and the one Omnipotent
Creator, who alone is absolutely infinite.

2 But be it only supposed, no way granted, that the power of making some
visible substance out of nothing, might be delegated to some Creature; the
exercise of this power thus delegated, would not infer the Exerciser of it,
but only the Author, to be Omnipotent. For to be Omnipotent, includes as much
as to be able to do all things, which imply no contradiction; as much as to
make all things that can be conceived as logically possible, out of nothing,
because all sorts or kinds of being, numerable or comprehensible, are eminently
contained in the incomprehensible Essence; of which the attribute of
Omnipotency is a chief prerogative. It is not then all one, to be enabled to
make some thing, suppose a gnat or fly, out of nothing; and to be able to make
as many things, as now are extant in the world, or much better than these are,
out of mere nothing. It is a maxim evident by light of reason, that no Doner
can really give more than he has to give: suppose he were willing, enabled and
authorized to give himself: to give its whole nature with the appurtenances to
any other Creature already extant, or in possibility to be created. It being
then supposed, that an Angel by some special delegation from the
incomprehensible Essence or power Omnipotent, might be enabled to make
something of nothing, it were not possible that he should make any nature or
essence more excellent than himself. Yet it is possible, that there might be
some more excellent created substance than this Angel: yea of necessity there
should be a possibility of his being more excellent in his kind, than now he
is. However; for him to give, for him to bestow a more excellent being upon
that which is not, than, for the present he himself has, is no way possible.
Suppose then he might entirely alienate from himself, or bequeath the best
being, which for the present he has, upon some possibility of being, or
advance some numerable not being to his own estate by his utter annihilation;
this could not argue him to be Omnipotent, because there be many other effects
possible, which are not in his power to produce; albeit he could resume that
which he had given unto another, and bestow it again where he pleased. Lastly,
seeing the prime Essence, who alone is absolutely infinite, did not make all
things out of nothing by a necessity of nature, but because it was his will so
to make them: no creature by any delegated power imaginable, could possibly
make any one thing, or more things out of nothing, besides those which the
Omnipotent was willing should be so made; nor these any better either for
substance or quality, than his will was, they should be. Nor could any
creature be enabled by his will out of nothing to make any thing, which was not
eminently contained in the nature of that creature, to whom this power of
creating, is supposed to be, by his will, delegated. For albeit some efficient
or productive causes bring forth effects for substance or quality more
excellent then themselves: yet this they never do, this they cannot do,
unless they work upon some advantage, which the subject or matter whereon
they work does afford them. But this advantage cannot be supposed in the
production of any substance, out of no subject or matter praexistent. All the
excellency, which any effect or substance so produced can have, must be
entirely derived from its efficient. And that can be no greater excellency or
perfection, than the efficient it self has; not altogether so great, because
it must be eminently contained in the perfection of its efficient: if so be the
efficient have any perfection or being left, after the production of such an
effect. So that every efficient cause, which is or can be supposed, as an
isntrumental cause of creation, or as enabled to produce something out of
nothing, is thus far limited, that it can produce no effect more excellent
that it self, and being thus limited in it self, and by dependence on an
higher cause, as well in its being, as in its operation, it cannot be conceived
to be Omnipotent. For that includes as much as to be illimited in operation,
or, which is all one, to be the operative power of the incomprehensible
Essence, or of Being infinite.

3 But though to be able to make something out of nothing be not formally
aequipollent to the attribute of Omnipotency: yet can it not hence be
concluded, that any agent besides the one Omnipotent, is either able or can be
enabled to produce the least substance that is, the least portion or matter
ingredient to any bodily substance out of mere nothing. To lay the first
foundation or beginning of being of any finite substance, is the sole effect of
being it self, and therefore of that which is truly infinite in operation.
Whatsoever is finite or limited, can have no other kind of being, than borrowed
or participated. And this kind of being must be immediately derived, without
intervention of any isntrumental cause, from being not participated or
borrowed, but from increated and authentic being. To create, is to give
actual being or existance, without the help or furtherance of any Contributer
or Confounder. Now if this power of creating could possibly be delegated to
any created substance, it were possible for that which is created by it, to
have its being extra infinitum esse, that is, it should not be immediately and
entirely contained in the infinite and incomprehensible Essence or Being. For
in this very supposall [That one created substance might by power delegated
from Omnipotency, create another] it is necessarily implied, that the substance
created should have its being entirely, or part of its being immediately from
the other, which, by power delegated, is supposed to create it. And having such
being, as it has, either entirely or in part immediately from the other, it
could not be immediately and entirely contained in the first cause of all
things. And if the least substance possible, could have its Being, not
immediately and entirely from the first cause or supreme Efficient, he could
not be actually and absolutely infinite in Being, or Omnipotent in working.
For that only is absolutely infinite, or infinite in Being, in which all
things possible are immediately contained; without whose incomprehensible
Being, nothing can have existence; without whose immediate operation nothing
can begin to be or exist.

These agitatio^s discussions may notify unto us the strength and soundness of
that treble rule or fundamental principle laid by others, and before touched
by us. First, it is peculiar unto Art to turn bodies already formed and
perfected by nature, into another fashion: It is the property of nature, and of
natural and finite Agents, to work the unfashioned or confused matter into
some determinate form or set kind of being. It is the prerogative of the
Omnipotent Maker, to afford natural Agents the entire matter and stuff,
whereon they work; and to bestow on them such being as they have, whether that
be material or immateriall, celestial or sublunary, spiritual or bodily; and
to bestow i^ entirely, without the help of any Co-efficient, without the
contribution of any stuff or matter, of any reallitie praeexistent.

SECTION II.
Of Divine Providence in general: and how contingency, and necessity in things
created are subject unto it.
CHAP. 9.
Of the perpetual dependence which all things created have on the Almighty
Creator, both for their being and their operations.
1 But will it suffice us to believe, that as Art has its proper subject made
or fitted by Nature; or as more perfect substances praesuppose an imperfect
state in Nature: so this imperfect state of nature, or the subject on which
natural efficients do work, was made of nothing, without any coagency of
Nature or Art, by the sole power of the Almighty Father? To believe all this,
is but the first part of our belief of this Article of Creation. For better
apprehending the entire object of our belief in this point, we are to observe
the difference betwixt the dependence, which Art has on nature, or which
works artificial have on the Artificer, or which more perfect natural
substances have on the imperfect substances, whereof they are made, or on their
natural efficients; and the dependence which both natural Agents and
Patients, and which efficient causes as well artificial as natural, with their
several matters or subjects, have on the Almighty Creator and Maker of all
things. First then nature or causes natural, after they have finished their
proper works, and fitted them for Art to work upon, do not cooperate with the
Artificer in fashioning them to his ends or purpose. The Artificer again,
after he has finished his work, does not continually support, preserve or
apply it to those uses, unto which it serves; but leaves this unto their care
for whose convenience it was made. The Clocke-maker does not tie himself to
keep all the Clocks which he makes: nor does he which undertakes to keep them,
bind himself to watch their motions perpetually, or to observe them as
curiously as Physicians do their sick Patients. Again, the most perfect
works of nature, as vegetables and living things, depend upon their causes,
whether material or efficient, (for the most part) only in fieri, not in
facto, whilst they are in making or in perfecting, not after they be made and
perfected. The Lioness does not perpetually nourish her whelps with her own
substance; nor does the Raven continually provide for her young ones; or any
other creatures more kind than they, perpetually support or direct their brood
in their motions, but leave them to fend for themselves. If the Almighty
Creator should do no better by his most perfect Creatures, their return to
nothing, would be as speedy, as their production from it. All of them have a
perpetual and undispensable dependence upon his power, not only whilst they
are in making, but as great after they are made. And thus great and perpetual
it is, not in respect of their substances only, but as truly in respect of
their motions or operations. The imperfect mass or matter whereof bodies
natural are made, is not only his sole work, or effect of his Omnipotency;
but that it is workable or fashionable unto any set form, this likewise is an
effect of his operative power; it could not be perpetually thus fashionable,
but by his perpetual working. That the most perfect natural Agent, should
work or dispose this matter to any set form: this likewise is his work. He
does not only support both Agent and Patient in that being which he gave them,
but does perpetually cooperate with them in their motions; does apply and
direct their motions unto those ends and uses, whereto his wisdom has
ordained them.

2 Concerning the manner of that perpetual dependence, which all finite Agents
with their effects, have on the one Omnipotent and supreme illimited
efficient, whether in respect of their existence or operation; the disputes in
Schools are intricate, and the questions perplexed. But the best is, the
ingenuous Reader may quit them, if he will be but pleased to take unto
himself, if not an ocular demonstration, yet a visible representation of this
truth, in that perpetual dependence, which light diffused (whether through the
celestial bodies, as the moon or stars, or through the air or other
inferior elementary bodies capable of enlightening) has on the Fountain of
Light, to wit, the body of the Sun: or which the light in rooms, otherwise
dark, has on the light of Fire or candles by night. So perpetual, so
essential is this dependence which light, in bodies enlightened by others, has
on the bodies which enlighten them; that some Vide Zabarel. de Lumine.
good Philosophers, from observation of this dependence, have concluded, that
[Lumen. non est inhaesive in corpore illuminato, sed in corpore lucente*] The
lightsomnesse which appears in these inferior bodies, or in bodies not lucent
in themselves, is not inherently or subjectively, in the borrowers, or bodies
enlightened, but in the bodies which enlightens them. To prove this conclusion,
they use this Antecedent, that light borrowed or participated, does follow the
motion of the body which bestows or lends it; and this Antecedent they think
sufficiently proved by sense. For if we hold a looking-glass to a candle by
night, the light which for the present appears either in the whole glass or
in some part of it, will alter its place or seat according to the motion of the
candle. If you move the candle higher or lower than it was, the light in the
glass will remove with it, from the highest place to the lowest, and from the
lowest to the highest, as it shall please the mover to alter the aspect betwixt
them, so will the light move from one part of the room to another, as the
candle is removed. And if you take the candle quite out of the room, the light
will follow it, and leave nothing but darkness behind. The same observation
holds as true in a Dyall, in which the light or shadow constantly follows the
motion of the Sun. But to hold this conclusion, [That light borrowed from the
Sun or a Candle, should be inherently or subjectively in the Sun or Candle]
is more than true Philosophy will warrant; more than the unquestionable truth
of the former experiment can logically infer. For though light in bodies not
lucent in themselves, be not their own, but borrowed; yet in that it is
borrowed, it must be truly in the borrower, not in the body which lends it.
For every one which lends, is presumed to transfer the use of what he lends
unto him that borrowes: the borrower must have the possession of what is lent
him, during the time of the loan. As for the former experiments, they may be
retorted upon such as use their help for inferring this pretended conclusion,
[ Vide Anton. Scarmilion. de coloribus.
That light diffused is not inherently in the body enlightened, but in the body
lucent, or enlightening.] For the mutation of the seat of borrowed light,
whether in a looking-glass held to a candle, or in a Sun-dyall, will be the
very same, albeit the Candle or Dyall stand still in the same place; if so we
move the Looking-glass the same way from the Candle, or the Dyall the same way
from the Sun, by which the Sun did move from the Dyall, or the Candle was
moved from the Looking-glass. This conclusion is most certain, [That the
motion of light, according to the motion of the body which diffuseth it, does
no way infer the light not to be inherently, (according to the inherency
which it has) in the body, through which it is diffused; but rather that this
light, however inherent in the body enlightened, has a perpetual indispensable
dependence upon the light of the body which produces it; a dependence on it,
not only in fieri, that is, whilst it is in production, which is in an
instant; but a dependence in facto, so long as it continues in the body
enlightened. And we cannot better conceive the manner, how a line should be made
by the continued flux of a point, or a surface by the continued motion of a
line; or how time should receive its continuation from the continued flux of
an instant, than by observing the manner how light being produced in an instant
in the body, which borrowes it (the extremity of it being terminated to a
mathematical point or line) does vary its place of residence in the same body,
moving continually from one part to another, according to the degrees of
motion, either of the body which gives the light, or of the body which is
enlightened, one from the other. If either body could move or be moved from the
aspect of the other, in an instant, the light would remove from the body
enlightened in the same instant. But moving as it does, the motion of the light
from one part of the same body or room into another, is perpetual; there is
no interruption in the motion so much as momentary, no interposition of
darkness so long as the motion lasts. And yet it is not the same numericall
light, which thus moves in the body or room enlightened. There is a
continual production of light fully answerable to the continual succession of
the motion. The light, whilst in motion, continues no longer the same than the
aspect between the body enlightening and enlightened continues the same. And it
may be questioned, whether there be not a perpetual production of new light,
even whilst neither the body enlightening nor enlightened remove one from the
other, whilst both stand or rest upon their several centers.

3 But what ever Philosophers may dispute one way or other concerning the
proper subject of light diffused or participated, or concerning the identifie
or multiplication of it in bodies not lucent in themselves, but enlightened: the
dependence of borrowed or participated light upon the fountain of light,
whence it is borrowed, is the most perfect Emblem, which the eye of man can
behold, of that dependence which all things numerable that are, or can be, have
on the incomprehensible Essence, or inexhaustible fountain of Being. Whether
light participated or diffused, have any true inherence or no in bodies
enlightened, or whether it be present with them or in them, (ad modum
spiritalium) after such a manner as spirits are in sublunary bodies, or with
them; this is certain, that light participated, is not deduced or drawn out
of any matter praeexistent, or out of any positive quality inherent; it is
produced out of darkness or want of light. And herein it is the true Emblem of
created Entities, which were not made of any entities praeexistent, but of
nothing. As light participated or diffused, has no permanent root in bodies
enlightened: So things created have not their root of being in any maetter
praeexistent, nor has the prime matter, of which things generated are made,
any root precedent out of which it grows. Such being as it has, it has
entirely by its perpetual dependence upon being it self. The most excellent
numerable being that can be imagined, is more truly participated or borrowed
from being it self, than the light of the Moon or Sarres, than the light in
the air, water, or ice, is from the body of the Sun. And albeit the forms
or perfect bodies, which, by operation of efficients natural, respectively
result or are produced out of the matter, have a being distinct from the
matter, out of which they are made or produced: yet even these have the same
immediate dependency upon the incomprehensible Essence or inexhaustible
fountain of Being, which the prime matter has. As the resplendencie or
irradiation of colored glasses, be they yellow, green or azure, have the same
immediate dependence upon the light of the Sun, which the light diffused
throughout the heavens, water, air, or pure glasses, has; unless the Sun
send forth his beams upon them, these colors have no resplendencie, they
cannot affect the sense of sight. Nor can any created Agent (albeit endowed
with qualities operative, more forcible and permanent, than any colored
glasses can be) produce any real effect, without the cooperation or coagencie
of the incomprehensible Essence, or inexhaustible fountain of Being. As
impossible it is, that any agent should move, or be moved, otherwise than by
the virtue of his Almighty power, as that it should have being or existence
(extra infinitum esse) without his infinite Being or immensitie, or that the
continuance of it in such being, should not be comprehended in his infinite and
interminable duration, which we call Eternity. Again, as light borrowed or
diffused throughout this inferior world, has a being in its kind distinct
from that light, which is permanently seated in the fountain of light, on
which, notwithstanding, all borrowed light absolutely depends as being
eminently contained in it: so every numerable being, or part of this world,
the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, the Elements, mixed bodies, vegetables, man,
and beast, have their proper kind of Being distinct each from other, and
distinct again from the incomprehensible fountain of being; on which
notwithstanding all of them have more immediate, more essential dependence,
than either the lights, or different shapes in a glass, have on the Sun
which gives the light, or on the bodies which they represent. And in this
incomprehensible fountain of being, all things not only which are, but which
possibly may be, are more eminently contained, than the least-sparkles or
portions of borrowed light, which appear in broken glasses, are in the body of
the Sun.

4 In this point only, or in this especially, is the production of light in
this inferior world by the Sun, unlike the Creation of all things by the
Almighty Father of lights, in that the Sun produces light or resplendency,
without any free choice or intelligence, but by a necessity of nature, that
is, it so produces light, as it has no power not to produce it. So does not
the Almighty Father either create the things that are, or preserve them in
their estate of being, or cooperate with them in the production of such
effects, as they in their several kinds and ranks are truly said to produce.
For albeit the Almighty Father, be more immutable than the Sun, yet is he
immutably free. For freedom of will, by which creatures rational exceed all
creatures merely natural, or capable of no better endowment then sense, being
a true and real branch of being, a perfection of the most perfect creatures,
must be as truly and really, though in an eminent manner, contained in the
Maker of all things, as any other branch of numerable being is. Now the object
of this freedom of will in the Omnipotent Maker, is not only the Creation or
not creation of things that are or may be; not the preservation or destruction
of things created, or of the several endowments or qualifications: but part of
this object of divine freedom is the enabling or inhibiting of all his
creatures, to exercise those qualities or faculties which are to them most
natural, and in their kind most powerful. Albeit Nebuchadnezzar had power to
make the flames of intended persecution, much hotter than any ordinary fire;
though other Tyrants might have power to make the like again, much hotter than
he did, or to environ Gods Saints with the fire of Hell; yet if the Almighty
Creator withdraw the influence of his power from such fire or flames, they can
have no more power to burn or scorch his Servants, than they have to cool
them; although we suppose their nature and qualities to be preserved still
entire, by the same power, by which they were created. For as (but now) was
said, the inhibition or enabling of natural qualities or faculties to exercise
their native force, is as truly the object of divine freedom, as the
preservation or destruction of the Agents themselves, with their qualities or
endowments is. For the same reason, the Sun was no way wounded in his
substance, nor hurt, nor tainted in its influence or other quality, when, by
the divine power, which is immutably and perpetually free, it was inhibited in
its course or motion.

5 That the Almighty Creator neither in our time, nor in the times long before
us, has laid any such restraint upon the Sun, that it should not move, or
upon the fire, that it should not burn, is not from any restraint which he
has laid upon his power by his eternal decree; but from his immutable and
eternal freedom. We may not say, that he cannot, for the times present or
which are to come, lay the like inhibition upon the Sun, upon the fire, or
upon other celestial or sublunarie bodies, for exercising the functions most
natural to them. That he will not, at any time, lay the like restraint upon
them, we are not bound to believe, until thus much be by his word revealed
unto us. That God cannot at this time bring such a general Inundation upon the
earth as he did in the days of Noah, we may not say or think: but that he
will not destroy the world by water, we must believe, because we have his
solemn promise to this purpose sealed unto us, by the sign of the Bow in the
Cloud. But when the iniquity of this present world shall come unto the same
height and measure, which the old world had made up, we believe he will
destroy it by fire. For other mutations in the course of nature, the condition
or exigence of times ensuing, may be such, as that they may be as strange and
miraculous, as at any time heretofore they have been. The not interposing of
miracles in these our days, proceeds not from any Act passed by the Almighty
to the contrary, nor from the unchangeablenesse of his eternal will; but from
the condition or course, which his creatures hold de facto, whose condition or
estate is in it self, and by his Almighty will so to have it, so changeable
and so improveable to different purposes, that many events, which to our
observation would be most strange, might upon special occasions be produced,
without any change or alteration in his power, whose exercise ad extra, that
is, in respect of effects producible in the creature, is immutably free, until
he promise to inhibit them, as he has done the general Inundation. And
although he be most immutable in all his promises or inhibitions: yet does not
every promise or inhibition which he makes, induce an absolute immutabilitie
or necessity of the things promised or inhibited. Their immutabilitie or
necessity is the proper effect of his more solemn or peculiar promises. Nor
are such inhibitions as he has set unto the water absolutely necessary from
Eternity, but grow necessary in revolution of time, by the changeable condition
of the Creature. And albeit we can neither prescribe limits to his will, nor
conceive any reason of the mutations which fall out in the Creatures by his
inhibition, by his permission, or by his positive enabling them to exercise
their native functions; yet of the least mutation, that can fall out in the
world, he knows a cause or reason, nor does he suffer any thing to be done,
for which his immutable freedom in governing the world, has not an eternal
rule or reason infinitely more perfect, than the wisest man living can give any
for his best Acts or undertakings. But suppose the Sun to have that freedom of
power in the emission or not emission of his beams, which men have over their
breath, or that dexterity in tempering or moderating its light or influence,
which skillful Musicians have in modulating their voices: and the former
representation of that power which God has over all his creatures, and of
their dependence on him in their beings and operations by the dependence which
light has on the Sun, would be more lively and full.

6 But the Psalmist has made choice of that free power, which man has over
his animal faculties, as over his breath or operation of his senses; as the
fairest picture of Gods free power creative and providence over his Creatures.
These wait all upon thee, that thou might give them their meat in due
seasons. That thou give them, they gather: thou openest thine hand, they are
filled with good. Thou hidest thy face, they are troubled: thou take away
their breath, they dye, and return to their dust. Thou sendest forth thy
spirit, they are created: and thou renewest the face of the earth. The glory of
the Lord shall endure for ever: the Lord shall rejoice in his works. He
looks on the earth, and it trembles: he touches the hills and they smoke.
Psalm. 104. verse. 27. etc. Yet even in these and the like emblematicall
expressions of the Creators free power over his Creatures, or in the choicest
that can be taken or gathered out of the Prophetical descriptions, from the
exercise of men's free and purest thoughts, there will still remain this
disparity: We cannot alter the objects of our intellectual or abstract
contemplations, without some alteration or change of Acts. It is then the
prerogative of the Almighty, freely to will things most contrary and different,
without any diversity in his will. And this his free will not only works
greater variety or change in the Creature, than the wits of all men in the
world can conceive, but withal irresistibly determines the issue of every
possible change, without any shadow of change or alteration in his thoughts or
resolutions; which in him are not many, but more truly one infinity, than any
one thought in us is one. This disparity between the Identity of his Eternal
knowledge, and of his immutable freedom, and the manner of our understanding
or intellectual choice, I cannot yet better represent than by the Sea the
first part of the Divine Essence and Attributes, chap. 21. page 229, 230. etc.
former disparity, between the circle and many sided figures. Man's purest
intellectual thoughts or actual choices, are in the contemplative part of the
soul, as angles are in many sided figures, all as different each from other,
as one angle is from another in a quadrangle, and every one is as distinct from
the substance of the soul wherein they are, as angles in a quadrangle are from
the sides or surface of it. But those which we term, or conceive as several
Acts or exercises of the Divine power, as the Act of creation, the act of
preservation, the act of conservation, the production of miracles, etc. are in
the Almighty, not so much distinct one from another, or from his
incomprehensible essence, as the Angles in a circle are from the sides or from
the circumference, which notwithstanding is a totangle, in which there is no
sensible distinction between sides and Angles, albeit both of them be truly
contained in the circumference, as all power and freedom of power is contained
in the immutable, infinite and incomprehensible Essence.

CHAP. 10.
The usual and daily operations of natural causes with their several events
or successes, are as immediately ascribed to the Creator by the Prophets, as
the first Creation of all things, with the reasons why they are so ascribed.
1 FRom the forementioned hundred and fourth Psalm, which is no other than a
sweet paraphrase upon the six days work of Creation, and from the like
prophetical emblazoning of Gods glory, which amounts from consideration of his
works; the intelligent Reader will inform himself, that the continual
rising and setting of the Sun and Moon, their incessant diffusion of light
through this visible World, the perpetual ascent of springing waters into the
hills, their continual decursion from them into the Sea, the limitation of the
Seas ebbing and flowing, the daily growth of plants and vegetables, the motion
of living things on the earth and in the waters, are as immediately and as
entirely ascribed unto the operative power of the Creator, as their first
Creation out of nothing was. Yet the reason of their ascribing all this unto
the immediate and sole power of God, will no way warrant the truth of their
criticisme, who teach that neither the fire does truly heat or burn, or the
water really cool or moisten, or that no visible creature has any real
operation upon another, but that our assigning of their motions or operations,
as true causes (in their kind) of the effects which we see daily produced, is
but a solaecisme of vain Philosophy, or of sciences falsely so called; whereas
the right resolution of this solaecisme into distinct and Christian phrase, is
but this, God does produce heat, cold, moisture, vegetables, and other living
things, (ad praesentiam creaturarum) the Fire, Water, Sun, Earth, etc. being
but bare witnesses of the Creators power, which is manifested in them, or of
its operation in their presence, by which operation alone, all those effects
are produced, which the Philosophers ascribe unto the Creatures. And most true
it is, that the Creator does daily work all those effects, which we attribute
to natural agents: yet does he not work such effects only in them, or where
they are present, but he truly works by them and with them. And if the
Omnipotent power be truly said to work by and with natural means or causes,
they must truly work with him, in their kind. When the Apostle says, in him
we live and move, and have our being, this necessarily implies, that we have
a life in its kind distinct from his life, a motive power different in its
kind from his power, a kind of being likewise distinct from his infinite
Essence, or from being-it-selfe. But in as much as the life of all things
living, the motions of every thing that moves, the being of every numerable
thing, that is, has such an absolute dependence as has been declared upon his
creative power; hence it is that the Prophets and Divine Philosophers, ascribe
all the visible effects or events, which time presents or place accompanies,
no less entirely to the Creator, than the first production of their visible
and natural causes. As for the former Critickes, in whose language, God only
works in his creatures, or (his creatures being present) they might with as
good reason, affirm that the Sun did not really move, but that God did move,
the Sun being present; yet could he not move or create motion ad praesentiam
Solis, unless the Sun did truly move. The truth is, the Sun does move, or
is moved by Gods presence in it, but he does not move with it or by it. But
with the Sun or other Creatures, he truly works, as they truly work with
him. And, by this concession of some true power and property of working unto
natural Agents, more is ascribed to the Creator of all things, than can be
ascribed by the contrary opinion, which utterly denies al power or property of
working to the Creatures. For he that denies any effects to be truly wrought by
them, cannot ascribe their abilities or operative force (which, in his opinion,
is none) unto their Creator. But Who fed thee in the wilderness with Manna,
which thy fathers (...) not, that he might humble thee, and that he might
prove thee, to do thee good at thy latter end: Lest thou say in thine heart,
My power and the might of my hand has (...) is wealth. But thou shall remember
the Lord thy God, for it is He (...) power to get wealth, that he may
establish his covenant, which he (...), as it is this day. DEVT. 8. verse. 16,
17, 18.
Moses taugh the Israelites, that it was God which gave them power to gather
substance. Nor were they more bound to praise God for the substance which they
gathered, or for the Manna which by miracle he sent unto them, than for the
(...) which he gave them to gather the one or other.

2 Ye^ is not this absolute and immediate dependence, which every creature, as
well or its being, as for its power or exercise of it, has o^ the Almighty
Creator, the entire ground or reason, why the effects which are (in their
kind) produced by the Creatures, are by the Prophets wholly ascribed unto
power Almighty. For this dependence, or the reason of ascribing all things to
God which is grounded on it, being for the present ^questred; he has a
peculiar title to all the works or effects, (especially to all of greater and
more public consequence) which the Creatures produce, from his skill or
wisdom in contriving the combination of second causes, with their several
operations, for the assequution of their last or utmost end. Nor was the
entitative goodness of every creature in his kind, albeit considered in that
perfection wherein God made it, the ground or reason of that approbation which
he bestowed upon them, as they severally began to be, or after he had
accomplished them all. God (says Moses) saw all that he had made, and lo it
was exceeding good. What goodness then was this, which he thus commends? the
goodness of order or of harmony betwixt them, as they were parts of this
Universe. This harmony, was the accomplishment of his several works, the
ground of his praises, and the complete object of our belief of this Article
of Creation. Hence says the Apostle, Heb. 11 By faith we believe; What? Secula
facta esse, nay more then so (...), that the worlds were harmonically made. It
was a double oversight in some good Divines, from one or both of these two
principles, (Omne ens qu^^ens, est bonum,) What soever has being is good,
whatsoever is, was made by God, and all things which God made were good; to
infer, that sin or moral evil could have no positive entitie. For the
greater the entitative goodness of any creature is, the greater measure of
moral evil it always includes, unless its entitative goodness hold such
harmony or correspondency with the rest, as may help to make up or support
that goodness of order, that is, that goodness of coordination amongst
themselves, or of that joint subordination unto their Creator, which he first
framed and placed in this Universe, as it was his work. Unless sin or
moral evil had some positive entitie, or some positive degrees or measure,
all sins should be equal, there could be no different kinds of sin, no
numericall difference or degrees betwixt particular sins of the same kind.
But of the nature of sin or moral evil, and how compatible this evil is
with goodness entitative, more at large, by Gods assistance, in the Treatise of
Original sin, or the estate or condition of the sons of wrath, which estate
every child of Adam by participation of this first sin does inherit. The
peculiar title which the Almighty Creator by right of Creation, or by the
combination or contrivance of natural and intellectual agents, has to all
the praises, which either the Soldier or Vide Salvi^num lib. 7. number. 227.
Statesman, the Landlord, the Husbandman, or such as live by Merchandising
daily rob him of, will come more fitly to be declared in some following
Treatises of Divine special providence.

3 If the Reader desire a brief abstract or sum of what has been said of
Gods power in creating the world, or of the reservation of this free power unto
himself to alter, to innovate or amend the estate wherein he has hitherto
preserved it; I cannot exhibit this general view more clearly or more
succinctly than Justin Martyr has done in his answer to the fourth question of
the Grecians. The question was thus proposed, [An Deus faciat, feceritve,
facturusve sit: Et si facit, suaptene voluntare, an praeter voluntatem?]
Whether God do make the things that are, whether he has made the things that
have been, whether he will make other things which yet are not, or the things
which are, after a better manner than as yet they have been made: or if he be
or has been a maker, or continue to make things better, whether he do all
this out of his own free will, or besides his will. His full answer to this
question is, Fecit Deus, and facit, and facturus est, suapte sponte and
voluntate: nam creaturam ipse condidit, quae antehac non fuerat, volens. Eam
providentia sua in eo ut sit, conservat: quod quidem est, facit. Quam etiam
instauraturus est, and in statum meliorem redacturus per restitutionem sive
renovationem: quod est facturus est: ut repurget came ab absurditate omni, ex
rationalium ignavia contracta. Non quod per judicii considerationem and
deliberationem posterius id quod melius sit, invenerit; sed quod long antea
and prius quam mundum condidit, constitutum habuerit ut faceret. Neque enim
possibile est ut vel ad notionem vel ad potentiam, Deo posterius quidquam
accedat, quod prius non habuerit. Volentem autem Deum mundum creasse, illud est
documento, quod cum Deus potuerit plures efficere soles, non plures, sed unum
duntaxat effecerit. Nam qui plures non potest condere soles, neque unum condere
potest: and qui unum solemn creare potuit, necessario quoque plures creare
potuit. Quomodo igitur quos facere potuit plures soles, Deus non fecit, nisi
certe quod plures soles facere noluit? Sin quos non fecit soles, voluntate non
fecit: perspicuam utique fuerit, cum etiam quem fecit, voluntate fecisse. Et
veluti sol, ita and reliquae creaturae parts omnes, quae vel obnoxiae vel non
obnoxiae sunt corruptibilitati, ex voluntate Dei and id quod sint, and id quod
hujusmodi sint, habent.

CHAP. 11.
Containing the sum of what we are to believe in this Article of Creation,
and of the duties whereto it binds us: with an introduction to the Article of
His providence.
TO believe that God is the maker of Heaven and Earth, and of all things
visible and invisible, includes in it an acknowledgement not only of the six
days work, but that he still makes all things that are, and shall make all
things which hereafter shall be. So long as any thing which has been
continues in being, so long as any thing which now is not, shall begin or
not cease to be, so long the Almighty continues a Maker. And in as much as some
things which are made, or which hereafter shall be made, shall have no end, he
continues an everlasting Maker. This title of Maker is none of his Eternal
Attributes, but a denomination ascribed unto him from his works which all had
their beginning in time, or rather with time, or with duration finite or
numerable. It is an everlasting Attribute, for that properly is everlasting,
which though it have beginning yet it has no end. But albeit the acts or
exercises of his will or power had a beginning with the world, (for they are
always in the creature or effect) yet his will and purpose to make the world
are eternal: So is the power by which he made it, so is the combination of all
these, to wit, his providence, by which he orders and governes all things,
coeternall to his essence. All modern controversies to my knowledge account it
an heathenish solecism to say, God only did make or has made the world and all
things in it, he does not now make them. For this were to deny the necessity of
his everlasting work in preserving, supporting, and continuing all things in
their proper being. And to deny this, would be more than a solecisme of
speech, a real branch of infidelity. Is it then a less solecisme of speech to
say, or a smaller portion of infidelity to think, that God only has decreed
before all times what shall fall out in time, but does not now decree nor shall
any thing hereafter be decreed by him? Questionless, if his decree be
coeternall to his power, the same with his will or purpose, if he cease not to
work or will, he cease not to work or decree. He did decree to work when
he did not work, or produce any effect ad extra, but he never produced any
effect or work when he did not decree. For he works all things by the
Counsel of his will, not by the Counsel of his will as past and ended, but by
the Counsel of his will, which was, which is, and which is to come. And he
decrees all things for the times present after the self same manner that he
decreed them from eternity, otherwise his decree were not eternal, could have
no resemblance of eternity. To infer that Gods decree is an act past, or that
God does not now decree, because he has decreed al things before all worlds,
is a solecisme or ignorance, to say no worse, of the same nature, quality and
scantling, as if you should say, God was before the world was, therefore God is
not since the world was, nor shall be after the end of this world. For the
world could neither begin, continue, nor cease to be, but by his eternal and
irresistible decree, which neither has beginning nor end, nor can admit any
interposition of change. It is true, that if we consider the Deity in himself
or his decree as it is in him, or the same with him, there is neither
praeteritum nor futurum, no such difference in them as we character or notify
by these terms past or to come: yet if we consider God or his eternal
Decree, as they include a reference of precedence to things temporal, past, or
to come, or as times current have coexistence with him, we may not deny that
God was before all times, and did decree things to come, that he is in all
times current, and does decree the issue of times present or ensuing. Thus in
all times, and in all places, the Almighty Father is present with us, present
in us, as our maker and preserver, present by his eternal providence to order
and govern us. And the government of the world, specially of Men and Angels,
is in true Divinity, the proper object of the Eternal Decree. And if God be
thus with us, nothing can go amiss with us, save only by our ignorance, by
our misbeleefe or weak belief of this first Article.

2 The true, that is, the firm and sound belief of every moral or sacred
truth, specially of such fundamental truths as are contained in this Article,
always include a correspondency in the believer unto the thing believed. And
this correspondencie must have its place, not in the brain or apprehensive
faculty only, but in the affection. The sympathy of affection unto the thing
believed, results from the impression which the speculative form or
representation in the brain makes upon the heart, which is the seat of the
affection. The means subordinate to the Spirit of God for making this
impression, are two: A right explication or branching of the article or object
to be believed: and a serious and frequent meditation upon the object rightly
branched, or a taking not of the truth only, but the consequences of it into
deep and settled consideration; or as we say, a laying of both to heart. The
maine branches of this Article are three: First, that God is the maker of all
men that are, not of Adam only. Secondly, that he is the preserver of all.
Thirdly, that he perpetually orders and governs all things, even the
thoughts of men, by the irresistible uncessant working of his Omnipotent decree
or will. In our belief of the two first branches (be it less or more, weak
or strong) so it be uniforme, it is essentially included, that God is good to
all, in that he has given life and being unto all. Of this his goodness no
man can want store of witnesses, so long as either he injoyes himself or the
necessary supplies of life. One special duty, whereunto the belief of this
Article does immediately bind all men, is expressly commended to us by our
Savior, Matthew. 6. The general neglect whereof is more than sufficient to
condemn not the Heathens or Infidels only, but the greatest part of such as
profess the Christian Faith, of infidelity: Take no thought for your life,
what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink, nor yet for your body what you
shall put on. Is not the life more than meat? and the body than raiment? It is
a sin for him which believes that God has given him that life and being which
he has, not to believe that God did give him both for his greater good, or
that he will not increase his blessings upon him, so he do not distrust his
fatherly care and providence: A greater sin it is to suspect or question,
whether God have not a more fatherly care over all men, than he has over other
creatures. So our Savior adds, Behold the fowls of the air: For they sow
not, neither do they reap, nor gather into barnes, yet your heavenly Father
feeds them. Are ye not much better then they? In that God has given man a
better kind of life and being than the fowls of the air; this is an undoubted
pledge unto all, that he has prepared far better food for them than for birds
and beasts, an everlasting food; so they do not distrust his providence. And as
he provideth better food for man than for beast, so has he better raiment for
them in store, than he has for vegetables; so they will seek it from him, and
not be their own carvers. Which of you by taking thought can add one cubit
unto his stature? And why take ye thought for raiment? Consider the Lillies of
the field, how they grow; they toil not, neither do they spin. And yet I say
unto you that even Solomon in all his glory, was not arrayed like one of these:
wherefore if God so cloth the grass of the field, which to day is and to
morrow is cast into the Oven; shall he not much more cloth you, O ye of
little faith. That to distrust Gods providence or doubt of his love, of such
love as is ready to bestow better raiment upon them than Solomon in all his
royalty had, is a point of infidelity, is included in our Saviors inference or
conclusion: Therefore take no thought, saying, What shall we eat? or what
shall we drink? or wherewithal shall we be clothed? For after all these
things do the Gentiles seek. For your heavenly Father knows that ye have
need of all these things. Is it then unlawful to make any thing which the
Gentiles sought after, any part of our care? No, the Gentiles after their
fashion, sought after God, who (as the Apostle says) gives to all life and
breath and all things, even to the Gentiles, that they should seek the Lord:
if happily they might feel after him and find him. Acts 17. 25, 27. The only
reason why they did not find him, was because they sought him amiss. And the
reason why they sought him amiss was their ignorance of this truth which our
Savior and S. Paul has taught, to wit, that God did give the very Gentiles
themselves food and raiment, with other necessaries of life, even life it
self, with all its contentments, to the end that they might seek him and
taste his goodness. But they ran counter, and sought only after those things
which were good not in themselves, but as they were pledges of his goodness.
And the more eagerly they thus sought after these temporal good things, the
further they ran from the Fountain of goodness, which alone must sweeten the
best things we can desire, and season our souls for the right entertainment or
fruition of them.

3 Our speculative assent unto this Article, or approbation of this truth,
whereof these Gentiles were ignorant, will rather aggravate than mitigate our
Saviors censure of them; if we be as greedy seekers after the necessities of
life, or as solicitous hunters after superfluities, as the Gentiles were. The
distinctions or divisions of care, with annotations what kind of care, is by
our Savior forbidden, what allowed of, are easy to be found almost in every
Writer, especially in the Expositors of that 6. chapter of Matthew. But whether
through the default of hearers or of teachers, or respectively of both: too
much liberty is every where taken for employing the greatest part of men's times
and endeavors in providing things of this life. Notwithstanding all the
prohibitions which have been given by our Savior to the contrary:
Covetousness and ambition, the two grand enemies of belief in God and his
loving providence, have no where in any age thriven better, than amongst
zealous Christian professors in these later times. And which is most to be
lamented, Scripture is secretly opposed to Scripture for justifying or
countenancing unchristian care of wordly matters. The warrant, which many take
to themselves from the mistaken sense of one place in S. 1 Timothy 5* 8
Paul, He that provideth not for his family is worse then an Infidel, is used
as a countermand to our Saviors prohibition. For the right limitation whereof,
the only caveat which I have to commend unto the Reader, is this, As S. Paul,
how mightily soever he debase works, not ceremonial only, but moral, does
never deny their use or necessity either for attaining to justification, or
for making our Election sure, but only seeks to strengthen our relyance upon
Gods mercies in Christ by denial of our selves, and of the best works which we
can do, whether before regeneration or after: so our Savior, albeit he seem
universally to forbid all care of minding temporal contentments, yet in deed
and real meaning, forbids us only to place any part of our hopes or
confidence in our own endeavors. He does not simply forbid all care of things
temporal, but so far only as it is an hindrance to our care and
watchfulness for trying and tasting the goodness of God, or as it weakens our
relyance upon his fatherly providence. If we be watchful in prayer, and
frequent in meditations upon Gods goodness already experienced, our care of
heavenly things and estimate of Gods goodness will better teach every one of
us in his several calling, the right limitation of his domestique cares, than
any general rule which can be gathered from the nature, quality, or quantity
of cares. For conclusion, he which forbids us to take care for the morrow,
commands us to pray this day for to morrowes bread, that is, to pray every day
for the good success or blessings of the days following, with all attention
and watchfulness.

4 Another fundamental duty, and one of the most formal effects of faith, as
it respects this Article, is that of the Preacher, Ecclesiastes the 12. verse.
1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth. But why is this duty in
particular pressed upon youth? Because the prints of Gods creative power are then
most fresh in our nature, and might transmit a fairer copy or truer estimate of
the Creators goodness unto old age, than old age can take any: so young men by
often reflecting upon the present comforts of health and strength, upon the
activity of body, the quickness of sense and spirit, would ingrosse them
deeply in their memories. Youth then is the fittest season for estimating the
benefits of Creation, and old age the choicest time for surveying our
unthankfulness to our Creator. If the former contentments of youth, with the
comforts which accompany our best thoughts and actions, were truly calculated
in our fresh and choicest days, and rightly waighed upon their proper center,
our thankfulness would reciprocate upon the Fountain from which they flow,
and be returned to their doner in a measure equiponderant to their weight upon
our souls. And nothing but want of thankfulness in such as have tasted the
ordinary benefits of Creation, can hinder the descent of Gods choice of
blessings in great abundance. Would we but sequester that delight which we take
in health and strength from our selves, and surrender it wholly into his hands
that gave it, he is still ready to renew and better our present and former
estate. Did we empty our hearts of pride, of selfe-delight, or complacency, by
pouring forth such joyful thanks giving as the Psalmist does, It is he that
has made us, and not we our selves: ^t is he that gives us all those good
things wherein we joy, we did not receive them from our friends or parents, we
cannot take them to our selves: the same Lord, as the Psalmist elsewhere
avoucheth, would give us our hearts desire, even fill our hearts with joy and
gladness which shall never sail or decrease. This is his sole and proper
gift, for though we could take unto our selves all the temporary contentments
of transitory pleasures, which either our hearts could wish, or our inventions
calculate, yet should we not have our hearts desire, so long as we fix our
delight either in the things enjoyed, or in the enjoying of them, and not in
the Lord which gave them unto us, and us power to enjoy them.

From thus delighting in the Lord, or from rendering according to the benefits
bestowed upon us, the general withdrawments are but two. First, an over
prizing of such externalls as procure or increase our contentments. Secondly,
an ouervaluing the fear or dread of men's persons, or other externalls which
seem to menace disgrace, vexation, or torment unto us, if we should do as in
our calmest thoughts we often desire to do. The sinister sway of both
temptations or withdrawments from the duties commended unto us, cannot be
otherwise counterpoized than by taking the last branch of this Article into
deep and serious consideration. The last branch was, that God does nor only
make and preserve us, but does withal perpetually order, direct, and govern
both us and all the externalls which we love or fear, by his all-seeing,
ever-working Decree or Counsel. If our souls or senses have for once or twice
been overjoyed with the possession of any externalls or isntrumental causes
of contentment, let us call to mind, that as the Almighty Creator gives both
us and them their being, so he likewise stints and limits as well their
operations, as our capacities to receive their impressions at his pleasure. The
same externalls which formerly wrought our comfort or contentments, may procure
our grief and misery by too much or unseasonable familiarity with them, or
fruition of them. If in fear or dread of evil menaced by man, or represented
to us by fire, by sword, or other unruly instruments of wrath or vengeance, we
cannot hope that the Almighty Creator will by miracle abate their strength, or
inhibit the exercise of their native qualities or dispositions, as he did in
Daniel and the three childrens cases; yet unless our faith in the last branch
of this Article fail, it will confirm us in this resolution, that he can and
will so contrive the concurrence of hurtful agents, as they shall become
instruments of greater good to such as love him, and in temptations adhere unto
him. The rule or Maxim is universally true: No agent or instrument, whether of
temporal harm or comfort, whether of joy or grief, can work any other ways
or any further than he by his Eternal Decree or Providence has appointed it
for the present to work. And in that promise made unto us by our Apostle, That
he will not suffer us to be tempted above our strength; it is included that
he will so restrain or abate the force and efficacy of all second causes, as
they shall not conquer our patience or quell the comfort of our unwounded
conscience.

CHAP. 12.
Though nothing can fall out otherwise then God has decreed: yet God has
decreed that many things may fall out otherwise than they do.
1 MEn, otherwise of light and vain behavior, gain oftentimes respect
amongst the multitude by pretended descent from worthy Families, with whom
their names have some alliance: so do inconsiderate positions or conclusions
dangerously erroneous, many times get more esteem among the Learned, than
ordinary truths do, as being mistaken for the true and natural offsprings of
undoubted Maxims. There is no Christian, but thinks himself bound upon his
allegiance to submit his assent unto the former Principle, [It is impossible,
that any thing should be, which God has decreed not to be; or any thing which
is, should otherwise be, than God has decreed it should be.] And many which
make a conscience as well of their words as of their ways, (herein perhaps
especially faulty, that they are too zealously sollicitous not to speak
amiss,) make no scruple of entertaining these and the like inferences
following, as naturally descending from the former Maxim: [It is impossible
ought should fall out otherwise than it does: all things in respect of God and
his Omnipotent Decree, are necessary: Contingencie is but a solecisme of
secular language, or if any thing may without offense be termed contingent, it
must be reputed such, only with reference to second causes.]

2 Howbeit such good men as do thus write and speak, will give us leave (I
know) to take it in the first place as granted, that God is wiser than we are,
and knows the nature of all things and their differences better than they or
we do. This being granted, we will in the second place suppose that
Contingency is not a mere fictitious name of that which is not, as
Tragelaphus; nor altogether Synonymall to Necessity. The question about
Contingency, and of its difference from necessity, is not such as one in
merriment once proposed in schools; An chimera calcitrans in vacuo terat
calceos: The very names of Contingency and Necessity to ordinary Latinists
differ more than Ensis and Gladius, than Vestis and Indumentum, betwixt which
perhaps the ancient Latin Artificers or Nomenclators knew some difference. Yet
was it impossible for them to know any thing which God knew not, who out of all
controversy knows the true difference between Contingency and Necessity,
much better then we can do. For both of them are Entities of his making, and
serve as different Laws to the diversity of his creatures, or their different
actions. All the reasons that can be drawn from the immutability of Gods
Decree to the contrary, may with greater facility and strength of the same
Decree be retorted than brought against us. For God immutably decrees
mutability. Now who will say that things mutable, are in respect of Gods decree
or knowledge immutable? The Heavens and other bodies moveable according to
local motion, are truly moveable in themselves, absolutely moveable, not
immovable in respect of Gods decree or knowledge: for he knows them to be
moveable, because he decreed them so to be; he does not know them to be
immovable because he decreed them not to be such, unless for a time by
interposition of miracle. It implies less contradiction, to say, Deus
immutabiliter decernit mutabilia, than to say (which has been accounted an
ancient orthodoxall Maxim,) Stabilis dat cuncta movere. For Mobility is a
branch of Mutability.

3 Every thing in respect of Gods decree or knowledge is altogether such as God
has decreed it should be. In what good sense all things may be said necessary
in respect of Gods decree.
If then God has decreed there should be contingency, as well as necessity; it
is altogether as necessary that some events should be contingent as others
necessary: and as truly contingent as the other is necessary in respect of Gods
decree. See chap. 22. parag. 2.
Albeit to speak properly, the natures of contingency and necessity consist
not in mere relation or respect. For in as much as both are immediate and
real effects of Divine Omnipotency; both must have absolute being, the being
of neither is merely relative. Now if Contingency have a true and absolute
being, it is neither constituted in the nature of contingency by any respect or
relation to second causes, nor can any respect or relation to the first cause
deprive it of that absolute nature, which the Omnipotent efficacy of the cause
of causes has irrevocably bestowed upon it. Briefly, if Contingency be any
thing, it is that which it is by the Omnipotent Decree; and being such, it is
altogether as impossible that some effects should not be absolutely contingent,
as that such effects as the Divine Decree has appointed to be necessary,
should not be at all. Or if we would make impartial inquiry into the original
of all things, nothing without the precincts of the most glorious and ever
blessed Trinity, is absolutely necessary.

4 By Contingency (lest happily we might be mistaken) we understand the possible
mean between necessity of being and necessity of not being, or of being such,
or of not being such; or between necessity of doing, and necessity of not
doing, or necessity of being done, or necessity of being left undone. This
mean between necessity of doing, and necessity of not doing, is that which in
agents intellectual, as in men and Angels we call freedom of will or
choice. Unto which freedom, necessity is as contradictory, as irrationability
is to the nature of man, and contingency as necessarily presupposed as life and
sense are to reason. Add reason to contingency, and we have the complete
definition of Free Will. In those cases wherein the Creator has exempted man
from restraint of necessity, his will is free. The divine will it self is not
free in those operations which are essential, though most delectable. God the
Father is more delighted in the eternal generation of his Son: so is God the
Father and the Son in the eternal procession of the Holy Ghost; than in the
creation, production, or preservation of all the creatures. Yet are not these
or other internal operations of the blessed Trinity so free in respect of the
divine nature, as is the production of the world. Whatsoever God decrees he
decrees it freely, that is, so as he might not decree it. Whatsoever he makes
he makes it freely, that is, he so makes it, as that it was not necessary for
him to make it.

CHAP. 13.
Contingency is absolutely possible, and part of the object of Omnipotency, as
formal a part as necessity is.
1 IT is an unquestionable rule in the Art of Arts, that propositions, for
their form not incompatible, may from the necessity of their matter or
subject, become equivalent to propositions directly contradictory; whose
indispensable law or rule it is, that if the one be true, the other must needs
be false, they admit of no mean betwixt them. Now there is no matter or
subject in the world, which is so absolutely necessary, as the existence of the
Divine Nature, or the internal operations of the Trinity. Whence it is, that
between these two propositions [The generation of the Son, is necessary, the
not generation of the Son is necessary.] there is no possible mean which can
be capable of truth. The first is so absolutely necessary, and so necessarily
true, that the latter is eternally false. But such is not the case or condition
of these two propositions following: [The Creation or Existence of the World is
necessary: The not Creation or non existence of the World is necessary.] These
are not contradictories for their form, nor equivalent to contradictories for
their matter or subject, and therefore may admit a mean between them. To say
the creation or existence of the world was absolutely necessary, has no truth
in it: for it had a beginning of existence and being, and may have an end: and
the other extreme or contrary [The not creation or non existence of the world
is absolutely necessary,] has less appearance of truth in it. It remains
then, that the two contradictorie propositions to these false ones, must be
true. The contradictory to the former is this: [The creation or existence of
the world is not absolutely necessary.] The contradictory to the latter is
this* [The not creation or non existence of the World is not absolutely
necessary.] Now seeing the world is created, and yet it was not necessary that
it should be created: both these propositions following (seeing either of them
is a true mean between the two former extremes or false ones,) are most
true: [1 The creation of the world was possible, 2 The not creation of the
world was possible.] And if as well the not creation, as the creation of the
world, was possible; we may not deny that God did freely create it: seeing
freedom properly taken, includes or is a possibility of doing or not doing. It
was likewise free for the Almighty, to create or not to create Man or Angel.
But his free purpose to create them after his own Image being supposed: it was
not merely possible, but altogether necessary that they should be created
good. In as much as he is goodness it self, it is not possible that evil
should be created by him, that he should be the Author of it. As is his being,
so is his goodness, perpetually absolute, eternally necessary. But though Men
and Angels were necessarily created good, yet their goodness in the beginning
was mutable, not perpetually necessary. The question is, whether continuance
in that goodness, wherein God created them, were truly possible in respect of
Gods decree, unto such as have not so continued, or their non continuance
necessary: Or whether, neither their continuance or non continuance were
necessary, or both alike possible. To say that Adams continuance in goodness
was, in respect of Gods decree, necessary, is ^vidently convinced of falsehood
by his fall. So that the other part only remains questionable, whether Adams
non continuance in the state of goodness, were so absolutely decreed by God,
that it was not possible for him to continue. For resolution of this point, we
are to inquire, First, whether in respect of Gods power it were possible.
Secondly, whether in respect of his goodness it were necessary or most
congruent, to ordain or decree neither a necessity of continuance, nor a
necessity of non continuance in goodness; but the mean between them, that
is, an absolute possibility of continuance, and an absolute possibility of
non continuance. That it was possible to decree such a mutual possibility,
may thus be proved.

2. Whatsoever implies no contradiction, is absolutely possible, and falls
within the object of omnipotency. But this mixed possibility of continuing or
not continuing, being a mean betwixt the necessity of Adams continuance, and
the necessity of not continuance in the state of integrity, implies no
contradiction: Ergo, it was possible for God to decree it. That it implies no
contradiction in respect of the form, is a point so clear from the first
principles of argumentation* that he which understands not this, is neither
fit to dispute, nor to be disputed with. But the same form (notwithstanding)
of contrariety applied to the divine nature, the persons in Trinity, or their
internal operations, admits no mean. What is the reason? The nature and
attributes of the Deity are absolutely necessary and precedent to all divine
decrees or effects of Gods power. And it implies a contradiction, that any
thing which is absolutely necessary, should admit any mixture of contingency,
or of possibility of the contrary. But the nature, state, condition, or
existence of man, are not proper objects of the divine decree, yet proper
effects of his power, and being such, they are not absolutely necessary; and
not being necessary in themselves, they cannot incomber or involve
propositions, for their form, not necessary with absolute necessity.
Whatsoever had a true possibility of being before it was, may be actually
such as it was absolutely possible for it to be, or such as it might please the
Almighty Creator (who is free in all his actions ad extra) to make it. It was
possible for him to make man's goodness or his continuance in it, not to be
necessary, but contingent. He that made man of nothing, had nothing to resist
or hinder him from squaring or framing his nature, to that abstract form of
truth which was in its self, or (as we say) objectively possible. For absolute
Omnipotency includes an ability to ingrosse or fill mere logical
possibilities, with true and Physical substances or qualities, as truly
answerable unto them, as natural bodies are to bodies mathematical. But
concerning Gods power to decree an absolute contingencie in the state,
Condition, or Actions of men, there can be no question amongst such as grant
his Omnipotency to be out of question. What could necessitate his will to lay
a necessity of sinning upon Adam, whose fall or first sin, if it were
necessary in respect of Gods decree, the necessity must needs proceed from
Gods Omnipotent decree, without which nothing can have any real possibility
or true title of being, much less a necessity of being. For Divine
Omnipotency is the first and sole Foundation of all Being, otherwise then by
it; and from it nothing can come to pass either necessarily or contingently.

3. Whatsoever is and has not been, must of necessity have some cause of now
being. And as is the event or effect, such must the causalty be. If the one
be necessary or inevitable, it is impossible the other should be contingent
or merely possible. Both, or neither, must be necessary. Man we suppose did
once stand upright, his first sin or fall, That action what soever it were,
which brought him down, the evils which thence ensued, are not mere nothing:
Evil it self got some kind of being by his negligence, which from the
beginning it had not. Of all, or any of these, the question still revolves,
whether they were necessary or not necessary, but Contingent. If Contingent,
we have no more to say, but Gods peace be on them, which so speak and think:
If any reply, that they were necessary, he must assign a necessary cause of
their being. For without some cause they could not be, and without a
necessitating cause, there was no necessity that they should be. Was this
supposed necessity then from man or from God? from any second cause, or from
the first cause of all things? if from man only or from other second causes;
then were they necessary not in respect of the first cause, but in respect of
the second: that is, some second cause did make them necessary, when as the
first cause had left them free, or merely possible; which to affirm is
contrary to their positions, with whom we dispute, and in it self
unconceiveable. For who can make that necessary, which God has made
contingent or subject to change? What can be said then? that God did make man's
fall, his first sin or appetite of the forbidden fruit, to be necessary,
or necessitate his will in his sinister choyces? This were all one, as to say,
that God were the immediate and necessary cause of sin, of death, of all the
evils that have befallen mankind since Adam. For he is the sole immediate and
necessary cause of all things which he so decrees as they cannot possibly
fall out otherwise. For him to err in decreeing, or for the execution of his
decree to be defeated, is impossible. In respect of his proper and adaequate
object, and peremptorily intended effect, his will is a more irresistible, more
powerfully necessitating cause, than any other cause whatsoever. Now if Gods
will had been, to leave no possibility for Adams perserverance, his fall had
been the complete object of Gods decree concerning our first estate, and by
consequence Gods decree, or will had been the first cause of sins first
entrance into the world.

CHAP. 14.
The former conclusion proved by the consent of all the Ancients, whether
Christians or Heathens which did dislike the error of the Stoikes.
THE incommodious or inconsiderate speeches, which some of better note and
antiquity, have let fall, were (as I persuade my self) but symptoms of their
provoked zeal, or eager desire to salve those gross absurdities, which they
had rightly espied in others. But it is always more easy to expugne an error
or salve a particular inconvenience, then to provide, that no more shall follow
upon the cure or medicine. Had those famous lamps of Gods Church, by whose
light many gross opinions have been discried and reformed, seen the
inconveniences, which follow upon their own positions, as clearly, as many of
their friends since have done: it would be a foul slander in us to suspect,
that they would not wil-willingly have altered their dialect, or taken advise
for expressing their good meaning in terms more safe, more proper, and
scholastique. If otherwise we abstract their speeches from that respect and
reverence, which we owe unto their memory, or that good opinion which best men
have had of their sincerity: I cannot see wherein the necescesarie
consequences of their opinions, as they are usually expressed, comes short of
the Manichees errors, or wherein they differ at all from the Stoics. The
Manichees held all evil, and mischief in the world to fall out by inevitable
necessity: but this necessity they derived from an evil Author, from a prime
cause or Creator of evil only, not of any thing that was good. And better it
is (for it is more consonant to our Saviors advise) to acknowledge the tree
for evil, where the fruit is evil, then to justify it for good, when the
fruit is apparently and of necessity naught. The pertinacie or stiffenesse in
this common error, [Evils and mischief, or wicked actions fall out by
necessitie] being presupposed aequall; they add less sin or error to it,
which hence acknowledge a prime cause of evil, or a cause evil by fatal
necessity; then those which hold evil to be necessary in respect of his
Omnipotent decree, who is infinitely good. In fine, the Manichees were gross
haeretiques in holding evil and mischief to fall out by inevitable
necessity; but this heresy once admitted, it was rather a consonancy of
error, then any addition of new heresy, to admit two prime causes or Creators,
the one of good, the other of evil. They durst not slander goodness with any
crime, or for being the Author of any thing that was not good: nor were they
disposed to flatter greatness, as if evil were no evil, because it proceeded
from it.

2. That which the Ancients reprooved in the Stoics opinion, as most injurious
to God and all good men, was, that they held all things (and evil things
amongst the rest) to fall out by fate or unavoydable necessity. This
foundation being once laid, the roots of virtue must utterly perish, and that
which we call vice should be a mere name, or matter of nothing: there is no
place left for just reward or punishment. Whether by fate the Stoics meant the
influence of stars, the course of nature, or the decree of GOD (who to them
was all one with Nature;) all was one in respect of the former inconveniences,
which necessarily followed from admission of an inevitable necessity in humane
actions, whence soever that be derived. To say, it comes from the first cause,
or from the second, is merely accidental to the error or inconvenience so
sharply and justly reproved by the primitive Church. In respect of a Tradesmans
commodity, it is all one, whether he be prohibited for setting up or
trafiquing, by the company of his own profession, or by some higher powers, so
the prohibition or restraint be as large and peremptory, without hope of
release: or if he be restrained upon his allegiance by the Prince or privy
counsel, his hopes of thriving will be much less, then if he were tied only
by the local statutes of some petty Corporation. Thus if the Stoic derived
the necessity of all things from the revolution of the Heavens, or from other
second causes, as their supposed guides: the impossibility of doing otherwise
then we do, was, in every Christians conceit, evidently much less, then if
we derive this necessity from the Omnipotent decree. Now the danger or
incenvenience of their opinion, did formally consist, in nursing a conceit in
men, that it was impossible for them to do otherwise then they do, or to
avoid the evils and mischiefs into which they fall. And these dangers or
inconveniences, are so much greater in Christians then they were in the
Stoics; as the God which we acknowledge is more Omnipotent, then nature or
the Stoics god. For the more Omnipotent he is, the more impossible is it for
any creature to avoid the necessity which by his decree is laid upon him.

3. In respect of the former inconveniences, or of the opinion it self, it is
merely accidental, whether this necessity be laid upon us by coaction, or
willingly and cheerfully entertained by us; whether it proceed from Gods power
or impulsion, or from his wisdom: so our actions and their issues, be, in
respect of his Omnipotent power or will, alike unavoidable. If birds and fishes
could speak, I suppose the one would as much complain of those that in hard
frost or snow, allure them with baits to come within the fall of the trappe,
as the other would do of Fishers for driving them violently into their nets.
If the birds once taken be used as hardly; their expostulations would be so
much more just, as their usage before their taking, was more kind. To make a
man willing to undo himself, upon fair promises made, not with purpose to
do him good, but to circumvent him; is greater cruelty then can accompany open
violence. He that wittingly ministers poison instead of Physic, is in all
men's judgment, as true a Murderer, as he that kills with the sword, albeit the
party to whom it is ministered, having no reason to suspect any danger, do
willingly drink it. And the less suspicious or more charitably affected he
is to his professed Physician, the greater wrong he has in being thus
uncharitably dealt with. It would little boot the malefactor in this kind, to
plead; Albeit I gave it him, he might have chosen whether he would have drunk
it, because I did not enforce him with a drawn Dagger or other weapon to be
his own executioner. In many cases, one may be the true cause of another
death, and deserve death himself, although he be not any necessary cause of
his death, or plot his destruction without possibility of avoidance. But if
our willing choice of those ways which lead to death, be necessary in respect
of the Almighties decree, so that there be no possibility left, to escape it;
he is a more necessary and more immediate cause of all their deaths that thus
perish, then any man can be of his death whom he poisons. And if the case stood
thus with any, their misery were greater, by how much they did less suspect
his goodness: However, most miserable, because most desperate. Reason and
knowledge (the two ornaments of the humane nature) should be to them a curse.
He that neither knows nor does his Masters will, shall be beaten; because it
was possible for him to have known it: but with fewer stripes, because not
knowing it, there was no possibility left for him to do it. But he that knows
it, and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes, because the knowledge
of his will to punish sinners, and reward the righteous, did include a
possibility to avoid death, and to be made partaker of life. If otherwise,
there be no possibility left for him, that knows Gods displeasure against
sin, to avoid the ways of sin (those are death;) his case before and after
death, is much more miserable than his, whom God in just judgment, has
deprived of knowledge. And the Praeserver of men should be accounted much more
favorable to stocks and truncks, than unto many men upon whom he besto^es his
best gifts in great plenty; if these be bestowed upon the Conditions now
mentioned, or be charged with remediless misery.

4 But admitting their misery to be fatal and inevitable by divine decree; is
it not possible to acquit this decree, or the Author of it from being the
Author of evil? did the Stoic condemn all Judges of injustice that sentenced
malefactors unto violent death, whereto by their opinion, all that suffered it,
were inevitably destinated? Perhaps the fear of censure in public Courts,
did make them silent in this point: But was not this care to keep themselves
harmless, or fear not to offend Magistrates, altogether fatal? Galen ((...)
my remembrance) in his Stoicall discourse, quod mores animi sequuntur
temperamentum corporis, has framed this answer to the question proposed: We
do not offend in killing Snakes or Toades or other like venomous creatures;
albeit their natural temper or disposition be unaltrably harmefull unto men.
And if nature or temper of body make some of our own stamp and rank more
noisome than these creatures are, unto their neighbors; to fit the one sort
with the same measure of punishment, which is due unto the other, is no
injustice, no inequality. And In Dialogistam.
Lipsius, a man not too much abhorrent from any opinion, that was fashionable
to his new style, or might serve to set forth the point, which for the present
he much affected; gives this brief placet, in favor of the Stoics opinion:
(Fatali culpae fatalis paena,) punishment is fatal to fatal crimes. But this
is principium petere, to take that for granted which is questioned. For, if the
harms which malefactors do and suffer, be truly fatal; the one is no true
crime, the other is no just punishment. To Galen I answer, that if we could by
any skill in physic or complexions discern some men to be as naturally
disposed to mischief all that come in their way, or by chance offend them; as
are the Snake, the Sloworm, or other serpent, it would be the wisest way for
such as love their lives, to rid the world of these fatally mischievous
reasonable creatures, as fast as they met with them* or to appoint some
certain days for hunting them, as we do noisome beasts. But to examine their
suspicious intentions, to question their actions, to arraign their persons, or
put them upon a formal or legal trial of their life, would be as ridiculous,
as to produce witnesses against a Snake, to empannell a Jury upon a mad Dog, or
to take bale for a Wolfes appearance, before a Butcher, in an assembly of
Mastives.

5 The common notions of good and evil, and the ingraffed opinion of
contingency in humane actions, have taught the Lawgivers of every nation, to
put notorious malefactors unto more exquisite tortures, than we do harmfull
creatures; either to enforce them to utter, what no destiny nor complexion
makes them voluntarily confess, or else to deter others (that are as
naturally disposed to evil, as they were) from doing the like. Scarce any
malefactor (unless he be poisoned with this opinion of absolute necessity) but
will acknowledge that it was possible for him to have done otherwise the^ he
has done; possible for him to have avoided the doom, which is passed upon him
by man: which to have avoided had been absolutely impossible, if it were to be
awarded upon him by Gods eternal decree, or (which is all one) if in respect
of this decree, it had been necessary. As ignorance of the true God, and his
saving truth, makes the former error more excusable in the Stoics, than in
such Christians as shall maintain it: so might impotency exempt that God which
the Stoics worshipped, (whether Nature, Fate, or some other distinct
celestial power) from those imputatio^s, unto which omnipotency makes the God
of Christians liable, if all things were by virtue of his decree absolutely
necessary. It was a received opinion among many Heathens, that the gods
themselves were subject unto Fate, and for this reason, when any thing fell out
in their judgment amiss; Fates commonly did either entirely bear the blame, or
the greatest part of it. And their gods (indeed) had deserved pity rather than
blame, if they could do no better than they did, as being overmastered by
Fates. But for a Christian to inveigh against Fates, is to accuse or deny his
God. If Fates be nothing, he has no reason to complain of them: if any thing
they be, they are of the true Gods making, who made all things, who cannot
possibly be subject to any thing that he has made. Nor can it stand with our
allegiance to say when any disasters befall us, that our God could no otherwise
choose, that our mischances were the absolutely necessary effects of his
Omnipotent decree. One special cause of this error, and of some men's adherence
to it, is a jealousy or zealous needless fear, lest they should grant God to
be impotent, or not so omnipotent but that some things might take possession of
being without his leave or notice. The original of this fear, is, want of
distinction, between chance or casualty, and such contingency as has been
expressed.

6 Many reasons might be alleged sufficient to demonstrate the inevitable
absurdities of this supposed absolute necessity. But it is one labor to
convince an error before indifferent hearers; another to make men forsake the
errors which have long possessed them: a third to win them unto a liking of
the contrary truth. For effecting the two latter, no means can be so
effectual in respect of their disposition with whom we have to deal, as a
plain declaration, how ill this opinion of absolute necessity, how well this
doctrine of mixed possibility or contingency consorts: first with their own
resolution of other difficulties in this very argument whereof we treat:
secondly, with the perpetual voice of Gods Spirit, and his Messengers,
specially when they seek ex professo, to persuade to good, and to dissuade
from evil.

CHAP. 15.
The principal conclusions, which are held by the favorers of absolute
necessity, may be more clearly justified, and acquitted from all
inconveniences, by admitting a mixed possibility or contingency in humane
actions.
1 THe most I have met withal, are afraid in plain terms to maintain; That
God did as immediately and as necessarily decree Adams fall or state of sin,
as his original justice or state of integrity. For this were to make him as
true, as proper, and necessary a cause of sin, and of all evil, as he is of
goodness. To allay the harshnesse of some speeches, heretofore used, by those
men whom they favor, they will grant no more then this: that God did decree to
permit his fall. But the speech is improper and very ambiguous* and in what
sense soever it may be taken, it must plead its warrant or right use, from our
opinion; theirs can afford it none. Permission, to speak properly, is a
vertuall part of the Decree it self; not the object whereto the decree is
terminated. But to let this pass; we will take [Gods decree to per^it] to be
all one, as if they had said Gods permissive decree. Did God then by his
decree, permit Adam to sin? if he did, this decree was either just or unjust.
Whatsoever is by just decree permitted, is by the same decree sufficiently
warranted. At least the punishment, otherwise due unto it, is dispensed with.
Such divorces as were unlawful from the first institution of Matrimony in
Paradise, were permitted to the Israelites for the hardness of their hearts by
Moses, and for this reason, they were not punished by the judicial Law. If it
should please our Sovereign to permit sickly Students to eat flesh in Lent,
we would take his professed permission, for a sufficient dispensation with the
penal Statutes in this case provided. God questionless would never have
punished Adam for eating an Apple, if by his eternal decrece he had Quam lon^e
quaeso est a jubente ^ermittens? Qui en^m, (...) nos ista ^mala) perferre, et
prohibere potest ne perferamus, probat absque (...) ^ebe^^ ^^ferre, and
quaecunq^ pati^^ur. sustin^^e Salvi^n. lib. 8. in initio pa. 260.
permitted him to have eaten it. But their meaning happily is not, that God did
allow or approve his eating of it, seeing he threatened it with death. But if,
by his decree, he did not allow it, he did permit it only in such a sense, as
we may say the Laws of our land, permit men to be hanged because they keep
not men close prisoners, nor so tie their hands that they cannot steal, rob or
kill, before they be suspected or convicted of felony, robbery, or murder.
But* no tyrant did ever before hand forbid such a fact, under pain of death,
without a supposed natural possibility to avoid it. And just Laws afford
ordinary or civil means for satisfying nature in necessities, lest these (as
they know no l^w) enforce men to use their natural possibilities or faculties
amiss. The laws of this Land and others, which make theft matter of death,
permit men the free employment of bodily faculties, to earne their bread, or
(if they be impotent) to crave or accept the benevolence of others, lest they
should perish for hunger, or be enforced to steal. If our laws or Lawgivers,
not permitting any of these means or the like, should punish the taking of a
loaf of bread or cup of drink, with death; they might be more truly said to
enjoyne, then permit theft; to be more delighted with the blood of the needy,
than with preservation of public peace; albeit they did not set other men's
meat before the^, when they are hungered, nor lead their hands to take it. In
like manner, he that says, God did permit Adam to eat the forbidden fruit,
and by eating to incur death, does necessarily imply, that God permitted him
the free use of his external and internal faculties to satisfy his appetite,
with some other meat. Now the free use of any faculty includes the concourse
or cooperation of God, without which it is impossible any creature should move.
And this concourse was a part of his decree or will as it concerned this act.
More plainly: He that permitted Adam to sin, did more than permit him to
abstain from sin, or to persevere in obedience. If then God in permitting
him only to sin, did afford means necessary for reducing this possibility
of sinning into a sinful act not allowed; his more than permission of him to
abstain from sin, his commandment to persevere in obedience, did not only
suppose a true possibility for him to abstain and persevere, but include
withal better means for reducing this possibility into act, then were
afforded for enabling him actually to sin. These two contrary possibilities,
and the several means for accomplishing them, must bear a proportion
answerable to a mere permission without approbation, or to a prohibition, and
to a peremptory command of civil authority. Now every just Lawgiver affords
better means and encouragement for accomplishing his commands or requests,
then he does for breaking or neglecting them.

2* For conclusion, when they say God, by his aeternall deree, did permit Adams
fall, their meaning rightly expressed, is no more then this; God did not decree
that his perseverance should be necessary. For necessity of perseverance
excludes all possibility of falling. But if his fall had been necessary in
respect of the aeternall decree, it had not only been permitted, but allowed
and required. It remains then that both were possible, neither necessary in
respect of the divine decree. Or to untwist the knot a little further; God by
his decree did permit and allow him a possibility to fall; but he did not allow
the reduction of this possibility into act, that is, he gave it him, not to the
end that he should fall, but that his perseverance might be more beneficial. He
did not only permit or allow him a possibitie of perseverance, but did command
and require the reduction of this possibility into act.

3 This form of wholesome doctrine admitted, will clearly enlighten the truth
of another distinction or resolution much used, but mightily obscured, or
rather quite stifeled, by such as hold all things necessary in respect of the
aeternall decree. The distinction is: God is the cause of every action, but he
is not the cause of the obliquitie which accompanies sinful actions, nor of
sin as it is sin. This is their last Apology for avoiding that imputation
of making God the author of sin. Herein we both agree; The coexistence of
the all-working decree (or divine cooperation) is necessarily required to every
action or effect. Every action includes a motion, and in him we move, we
live, and have our being. But he that will grant this cooperation or actual
coexistence of the all-working decree to be the necessary cause of every
action, unto which it is most necessarily required; must, upon the same
terms, grant, God to be not the necessary only, but the only cause of all
and every obliquitie, of all and every sin, of all that has been, is, or
can be blameworthy in men or devils, from their creation to everlasting. The
demonstration of this inconvenience or absurdity, wherewith we charge the
adverse opinion (but no maintainer of it) must be referred unto the discussions
of the state of Innocence and the manner of sins entering into the world: we
are now engaged to extract a better meaning out of their other words, than they
themselves express, or can truly be contained in them, until they abandon
the opinion of absolute necessity in humane actions, as they have reference to
the aeternall decree.

Seeing it is agreed upon, that God and man are joint agents in every sinful
action, or in effects essentially evil (such questionless was man's desire to
be like God, or his lusting after the forbiden fruit:) The Problem remains,
why both should not be aequall sharers in the sin: or how it is possible
justly to condemn men of iniquity, without some imputation unto God, who is
the principal agent in all actions. Shall we be partial for him or seek to
excuse him by his greatness? Shall we say he cannot do amiss, because he
is supreme Lord over all, and may do with his creatures what he list? To
such as count the donative of robbers a true boon or real courtesy; to such
as can magnify their own integrity, whereof they give no proof, save only
as he did by negatives, (non hominem occidi,) I am no murderer. The Poet has
shaped an answer, as fit as pertinent, (non pasces in cruce corvos,) Thou
shall not feed Ravens upon a Gibbet. To say God is the Author of sin were
hideous blasphemy: yet to say he is no tempter, no seducer of mankind to
evil, is not to offer praise unto him. Let my spirit vanish with my breath,
and my immortal soul return to nothing, rather then suffer her self to be
overtaken with such a dead slumber, as can rest contented to set forth His
Glory by bare negatives, or by not being the Author of sin, who is most
highly to be praised in all his works, whose goodness is infinitely greater in
concurring to sinful actions, then the goodness of his best creatures in the
accomplishment of their most sincere intentions.

4 The truth of this conclusion is necessarily grounded upon these assertions
hereafter to be discussed: That man's possibility or hopes of attaining
everlasting happiness, was of necessity to be tempered with a possibility
of sinning, or falling into misery. To permit or allow man this possibility of
sinning, and to bestow upon him the contrary possibility of not sinning and
hope of happiness was one and the same branch of divine goodness. One and the
self same branch of Gods goodness it was, to allow this possibility of
sinning, and to afford his concourse for reducing of it into Act. For unless
he had decreed to afford his concourse thereto, it had been impossible for man
actually to have sinned. And if for man to sin had been made impossible by
Gods decree: it had been alike impossible for him to have done well or ill, or
to become truly happy. Briefly, God in that he decreed a mixture of contrary
possibilities, decreed withal a concourse or cooperation suitable unto, and
sufficient for the actual accomplishment of both. To the problem propounded,
the answer from these grounds, is easy: Albeit God and man be joint agents
in every action or effect essentially evil, yet the whole sin is wholly man's:
because the nature of sin consists either in man's using the possibility of
sin allowed of God for his good, to accomplish such acts, as God disallowes,
or in not using the contrary possibility unto such acts, as he not only
allows and approves, but requires and commands, such as he most
bountifully rewards, and unto whose accomplishment, he affords, not his
ordinary concourse only, but his special furtherance and assistance. In
every sin of commission, we approve and make choice of those acts which his
infinite goodness disalloweth. In every sin of omission, we do not approve
those acts, which he approves: although perhaps it may be questioned, whether
there can be any sin of pure omission, or not mixed with commission; that is,
any sin wherein we do not either like what God dislikes, or reject and
contemn what he likes and co^mends unto us for good.

5 From these resolutions we may find some truth in an usual position; which,
without this truth presupposed, is palpably false. Every action or effect, as
it is an effect or action, or as it proceeds from God, is good. The best
meaning whereof it is capable, must be this; Gods goodness is seen in every
action, even in those which are most sinful. To vouchsafe his cooperation to
them, is a branch of his goodness, because man could not be happy without a
possibility of deserving to be miserable. But humane actions or effects in
their own nature, indefinitely considered, or in the abstract as they are
actions, are neither morally good, nor morally bad. When it is said that every
action, as an action, is good, this must be understood of transcendentall
goodness only, of which kind of goodness moral evil or sin it self is partaker.
If every action, as it is an actio^ were morally good, it were impossible any
action should be morally evil. If we consider humane actions not indefinitely,
or with this reduplication, as they are actions, but descending unto
particulars, some are good, some are bad, and some (perhaps) positively
indifferent, but of this hereafter.

CHAP. 16.
The former contingency in humane actions or mutual possibility of obtaining
reward or incurring punishment, proved by the infallible rule of faith, and by
the tenor of Gods covenant with his people.
1 THough manifest deductio^s of ill sounding Consequences from their
positio^s, which we refute, and more commodious explanations of other tenants
common to both, may somewhat move the Favorers of universal necessity to a
dislike of their own opinions, and in part incline them to the opposite truth:
yet is it positive proof of Scriptures that must strike the maine stroke, and
fasten their assents unto it. And God forbid they should be so uncharitable,
as to think, that we or any sons of the true Church, would be unwilling to
put our selves upon this trial. Scripture we grant (and are ready upon as
high and hard terms as they, to maintain,) is the only infallible rule of
rectitude or obliquitie in opinions concerning God, or man's salvation. Yet are
we not hereby bound to reject reason, and infallible rule of Art, as
incompetent Judges, what propositions in Scripture are equipollent, which
opposite, which subordinate: or what collections from undoubted sacred Maxims,
are necessary or probable, or what conclusions are altogether false and
sophistical. Nor ought they to suspect reason in others to be unsanctified;
because it is accompanied with rules of profane sciences. For even these are
the gifts of God, and are sanctified in every Christian, by the rule of faith.
And in as much as both of us admit Scripture to be the only rule of faith in
it self most infallible: both of us are tied by infallible consequents of
truth from this rule derived, to admit of this Maxim following; Vid. Suffrag.
Britannorum in Council. Dordr. thesi 3. de Antecedaneis ad Conversionem. Vide
etiam D. Wardum Concione de Gratia discriminante page 5, 6, 7. editionis 2.
Gods threats and promises, his exhortations, admonitions, or protestations,
whether immediately made by himself or by his Prophets, contain in them
greater truth and syncerity then is in our admonitions, exhortations, and
promises. His truth and syncerity in all his ways are the rule or pattern,
which we are to imitate, but which we cannot hope to equalize.

2 Put the case then a religious, wise, and gracious Prince, should exhort a
young gentleman (that in rigor of Law had deserved death for some aemulous
quarrel in the Court) to behave himself better hereafter, and he should be
sure to find greater favor at his hands than any of his adversaries: no man
would suspect any determination in the Prince, to take away his life for this
offense, or any purpose to entrap him in some other. A minister of public
justice in our memory told a Butcher, (whom he then sentenced to death for
manslaughter,) that he might kill Calves, Oxen and Sheep, but mankind was no
butchery ware; he might not kill his honest neighbors. The solecisme was so
uncouth, and so ill beseeming the seat of gravity and of justice, that it moved
laughter (though in a case to be lamented) throughout the assembly; and a young
Student standing near the bar, advised the poor condemned man to entreat a
License to kill Calves and Sheep that Lent. The wisest of men may sometimes
err, sometimes place good words amiss, or give wholesome counsel (such as
this was, had it been uttered in due time and place) out of season. But to
spend good words of comfort and encouragement, upon such as thou have certainly
appointed to dye; to floute the children of destruction with fair promises of
preeminence; Genesis 18. 15*
That be far from thee O Lord. Shall not the Judge of all the earth do that
which is right and just: a thing welbeseeming the best and wisest Princes of
the earth to imitate? Was then the sentence of condenmation for Cains exile or
utter destruction without possibility of revocation, when thou entreatedst him
as a most loving Father; Genesis 4* 6, 7, 8.
Why art thou worth? and why is thy countenance fallen? If thou do well, shall
not thou be accepted? and if thou do not well, sin lies at the door:
and unto thee shall be his desire, and thou shall rule over him? Did that,
which the Text says, afterward came to pass, come to pass by inevitable
necessity? And Cain talked with Abel his brother: and it came to pass when
they were in the field, that Cain rose up against Abel his brother and slew
him. My adversaries (for I am not theirs) must be entreated to pardon me, if I
be as resolute and peremptory for my opinion hitherto delivered, as they are
for any other. For reason and conscience ruled by Scripture persuades me, it is
possible for the Judge of quick and dead to be unjust in his sentences, or
unsyncere in his encouragement, as that Cains destruction should be in respect
of his decree, altogether necessary or impossible to have been avoided. When
the Lord took first notice of his aemulation and envy at his younger brother;
God would not banish him from his brothers presence, nor so tie his hands that
he could not strike: But he used all the means that aequitie (in like case)
requires to move his heart, that way which it was very possible for it to be
moved. And unto this motion Cain had both Gods assistance and encouragement, as
ready as his general conc^urse to conceave anger in his heart, or to lift up
his hand against his brother.

3 The very tenor of Gods grand covenant with the sons of Abraham includes
this twofold possibility, one of attaining his extraordinary gracious favor
by doing well, another of incurring miserable calamities by doing ill. If ye
walk in my statutes, and keep my commandments, and do them; then will I
give you rain in due season, and the land shall yield her increase, and the
trees of the field shall yield their fruit. And your threshing shall reach to
the vintage, and the vintage shall reach unto the sowing time: and ye shall
eat your bread to the full, and dwell in your land safely etc. I am the Lord
your God, which brought you forth out of the Land of Egypt, that ye should
not be their bondmen, and I have broken the bands of your yoke, and made you
go upright. Levit. 26. ver. 3. ad 14. But if ye will not hearken unto me,
and will not do all these commandments; And if ye shall despise my statutes,
or if your soul abhor my judgments, so that ye will not do all my
commandments, but that ye break my covenant: I also will do this unto you, I
will even appoint over you terror, consumption and the burning ague, etc.
Levit. 26. ver. 14, 15, 16, etc.

This tenor or condition was to continue one and the same throughout all
generations. But some generations, as the event has proved, were de facto
partakers of the blessings promised; others have had their portion in the
curses. Shall we hence infer, that prosperity, was in respect of GODS
decree or good pleasure altogether necessary unto such as prospered, not so
much as possible unto those that perished, or that their calamity was
absolutely necessary? I would say rather, and I have Gods word, yea his hearty
wishes, for my warrant, that the most prosperous times, which any of Abraham's
or David's posterity enjoyed, did come far short of that measure of
prosperity, which by Gods aeternall decree, was possible to all, even to the
whole stock of Jacob throughout all their generations. O that my people had
hearkened unto me: and Israel had walked in my ways! I should soon have
subdued their enemies, and turned my hand against their adversaries. The haters
of the Lord should have submitted themselves unto him: but their time should
have endured for ever. Psalm. 81. verse 13, 14, 15. But in what estate? fed with
the finest of the wheat, and satified with honey out of the Rock. verse 16.
Were these mere wishes of wind which vanished with the avouchers breath? did
the Pslmist utter them out of tender affection to his people and country,
without commission from his Maker? or was He less affected toward his people
then this his messenger, that his message wants the weight of everlasting
truth? To these and the like demands, of many bad answers, this is the best and
most common: God would undoubtedly have made his promise good, and done as well
by Israel as here he wishes, if Israel could have turned to him or done
what he requires. But that, say the same men, was in repect of Gods decree or
secret will, impossible. Whence, seeing the condition neither was nor could be
performed by Israel, God was not bound to bestow these blessings upon them, but
free to reserve his store unto himself, or for some other people; which was
proffered (but upon conditions impossible to be performed) unto Israel. Might
not churlish Naball have promised abundance of bread, of wine and flesh to
David's servants, upon like terms? May not cutthroate Usurers assure bags of
Gold to bedridden or decrepit limbs, upon condition they will fetch them from
the top of high towers or sleep mountains? But what kindness, what
synceritie could there be in such lavish profers, specially if the impotent
wretches were by covenant excluded from al use of crutches? Yet is it more
possible for a creeple to go without his crutches, then for Israel to walk
in the ways of God, without his aid or assistance. Necessity therefore
constraines us to confess the one of these two, Either that there was no more
synceritie in the Almighties protestations, then in Nabals or the Usurers
supposed bounty, which they never meant to use, but upon performance of
impossibilities: Or else his promises, if they had any syncerity in them, did
include his furtherance and assistance unto Israel for performing the
condition required. Now unto whatsoever effect or event the furtherance or
special assistance of Omnipotent power is, upon the truth and synceritie of
divine promise, always ready and assured, the same effect cannot truly be
deemed impossible in respect of the aeternall decree. And whatsoever is not in
respect of this decree impossible, the non existence of it, or the existence of
the contrary effect, cannot, in respect of the same decree, be necessary. So
then neither was Isreal's well-doing and prosperity, nor their ill-doing and
calamity at any time absolutely necessary, in respect of Gods decree; both
were possible, both contingent.

4 The truth of these collections from Gods word (or rather of these infallible
consequences of his essential goodness, sincerity and truth) though
necessary and evident unto Artists, may from other positive authorities of the
same word be ratified a fortior to common sense. If Neither these good things
which God sincerely purposes and expressly promises, nor that evil which he
seriously and expressly threatens, be necessary in respect of his decree:
much less can that good which is neither particularly promised or avouched; or
that evil which is not expressly threatened or foretold by his infallible
messengers, be held necessary in respect of his decree. Now, that the
prosperity which he expressly promises by such messengers, is not so necessary,
as to exclude all possibility of contrary Evil; nor the evil which he
solemnly denounces so necessary, as not to leave a true possibility for a
contrary blessing: his Prophet has given such a general and evident
assurance, not to Israel only out to all the Nations of the earth; as we
cannot deny, but that it was devised of purpose, by the Lord himself, as a
post statute to prevent this strange misconstruction, which his people had then
made, and which he then foresaw would afterward be enforced upon his decrees
or laws, by this praejud^cate opinion of absolute necessity. At what instant
I shall speak concerning a nation, and concerning a kingdom, to pluck up and
to pull down, and to destroy it; if that nation against whom I have
pronounced, turn from their evil, I will repent of the evil that I thought
to do unto them. And at what instant I shall speak concerning a nation, and
concerning a kingdom to build and to plant it; If it do evil in my sight,
that it obey not my voice, then I will repent of the good wherewith I said I
would benefit them. Ier. 18. ver. 7, 8, 9, 10. And, if we may guess at the
nature of the disease, by the medicine, and the manner of applying it; the
house of Israel, was at this time almost desperately sick of this error
which we refute. Or what need we frame conjectures from the quality of the
medicine, when as the working of it has made the Crisis palpable and apparent.
The pestilence is best known by the botch, or outbursting. What then was the
issue of that Cordial which the Prophet ministered unto them, being but the
extraction of the former generals? Thus says the Lord; Behold, I frame evil
against you, and devise a device against you; return ye now every one from
his evil way, and make your ways and your doings good. We have seen the
application of the medicine, what was the operation? And they said, there is no
hope, but we will walk after our own devises, and we will every one do the
imagination of his evil heart. Ier. 18. ver. 11, 12. But did the Prophet take
their answer verbatim, as they uttered it? No, God did not appoint him to
keep a Register of their words, but to make a comment upon the secret language
of their hearts. They are sufficiently convicted to have said, we will every
one do the imagination of his evil heart, in that the imaginations of their
heart were evil, and they had resolved to retain their wonted principles, and
not to hearken unto the Prophets doctrine. The true and literal paraphrase of
their replye, no interpreter extant has so fully expressed, as the usual
language of some in our times briefly does; What shall be, will be: there is
no hope the world will amend: if it be Gods will to prosper the courses which
are taken, all will be well: if not, his will however must be done. Thus we
delude and put off our Maker with Ifs, and Ands: when as his will revealed,
as well for private as public good, so we would address our selves to do it,
is plain and absolute. And it is impossible we should address our selves to
do it, unless we would hearken (...) to such as teach it. To expect any
other fruit, or use of this doctrine of absolute necessity, then carnal
security in time of peace and prosperity, and than desperate wilfulness in
distress and adversity, were a madness. And seeing this frenzy did still
grow greater and greater, in the Jew, as the destruction of Jerusalem (whereof
it was both times the principal cause and most fearful prognostique) grew
nearer: the Lord authorized another Prophet (after Jeremy) to interpose his
oath for the cure of it. They thought that death and destruction, when they
approached, were armed with absolute necessity, (derived from Gods decree) to
punish them for their fathers sins: and in this conceit many yielded unto
them, when they might easily have conquered them. To discover the vanity of
this skale and to acquit his omnipotent decree from the suspected imposition of
necessity. As I live (says the Lord God) ye shall not have occasion any more
to use this Proverb in Israel: The Fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the
Childrens teeth are set on edge. Behold, all souls are mine, as the soul of
the father, so also the soul of the son is mine: the soul that sins, it
shall die. Ezekiel. 18. ver. 2, 3, 4. Have I any plasure at all that the wicked
should die, says the Lord God? And not that he should return from his ways
and live? ver. 23. Cast away from you all your transgressions, whereby ye have
transgressed, and make you a new heart, and a new spirit: for why will ye dye,
O house of Israel? For, I have no pleasure in the death of him that dies,
says the Lord God: wherefore turn your selves and live ye. verse. 31, 32. If
the returning of this people, wherein God took pleasure, were not necessary,
as the event has proved (for, the most part of them did not return) it must
needs argue a spice of their frenzy, to think their death, wherein he took no
pleasure, should be necessary. The only orthodoxall resolution of this point
then, must be this, [It was Gods good will and pleasure,] (the formal dictate,
and absolute injunction of his eternal and irresistible decree,) that neither
the life or death of such as perished should be necessary; but that both should
be possible: albeit the choice of life had been more pleasant to God, who had
complained with grief, Perditio tua ex te O Israel.

CHAP. 17.
That Gods will is always done, albeit many particulars which God wills, be
not done, and many done which he wills should not be done.
1 AVt erit aut non erit, is a Prophecy which will never be out of date,
impossible ever to be impeached of falsehood: an answer as universally true to
all, as unsufficient to any question concerning things to come. The truth of
every disjunctive proposition, as Logicians teach, is fully salved, if any one
member, though of never so many, be true. Or if the disjunction or division be
artificially formal, the actual existence of one part or member, excludes the
actual existence of the other: so does the absolute necessity of the one
exclude all possibility of the others reduction into act. If I should wage any
sum that it would either rain all day to morrow, or be fair all day to
morrow; no man of understanding would put me to prove, that it did both rain
all the day, and hold up all the day. The proof of either part, would be
sufficient to evince the truth of my disjunctive assertion; that both should be
actually true is impossible. Or if my adversary could substantially prove,
either any intermission of rain or interruption of fair weather: His
advantage against me would be as evident; because the proposition, which he
was to make good against me, was but disjunctive: so that of any two minutes in
the whole day, if the one were rainy, and the other fair, my universal
disjunctive must needs be false, and his apparently true, because directly
contradictory unto mine. That it should at one and the same time rain and not
rain, is impossible, and comes not within the compass of any contradictory
contestation, it can be no object of lay or wager.

2 When we say that God in many humane actions decrees a mixture or
multiplicity of possibilities; our meaning is, that the tenor of Gods eternal
and omnipotent word, from which all things derive as well the law and ma^^^^^
of their being; as their being it self: is in respect of the several possible
events decreed, not conjunctive or categoricall, but disjunctive. And we hold
it a sin to think or say, that the only wise Almighty Creator is not able
to conceive or make propositions as truly disjunctive, as any of our making
are, or not able to make as formal and contradictory opposition between their
several parts, as any humane wit can conceive. Thus much being granted, our
intended inference is an everlasting truth. Gods decree or determinate
proposition, concerning the supposed multiplicity of possibilities or manifold
events, all alike possible; is always exactly fulfilled, when any one of the
events, whose possibilities are decreed, goes actual existence. To reduce more
of them then one into act at one and the same time, is, in many cases
altogether impossible, and falls not within the object of Omnipotency. If the
reduction of any one of them, into actual possession of its own being, were
in respect of his decree, or by any other means, altogether necessary; his
decree should necessarily; be broken, and his omnipotency might be overborne.
For the necessity of ones being, takes away all possibility of being from the
contradictorie, which omnipotency (as is supposed) had bestowed upon it.
Finally, Gods decree in respect of all and every part of its proper object, is
alike Omnipotent: and therefore it is as impossible for any necessity (by
virtue or respect of what cause soever,) to incroach upon those events, the Law
or manner of whose production God has decreed to be contingent; as for
Contingency to hinder the production of those events, the law or manner of
whose production or existence, he has decreed to be necessary. As impossible
for necessity to mingle with absolute contingency, from which God has
separated it; as for contingencie to be wedded to absolute necessity, whose
marriage God has forbidden by an everlasting decree.

3 The only difficulty, Objection
wherewith these conclusions can (as I conceive) with probability be charged,
may be conceived thus: Admitting Gods decree concerning the house of Isreal's
life or death, were (as evidently it was) disjunctive, and did essentially
include a possibility of life, and a possibility of death, in respect of all or
most of their persons, or of their public state; Yet no man will deny but
that amongst the several or opposite members of this or the like decree, God
wills one, more than another. For so he says, That he willed not the death,
but the life of him that dyed. Now if that which God wills not, may come to
pass; and that which he wills may not come to pass; or if, of two possible
events, that whose actual being he wills ten thousand times more ardently,
never get actual being or existence (as being prevented by the actual
accomplishment of the contradictorie or incompatible event which he less
wills,) How can his will, in this case be fulfilled? and if his will be not
fulfilled, his decree must needs be broken; and if his decree may be broken,
how is his will said to be irresistible? how do we believe him to be
Omnipotent? Some perhaps would hence conclude, that if of two objects, which we
suppose to be alike truly possible, there be no necessity, that that should
come to pass, which GOD wills most, or any probability for that to come to
pass, which he less wills, or wills not at all, but rather the contrary:
Then there is a possibility or rather a necessity, that his will should not
be always fulfilled, that he might sometimes sit down with a kind of loss,
and say with impotent man, Answer.
I have failed of my purpose. The best preparation for fit and peaceable
entertainment of the Orthodoxall solution to these difficulties, will be to
declare the evident and necessary truth of that assertion, which they object
unto us, as a dangerous inconvenience able in their judgment to infer the last
conclusion.

Truth fully and evidently declared will justify it self against all
gainsaiers. The assertion which we grant will necessarily follow from our
former discursions, and comes now to justify it self is this; That such
things as God no way wills, ofttimes come to pass, when as their
contradictories, which he wills most ardently, come not to pass.] The
principal instance for justifying this truth, is the repentance and life of a
sinner, which God has sworn that he wills; so does he not his death, if we
will believe his oath. If any man's verdict shall scatter from mine, or others,
which maintain this doctrine, I must call God and his conscience to witness,
whether he has not left that undone, which God would have had him to do, and
sometimes done, that which God would have had him not to do? Let him that will
answer negatively to this Interrogative, indite that confession which we daily
make in our Liturgy of falsehood or slander. Let him call for Jacobs Ladder
down from heaven, and require a guard of Angels to conduct him safely into
Gods presence. For if he have as truly and continually done Gods will here on
Earth, as the Angels do it in heaven; he may justly challenge speedy
admission into their society. But if he can with safe conscience communicate
with us sinful men, in that confession; his exceptions against our assertion
are but needless scrupulosities, altogether against reason? whatsoever they
be in respect of his conscience, yet to his exceptions we are to frame a
further answer.

4 There is an absolute necessity, that Gods will should always be fulfilled:
but there is no such necessity, that it should always be fulfilled by the
parties to whom it is revealed or directed. They are tied indeed by necessity
of praecept, and at their peril, always to do it; but the Almighty God,
does not refer the fulfilling or evacuation of it, to their fidelity, choice
or resolution: for so the certainty or infallibility of executing his decree,
should be but commensurable to the fragility of our Nature; and that which
some object unto us would fall directly upon themselves, to wit, That Gods will
should depend upon man's will. As he always grants the requests of the
faithful, or, as the Psalmist speaks, gives such as delight in him, their
hearts desire, albeit he always gives them not the particulars or materials
which they request or heartily desire: so he knows how to fulfill his own will,
or do his pleasure, albeit those particulars or materials, which he ardently
wills and takes most pleasure in, be not always done by us. And this answer
might suffice unto a Reader not scrupulously curious. But sophistical and
captious objections require artificial and formal solutions. The former
objection may perhaps be framed more captiously thus. Of more particulars
proposed to the choice of men, if that be not always done, which God wills
most, his will is not done at all. For as a lesser good whilst it stands in
competition with a greater, is rather evil than good: so, that which is less
willed or desired, cannot be said to be willed or desired at all, in respect
of that which is more desired, specially in the language of Gods Spirit, which
expressly says, that God will have mercy, and not sacrifice. Whence it will
follow, that when sacrifice was offered, without performance of duties of
mercy, or obedience; Gods will was not done, but broken. It is Gods will
likewise, that we should go unto the house of mourning, rather then unto the
house of mirth. The duties to be performed in the house of mourning are many:
To mourn, to fast, to pray, with other branches of humiliation; all which God
truly wills, in different measure according to the diversity of their nature,
or the more or less intensive manner of their performance. The transgressions
likewise usual and frequent in the house of unhallowed mirth, are many and
much different as well in quality as degree; all detested of God as contrary to
his most holy will, but more or less detested according to their nature,
quality or degree, or other circumstance. Suppose a man, to whom choice of
going into the house of mirth or mourning is solemnly proposed; the
inconveniences of the one, and gracious acceptance of the other in Gods fight,
seriously pressed by Gods Minister; do utterly reject the Preachers counsel, and
adventure upon the most desperate evil that is practiced in the house of
mirth: shall we say Gods will is in this case fulfilled? Yes, though the evils
which he wills not, were ten thousand, and man did desperately resolve to
do the very worst and most contrary to his will; yet that which he wills
most, shall still be done: for it is his absolute and peremptory will, that all
the particulars offered to man's choice, as well those which his Holiness most
abhors, as those which he wills most, should be truly possible for a man
to choose without impediment, that none should be necessary. Now this liberty
being left to man which way soever his will inclines, Gods will shall be most
infallibly fulfilled, in the self same measure, as if the very best had been
chosen by man; seeing it is his absolute will to grant him freedom (at his
peril) to choose the very worst and refuse the best. And the peril is, that
Gods will shall be done upon him according to the measure it was neglected by
him. As this proposition [The Sun will either shine or not shine this day at
twelve of the clocke] will be as true if the Sun shine not, as if it shine:
so Gods will being (as is supposed in this case) disjunctive, shall be as
truly fulfilled, albeit man does that which he wills not, as if he did that
which he willed most. For his will (as was now said) may (according to the same
measure) be fulfilled two ways, either by us, or upon us; whether it be this
way or that way fulfilled, it is all one to God, but much better for us to do
it, then to have it done upon us. And though it be possible for us not to do
it, yet not doing it there is no possibility left, that it shall not be done
upon us. In as much then as Gods will must of necessity be done, and no man can
do it by doing evil, (seeing it is set only on that which is truly good;)
the punishment of such as continue to do evil, is absolutely necessary, that
is altogether as unavoydable, as if they had been appointed to it from all
eternities, or created to no other end, then that they might be punished. For
the punishment of evil is good, and is for this reason a part of Gods will, or
rather a part of the object of his irresistible will or inviolable decree; yet
may we not say that God Et vere clamor and grandis clamor est, quando pietas
Dei, peccatorum clamoribus vincitur, ut peccantes punire cogatur. Ostendit ergo
Dominus, quam invitus puniat etiam gravissimos peccatores, dicens, quod clamor
Sedomorum ad se ascenderit. hoc est dicere: Miseritordia quidem mea mihi suadet
ut parcam, sed tamen peccatorum clamor cogit ut puniam. Salvianus lib. 1.
simply wills evil, or delights in punitive justice, which he never
wills, but upon supposall of evil deserts in the Creature. As for the evil
it self, which deserves punishment, that, God is not said (in true Divinity)
to will at all, either voluntate signi, or beneplaciti, either by his secret or
revealed, or by his antecedent or consequent will. For nothing is evil, but
that which swarveth from, or is contrary to the rule of goodness, and other
rule of goodness there is none, besides Gods goodness; nor does he will any
thing that is not consonant to his goodness; so is not any thing that is truly
evil. They which otherwise teach, that God in any sort can will that which is
morally evil, have mightily forgot the rules of Logic: For if nothing be
evil, but that which God would not have done, then nothing which God would
have done, can be evil.

CHAP. 18.
Of the distinction of Gods will into Antecedent and Consequent. Of the
explication and use of it.
1 GOds will being, as all confess, indivisible, some there be which hold all
distinctions concerning it, no less unfitting, then the division of Christ's
seamlesse coat. Others mislike that distinction of his antecedent and
consequent will, and yet are content to distinguish his will into revealed and
secret, or into voluntatem signi and beneplaciti. The use notwithstanding of
the first distinction [of his antecedent and consequent will] is most ancient;
warranted by the authority of Chrysostom, and well exemplified by Damascene.
And of this distinction I have made choice in other meditations, as most
commodious (to my apprehension) for resolving many problemes arising out of
Prophetical and Evangelical passages, concerning the fulfilling of Gods will
in his threats or promises. The ingenuous Reader will not be so uncharitable
or injurious toward Chrysostom or Damascene, as to suspect, that either of
them imagined two wills in God; unto which imputation, they are more justly
liable, which affect the distinction of Gods secret and revealed will, or of
voluntatis signi and beneplaciti. For every distinction of Gods will, must be
framed ex part volitorum, non ex part volentis, in respect of the things
willed, not in respect of him that wills them. We must in charity and good
manners permit Chrysostom and Damascene that liberty of speech which we take
our selves. Now it is usual with all of us, to attribute that verbo tenus unto
the cause, which really and properly belongs only unto the effect, or to
denominate the intellectual faculty from the quality of the object to which it
has reference; as when we say the Sun is hot, the understanding is
practique, etc. The meaning of those two good Authors, whom we follow in the
use of the distinction of Gods antecedent or consequent will, was this, or the
like: That God by one and the same indivisible will, might differently affect
or approve diverse objects, according to the nature quality or degrees of
goodness contained in them. And certain it is, that the immensity or greatness
of our God, does not make his power or will to be unweildy. Though he be in
power truly infinite, yet he always works not according to the infinity of
his power, but oft-times more gently and placidly, then the weakest or softest
spirited of his reasonable creatures can do. Though his will likewise be
always irresistible, yet is it not always so peremptorily set on this or that
particular object willed by him, as man's will, for the most part, is. The
variety of particular objects which he truly wills in different measure, is
much greater than the wit of man can comprehend So is the liberty or variety of
choice, which he allows unto his creature, much greater then we can without
grudging, afford to such as have dependence on us. Some things he wills in
the first place and directly; though not so peremptorily, but that things less
willed by him, or contrary evils, which he wills not, may get the start or
take place of them in humane choice. Other things he wills in the second
place, or by consequence, as in case, that which in the first place he willed,
be (by abuse of man's free will) rejected. The former he is said to will by his
antecedent will, because the object willed by him, has antecedence or
preeminence in respect of his beneplacitum or acceptance: the latter he is said
to will by his consequent will, that is not in the first place or directly, but
by consequent, as supposing those objects, which he better approved, to be
neglected. Whatsoever is good in it self, and good withal for a reasonable
creature to make choice of, that, God is said to will by his antecedent will,
as the repentance of a sinner, and the joyful fruits which the sinner shall
reap by his penitencie. Whatsoever in it self is not evil, or contrary to
the rule of goodness, but evil to the reasonable creature, which must suffer
it, as sickness, death, all kind of torture or calamity, that God wills
only by his consequent will. We may not deny but that he truly wills the
death of obstinate sinners, yet this he wills by his consequent will. Their
obstinacy in sin he wills not at all, for if he did, he would not punish
it: for punishment is the necessary consequent of his will neglected. Both
these branches of one and the same will (which from the reference only which
they have unto their different objects, we conceive to be two or diverse) are
subordinate to his absolute and peremptory will, which is, that man should
have a liberty of doing, and not doing those things which in the first place
he willed or liked better. But is not this liberty of man an imperfection?

2 An issue though a blemish to youth and livelihood, is ofttimes a good mean
or principal cause of health to an unsound and crasie body. So possibility of
declining to evil, albeit in it self an imperfection, and not possibly
incident to aeternall and immutable goodness, is no way contrary to the
participated actual goodness of the reasonable creature; whereof it is an
essential or constitutive part, at the least a necessary ingredient or
condition precedent to the constitution of it. And imperfection with reference
to this end, may be the object of Gods antecedent will, or part of that which
in the first place he wills and principally intends. But inasmuch as actual
evil is formally dissonant to actual goodness; he which is actually and
infinitely good, cannot but hate or dislik actual evil in whomsoever it is
found, as much as he loves the contrary good. Now punishment or malum poenae,
being as necessary a consequent of Gods hate or dislike of sin, as reward or
happiness is of his love to virtue and piety: the reasonable creature by
declining from virtue to vice, from good to bad, does ipso facto and inevitably
bring evil [malum poenae and damni] tribulation and anguish upon it self. By
reward and punishment in this place, we understand not only life and death
everlasting (of whose reference to Gods aeternall decree, we shall in
particular dispute hereafter, if Superiors shall so think fit:) but every
temporal blessing or cross, all prosperity or calamity, specially public
and remarkable. Prosperity we always take to be a pledge of Gods love (though
not always of the Person, on whom it is bestowed, yet of some good quality in
him or in some of his, serving for public use or private imitation;) and is
always (in the beginning at least) an effect of Gods antecedent will.
Calamity we take always for a token of Gods dislike, though not always of
the person afflicted, yet either of somewhat in him to be amended, or of
somewhat formerly done by him, to be by others avoided; and is an effect of
Gods consequent will. For he wills no evil at all, not malum poenae, but as it
is either a punishment or correction for evil done, or good neglected, or as
it is a medecin to prevent the doing of evil, or neglect of goodness.

3 From the infinite variety of possibilities authorized by the aeternall
decree, and their correspondent consequences, which one time or other actually
follow upon their reductions into Act, by the irresistible award of the same
decree; we may resolve many difficulties, and abandon sundry inconveniences,
wherewith the Heathen in their vain speculations, and many Christians in more
grievous temptations, charge, either the truth or goodness of Gods Providence.
The variety of such possibilities, amounts, partly from the specificall nature
of the objects, made possible by the divine decree: partly from the several
degrees of good or evil contained in such objects, or in men's actions
concerning them. The whole latitude (if I may so speak) of Gods providence, as
it concerns kingdoms, states or persons, consists in moderating and ordering
the possible devolutions or alternations of the reasonable creature from his
antecedent will to his consequent. The alternations or devolutions themselves,
may be numberless, save only to God; so may the degrees be of man's
dissonancie or consonancie to Gods antecedent will, throughout the course of
his life.

CHAP. 19.
Of the diverse acceptions or importances of Fate, especially among the Heathen
writers.
1 THE very name of Fate, will be I know, to many very offensive, unto whom I
am unwilling to give the least offense. The use of it (I must confess) is in
some cases prohibited by St. Austin, a man too modest, to usurp greater
authority then he had; and oecumenicall authority in this point he had none,
or none so great as might impose silence upon all posterity. Would to God such
as are most forward to press us with this Reverend fathers interlocutorie
sentence once or twice perhaps uttered for not using the name; could be
persuaded to stand to his definitive sentence often pronounced against the
nature of the Error, which the Heathens, against whom he disputes, covered
under this name. Upon condition they would be pleased not to revive the nature
of the error, or bury their opinions that way tending; my heart and mouth
should never give breath unto the name. The opinion which some rigid Stoics
had of Fate, is an haeresie not to be named among the Heathen; so deeply
tainted with the very dregs of heathenisme, that it is a wonder any Christian
writer should come near it; that any at least should take infection from it:
especially seeing the Reverend and learned Fathers of the primitive church, had
provided so many excellent preservatives against it. But albeit Fate, according
to that sense or meaning, where in some heathens took it, was become a wicked
Idol: yet seeing the word or name, whether in the ordinary use of Greek or
Latin writers, has greater variety of significations or importances, then
almost any other word in the world besides* to abandon all, for one ill sense,
or importance, seems to me as rude and uncivil a part, as to root out a
whole clan or surname, because one of the same name and stock had been at
deadly sohood with our family or had otherwise deserved death. Upon diligent
perusal of the best Philosophers, historians or Poets amongst the Heathens, of
some historians and Moralists of best note amongst Christians; we may find
realities, or solid matter answering to this word Fate, which cannot be so
well expressed by any other term or name, by any paraphrase more brief than
the true and proper definition of the matter or reality signified by it. Now if
the matter defined, prove to be no Idol; the name certainly is indifferent,
and of the definition there may be a good moral or historical use. For
finding out the true and proper definition or description of it, we are to
explicate the diverse acceptions or importances of the name.

2 Fatum a fando dictum, and sometimes imports no more then the dictate of
nature, or the certain course appointed to things natural. Thus natural
death, is by some accounted fatal. And Dido according to this importance, did
not die by Fate, because she prevented Lachesis by cutting the thread of her
own life, before this great Arbitresse of mortality had passed sentence upon
her;

Virgil. 4. Aeneid. vid. Rodiginum lib. 21. cap. 4* page 972.
Sed quia nec fato, merita nec morte peribat. And according to this importance
it is used by the Prince of Roman Historians in the sixth book of his Annals;
Per idem tempus Lucius Piso Pontifex (rarum in tanta claritudine) fato obijt.
About the same time L. Piso High Priest died a natural death (being 80. years
of age;) a matter rare in those times, in a man of so great birth and place.
Sometimes again Death it self, howsoever it come upon men, is termed Fate or
Destiny; perhaps because the coming of it is by course of nature certain,
albeit the time and manner of it, be unknown or incomprehensible. So another
Roman Poet says, The parthians poisoned arrows carried Fates upon their
points, able to let in Death at the least breach of skin, Fatumque in sanguine
summo est. It may be Virgil held natural death to be fatal, because it cannot
be avoided, being otherwise of our opinion, that Dido might have lived longer,
or that it was not absolutely necessary from the hour of her birth, that she
should live so many years and no See Cha. 23.. 2.
more. For so some of the wisest amongst the Heathens held death to be fatal,
that is, simply necessary unto all; albeit to dye at this or that set hour,
were in their opinion contingent, or at least supposed a Contingency before it
became necessary. Of this opinion was That Death it self is fatal, Pythagoras
supposes in those verses; Iura colas non ore tenus; sed rebus and ipsis:
Nec pravis mentem suescas rationibus uti:
Sed mortem fato subituros noveris omnes:
Divitias quandoque dari; quandoque perire.
That disasterous or untimely death was not fatal but preventable, he
supposes in the verses following, for he calls all Calamities Divina
Infortunia. See Hierocles upon both places. See his Annotations upon the
latter. Chap. 21. of this Book. Parag. 2.


Pythagoras and his followers. And so it seems was Quaest. 32. Si Deus
mortalem naturam nostram fecit, cur Deum mortem non fecisse dicis? Explicatio.
Non si quid est mortale natura, id omnino mori necesse est. Argument sunt
Enoch and Elias, qui cum natura mortales sint, in immortalitate etiam manent
superiores excelsioresque effecti quam ad quos elogium illud pertineat, Terra
es, and in terram reverteris. Verum est igitur, naturam nostram a Deo factam
esse mortalem, mortemque invectam esse in mundum hominis inobedientia. Si enim
Deus ut naturam fecit mortalem, sic etiam mortem fecisset, non inobedientia
mortem induxisset: ac si Deus inobedientiam non fecit, ne mortem quidem fecit.
Iustine Martyr. But Lucan, we know, was somewhat allied unto the Stoics, and
out of his private conceit that the set time or manner of every man's death, was
no less necessary then death it self, he might, not inconsequently term
violent or sudden death, Fatal. And Tacitus, who seems to be doubtful,
whether all things fell out by Fate or Necessity or no, ascribes violent and
undeserved death, as well as natural, unto Fate. For, speaking of Agricola his
untimely death, (as we would term it) he says, Constans and libens fatum
accepit: He constantly and willingly entertained his Fate. Martials conceit
concerning Death and Fates, is not much different from Lucans, or this last
cited place of Tacitus, though not altogether the same.

Nullo fata loco possis excludere: cum mors
Venerit, in medio Tybure Sardinia est.
From Fates no place is priviledg'd:
but when Death is their doom,
The pestilent Sardinia,
in Tyber finds room.
And as Death, in his opinion, could not be repelled where Fates had granted
his admission; so neither could it be obtruded, or admitted, without the leave
or approbation of Fates, if the authority of the Father of Poets be authentic.

Homer. Iliad. 2. non procul a fine.
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...).
Vex not thy soul, for none can send
me to my grave, before,
My day be come, since all men's lives
run on a fatal score
Which none may pass, none not make up;
it is not man's power or will
Can change the period which is set
as well to the good, as the will.
Virgil was somewhat of a better mind in this point than Homer was, or they
are, which can thus liberally dispose of their friends bodies or bones.

Similis si cura fuisset, Virgil. Aeneid. lib. 8.

Tum quoque fas nobis Teucros armare fuisset.
Nec pater omnipotens Troiam, nec fata vetabant
Stare, decemque alios Priamum superesse per annos.
Had like care been, nor mighty love,
nor Fates did fore-ordaine
Or Troy to fall, or Priamus
not ten years more to reign.
3 That no man can dye before his Day come, is an opinion in whose truth some
are so confident, as they will not stick to bequeath the bones of their dearest
friends unto the devil, if they should dye otherwise. And it is certain, all
things have their appointed time, yet may we not hence collect that no man can
live longer or dye sooner than he does, or that the number of his days cannot
possibly be diminished or increased: But of this argument see Quaestio. 33. Si
hominum natura ut mortalis, proprium ac suum finem agnoscit, tempus autem
unuscujusque non est certi cujusdam termini; quod quidem fotum vocant ij qui a
religione nostra abhorrent: quomodo Ezechiae addita sunt tempora? Quod enim
additum est, in praefinito determinatoque numero certe sumitur. Vnde igitur in
merientibus incertum interminatumque tempus docetur? Explicatio. Non esse
uniuscujusque tempus certum ac definitum, (...) divi^^ scripturae verbis
docetur, Si in campo invenerit homo puellam desponsatam, eique vi^llata
dormierit: vitum quidem interficite, puellam autem ne interficite. Mores e^^m
corrupit homo proximi sui, eumque puls^ns non crat qui juvaret, atque ita
haecres (...). Et puella clamavit, nec suit qui ei auxilium ^^^ret. Non autem
divina scriptura violatum therum coactae morti comparasset, simor^ certa
desinitaque fuisset. Quod enim apud Deum definitum est, id nec viola^i, nec
transiri potest. Quod si ita est, profecto definitae Ezechiae vitae tempora
vitae non sunt addita, sed annis ejus qui indefinite occupaverant, quorum sinis
morbo lethali eveniebat, nisi Deus morbam ejus curasset, eumque ad vitam
revocavisset. Justin. Martyr. explicat. page 29.
Justin Martyr, or the Author of the questions and explications, which have for
a long time gone under his name. In all these or the like acceptions of Fate,
and the very common conceit which this name suggests, there is an importance
of necessity. And according to the several degrees of necessity, Fates good
or bad (for so they divided them for their quality) were subdivided into
(majora and minora) into lesser and greater fates. (Fata minora) lesser fates,
were held alterable by enchantment or other curious practices, taught by
Satan, as imitations of those sacred rites or solemnities, which God had
ordained for averting imminent plagues. (Fata majora) chief or supreme fates
were so unalterable, so inflexible, that their great god Jupiter could not
command them, but was to do whatsoever was designed by them (...) done. Whence
as Lactantius wittily (...) they could not rightly enstyle him Maxi^^^ because
he was less then this kind of Fate^^ in this heathenish division
notwithstanding, there was a true glimpse of a Christian truth, hereafter (...)
^^sewere to be discussed. Subordinate to this division of Fates, were the
opinions of the Caldean and Egyptian Astrologers concerning the power or
efficacy of the heavens, over sublunary bodies. The Vide Bellantium.
Caldeans were impious not in practice only but in opinion, in that they held
the operation of the heavens to be unalterable and unpreventable by the wit,
industry or skill of man: all which such as follow Ptolomie the Egyptian,
expressly deny, and bring good reasons for their denial. If their practices
to foretell things to come, be no worse than their opinions concerning the
manner how they come to pass; it would be no great sin to be their
Scholars.

4 There is no Christian but will grant his God to be greater then Heathenish
Fate, and his Law to be above all control of any other Law or power
whatsoever. And yet by the doctrine of many Divines, the Almighty Lawgiver is
made aeternally subject to his own decrees. Their meaning is taken by many to
be in effect this: That albeit God be Omnipotent, yet it is true of him,

Post semel emissum volat irrevocabile verbum. That he had past his Omnipotent
word, concerning the ordering and managing of all things to come, before it
could be taken or accepted by any creature: and that by his word thus past once
for all for ever, such irrevocable doom had passed upon some of his best
creatures before their nonage, (in their non existence;) as they would not have
accepted life or being it self, when they first entered upon possession of it,
if they had known upon what hard conditions it had been tendered. Or, were it
yet left free for them to disclaim those covenants or conditions of life and
being, whereunto they never gave their consent; The greatest part of divine
goodness which they could hope to be partakers of, were to be released from
the right of creatures, and to return again to nothing. Briefly, by making
God supreme Lord of such hard weirds or sinister Fates, as are by these men
inevitably awarded to absolute reprobates; they do not add so much unto his
greatness, as they derogate from his goodness, in respect of the heathen
gods. For, unto such of the heathens, as granted Fates a negative voice in some
cases against the good purposes of their gods; it was some comfort to think,
that their gods wished them well, and did entreat them, as great personages or
courteous gentlemen do their suitors, whom for the present they cannot pleasure,
as being overborn by the opposite faction. But alas, what can it boot poor
impotent man, to believe his Maker was not from aeternitie subject to Fates, or
any other law; if by his own Laws, or decrees, he has bound them before the
world had beginning, (without all hope or possibility of release) to harder
conditions of Life, then the heathens imagined could be enjoined by Fates. For
it is probable, that such of the heathen as were most peremptory for the
absolute necessity of fatal events, did think bad Fates had spit their
poison, when this life was ended. They did not suspect the miseries inflicted
by them, to be for time so everlasting, or for their quality so unsufferable,
as we Christians believe the torments of the life to come shall be to all
that are ordained for the day of wrath. But be the torments for their quality
more exquisite than the Heathens could conceive any; was it absolutely
necessary for the Almighty from aeternitie to appoint them? If so it were,
there was a fatal necessity praecedent to the Almighty decree. But if his
decree has brought this absolute necessity upon men; the execution of this
decree by isntrumental or second causes, differs nothing save only in excess
of rigor and severitie, from the most rigid stoicall Fate.

CHAP. 20.
Of the affinity or alliance which Fates had to necessity, to Fortune or
chance in the opinion of Heathen writers.
BUT that we may find out, which we most desire, some mittigation or
tolerable reconciliation of the most harsh opinions, whether maintained by
heathens or Christians in this argument: it is a common notion received by all,
that every fatal event is necessary; but very few of the heathen, were of
opinion, that all necessary events were fatal. Albeit by way of such a
Poetical license in substituting the special for the general, as he used
that said, Hunc ego si potui tantum sperare dolorem.

Fate is sometimes taken for necessity without restriction. It was not usual
with ancient Heathens, nor is it with such as to this day use to ascribe many
events to Fates, to term the rising, or setting of the Sun, the ebbing and
flowing of the Sea, or other like effects of hourly observation (necessary by
the common course of nature) fatal. In the literal construction of many good
Writers, Fate and Fortune, are, if not Synonimall in their formal, At vos, O
superi, and divum tu maxim rector
Iuppiter, Arcadij quaeso miserescite regis:
^t patrias audite preces, si n^mina vestra
Incolumem Pallanta mihi, si fata reservant:
Si visurus eam vivo, and venturus in unum,
Vitam oro: patior quemvis durare laborem.
Sin alique^ infandu^ casum Fortuna minaris,
Nunc, o nunc, liceat crudelem abrumpere vita^.
Virgil. Aeneid. lib. 8.

prime, or direct significations, yet coincident in their importances or
connotations. Their titles, to the self same events or effects, were ofttimes
undistinguishable, by such as ascribe too much to the one or to the other.
Ausonius, but for verse sake, might as well have said, Dum vult fortuna, as,

Dum fata volunt, bina venena juvant.
When such success the fates shall will,
One poison shall another kill.
Or Iuvenal as well, Si fata velint, as,
Si fortuna volet, fies de Rhetore consul:
Si volet haec eadem, fies de consule Rhetor.
Of Rhetorician whom she will,
Dame Fortune Consul makes:
And when she will, to meaner state,
her Favorite down she takes.
Others held Fortune to be a branch of Fate, or an instrument for executing
what was by Fates designed.

Quid referam Cannas? admotaque moenibus arma?
Varronemque pigrum, magnum quod vivere posset
Postque tuos Thrasimnene lacus? Fabiumque morantem
Accepisse jugum victas Carthaginis arces?
Spectatum Hannibalem nostris cecidisse catenis?
Exiliumque Rogi furtiva morte duisse?
Add etiam Italicas vires, Romamque suismet
Pugnantem membris, adjice and civilia bella:
Et Cimbrum in Mario, Mariumque in carcere victum:
Quod consul totiens exulque ex exule consul:
Et jacuit Libicis compar jactura ruinis
Atque crepidinibus cepit Carthaginis orbem: Manil lib. 4 cap. 4.

Hoc nisi fata darent, nunquam fortuna tulisset.
The resultance of this long Oration, is no more than this: Fortune was but the
messenger to bring all those welcome, or unwelcome presents to the Roman
State, which Fate did bestow upon it. Of this argument see more in the 27.
Chapter of this Book, parag. 2, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.

2 In Tacitus his language Fate and Fortune have sometimes the same reference
or importance. Occulta lege fati, and ostentis ac responsis destinatum
Vespasiano liberisque ejus imperium post fortunam credidimus: After his good
fortune we surely believed, that the Empire was by the secret course of fate,
by signs and Oracles destinated to Vespasian and his son. Tacit. 1. histor.
cap. 10. Yet is not this difference betwixt Fate and Fortune constantly
observed by these two Writers themselves, much less observed at all by others:
with Cominaeus, Machiavel, and other later Historians or Politicians, Fortune
and Fate, are used promiscuously. The properties or attributes of Fate, are, in
ordinary construction the same, or equivalent to those of Fortune. The titles
of Fate were anciently these, or the like, unavoydable, insuperable,
inflexible, ineluctable. And it is a conceit or prenotion, that to this day
runs in many Christians minds, that nothing can be against a chance: Where
Fortune fails, nothing prevails. This difference notwithstanding betwixt
them, might be observed in many Writers (or in their language, which have
cause, in their own apprehensions to like well or complain of them.) That the
ordinary success of others labors or consultations, are for the most part
ascribed by envy or aemulation unto Fortune: whereas Fates are usually charged
with the calamities or disasters, which befall themselves or such as rely upon
their counsels. Most men are by nature prone to excuse themselves in their
worst actions, si non a toto, yet a tanto, by accusing Fortune; and can be well
content to exonerate their galled consciences, of inward grief, by venting
bitter complaints, or receiving plausible informations from others, against
Fates. Attonitis etiam victoribus, qui vocem precesque adhibere non ausi,
lacrymis ac silentio veniam poscebant, donec Cerealis mulceret animos, fato
acta dictitans, quae militum ducumque discordia, vel fraud hostium evenissent.
Tacitus lib. 4. Histor. number. 72. Even the Conquerors were astonished at the
sight, who not daring to speak, begged their pardon with silence and tears,
till such time as Cerealis with comfortable words revived their spirits;
affirming that those things, which indeed came to pass through the
mutinousnesse of the soldiers, or the dissension of the Leaders, or the malice
of the Enemies, were but fatal mischances which could not be escaped.

3 Some again derive Fate and Fortune from one and the same fountain, and
distinguish them only by excess of strength, as the same stream in Winter
differs from it self in drouth of Summer. Caelius Rodigin. lection, antiq.
lib. 10. c. 20.
Advertendum vero illud, quandocunque illa coelestium causarum ratio ita
digeritur, ut artem exculcatam exsuperet, dici a platonicis fatum: ubi vero
sic, ut vincere inertem desidiosumque evaleat rursum a solerti strenuoque
vinci, Fortunam. Vtrobique vero divinam statuunt providentiam, quae ad finem
agat sibi soli notum quae universa modis contemperet occultioribus. Lection.
Antiquar. lib. 10. cap. 20 The Platonicks, which derive most humane events or
success from the order or disposition of celestial causes, call this
disposition, Fate; when it is so strong, that no endeavors or skill of man can
prevail against it: but when the strength of it is of such a middle size, as
may prevail against sloathfull and careless men, but may be vanquished by
the vigilant and industrious, they call the same disposition Fortune. In both
cases they admit a Divine Providence, which works to ends known only to it
self.

4 For this affinity between Fortune, Chance and Fate in best Writers, it will
be expedient to touch at the seat of Chance or Fortune in our way, and to
declare what is meant by these terms; and whether such events as we say fall
out by Fortune or Chance, have any alliance with necessity. In this discussion,
I hope we shall arive at that point, whereat the favorers of absolute
necessity, and the favorers of other opinions concerning Fate and Fortune,
more fluctuant, will be content to cast anchor. Fortune (says Casus autem
latius patet quam Fortuna: quando and eam complectitur, and multa alia quae
alias aliter accidere suapte natura possunt. Ipsum nomen hoc indicat. Est enim
(...) Graecis quod ultro and a se fit: intelligiturque casus, quum quod
alterius causa sierisolet, (...) propter illam caus^m, quale frigus sub
caniculae ortum esse videtur non enim frustra, neque denique sicut quod est in
nostra potestate, pars est contingentis: sic fortuna pars est casus. Vtque
casus contingenti, ita i^s quae in nostra sunt potestate, fortuna accidit: non
omnibus tamen, sed in quibus consilium delectusque adhibentur, uti diximus.
Proinde casus communis est animatorum and animae expertium: fortuna hominis est
propria, ejus qui jam agere possit. Idque hinc constat, quod fortunatum esse
and foelicem esse pro eodem habentur, and foelicitas est quaedam agendi
dexteritas: haec autem solius est perfecti hominis. Quae ergo fato
comprehenduntur, haec sunt* contingen^, possibile, delectus, in nostra situm
potestate, fortuna casus, iisque, adjuncta, de quibus est etiam (...)
fortassis, and perinde: quae omnia continentur quidem fato, nullum autem eorum
fatale est. Plutarch. de fato. page 418, 419. Faium iamen sub provi ^e^lia
comprebendit.
Plutarch) is a part of Chance, as free will or choice is of contingency. Every
casual event is contingent, but every contingent effect is not casual or a
chance: (...), quasi (...). The very name of Chance in Greek (says Aristotle)
implies as much as to be to no end or purpose: yet this etymology (under
correction) was no part of the Ancients meaning, which gave the Greek name
(...), to such events as we term casual, unless [(...) frustra] be referred
only (as perhaps Aristotle intended) to the efficient cause. After a manner of
speech not much unlike to this, the Schoolmen say that is gratis dictum (as
we would say freely spoken) not for which a man takes no fee, but for which he
has no just ground or reason. And that in phrase of Scripture is said to be
done gratis or frustra, which is done without just motives or provocation, not
that which is done or attempted to no end or purpose. Oderunt me frustra, and
Oderunt me gratis, They hated me without a cause, or They hated me vainly, are
in some translations equivalent. The word in the original answers to both. In
analogy to this kind of speech, those events were said to fall out by chance,
or to be (...), which in the opinion of such as gave this name, had no
efficient cause, or at least none discernable, but were supposed to move
themselves or to take possession of such short being as they had, without the
assignement of any superior power, or of any constant or settled cause;
intruding themselves into the course of nature, like unbidden guests, sometimes
as unwelcome as frost in summer, sometimes as welcome as warm weather to such
as want fire in winter.

5 Fortune has her authority placed only in reasonable actions or Plato
fortunam causam in propositis constitutisque per accidentiam and
consequutionem. Aristoteles, causam per accidens in ijs quae ex animi
appetentia propter quid fiunt, obscuram illam quidem and instabilem. Diff^rre
autem a fortuna spontaneum temer ariumque casum. Quod enim a fortuna, idem a
temeritate quoque fieri: hocque gerendis in rebus esse. Quod autem temerarium
spontaneumque sit, non continu^ idem a fortuna fieri, idque citra omnem rerum
administrationem usu venire. Poro fortunam rationalium esse; spontis autem
casum, tum rationalium, tum rationis expertium animantium, tum inanimatorum
corporum. Epicurus, causam non sibi constantem, personis, temporibus, modis:
Anaxagoxas and Stoici, indeprehensam humano captui causam. Siquidem eventorum
quaedam e necessitate, quaedam e fato, quaedam ex libero and constituto,
quaedam e fortuna, nonnulla e suae spontis casu. Plutarch. de placitis and
decretis Philosoph. lib. 1. p. 213.
deliberations, yet not in all these, but only in such events as fall out
either so far beyond or contrary to men's intentions, that they may be rather
wondered at, then expected. If husbandmen should dig their Vineyards with
purpose to find Gold, the fruitful vintage thereon following (though no part
of their intentions) could not so properly b^e ascribed to Fortune, as if a
husbandman, intending only to dig his Vineyard in hope of a plentiful
vintage, should find store of Gold.

6 The meaning of Plato, of Aristotle and Plutarch may be better perceived by
fit instance, then by large scholastique commentaries upon their several
definitions of Fortune. Valerius Maximus (and to my remembrance, Plutarch) has
a memorable story of one Jason Phereus, that was cured of an impostume in a
fray or Duel. The blow of an enemy was the cause of this man's health, but by a
rare and unusual accident, quite contrary to his intention that gave it; and
altogether beyond his expectation that received it. His purpose was only to
maintain his reputation or revenge his wrongs, either to wound or to be
wounded, without any hope or thought of curing his disease, the danger whereof
was not fully discovered, til it was past. But a more perfect Idaea or
exemplarie form of fortune good or bad, then any historian relates, the greek
Epigrammatist has pictured for our contemplation. The matter of the Epigram
was in English thus: A silly poor wretch, being deprived of all means to
live, resolves to deprive himself of breath; but, whilst he sought a place
convenient for acting this desperate purpose, finding store of gold which
another had hid; he returned home again leaving his halter in the place, which
was worse taken by him that hid the gold, then meant by him that left it: for
he hanged himself in it for grief of his loss.

(...)
(...).
A poor wretch finding gold, for joy,
left's halter in its steed:
Which he that left the gold, for grief,
did make his fatal thread.
To find Gold was no part of that poor man's hopes, whom despair of like
means to live by, had made desirous of death: the other had as little mind to
dispatch himself, when he came to visit the supposed stay and comfort of his
life wherein his soul had solaced her self with the fool in the Gospel.

CHAP. 21.
Of the proper subject and nature of Fate.
1 THE most useful issue which these or the like cases afford is this, whether
the event specified in them be merely casual, contingent, or (in some sort)
necessary. One and the same determination, will as well befit the like
quaestion, concerning such events as are properly termed Fatal, whose proper
subject, nature and definition, we are more particularly to inquire after. The
first quaere, which few meddle withal, would be this: Whether fatal events
participate more of contingencie, then of necessity. But setting aside all
comparison, it suffices us that they truly participate of both; but in
different degrees or measures according to the diversity of times.
Contingencie is always as necessarily praesupposed to the production of events
fatal, as necessity is included in them. And as the proper form or essence
of Fates consists not in every sort of necessity, but in some peculiar branch
thereof; so neither is every Contingent subject a fit matter for receiving that
form or branch of necessity, wherein the nature of Fate consists, and which
gives denomination and being to events fatal. I have heard many unthrifts,
upon the loosing of a fair game at Tables, curse the Dice or cry vengeance
upon ill luck; but I never heard any Gamester frame such inditements either in
verse or prose, against Fates, as were usual amongst the heathens, whose
language in other cases, is with our unthrifts most familiar. Such petty
adventures as Cards and Dice, are as met all too base to be instampt with the
inscription of Fate: whose proper subject in public affairs, is matter either
of tragedy or of triumph: in private matter either of extraordinary and
unusual prosperity or of calamity.

Most of Gods creatures are the subject of contingency; mankind only or humane
society, is the the proper sphaere, without whose circumference, neither
fortune or fatal events do wander. Yet is not every part of man subject to
fate, though man according to every part be subject to that contingencie,
which is praesupposed to Fates. Si fato fieret, ut esset aut improbus, aut
bonus; profecto contraria in cum cadere nunquam possent, nec saepissime
mutaretu^; quin nec alii quidem probi essent, alii malitalioqui fatum causam
malorum esse, contrariaque sibi facere sentiremus, aut illud quod ante dictum
est, videri verum esse, nihil esse virtutem nec vitium sed opinione solum bona,
and mala judicari: quae, ut vera ratio docet, maxima est and impieta^ and
injusti^ia. Verum fatum hoc immutabile esse dicimus, iis qui praeclaras
bonasque res cligunt, ac sibi proponunt, digna praemia, itemque iis qui
contraria, digna praemia constituens. Non enim ut alia, veluti a^bores and
quadr^pedia, quae nihil voluntate and judicio facere possunt, sic hominem Deus
condidit. Neque enim praemio ac laud dignus esset, si per se, and a se, bonum
non deligeret, sed bonus ^actus esset: nec si malus esset, jure supplicio
afficeretur, cum non a se talis esset, sed aliud nihil esse posset, nisi quod
factus fuisset. Justin. Martyr. Apolog 2 pro Christ page 32. Itaque Deus non
est sic mundum deletu^us and eversurus ut nulli sint jam futari improbi angeli,
daemones, and homines, propter Christianorum semen and genus quod ipsum causam
rerum esse intelligit. Nam nisi hoc esset, ne vobis quidem haec jam a malis
geniis fieri ullo modo possent, sed ignis judicij delapsus omnia dissiparet and
incenderet, quemadmodum etiam cl^vies superioribus seculis nemini pepercit,
nisi uni illi qui a nobis Nochus appellatur, a vobis Deucalion, ejusque
familiae, ex quo rursus tam multi nati sunt quorum partim improbi, partim boni
fuerunt. Sic enim conflagrationem fore cens^mus, non, ut Stoicis placet, omnium
rerum inter ipsas mutatione, quod turpissimum videtur: nec fato homines facere
aut pati quicquam co^u^ quae fiunt and evenium, judic^mus, sed voluntate ac
judicie unumquenque been agere aut peccare: maloru^que genioru^ opera^ bonos,
veluti Socrate^ ejusque similes exagitari and in vincula conjici: Sar ^anapatu^
aut^^, Epicuru^ ac fimiles in reru^ abundantia and gloria beatae vitae compotes
videri: quod cum non intellexissent Stoici, fati necessitate fieri omnia
censuerunt. Justin Mart. Apol. 1. pro Christ. page 8.
Justin Martyr; though a professed enemy to Stoicall Fates, and a most valiant
champion, a chief leader to all the rest which have defended the Christian
truth against that sect, being most potent in the infancy of Christianity;
was not so nice, as either to deny us the right use of the name Fate, or the
nature of the thing thereby signified. This, says he is immutable Fate, that
such as do well, shall be rewarded, and such as do ill shall be punished.
Quid aliud est fatum, says Minucius Feli^^ quam quod de unoquoque nostrum Deus
fatus est, qui cum possit praescire materiam* pro meritis and qualitatibus
singulorum, etiam fata determinavit. Both of them follow their Master St. Paul,
that God will render to every man according to his works: unto them that are
contentious, and disobey the truth, and obey unrighteousness, shall be
indignation and wrath. Tribulation and anguish shall be upon the soul of
every man, that does evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Grecian. But to
every man that does good, shall be glory, and honor, and peace, to the Jew
first, and also to the Grecian. For there is no respect of persons with God.
Romans 2. verse 8, 9, 10, 11. It is a point clear from the authority of
Minucius Felix and Justin Martyr, and from the grounds of Christianity it
self, that the reasonable soul is not subject to Fate, Rodiginus lection.
Antiquar. lib. 10 cap. 20. Caeterum quo planius fati ratio pernoscatur, ita
omnino colligendum, sicuti animi rationalis summus creator est Deus, atque idem
gubernator, ita et corporis geniter est mundus, ac moderator, vnde consequitur
illud, uti animus velut Dei filius ab Deo, tanquam a patre, providentiae
legibus clementer agatur, and suaviter. Corpus vero ut mundi membrum a mundano
corpore fati viribus, velut particula quaedam ab mole tota impetu quodam
^ra^atur violento: unde fit, uti in mentem nulla pror sum sati vis queat
assultare, nisi quatenus corpori ipsa se fatalibus obnoxio legibus, addixerit.
propterca semper fere divinus Plato ab corporis amore, ac externorum cura ad
animi and Dei cultum praecipit defugiendum, quando non alia ratione declinari
mala queunt.
taken (in the Stoicall sense) for absolute necessity, whencesoever such
necessity be derived. For as Justin Martyr strongly concludes, if the soul of
man were by the necessity of the Divine decree, either violently driven or
placidly drawn to good or evil, there could be no vice or virtue, or God
should be as truly the only author of all vice, sin, and wickedness, as
he is of virtue and godliness; or as St. Austin infe^^^^, he could not justly
punish any besides himself, who is altogether incapable of punishment, but
more incapable of deserving it, or of doing evil. That freedom of choice or
Contingencie, which these good Writers, with all the ancients suppose as
granted, by the divine decree, to the humane soul, is the proper subject or
immediate matter whereto Fate is limited. The nature or essence of Fate, in
their doctrine consists in the infallible doom or sentence, past by the Divine
providence upon men's actions according to their nature or quality. The actions
or choyses themselves are truly and properly contingent, not Fatal, the
events or issues of them are Fatal, not contingent. And in this sense did most
of the Neque enim si non esset provide^tia, ordo ille in mundo existeret, quod
fatum possit aliquis appellare: nec si ista deessent, ulla esset mulcta
ullumque adversus sceleratos judicium: immo nec bonorum praemium, nec
co^mendatio. At vero, Providentia^ atque ordine existentibus, omnes oportebat
qui jam nascuntur eadem bona Sortiri; si nihil a seipsis ad inaequalitatem
contulissent. Hierocles in Carm. Pythag. page 127. And again page 136. Tot
tantaque adeo ex versibus istis possumus baurire prae^epta quae ad virtut^
institutionem primam conferunt. Videntur enim and Providentia, and Fati,
liberatisque animi verissimimas rations complecti; quibus molestiam illam,
quae in eorum, quae c^rnuntur, dissimilitudine versatur, oration examinavit;
inque omnibus malorum caussam Deum nequaquam existere demonstravit. That Fates
may stand with freedom of Election in man, Tacitus observes out of the ancient
Heathens. Sed mihi haec, ac ^alia audienti, in incerto judicium est, fatone res
mortalium and necessitate immutabili, an forte voluantur. quippe sapientissimos
veterum, quique sectam eorum aemulantur, diversos reperies: ac multis insitam
opinionem, non initia nostri, non finem, non denique homines diisque curae.
Ideo creberrima and ^ristia in bonos, laeta apud deteriores esse; contra alii,
fatum quidem congruere rebus putant sed non e vagis stellis, verum apud
principia and nexus naturalium causarum, ac tamen electionem vitae nobis
relinquunt: quam ubi elegeris, certum imminentium ordinem. neque mala vel bona,
quae vulgus putet: multos qui conflictari adversis videantur, beatos: ac
plerosque quamquam magnas per (...), miserrimos: si illi gravem fortunam
constanter tollerent, hi prospera inc^nsulte utantur. Caeterum plurimis
mortalium non eximi, quo primo cujusque ortu ventura destinentur: sed quaedam
secus quam dicta sint cadere, fallacijs ignara dicentium, ita corrumpi fidem
artis, cujus clara documenta, and antiqua aetas and nostra tulerit. Quippe a
filio ^jusdem Trasulli, praedictum Neronis imperium in tempore memorabitur, ne
nunc incepto longiu^ abierim. Cornel. Tacit. lib. 6. Annal. number. 22.
heathens, in their sober moodes use the name of Fates. So Virgil ascribes the
want of an Aeneid. 7. Filius huic, fato divum, prolesque vir^lis
Nulla fuit; primaque oriens erepta juventa est.

heir male by the untimely death of the first borne and the ill Virgil.
Aeneid. 7. Vndique collecti coeunt, Mattemque fatigant.
Illicet infandum cuncti contra omnia bellum,
Contra fata Deum, perverso numine poscunt.
Certatim regis circunstant tecta Latini.
Ille, velut pelagi rupes immota, resistit.
Vt pelagi rupes, magno veniente fragore,
Quae sese, multis circum lat^antibus undis,
Mole tenet; scopuli ne quicqua^, and spumea circu^
Saxa fremunt, later ique ill^^a refunditur alga.

success of war unseasonably undertaken, or begun (as a man would say) in an
ill time, unto the Fates, or Weirds allotted by the gods. The fained complaint
or speech which he puts in Latinus his mouth dissuading Veru^ ubi nulla datur
caecu^ exuperare potestas
Consilium, and saevae nutu Iunonis eunt res:
Multa deos aurasque pater testatus inanes,
Fra^gin^ur heu fatis, in quit, fer^murque procell^.
Ipsi has sacrilego pendetis sanguine poenas,
O miseri, te Turn nefas, te triste manebit
Suppliciam: votisque Deos venerabere seris.

Turnus and his people from going to war, is a true picture of Moses his
expostulation with the Israelites, which had gone out to war contra^y to Gods
Commandment, and found that success by experience, which Latinus fore-warnes
Turnus of: Ye answered, and said unto me, we have sinned against the Lord,
we will go up and fight, according to all that the Lord our God commanded us.
And when ye had girded on every man his weapons of war, ye were ready to go
up every man into the Hill. And the Lord said unto me, say unto them, Go not
up, neither fight, for I am not among you: lest ye be smitten before your
enemies. So I spoke unto you, and you would not hear, but rebelled against the
Commandment of the Lord your God, and went presumptuously up into the Hill.
And the Amorites which dwelt in that mountain, came out against you, and
chased you as Bees do, and destroyed you in Seir, even unto Hormah. And ye
returned and wept before the Lord; but the Lord would not hearken unto your
voice, nor give ear unto you. Deuter. 1. verse. 41, 42, 43, 44, 45.

Plagues or punishments are properly then termed fatal, when GOD will not
repent or change the Doom threatened; when his eyes are shut unto men's tears,
and his ears unto their prayers. But of all the heathens which I have read,
this point is most divinely discussed by Si quidem per se alteri quidem
divitias; alteri autem paupertatem, divinum judicium tribuit: Divinam
voluntatem nominari istud oportuit, non infortunium. Sin autem nih^l hujusmodi
nominibus imperat; sed fortuito and temere accidit, ut felix iste sit, sicuti
dicunt; ille autem infelix: Infortunium vocare tantummodo istud oportuit; non
Divinum Infortunium. Sin porro Deus arbiter unicuique tribuit, quod meritis
convenit; neque in caussa est, ut tales ipsi simus; sed eo fine tantum
justitiam possidet, ut ex praescripto ipsius, gestis paria referat: non
immerito conjunctis nominibus judicij decreta Divina Infortunia nuncupat: sive,
(quia Divinum sit judicium, atque intelligens) praeponendum putarit quod
Divinitatem atque scientiam demonstret: sive etiam (quod sponte malitiam
idipsum amplectatur, de quo agitur, unde etiam calamitatibus istis dignum est)
Infortuniorum nomen adjecerit, tanquam non ex professo certum hominem vel
supplicio, vel praemio afficere Deus statuat; sed eum semper, qui i^^o se,
atque illo modo gesserit; cujus rei caussa non sit extra nos investiganda.
Itaque voluntatis nostrae, divinique judicij nexum Infortunium parere; nihilque
aliud totum hoc Divinum existere Infortunium, quam Dei adversus peccata
calculum. Hieroc in aurea Pythag. carmina page 111.
Hierocles in his commentary upon Pythagoras golden verses. If Calamity (says
he) be the award of divine power, Pythagoras might better have called it Divine
will, than Divine misfortune. If it be not the award of Divine power, it had
been enough to have called it misfortune; a Divine misfortune it cannot be.
Out of these straights he winds himself with this acute distinction, Inasmuch
as Calamity or vengeance is the award of Divine power, it is in this respect
rightly called Divine. But with reference to this or that particular man, it is
a misfortune. His meaning (as he elsewhere illustrates himself) is this: The
Divine power (as every just judge) does only intend to punish evil, suppose
Adultery, Murder, Incest, etc. But that this or that man should commit these
or the like evils, which necessarily draw calamity upon themselves, this is
contingent. Now the necessary award of a contingent evil, is by the
Pythagoreans, sometimes termed Fate, sometimes Divine misfortune.

2. Not to interpose ought one way or other praejudiciall to the different
opinions concerning freewill, as it has reference to merit, election or
predestination (for all which points we have allotted a peculiar place in this
long work:) we hold it for the present as a part of our Creed or fundamental
point of Christianity; That man in in respect of some objects, has a true
freedom of choice or Contingencie, and is enabled by his Creator to make
variety of antecedents in thought, word or deed. But the Sea chap. 28.. 1.
antecedents being once made by man, though not without divine cooperation; God
alone allots the consequents, without any concurrence or suffrage in man. To
repair to Gods house or loyter at home, or in worse places on the Lords day,
is left free unto us by the divine decree: but what good or evil, spiritual
or temporal, shall befall us upon our better or worse choice, is entirely and
merely in the hands of God. we have no power or freedom to resist the doom
or sentence which God has appointed to our resolutions, be they good or bad.
As unto evil or goodness indefinitely taken, some measure of reward or
punishment is, in the language of Justin Martyr and other of the Ancients,
truly fatal: so every Nos ita judicandu^ humanu^ gen^a Christo dicim^, ut
tame^ etia^ nu^c omnia Deum, prout rationabileputat, regere ac dispensare
credamus: and ita in futuro judicio judicaturum affirmemus, ut tamen semper
etiam in hoc seculo judicesse doceamus. Dum enim semper gubernat Deus, and
semper judicat: quia gubernatio ipsa est judicium. Salvian. lib. 1. And again:
^deo etiam sanctos homines castigatos quo^da^ judicio Dei legimus, ut
judicandos nos, Deo judice, etiam presenti seculo nosceremus; quia sicut Deus
est semper, sic justitia Dei semper: sicut omnipotentia Domini indeficiens, sic
censura indemutabilis: sicut Deus jure perpetuus, sic justitia perseverans.
Salvian. lib. 2.
possible degree of good or evil, whether merely moral, or spiritual, has
success from aeternitie fitted to it quoad pondus, in measure more exact then
the cunningest Arithmetician can devise. Gods Justice holds one scale, his
mercy and bounty the other; their several awards are most exact, most
infallible and irresistible; yet alternant. Punishment or chastisement for
offenses past is necessary, yet not absolutely necessary to any man's person
in this or that degree; because the aeternall decree has left him a
possibility not to offend in this or that kind, or not to offend in such a
degree; or in case he so offended, to seek for pardon. Nor shall we, by this
assertion be enforced to imagine any new act or determination in God, either
for daily awarding different success, or the same success in different
measure, according to the diversity or contingency of humane choice, which may
vary, every moment. For the infinite, incomprehensible and all comprising
essence, as is In the Treatise of the Divine Essence. Part. 1.
before observed, is fitness it self, an unchangeable rule aeternally fitting
every alteration possible to the creature, without any alteration in it self.
A rule it is, which needs no application to the event, the event by getting
existence or actual being is actually applied unto it. The just measure and
quality of that success, which is by the Idea of equity, bounty, or mercy
allotted to every event, is no less essentially contained in goodness it
self, then the event it self or its being, is in infinite essence, or in
Essence it self.

3 The immediate and proper subject of Fate, is Freedom of choice or
contingencie in humane actions; the genus proximum, is the certainty of Divine
retribution according to the nature and quality of the choice we make. Yet
are not rewards or retributions, but retributions extraordinary and
remarkable, as well for their manner of execution as for their matter or
quality, properly termed Fatal. Of sinister Fates, there is no contingent
subject, which can exhibit a more exact picture or model, for the manner how
they come to pass, then a game at Chesse or Tables. Many games at both, which
at the beginning, or until the middle of time spent, in them, are very fair
and more then ten to one; after some few oversights, or ill dice, become
desperate and irrecoverable, by any skill that can be used: so events properly
fatal, become at length unpreventable, irresistible; but such they were not
from the beginning of time, or from their infancy or first attempts, on whom
they fall. Such disasterous or dismal events, for which the Heathens usually
indicted Fates, were commonly remarkable checks given, they know not by whom, to
humane policies or cunning contrivances. They were, as the unexpected winning
of an after-game, upon some great stake or wager. Good or dexterous Fates, were
the unexpected issues of men's contrivances, for their own or associates good
Fortunes. The manner of accomplishing such fates or Fortunes, is like a game
won by a bungler, against a skillful player, by extraordinary dice, or by
the suggestion of some by-stander, more skillful then both. This kind of Fate
or strange Fortune, of which most of the Heathen knew not well what to make,
we may define, To be the incomprehensible disposition, or irresistible
combination of second causes, conspiring for the infallible execution of Gods
will, maugre all plots or conspiracies of men to defeat the events, which he
had purposed. Sinister or disasterous Fates were the infallible execution of
his consequent will. Good fates or fortune, were the infallible effects of his
antecedent will; both were sometimes strangely and remarkeably accomplished
against cunning and potent oppositions, not so much for the parties sakes whom
they befell, as for others. Many disasters have befallen some men, though
deservedly for their own sins, yet withal for the admonishing of others, to
prevent the like. Hence it is that the Heathen Poets observation [Multi
committunt eadem diverso erimina Fato] though in many cases most true, is no
way prejudicial to the unchangeable rules of the All-seeing Providence, which
is always full of equity, whose justice is still allayed with mercy.

CHAP. 22.
The opposite opinions of the Stoics and Epicures. In what sense it is true,
that all things are necessary in respect of Gods decree.
1 THE Stoics did well in contradicting the Epicures, which held fortune and
Chance to rule all things, or at least to be in themselves somethings, not
mere denominations of such events as had no certain or constant cause,
apprehensible by man. The Original of their Error, was, their desire to be
extremely contrary to the Epicureans in a matter contingent, or rather in
contingencie it self: for that is the common subject of Fortune, chance or
fate. Fortune and chance they deny to be any thing, with no other purpose, it
seems, then that they may make Fate to be all things. They were Orthodoxall
in acknowledging an infallible unerring providence, but they ^rred again as
much in not acknowledging this infallible providence, oft-times to hold the
mean between Chance or Fortune, and absolute necessity; or not to order and
moderate contingencie it self. From the same original, some have thought it
to be the most safe and compendious course for rooting out error and
superstition, to overthrow the a^tecedent, when their commission directs them
only to deny or refute the consequence. As not a few, no less afraid (and
the fear it self is just) to grant merit of works, then the Stoics were to
admit of Chance, have taken away all contingency in humane actions, save only
with reference to second causes. Wherein they seem to invert that rule of
Tyrannical policy: He is a fool that kills the Father, and leaves his braits
behind to revenge his blood. These take away the harmless Parents for the
faulty issues sake, seeking to destroy true and Orthodoxall antecedents for
the incommodious consequences which others have falsely fathered upon them. The
reclaiming of men from this one Error is my present and scope.

2 For the better effecting whereof, we will subscribe at length unto their
general Maxim, [That all things are necessary in respect of Gods decree,] upon
condition they will not extend it beyond its natural and proper subject, or not
take decree in the Stoicall, but in a civil sense. Now he that says [All
things are necessary in respect of Gods decree,] cannot in civil construction
be conceived to mean any more then thus; All things which God has decreed
are necessary. The question then is, whether every thing that is, may truly be
said to be the object, or part of the object of Gods decree. To which question
our answer must be negative. For those things only are properly said to be
decreed, which are enacted and appointed for better ordering and moderating
such things as either by nature, custom, or ill example, are apt to grow
worse, or may be amended by good education, wholesome advice or discipline.
Every decree of man supposes the subject or party whom it immediately
concerns, to be capable of persuasion to good or evil, to be alterable in his
inclinations, through fear of punishment, or hope of reward. Magistrates or
Corporations take order that mad men or dogs should do no harm; yet are not
these creatures the proper subject of their decrees or sanctions. They do not
tie Mastives by penal laws not to bite, they do not bind mad men to good
behavior: but they i^joyn men of reason and understanding to muzzle M^stives
lest they bite; to keep mad men or franticks, close, lest they should do
mischief by going abroad. Now the Divine decree concerning the ordering of
man, is the rule or pattern of all humane decrees, and therefore supposes
somewhat in man, which makes him more capable of the divine sanction, than
reasonlesse or inanimate creatures are. This capacity of the reasonable
creature or man, consists in freedom of choice or contingency, in his actions
or resolutions. The donation of this freedom upon man, is an act of Gods free
bounty, and is presupposed as the proper subject to the divine decree, or to
all acts or awards of divine justice or mercy. The proper and formal object of
the same decree, is, the moderation of this contingency or freedom of man, by
awarding the issues or consequences, in mercy, justice, or bounty, exactly
proportioned to the nature and manner of his choice and resolution. For
illustrating the truth of our intended conclusion, let us take the
Epigrammatists See Cha. 20.
relation, or that idaea of Chance or Fortune, which he has pictured, for a
true story. It was not necessary in respect of the divine decree, that the one
should be so extreme poor, or the other so miserably rich, as to come within
the compass of that snare, wherein the latter was taken. The means by which
the one came to that depth of poverty or melancholy passions, wherewith he
had almost been stifled, and the other to that height of covetousness, from
which he fell headlong into despair, were contingent. Neither were driven into
such excess of passion or distemper by irresistible necessity. But taking them
as now they have made themselves; that the one should be led unto temptation,
the other into it; fell not out by chance, but by the especial disposition of
the Divine providence. The great Tempter intended mischief to the one, but
failed, God having yet a blessing in store for him. To the other, perhaps he
intended not this particular harm, until opportunity did offer it. So that
the enriching of the one by a chance rare and unusual, in respect of man, was
necessary in respect of Gods decree of mercy and fatherly providence; the
delivering of the other unto Satan, was likewise necessary, in respect of Gods
justice.

3 Now if such events, as to the apprehension of mere natural men come by
chance, be necessary in respect of the divine decree: disasters by common
consent reputed fatal, must by efficacy of the same decree be divorced from
contingency, with which formerly they had connection. For though Fortune, as
well as Fate, be a branch or particle of the proper object of the divine
decree; yet as they have reference to man, this difference may in the last
place be observed betwixt then: Those things fall out by mere chance or
fortune, whose procuration or prevention has not been thought of at all by
man, or but slightly, before they happen: Those by fate, which have been
often and seriously thought of, but either far exceed all expectation, or
frustrate sollicitous care or forecast. Ofttimes the unexpected accomplishment
of one man's expectation defeates the industrious hopes or anxious contrivance
of another, and such events are in a twofold sense termed fatal.

Heu stirpem invisam, ac fatis contraria nostris
Fata Phrygum.
Both Phrygian race, and Phrygian fate,
As contrary to ours, we hate.
4 All events properly fatal include a kind of canvas between man and man,
nation and nation, or between divine providence and humane policy, or betwixt
the soul of man and wicked spirits licensed by divine providence to solicit,
tempt, or assault her.

CHAP. 23.
Of the degrees of necessity, and of the original of inevitable or absolute
necessity.
1 Were the maine question hitherto disputed, thus proposed, Whether all
things were only so far necessary, so far contingent, as it pleased the
Omnipotent to appoint: or whether the success or issue of humane intentions or
contrivances, were so far avoydable or unavoydable, as he has made them by his
decree: I should have Infidels only for mine adversaries: Christians, I am
persuaded, will move no questions about his power or ability, but only about
his will or pleasure, for determining all things. And who can deny that Gods
Law or covenant for effecting some things, is more strict and peremptory, then
for effecting others. The Prophet supposed his covenant for day and night to
be more certain and invariable, than his covenant for the former and latter
rain. And yet the Law which he has appointed for the most glorious creatures
in the Firmament, is not like the law of the Medes and Persians. It was
dispensed withal all at Iosuahs suit, and may again be dispensed with at his
pleasure. The motion of the Sun and Moon, is not perpetually necessary in
respect of his decree. The seasons of seed time, harvest, and the disposition
of these lower Regions (in which Fortune may seem to have placed her wheel,
and Chance erected his tottering throane) may become certain and constant to
such as constantly observe his holy Covenants: If you walk in my statutes,
then will I give you rain in due season. Levit. 26. 4. etc Such was the
wisdom of the Laws given unto this people, that by observing them, they
might have changed the disposition of the Air, altered the influence of the
Heavens, and have had dominion over the Stars.

2 Constancy of assent or adhere^ce unto these fundamental truths of religion,
would fasten our minds unto a point of inestimable use (as well forreforming or
curing maladies of State* as of private life) often in this Treatise intimated,
but not fully declared. The point is this; maine events which at this instant
are merely contingent, and may easily be prevented by diversity of practices,
not only possible but acceptable by the divine appointment, may in succession
or revolution of time, become more necessary, and at length truly fatal,
altogether unavoydable. Absolutely necessary from all eternities, nothing can
truly be reputed, besides the Deity, and the internal operations of the ever
blessed Trinity. Many things which from the beginning of time had but the first
degrees of possibility, (their contraries or incompatible opposi^es being in
the highest degree of probability,) have by the continued sinister sway of man's
thoughts and practices, been drawn from mere possibilities to be more then
probable, and unto the first degree of necessity: yet at the first not
absolutely or irresistibly necessary. Some means there may be, though but a
few left of many, and those not easy to be put in practice, for preventing
them. The events of greater consequences which stood thus, were with the
Heathens accounted Fata minora: For Fates (as we said before) admit the self
same division or degrees that necessity does. The same events by omission of
practices appointed by the divine decree for their prevention, become
altogether irresistible and absolutely necessary in respect of any means
possible for averting them: yet not absolutely necessary from eternity, but
absolutely necessary only from that point of time, wherein the eternal decree
or providence did cut off all contrary possibilities, which before were
concurrent with the possibility of their being. And events thus utterly
bestript of all contingency, or al possibility of being recalled or avoided,
were by the Heathens ascribed [Fato majori] to greater Fates. The symptoms or
characters of events becoming thus irresistibly and absolutely necessary, come
In the Treatise of Prodigies and of their useful observation.
elsewhere (by Gods assistance) to be deciphered. Here it suffices to
advertise the Reader, that as diverse things besides, so necessity may be
enstyled absolute many ways, but two especially. Some things are said to be
absolutely necessary, that is, altogether inevitable, albeit this necessity
or inevitableness did accrue from some occasions or set points of time lately
past. As many diseases, in their nature curable, and easy to have been cured
by ordinary medicines (if they had been administered in time,) do, by some few
days ill diet, by careless attendance, or casual relapse, become altogether
incurable, by any after-care or help of physic. Other events there be, which
were absolutely necessary in respect of all times: their exhibition or
production could not by any policy of man have been prevented. So our
Saviors death was absolutely necessary from the beginning of the World, but
whether absolutely necessary from eternity, or absolutely necessary, without
supposall of Adams fall (which was not necessary) shall not here be disputed.
Certain it is, that nothing decreed by God, can be so absolutely necessary as
the Divine Nature, or blessed Trinity is. Many errors have found opportunity to
mingle themselves with divine truth for want of a commodious distinction or
explication of this indistinct and confused term Absolute: the anatomy of it
were worth the pains of the Learned. Evident it is, that some things which are
not to day, may to morrow be, in their kind, absolute.

3 We truly say, that the sum of money wherein one man stands bound unto
another, is absolutely due from the time of the forfaiture, or nonperformance
of the condition: that is, there is no plea left in Law, no course or means of
Justice to avoid the payment of it. Yet was not the same sum absolutely due
from the first date of the bond; the performance of the Condition in due time
had prevented the loss, which negligence or breach of promise has now made
necessary and irrecoverable. Moneys lent upon no other consideration, but upon
mere good will, to be repayd whenever the party lending shall demand them;
are absolutely due, from the date of the recognizance, and for that which is
absolutely due, there is a necessity of payment or satisfaction.

4. Some disasterous events become, by divine providence, irresistibly
necessary long before they be actually accomplished, or inflicted: such was
the destruction of Pharaoh, of Senacherib, the desolation of Judah and
Jerusalem by Titus. Others become fatally irresistible within some few days or
hours before they happen, other not till the very moment wherein they are
awarded either for some grievous sin then committed, or for some remarkable
document of Gods justice. Some again are for a long time totally irresistible
and unpreventable; others resistible quoad See Cha. 24. parag. 9. and 10.
tantum, though not quoad totum, that is, part of the evils might be prevented,
though not the whole. All that we have said concerning the alteration of
possibilities, or contingencies, or change of events contingent into necessary,
may easily be conceived, without any surmise of alteration in the Omnipotent,
or in his everlasting decree. The least degree of possibility or contingency,
is as necessarily derived from Nos calamitatum nostrarum authors s^mus. Deus
enim pius est and misericors, and qui, ut scriptum est, neminem velit perire
vel laedere. Nos^ ergo adversum nos omnia facimus. Nihil itaque, nihil est in
nobis crudelius nobis. Nos inquam, nos etiam Deo nolente cruciamus. Sed
videlicet adversum meips^im dicere arbitror, qui cum superius dixerim, ob
peccata nostra nos puniri a Deo, nunc dicam nos puntri a nobis ipsis. Vtrumque
verum est; Deo quippe punimur, sed ipsi facimus ut puniamur. Cum autem punire
nos ipsi facimus, cui dubium est quin ipsi nos nostris criminibus puniomus:
quia quicunque dat causam qua puniatur, ipsese punit, secundum illud; Funibus
peccatorum suorum unusquisque constrin gitur. Salvianus lib. 8.
his absolute irresistible will, as necessity it self in the highest degree.
It is impossible for possibility to have any right to actual being without his
special appointment. To think that Fate, Chance, or Fortune, should nestle in
some certain periods of time, or be brought forth by revolutio^s of the
heavens, is altogether heathenish. But neither does Scripture insinuate, nor
can reason justly suspect any danger in avouching, that the Almighty suffers
that contingency or multiplicity of possibilities between good and evil, or
the several degrees of evil, wherewith he has endued the reasonable
creature, to explicate or contract it self in every moment of time. And
according to the nature of the free motions of man, the irresistible decree
brings (...) such events or issues, as were truly possible from eternity, but
become necessary by revolutions, not of the heavens, but of man's heart and
thoughts; public plague or calamities become necessary, or inevitable by these
means only. We must ever remember that God has not so decreed all things
before they come, or the manner how they shall come, as that he does not yet
decree them. For he continually decrees as well necessity as contingency, and
brings forth effects as well contingent as necessary, from this present hour;
both being sometimes merely possible. The truth of this our last assertion, may
be demonstrated from our former principle: If one part of a disjunctive
proposition be denied or fail, the other may be necessarily inferred, though
neither be absolutely and determinately necessary, but become such by
consequence, or upon supposition of the others failing. Many things which in
respect of our present purpose or resolution are free or contingent, may within
a short while after become altogether necessary and unavoydable, without any
alteration or change in us. Suppose a Judge should be tied by oath to execute
justice upon a malefactor within eight days; there is no necessity that he
should perform his vow the first, second, third or fourth day. The execution
or not execution of Justice, is during the first seven days, free and
contingent, without any breach or violation of oath: but omitting the
opportunities, which the first seven days have offered, the execution of
Justice upon the eighth day, is as necessary, as his honesty or fidelity; as
necessary, as if he had been tied by oath to execute it upon that day alone.
The parts of indefinite time, or of the matter promised or threatened by man,
may be far more than this instance implies. So that the performance of those
duties or promises, which for a long time was free and arbitrarie, and might
have been performed in different measure, becomes at length absolutely
necessary, and necessary to such a determinate degree. The parts of Gods
disjunctive decree, and the degrees as well of every matter decreed by him, as
of the time allotted for the execution of it, may be numberless in respect of
us. And man by not entertaining the opportunities, which by several times have
been allotted him, for reducing his possibilities of doing Gods antecedent
will into act, may forfeit the very possibilities themselves for ever, or for a
long time. And by continuance of such neglect of many parts or kinds of
success, all truly possible, in respect of the eternal decree; that only shall
in the end become necessary, which he least desires, which his soul shall most
de^est. In respect of some future events not as yet become necessary, the
eternal decree leaves fewer branches of contrary contingencies or
possibilities, in respect of others more. Their multitude may expire or revive
every moment, according to the diversity of men's ways, on which Gods will is
always done by means infinite, at least to man incomprehensible.

4 The incarnation of our blessed Savior, was in the opinion of some of the
Ancients, absolutely necessary before the creation of mankind, and should in
time infallibly have been accomplished for confirming or augmenting that happy
estate wherein Adam was created; if so he had continued steadfast in it until
the time appointed by God for his change or translation. But however the
Schools may determine or wave this question (I must confess, neither very
useful nor in this place much necessary) there was no necessity questionless,
that the second Adam should become a bloody sacrifice for our sins, unless
the first Adam had sinned: but after he, by his actual transgression, had
utterly cut off that possibility of perseverance, which the eternal decree had
bestowed upon him, the humiliation and bitter passion of the Son of God,
became as necessary in respect of Gods mercy and bounty toward man, and of his
infinite justice which (notwithstanding his infinite mercy) was to be fully
satisfied, as his incarnation. After Cain had despised Gods (...) and had
slain his brother Abel, it was necessary the Messiah should proceed from Seth;
yet not then so necessary, that he should be the son of Abraham, as the Son
of Seth. Others lineally descended from Seth, might have forfeited their real
possibilities, or ordinary hopes of attaining unto this glory. At the least,
when God first made his promise to the Woman and her seed, the birth of Abraham
was not in respect of the eternal decree so necessary, as Christ's birth was.
It was possible to have written Terah as childlesse as Iechoniah, after his
marriage with Abraham's mother. But after the same God had passed that promise
unto Abraham and confirmed it by solemn oath, In thy seed shall al^ the
nations of the earth be blessed: It was thenceforth altogether as necessary,
that our Redeemer should be the seed of Abraham, as of the Woman: Yet not then
so necessary, that he should be the son of Judah, or that Judah should have
a son called Iesse, or that Iesse should have a son called David, a man after
Gods own heart. That glory, which long after Gods oath to Abraham, befell the
Tribe of Judah, was (for ought we know or can object unto the contrary) a part
of that dignity; whose possibility was once really possessed by Reuben, though
utterly forfeited by his misdemeanour. But after Jacob had prophesied, that the
Scepter should not depart from Judah, till Shilo come, or rather after the Lord
had sworn not to fail David in bestowing the prerogative promised to Judah
upon his seed, the necessity becomes as great, that our High Priest, after the
Order of Melchisedeck, should be the son of David as the son of Man, or seed
of Abraham. Now if we can persuade our selves, that God either speaks or
swears as he truly intends, or that mortal man may certainly know where to
have him, or what to trust to: we must believe and acknowledge those events
concerning which he has sworn not to repent, to be far more necessary in
respect of the irresistible decree, from the first interposition of such oath;
then those ordinary blessings or cursings, which he seriously threat^eth or
promises, but disjunctively, and with express reservation of their repentance
whom he threatens, or of their defection whom he incourageth by his promises:
yet such was his covenant of life and death with his people, such was his
decree concerning the prosperity or calamity of David's temporal Kingdom; as
the Ier 18. ^. etc.
Prophets comments upon the promise made to 2 Samuel 7. 12. etc. See the next
chapter of this Book parag. 2.
David expressly testify. By these and the like oracles fully exemplified in
the alternation of Jerusalem and Iudahs contrary fates, or success; we may
discern the course of that eternal providence, by whose irresistible unerring
disposition, all other States or Kingdoms have the certain periods of their
prosperity or calamity assigned, and by which Princes and greatest statesmen
stand or fall.

SECTION III.
Of the manifestation of Divine Providence in the remarkable erection,
declination, and periods of Kingdoms: in overruling policy, and disposing the
success of humane undertakings.
CHAP. 24.
Of the contrary Fates or Awards whereof David's temporal kingdom was capable:
and of its devolution from Gods antecedent to his consequent Will.
1 HOMER was not so blinded with the heathenish misconceit of Fate, as
not-to-see more ways to death than one. In Achilles he described two courses
of life, the one shorter but decked with glory; the other longer, but bare and
naked of ^ame: both alike possible by Fates.

Thetis foresaw, Fates by two ways, Homer. Iliad. 1.

Might bring me to my end;
The one by Troy, where if my time
I should with honor spend,
It was but short: but if at home,
A sluggard still I stayed;
My life was long, but with no Fame,
Or praise to be repaid.
Now as one poison sometimes expels another: so this opinion of double Fate,
(if men be disposed to use this term) takes away the malignity of that error,
which holds all events to be fatal; albeit of such twofolded fates or
success, the one part or the other must by absolute necessity be fulfilled,
according to the parties choice, unto whom they are awarded. The body of that
which Homer shadowed in Achilles, is evidently contained in Gods forementioned
covenant with Israel, and sealed unto us by manifest experience in David's
line. For of Gods special providence over the seed of Abraham or the Jewish
nation in general, we have treated at large in the first Book of the Comments
upon the Apostles Creed. The contrary Fates of David's kingdom in succeeding
ages, seem to wrestle and strive, as Jacob and Esau did in the womb, or to
countersway each other, like two opposite scales unequally balanced, by
turns. That thus it fared with David's Kingdom, does not argue Gods decree
concerning it to have been mutable, but rather immutably to have elevated and
depressed both Prince and People, according to the degrees of their mutability
in turning to him or from him.

2 Solomon had the largest talent of wealth, and the greatest measure of wit to
use it, that any earthly King either before or after him had. His possibilities
to increase his kingdom, and propagate greatness to his posterity, were much
greater than any earthly Monarch since him might expect. Many parts of Gods
glorious promises made to David, were literally meant of him, which were never
literally fulfilled in him, or in his natural lineage; because they did not
perform the conditions, which God required, that they might be more capable
of his extraordinary undeserved favors. The Covenant with David is expressed
Psalm. 89. I have found David my servant: with my holy oil have I anointed him.
With whom my hand shall be established: mine arm also shall strengthen him.
The enemy also shall not exact upon him: nor the son of wickedness afflict
him. And I will beat down his foes before his face: and plague them that hate
him. This promise pertaines to David and to his successors: but however the
promise was on Gods part unalterable, yet the prerogative promised was subject
unto change on contingency. For so a little after the Psalmist distinguishes
betwixt David's seed and David's sons. His seed will I make to endure for ever,
and his throne as the days of Heaven. This he speaks not of many, but of one,
to wit, of Christ, to whom only the Kingdom of David was predestined. Of
such as were ordained to this Kingdom, he speaks in the plural, not
absolutely but conditionally: If his children forsake my Law, and walk not in
my judgments; if they break my Statutes, and keep not my Commandments: Then
will I visit their transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes.
The tenor then of Gods Covenant with David as it concerned Christ was
absolute, but as it concerns David's other sons, it was disjunctive, or
conditional. If any shall question why God for many generations did deal no
better with David's successors, than with the successors of other Kings, the
answer from the tenor of the Covenant is plain, They forsook his Laws, and
would not walk in his Judgments. Psalm. 89. verse. 32. and thus breaking his
Statutes, their visitation was altogether unevitable, not on a sudden, but by
degrees. The Lords arm even in Salomons time was stretched out, ready to fetch
the blow, which after his death fell upon his son Rehoboam, as heir to his
chastisements. The blow was sudden and smart; for of twelve Tribes, ten were
rent from his Kingdom by Jeroboam. The wounds Inflicted by the Egyptian upon
Judah and Benjamin, and upon Jerusalem her self, were grievous, though as yet
not uncurable. So grievous as might give that people plainly to understand,
that the prosperity of David's earthly Kingdom was not like the days of
heaven, nor the glory of Salomons throne like the Sun in the Firmament,
altogether privileged from change, or mutability. But albeit the motion of the
creature, appointed to execute Gods wrath, were sudden, yet the weight of
Ierusalems burden was not permanent, because she was not as yet frozen in
sin.

3 Of Rehoboams successors some were good, and these by their penitency and
heroical reformation, set back the Dial of such dismal Fates, as still did
threaten them: many were bad, and did draw Gods plagues upon themselves and
their people. And whilst the blow of Gods stretched out arm, is diverted and
borne off by the fervent prayers of godly Princes; the weight of the whole
Nations burden, is much increased by the iniquity of the people. Either the
number of the supplicants was not equal to the number of the delinquents; or
the fervency of their prayer and repentance, not so constant, as the others
delight in sin and wickedness. The weight of their sinister Fates, by this
means secretly and insensibly increasing (even whilst their motion was
restrained or abated) increased the swiftness or violence of the motion, when
by permission of the Divine Decree, they had liberty to take their wonted
course. Ioas and Achas pulled them on so fast, that Micha threatened judgment,
not against the King and Nobles only, but against City and Temple, in such a
thundering voice, as if desolation had even then besieged the City round about,
and utter destruction was ready to enter in at the breach: Therefore shall Sion
for your sake be plowed as a Field, and Jerusalem shall become heaps, and the
mountain of the house, as the high places of the Forest. Micha 3. ver. 12.
Spoke he this of his own times, or of some others following? was it in respect
of the Eternal Decree, altogether impossible for this dreadful sentence to
have been forthwith put in execution? Indeed many of their Magistrates and
Politicians, most of their Priests and Prophets, until this very instant had
said to the like purpose: Is not the Lord among us, none evil can come upon
us. verse. 11. This vain confidence presumptuously and falsely grounded upon the
immutability of Gods promises, made the doom menaced by Micha more necessary
and fatal at this time, than otherwise it would have been; though to such as
understood the tenor of Gods Covenant with his people, neither at this time
nor many years after, altogether unevitable.

4 The good King Hezekiah knew the Lord did not threaten in jest, and for this
reason his fear was hearty, and his prayers earnest: Did he not fear the
Lord, and besought the face of the Lord? Ier. 26. ver. 19. But did this his
fear or hearty prays impair the present possibility or necessity of the
plagues threatened? Yes, The Lord repented him. Of what? that he had denounced
all this evil against Jerusalem, or entreated Hezekiah so roughly by his
Prophet Micha? no: But the Lord repented him of the evil which he had
denounced against him and meant to execute. For who repents himself of that
which he did not so much as truly intend? Is God then as man that he should
repent? It is impossible that there should be any change of purpose in God, and
herein he is most unlike to man, or the son of man, whose repentance always
includes some internal alteration of will or purpose, not of the matter
purposed only. Our best intentions of good to others, often expire upon
particular respects, and cannot be revived again, albeit we neither had just
occasion to take dislike, nor the same reasons to continue it, which we had to
take it. Through the inconstancy of our nature we loath to morrow what we like
to day: our affections alter without any change in the matter affected by us.
Far otherwise it is with God, whose will or purpose is still immutable; and yet
exactly fitteth every change or mutation in the creature. To have punished
Jerusalem continuing her wonted course (but six months longer after the
Prophet had thus warned her) with such miseries as Senacherib had menaced, was
one part of the eternal and unchangeable decree: another part of the same
decree (no less immutable) was to avert these plagues from Jerusalem truly
repenting upon their denunciation. No former wickedness could alienate his
love from her, or make him recall the blessings promised to David, so long as
this people was so affected, as in that covenant was required.

5 The possibility of the desolation menaced by Micha, was, for the present, as
great, as the Assyrian was potent. It might truly have been said of this City,
in respect of his army, what one says of Navigators:

Est tua tam prope mors, quam prope cernis aquam. That extraordinary power
wherewith the Lord had armed this Tyrant to take vengeance upon his neighbor
nations, might well make the present avoydance of the plagues menaced by Micha,
seem almost impossible. But good Hezekiah, by turning with all his heart, and
all his soul unto the Lord, unto whom all things are possible, did not only
remove destruction threatened from the City and Temple, but caused it to turn
upon the destroyer. Jerusalem and Judah, by the unfeigned penitence of Prince
and People, became the object of Gods antecedent will, and fell under the
former part of Gods Covenant with David: The enemy shall not exact upon him,
nor the son of wickedness afflict him. And I will beat down his foes before
his face, and plague them that hate him. Psalm 89. verse. 22, 23. The Assyrian by
going beyond his commission, in daring not Hezekiah only, but the Lord of
Hosts, unto whose protection Hezekiah had fled, becomes the object of Gods
consequent will, which by divine appointment, he was at that time to execute
upon Jerusalem; but upon Jerusalem fallen away by disobedience, not upon
Jerusalem returning in heart unto her God.

6 That this people might have some time of breathing and respite to gather
themselves for the better accomplishing of so great a work, as Hezekiah had
begun; the Lord in his wisdom so disposed that Tirhakah King of Cush should
make forward to entertain Senacherib with battle at that very instant,
wherein he had purposed to give the on set upon Jerusalem. This unexpected
removal of present terror, was (no doubt) a sure pledge unto the people for
strengthening their relyance on Gods promise, for settling their hearts and
continuing their constancy in fervent prayers, during the time of the enemies
absence. And seeing the force of Egypt and Cush were not sufficient to
dissipate Senacheribs mighty army, perhaps not able to hold him play any
longer; the Lord sends Hezekiah and his people deliverance from heaven: Then
the Angel of the Lord went forth, and smote in the Camp of the Assyrians, a
hundredth fourscore and five thousand: and when they arose, early in the
morning, behold they were all dead corpses. Isaiah, 37. verse. 36. The noise of
this great overthrow was as the joyful sound of a Iubile unto Jerusalem, and
did portend another more admirable and victorious Iubile to be accomplished in
the same place; of which In the Treatise of Christ's answer to John.
elsewhere. This for the present might witness to Hezekiah and the people,
that rather then one tittle of Gods Covenant with David should fall to the
ground, the host of heaven should leave their station, and keep garrison on
earth. A little after this miraculous deliverance, the Sun is compelled to go
fifteen degrees backwards, for setting forward the course of Hezekiah his
life, whom Death and Fate had now, in the worlds sight, arrested. God hereby
testified unto Prince and People, that if they would continue such in health,
as they were in sickness, so well-minded in peace and prosperity, as they had
been in strait siege, or other distress of war: Ierusalems good days might
become as certain and constant, as the days of heaven; seeing that great
light, which was appointed from the beginning to rule the day, did now give
place to Hezekiahs prayers. But most of this people were most unlike their
Prince, albeit even he, after he had received those two miraculous pledges of
Gods love, did not render according to the reward bestowed upon him. 2 Chronicles.
32. v. 25. For his heart was lifted up, therefore there was wrath upon him, and
upon Judah and Jerusalem. Notwithstanding, Hezekiah humbled himself for the
pride of his heart (both he and the inhabitants of Jerusalem:) so that the
wrath of the Lord came not upon them in the days of Hezekiah.

7 After the yoke of Ashur was taken from off this peoples neck, many of them
became wanton, others secure, as not suspecting that a Cockatrice should spring
out of this Serpents root, that his fruit should be a fiery flying Serpent.
Isai. 14. v. 29. Unto Hezekiah himself, though a most wise and prudent King,
the Babylonian tyranny, being now in his infancy, did seem by nature more mild
and gentle, than the Assyrian had been. And not content to entertain the King
of Babylons Ambassadors with courtesies suitable to their congratulations, he
showed them his treasury and all the good things wherewith the Lord had blessed
him: willing (perhaps) to give their master and the world to wit, that
notwithstanding the former wars and exactions, he was no beggar; but a fit
confederate for neighbor Princes, to curb the insolency of the Assyrian,
whose strength though much abated by the terrible blow, which the Angel of the
Lord had given Senacheribs host, was not quite broken till many years after.
But the Prophet knew this fawning whelpe to be of wolvish kind, and discovered
those implanted seeds of cruelty in him, which when they came to be ripe, would
be more noisome to the Kings and Princes of Judah, than his predecessor the
Assyrian had been. Isaiah said unto Hezekiah, Hear the word of the Lord:
Behold, the days come, that all that is in thy house, and that which thy
fathers have laid up in store unto this day, shall be carried unto Babylon:
nothing shall be left, says the Lord. And of thy sons that shall issue from
thee, which thou shall beget, shall they take away, and they shall be Eunuchs
in the palace of the King of Babylon. 2 King. Chapter 20. verse. 17, 18.

8 Any Heathen which had held Esaias for an undoubted Sooth-sayer, would
instantly have concluded hence, that the captivity of Hezekiahs successors, and
all the miseries which the Babylonian afterward brought upon Judah and
Jerusalem, were absolutely fatal, altogether impossible to be avoided. And
many good Christians (perhaps) will question, whether the plagues here
threatened, were not from this point of time, necessary in respect of the Divine
Decree. To answer this question by interrogation: Why should not the spirit of
the Prophet Esaias be as truly subject to the former prophetical rule, as Micahs
was? Now God, according to that rule, was ready to repent him of all the evil,
which he had threatened, whenever the people should repent them of whatsoever
they had done. The Lord had given Hezekiah and his successors a far larger
and longer time, for preventing the evil which Esaias threatened, than they had
for avoiding the doom denounced by Micah. The very tenor of the denunciation
made by Esaias, shows them a ready means for preventing the woe denounced; so
they would have laid it to their hearts, or followed the advice of succeeding
Prophets. But mortality must needs be rife, where variety of diseases and
multitudes of unskilful Empyricks do mere. The common transgressions of the
people, are the epidemicall diseases of States: and such projects as Princes or
Statesmen, without the prescript of Gods Word, or suggestion of his Providence,
use for their recovery, are like unseasonable ministration of Empyricall or old
wives medicines, to crased bodies. They usually invite or entertain the
destruction or ruin of kingdoms, otherwise ready to depart. Not the best
amongst the Kings of Judah, but were smatterers in empyricall or secular
policy. Some were more, some less, all too much given to put confidence in
multitude of men and store of treasure. And for increasing this supposed sinew
of War and nutriment of Peace, they used means, neither warrantable by Gods
written Law, nor by the rule of charity. To prevent this mischief which is
the root of all evil, what persuasion could be more fit or pertinent, than
this prediction of the Prophet: That the wealth which Hezekiah and his fathers
had heaped together, which his successors would be too careful to increase,
would in succeeding ages steal their children, for whom it was provided, from
them, and make them miserable captives in a foreign Land. To heap up riches
we know not for whom, is a vanity; to heap them up with care and toil to the
destruction of our best private friends, and advancement of the public enemy,
is the extremity of folly mixed with misery. Had Hezekiah his successors been
as ready to ask counsel of Gods Prophets as of Politicians; these could have
instructed them, that the miseries foretold by Esaias, were fatal unto
covetousness and unconscionable care for posterity; yet not simply necessary
after covetousness was much increased in Hezekiahs successors. For long after
the going out of this decree, whenever the Princes of Judah repented for
their own oppression, and the oppression of their fathers, the Lord repented
him of the plagues denounced, and showed himself ready to remove the oppressor
from them. And though in penitency in other sins, did in part concur; yet
continuance in violence and oppression, was the principal string and fatal
cord, by which the Princes of Judah did draw captivity upon themselves and
their children, and desolation upon the City.

9 To pass over the various alternation of Iudahs and Ierusalems different
fates, in the days of Manasses Ammon, and Josias, and come to Iehoikim, Josias
son, in whose days the inveterate disease of Judah came to a Crisis: Did not
thy Father (says the Prophet Jeremy to this untoward and Prince) eat and
drink, and do judgment and justice, and then it was well with him? He judged
the cause of the poor and needy, then it was well with him: was not this to
know me (says the Lord?) But thine eyes and thy heart are not, but for thy
covetousness, and for to shed innocent blood, and for oppression, and for
violence to do it. Therefore thus says the Lord concerning See Josephus in
the history of Iehoiakim. Et Seder Olam.
Iehoiakim the son of Josiah King of Judah, They shall not lament for him,
saying, Ah my brother, or ah sister: they shall not lament for him, saying, Ah
Lord, or ah his glory. He shall be buried with the burial of an Ass, drawn
and cast forth beyond the gates of Jerusalem. Ier. 22. verse. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.

Shortly after the execution of this sentence upon Iehoiakim in full measure,
Ieconiah his son, with other of the royal seed, according to Esaias former
prophecy, were carried captives unto Babell, and all or some of them made
Eunuchs. Howbeit the execution of the same decree upon Zedekiah and such as
were yet left behind, was not as yet unavoydable, or merely fatal; but such
notwithstanding they made it at last by continuance of like covetousness and
oppression.

When the City was more narrowly besieged by the Chaldean, than it had been by
the Assyrian: the Lord of hosts calls for the Egyptian, as he had done for the
King of Cush, to remove the siege. The liberty and respiration which Zedekiah
and his besieged people in the mean time got, being much greater then Hezekiah
had for two years space together; was a true pledge of Gods antecedent will,
which in part they had fulfilled, and which should undoubtedly have been
fulfilled in greater measure for their good, so they had used this liberty to
Gods glory; or gone on so well in this time of breathing, as in their distress
they had begun. Ye were now turned, and had done right in my sight, in
proclaiming liberty every man to his neighbor, and ye had made a covenant
before me in the house which is called by my name. But ye returned and polluted
my name, and caused every man his servant, and every man his handmaid, whom
he had set at liberty at their pleasure, to return; and brought them into
subjection, to be unto you for servants and for handmaids. Therefore thus
says the Lord, Ye have not hearkened unto me, in proclaiming liberty every
one to his brother, and every man to his neighbor: behold I proclaim a
liberty for you, says the Lord, to the Sword, to the Pestilence, and to the
Famine: and I will make you to be removed into all the Kingdoms of the Earth,
etc. Ier. 34. v. 15, 16, 17. And Zedekiah King of Judah and his Princes will I
give into the hands of their enemies, and into the hand of them that seek
their life, and into the hand of the King of Babylons army which are gone up
from you. Behold, I will command, says the Lord, and cause them to return to
this City, and they shall fight against it, and take it, and burn it with
fire, and I will make the Cities of Judah a desolation without an inhabitant.
ver. 21, 22.

10 Too much skill in secular policy made them put too great confidence in the
strength of Egypt: and this confidence in the help of man, made them secure,
whilst they were conscious of breaking the Covenant which their Fathers had
made, and they lately renewed with their God. The probabilities of the
Egyptians success against the Chaldean, were (in all politic esteem) very
great: and likely it is that the Chaldeans were brought back again with speed
unto Jerusalem by the special hand of the Almighty, that they might execute
his judgments upon this rebellious people. How necessary, how fatal and
unevitable the execution of his consequent will always becomes, where his
antecedent will has been thus openly and wilfully neglected, may best be
gathered from the same Prophets reiterated threats unto this people, resuming
(as it seems) their former vain confidence of the Chaldeans final departure,
after his forementioned prophecy to the contrary. Ier. 37. ver. 9, 10. Thus
says the Lord, deceive not your selves, saying, The Chaldeans shall surely
depart from us: for they shall not depart. For though ye had smitten the whole
army of the Chaldeans that fight against you, and there remained but wounded
men among them; yet should they rise every man in his tent, and burn this
City with fire. To extinguish this flame, or prevent the extinction of
Zedekiahs royal race and Iudahs earthly glory, there was no possibility left,
so long as they wrestled with Fates, and made policy their strength: yet was
there after this time, a possibility, as true, as Gods promise can make any,
for escaping a tanto, though not a toto; a possibility for Zedekiah to have
kept himself and his family in a better estate, then they afterward enjoyed;
a possibility to have left the City and Temple standing, after death had
disposed of them; so he would at the time appointed by God, have submitted
himself unto the King of Babell, unto whom he had sworn allegiance. Then said
Jeremiah unto Zedekiah, Thus says the Lord the God of Hosts, the God of
Israel; If thou wills assuredly go forth unto the King of Babylons Princes,
then thy soul shall live, and this City shall not be burnt with fire, and
thou shall live and thy house. But if thou will not go forth to the King of
Babylons Princes, then shall this City be given into the hands of the
Chaldeans, and they shall burn it with fire, and thou shall not escape out of
their hand. Ier. 38. ver. 17, 18

And Zedekiah the King said unto Jeremiah; I am afraid of the Jews that are
fallen to the Chaldeans, lest they deliver me into their hand, and they mock
me. But Jeremiah said, They shall not deliver thee: obey, I beseech thee, the
voice of the Lord, which I spoke unto thee: so it shall be well unto thee, and
thy soul shall live. But if thou refuse to go forth, this is the word which
the Lord has showed me. And behold, all the women that are left in the King of
Iudahs house, shall be brought forth unto the King of Babylons Princes, and
those women shall say; Thy friends have set thee on, and have prevailed against
thee: thy feet are sunk in the mire, and they are turned away back. So they
shall bring out all thy wives, and thy children to the Chaldeans, and thou
shall not escape out of their hand, but shall be taken by the hand of the King
of Babylon: and thou shall cause this City to be burnt with fire. etc. verse.
19, 20, 21, 22, 23.

11 This last neglect of Gods antecedent will, so often revealed for his good,
procured the speedy execution of his consequent will without all possibility to
avoid it. Not a title of Ieremies or Ezekiels prophecy, which his See Josephus
in the History of Zedekiah.
Politicians sought to set at variance, but is exactly fulfilled upon him, and
so is Micahs prophecy upon this City. The manner how Ieremies and Ezekiels
prophecy, which seem to contradict each other, were both fulfilled, is
admirable, and might well move a man, not well acquainted with the nature of
prophecies and Gods special providence, to think the Fates had plotted his
ruin. But this particular argument is prosecuted elsewhere more at large.

12 To recapitulate the sum of many arguments to like purposes unto every
possible choice or resolution made by man, whether concerning matters private
or public, there is a distinct correspondent success allotted by the
omnipotent and immutable Decree. Every actual choice or resolution, is as the
drawing of a new lot, whose just price or recompense, be it good or bad, is
instampt upon it from eternity. And for the awarding or payment of it in due
time, the whole host of Gods creatures stand bound by the very tenor of their
being or dependancy upon their Maker. Seeing all of them were made by his
word, and are continued by his mere will and pleasure; sooner shall they
forfeit their very being, and be resolved into nothing, than the least tittle
of Gods will, concerning any creature, should not be fulfilled; or, that
success, be it good or bad, should not be awarded to private men or public
States in that exact degree and measure, which God from eternity has appointed.

From ignorance of this essential subordination, which fate or conspiracy of
second causes, have unto Gods irresistible providence, who by his infinite
creative power, can at all times dissolve their combination, or compose them
anew, by ways to man for number incomprehensible, as pleases him; the wisest
amongst State wizards have erred and do err more grossly in assigning the
causes of Kingdoms ruins or erections, or in prognosticating the success of
politic skill, than a vulgar Astronomer should do, which would take upon him
to foretell the peculiar disposition of the Air or weather in every place
throughout this Island, for every hour of the year following. The observation
which many of them gather from the inspection of times present or past, are of
as little use for future ages, as an Almanac of this year, is for the years
following. Sooner may modern Scholars prove extraordinary Husbandmen, by
observing Virgils Calender of the rising and setting of Stars, or other rules
of that ancient husbandry, which he describes; than pragmaticall wits become
wise Statesmen by reading Tacitus, Livy, or others, better acquainted with the
mysteries of State, or Princely secrets, than with Gods providence or with the
Almighties Decree concerning the success of their projects. Though that decree
be as He is most immutable, yet the variety of men's dispositions, especially
in sundry ages, is greater than any alterations in the heavens; the diverse
conjunctions or oppositions of men's wills to his, are more then can be found
amongst the Stars. Now it is his immutable will to render unto every people
and nation, according to the degrees of that conformity or dissonancy, which
they hold; with his mercy, bounty, or justice, or with his most holy will.

CHAP. 25.
Of the sudden and strange erection of the Macedonian Empire, and the
manifestation of Gods special providence in Alexanders expedition and success.
1 ARISTOTLE (...). Arist. l. 7. cap. 7. polit.
being born when Greece did flourish, and living when the Halcyon days of
Macedon began to dawne, would gladly tie the light of GODS countenance, which
in his full age was inclining to the Meridian of Greece, unto the situation of
his Country, and disposition of his Countrymen, whose politic virtues, in his
Philosophical vanity, were intailed to the peculiar temper of that clime. The
people (says he) that live in cold countries, and in Europe (as distinct from
Greece) are stout and hardy, but not so wise and politic; more free then
civil, much apter to be their own men then their neighbors masters. The
Asiatickes (that want no wit) are destitute of courage: therefore they remain
in servitude and subjection unto others. The Grecians as they enjoy the middle
place for situation, so they participate with the Asiaticks for wit, and colder
countries for courage, in such proportion, as enapts them to preserve their
liberty, and to bear rule and sovereignty over others. Many Comets at their
first appearance, are usually mistaken for fixed Stars, reputed next in glory
unto the Moon; until their parallax bewray their place, and their sudden end
discover their orginall to be corruption. Thus the brightness of the Grecian
Monarchy, whilst it was in rising or coming unto its height, misperswaded
their hearts whose eyes it dazeled, that it was to endure like the days of
heaven; whereas it proved but like the glistring bubbles of the morning dew,
which dissolve with the strength of those beams, that gave them luster. This
is the only difference: the period of their splendour falls in the compass of
an hour, and Comets usually continue not many months. Whereas the rise and fall
of Kingdoms commonly outreach any one man's age or observation, and such as
follow mark the occurrences of their own times more then their connection with
former. Whence it is, that secular politicians are always learning, and never
attain unto the knowledge of what they seek. Howbeit, Aristotle lived long
enough to have seen his error, for Alexander (I take it) did dye before him,
and with Alexanders life the light of Macedon was extinguished, and the glory
of Greece much eclipsed and abated. And though neither Greece nor Macedon have
changed their clime or site, yet Aristotle's (...), Keen Cocks of the game,
have proved as arrant Cravens since, as the Asiaticks in his time were; as any
Europe ever hatched: infamous for effeminatenesse under the Romans, so deeply
infected with the Asi-aticke luxury, that their very nature seemed to be
tainted with servility, and to solicit that barbarous yoke, which for a long
time has been laid upon them. But their present estate stands in more need of
our prayers, then their fore-elders did of our censure. To return unto their
best times.

2 Never had any Monarchy on Earth save one (if happily that may be called a
Monarchy) either so speedy an erection or so sudden a dissolution, as the
Macedonian had. The true reason of its sudden dissolution, as a Pa^san.
Writer in this case unpartially tells us, was, because the Foundation of it
was laid by perjury. The true cause of its swift erection, was partly the
execution of Gods justice upon the Persian, and other Nations communicants with
him in his present luxury, partly the accomplishing of Gods antecedent will for
the good of his Church, as is In the fulfilling of that prophecy, Zac. 9. v. 9.
elsewhere specified. In Aristotle's time, Alexander was, as Nebuchadnezzar had
been Gods scourge or hammer to bruise all Eastern Nations.

3 The incredible success of Alexanders furious attempts were such, as no
Heathen which outlived him, could ascribe unto policy, wealth, or strength, or
whatsoever means merely humane. Amongst others, the heroical Roman Poet so
describes his beginnings and proceedings, as if the Fates had used his
restless instinct to purchase same, but as a spur to make him run the race,
and his sudden death as a curb to check his fury, lest he should transgress
the bounds that they had set him.

-- Macedum fines, latebrasque suorum
Deseruit, victasque patri despexit Athenas,
Perque Asiae populos fatis urgentibus actus
Humana cum strage ruit, gladiumque per omnes
Exegit gentes: ignotos miscuit amnes;
Persarum Euphraten, Indorum sanguine Gangen:
Terrarum fatale malum, fulmenque quod omnes
Percuteret pariter populos, and sydus iniquum
Gentibus. oc^ano classes infer parabat,
Exteriore mari, non illi flamma, nec undae,
Nec sterilis Libye, nec Syrticus obstitit Ammon.
Isset in occasus, mundi devexa secutus,
Ambissetque polos, Nilumque a font bibisset:
Occurrit suprema dies, naturaque solum,
Hunc potuit finem vesano ponere Regi.
Lucan. lib. 10.
Sed cecidit Babylone suae, Parthoque verendus.
Pro pudor! E^i propius timuere sarissas,
Quam nunc pila timent populi: licet usque sub Arcton
Regnemus, Zephyrique domos, terrasque premamus
Flagrantis post terga Noti: cedemus in ortus
Arsacidum domino, non foelix Parthia Crasso
Exiguae secura fuit provincia Pellae.
Lucan. ibid.
The Eastern Nations (to our shame)
The Grecian pikes did dread
More than they do the Romans dart,
Whose sovereignty is spread
Through Climates hot, and Climates cold;
Through all the winds that blow.
Did not proud race of Arsacus,
Us in the East o're-crow.
Yet Parthia stout, which, (unrevenged)
Drunk Roman Crassus blood,
To little Pella, on safe terms,
Of conquered Province, stood.
4* Some passages in this Poet may serve as a Motto to Apelles his devise, who
painted Alexander with a thunderbolt in his hand; as if he had been appointed
for a sudden terror to Nations far and near, astonishing more places with
dread of his swift approach, then felt his stroke. But whatsoever the Poet or
Painter could express, was more excellently represented by Gods Prophet, many
years before Alexander or Darius was born. And as I was considering, behold,
an he Goat came from the West on the face of the whole earth, and touched not
the ground: and the Goat had a notable horn between his eyes. And he came to
the Ram that had two horns, which I had seen standing before the river, and
ran unto him in the fury of his power. And I saw him come close unto the
Ram, and he was moved with choler against him, and smote the Ram, and brake
his two horns, and there was no power in the Ram to stand before him, but
he cast him down to the ground, and stamped upon him; and there was none that
could deliver the Ram out of his hand. Therefore the he Goat waxed very
great, and when he was strong, the great horn was broken: and for it came up
four notable ones, toward the four winds of heaven. Dan. 8. ver. 5, 6, 7,
8. What should move the Prophet to compare the Kingdom of the Medes and
Persians to a The Persian Rams, as some relate, are of an extraordinary
greatness, and might serve as an Emblem of Darius his excessive power in
respect of Alexanders, if it were to be measured by visible co^jecture.
Ram, or what the comparison did in particular portend, is not so useful for
me at this time to know, nor so easy to find, as the mystical portendment of
his resembling the Macedonian Kingdom to a Goat. The Macedonians in Daniels
time, and until Philip of Macedons time (who as Non sum facturus verba,
Macedones, ut vos abista domum redeundi cupiditale demoveam (siquidem per me
integrum vobis est quo libuerit abire) sed ut intelligatis, quid ego vobis
praestiterim, and quale^ vos mihi vice^ rependentes discedatis. Ac primum a
Philippo patre (ut par est) ordiar. Philippus enim vos incertis sedibus
errantes atque inopes, and pleresque sub Pellibus degentes, exiguosque ovium
greges in montibus pascentes, ac pro ijs parum feliciter adversus Illyrios,
Triballos, and finitimos Thracas bellum gerentes; pro Pellibus Chlamydes
gestendas dedit, ex montibus in planitiem deduxit, paresque hostibus ad
pugnandum effecit, ut non tam in Loceru^ munitione deinceps, qua^ in vestra
virtute sal^te^ collocaretis urbes vobi^ habita^das dedit, optimisque legibus
atque institutis ornavit. Idem vobis in eos ipsos barbaros qui vos assiduis
populationibus lacessebant, imperium acquisivit, and dominos eservis effecit:
magnam Thraciae partem Macedoniae adjecit oppidisque ad marit^mam oram peroppor
tunis in potestatem suam redactis, commerciorum sacultatem aperuit, and tutas
metallorum fodinas suppeditavit. Thessalos praeterea, quorum metu olim
exanimati eratis, vestro imperio subjecit: Gente Phocensium afflicta, aditum in
Graeciam amplum and expeditum pro angusto and difficili vobis patefecit.
Arrian* de expedit. Alex. lib. 7. p. 151.
Alexander in his choler, upbraided them, first made them Gentlemen) were poor
shepherds or goath^ards scarce able to defend their own mountains; no way
likely to assault the Persian in his own Land. Now as the swiftness of
Alexanders expedi^ion, and the fierceness of his onset upon Darius, is lively
resembled by a Goat running to push; so his tender years are excellently
characterized in the Hebrew, which is verbatim hircus caprarum, which properly
signifies rather a Kid, then a Goat come to full growth; or a male kid that
follows the Damme. For, Alexander, when he undertook this expedition
against Darius had more of his mothers countenance, then of his fathers. But
the younger he was, the more ready he was to conceive hope of victory against
all hope in the forecast of man. His too much haste had procured worse speed,
unless he which had raised up his spirit to this attempt, had a while arrested
him with sickness at Tharsis. His abode there and at Solis to sacrifice for
his recovery, made Darius presume that he had run himself out of breath,
and durst not look upon his puissant host, much less abide his push. And in
this error, into which his own and others presumptuous confidence, in the
multitude and magnificence of his army, had led him, he makes haste to follow
after Alexander, who, before either knew of others removal, was gotten beyond
him. The circumstances of their mutual error and of their conflict, are so
consonant, to the Prophets predictions, that I must believe the same God, which
decreed Absalons fall by overthrowing Achitophels counsel, had now fully
decreed to ruinate the Persian Monarchy, by suffering Darius to listen more
unto his flattering braggards, then unto the mature advice of Amyntas. This
wise Darius interea cum exercitu castris locum delegerat, Assyriae ca^pum
planu^ omnique ex part apertum, qui and magnitudini exercitus maxim commodus
esset, and ad ducendum equitatum peropportunus visus fuerat. A quo quidem loco
ne recederet, Amyntas Antiochi filius, ab Alexandr^ transfuga, su^serat. Loci
enim amplitudinem, and multitudini Persarum and impedimentis percommodam esse.
Et mansit quidem eo Loci Darius. Caeteru^ quum Alexander longiorem moram Tarsi
ob aegritudinem sa^^ret, neque minorem Solis, ubi and sacrificarat and Ludos
fecerat; mullum etiam temp^ris in expeditione adversus Cilicas montanos
posuisset: Darium a sententia sua abduxit, neque invitus adid quod maxim cordi
erat credendum, protractus est. Siquidem ab ijs qui ad voluptatem tantam
loquuntur (maxim^ semper regibus, cum quibus versantur, damno futuri) impulsus,
Alexandrum ulterius progredi (...) sibi (...) adventus perculsum. Arrian. de
expedit. Alex. lib. 2. page 35.
Captain, by birth a Macedonian, well knowing Alexander to be of such a
forward spirit, as would scorn either not to seek his adversary any where, or
not to encounter him wheresoever he found him; counseled Darius to expect him
in the plain of Assyria, whither he assured him that he would shortly come,
though to the great disadvantage of the Grecians: But that advantage which
Alexander scorned to seek, the Lord mighty in battle, vouchsafed to give
him, as Alexander himself freely acknowledged, after he knew where Darius his
army was encamped. Although he could hardly be brought to believe that Darius
had left his station and marched toward Cilicia, until his Scouts brought him
certain word that he had his adversary in his hands, so it would but please
him to put them forth whilst time served to take him.

But the Historians censure of Darius his fatal miscariage, will give the
ingenuous Reader better satisfaction, then any discourse can be made upon it.
To excuse his folly in not harkening to Amyntas, which had been too gross if
it had been merely natural, he says, (...), etc. which the Translator
misinterprets, when he says, Ac fortasse Deus illum eo loci adduxit. The
Authors words import thus much in English: Assuredly some divine misfortune led
him into that place, in which his horsemen, his chiefest trust, would do him
no Hoc etia^ modo ejus animum commoverant, quod Darij Equitatum facile
universas Macedonum copias proculcaturum dicebant: quantumvis Amyntas
Alexandrum, ubicunque is Darium esse audi^ et, venturum affirmasset: ibique eum
opperiri suasisset. Caeterum deterior sententia, quod primo accessu gratior
auribus accideret, vicit. Ac fortasse Deus illum eo Loci adduxit, ubi nec
equitatus magno usui esse posset, ut nec infinita hominum pariter and jaculoru^
ac telorum multitudo; sed nec ipsam quidem excercitus magni ficentiam ostendere
poterat: sed Alexandro facilem omnino victoriam praebebat. Oportebat enim Asiae
imperiu^ Persis a Macedonibus adi^i, quemadmodum Persa Medis ac prius Medi
Assyriis ademerant. Arrian, ibid.
service, wherein nor multitude of men, nor store of munition, could advantage
him, being so straightened that he could not make any true representation of the
gaudinesse or goodlinesse of his army. It was a place so fit as Alexanders
Counsel of War, could not have made choice of a fitter for delivering up the
Scepter of Persia into his hands.

5 Alexanders sollicitous, though superstitious care to render thanks or
supplications for good success unto the reputed Gods of every place where he
touched in this expedition, is to me a sufficient testimony or assured sign,
that he had taken certain notice of some peculiar divine instinct impelling
him to undertake it. And not knowing from what special God this instinct or
impulsion came, he tendered his service unto all he knew. Postquam namque e
longinque vidit candidatum populum, and Sacerdotes ante agmen in amictu
byssino, Pontificemque in stola hyacinthina auro distincta, tiaram in capite
gestantem, prae fix^ aurea lamina Dei nomine inscript^, vix mentis compos,
solus accedens ad Pontificem ^lexander, comiter salutans nomen Dei adoravit,
quem se in Macedonia vidisse memoravit, dum deliberaret quo pa^to Asiam posset
subigere, ejusque ^ortatu expeditionem suscepisse. Quare and Deo immolavit*
salvis vitibus in templum ascendens, gavisus admodum o^^enso sibi libro
D^^^elis, in qu^ Graecum quendum Pers^^ debellaturum significabatur. Lib.
antiq. 11. cap. 8.
Josephus his narration of his devotion at Jerusalem, and great respect of Gods
High Priest there, suits well with his usual demeanor toward other Gods,
related by this Heathen Writer, and is not improbable from his princely
kindness unto the Jews, to whom he allotted free habitation in the City
called by his own name. Vide Dion.

6 Many particulars not impertinent to this discourse, I leave to the ingenuous
Readers observation, that shall be pleased to peruse Diodorus Siculus, Arianus,
or Quintus Curtius. These present rightly applied, may assuage that declamatory
humor of some pedantick politics, which would have Alexanders strange
success to be the natural issue of Macedonian valor, and Asiatick
effeminatenesse. Such collections might be tolerated in a young Student
appointed to make a theme or declamation in praise of masculine or frugall
spirits, or in dispraise of feminine luxury. Howbeit these politic
conjectures, are rather imperfect, than altogether untrue: whether the Authors
of them did apprehend so much or no, I know not, but certain it is, their
opinion supposes a Divine truth, which they express not. It is not improbable
in true Divinity, that the Persians were plagued as for many other sins, so
in special for their riot and luxury, and that God to give them notice hereof,
did make special choice of the Macedonian to be his scourge; a people
remarkable in those days for austerity of life and masculine behavior. For so
it is usual with the just Lord to upbraid those whom he severely punishes for
some predomiant vice, with some contrary virtue in them, by whom he punishes,
as elsewhere is exemplified more at large out of Dupliciter in illa Hispanoru^
captivitate Deus ostendere veluit, quantum and ^disset acrius libidinem, and
diligeret ^^stitatem, cum et Vandalos ob solam maxim pudicitiam illis
superponeret, and Hispanos ob solam vel maxim impudicitiam subjugaret. Quid
enim? Nanquid non erant in omni orb terrarum b^rberi fortiares, quibus
Hispaniae traderentur? multi absque dubio, imo ni fall^r, omnes. Sed id^o ille
infirmissimi^ hostibus cuncta tradidit, ut ostenderet scilicet, non vires
valere, sed causam; neque no^ tunc ignavissimorum qu^rundam hostium fortitudine
obrui, sed sola (...) nostrorum impuritate superari. De gubern. Dei. lib. 7.
Salvianus. But unless the Lord had otherwise disposed of time and place, the
Persian horses were not so effeminate or cowardly, but they might easily have
put the Macedonian pikes to flight, or trampled the footmen under their feet,
as Darius Courtiers proudly bragged before their encounter. But pride goes
before destruction, and God for this ^^^^on brought them into those straits,
wherein they might perceive and see the truth of what his Prophet had said, An
horse is but a vain thing, neither shall he deliver an^ by his great
strength. Psalm. 33. 17. And again: Woe to them that go down to Egypt for
help, and stay on horses, and trust in charets, because they are many, and in
horsemen, because they are very strong: but they look not unto the holy One of
Israel, neither seek the Lord* Isaiah 31. ver. 1. I should think my self
infideli deteriorem, worse then the Heathen Writer, if I did not derive
Alexanders victory over Darius, from the divine decree: The time appointed (to
use his Parag. 4.
words) was now come, that the Macedonian should take the Empire of Asia from
the Persians, as the Persians had taken it from the Medes, and the Medes from
the Assyrians. Now who is it that can appoint the times, but he which sits
above the circles of the heavens, and moves all things, being himself
immovable?

CHAP. 26.
Of the erection of the Chaldean Empire, and of the sudden destruction of it by
the Persian, with the remarkable documents of Gods special providence in
raising up the Persian by the ruin of the Chaldean Monarchy.
1 THe weapons of war wou^d more or less, according to their skill or strength
that weild the^. So is the whole strength of war it self; so is the might
and policy of every Kingdom more or less successful to friends, or
hurtful to foes, according to the proportion which it holds, with his will or
purpose, who is enstyled the Lord of hosts, the Lord mighty in battle.
Behold, they shall surely gather together, but not by me: whosoever shall gather
together against thee, shall fall for thy sake. Behold I have created the Smith
that blows the coals in the fire, and that brings forth an instrument for
his work, and I have created the waster to destroy. No weapon that is framed
against thee, shall prosper, and every tongue that shall rise against thee in
judgment, thou shall condemn. This is the heritage of the servants of the
Lord, and their righteousness is of me, says the Lord. Isaiah 54. verse. 15,
16, 17.
Unless the Grecians had been generally liable to the Egyptians censure
[(...), The Grecians are always children] in true antiquity, Aristotle might
have informed himself and his followers, that the Assyrians, and other
inhabitants of the southern coasts of Asia, had sometimes been a people so
fierce and terrible in war, that Alexander attended with the whole strength of
Macedon, would have been but as a flock of Sheep or an herd of Goats to an
host of Wolves or Lions. Whilst Tiglath Pelezer, Senacherib, and other Kings
of Assyria, were Hammers in the hand of God, who could resist them? The
strength of these Assyrians was so great, that the Prophet foresaw the sudden
advancement of the Chaldeans to the like or greater height or strength, would
hardly be believed by neighbor Nations, Jew or Gentiles, until they felt it
to their smart. Hab. 1. v. 5. to 10.
Behold ye among the Heathen, and regard, and wonder marvellously: for I will
work a work in your days which ye will not believe, though it be told you.
For lo, I raise up the Chaldeans, that bitter and hasty nation, which shall
march through the breadth of the Land, to possess the dwelling places that are
not theirs. They are terrible and dreadful: their judgment and their dignity
shall proceed of themselves. Their horses also are swifter then the Leopards,
and are more fierce then the evening Wolves, and their horsemen shall come from
far, they shall fly as the Eagle that hastes to eat. They shall come all for
violence: their faces shall sup up as the East wind, and they shall gather the
captivity as the sand. And they shall scoff at the Kings, and the Princes
shall be a scorn unto them: they shall deride every strong hold, for they
shall heap dust and take it.

The true and final reason, as well of the Assyrians as the Chaldeans sudden
greatness and success in battle, was the accomplishment of Gods consequent
will upon Israel and other neighbor Countries, grown, by speedy increase of
their iniquity, slaughter-ripe. Howbeit, the power it self or success of
these two Monarchies was a sure pledge of Gods antecedent Vide S. Hieron. in
cap. Isai. 45 v. 2. and 3.
will for their own greater good; so they had gratefully acknowledged his
goodness in making them so great. But when these Battaile-Axes began to lift up
themselves against him, which hewed the Nations with them; he abated their edge
and softened their temper. Of Nebuchadnezzar, whose excessive pride had made him
prouder then the rest, that Oracle was verified in an exquisite sense: Psalm.
49, 20.
Man being in honor had no understanding, but became like the beast that
perishes. And that other remnant of the last forecited prophecy, was
literally fulfilled in him, of whom it was meant; Then shall his mind change,
and he shall pass over, and offend, imputing this his power unto his God.
Habak. 1. v. 11. And Balshashar his son not taking warning by his
humiliation, nor by the hand writing upon the wall, was surprised with sudden
destruction, either the self same night wherein the hand was seen writing, or
(which is more probable) the same night of some year following. He had filled
the measure of his fathers sins, as full with iniquity, as the boules wherein
he caroused were with wine; and that being full, to drink the cup of Gods
wrath was to him at that time, necessary.

2 Now according to the Chaldeans growth in former iniquity, the prosperity of
the Medes and Persians did daily increase, and their success in war, become
every day more assured, than formerly it had been, and at length (in such a
sense as has been observed) altogether fatal. The frugality of their private
life, and public discipline, specially in war, were qualifications without
which (perhaps) the Lord would not so highly have advanced them, or used them
as his instruments in this service. But even these, and all other moral
virtues, unto which the Politician ascribes their good success, were proper
effects of Gods consequent will, now absolutely set to plague the Chaldeans,
and of his antecedent will for Isreal's redemption; sure tokens withal, of his
love unto these Conquerors.

The Historical syncerity of Xenophons intentions, or literal truth of his
ingenuous relations, have not been so much disparaged by any other pretenses
what soever, (if by any other at all) as by the heroical sweet exemplary
disposition of his admired Cyrus, by his dexterity in consultations, and the
extraordinary speedy success of what he put in execution. Whatsoever Xenophon
has said concerning his success, it does not so far exceed the unsuspected
stories of Alexanders swift growth in fame and greatness, as that did the
greatest increase or excess, which any one General, (though much longer
live'd than Alexander was) or which any one age did ever bring into the Roman
State. The Fama est [Caesarem] quu^ alio te^pore in Hispania, legeret per otium
Alexandri historia, diu eum secum cogitabundum sedisse, inde lachrymas
profudisse, Mirantibus causam amicis dixisse; Annon videtur vobis gemendum,
quum hae aetate, Alexander tot jam regna subegerit, me nihildum gessisse
praeclari? Vt ergo Hispaniam attigit, mox accinxit se operi, atque intra paucos
dies cobortes december ad priores viginti conscripsit. Plutarch. in vita Iul.
Caesaris.
best spirits which Rome had bred, whilst they looked on Alexanders picture,
and the Map of his conquest, were ashamed of their own dullness and slow
progress of their victories. The Parthian though not so masculine and valorous
as in Alexanders time he had been, was able, in Pompeys. judgment, to have
given Caesar the check, after his Pharsalian victory. And in this persuasion
Pompey had sought (...) from him, had not Ca^^es indignation at the motion
deterred him:

Si servere potes, miserum quid decipis urbem? 3 The ods of antiquity between
Cyrus, Alexander, Caesar and Pompey, and other circumstances of several times,
being rightly allowed (according to the rate of See the first Book upon the
Creed. page 59. etc.
former discussions to this purpose,) will make the credit of Xenophon in his
institution of Cyrus, of Arianus, and Quintus Curtius, in their Histories of
Alexander, and of the best Roman Writers from Livie downwards, to any
unpartiall Examiner, much what eaven. Or what if Cyrus, as he is set forth by
Xenophon, did in his infancy, youth, or maturity, (all odds and allowances of
antiquity rightly made) far excel Alexander, Pompey, Caesar, or any other
whosoever that lived after him, as well in dexterity of wit, as in exemplary
disposition of life, military or civil: all this may, without any just
suspicion of Poetical fiction, without the least transgression of a faithful
Historians bounds, be referred unto a more intimate, more placid, and more
loving touch of that Spirit, wherewith, all that much excelled others in any
age, have been in some measure or other inspired, and incited to those
exploits which have been performed by them. I cannot blame the latter Roman
Heathen for mistrusting Xenophons relations in the forementioned book; but
surely, that Christian which will not acknowledge some extraordinary It is
memorable which Xenophon relates in his fourth book, at the time when Cyrus did
prosecute the victory, which he had gotten over the Babylonians in the first
conflict, wherein their King was slain. Quum autem progrederentur, and nox
a^petiisset; proditum est; Cyro and exercitui Lucem claerissimam caelitus
ablatam fuisse: quo factum ut in animis ^mnium quidam horror erga numen
divinum, and in hosts confidentia existeret. Xenopon. Lib. 4.
fruits of Gods peculiar calling, of his professed fatherly institution,
instruction, and protection of Cyrus, shall much forget himself.

Thus says the Lord to his anointed, to Cyrus, whose right hand I have holden,
to subdue Nations before him: and I will loose the loins of Kings to open
before him the two leaved gates, and the gates shall not be shut. I will go
before thee, and make the crooked places straight; I will break in pieces the
gates of brass, and cut in sunder the bars of iron. And I will give thee the
treasures of darkness, and hidden riches of secret places, that thou may
know, that I the Lord which call thee by thy name, am the God of Israel. For
Jacob my servants sake, and Israel mine elect; I have even called thee by thy
name: I have surnamed thee, though thou have not known me. I am the Lord and
there is none else, there is no God besides me: I girded thee, though thou have
not known me. That they may know from the rising of the Sun, and from the
West, that there is none besides me; I am the Lord, and there is none else.
Isai. 45. ver. 1. usque ad 7.

The Spirit of God (so far as my remembrance or observation serves me) does
not elsewhere vouchsafe to grace any Heathen Prince with such honorable
titles, or affable speeches as these here mentioned are. Of Gods own people,
but few were called by their names, before these were imposed by men. This is
the prerogative of such as were types of the true Emanuel. The very Ego vero
sic ^io, mi Rex, inquit. Nam regem natura ni^ilo te minil^ ortum arbitror: quam
ille rex est, qui dux apum in alveo nascitur. Illi enim semper apes ultro
pare^t, ac quocunque loco ma^serit, ab eo nulla earum discedit. Quod si aliquo
prodierit, nulla ipsum deserit. lam mirisicus eis amor erga principem hunc suum
innascitur. Itidem erga te mihi quodam modo videntur hi homines adfecti esse.
Xenophon. lib. 5. p. 118.
characters, which the Heathen have made of Cyrus his amiable carriage toward
men, his devotion, and vigilant care to testify his thankfulness toward the
Gods for his good speed, are evident tokens of this his special calling to the
present service, and of his seeking to express himself in outward Cyrus autem
domum reversus, precatusque vestam patriam, and Iovem patrium, and Deos
caeteros in militiam domo profectus est, quum quidem and pater eum una
prosequeretur. Ac postquam domo egressi essent, fulgura tonitruaque dextraei
oblata fuisse perhibentur. Quae quum adparuissent, alio praeterca nullo captato
augurio perrexere; quod maximi Dei signa nemini obscura esse possent. Xenophon
lib. 1. p. 25. He knew by experience that he was set on work by some divine
instinct, and this made him seek to please all which he tooks for Gods or
Divine Powers. So Xenophon relates in his third book: Bonis avibus hostile
solum invasit; ut vero primum fiaes transierat, Tellurem libationibus prepitiam
sibi reddidit, and Deos atque Heroas regionem Assyriorum incolentes sacrificiis
placa^^t. Quibus peractis rursum Iovi patrio rem divinam fe^it, nec si quis
alius se Deorum (...), ullum neglexit. The watchword which he gave unto his
Soldiers in that battle wherein the King of Babylon was slain, was, Jupiter
auxiliaris and Dux. Xenophon. lib. 3.
performances: albeit young Samuel-like, he could not distinguish the callers
voice, wanting an Ely to instruct him; yet can no Atheist be so impudent as to
surmis^ that Esaias, leremy, and Xenophon, should conspire like partners to make
a fair game by seeing one another hands. For what common stake could they
hope to gain by this practice? but to omit generalities for justifying
Xenophon and Herodotus in relating such rare documents of Cyrus his infancy
(albeit these being compared with the former prophecy and sacred relations
concerning Solomon, or others whom God has called by name, are in themselves
capable enough of credit:) we will descend to such particulars in Heathen
Writers, as are consonant to the sacred passages, concerning the Babylonian
war, and may serve to set forth the wisdom and providence of God in
effecting his good purpose toward the captive seed of Abraham. for (according
to the intent and purport of the former Prophecy) the Reader is always to
bear in mind, that the true and final cause of Gods extraordinary blessings
upon Cyrus, and of his conquest of the Babylonians, was the appointed
deliverance of his chosen people, and the manifestation of his power and
wisdom to the ends of the world.

4 A man of modern experience in treatise of Leagues, and but of speculative
acquaintance with the difficulties which interpose to hinder the association of
lesser Segniories against mighty neighbor Monarcks, would happily deem that
Xenophon had framed his relations of Cyrus his success, in linking bordering
Nations to the Medes and Persians, by the model of some Academicall canvas, or
suit for some annual office amongst fellow Citizens. The Armenians, the
Hyrcanians, the Cedrosians, with many other natural subjects to the
Babylonian, all unacquainted with the project at the beginning, come over unto
Cyrus with as great facility and speed, as if there had been no greater danger
in undertaking this doubtful and (in common experience) most desperate war,
than in giving a free voice to one competitor before another in a free and
popular State.

But Xenophon was not so mean a contemplative Scholar, as to commit so foul a
solaecisme as this had been; albeit his pupose had been to poetize in these
narrations. Poetical fictions must bear a true resemblance of probability.
Truths themselves must be set forth in their native colors, although they
appear to ordinary experience, most incredible. Such was the success of Cyrus
in the former business; if it were to be derived only from his own wit or
contriuance. But Xenophon might have good historical reasons not to suspect
the Persian annalls or Persians reports of Cyrus, as we have sacred authority
to believe the matters reported by them. He that called Cyrus by his name
before he was borne, and had now set him up as Competitor with the Babylonian,
for the Asiaticke Monarchy, had laid the plot, and made the canvas for him
before he set forth: and (which is principally to be observed) had given
public warning to those Nations, which Xenophon mentions (more then threescore
years before) to be ready with others in arms against Babell: Ier. 51. 27,
28, 29.
Set up a standard (says Jeremy) in the land, blow the Trumpet among the
nations: prepare the nations against her: call together against her the
kingdoms of The first occasion of Cyrus his expedition was to regaine the
revolting Armenians unto his uncle Cyaxarez, King of the Medes. And these he
won to their allegiance, partly by love, partly by sleight, having ^ur prized
some parts of their country (under pretense of hunting) before they were aware.
See Xenophon, book 2. and 3. how Cyrus won the Chaldeans which bordered upon
the Armenians to his side. And his 4. book, how the Hircanians, after the King
of Babylon was slain in battle, revolted to him, and of the good service
which they did him. And after them the Sacae and the Cadusii, with Gobrias and
Godatas two great Princes.
Ararat, Minni, and Ashchenash: appoint a Captain against her: cause her
horses to come up as the rough Caterpillars. Prepare against her the nations
with the Kings of the Medes, the Captains thereof, and all the Rulers thereof,
and all the land of his Dominion. And the land shall tremble and sorrow: for
every purpose of the Lord shall be performed against Babylon, to make the Land
of Babylon a desolation without an Inhabitant. It is intimated by another Hab.
2. v. 2, 3, etc.
Prophet, that the Lord would have these prophesies concerning Babylon so
remarkeably fulfilled, that all the world might take notice of them: The Lord
answered me and said; Write the vision, and make it plain upon tables, that
he may run that reads it. For the vision is yet for an appointed time, but
at the end it shall speak, and not lie: though it tarry, wait for it, because
it will surely come, it will not tarry. Behold his soul which is lifted up, is
not upright in him; but the just shall live by his faith. Yea also, because he
transgresses by wine, he is a proud man, neither keeps at home, who
inlargeth his desire as Hell, and is as death and cannot be satisfied, but
gathers unto him all nations, and unto him all people. Shall not these take
up a parable against him, and a tanting proverb against him and say; woe to
him that increases that which is not his: how long? and to him that ladeth
himself with thick clay? Shall they not rise up suddenly that shall bite thee?
and awake, that shall vex thee? and thou shall be for booties unto the^?
Because thou have spoiled many nations, all the remna^t of the people shall
spoil thee: because of men's blood and for the violence of the land, of the
City, and of all that dwell therein.

Cyrus in the beginning of this expedition was but Cyaxarez his agent, to
regaine the revolted Armeneans. The war was managed in the King of Media his
name, albeit God (according to Esaias Prophecy) did prosper Cyrus under him,
as he did David under Saul. The same did go of Cyrus amongst the Medes and
Persians, as it had of David through the host of Israel, Cyaxarez has slain
his thousand, and Cyrus his ten thousand. The Monarchy was to be settled on
the Persian; Cyaxarez was feoffee in trust for Cyrus, as Saul was, by Gods
appointment, for David.

5 Their Pr^cedente vero tempore moritur apud Medos Astyages, and Cyaxares
Astyagis filius, matrisque Cyri frater, Medorum imperio potitur. Rex autem
Assyriorum quum Cyros universos, non exiguam sane nationem, subegisset, Arabum
regem imperio suo subjecisset, Hyrcani^s subditos haberet, Bactrios appug^aret;
futurum existimabat, ut si Medorum vires d^bilitasset, facile finitimis omnibus
imperaret. Xenophon. lib. 1 p. 22.
taking of arms was just, and in their own defense. Their first resolutions
did reach no further, then to the safeguard of their borders, much trespassed
upon by the Caldeans, until unexpected success and hopeful opportunities of
better, daily presenting themselves without seeking, did invite them to come
nearer. After they had gotten secret intelligence of the enemies estate, many
new associates, and qui^ possession of so much of his dominions, as would
suffice to maintain their doubled army; they had no hope to conquer, no
purpose to besiege the Metropolies of the kingdom. That, which after a
doubtful consultation, did chiefly sway them in the height of all their
strength to continue their war, was the complaint of their trusty The Medes
themselves were unwilling to follow the wars after the King of Babylon was
slain, until the Hyrcanians did persuade them; and Cyrus himself was
doubtful what to do, until he saw in what desperate estate he should leave
Gobryas, if his army were dissolved. See Xenophon in the 5. book.
confederates, justly fearing lest they should become a prey to the insolent
Tyrant, (much exasperated by their revolt) as ready, as able to take revenge
upon them, if once their army should be dissolved. The overthrow of Craesus,
following upon their resolution to continue the war, brought great access of
new associates and fresh supplies unto their army. Had Cyrus or his
confederates understood the tenor of the Commission which the Lord of hoasts
had sealed them before they undertook this war; they had no question given
the onset upon Babylon before the overthrow of Craesus, at that time when they
marched by it. Their written warrant, if they could have read it, was very
express, and their invitation to attempt, full of hope: Remove out of the
midst of Babylon, and go forth out of the Land of the Caldeans, and be as the
he goats before the flocks. For lo, I will raise and cause to come up
against Babylon, an assembly of great nations from the North country, and they
shall set themselves in array against her, from thence she shall be taken:
their arrows shall be as of a mighty expert man: none shall return in vain.
And Caldea shall be aspoile: all that spoil her shall be satisfied says the
Lord. Ier. 50. verse. 8, 9, 10. But such is the infinite wisdom of the Lord,
that ignorance or concealment of his purpose from men whom he imploies in his
service, is oft-times the best mean to have it spedily executed by them. In
this assembly of great Nations from the North, foretold by Esa. 48. 20.
Esaiah; besides the Armenians and Hyrcanians, the Lydians and the
Cappadocians, with others mentioned by Xenophon, were included, without whose
presence and assistance the enterprise had been in vain. The opportunity
which Cyrus after his conquest of Craesus took, was the definite time,
appointed by God, but concealed from men, perhaps from the Prophet himself,
which pe^ned the Commission. The entire presence of these nations now
assembled, and skilfully set in array, before the City (as God had commanded,
for representing their terror and strength) was yet nothing so terrible to the
besieged spectators as the fame of their absence had been, when they were
^ewer. The Qui autem in mure stabant, obsidionem hanc irridebant, quod ei^
commeatus esset copiosior, quam in annos viginti. Quae Cyrus quum audiisset, in
parts duodecim exercitum divisit, ut pars quaelibet unum anni mensem in
excubiis esset. Quibus iterum auditis, multo etiam Babylonii magis irridebant,
qui cogitarent secum, Phryges ac Lycios and Arabes, and Cappadoces futur^s
c^ntra se in excubiis; quos omnes arbitrabantur animia erga se magis esse
benevolus, quam erga Pers^^. Ac Fossae quidem jam actae erant. Cyrus vero quum
audiisset, celebrari Babylone festum, quendam ejusmodi diem quo Babylonii omnes
nocte tota potarent and comessarentur: quamprimum eo die tenebrae accessissent,
magna mortaliam multitudine adhibita, Fossarum ostia versus amnem aperuit. Hoc
quum factum esset, aqua noctu in Fossa^ manabat, and alueus fluvii per urbem
tendens hominibus permeabilis esse cepit. etc. Xenoph. de instir. Cyri Histor.
lib. 7. page 190.
magnificence of Babylons walls, did seem to outface them in the height of
their bravery, and made them contemptible in her proud childrens eyes. Cyrus
himself despaired of doing any good by violent assault; his chief hopes,
were, not in the multitude of his soldiers, but in the multitude of his
enemies, more easy to be vanquished by famine, then if they had been fewer.
But this his project seemed to them ridiculous, being stored with provision for
twenty years; within which space, some of those companies which he had set by
course to keep quarter before the City, would forsake him, others they hoped
would become their friends, as they anciently had been: and in this
confidence, they rest secure, as if they had thought to have out-laughed their
sudden destruction.

6 The doom which our Savior gave upon the Fool in the Gospel, does so well
befit the King of Babylon, his wisest Counselors and Followers, as if it had
been framed of purpose for them. Each of them had said unto his soul, Soul
thou have store of provision laid up for many years, take thine ease, eat,
drink, and be merry: but the Lord had said unto them all, by his Prophet
Daniel, Ye Fools, in this night of your merriment and solemnity of your God,
shall your souls be taken from you, and whose then shall those things be,
that you have provided? The hand which wrote that dreadful sentence upon the
wall, Mean, Mean, Tekel, Vpharsin; was not more visible to Belshazzar himself,
then the finger of God in all this business, is, or may be to such, as will
confer Xenophons Historical Narrations, with Prophetical Predictions.

7 First Ac primum quidem turres propter flumen exstru^bat palmis ^undatas,
quarum non minor erat, quam jugeri longitudo. Nam hac majorem etiam in
longitudinem excrescunt. Has autem pa^mas operi propterea subjiciebat, ut quam
maxim videretur id facere quod solent, qui ad urbem obsidendam sese comparant,
ut tametsi flumen in fossem dilaberetur, ipsas turres non everteret. Etiam
multas, alias supra terram egestam excitabat, ut quam plurima essent excubiarum
loca. Xenophon. de instit. Cyri lib. 7. Histor. page 190.
Cyrus casts his trenches near the River, whether with purpose to interrupt or
divide its course, or only for more commodious defense of his army, or
annoyance of his enemy, Xenophon expresses Yet it seems by Cyrus his answer
to Chrysantas, that he had no hope to find any entrance into the city,
otherwise then by famishing the besieged. Vbi jam in Castris essent Cyrus ijs,
quos oporteret, convocatis, dixit: urbem socij undique contemplati fuimus:
atque equidem, quo pact^ quis adeo firmos and excelsos muros oppugnando capere
possit, videre mihi non videor. Quanto autem plures homines in urbe sunt,
quando ad pugnandum non exeunt, tanto citi^s fieri arbitror ut fame in
potestatem redigantur. Nisi igitur aliquem alium modum habetis, quem nobis
ostendatis, hoc ipso nobis istos expugnandos esse autumo. Et Chrysantas inquit:
Hic^ine fluvius per urbem mediam labitur, cujus latitudo ^^adia duo superat?
Ita profecto, ait Gobryas, ac tanta quoque prefunditas ejus est, ut ne duo
quidem viri, alter alteri insistentes, supra aquam exstare possint. Quo fit, ut
fluvio sit urbs etiam munitior, quam moenibus. Et Cyrus: Missa faciamus haec,
ait mi Chrysanta, quae viribus nostris potiora sunt. Xenophon. de instit. Cyri
lib. 7. page 190. The reason why Cyrus did cast his trenches so wide and deep,
was in his first intention, as it seems, only for the more commodious defense
of his Soldiers against the sallies of their enemies. Adibita vero mensura
quamprimum fossa latissima profunditissimaque vobis erit agenda, pro part
cuique ^ua; quo paucissimis custodibus vobis sit opus. Xenophon. ibid.
not; Herodotus is of opinion, that this opportunity was rather taken when it
offered it self, then sought by Cyrus, when he first began to cast his
trenches. However, the trenches being made, were ready, when opportunity
served, to rob the City of the deep stream, whose natural course was through
the midst of it; and the stream diverted from its wonted channel, left an
easy entrance for Cyrus and his army, under the walls and ^loodgate through
which it passed. His stratagem to make this entrance into the City now drowned
with wine, opens to us the literal meaning of diverse aenigmaticall prophecies:
A drought is upon her waters, and they shall be dried up: for it is the Land of
graven Images, and they are mad upon their Idols. Ier. 50. v. 38. Whatsoever
Cyrus might intend, it was Ierusalems and Syons curse upon Babylon, which gave
success unto his stratagem. The violence done to me, and to my flesh, be upon
Babylon, shall the inhabitants of Zion say; and my blood upon the inhabitants
of Chaldea, shall Jerusalem say. Therefore thus says the Lord, Behold I will
plead thy cause, and take vengeance for thee, and I will dry up her sea, and
make her springs dry. Ier. 51. ver. 35, 36. All these plagues here threatened,
are exactly fitted to the patterns of cruelty which Nebuchadnezzar had
exhibited in the destruction of the holy City, and the derision of her and
other captivated Princes. Jerusalem in the present sense and fresh memory of
her grief had thus complained: Nebuchadnezzar the King of Babylon has
devoured me, he has crushed me, he has made me an empty vessel: (therefore
must Babylon be drawn dry of water) he has swallowed me up like a Dragon;
he has filled his belly with my delicates, he has cast me cut. Ier. 51.
verse. 34. Therefore must Babylon become as heaps, a dwelling place for
Dragons, an astonishment, and an hissing without an Inhabitant. verse. 37. It is
significantly foretold by Habakkuk that Nebuchadnezzar had consulted shame to
his house. Habak. 2. And it is the opinion of good interpreters, that the woe
following should be particulatly directed unto him and to his family: Woe unto
him that gives his neighbor drink; that put thy bottle to him, and
make him drunk also; that thou may look on their nakedness. Thou art
filled with shame for glory; drink thou also, and let thy foreskinne be
uncovered: the cup of the Lords right hand shall be turned unto thee, and
shameful spewing shall be on thy glory. Habak. 2. verse. 15, 16. Diverse
Authors of good note have left written, whether upon any better authority then
tradition of the Hebrews, I know not (though that I know in many cases worthy
of respect and credence) that Nebuchadnezzar did use to make himself sport, by
making his captive Princes drunk. This and the like insolences the Lord
avengeth upon his son and people: In their heat I will make their feasts,
and I will make them drunken, that they may rejoice, and sleep a perpetual
sleep, and not awake, says the Lord. Ier. 51. verse. 39. and when the time
appointed was come (whether that were the first or second year after the hand
writing upon the wall) the Lord gave Cyrus notice of the Babylonians intended
aniversary revellings, whom he had now more infatuated, then they at other
times used to infatuate themselves. Cyrus his stratagem to dry up the water,
either first conceived or put in execution upon this notice of their drunken
festival, and whatsoever purposes of his that took effects, are all directed
to the accomplishing of Gods revealed purpose or consequent will upon Babylon,
as it were so many arrows to their mark. The Lord of hoasts was the Archer,
and Cyrus his bow, whose intentions against Babylon must therefore prosper,
because, The Lord of hoasts has sworn by himself, saying, Surely I will fill
thee with men, as with caterpillars; and they shall lift up a shout against
^hee. Ier. 51. verse. 14. There is not one clause of Cyrus his advise or
exhortation to his followers, after they had found the river to be passable,
or of his proclamation after their entrance through the watergate which
Xenophon relates, but is parallel to some part or other of Ieremies
Prophesies. We may boldly say all that Cyrus commanded, was faithfully
executed, that the scripture might be fulfilled.

8 That At si hoc in mente^ alicui venit quod fertur esse formidabile urbem
intrantibus; ne tectis illi conscensis hinc inde tela in nos conjiciant: id
ipsum maxim vobis animos addat. Nam si qui conscendent aedes, opitulator nobis
est deus Vulcanus. Et sunt eorum vestibula crematu facilia. Nam januae palmarum
e materia fabricatae sunt, quae ingens incendium cito parient; and copia pici^
ac stuppae, quae cite magnam flammam eliciunt. Quo fiet, ut vel celeriter
necesse sit hos ab ^dibus aufugere, vel celeriter exuri. Verum agite, arma
capite, Diis equidem juvantibus praeibo. Xenophon. de instit. Cyri Histor. lib.
7. p. 191.
which in reason might most daunt or deter his soldiers from raunging the
streets of Babylon, was opportunity of annoyance from the tops of their
flat-roofed houses. But this inconvenience Cyrus by his good foresight turns
to his advantage. If any (sath he) clime up to the tops of their houses (as it
is likely many of them would) we have God Vulcan our confederate: for their
porches are very apt to take fire, their gates being made of palmetrees, and
asphaltites inunctae, which will serve as oil to cause them to take fire, and
we have store enough of torches pitch and straw to enlarge the flame after the
fire be once kindled. By this means either we may enforce them to forsake
their houses or burn both together. The execution of this stratagem would
quickly amate men already affrighted with the sudden surprisall of the City.
To this purpose, the Lord had spoken long before: The mighty men of Babylon
have forborne to fight: Cyrus autem co^ortes equitum per vias passim
dimittebat, edicens, ut si quos extra domos invenirent, ^cciderent: at illis,
qui adhuc in aedibus essent, per Syriacae linguae peritos (...) jussit, ut
intus manerent. Quod si quis foris deprehenderetur, enus morte mult a^dum. Et
^i quidem haec exs^quebantur. Xenophon. ibidem. page 192.
they have remained in their holds: their might has failed, they became as
women: they have burnt their dwelling places: her bars are broken. Ier. 51.
verse. 30. One post shall run to meet another, and one messenger to meet
another, and show the King of Babylon that his city is taken at one end. And
that the passages are stopped, and the reeds they have burnt with fire, and
the men of war are affrighted. verse 31, 32. Xenophon tells us, that after
Cyrus had given Gobrias and Gadatas in charge to conduct the Army with all
speed to the Kings Palace: Si qui occurrebant, of such as Atqui, aiebant illi,
qui erant cum Gobrya, Demo^strate nobis i^inera quu^ vob^s ea cognitasint. Vrbs
enim tota, hac nocte comessationi est intenta. Sed in excubias tamen ante
regiae portas incidemus, quod cae semper i^tic coll^centur. Non negligenda res
est, ait Cyrus, sed eundum, ut quam maxim imparatos offend imus. Quae quum
essent dicta, pergebant. Si qui eis obviam venirent, partim caesi peribant,
partim retro vicissim fugiebant, partim clamorem edebant. Cum his and Gobrya^i
clamores edebant ^osdem, velut ipsi quoque comessationum socii. Simul
pergentes, qua celerrime progredi poterant, ad regiam perveniunt. Et hi quidem
Gobryae Gadataeque adjuncti portas regiae clausa^ invoniunt: qui vero adversus
Regiae custodes ire jussi f^erant, irr^unt in eos in ignem luculentum potantes,
statimque hostili cum eis more agunt. Xenophon ibidem.
came in their way, some were slain, others retired again into the city,
others cried out. That which made the noise more confused and the danger less
apprehended, was, that Gobrias and his soldiers being Babylonians by birth,
did counterfaite the roaring of that unruly night. Whatsoever occasion of
distaste or implacable discontent the proud King had given to these two
captains, (whether those which Xenophon reports or others) the final cause of
that success, which their bloody intentions against their native King did
find, was the accomplishment of Gods will revealed against him for his
Grandfathers cruelty against Jerusalem, whereof being gently warned by Gods
Prophet, he no way repented, but added gall to wormwood, and thirst to
drunkenness, O thou King, the most high God gave Nebuchadnezzar thy So
Grandfathers are usually called Fathers in Scriptures, specially in respect of
such as inherit after them. It is evident from Ier. 52. verse. 51. that
Evil-Merodach did immediately succeed Nabuchadnezzar. This Evil-Merodach was
that King of As^yria which was slain in the battle betwixt Cyrus and the
Babylonians related by Xenophon in his 4. book. A King much better beloved of
his subjects than his son Belshazzar.
father a kingdom, and majesty, and glory, and honor. And for the Majesty
that he gave him; all people, nations, and languages trembled and feared before
him: whom he would, he slew; and whom he would, he kept alive; and whom he
would, he set up; and whom he would, he put down. But when his heart was
lifted, and his mind hardened in pride: he was deposed from his Kingly throne,
and they took his glory from him. And he was driven from the sons of men,
and his heart was made like the Beasts, and his dwelling was with the wild
Asses: they fed him with grass like Oxen, and his body was wet with the dew of
heaven, till he knew that the most high God ruled in the kingdom of men, and
that he appoints over it whomsoever he will. And thou his son O
Belshazzar, have not humbled thine heart, though thou knew all this: but
have lifted up thy self against the Lord of heaven, and they have brought the
vessels of his house before thee, and thou and thy Lords, thy wives and thy
Concubines have drunk wine in them, and thou have praised the gods of silver,
and gold, of brass, iron, wood and stone, which see not, nor hear, nor know:
and the GOD in whose hand thy breath is, and whose are all thy ways, have thou
not glorified. Then was the part of the hand sent from him, and this writing
was written. And this is the writing that was written, MEAN, MEAN, TEKEL,
VPHARSIN. This is the interpretation of the thing, MEAN, God has numbered thy
kingdom, and finished it. TEKEL, thou art weighed in the balances, and art
found wanting. PEERS, thy kingdom is divided, and given to the Medes and
Persians. Dan. 5. verse. 18. to 29.

9 Thus would Daniel have cured Babel, but she was not cured by him; howbeit
Belshazzar was more kind to Daniel then to himself, then most great Princes
are to Gods best Prophets that reprove them: For he commanded and they clothed
Daniel with scarlet, and put a chain of gold about his neck, and made a
proclamation concerning him, that he should be the third Ruler in the kingdom.
In that night was Belshazzar the King of the Caldeans s^aine. And Darius the
Median took the kingdom being about threescore and two year old. Dan. 5.
verse. 29, 30, 31. For it is not the bestowing of a Scarlet robe, of Court holy
water, or of real honor in greatest measure upon Gods servants, that can
cover a scarlet sin in Princes. The stain of blood can never be washed off,
nor the cry of the oppressed blown away (though the whole element of water,
wind, and air were at their commands) without the tears and sighs of the
oppressors, whose hearts cannot be cleansed without repentant prayers.
Ierusalems sighs and tears in her sorrow had sunk too deep into the
Almighties ears, to be expiated without the sacrifice of many sorrowful
hearts and contrite spirits throughout Babel: Israel is a scattered sheep, the
Lions have driven him away: first the king of Assyria has devoured him, and
last this Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon has broken his bones. Therefore thus
says the Lord of hosts the God of Israel, behold I will punish the King of
Babylon and his Land, as I have punished the king of Assyria. And I will bring
Israel again to his habitation. etc. Ier. 50. verse. 17, 18, 19. Thus Israel is
revolved from Gods consequent will to his antecedent, and Babylon from his
antecedent to his consequent will. And for the speedy execution of both parts
of this his will, for Isreal's good, and Babylons hurt, the Persian Monarchy is
with such speed erected.

10 But some happily will here demand, wherein the similitude mentioned by
Jeremy, between the King of Assyria and the King of Babylons punishments, did
consist? Senacharib is the only Assyrian King, whose disastrous end is
registered in sacred story: and Belshazzer is the only King of Babylon, that
did parallel him in his plagues. Senacharib was slain by his own sons,
Belshazzar by his natural subjects, sometimes his dearest friends, but made
his enemies by his unnatural He had slain Gobrias his son, because he was
a better Archer than himself: and gelded Gadatas being jealous lest he should
prove his corriuall*
cruelty. Senacharib for blaspheming the God of Israel was murdered whilst he
offered sacrifice in the house of Nisroch his god: this was one remarkable
branch or issue of Hezekiah his prayers against him in the Temple, to wit, That
the Lord would declare himself to be a God above all the gods of the nations.
Beshazzar is slain in his royal palace, whilst he solemnizeth the feast of
his great God Bell; Part of whose ceremonies were to praise the gods of silver
and gold, of brass, wood, iron, and stone, etc; and to sauce this Idolatrous
luxury, with such sacrilege and blasphemy, as Dan. 5. 21.
Daniel had forewarned them to avoid. Senacharib had a large time of repentance
allotted, from the sudden destruction of his army until his death.
Belshazzars disaster and dissolution of his empire, fell out both in one
hour;both (it may be) were more sudden, because his warning to desist from
oppression, sacriledg and Idolatry, were more express and solemn. The justice
of God, though executed upon the Assyrian host, by the more immediate hand of
his power, upon Babylon by his wisdom; in managing the opportunities and
moments of war, was in both alike remarkable; in that both had their fatal
sudden blow in that very night, wherein they had lifted up themselves against
the God of heaven, and blasphemed the holy one of Israel: It came to pass that
night (not imediately after Ezekias had received Zennacheribs blasphemous
message, but in the same night some two years after) that the Angel of the
Lord went out, and smote in the camp of the Assyrians, an hundred fourscore
and five thousand, etc. See Abulensis and (...) in their Comments upon this
place.
2 King. 19. 35. And in that night (says Daniel) was Belshazzar the King of
the Caldeans slain, to wit, in that night, which was solemnly consecrated unto
the Caldeans God, and solemnized by aniversarie custom; but whether in that
night tweluemonth, wherein the handwriting was sent from God, or more years
after, is not certain: that it should be the self same night, is from many
sacred circumstances, most improbable, if not impossible.

11 In what night soever it was; the sudden surprizall of Belshazzers court and
kingdom, though to modern politicians it may seem strange; yet no
circumstance related by any sacred writer is in it self so incredible, as that
which Aristotle in his second book of his politics reports, as credited by
him; to wit, that some parts of this great City did not perceive the deadly
blow, which the principal parts of it had felt, till three days after it was
given. It is a very inconsiderate note which Ramus, or he that set forth his
translation of Aristotle's politiques, has left in the margin of this text:
Hic locus indicat post Alexandri victorias hos libros scriptos esse, and tamen
permirum sit in his Alexandri nullam mentione^ fieri. A judicious Critic
would rather have conjectured that these books had been written before
Alexander took Babylon from Darius; in that, there is no mention in all these
books of Alexanders projects or success; fit matters (specially being fresh)
for politic discourse or instance. At the least, he which had read and
remembered the Prophesies of Jeremy or Daniel concerning. Babylons destruction,
stood bound in Christian charity to have demurred upon the point (before he
had given sentence) whether this place were not to be understood rather of
Babylons surprizall by Cyrus the^ of Alexanders taking of it; though it had
been out of question that Alexander had taken it before Aristotle wrote his
politics. Aristotle might have more good Authors then one, for this report.
Herodotus, we know, (whom Aristotle had read) relates the like; whose entire
narration concerning the taking of Babylon by Cyrus I have transcribed, that
the Reader may compare his historical relations with the prophecies before
rehearsed, or hereafter to be cited.

[Cyrus quum Gyndem mulctasset in trecentos and sexaginta rivos diductum, and
alterum ver illuxisset, ita porro ire Babylonem pergit, Babyloniis eum producto
exercitu praestolantibus. Qui, ubi propius urbem ille promovit, cum eo
conflixerunt, praelioque fugati, in oppidum compulsi fuerunt. Ii tamen, quia
Cyrum jampridem animadverterant inquietum esse, viderantque omnes pariter
gentes aggredientem, comportaverant permultorum annorum commeatus: ideoque tunc
obsidionem nihili faciebant. Et Cyrus, quum jam longo tempore nihil admodum res
ipsius proficerent, inops consilij erat. Tandem sive alius ei anxio suggessit,
sive ipsi in mentem venit quid in rem esset, sic statuit faciendum: Instructis
universis copiis, partim qua fluvius urbem ingreditur, partim a tergo qua
egreditur, praecipit ut, quum cernerent alveum posse transiri, illac urbem
invaderent. Ita instructis atque admonitis suis, cum inutiliori exercitus part
abijt ad paludem. Eo ubi pervenit, quae Babyloniorum Regina fecerat circa
flu^en and circa paludem, eadem and ipse fecit. Nam revocato flumine, alveum
ejus pristinum vado transibilem reddidit. Quod quum ita factum esset, Persae
qui ad hoc ipsum instructi erant, per alveum unde fluvius Euphrates abscesserat
mediorum fere femoru^ tenus fortiter Babylonem introierunt. Quos Babylonij, si
factum Cyri prius aut audissent, aut sensissent, haud dubie contempto eorum
ingressu, pessimo exitio affecissent. Nam obseratis omnibus quae ad flumen
ferunt portulis, conscensisque septis, ipsi pro ripis stantes illos progressos
veluti in cavea excepisset. Nunc ex inopinato eis Persae ^stiterunt: and quum
capti essent qui media urbis incolebant Babylonij, propter ejus tamen
magnitudinem non sentiebatur (ut fertur) ab iis qui circa extrema habitabant.
Sed quod forte dies festus eis esset, exercendis choreis atque oblectationibus
operam dabant, donec plane hoc resciverunt. Atque ita primo capta est Babylon.
Herodotus Lib. 1.]

One material circumstance there is in Herodotus, which is not so much as
intimated by Xenophon; and it is this: Albeit the Babylonians could neither
have prevented Cyrus in diverting the course of the River, nor withstood his
entrance by its channel; yet might they with ease have stopped his passage
along the channel, or his entrance into any street of the City, had they been
mindful to shut those gates, which at the end of every street did open upon
the river. But that night being consecrated to revelling, the passage by water
from one part of the City to another was freely permitted. They had a solemn
custom of leaving those gates open that night, which on other nights were to
be shut. And by this means, destruction found a more easy entrance into that
great City.

12 Some modern Politicians have discoursed in folio, against the vastness of
Cities as most incommodious for defense, taking occasion from Aristotle's
exceptions against Babylon, which in his censure was a Region; no more a City
then Peloponesus should be, if it were walled about. But it was not Babylons
vastness which bred this insensibility when the day of destruction was come,
that some members of her should not so much as feel any pain when others were
utterly cut off. Should any Prince now living, in confidence of this
experiment, attempt the like upon Quinzie, Moscho, or if any other greater
Cities there be in the world, he might find their Citizens better prepared
upon few hours warning then Babylon was in three days, unless perhaps he
made his assault upon Moscho upon some great Festival, wherein her citizens
enjoy the liberty of Lacedemonian slaves, to be beastly drunk without censure.
Cities far less then Babylon, only her matches in impiety, have been
surprised with Babylonish stupidity, when the full measure of their iniquity had
brought forth the day of visitation. Carthage was far greater and fuller
stuffed with all sorts of people when Scipio razed it, then when the Vandals
took it. And yet no member of it, in the former calamity, was so senseless of
their fellow members, or of their common mothers grief, as the whole body was,
when most of its natural members were cut off by the Vandall.

[Fragor ut ita dixerim, extra muros and intra muros praeliorum and ludicrorum
confundebatur; vox morientium voxque Bacchantium: ac vix discerni forsitan
poterat, plebis ejulatio, quae cadebat in bello, and sonus populi qui clamabat
in circo. Et cum haec omnia fierent, quid aliud talis populus agebat, nisi ut,
cum eum Deus perdere adhuc fortasse nollet, tamen ipse exigeret ut periret.
Salvianus Lib. 6.] The noise of battle without the walls, and the noise of
sporting within the walls; the voice of dying men, and the voice of riotous or
drunken men, were so mingled and confounded, that a man could hardly have
distinguished the outcries of such as fell in battle from the noise or cry of
the multitude in the game-court. And by such doings, what did this people else,
but solicit their own destruction at Gods hands, who otherwise would not
(happily) have destroyed them; or not at this time. With the like stupidity was
Treers taken, none of the greatest Cities then in Europe, though one of
wealthiest amongst the Gauls, after she had been thrice lanced. The very
Babylonish madness did possess another City not far from Treers: such a
lethargy had over-spred the whole Corporation, Vt Principes illius urbis, ne
tunc quidem de convivijs surgerent, cum urbem hostis intraret: Ideo enim Deus
ipsis evidenter, uti credo, manifestare voluit cur perirent, cum per quam rem
ad perditionem ultimam venerant, eam ipsam agerent cum perirent. Salvi^nus
ibidem. Her Governors did not break off their feasting and banqueting, when
the enemy did enter the City. God (as I conjecture) did purposely manifest the
reason why they perished, in that they were doing that very thing when they
perished, which had brought them to utter destruction.

13 But of the causes, symptoms, or signs of divine infatuation, elsewhere.
Thus much I thought expedient in this place for the young Readers information;
that albeit Babylon had been much greater in compass, then she was, so that
the measure of her iniquity had been less; the date of her prosperity might
have been much longer. Chaldea might have sat as Queen of Nations, in
despite of all politic prognostications, which have been framed since her
overthrow. The best service which this kind of Critic usually performs to
States or Kingdoms, is to fix their bol^s upon the gates of great Cities,
after they have been ransacked by the enemy. But Babylons iniquity being grown
unto that settled height, at which it stood in Ieremies and Daniels times;
although her strength, her wealth, provision, and policy, had been far
greater then they were, and contracted into a narrower room, than the compass
of her walls; the date of her sovereignty would have been as short; the device
of the Lord would have been performed against her by other means, as sure,
and speedy, as Cyrus used, if his stratagem had been defeated. For See Section
1. cha. 9 parag. 3. and chap 10. parag. 2.
strength of body, or strength of wit, skill in arms, or skill in policy; all
of them are but the gifts of God, he can either deny them when he pleases, or
inhibit the use of them where they most abound. He that commanded the fire not
to touch his Saints in the furnace, can as easily prohibit the strong to use
his strength, the swift his flight, and intoxicate the politicians brain that
shall displease him. This is the word of the Lord which came to Jeremiah the
Prophet, against the Gentiles, against Egypt, against the army of Pharaoh
Necho King of Egypt, which was by the River Euphrates in Carchemish, which
Nebuchadrezzar King of Babylon smote in the fourth year of Iehoiakim the son
of Josiah King of Judah. Order ye the buckler and shield, and draw near to
battle. Harness the horses, and get up ye horsemen, and stand forth with
your helmets, furbish the spears, and put on the brigandines. Wherefore have I
seen them dismayed, and turned away back? and their mighty ones are beaten
down, and fled apace, and look not back: for fear was round about, says the
Lord. Let not the swift flee away, nor the mighty man escape, they shall
stumble and fall toward the North by the River Euphrates. Ier. 46. verse. 1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6. Go up into Gilead, and take balm, O Virgin, the daughter of
Egypt: in vain shall thou use many medicines: for thou shall not be cured. The
Nations have heard of thy shame, and thy cry has filled the Land: for the
mighty man has stumbled against the mighty, and they are fallen both
together. verse. 11, 12. If a few shall chase a multitude, we know the reason,
the one was either less valiant, or less skillful then the other; But why the
valiant should turn their backs in the day of battle, it is Gods Prophet, not
the Politician must resolve us: They could not stand because the Lord did drive
them. verse. 15.

14 The Lord had given Moab wit and strength and wealth abundance: He had
been at ease from his youth, and he had settled on his lees, and had not been
emptied from vessel to vessel, neither had he gone into captivity: therefore
his taste remained in him, and his sent is not changed. Ier. 48. 11. But when he
begun to ascribe his prosperity to his strength or policy, to trust in
wealth, and deride his poor neighbor Israel now going into captivity, the
Lord who is debtor to none; bereft him of all: Therefore behold, the days
come, says the Lord, that I will send unto him wanderers that shall cause him
to wander, and shall empty his vessels, and break their bottles. And Moab
shall be ashamed of Chemosh, at the house of Israel was ashamed of Bethel
their confidence. How say ye, we are mighty and strong men for the war?
Moab is spoiled and gone up out of her cities, and his chosen young men are
gone down to the slaughter, says the King, whose name is the Lord of hoasts.
The calamity of Moab is near to come, and his affliction hastes fast. Ier.
48. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, etc. The horn of Moab is cut off, and his arm is
broken, says the Lord. Make ye him drunken: for he magnified himself against
the Lord. Moab also shall wallow in his vomit, and he also shall be in
derision. For was not Israel a derision unto thee? was he found among thieves?
for since thou spakest of him, thou skippedst for joy. ver. 25, 26, 27. They
shall howl, saying; How is it broken down? how has Moab turned the back
with shame? so shall Moab be a derision, and a dismaying to al them about him.
For thus says the Lord, Behold he shall flee as an Eagle, and shall spread his
wings over Moab. Kerioth is taken, and the strong holds are surprised and the
mighty men's hearts in Moab at that day shall be as the heart of a woman in her
pangs. v. 39. 40, 41

As for Babylon, if she were stupid and blind, without all foresight, fear or
apprehension of that hideous storms approach, wherein she perished: the
wonder is less to any Christian, then their stupiditie; who think her
destruction might by rules of policy have bin preve^ted. For, Orto autem
clamore ac strepitu, quum ij, qui erant in^us, tumultum sentirent, and inspici
rex juberet quid illud esset rei; apertis aliqui portis, soras procurrunt. Eas
quum patefactas Gadatai conspicerent, iruunt and illos rursus fugientes intro
sequuti, ac ferientes, ad regem accedunt: eumque jam er^ctum cum acinac^, que^
strictum tenebat, inveniunt. Hunc Gadataei and Gobriani numer^ plures
opprimunt, interfectis etiam jis, qui regi adera^t ac partim aliquid
objiciebant, partim fugiebant, partim se quacunque re peterant, tuebantur.
Xenophon. l. 7. page 192.
though her defendants had been more in number then her proud walls could
contain, though every one had been more stout then Hector, armed with more
hands then Briarius had; though every one of her sta^gazing statesmen had had
more politic eyes then Argos had, all had been one, totidemque occulos nox
occupatuna. A messenger from the Lord of hoasts, had called for a dimnesse of
sight upon her Seers, and sung a lullaby to her soldiers everlasting sleep: I
will make drunk her Pinces and her Wisemen, her Captains and her Rulers, and
her mighty men: and they shall sleep a perpetual sleep, and not awake says
the King, whose name is the Lord of hoasts. Ier. 51, verse. 57. So infallibly
does divine Justice observe the rule of retaliation, whereof I shall hereafter
speak: Though Babylon should mount up to heaven, and though she should
fortify the height of her strengh, yet from me shall spoylers (...) unto her;
says the Lord. Ier. 51. ver. 53. For, seeing her people has entered into the
sanctuary of the Lords house, the Lord will do judgment upon her graven
Images. verse. 52.

15 To conclude, The reason of Babels stupiditie, and whatsoever oversights the
Politician can discover in her (related by Xenophon or Herodotus) was, that the
fulfilling of Ieremies Prophesies against her, might become more manifest to
succeeding ages: How is the hammer of the whole earth cut asunder and broken?
how is Babylon become a desolation among the nations? I have laid a snare for
thee, and thou art also taken, O Babylon, and thou wast not aware: thou are
found and also caught, because thou have striven against the Lord. The Lord
has opened his armorie, and has brought forth the weapons of his indignation;
for this is the work of the Lord God of hoasts, in the land of the Caldeans.
Come against her from the utmost border, open her storehouses, cast her up as
heaps, and destroy her utterly, let nothing of her be left. Ier. 50. verse.
23, 24, 25, 26. For she had carried away all that was in Ezekias house, all
that his father had laid up in store, nothing was left, as Esaiah had foretold.
c. 59. v. 36. the exact fulfilling of whose Prophecy is registered by the
sacred Historian. 2 Chronicles. 6. verse 18. The sudden surprizall of the City and
Court of Babylon made the finding of the treasure of Darkness and the riches
of secret places, which the Lord by his Prophet had promised to Cyrus, more
easy, then if his entrance at that time had been suspected or feared: for so
the besieged might have had leisure to have hid their treasure where the enemy
should hardly have found it.

16 But what special comfort is this to Sion, that Cyrus had done to Babylon,
as Babylon had done to her. This might satiate or somewhat allay the boiling
heat of a revengefull mind. But is the misery of an enemy of like use unto
Gods people, as was the Brazen serpent? Can the sight of it cure their grief,
or beget true happiness in such as look on it? It is very probable that
Babylons spoils did help to reedifie Jerusalem. And albeit, the God of Sion,
had other means in store (more by many, then man can number or conceive) for
reducing his people into their own Land; we may, notwithstanding, without
censure of curiosity, safely conjecture, that the disgraces which Nebuchadnezzar
and his successors has done unto the royal seed of Judah, were the first
seeds of their special favor and grace with Cyrus. Of the plagues threatened
by Esaiah unto Ezekiah for showing his treasures unto the Babylonians, it was
one part that of his sons some should be Eunuchs in the Palace of the King
of Babylon. Is. 39. 7. Now it is unlikely that Cyrus would either make the
Persians Eunuchs, or trust the Caldeans about his body. Daniel and other his
fellows of the royal seed of Judah, being made such unto his hand, were men
as fit for his purpose as he could seek. And it was his purpose upon
consultation (as Quumque in mentem ei veniret, quid in se nego^ij suse episset,
qui multis mortalibus imperare niteretur, and habere domicilium in urbe inter
illustres amplissima institueret, quam sic adfecta in eum esset, ut urbs alicui
maxim infesta: quum haec inquam expenderet, corporis sibi custodia opus esse
existimavit. Quod item sciret, homines opprimi facilius non posse, quam inter
vescendum, bibendum, lavandum in cubili and somno: circumspiciebat, quos^am in
his sibi maxim sidos habere posset. Arbitrabatur autem, non posse fidum
hominem unquam esse, qui magis amaret al um, quam illum, qui ejus custodia
indigeret. Quamobrem ^lios, quibus essent liberi, vel conjuges genio
congruentes, vel amores alij, naturae quadam coactione judicabat ad eos maxim
diligendos impelli. At Eunuchos omnibus his carere cernens maximi facturos
putabat illos, a quibus locupletari plurimum possent, and opem habere, si
injuriis adficerentur, atque etiam honoribus ornari. A quo autem beneficiis in
hos conferendis ipse superari posset, neminem fore censebat. Xenophon. lib. 7.
page 192.
Xenophon tells us) to have Eunuchs next about him, as men most likely to be
trusty. Daniel or others of good note amongst this people, being admitted to
favor, for to be of Cyrus bedchamber; would not be defective in procuring
their countries good. And easy it was for him, that causes darkness to
bring forth light, that turns the shadow of death into the morning, to raise
up a blessing unto his people out of their expiring curse. But whether by this
means or others, certain it is, that such of Judah as escaped Nebuchadnezzars
sword, were detained captives to him and his sons until the erection of the
Persian monarchy. 2 Chronicles. cap. 36. verse. 20. Now in the first year of Cyrus
King of Persia (that the word of the Lord spoken by the mouth of Jeremiah,
might be accomplished) the Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus King of Persia,
that he made a proclamation throughout all his kingdom, and put it also in
writing, saying; Thus says Cyrus King of Persia, All the kingdoms of the
earth has the Lord God of heaven given me, and he has charged me to build
him an house in Jerusalem, which is in Judah, who is there among you of all his
people? the Lord his God be with him, and let him go up. verse. 22, 23. This
last passage compared with the forecited Prophecy, Esaiah 45. verse. 4, 5, 6.
may acquit Josephus his report of Daniels conference with Cyrus, from all
suspicion of fiction or uncertainty of tradition.

Blessed be the name of God for ever and ever: for wisdom and might are his:
and he changes the times and the seasons, he removes Kings and sets up
Kings. Dan 2. verse. 20, 21. He has yet a fourth hammer in his hand, to bruize
and crush these Western Nations, as the three first had done the Eastern, and
yet appointed to take fuller vengeance upon these Jews (whom he had now
redeemed by Cyrus) then the Chaldean had done; after the second measure of
their iniquity, became more full then the former had been.

CHAP. 27.
Of Gods special providence in raising and ruinating the Roman Empire.
1 THe lingering growth of the Roman Monarchy has made the print of Gods
special hand in erecting it, less discernable, then it had been in the
sudden advancement of the three former. Nor was it come to any competent height
before Prophecy did cease in Iewry. So that we are (for the most part)
destitute of such Comments, as God had furnished us with, upon the histories of
other Monarchies. But whatsoever the registers of Romes success have ascribed
to Fortune, we may recover it, by the former ruled cases, as entirely due unto
Gods providence. Now the ancient Romans were not of their later Satyricall
Poets mind: Nullum Numen abest, si sit prudentia. Not Felicity her self, whom
they took for a Goddess, much less was Prudence, or any other supposed
patroness of inferior virtues, so much honored by them as Lady Fortune; the
multitude of whose Temples testified they took her for their sovereign
Mistress. From this real testimony of the ancient Romans, (who best knew by
what means their state was raised, or at least perceived it to be often held
up and enlarged by means in particular unknown to them;) Livie and Plutarch
give Fortune Existimarunt multi, and inter caeteros Plutarchus gravissimus
author, populum Romanum in acquirendo tanto imperio majore fortune prosperitate,
quam virtute usum esse; idque vel ipsiusmet populi Romani autoritate constare.
Neque enim fortunae tot Templa dedicasset, nisi ei victorias suas acceptas
tulisset. Nam Romae nulli Deorum, Dearumve tot erant posita templa, uti
Fortunae. Eidem huic sentiae videtur Livius quoque suffragari, eo quod in
recitandis orationibus Imperatorum, nunquam solius virtutis mentionem facit,
sed fortunae auxilium adjungit. Ego vero contrarinm sentio, neque Plutarchi
hanc opinionem defendi posse contendo. Nam si nulla extitit Respublica quae
tantum Imperium, uti Roma acquisivit: cur id fortunae potius, quam bonis ipsius
legibus and institutis tribuamus? virtus exercituum, and Imperatorum singularis
industria Imperium Romanum peperere: res autem p^rtas conservarunt bona rei^:
institutio, rectaque gubernandi ratio a primo Legislatore constituta: uti
deinceps copiosius disseremus. Disput. Nic. Machiavel. Lib. 2. Cap. 1. in
initio.
precedence of virtue (civil or martial) in the Roman territories, as being a
more special Benefactresse or principal Foundresse of their Empire. Machiavel
is of a contrary mind, persuaded thereto, by such a reason, as argues he had
not God or his providence in his thoughts; that his thoughts were not his own,
when he conceived it: so dissonant it is to truth and his own politic
principles. His words are these; If no other State did ever compass such a
mighty Empire as Rome did, why should this be attributed to Fortune, rather
then to good laws and discipline?

2 With Plutarch and Machiavel it fares just so in this controversy, as it
usually does with other controversors; each of them has the truth under his
level, whiles he oppugnes the adverse opinion; both of them overshoot it
whilst they deliver their own. Plutarch rightly denies the moral or civil
goodness, whether of Roman laws or lives, to have brought forth their
greatness. He erreth as much in adjudging all that to Roman fortune, whereto
Roman virtue had no just title. Notwithstanding if by Fortune he meant any
certain latent cause more then humane, which did convay success to the current
of Roman policies, by secret and hidden passages; his meaning is better then
his manner of expressing it. To think thus charitably of this ingenuous
Philosopher, we have reason, as knowing him to be a perfect enemy, as well to
Epicurean chance, as to Stoycall Fate: and therefore no adversary of Divine
Providence. In favor of Machiavels opinion, who deserves no favor himself,
thus much on the other side might be said; If the ancient Romans had been as
vain as the Graecians, as luxurious as the Asiaticks, as perfidious as the
Carthagineans, as uncivil and barbarours as many nations, which they
conquered: they should not have been so constantly fortunate in their
enterprises at home, and abroad, as Livie and Plutarch had observed them to
be. That is, in our language, Divine Providence would not have destined them
unto that greatness, unto which at length they grew, if they had been
always, or for the most part, as bad, as in the period of their prosperity,
they proved. For albeit God be debtor unto none; yet the abandant riches of his
bounty, will no suffer him to leave moral virtues or constant execution of
Laws comparativly good, unrewarded with blessings temporal. All this,
notwithstanding will not infer, what Machiavell undertook to prove that the
Romans did raise themselves, more by virtue, then they were raised by Fortune;
if we take Fortune (as in all probability Plutarch did) for an hidden
fountain, secretly feeding those courses which the Romans took for their
good, with success and speed far above their expectation. Under this
indefinite latitude of unknown causes, the Divine Providence or coelestic
fortuna (as the Pythagorians term it) may be comprehended, and this divine
providence or celestial Fortune it was, which raised the Romans: they did not
raise themselves by their virtues. For we do not use to say that Princes
favorites do advance themselves, albeit Princes would not adva^ce them to such
great dignities as they enjoy, unless they were in some measure qualified unto
their liking.

3 Some nations have been, others might have been more observant of better
Laws then the Romans knew, and have used the same discipline of peace and
war, even all their policies, with greater sincerity of good intentions then
they did; and yet not have propagated their sovereignty over others, half so
far, as the Roman Empire was (by Gods special Providence) propagated. For
virtues moral, and civil discipline, or reformation of misdemeanors, (though
all more exact, then the practice of any nation could hitherto patternize) are
no such meritorious causes of temporal prosperity or Dominion, as may bind
God in justice, to dispense the one in greatest plenty, where the other most
abounds. Without these qualifications the Romans had not been capable of
such prosperity, as God in bounty bestowed upon them; but the true positive
cause of their extraordinary greatness, was the special service, whereto his
wisdom had appointed them. The rule of his liberality in disposing
kingdoms, is the correspondency or proportion, which temporal greatness
holds with the execution of his will, whether for punishing those which have
made up the measure of their Iniquity, or for the propagating or preservation
of his Church already planted, or for preparing or ploughing up the hearts of
wild and unnurtured Nations, for better receiving the seed of his Gospel.

4 When the measure of that prosperity, which GOD for these and like purposes
had allotted Rome heathen, and her iniquity became full; she and her
Provinces became a swifter prey to Barbarous Nations, some scarce so much as
heard of before, then any neighbor countries had been to her. The incredible
success of the Goaths and Vandals, of the Franks and Almaines etc, but
specially of the Hunnes, (whose furious progress was like to the Vultures
flight, and seemed to presage the slaughter which they made) will justify the
probability either of Xenophons stories concerning Cyrus, or of Curtius,
Arianus, or other writers of Alexanders conquests. Was it then natural policy
or skill in war, which did seat all, or most of these barbarous Nations in
these western countries? Virtues they had not many amongst them, yet each of
them some one or other commendable quality, which did manifest the contrary
predominant vice or outcrying sin in the Christian people, which God had
appointed them to plague, as De providentia. lib. 7
Salvianus has excellently observed. Howbeit this great power was not given
them altogether to destroy others, but withal to edify themselves in the
faith, and to be made partakers of Gods Vineyard which he had now in a manner
taken from these ungrateful husbandmen, whom they conquered. The Francks
became Christians through fear of the Vide Annonium lib. 1. cap. 15. See the
Treatise containing the Origi^nall of Unbelief, etc. cap. 18.. 1
Almaines; dread of the Hunnes did drive the Burgundi^ns to seek sanctuary in
the same profession And no question, but such of the ancient Christian
Inhabitants, as outlived th^se storms, did believe God and his servants better
afterward, then they had done before. Never were there any times more apt or
more powerful to kindle devotion in such as were not altogether frozen in
unbelief, or benumbed with the custom of sinning, then these times were.
Rome, which had been the watch tower of politic wisdom, became more stupid
then Babylon had been, when the day of her visitation did come upon her. Her
Citizens, (were a mere politician to be their judge) deserved to be buried in
their Cities ruins, for not awaking upon such and so many dreadful warnings
as she had. Extraordinary Prophets the Christian world at that time had none,
because it needed none: the Prophecies of ancient times did so well befit them,
as if they had been made of purpose only for them. Nor Senacherib, nor
Nebuchadnezzar in the prime of their strength and power could better have
brooked that title (though given them in express terms by GOD) which Attilas
(as it seems from certain Other Barbarians had the like apprehension of their
calling to the like service as Salvianus witnesses. Potuerant (Wandal^) ergo
ille degere, nec timebant: sed illa utique coelestis manus, quae eos ad
punieuda Hispa norum flagitia illuc traxerat, etiam ad vastandam Africam
transire cogebat. Ipsi denique fatebantur, non suum esse quod facerent. Agi
enim se divino jussu at perurgeri. Ex quo intelligi potest quanta sint mala
nostra, ad quos vastandos atque cruciandos ire barba^i compelluntur invi^i,
secundum illud quod vastator terrae Israeliticae Rex Assyriorum ait. Esa. 35.
and Ier. 25. Salv. lib. 7. de Gubern. Dei.
apprehension of his extraordinary calling to do the like service,) had
inserted into his royal titles, Chronica Hungarorum.
Malleu^s Orbis and Flagellum Dei; The Hammer of the World and Scourge of God.
The fame of Alexanders first victories, was nothing so terrible to Asia, as the
noise of this Scythian Thunderbolt was to the utmost parts of Europe, and would
have been to Africa and Asia, unless the Lord had put his hook into his
jaws, when he begun to swallow these and other Nations in his greedy hopes.
But when the time of his commission drew near to an end, this Sampson had a
Dalilah to abate his strength. H^ that had made himself sport with others
misery, and counted it his greatest glory to shed much blood, was choked
with his Vide Chronica Hungarorum. Et Bonfin. lib. 7. dec. 1.
own, in his marriage bed: these were the first fruits of his luxurious
nuptial feasts; what the after crop was, we leave to God.

5 The known success of these Hunnes, throughout Hungary and other parts of
Europe, may serve as a leading case to determine the question proposed between
Plutarch and Machiavel; Their valor or strength of war was not so much as
known by fame to Europeans, until they felt it. The passages into Europe, out
of these places of Scythia, which they inhabited, was unknown unto themselves,
much less did they dream of invading the Roman Empire, until he that had
decreed to make them a scourge to Europe, did lay a train to teach them the
ready way unto it. Bonfin. lib. 2. dec. 1.
The manner of their introduction was in the Philosophers language by as mere
a chance or fortune, as if a Sexton should find a casket of Gold, whilst he
digs a grave. They had no other intention, that very morning wherein they first
became acquainted with the confines of Europe, then to chase the Heart, and the
Heart no other desire, than which was merely natural, to save his life. That
this reasonlesse creature by seeking thus to satisfy his natural desire,
should show these Hunnes a safe passage through the Fens of Maeotis, into
Europe; was mere Chance in respect of them or their shallow forecast, but
providence in respect of him, who has the product or issue of every attempt
possible, in numerato, as we say, in ready coin: who can so temper all
occurrences at his pleasure, as that the self same ingredients may be an
wholesome potion unto some, and deadly poison unto others; and so combine the
careless intentions of men, and the desire of brute Beasts, as they shall
become more faithful cofederates for accomplishing his will, then men can be
(albeit they purposely conspire together, and bind themselves by solemn oath
or Sacrament) for effecting their own designs.

6 The report which these roving Hunters had made to their Countrymen of that
pleasant Land, into whose confines the chased Heart had led them, did invite the
chief heads of their Clans, with their several rascalities, to flock into
Europe like beggars dismissed out of a prison, invited to a solemn banquet. And
their hunger-starved appetites, being once fed with variety of uncouth
pleasures, did whet their wits and arm their spirits, to attempt greater
matters then they could conceive before. Artis magister ingeniique
larg^torventer. Their bellies taught them new Arts, and practice of inventions
unsuspected unto Christians. The mixed Inhabitants of that Country, which from
them was after termed Hungary, having sufficient warning of their intended
invasion, had prepared a competent army, whose Leaders presumed, they were more
safely guarded against the sudden assault of their barbarous enemies for one
night, by the River of Danow which ran between them; then they could be by
any wall or trench. And in this presumption they rested as secure for that
night, of the Hunnes, as the Babylonians were of Cyrus. It is very likely, that
Detricus General for the Romance, and Matrinus, alias Martinus, (or Macrinus)
chief Commander for the Pavonians, one or both had read how Cyrus had divided
the River Gyndis, and so turned the course of Euphrates in one night, that the
usual Channel of it became passable to his foot Soldiers before the morning.
But that the like should be attempted upon See chapter 26. parag. 11.
Danow was not credible; to be effected by their enemies, they knew it
impossible. And what other passage there was possible for these Hunnes to find,
being utterly destitute of Ship or Boat, they could not suspect. But they
bought the knowledge of their new invention a great deal too dear; with the
loss of the better part of their army, which encamping in the open fields,
were pitifully slaughtred like wandering sheep by the Bonfinius. lib. 3. dec.
1.
Hunnes, who with the help of bladders had swum over to the number of an
hundred thousand, in the deadest time of the night. This sudden disaster, which
being now past, might in some modern politicians judgment easily have been
prevented, did so lessen the Roman forces, that albeit they became co^querors
in the next conflict, yet purchased they victory with the loss of so many
soldiers, that they were not able to stand before the multitude of their
furious enemies in the third encounter: And to try them the fourth time, they
had no courage. The stumpe of that arrow, which Detricus carried in his
forehead to Rome, in witness that he had confronted his enemies, and was not
wounded in the back, did pierce the hearts of some and daunt the spirits of
other Romans. And the fresh bleeding experiments of these Hunnes incredible
fury, might well occasion, that generation and their children, to flatter their
cowardly fancies, with forged tales, as if it were no disparagement to the
Romans (though as yet in highest esteem for valor amongst the sons of men)
to be outdared by an enchanted generation of infernal monsters, borne of
witches and begot by Devils. For such legends of these Hunnes original, have
gone for current amongst Aetius postquam audivit Attilam exercitum infinitae
multitudinis ductare in Gallias, obviandum mature putavit: and, ut ipse dicere
solebat, enitendum, ut Ala^tores, seu mali genii procul ferro exterminarentur:
alludens ad naturam umbrarum and Daemonum, qui gladium eductum timent and
minus, ut Psellius ait; ac praeterea site alludens ad originem decantatam
Hunnorum ad Daemones referendam. Nam cum Filimer Rex Gothorum post egressum
Scanziae insulae terram Scythicam ingressus, reperisset mulieres quasdam magas
malefica art populum vexare, long fugatas adegit in solitudinem, ubi spurci
ac vagi spiritus in complexum suumeas illexere, humanae, figurae, sed in
humanae prorsus mentis and impietatis supremae edituri sobolem, nempe Hu^nos,
rapto and venatu ali consuetos. Forcatulus. lib 5. page 72^. ex Iornande in
lib. rerum Getic. Fabulosum putarem, nisi D. Augustinus Sylvanos and Faunos,
agrestia veterum numina, improbos extitisse mulieribus, appetisse and peregisse
concubitum retulisset: and Daemones quosdam, quos inquit, Dusios Galli
nuncupant, eadem cupidine inquinatos pr^ comperto haber^tur. Ibid. ex
Augustino. lib. 5. de Civit. Dei. cap. 23.
good writers, and are not altogether out of date in some places unto this
present day. But the Romans did want a Marius, Sylla, or Camillus, to be their
Dictator in these times; Detricus was no Julius or Germanicus: what the best of
these could have done, or durst have attempted, had they been living then, is
more then the spirit of any now living can divine; he that had made these in
their times valorous, had now decreed the beggarly Hunnes should be
victorious, and there is neither counsel nor might against the Lord.

7 Or if this be not canonical scripture with politician, let us examine
whether the evidence of truth manifested in the historical narrations, whereon
Machiavel comments, have not extorted as much from him in a manner against his
will, and contrary to his purposed conclusions, as the author of truth in this
point has taught us. He, Disput. lib. 2. cap. 29. Quod si quis igitur animo
comprehendat res a populo Romano, prius tam praeclare, longo annorum numero,
gestas: iisque has conferat, quas adversus Gallos gessere: tam diversat esse
comperiet, ut non ab uno eodemque sed diversis populis, g^estae esse videantur.
Vsque ad^o scilicet, occaecat fortuna animos hominum, ait Livius: cum vim suam
ingru^entem ref^ngi non vult. Quo ^it, ut qui in perpetuis pericul^ versantur,
min^s vit^perari debeant; and min^s laudari qui continua foeli^itate fruuntur:
cum and illos and hosfata tr^^ere videantur^ neque consilium illorum ad
resistendum malis; neque horum virtus ad comparandam foelicitatem multum facere
queat. etc.
says Machiavel, that will compare the Romans wise carriage of state-businesses
for many years together, with their ill managing of matters, when they were
invaded by the Gauls, shall find them so different, as that the latter gross
error may seem to have bin committed by another people, not by the same. So
stangely does Fortune (so he now accords in terms with Livie, whom herein he
contradicted before) blind the judgments of men, when it is her pleasure not
to have her power controuled, whose authority is so great, that neither they
which are commonly exposed to danger deserve much blame, nor they much praise,
which enjoy perpetual felicity. Fates may so strongly draw both parties this
way or that way, as the policy of the one shall not be able to prevent the
evils which happen, nor the others virtue be sufficient to bring forth good
success. In fine, taking Fortune and Fates for terms equivalent, throughout
his whole Discourse, he He concludes; Cum urbi Romae tanta Imperii magnitudo
fatalis esset; opprimi, ac vehementissime affligi ^am oportuit, ut deinceps
cautior, prudentiorque fieret, ac tantam imperij molem acquirendam: delere
tamen plane non debuit. Itaque ut omnia h^ec ita succederent, Fata Camillum in
exilium misere, non necaverunt, urbem a Gallis permisere occupari non
Capitolium: utque commodius occupari urbs posset, efficere, ut major exercitus
pars, ex praelio non Romam, sed Veios fugeret. Et (ut omnia uno quasi fasce
comprehendam) effecerunt, ut ad avertendum a Republica tantam malorum molem,
nihil a pepulo Romano prudenter sapienterque fieret: ad defendendum Capitolium
and recuperandam urbem jam captam omnia commodissima instructa essent. Disput.
Nic. Machiavel. lib. 2. cap. 29.
concludes for Plutarch; That the greatness of the Roman Empire was decreed
by Fate; and with reference to this end, as Rome could not in her growing age
be overthrown, so it was expedient that she should often be oppressed and
afflicted, that her Statesmen might become more wary and wise, for procuring
that greatness which Fates had decreed to accomplish by them. Wherefore, that
all these might take place: the Fates (which as he grants, use means
convenient for effecting their purpose) had put Camillus to exile, not to
death; suffered the City to be taken by the Gauls, but not the Capitol: and
that the City might be taken with less ado, they had likewise ordained that
the greatest part of the Roman army, being discomfited by the Gauls, should
not retire to Rome, but fly to Veios. To knit up all (as he speaks) in a
bundell, it was the ordinance of Fates, that the Romans should for this turn
use neither their wonted wit, nor discretion, for averting the evils which
befell them, and yet have all things made ready to their hands, for defending
the Capitol and recovering of the City. By the forecast of Fates, not of the
Romans, it was, that exiled Camillus, who was no way guilty of the wrongs
which the Senate had done unto the Gauls, no way obnoxious unto them, but free
from all obligements, should be at Ardea with one army, and expected at Veios
by another, that they might with joint forces assault the Gauls, when they
least expected, and so recover the City.

8 Had Machiavel told us what he meant by Fates or Fortune, we might either
quickly agree with him, or easily confute him, as disagreeing most from
himself: whatsoever he meant by them, it had been a point of honesty in him,
to have craved pardon of Plutarch for contradicting him in the former
discourse; seeing he borrows Plutarchs own language in this Comment of
Romes surprizall by the Gauls. If Machiavel by Fate or Fortune, understand some
branch of Gods decree or providence, mentem teneat, linguam corrigat. For
though he comment upon a Heathen writer, it would no way misbeseeme him
sometime so to speak, as men might suspect him to be a Christian. But not to
question in what signification he used the words Fates or Fortune; the real
attributes which he gives to Fate or Fortune, cannot belong to any power in
heaven or earth, save only to the only wise invisible GOD, for who can blind
the minds of men, of such politic wise^men as the Romans were, save only
he who made our souls, and gives wisdom to whom he pleases, who can make
choice of excellent spirits, for managing humane affairs present, or
entertain occasions offered for great atchievances? who again can deprive
such men (men so qualified as Machiavel would have them) of life, depose them
from their dignities, or so abate their strength; as they shall not be able to
make resistance when evils are determined? That power only can do all these,
which knows all things, works all things, determines all things, rules all
things. Yet all these attributes here specified has Machiavel, bestowed on
Fate. Either was this man stricken with heathenish blindness for detaining the
truth in unrighteousness, or else in seeing thus far into events, in his
judgment, Fatal, he might have seen Gods providence ruling in them, and
disposing of all humane affairs whatsoever. The like contemplation of fatal
or fortunate events, led Commineus, a man as well seen in matters of state, as
Machiavel was, unto a distinct view of Divine Providence, as shall be showed
See cha. 29. parag. 1.
heareafter. Whatsoever effect these observations wrought in Machiavel; the
perusal of them will lift up the Christian Readers heart to sing with Daniel:
Blessed be the name of God for ever and ever, for wisdom and might are his.
He changes the times and seasons, he gives wisdom unto the wise, and
knowledge to them that know understanding.

9 But though we could make this or the like orthodoxall construction of
Machiavels meaning, in this discourse, though fate and fortune in his language
were the same that Gods providence is in ours; Yet the use which he makes of
this his doctrine, would neither be consonant to his own principles elsewhere
delivered, not to the eternal truth: Hoc unum pronunciabo de fortunae viribus
and fati necessitate, quod historias omnis generis percurrenti facile
apparebit, homines fati necessitatem evitare non posse: sed faciliorem eventum
ijs, quae ab eo impendent, efficere, eumque promovere; adeoque parcarum ^elas
texere, non retexere, aut rumpere. Quod etsi ita se habeat, non decet tamen, ut
animum abjiciamus, nosque plane committamus fato; sed, quacunque fortuna
aspirante, been speremus, diligenter prudenterque rebus nostris provideamus:
quod fatorum viae and rations producendorum effectuum, obscuriores sint, quam
ut a nobis intelligi qu^ant. Machiavil. in fine lib. 2. What great matter is
this, which is so plainly witten in histories of every kind, as he^ that
runs may read it? His resolution is this, that men cannot avoid the
necessity of fate, but rather facilitate the events by it decreed: So unable
are they to undo the contrivances or contextures of destiny, that by how much
the more they struggle with them, they weave and knit them faster. But shall
state-pilots for this reason strike sail to Fortune, and suffer the world to
floate, whether fates do drive it? No, rather bear out against all blasts of
chance, because the ways of fate, and manner how it brings its matter about,
are so obscure, that no wit of man can discern them. But what boots it us to
know the ways of Fates to be so obscure, that they cannot be known, if
neither known nor unknown, they can be avoided* It would inspire our
endeavors with greater alacrity, and our endeavors would be blessed with
better success, were we taught (as the truth is) that such events as
Politicians term fatal, are in their nature, alterable, though not by us, or
by any humane skill or policy, yet by him whose almighty aid, is always ready
for us, so we seek it with due humility. But Machiavel (if I mistake him not)
was once of opinion, that Fates and Fortune interpose their authority only in
some more principal humane affairs; he acknowledges no general providence
over all. The general Maxim whence he falsely derives his fruitless
inference, is, That Gods Decree (whereof Fates good or bad, are necessary
branches) is altogether immutable. The most necessary, immediate, and most
useful consequent of which truth, is this, As long as the parties against whom
he decrees evil, continue the same; the evil decreed, is as immutable as his
decree, and men by seeking to avoid it by their wit or strength, do draw it
more speedily, or more heavily upon them. For, it is impossible, that humane
power should not be foiled, whilst it opposes it self against Omnipotency;
or the devices of humane wisdom not be defeated, whilst they counterplot
Wisdom infinite. But though in the Almighty, or in his decree, there be no
shadow of change; yet as Daniel speaks, he changes times and seasons; and in
that his mercy is immutable, he is always ready to repent him of the evils
forethreatned, when men repent them of the evil, for which he threatens
them. Or, in terms (perhaps) more proper, it is one essential part of his
immutable decree to alter the events decreed, or foresignified, (be they good
or bad) according as men alter their minds for better or worse. But how Fates
are invited or may be avoided, we are to speak more particularly hereafter.

10 The very instance whence Machiavel framed his forementioned Aphorism, will
be a fit example for illustrating our present rule. The Romans (as he
observes) were usually most religious observers of the Law of nations, and
whilst they continued thus, Gods blessings did rest upon their policies: But
at the time when the Gauls invaded Italy; the Fahii, being sent Ambassadors
in a Treaty of peace, unaduisedly put on the girdle of war, and slew a
standard bearer of the Gauls in defense and quarrel of the Clusini, betwixt
who^ they should have been indiferent arbitrators. And in stead of just
punishment (which by the Law of nations was, to have been delivered up unto
the Enemies whom they had wronged,) the Romans did grace them with the office
of Tribunes, at their return, and appointed them chief managers of that war
with the Gauls, which Imprimis igitur habenda ratio est earum rerum, quae fato
ipso, seu astrorum influxu, evenire videntur, and quibus ut resistamus, fortuna
non permittit. Quarum exemplum luculentissimum est id, quod, populus Romanus,
in clade Gallica accepit. Nam cum fatis urgentibus, tanta moles mali instaret:
primam occasionem, ad illam accelerandam dederunt tres Fabij Legati, qui cum
agere debuissent de pace, inter Clusinos and Gallos; contra jus gentium, pro
Clusinis, adversus Gallos praelio decertarunt: atque ita Gallorum iram,
adversus populum Romanum provocarunt. Machiavel. lib. 2. cap. 29.
their insolency had provoked. The success whereof was such, as the
Israelites had, before Achans sacrilege was punished by Iosuah. Romes present
calamity had spread much farther, if the whole State had been as deeply
infected with this foul crime, as the whole Senate and people, Magnus ille
nostroru^ temporum Medicus Vindicianus, consultus a quodam; dolori ejus
adhiberi jussit, quod in tempore congruere videbatur: adhibitum sanitas
consecuta est. Deinde, post annos aliquot eadem cursus corporis causa commotus,
hoc idem ille putavit adhibendu^: adhibitum vertit in pejus. Mira^us, curr^t ad
Medicu^, indicat factum: at ille, ut erat acerrimus, ita respondit; Ide^ ^a^e
acceptus e^, quia ego non jus^^: ut omnes qui audissent, parumque hominem
nossent, non eum art medicinali fidere, sed nesci^ qua illicita potentia
putarent. Vnde, quum esset a quibusdam postea stupentibus interrogatus, aperuit
quod non intellexerant, videlicet illi atati jam non hoc se fuisse jussurum.
August. Epist. 5. ad Marcellinum.
then resident at Rome were: Sed Veios habitante Camillo, illic Roma fuit: In
as much, as the life and soul of the Roman estate did then reside in the
exiled Camillus and his company, (who had suffered much wrong from the Romans,
but had done none unto the Gauls;) it pleased the Lord to raise up his spirit,
to rescue the City from their tyranny, who would have revenged the offense
committed, with greater severitie, then this aeternall aequitie had appointed
for this time, wherein Romes iniquity was not fully ripe for utter destruction.

11 To do justice, though to a public enemy, is a fundamental rule of
Prophetical and Christian policy, whereto Machiavel has one, and Plutarch
another discourse very pertinent. Thus to do, is good and acceptable in the
sight of God, without whose special direction and benediction, the practice of
most approved rules of policy, prove more fruitless, if not more dangerous to
great Estates, then choicest receipts do to illiterate or ordinary patients,
being administered without the Physicians advise or prescript. Magnus ille
nostroru^ temporum Medicus Vindicianus, consultus a quodam; dolori ejus
adhiberi jussit, quod in tempore congruere videbatur: adhibitum sanitas
consecuta est. Deinde, post annos aliquot eadem cursus corporis causa commotus,
hoc idem ille putavit adhibendu^: adhibitum vertit in pejus. Mira^us, curr^t ad
Medicu^, indicat factum: at ille, ut erat acerrimus, ita respondit; Ide^ ^a^e
acceptus e^, quia ego non jus^^: ut omnes qui audissent, parumque hominem
nossent, non eum art medicinali fidere, sed nesci^ qua illicita potentia
putarent. Vnde, quum esset a quibusdam postea stupentibus interrogatus, aperuit
quod non intellexerant, videlicet illi atati jam non hoc se fuisse jussurum.
August. Epist. 5. ad Marcellinum.
To a Patient demanding why the same medicine, which had once done him much
good, did at the second time do him harm; Vindicianus a learned Physician in
S. Augustines time answered, because at the first time, I gave it you; you
took it the second time your self, being of that age, in which I would not
have given it. Now as diversity of times, alteration of humors, or
constitution of men's bodies, may cause the self same medicine, which at some
times brought health, at another time to bring forth Death or dangerous
sickness to one and the self same body: so may Kingdoms, whether for form
or government the same, or different, be speedily overthrown, by following
that method of reformation, or the self same rules of policy, by which most
States formerly have been preserved. He that changes times and seasons,
disposes the concurrents, or dissolveth the combination of occurrent
circumstances or opportunities; must give his approbation or allowance, before
any contrivance of man can be effectual. He is the supreme Physician of men's
souls, the preserver of States and Kingdoms. The greatest statesmen are at
the best, but his Chyrurgions, or his Apothecaries, and if they adventure upon
any difficult cure without consulting him; the same hand which healed this
year, may wound the next; the same receipt which gave life to day, may kill to
morrow. From these Collections, Machiavel, so he would be constant unto
himself, cannot vary.

12 The diversity of Fortune much furthering some, and crossing others, Dum
sape multumque ipse mecum cogito de fortunae diversitate quae aliis secundam,
aliis adversam se in eorum actionibus, institutisque exhibet: hanc ejus causam
invenisse mihi videor, quod ut diversi sunt agendi modi, aliis atque aliis
hominibus consueti ac naturales: ita aliae atque aliae sunt temporum rations,
occasionesque* Quidam in rebus gerendis, administrandisque ferocia quadam
utuntur, and omnia cum impetu agunt. etc. Mac^iavel. lib. 3. cap. 9 in initio.
he derives from these originalls: As there be diverse kinds of proceedings in
managing the affairs of peace or war, with whose diversities the
dispositions of men, by nature or custom much different, suit, some with one,
some with another: so have different times their seasons and opportunities.
Some times require quick dispatch, others delay of business; some businesses
speedy execution, others maturity of consultation and long forecast. Now seeing
no one man is fitted for all kinds of proceedings, nor no one kind of
proceeding can befit all or most times, but all have their limits, which
without error or danger they cannot transgress. Hence it is that those men
least err, and become most fortunate in their achievements, which have the
hap to be employed in such times and seasons, as best agree with their natural
and accustomed manner of projecting. Statefortune then by Machiavels
conclusion, is no bastard brood, no fatherless bratt, but the true and
legitimate offspring of Time, fitly matched with the peculiar disposition of
experienced practickes. On the contrary, public misfortune or ill success,
is the natural issue of men's endeavors, when they are undertaken in an unfit
time. The only question then remaining, is, whether there be any, or if any,
who is the chief author of all fit matches or disagreements between the
several dispositions of men, and the opportunities of times? It is a point
unquestionable, that the prime author of such matches, is the first author of
all success, be it good or bad, in humane affairs. The greatest amongst the
sons of men cannot command what opportunities they please, but must be
content with such as time affords them: nor are the wisest of men always able
to make choice of the best which time presents. Time likewise, though thus
affording opportunities, cannot appoint the men, that are most fit to entertain
them. So that neither is time the fountain or author, nor can men be their
own Carvers of good success. Does this office then belong to Goddess
Fortune? If she could see this, she might see all things; and were no longer
to be reputed Fortune: wisdom and providence should be her titles. It is That
wisdom by which all things were made, which disposes their operations. It is
that Providence, which was before all times, that dispenses the times and
opportunities, that are. These sit supreme scrutators in consultations of
state, and have more casting voices, then the world takes notice off. They
secretly sway every election: other suffragants may freely declare their
opinions, and vent their breath; which these tune and moderate as they please.

13 That we may descend to Machiavels instance; The Romans appointed no
general without public consultation. Whether Fabius Maximus were chosen
general by unanimous consent of the Senate, or with difficulty and
contradiction, we have not observed, or do not remember. Even such as were
most forward, or factious for him, did little think how well his peculiar
temper did suit with the opportunity of those times, wherein he was appointed
to cope with Hannibal. The common rumors, which run of him throughout Rome,
argue a general dislike of his proceedings; if lingering, might in their
censures be called proceedings rather then cowardly delay or detrectation. The
best proof he gave for a long time of his courage, was his constant contempt
of others censures. Non ponebat enim rumores ante salutem.
But after, the event did as far surpass their hopes of his slow
proceedings, as these had come short of their first expectations; their note
was changed. Fabius was now the Vnus home nobis cunctande restituit r^m. Ennius.
only man, and (as some of them make him) more then a man; in -- Sed men's
humana major; nec t^la nec enses Nec fortes spectabat equos, tot millia contra
Poenorum invictumque ducem, tot in agm^ne, solus Ibat, and in sese cuncta arma
virosque gerebat. Sillius Italicus. lib. 7.
common esteem the only Author of their Cities preservation. Howbeit, to such
as can resolve effects into their prime and native causes, children might more
justly be fathered upon the woman that bears them, then this joyful issue,
which was brought forth by his lingering, can be upon his forecast or wisdom.
For this cunctation, of which the peculiar opportunities of these times begat
good success; was to Fabius ( Neque Fabius sua cu^ctatione, ^lla co^modiori
te^poru^ occasion uti potuit, quam illa ipsa: cum tamen naturalis esset in
Fabio illa cunctatio, non ex praesenti temporum statu su^pta. Id enim vel eo
ipso satis declaravit, quod cum Scipio in Africam postea ad conficiendu^ bellum
trajicere vellet: Fabius ei vehementer resistebat, and omnibus modis impedire
conabatur: ut qui natura sua magis ad cunctandum, arcendaque praesentia
pericula ferretur, quam ad alia majorasubeunda. Itaque per Fab^um non stetit,
quo minus Punicum bellum absolvi fini^ique non posset, quod is non
animadverteret alia jam tempora esse, and aliam belli gerendi rationem commodam
existere. Quod si solus rerum potitus fuisset, victoriam de Carthaginensibus
obtinere nequivisset, quod belli gerendi rations temporum diversitati
nescivisset accommodare. Se^ ^um in ea republica totessent insignes
Imperatores, ac rei militaris peritissimi homines, voluit fortuna, ut sicuti
difficilibus illis temporibus Fabius bellum sustinere, ac pericula arcere; ita
postea, commodiori reru^ statu, Scipio id conficere, and victoria^ obtinere
pot^erit. Ma^h^. 3 c. 9.
as Machiavel well observes) a disposition natural: he could not have changed
with the times, nor fashioned himself to new occasions. He had held the same
byas still, though on another much different ground: and so might he well have
lost his late purchased fame, and Rome her prize; unless there had been more
skill used in playing the game, than the supposed Roman Gamesters practiced. As
suppose Fabius had been sent to have bid Hannibal play in Africa, and Scipio
appointed to keep the goal in Italy: Rome and Carthage, by the misplacing of
these two men, might have changed Fates and Fortunes. Rome, in all likelihood,
had been taken, when Fabius saved it; and Carthage enriched with Roman
spoils, at the time when Scipio ransacked it. Rome could not have found a
surer buckler to bear off Hannibals blows in Italy, then lingering Fabius: nor
a fitter sword to beat him in his native soil, then forward Scipio. And yet
was Fabius the most forward man to oppose Scipio his expedition into Africa:
and it may be some of Scipio his friends had bandied as earnestly against
Fabius. Either of them liked his own course best: if happily either liked any
other besides. Neither of them knew, what temper was fittest for every season;
nor is it possible for the wisdom of man to match these always aright,
because albeit the temper or dispositions of men did never alter, ye^ the
occasions or opportunities of times are more changeable than the Moon.

14 The Aphorism which Machiavel gathers from the former discussions is not so
false, as imperfit, and it is this: Seeing different times require different
manners of proceedings, and state-agents cannot easily change their manner,
whereto they have been most accustomed; it were most expedient for States to
change their agents, that their several dispositions might more exactly suit
with the alterations of times and opportunities. The facility of observing or
practicing this rule in Aristocratis, is in his judgment, one special cause
why, that kind of government is more durable then Monarchical. For Princes
will hold their wonted ways, they will not change their resolutions, much
less will they give place to others, that are better fitted for entertaining
the opportunities or change of times. Petrus Soderinus, cujus alias etiam
mentione^ fecimus, natura humanus erat, et patientia sua multas injurias
ferebat, quae res salutaris fuit Reip. simul atque ipsi quandiu te^pora
cleme^tiora fuere. Sed cum te^poru^ mutatione ferrea quaeda^ aetas adesset,
quae severitatem postulabat: atque ille a co^sueta sua patie^tia and bonitate
discedere nesciret, semetipsum simul, atque patriam perdidit. Machiavel. lib.
3. cap. 9.
Petrus Soderinus, a man for his moderation and wisdom fit to have governed
an Empire, did (as he thinks) overthrow himself and the Florentine estate,
by continuing his authority, being unable to put off his wonted lenity and
patience, in times requiring austere imperious reformation. Whereas Pope Julius
the second, played the Lion all his time with the Foxes luck: the more he was
cursed for his impetuous insolency, the stronger he grew: no thanks to him or
his wit, but to the times, which had they changed, he must have fallen. But
was not Septimius Afer, for his native severitie, as well fitted to the
impetuous disposition of the Roman Empire when he undertook it, as any medicine
can be to the malady, for which it is by art prepared? And yet his practice
(though exactly answering ^o Machiavels rules of reformation (here and
elsewhere set down) found but the Mountebankes success; he cured some
present mischiefs, but procured more grievous, secret, and more permanent
inconveniences. The barbarous nations which longed most for Romes destruction,
learned the use and art of making the Romans weapons and artillery, from the
discontented Exiles, which his severitie thrust upon them. Nor did Constantine
the great (though Leunclavius be willing to prefer the unsanctified Zozimus
his bill against him, to Christian Princes) half so much weaken the Empire, by
his largess toward the Christians, as Septimius did wound it, by seeking to
restore or rather to intend the rigor of ancient discipline amongst modern
dissolute Romans. Many like practices, in the issue became means of the
Empires more speedy dissolution; though all, (as far as the eye of policy
could see,) most convenient for the present season, but it is not for
politicians to know the exact temper of times and seasons, which the father
has put in his own power, as cases reserved for infinite Wisdom.

15 Had Rome in the days of Arcadius and Honorius stood at the same point of
liking with God, as she sometimes had done: these oversights (as it pleases
posterity now to censure them) of Constantine and Septimius with infinite
other particulars of like nature, falling out before and after them, should
have added much to the measure of her wonted prosperity. But being now
declined from Gods favor to the aspect of his Justice, all conspire against
her: and her best supporters become stumbling blocks, to cause her to fall.
And, although it had been possible for the several successions of her ancient
and choicest Senators, to have been assembled together in counsel for her
good; yet what possibility was there left to prevent the combination of second
causes secretly conspiring her destruction, when as the unavoidable mischances
of Nations, which they knew not, even the disasters of her enemies became
confederates with domestic miscariages to work her mischief. If we consider
only the visible causes, or means observable, by which this mighty Empire
came to miserable ruin: not all the oversights committed by any one, though
the very worst of al her Governors or Counselors; not all the devises of any
one nation or common enemy, did sow the seeds of so much evil and mishap, as
befell her from one example of severitie, unseasonably practiced by the Bonfin.
lib. 2 dec. 1.
King of Goathes, upon a wicked woman, that sought to cover her adultery, by
her abused husbands blood. The fact indeed deserved the height of Princely
indignation, and more then an ordinary death, but to pull her in pieces with
horses (as Hermanarichus commanded) was so indignely taken by her brethren,
that in revenge they killed this grave and ancient King; by whose wisdom and
authority the Goathes had been able so well to have matched the Huns, as the
Romans might have stood as arbitrators to moderate the quarrel as they saw
fit, or to have divided the prey. But the Goathes, being suddenly deprived of
their* Governor in the very nicke* when the war was begun, left their
habitation to the Hunnes, and (upon protestations of more then ordinary
fidelity and good service) got to be admitted as natural subjects within the
Empire, which by this means became exposed to a double mischief. It has the
Hunnes as near, but more insolent and noisome neighbors, then the Goathes had
been: and through the folly and greediness of the Imperial officers, the
Goath in short time of a former open enemy, became a treacherous friend. The
Romans nursed this young snake in their bosom, after such an unpleasant and
untowardly fashion, as they might be sure, he would be ready to use his
sting, when God should send him one. And albeit the Goath and Hun, did
naturally worse agree, then the Toade and Spider: yet in relation to the
execution of Gods justice upon the Roman Empire, they hold this exact
subordination, that wheresoever the one had broken skin, the other was ready
to infuse his poison; the one always ready to enlarge the wounds, which the
other had made, before they closed. Howbeit, when both these enemies had done
the worst to Rome that they intended, (for both of them had power in respect of
any help that man could make, to do her as much harm, as they listed) yet the
Prophets speech concerning Israel, was remarkably true of her, Perditio tua ex
te O Roma, Romes destruction was from her self. Her very enemies would have
healed her, but Babylon-like she would not be healed. Alaricus the Goath had
taken the City, but made conscience of defacing it: he spared the suppliants
for the Temples sake. Attilas was kindly entreated by Pope Leo not to visit it;
the rather thereto persuaded, because God had visited Alaricus for polluting
it. It was the cry of the noble Aetius his blood treacherously shed, not by
the Enemy, but by the Emperor Valentinian, at the instigation of Maximus,
which did solicit Gensericus King of Vandals to come out of Afrique to visit
Rome, now sunk so low by Aetius his fall, that she could never be raised
again.

16 The concatenation of sinister Fates, that is, (in better language) the
combination of second causes designed by God for the execution of his
consequent Will upon the Roman Empire, is in this case so pregnant: that I
cannot make a fitter close of this discourse, then by relating the historical
Circumstances, occasion and consequence of Aetius his death. Maximus a Roman
Senator, and principal Favorite of Valentinian the Emperor, Vide Pr^cop. l.
3. de bell^ Vandalico.
sporting with him on a time in his Palace, chanced to leave his ring behind.
The Emperor, by this token invites Maximus his Lady to come and visit his
Empress Eudoxia, his intention being to visit her in such a manner, as was no
way pleasing to her, but most displeasing to her Husband, unto who^ she
disclosed their joint wrong and her special grief. The indignity of the Fact
(being done by so dear a friend as he supposed Valentinian was) made so deep
impression in his heart, that an ordinary revenge could not suffice. The
Emperors life seemed too small a recompense, without hopes of succeding him:
and his hopes of succession (he saw) were but vain if Aetius should survive
Valentinian: Maximus therefore, smoothly dissembling his discontent for the
present, persuades the Emperor that Aetius was too potent in the opinion of
the State, and become more popular than before, by the happy success of his
late employment against Attilas the common enemy and terror of Christendom.
Paulus Diaconus. lib. 15
The Emperors weakness is easily wrought to put Aetius to death, which (as one
observes) was in effect to cut off his own right hand with his left, and to
expose himself to public hatred and danger, without a Defendant. Thrasilas, a
Centurion to Aetius, knowing his Generals loyalty and innocence, in ^^venge of
his undeserved death, kills Valentinian* And Maximus not content to usurp the
Empire, unless he might have the Empress Eudoxia in to the bragaine, abuses
her as Valentinian had done his Lady. Eudoxia more impatient than Maximus his
wife had been, Vide Bonfinium lib. V. dec. 1. and Niceph. l. 15 hist. Eccles.
cap. 11.
sollicites Gensericus King of the Vandalls to revenge her husbands death, and
her wrongs. In the execution of Gods will or wrath upon Maximus, the Roman^^
prevent him, for they stone him to death; but ^ould not prevent the ransacking
of the City by him, and the final overthrow of the Roman Empire. As for those
imperial titles which some afterward took upon them, these were but as
ominous formalities for the more legal resigning up of the Roman Sovereignty
into the hands of strangers, as Momillus surnamed Augustulus (the last of
Italian blood which bare rule in Rome) did it into the hands of the Hunnes, the
relics of Attilas his race, their inveterate enemies; whose rage and cruelty
when it was at the height of its strength, had been broken by Aetius his
valor. As the Roman Rulers and Senate had done to him: so has the Lord now
done to them.

CHAP. 28.
Why God is called the Lord of Hosts, or the Lord mighty in Battle. Of his
special providence in managing Wars.
1 ALBEIT the sole authority of Scripture without the assignement of any
reason, be a warrant alsufficient for us to enstyle our God the Lord of Hosts:
yet why he is so often in Scripture thus enstyled, as by a most special and
peculiar attribute, these reasons may without offense be given. His peculiar
hand is not in any subject of humane contemplation more conspicuous, then in
the managing of Wars. Why it should be more conspicuous in this then in
other businesses, wherein men are much employed, the reason is plain: for
Contingences are no where more ticklish than in War, not is their number in
any other subject so incomprehensible to the wit of man. It is hard to use wit
and valor both at once; hard to spy an error upon the first commission of
it, harder to redeem the time, or regaine opportunities lost. It is a gross
error which has insinuated it self into some Politicians thoughts, if we
may judge of their thoughts by their writings; that the chances which may fall
out contrary to Warriors expectations, are not so many but that they may be
forecast or numbered. It is the Politicians error likewise, (though would to
God it were his alone) to think all occurrences which are casual in respect of
man, to be from the first occasions of war begun, so determined by him, which
gives success in battle, as that victory must in deed and truth (though to
men she seem not so) incline to one party more than to the other. These
casualties of War, or doubtful inclinations of victory, are in succession
infinite. Their possibilities one way or other, may every moment increase from
misdemeanors either of them which fight the battles, or of the parties for
whom they fight. The fairest probability of good success may be abated from
every good act or reformation of the adversary. Gods eternal freedom either
in determining new occurrences, or altering the combinations of others already
extant, cannot be prejudiced by any Act past. He has not so before all time
decreed them, that he does not still decree them, at his pleasure, as well
during all the time of war and fight, as before. Ita accidit Lazius.
saepenumero, ut fortuna ad utrumque victoriam transferat, quo Bellum
extrahatur, animosque nunc horum, nunc illorum accendat. So it oftentimes falls
out, that Fortune makes fair profer of victory to both sides, and one while
incourageth this party, another while that, by which means wars are usually
prolonged. Now whatsoever in these cases befalls men either beyond their
expectation, or contrary to their forecast, is counted fortunate, if it be for
their good; or fatal, if it be for their harm. Hence men not only of most
accurate booke-learning amongst the Romans, but of best experience in matters
of war, have given more to Fortune, then bystanders or Historical Relators
usually acknowledge to be her due.

Had Caesar upon a diligent and accurate survey of the means, by which he got
his victories, allotted Fortune her just part in several, or told us truly how
much fell out beyond or above his expectation, how much just according to his
reckoning: the world (I think) would have been of the same mind with
Machiavel in his Cha. 27.. 7.
forementioned contemplations of Romes surprisal by the Gauls, which was, That
the most victorious do not deserve much glory either for wit or valor, nor the
conquered much dispraise for the contrary imperfections; seeing Fate or
Fortune have always the chiefest stroke as well in the exaltation of the one,
as in the dejection of the other. Notwithstanding it is no part of mine,
whatsoever it was of Machiavels meaning, to have any man deprived of that
commendation which is due to him in respect of other men. And it is not the
least title unto true praise, to be in favor with the supreme disposer of
Martial success. In respect of him the victorious have no cause to boast, but
rather to condemn their sloth and negligence in that the fruits of their
success, was no better then usually it proves, they having so good assistance,
and sure pledges of divine favor.

2 Wheresoever Cicero, Caesar, Vegetius, or other heathens, could suspect or
descrie the secret assistance of fate or fortune, specially in matters more
remarkable, as are the usual consequents of war; there we may without
solecisme say, the finger of the Lord of hoasts did work. For if the least
wound that is given or taken in fight, do not make it self, but is made by
the vigilant and working hand of man; shall not the chief stroke or sway of
battle, which usually falls without Warriers comprehension, lead us to a
direct, a certain and positive cause? Now if this cause were otherways
unknown, by what name could we more properly call it, then by the Lord of
hoasts, or great Moderator of war.

If we may guess at Gods working in all, by the manifestation of his special
hand in some: I am persuaded there was never any great battle fought since
the world began, much less any famous war accomplished with such facility
or speed, but that if it had pleased the Historians to express all
circumstances of special moments, or could the reader survey such as they
express, with as diligent and curious eyes, as one Artificer will another
work: the consultations of their chief managers, and the executions which seem
to have most dependence on them; would bear no better proportion with their
entire success, then the day laborers work does with a curious edifice, or
then the Pioners pains does with the defense or expugnation of strong forts or
Castles. And yet even in the maturest deliberations or most exact consultations
of war; related by ordinary historians, the final determination, may for the
most part be resolved into some special Divine instinct: the execution of that
which men by such instinct determine and resolve upon, essentially depends upon
the disposition of Gods peculiar providence, who has an authentic negative
in the use of every means, which men make choice of; albeit in using them he
admit men, as his coworkers, but not as sharers in production of the principal
effect or end. He alone bestows victory where he pleases, by what means
or whose agency he pleases, but not always with victory and success,
unless such as be his agents or instruments in the execution of his consequent
will upon others, be ready to do his antecedent will or pleasure themselves.

3 This is a subject whose fuller explication would require a larger volume,
then this whole Treatise in my intendment shall be. I will therefore instance
especially in one battle, and another war, of the greatest consequences,
that the histories of these three hundred years past present unto us. The
first shall be in that fierce and violent conflict at Gru^wald between Iagello
or Vladislaus King of Poland and Lituania, and the Crucigeri or Knights of
Prussia, about the year one thousand four hundred. Should a Politician or
Soldier, that will believe no more, then he sees grounds for out of his own
Art, have seen, the mighty preparation and courageous resolution of both
parties, he would happily have demanded a sign of Gods providence, and said in
his heart, Let us see either of these two Armies take flight upon a conceipted
noise of Chariots or Horsemen, or an imagination of an Army not really
existent: or what Gedeon is he now alive, that dare adventure on the weaker of
them, with three hundred men, although he had thrice three hundred Trumpeters
to encourage them. We will not therefore press any with belief of Miracles in
these later times, but rather persuade them with us to acknowledge, that those
extraordinary manifestations of power more then natural, in battles fought
for Israel and Judah by Gedeon or Sampson, by the Angels, by the Host of
Heaven, or by inferior Elements, were not more pregnant documents of Gods
immediate hand in managing wars, nor better proofs of his just title to be
the Lord of Hosts; than the contrivances of ordinary causes and occurrences in
martial affairs of modern times, does or might afford to all such as rightly
survey them. To make a mighty army fall by the free and unimpeached exercise
of their own valor and strength, can be no less wonderful to unpartiall
eyes, than to scatter them by fire and lightning, than to beat them down by
mighty hailestones from heaven. To cause the stronger and more skillful in
war to faint, without diminishing of their courage and strength, is no less
the Lords doing, than if their hearts had been surprised with a panick
terror, or their arms suddenly deprived of life and motion, as Ieroboams was.
Yet this was the case of the Prussian Knights of the Cross, and the Germane
Forces which assisted them against Iagello.

4 The conduct of the right wing of Iagelloes Army, which did consist of
Lituanians, was commended to his brother Vitoudus, not out of any foresight of
advantage, but in honor of his person, or of that Nation; which was perhaps an
oversight in point of war. However, this wing was fiercely assaulted by the
opposite wing of the Germane Army, which was a great deal the stronger,
especially for horsemen. God by his secret Vide Varsevicii paral. in vita
Iagell.
providence did so dispose that this advantage should redound unto their greater
overthrow. For the Lituanians being the far weaker part of Iagello his Army,
both for want of skill and of Armor, after a furious encounter fled the
faster: and the Germane wing, which had put them to flight, not suspecting but
that their other wing had been as able to match the Polonian, as they had
been to defeat the Lituanian; pursued the victory so long and so far, that
they were neither able fully to succor the other wing being scattered and
broken by the Polonians, before their return, nor to fly from their enemies
with that speed they desired; as being over wearied with the former chase. Of
the Germans, by this oversight and presumption, fifty thousand were slain,
and (as some relate) almost as many taken prisoners. They had put their
confidence in the valor, skill and multitude of their Army, which did consist
of an hundred and forty thousand choice soldiers. The good King Iagello his
trust was in his prayers to God; and in the presumption of his Enemy, which had
been so triumphant before the victory, so certain of victory before the
joining of the battle; that they would not give Iagello leave to say his
prayers, or do his wonted service unto God, but sent him two swords in
mockery, one for himself, and another for his brother Vitoudus, as if they
had wanted weapons to defend themselves; profering him withal, that if the
place wherein he then was, were too strait for ordering his men they would go
back, as in contempt and scorn they did, and make him room. This insolent
message was by the religious King embraced, as a welcome prognostique that they
should give him place against their wills. And so it fell out, that they were
not able to defend themselves within their trenches; their Tents and cariages
became a prey to Polonians, being so well fraught with all manner of provision,
not for necessity only, but for pleasure, that Iagello caused a great number
of Wine-vessels to be burst in pieces, lest his soldiers should be overcome
with plenty of wine, after they had overcome their potent enemies, or at lest
be hindered from further pursuit of victory. There a man might have seen a
strange spectacle, a flood or stream not of blood or wine, but as if it had bin
of gore by the mixture of the wine and the blood alike violently shed in the
Germane Camp. The gaudinesse of their Armor would not suffer such as escaped
by flight, toly hid in the fennes or reeds into which they ran. This was the
issue of their unhallowed confidence, which had in their Tents abundance of
Torches and of chains; the one provided ^or leading the Nobles of Poland
Captives, the other for firing their Cities.

5 There is a story mentioned by Salvianus, exactly paralleld to the former,
for the different d^spositions of the parties conflictant, and for the contrary
success which befell their contrary demeanours before the battle. The
conflict was betwixt the Goathes and the Gauls. The Goathes were a kind of
Christians, but Arrians, through default of their Instructors. The Gauls were
Catholics, as good as Rome had any in those days; so were the Prussian
Knights: Iagello was a late convert^Christian, and very devout in his kind,
yet not quite purged from some Heathenish inbred superstition. It was a custom
with him, to turn thrice round about, and to break a straw in three pieces
before he went abroad. How much more acceptable or less displeasing unto God,
how much more availeable in the day of battle un^ained humility, fear and
devotion, (though in part tainted with e^roneous opinion, and superstition)
are, than confidence in the purity of opinions, or profession of Orthodoxall
religion, without correspondency of practice, cannot better be expressed than
it is by Non ita Gothi, non ita Vuandali, qui and in discrimine positi opem a
^eo postulant, and prosperitatis suae munus divinis nominibus appellant.
Denique probavit hoc, bello Proximo infelicitas nostra. Cum enim Gothi
metuerent, praesumpsimus ^os: nos in viribus spem ponere, illi in Deo: cum pax
ab illis postularetur, a nobis negaretur: illi Episcopos mitterent, nos
repelleremus: illi etiam in alienis Sacerdotibus Deum honorarent, nos etiam in
nostris contemneremus: prout actus utriusque partis, ita and rerum terminus
fuit. Illis data est in summo timore palma; nobis in summa elatione confusio.
Ve^e and in nobis tunc and in illis evidenter probatum fuit illud Domini nostri
d^ctum: quoniam, qui se exaltat, humiliabitur, and qui se humiliat,
exaltabitur. Illis enim exaltatio data est pro humilitate; nobis pro elatione
dejectio. Namque agnovit hoc ille dux nostrae partis, qui c^ndem urbem hostium,
quam ^odem die victorem se intrat^rum ^sse prasumpsit, captivus intravit etc.
In quo quidem pr^ter ipsam rerum infelicitatem, praesens judicium Dei patuit,
ut quicquid facturum se usurparat, ipse pateretur. etc. Salvian. lib. 7.
Salvianus. That saying of our Savior, He that exalts himself shall be
brought low, was evidently experienced in the Goaths and in us: they h^mbled
themselves and were exalted; we exalted our selves and were dejected. This our
General found true in himself, being led captive into that City of the
Enemies, into which he presumed he should the same day have entered as
Conqueror. Herein the judgment of God was apparent upon him, that he should
suffer, whatsoever he had presumed or undertaken to do. The King of the
Goathes (as he concludes,) fought with prayers and supplications before he
came to fight with the arm of flesh; and he therefore went out with confidence
unto Battle, as having obtained victory in his prayer.

A second parallel to the former battle, for the alternant inclinations of
victory* or sudden turning of woeful and sad beginnings unto joyful issue,
might be taken from that famous battle of Flodden, if we may believe either
the ordinary Scottish History, or the constant report of the English, which
were then alive, and took the Relation from the mouths of such as were
employed in that service, being men of note and no way partial. In their
observation, it was the extraordinary valor the of Scottish vauntguard in the
very first onset or joining of battle, which brought victory (otherwise
doubtful or declining from them) to the English. For the sudden discomfiture
and confused flight of the English Vantguard unto the maine Battle, made that
unfortunate King believe, that the English Army began to reele; and out of this
mistake, as one that had prepared himself to follow the chase, rather then to
order his own Battle, he was encompassed by the English in that very place
(as some report) which he had been forewarned, but in terms general and
ambiguous, to eschew.

6 That great war between Charles the fifth, and the confederate Princes of
Germany, begun in the year 1546. was more lingering. For as the Judicious
Thuanus Anno 1546*
Historian observes, we shall hardly find any record in antiquity of two such
great Armies lying so near one to the other, so long as these two armies did
without a full battle. The war was managed, as if it had bin a game at Chess,
wherein diverse oversights were committed on both sides; and yet the
disadvantage given or taken, still so recoverable, that the old Maxim, Non
licet bis peccare in bello, may seem by the event of this war, to be
restrained to praelium, rather to a set battle then to war* Charles the
Emperor, did in the esteem of Warriors, manage his businesses more
cautelously than the Confederates did: and yet if we should speak in the
ordinary Politician or Soldiers language, was more beholding to Fortune, than
to prudence or counsel of War. It was a great oversight to expose himself
unto such imminent danger, as he did at Thuanus ibidem.
Genge, out of a desire to view his Enemies Army. For (as the Spaniards
confess) if the confederate Princes had been as vigilant to take advantage,
as he was careless to give it; they might have put an end to this war, as
soon as it was begun. It is noted likewise, as a great oversight in them,
that they did not assault him, whilst he was encamped about Ingolstade and
R^^isborne, expecting fresh supplies out of Italy and the Low Countries: yet
the loss of this opportunity they had easily redeemed not long after, had not
their project been disclosed to Charles, who removed his Camp before they had
notice, and, by favor of the great winds, which that night happened, surprised
Donaverd, a place of good importance for his present designs; That Count
Egmond with his Netherland forces, on whose skill and valor Charles did most
rely, should escape the surprisall intended by the Landgrave, was more from
good hap and Caesar Magius his extemporary sophisme, than from any forecast
either of the Emperor himself, or of Count Egmond. For unless his Soldiers
had been persuaded that the Landgrave was nearer to them over night, than
indeed he was; he had been nearer to them, or sooner upon them in the
morning, than they could have wished. But this false Alarm, given by Magius,
made them willing, though much wearied, to march all night. Not long after
their safe conduct unto the maine Camp, the chief Counselors of war were
instant with Charles to dissolve his Army for that w^nter, until the next
Spring. That his resolution to the contrary, proved so successful, was more
than in humane wisdom could be forecast; so long as the success of Maurice
Duke of Saxony, and the Bohemians which had invaded the Territories of John
Duke of Saxony, was uncertain. But the prevailing power of this unexpected
enemy, being a known Professor of that Religion for whose maintenance his
noble Uncle and Father in Law had taken arms, enforced the Confederates to
divide their Army, which could not but give advantage to Charles. But that
Henry the eight of England, and Francis the first of France, (neither of them
likely to have stood as bystanders in this great business, if they had lived)
should both dye in this interim, this was the Lords doing, not Fortunes.
Charles could not ground any resolution upon the hope of it, nor could the
confederate Princes foresee the disadvantage, which from their death did
redound unto them. Yet after all these prejudices on the confederate Princes
behalf, Charles his expedition into Saxony against John Prince Elector, who
had retired thither with part of the Army, to prevent Maurice his further
proceedings; was very doubtful and full of danger: and yet was Charles (who
before had showed himself to be more timorous and backward) more resolute and
forward, in this expedition, than any of his Captains or Commanders.

7 Doubtless lest his Captains, his Soldiers, or Counsel of War should
boast, as if their own right hands, their policy and strength had gotten the
victory; the Lord of Hosts, the Lord mighty in Battle, did so dispose that
the Emperor one while should fear, where no fear was, and another while be
courageously wilful or resolute, against his grave Counsel of War, and
against all probability of hopeful success. At Nordling, when his Army was
full, and his Soldiers fresh, when the Spaniards (after some difficult
passages had been conquered by their undaunted Resolution,) were persuaded
that victory was hard before them; Charles would not give them leave to
overtake it, or (as if it had been snatched out of their jaws) they did gnash
with their teeth for very indignation; nor was this hope of victory in the
Spaniards conceived from intemperate heat of war, or longing desire to fight
without good grounds of reason. For Maximilian Egmond, a wise and well
experienced Commander, was so taken with the same persuasion, that when the
Emperor called him back, he pulled his Helmet off his head, and for anger and
indignation, threw it with violence against the ground. Had Egmond followed his
advantage and presently overcome his enemies, this might have been attributed
to Scipioes valor in him. Or, if Charles himself had continually sought to
drive away danger by delay, he might have been reputed another Fabius. But
this ^^mper changed with the time, Versa tabula cu^^ebat, qui modo stabat, and
stabant qui modo currebant. They drew back, which formerly could hardly be
recalled from fighting; and he which recalled them, draws them forwards
against their wills. For coming near to Thuanus anno 1547*
Mulberg, where John Prince Elector of Saxony was taken; albeit the Duke of
Alva (one at that time as notoriously known for his resolution, as for his
cruelty afterward) and the rest of the Counsel of War, did utterly mislike
his intended passage, over the River of E^ve that day, as an attempt too
adventrous and desperate, which might yield great advantage to his enemy; no
persuasion could move or weaken his resolution, but fight he would upon that
very day upon what terms soever. And it afterward appeared that unless he
had put this his unseasonable desire of battle (as to them it seemed) in
present execution, he might long have waited, before he had laid hold on the
like opportunity again. For some few hours start, might either have secured
the Duke of Saxony from a necessity of battle, or assured him of victory, if
he had been enforced to fight. The next morning, after his overthrow, the
Emperor met with new supplies, which had received the Duke in a well-fenced
place, whereas it was Caesar's good fortune to take the Duke the day before,
beyond all expectation, in such a place, as he could not fight upon equal
terms, nor make from him but by a disgraceful flight.

8 Alva out of his experience and skill might foresee much hazard and danger in
his Masters adventrous resolution to pass over an unknown River in such
haste; and his Master, out of some humor or restless instinct, might be pusht
forwards to fight that day, without apprehension of any just reason why: but
who besides him alone, which appoints the occurrences and opportunities of
time, could foresee or forecast, that the Duke of Alva, being sent on a sudden
to seek a guide, should forthwith light on a Man, from whom some of the Duke of
Saxonies followers (a few days before) had taken two Colts, and made him ready
and willing in hope of revenge, or recovery of his loss, to discover an
unknown passage of that uncouth River. They had reason to enstyle him, as they
did, Dux via: for he stood the Emperor in more stead, than any ten Captains
in his Army, he being resolved to try the fortune of Battle that day. Thus
the Lord of Hoasts, as skillful as mighty in battle, can turn and wind the
whole fabric of War with the least finger of his hand, and overthrow or
establish the cunningest projects of greatest Princes, and their Counsels of
Watre, by the experience and information of a silly* Country Swain. Captains
may consult, but he determines; they throw the Dice, he appoints the chance;
they may set their men as it pleases them, but he in the issue will play the
game as it pleases Him. When we see great Statesmen, or subtle Politicians
more grossly infatuated in some particulars of greatest consequence, then
ordinary men usually are; this is a sure token, that the wisdom which they
formerly used, was not their own: but when we see them wittingly cunning to
work their own overthrow, this is an argument that there is one wiser then
they, which sometimes gives wisdom, sometimes only lends it so, as he will
require satisfaction for the mis-imployment of it. And it is not so great a
wonder, to see a wise man infatuated, or utterly deprived of wisdom, as to
see his wit and skill continually employed in weaving a net, to ensnare
himself in, and such as rely upon his projects and power.

9 Hitherto Charles the fifth had the fortune of good Dice, and played the
fore-game exceeding well. But seeing Religion lay at the stake, God instructs
others to play the after-game a great deal better against him; albeit he had
two great Counselors, the one for matters of State, the other for War, to
wit, the Duke of Alva, and Granvel the Chancellor, as bystanders to help him.
The sum of their advice, was to account severity the best fruits of victory;
and to keep them under by strong hand, whom he had conquered; and to bring
them in by cunning, which had yet some opportunity to stand out against him.
His first oversight, was in committing the ever-renowned Duke of Saxony, to the
custody of a Spaniard, to Alfonsus Vives, brother to the famous Ludovicus. This
bred great alienation of affection and discontent in some Nobles of Germany, of
whose fidelity and good service in this War, he had proof sufficient. But
more mightily overseene he was, in the cunning draught of those Articles, upon
which the Landgrave of Hessen did yield himself, not as a Prisoner, but as a
reconciled friend, or Subject, as he presumed. The Emperor and his Counsel,
had wit enough to take this man prisoner, but not to foresee the blot, which
would hereupon follow, not to the stayning only of the Emperors honor, but
to the hazard of the maine game, and utter loss of his late Conquest. They did
not consider that Maurice of Saxony, son in Law to the Landgrave, was as
subtle as valorous, and being as ambitious as subtle, would meditate as full
a requital of this real disgrace and delusion, (he being interested in the
reconcilement) as he had done of a friendly but sharp check, given by his
Uncle and Guardian (the now captive Duke of Saxony) for being too prodigal of
his patrimony in his nonage. But Maurice his disposition and abilities, were
happily unknown unto the Emperor: and it was not usual, for a forward young
Captain, not above twenty six years of age, to be of as deep a reach in
matters of State, as his gray headed and most experienced Counselors. The more
patient he was for the present, the more deeply he laid his plot, the more
vigilant he was to entertain all opportunities which should be offered for
the redemption of his Father in Law, and the liberty of his Country. The
making of Maurice Prince Elector in his captive Uncles stead, did add much to
his power: the Spaniards security and insolency expressed in their printed
books of the conquest in Germany as of some meaner province, or appendix to
their affected Monarchy, did much exasperate the Germane Princes especially,
all but of Brandeburgh hitherto a faithful adherent unto Charles the fifth, and
a trusty friend and companion unto Maurice, to whom he was now more nearly
li^kt by the sure tie of common discontent. The first opportunity, which
Maurice had for effecting his long concealed plot, was the manifestation of
Charles his purpose for reducing the Romish religion into the free States and
Cities of Germany (which had abandoned it) contrary to his former promises,
when he solicited their aid against the Duke of Saxony and Landgrave of
Hessen, not as the chief maintainers or patrons of reformed religion, but as
rebels against his imperial Majesty. This unexpected purpose of Charles was
most clearly bewrayed in the siege of Magdeburge, against which City, no
occasion of hostility could be pretended, besides her Citizens resolution to
maintain that religion, which by public Authority had been established.
The whole body of Germany besides, was in a manner so drowned and choked, that
liberty (especially in points of religion) could scantly draw breath, save
only through Flaccus Illyricus* his pen. For subduing this City, which for
a while had held out stoutly against others set to besige it, Maurice of Saxony
was adjudged the fittest man, who being employed in this service, gains
opportunity by protraction of the war to make leagues as well with the French
King as with some Princes and States of Germany: but after many suspicions and
jealousies taken against him, so cunningly goes on with his project, that he
came upon Charles the Emperor on such a sudden manner at Inchborrouh, as made
him and his Courtiers, with the foreign Ambassadors there attending, to leave
the Supper which had been provided for them unto Maurice and his company.
There was a horse-liter and torches provided for the Emperor himself with
some few attendants, but such scarcity of horses for the rest, that a man might
have seen that common resemblance of Princes, of Nobles, and common people, to
a company of Chesse men promiscuously put up into a co^^on bag, when the game
is ended, really acted in the confused flight of this great Emperors amazed
Court. Dukes, Earls, and Lords, great Commanders in War, common Soldiers
and Kitchen Boys, were glad to trudge it on foot in the mire hand in hand; a
Duke or Earl not disdaining to support or help up one of the black Guard
ready to fall, lest he himself might fall in the mire, and have none to help
him. This was the issue of the greatest War which Germany had seen or known
since the days of Charles the Great; in the managing and prosequution whereof
more excellent Commanders were employed by Charles the fifth, than any Prince in
Christendom since has had to employ.

10 Unto many is given power and wit sufficient for compassing the conquest of
their potent enemies, unto whom the wisdom of using the victory aright
(which they oftentimes purchased at too dear a rate) is denied. The same Lord
of Hoasts which put his hook into Senacheribs nostrills, and thereby dragged
this furious Monster, which had ranged far and near to devour others, into
his own Land; there to fall by his own bowels in the house of his false
gods; had all this while led Charles the fifth (a Prince of more calm and
moderate spirit,) as it were in a silken string, yet strong enough to bring
this roving projector back again within the Rheine, where he is now to
encounter with the French. And being thus overwearied in the Germane War, the
Duke of Guise at the siege of Metz, beats his Soldiers out of heart and
breath, and makes Charles himself thus to pant: Iam me desertum and circa me
nullos viros video; Now I see I am a man forsaken, and have no men about me.
Few there were besides himself, that were willing to have the siege continued
any longer: and one of his common Soldiers, out of the bitterness of his
discontented soul and diseased body, calls him the son of a mad woman to his
face, for continuing it so long. But whether his undertaking or prosequuting
this siege, did relish more of his mothers disposition, than of his own; let
Warriors judge: he never showed more wisdom in any enterprise before, then
he did in this; that he sought not from this time, to woo his wonted fortunes,
by wrestling with Fates. But after he perceived the Lord of Hoasts did not go
out with his Armies, as before he had done; he willingly puts off his imperial
Robes with his Armor, and betakes himself to a private retired life. How much
happier in this resolution, than either the Davus or Diabolus Germaniae, than
the often mentioned Maurice of Saxony, surnamed the Victorious, or the
turbulent Albert of Brandeburgh, which had brought him into these straits! As
these two Princes in all their undertakings, in their secret confederacies,
whether for Charles the fifth, or against him, had aimed more at their private
ends, than at the public weal of Germany: so it pleased the Lord of Hoasts
(after he had by their joint forces, so turned the seals of the Germane War,
as is before set down) to settle the public peace, by their fatal discord.
So I term it, partly because they had been so dear friends, Inter Mauritiu^
et Albertum, cum essent aequales, maxima se^per fuerat necessitude; sic ut
nihil esset illis co^junctiu^. Tribus enim bellis a^bo simul Caesari
militarunt, Gallico, Smalcaldico Magdeburgi^o deinde, quartu^ atque postremum
hoc in Caesarem susceperunt. Sed natis offensionibus, hunc tam funestu^ habuit
exitum ipsoru^ amicitia. Sleidanus Comment. li. 25. anno 1553. See the
occasions of their out fall. lib. 24. anno 1552.
partly because a reconcil^ation betwixt them was so earnestly sought by many,
and would have been readily embraced by Maurice, had not Albert, more out of
the strength of wine, than either of wit or courage, provoked him to battle
by a most gross and most unseasonable challenge. Maurice had given good tokens
of his inclination to peace, and the like was expected from Albert. But Vide
Thuanum anno. 1553*
the messenger being dispatched after dinner, when Bacchus was more predominant
with Albert, than either Minerva or Mars; in stead of a pledge of peace, he
sent his colors to Maurice, and so after they had eaten and drunk, they rose
up to play, after such a manner as Abners young men and Ioabs did, 2 Samuel 2.
14, 15. The manner of their mutual assault, was more like a butchery, than a
sober war. Albert in this furious conflict was so foiled, that he never
recovered root or branch again: but after some few attempts, lived as a
perpetual Exile or Vagabond; his memory being as hateful to his Country in
his absence, as his presence had been terrible, whilst he was able to gather
forces. And Sig^a militaria sunt hostibus erecta, and ad ipsum ex prael^o
relata: Pedestria quide^ quinqu aginta quatu^r, equestria vero qu^tuordecim.
Mauritius ergo vitam quidem ipse profudit, sed Alberti tamen vires atque r^bur
admodum fregit: nam ab eo praelio vix^^quam ille potuit vel m^^diocres
recolligere copius. Sleidanus* comment. lib. 25. anno 1553. Vide plur^ Thuanum.
Maurice who deservedly enjoyed the title of Victorious, did take up victory
upon exchange of life; having so much use of sense and memory, as to have his
Enemies colors presented to his eyes, now ready to be closed up in perpetual
darkness. This was the end of this victorious Prince, which had outstripe the
greatest Statesmen of those times in maturitie of wit, and deepnesse of
judgment, in matters Martial or Civil, before his body was come to its full
growth: in so much that Policy (whom Caesar's in their greatness are oft-times
forced to serve) did seem to attend on him, enabling him to atchieve those
projects with an heroical careless resolution and majestique grace, for the
purchase of which, many powerful Monarchs have been often drawn to use
untowardly shifts and slye coll^sions, odious and contemptible to their
inferiors. He was the only man of his age (as one writes of him) that had the
skill to take occasion (when it offered it self) by the very point, and to
carve opportunities out of perplexities. Yet for all this ^ad no skill or
forecast to prevent; no fence to put by the sudden stroke of Death, which se^ a
short period to his far reaching plots, and dashed the masterpiece of his
projects, when it was come to the very height, and ready to fall upon the mark
it aimed at. The Spaniards have more cause to bless the day of this Princes
death, then the day of their victory over the Duke of Saxony his uncle. For if
he had lived but a little longer, the wings of Austria and Spain had (in all
probability) been cut a great deal shorter throughtout Germany and the
Low Countries, than since they have been, by the confederacy which the French
King and he had made lately for ruinating Charles the fifth. But whatsoever
devices were in their hearts, the counsel of the Lord was against them: and
that must stand, though by the sudden fall of the Confederates.

11 To reflect a little upon the more special interpositions of Gods
providence in moderating the proceedings and issues of this war. The
Romanists have small cause to brag (though many of them do so) of Charles his
victory over the two confederate Princes, as of some special token of Gods
favor to their Church and religion. In the life of Charles the fifth.
Chytreus, a most unpartiall Writer, and well acquainted with the State of
Germany as then it stood, and with the several dispositions of the chief
confederates; ingenuously confesses as a special argument of Gods favor
toward the professors of the reformed Religion throughout Germany, that the
Duke of Saxony and Landgrave of Hessen had not the victory which they expected
over the Emperor. He might have more reason thus to write, then I know or now
remember: but certainly their agreement during the time of the war, was not
altogether so good, as to promise any lasting concord or sure establishment of
true Christian peace throughout the several Provinces of Germany, if they had
prevailed. Shertelius, who commanded in chief for the free Cities, did (as
some write) forsake the Camp, as being weary of their wranglings. However
their few years captivity, was a fatherly chastisement, no plague or token of
Gods wrath against them. As the unjust detention of the Landgrave, brought
greater dishonor to the Emperor Charles, then any one Act that ever he did:
so the Duke of Saxony won himself more honor by his durance, then the
Emperor could bestow upon him. Victory in battle, abundance of wealth, and
titles of honor, are gifts and blessings from the Lord; yet of which Pagans
and Infidels are capable; and such, as many Heathen have scorned or not
affected. But for a Prince by birth, which had been continually borne upon the
wings of better Fortune, always reputed the chief stay and pillar of his
Country; to endure captivity in an uncouth Court, with such constancy of mind,
as could turn the intended contempt and scorn of his witty enemies, into
kindness and admiration, and cause such as had led him captive, not only to
pity but to honor him, and propagate his fame unto posterity. This was a
blessing peculiar to Gods Saints. That character which foreign Writers have
put upon him, will hardly befit any that is not a Christian inwardly and in
heart; [Neque in prosperis elatum, neque in adversis dejectum sui hosts unquam
videre:] His enemies did never see him either puffed up with prosperity, or
dejected with adversity. But was it not the greater pity, (if we may speak
after the manner of most men, and as many Germans in those times did,) that so
noble a Prince should be punished with the perpetual loss of his Electorall
dignity? Yet even this (that we may with veneration rather admire than question
the secret ways of Gods providence) was no loss, but gain unto Gods Church,
and the public weal of Saxony, which he more sought, than his own ends or
commodities. For by his falling into Charles his hands, the Electorall dignity
of Saxony fell into another Collateral line, which proved as beneficial and
favorable to good learning and Reformed Religion, as any other Princely Family
of Germany in those times. Witness (to omit their other good deeds in this
kind) that Princely munificence of Duke Augustus (brother and heir to Maurice
the victorious) annually exhibited to Ministers Orphans, related by In his
Preface or Epistle dedicatorie to the continuation of Chemnitius his Harmony.
Polycarpus Lyserus. How well those good examples which Maurice himself, and
his brother Augustus had set, have been followed by their Successors, falls
not within my reading or observation. Of Maurice his munificence and good
affection toward learning and Religion, see Sleidan. lib. 19. anno 1547.
But surely these two advancers of this second Line did better imitate the
princely virtues of their deprived Uncle, than his own sons were likely to
have done. For the judicious unpartiall French Historian, assigns this as one
special reason, why the fame and memory of John Duke of Saxony did not
continue so fresh and precious after his death, as he deserved, Quia reliquit
filios sui dissimillimos.

CHAP. 29.
Of Gods special providence in making unexpected peace, and raising unexpected
war.
1 THE hand of the Almighty is not more conspicuous in managing wars begun
by men, than his finger is in contriving their first beginnings. Love is his
nature, and friendship or mutual love betwixt man and man, Princes or Nations,
is a blessing which descends from him alone, who is the only Author of all
true peace, but not the Author only of peace. Sometimes he kindles
unquenchable dissentions where the seeds of secular peace have been sown with
greatest policy, and watered with continual care and circumspection. Sometimes
again he makes sudden unexpected concord between spirits which jarre by
nature, and joins the right hand of inveterate foes, to strengthen the stroke
of Justice upon his enemies.

2 Later Chronicles will hardly afford any example of worse consort between
neighbor Princes, than was between Charles of Burgundy, and Jews of France;
whether we respect the contrariety of their natural dispositions, or the
incompossibilitie of their projects or engagements. Nature had planted, and
policy had nourished a kind of Antipathy betwixt them. And yet how quickly
and unexpectedly did these two great Princes (after irreconcilable variances)
close and agree together to crush the wise, the rich, and martial Earl of
Saint Paul, then High Constable of France. He that had been of both these
Princes Courts, and of both their Counsels, has left it observed, that they
could never be brought in all their life time to concur in any other action
or project besides this: albeit they had often greater motives to entertain
peace between themselves, than provocations to conspire against this Earl.
Perhaps his experience of their ill consort made him more confident than
otherwise he would have been; though confident he might have been upon
better grounds than most great Subjects or inferior Princes can be, if wit, if
wealth, if policy, if martial power or authority could secure any from the
execution of Gods Justice.

3 The best use which Machiavel or his Scholars make of this Potentates mishap,
is to forewarne great Subjects or inferior Princes not to interpose as
Arbitrators or Vmpires upon advantage, when their betters fall at variance. The
advice I confess is very good, and ignorance hereof, or want of like
con^ideration (it may be) was some part of this great Earls folly, not his
principal fault; some occasion, no tue or prime cause of these two great
Princes combination against him. For besides Jews and Charles, Quid v. hoc
loco dicas de Fortuna, mund^i gubernatrice? ut nonnulli puta^t*
Cominaeus, a man no way inferior to Machiavel in politic wit, had espied a
third principal actor in this Tragedy, whose first appearance was (to his
apprehension) in the likeness of Lady Fortune, but was discovered upon better
review to be Divine Providence. Obtinebat ille summa^ in Gallijs authoritatem:
finitimus erat utrique principi; arcem habebat munitissimam, and rebus omnibus
instructam. Praesecerat eum Rex quadring entis cataphractis: valebat ingenio;
and peritia rei bellicae praestabat; magnum habebat rerum usum, and auri vim
ingentem possidebat. Statuendu^ est igitur Fortunam, qua nihil est mutabilius,
ei fuisse plane adversariam. Sed revera nihil aliud est Fortuna, quam sigmentum
poeticum. Quin potius ita judicandum est iratum ei fuisse Deum and graviter
offensum. Et si de consiliia arcanis fas esset ulli homini pronunciare, dicerem
illum excitasse iram Dei adversum se, hac unare po^issimum quod per emnem
vitam, mente and animo totus in hoc fuerat ut perpetuum bellum a^eret. Nam in
eo positam esse putabat sua dignitatis materiam, ac v^luti segetem. Neque vero
difficile ei erat istud perfi^^^. Tota enim natura and moribus and ingenio
Principes in^^ se dissidebant. Vix igitur credendum est fortunam aliquam eo
dementiae adduxisse virum long prudentissimum, ut eos Principes adversum se
concitaret, quorum fuerat per omnem vitam in rebus omnibus contraria, and
diversa voluntas: qui nullam rem unquam simul ex animo comprobarunt nisi hanc
in illius caput factam conjurationem. Cominaeus commentar. lib. 6. juxta finem.
This good Authors Comment upon this accident is so full and lively, as it will
not admit any paraphrase of mine, without wrong, not only to him, but to the
Reader. Only of one clause pertinent as well to the Discourse following, as to
that or the like passage of sacred Writ, [As every man sowes, so shall he
reap,] I must give the Reader special notice. This Earl was always
delighted to sow the seeds of war, war being (as he and the World thought)
the chief field or surest ground of his glory, and he ends his thus honored
life with a bloody and unglorious death. This was by Gods appointment the most
natural crop and proper harvest of such a seed-time as he had made. Yet was
not the finger of God more remarkable in knitting these two Princes, which al
their life times had stood (as we say) at the staffes end, than in loosing the
strict link of mutual amity between other ancient Friends, and sworn
Confederates; albeit the Politician seek in this case, as in the former,
altogether to cover or obliterate all impression of it. For it is his manner or
humor, as was observed before, to bring as much grist as he can, and more then
he ought, to his own Mill; to entitle such partial and subordinate means, as
fall within the compass of his profession, sole or prime causes of those
effects which are immediately produced by Divine Providence.

4 He spoke merrily that said, A man could not bestow his alms worse than on
blind men, seeing they could find in their hearts to see their best
benefactors hanged. But it has been delivered in good earnest as a cautelous
rule by some politic Discoursers, that the most thanklesse office any great
Personage can do to his dearest friend, were to make him King. It is a lesson
of every days teaching, The greater men grow, the more they scorn to be
thought to be beholden unto others. The very sight of such as they have been
more beholding unto, than they can handsomely requite, seems to upbraid
ambitious minds. He is a mean Historian that cannot instance in diverse
upstart Princes, which could not long suffer the heads of those men, whose
hands had put Crowns on theirs, unto which they had no lawful title, to stand
where nature had given them lawful possession, (^i.) upon their owners
shoulders. Politic rules or Aphorisms grounded upon historical observations
of this kind, are not altogether without use. But the doctrine inveiled in
Poetical fictions, is in this and many other cases more Catholic than the
Historians or Politicians observation. Usual it is with the Poets when they
represent the original and progress of tragical dissentions between quondam
friends; in the first place to dispatch the Furies abroad with firebrarnds in
their hands to kindle or blow the coals of cruel and (without the mutual
blood of the Actors) unquenchable hatred. And to speak the truth without
fiction, it seems scarce possible that such light sparkles of humane anger as
are usually the first seeds of quarrels between neighbor Princes or
confederate States, should grow unto such raging and devouring flames as they
often do, unless some spirit more potent than the spirit or breath of man did
blow them. Now if by Furies the Poets mean infernal Fiends or evil Spirits,
their language does not vary much from the ancient dialect of Canaan. God
(says the Author of the Book of Judges, cap. 9. ver. 23, 24.) sent an evil
spirit between Abimelech and the men of Schechem: and the men of Shechem dealt
treacherously with Abimelech: That the cruelty done to the threescore and ten
sons of Ierubbaal might come, and their blood be laid upon Abimelech their
brother which flew them, and upon the men of Shechem which aided him in the
killing of his brethren. The mutual disasters of both parties related in the
verses following, is but the just award of lothams imprecation. verse. 19, 20.
If ye then have dealt truly and sincerely with Ierubbaal, and with his house
this day, then rejoice ye in Abimelech, and let him also rejoice in you. But if
not, let fire come out from Abimelech, and devour the men of Shechem, and the
house of Millo: and let fire come out from the men of Shechem, and from the
house of Millo, and devour Abimelech.

5 It would be more easy than safe, out of the Histories of times ancient and
modern, domestique and foreign, to parallel this last instance so exactly as
well for success as practice, as might be sufficient, if not to persuade the
irreligious Politician, yet to leave him without excuse for not being
persuaded, that there is an immortal King of Kings and Lord of Lords, from
whose jurisdiction no corner of the Earth can be exempted; an everlastingly
wise and righteous Judge, which oversees the inventions of man's heart with a
steadfast eye, and measures their actions with a constant hand; one that
visits the same irregularities by the same rule or canon, and fitteth like
sins with like punishments, after thousand of years distance in time, in
places distant some thousand of miles. But leaving the collection of parallel
examples or experiments suitable to the rule proposed unto the Readers private
observation: the proof of the last mentioned conclusion will be more apparent
and concludent from the examples or instances in the last Section concerning
the rule of retaliation.

CHAP. 30.
Of Gods special providence in defeating cunning plots and conspiracies, and
in accomplishing extraordinary matters by means ordinary.
1 WHen it is said that In God we live, we move, and have our being, this is
not to be understood only of being or life natural, or of motion properly so
called, but is to be extended unto life and operations purely intellectual. So
that the incomprehensible Nature in respect of our apprehensions, is as
properly an agent superartificiall, as supernatural. All the skill wherewith
any intelligent Creature is or can be endowed, all the devises and projects of
men's hearts, are as essentially subordinate to his incomprehensible wisdom,
or counsel of his will, as the life, being, and motions of things natural,
are to his creative, conservative, or cooperative power. Howbeit this
subordination of the rational creatures cogitations to his infinite wisdom,
does no way deprive it of all liberty or freedom, in projecting, devising or
consulting; but only of power to appoint success unto its own projects or
devises. Thus much, to my apprehension, is included in the wise Kings Maxim,
Pro. 19. 21.
Many devises are in the heart of man: but the counsel of the Lord, that shall
stand. This freedom or liberty of man's will in devising or projecting, and the
want of all liberty or power to allot success unto his projects, does more
truly argue, that which the Latins call servum arbitrium, that is, man's
servitude so misery and sin, than if he had no more liberty in the one case
than in the other. The more ample the sphere of his liberty in projecting or
devising, is, or (by divine permission) may be; the more admirable does the
Counsel of the Lord appear in directing and ordering his free courses, most
infallibly unto such ends as he appoints, by means for their kind, ordinary
and natural. And if we would diligently consider the works of God in our
days, they are as apt to establish true belief unto the rules of Christianity
set down in Scripture, as were the Miracles of former ages, wherein Gods
extraordinary power was most seen: yea the ordinary events of our times, are
more apt for this purpose in this age, than use of miracles could be. For the
manifestations of Gods most extraordinary power, cease, by very frequencie, to
be miraculous; and men (such is the curiosity of corrupted nature) would
suspect, that such events (were they frequent or continual) did proceed from
some alteration in the course of nature, rather than from any voluntary
exercise of extraordinary power in the God of nature. But the continuance of
these ordinary events, which the all-seeing wisdom of our God daily and
hourly brings to pass, is most apt to confirm the faith of such as rightly
consider them. For by their successive variety, the amplitude of his
unsearchable wisdom is daily more and more discovered, and by their frequency
the hidden fountain of his Counsel, whence this multiplicity flows, appears
more clearly to be inexhaustible. Only the right observation or
live-apprehension of these his works of wisdom, is not so easy and obvious
unto such as mind earthly things, as his works of extraordinary power are.
For such works amate the sense, and make entrance into the soul, as it were by
force; whereas the effects of his Wisdom or Counsel, make no impression upon
the sense, but upon the understanding only, nor upon it, save only in quiet
and deliberate thoughts. For this reason, true faith was first to be planted
and ingrafted in the Church by Miracles, but to be nourished and strengthened in
succeeding ages, by contemplation of his providence. The limits of this present
contemplation, shall be by example or instance to show in what manner the
wisdom of God does sometimes defeat the cunningest contrivances or deepest
plots of Politicians, and sometimes accomplish matters of greatest consequence
by means or occurrences light and slender in the esteem of men. But how weak
or slender soever they be for their particular nature, or in themselves, yet
the combination or contexture of them must needs be strong, because it is woven
by the finger of God.

2 What plot could have been invented against any land or people, more deadly,
then that of Hamans against the people of God, storied Ester 3. 8, 9. His
information against them was bitter, and easy to find entrance into an
absolute Monarchs ears, whose words must be a Law to all, especially to his
captivate and conquered subjects. And the Jews on the other side more likely
to change their lives, than the laws of their God, for any Princes pleasure.
What hope (in humane sight) for Mordecai to find any favor, when as He was to
execute this bloody Law, whose particular spleen and revengefull mind against
Mordecai, had for his sake procured it, in most absolute form against the
whole Jewish Nation? You will say, that Ester lately received to greatest
favor with the King, and now made consort of his bed, might prevail much. And
for a barbarous King to show mercy, at his Queens entreaty, unto such as had
done him so good service, as Mordecai had done Assuerus, is but an ordinary
thing. I confess as much, that many occurrences, which seem to conspire for
Mordecai and his peoples deliverance, are not extraordinary. For a King in his
cups, to take a displeasure at his former Queen, that would not consent unto
his folly; or for his displeasure unto the divorced, to show greater love unto
his late espoused Queen, is a matter neither strange nor unusual: but that
Queen Vashti should be displaced, and Ester (unknown to be of the captive
Hebrews kind) admitted to be Assuerus his mate, just at that time, when
Haman, the Jews sworn enemy, was exalted next to the King and Queen in
dignity; this can only be ascribed to him, who, as the wise son of Syrach
speaks, has made all things double, one against another, Ecclus, 42. v. 24.
Again, that the King, the very night before he came to the banquet which
Ester had prepared, should take no rest; this was the Keeper of Isreal's
vigilant care over his people, who neither slumbers nor sleeps, whilst his
enemies are a plotting mischief against them. Again, that the King taking no
rest should seek to solace his restless thoughts by reading the Chronicles,
that reading them he should light on that place, wherein the now distressed
Mordecaies faithful service, in bewraying the treason intended against his
person, by Bigtan and Teresh his Eunuchs, was registered: All this doubtless,
was only from his wisdom, that has the disposition of all the lots, much more
of all the plots which man can cast. Many other occurrences might here be
considered, no one of which considered apart, from the rest, but is ordinary
and usual; and yet the entire frame or composture of them, such as cannot be
referred to any but his workmanship, who has created all things in number,
weight, and measure.

Yet a Politician that should have read this story in the Persian Chronicles,
could at the first sight have discovered a great oversight in Haman, in not
putting sooner in execution this his absolute commission; Semper nocuit
differ paratis. Perhaps this conditional proposition may be true, that if
he had executed his Commission with speed, the Jews had fared worse; but for
this cause the Lord did not suffer him to entertain this resolution. Yet, let
us see whether haste in execution could accomplish the like designs against a
State in like case.

3 Fliscus that nobly descended and potent Genoesi, with his familiar Verina,
had enacted as cruel a Law against the Dorian Family, and the other Nobility
of Genoa; which they had resolved to have written, first with characters of
blood upon their pretended enemies breasts, and after their death, to have
condemned them by proclamation, when as Fliscus through popularity should have
got the Diadem. Vide Thuanum anno. 1547
Their plot for effecting their enemies death and their own advancement, was
laid as exactly as policy could devise; their practice and execution of means
invented, was more exact then the pattern which Machiavel gives for like
designs. First, because store of armor and munition was necessary for such an
action, and provision of such store of munition would be suspicious for a
private man to undertake in a popular and factious State; Fliscus persuades
young Doria (whose death he especially sought) to be his partner in setting out
a Man of War against the Turks. Doria kindly accepts the offer, altogether
ignorant of the others intent, which was by this color to furnish himself
with armor and munition out of the Country for Doriaes overthrow. And being
once furnished with such tragical attire, without suspicion of any tragedy to
ensue: for to provide himself of suitable actors; he invites a multitude of
the Commons to a night feast, where in stead of thanksgiving before meat, he
makes a patheticall oration, exhorting them to banquet it that night in the
Nobilities blood, assuring them that they should be their own carvers for
ever after, of the good things of that City. Some for love to Fliscus, others
for hate to the Nobility, some for fear of present danger, and others for hope
of greater dignities; for one cause or other, all at length, save two (who
desired to be spared for their faint hearts) offer themselves to Fliscus his
service. And by their forwardness, the City gates, next to the key, whose
command made most for their purpose, are presently surprised: yet not without
some noise, which coming unto Doriaes ear, makes him suspect that his
Mariners were quarrelling; and rifing out of his bed to compose the supposed
quarrel by his presence, he falls immediately into his enemies hands before he
was sought for. But however this young gallant had committed no actual crime,
that by course of humane law, deserved a violent death by such executioners;
yet the right hand of the Lord had found him out, for consenting by Piracy to
disturb the public peace lately concluded betwixt Charles the fifth and the
Turk: which peace the Genoezes amongst others, the Dorian faction above other
Genoezes, but especially this young Doria and his Fathers house (which had
stood for Caesar against the French) were bound in conscience to observe. But
leaving the cause of his death unto the righteous Judge: his sudden end in any
Politicians judgment was a good beginning to Fliscus mischievous designs. And
what more could Machiavel have in the next place given in charge, but that the
Galleys which made some stir at the noise, should with all speed be boorded
to make all sure, until the Tragedy were fully acted. This Fliscus sought to
put in execution with as great speed as Machiavel in like case could have
wished. But haste (as we say) makes waste: his forward mind had made him
forget, that his body was not so nimble in armor, as out of it; not so apt
either to avoid a slip, or to recover himself when he began to slide. By his
hasty treading upon a loose plank (as if the snare had been set for his soul
by the Almighties hand) he, and one or two of his companions, fell some yard or
two short of their purpose, and drowned themselves and their plot, even whilst
it was come to such perfection, that the younger Fliscus yet hoped to make
himself Duke of Genoa, as happily he might have done, if the Lord had lent him
so much wit as to have concealed his elder brothers death, scarce known to any
till he bewrayed it to such as enquired for him, in hope to finish all
instantly by his presence. But they partly amazed with the elder brothers
sudden disaster, and seeing no sufficiency in the younger, to satisfy their
expectation, dissolve the rout, and ceasing to project the ruin of others,
begin every one to seek the best means for his own safety. Thus has this
politic Gentleman consulted shame unto his house, his stately Palace is
demolished, and his Noble Family almost extinct. Yet were all the conditions
which greatest plotmasters require in such projects, exactly observed in this:
the plot it self as acurate as could by the reach of man be devised, their
counsel communicated but to a few at the first, the execution of it so speedy,
that the appointed actors could have no leisure to deliberate whether it were
better to relent, or go forwards; and yet the success more dismal and sudden,
than their enemies could expect or wish. Thus Machiavels rules have their
exceptions, but the Prophets Calendar is never out of date; Non est viri
dirigere gressus ejus. Not Machiavel himself had he been present, could so
have directed Fliscus his steps, that his treadings should not slip; yea, he
should have fallen, though Machiavel had held the plank. For his iniquity had
overgrown his plot, and being come to full height, it strikes upon that
immutable and irresistible doom which God by Moses had pronounced, Deuteronomy. 32.
v. 35. Vengeance and recompense are mine, their feet shall slide in due time,
and the day of their destruction is at hand, and the things that shall come
upon them, make haste. These men we spoke of, hastened their own destruction,
by making too much haste to destroy others.

4 Perhaps the Politician will reply: As Haman was too slow, so Fliscus was too
hasty, and should have observed the contrary rule, Differ; habent parvae
commoda magna morae. Suppose this hot-spur were revived, to re-act his former
or the like cunning plot, and for his better remembrance should take the
Dolphin and Harrow for his devise, with this inscription, Festina lent; it
were not possible his speed should be better, so long as his intentions were as
bad, or worse then they had been; and his adversaries no worse then they were,
when he conspired their death.

To omit more examples ancient or foraigne: the fresh memory of the Powder
treason eclipseth all that have gone before it. No Politician can justly accuse
the Actors of this intended Tragedy, either of Hamans too long delay, or of
Fliscus his haste. Such maturity and secrecy they used in their actions and
consultations, as none on earth could have used more, considering the many lets
and impediments which did cross their projects. Hell it self had gone so long
with this hideous monster, that it was weary and well content to make an
abortive brood, as fearing the pangs that must have accompanied the full
delivery of what had been conceived within her bowels, would be unsufferable.
But Achitophel had wit at will, to plot a treason to his Sovereigns overthrow;
yet herein blinded by him, that gave him sight in other projects, that he could
not forecast what harms might befall him by Absoloms folly. And though the
Archplotter were Vir profundae dissimulationis, one that could give traitorous
counsel, as the destroying Angel of the Lord, and hide his counsel as deep
as Hell; though he had this extraordinary quality in him, of making his friends
so sure unto him, that they would adventure both body and soul at any time for
his sake: yet thus far infatuated he was, as not to consider, that some of
them which were so willing to work a public mischief for his pleasure,
might also have a desire to secure their private friends from danger, by giving
them some general or ambiguous admonition, albeit against their oaths of
secrecy. That one of them should seek to admonish his Honorable friend of
the instant danger, was a thing not extraordinary, except in this, that so much
good nature could be left in his breast, that could consent unto his Countries
ruin. That a man of the Jesuits instruction, should find an evasion in an
oath, which he held lawful, is a matter usual. And who knows whether he
that permits evil, because he knows to turn it unto good, did not at this
time make use of the Jesuits doctrine of playing fast and loose with his
sacred and dreadful name, to animate this Discoverer to dispense with that
solemn oath of secrecy which he had taken, and afterward to forswear the fact
so deeply. I do not think he durst have adventured upon either, without some
secret mental reservation. But without all question, it was his counsel which
moderateth the maine devises of man's heart, that moved him to express his
mind in such terms, as might represent or call the fathers disaster, unto the
remembrance of his royal son, whom nature had taught to make jealous
constructions of every speech, word, or circumstance, that might revive the
memory of the intendments against his father, and to forecast all possible
interpretations of all occurrences, which might portend or intimate the like
designs against himself. As the sincerity of his royal heart and
consciousnesse of clemency toward all, especially toward that faction which
deserved none; had brought our Sovereign asleep in security: so the
collections which he made out of the disclosers aenigmatical admonitions, were
such as a man would make, that had heard the Letter read in a dream or
slumber, not such as so wise and learned a Prince would in other cases have
made in his vigilant and waking thoughts. But from what cause soever the dream
came, the interpretation was from the Lord, and Let it be unto the Kings
enemies for ever. The event has proved the discloser to have been a false
Prophet, and to have spoken presumptuously when he said, that God and man had
concurred to punish the iniquity of those times, by such a blow as he meant. We
must with the true Prophet make confession: Not unto us Lord, not unto us, but
unto thy Name give the glory. It was not God and man, but God alone, that did
suit and order the several occurrences by which the intended blow was
prevented. It was not God, but the devil, that did intend it.

5 That the Jews in the days of Mordecai, that the Genoezes within this age,
that this Land and people within our memory, have not become a prey unto their
malicious enemies, was merely from the counsel of the Lord, which must stand,
for our good, if we decline not unto evil. It is not the breath or vapor of
Hell, that can undermine our State, or shake our Princes Throne; whilst God is
with us. But if he be against us, what can be for us? If he do but speak the
word, even the least word of mortal man, whose breath is in his nostrils,
shall be sufficient to blow up or overturne a Kingdom.

If subjects should rebel, as often as Princes break jests upon them, they
might work their own greater real disgrace, and wrong both themselves and
their posterities far more in deed, than the other had done in words. But
opportunity makes a thief, and want of opportunity oftimes keeps great
minds much discontent, from rebellion. But when it shall please him that has
reserved the perfect knowledge of times and seasons to himself, not to dispose
their opportunities to any Land or peoples good; a woman's unseasonable word may
breed mightiest Empires greater real mischief, than Emperors Swords for many
generations can redress. So it fell out, when Justin the Emperor had removed
Narses the Eunuch from his regency of State upon importunate accusations,
which, for the present, he could not put off, but only by putting him from his
place. Sophia his Empress (not so wise herein, as after-experience might have
taught her to have been) whether willing (as the old proverb is) to add
scathe to scorn, or whether desirous to sooth Narses his calumniators in their
humor; See the Histories which write of Justin the second.
said she would have Narses come unto Constantinople, there to spin amongst her
maids. The jest, being brought unto his ears, provoked him to give her proof
of his masculine spleen and indignation. For he thus resolved, Seeing it has
pleased her Excellency to appoint me this task, I shall shortly spinne her
such a thread, as she and her Husband shall hardly be able all the days of
their life to untwist. Not he, but the Lord by his mouth had spoken the word,
and it was done. For Alboinus King of the Lombards comes instantly out of
Hungary at Narses his call, who could not dissuade him from entering into Italy,
after it repented him of his former spleen against Sophia, and of his
encouraging of this King to revenge his wrong. The Eastern Empire had received
many wounds before this time, but lately cured of the most dangerous by Narses
his good service. This was the first perpetual and irrecoverable maime: the
second more grievous did follow upon as light occasions, but where in the
concourse of many circumstances were more notable.

6 When See the writers of the Emperors lives* in the life of Heraclius.
Mahomet first begun to counterfeit extaticall visions, and practice Sorcery;
he aimed perhaps, at no greater matters than Simon Magne did, only to be
accounted (...), some great one among his fellow Badgers and Camel-drivers. He
did not so much as dream of Nestorius or his heresy. And Sergius the Monk,
when he began to maintain that heresy at Constantinople, did think as little
of Arabian Sorcery. After these two, by Satan's instigation, and Gods
permission, had made a medley of Jewish infidelity and Grecian heresy, as if
it had been a garment of English wool and out landish^^int; they least thought
of any mutiny toward, in Heraclius his camp for want of pay. The Roman
Quaestor was altogether ignorant of Mahomets visions or his new coined Laws,
when he thus disgracefully entreated the Arabians or Sarazens: There is scarce
sufficient provision for the Roman and Grecian Soldiers, and must this
rascality of Dogs be so importunately impudent, in demanding their pay? Sed
habet and Musca splenem. These poor Barbarians were such hungry Dogs, as
looked to be cherished where they fawned, and could be content to change many
masters, rather then be continually raited thus. Now albeit the Roman Quaestor
did thus uncourteously dismiss them, without a pasport or direction whither to
go: yet the Lord by his harsh language did hiss for these Hornets, unto
Mahomets Camp; who had been lately foiled by the Persian, until these
fugitives raised him up, and made him Lord of Egypt. Thus of the heresy of
Sergius (by birth an Italian, by profession a Monk) and of Mahomets sorcery,
and of these Sarazens mutiny, has the Divine Providence, made up a triple
cord, which cannot to this day be broken, having continued almost these
thousand years, as a fatal scourge to Christendom.

7 A mere Politican, that considers the causes of Justinius his loss, by the
discontent of Narses, or of Heraclius his prejudice by these Sarazens revolt,
would from both draw that Aphorism which diverse have done, from a trusty
Camerarius ex Ferrono.
Gascoignes answer unto Charles the 7. French King. The Aphorism is that
Princes must beware what speeches they use unto great Soldiers or men of
valor, seeing that Gascoigne ingenuously told his Lord and Master, that for a
foul disgrace he could turn Traitor, though all the riches of France, though
the French Kingdom it self would not suffice for a bribe to make him prove
false, or to corrupt his loyal mind. The Rule or Aphorism is in many cases
good. Yet if this and all other like caveats were strictly observed, and other
matters not amended; he that at his appointed time turns disgraceful speeches
unto the speakers overthrow, can make the mildest words, which Generals or
other Confederates in Arms can utter, for accomplishing their joint purposes,
to effect their own ruin, and delivery of their enemies.

8 It is a known story of a Family or faction in Perusium, who having gathered
a competent army of their Allies, to surprise the city from which they had
been lately banished; made their forcible entrance into it by night, but sting
all the chains that otherwise would have hindered the passage of the horsemen,
until they came unto the Market stead or chief place to be surprised. But
here their Hercules, wanting room (by reason of the press) to fetch a full
blow with his club, for bursting that chain, much stronger (in all likelihood)
than the rest, cries See Guicciardine and Machiavel, locis citatis.
Back, back, unto those that were next unto him, and they the like unto such as
were behind them, until the same words had run like an echo to the hindmost
ranks or reere; who imagining that those in the front had descried some danger,
resolved to be the first in retiring, as they had been the last in entering:
and hence they in the front perceiving themselves suddenly destituted of their
company, give their enterprise for lost, which one blow more, or one word
less, had presently effected. But perpetual exile was by Divine justice the
enterprisers due; and though iron chains may be burst by the strength of man,
yet the Counsel of the Lord, that shall stand, more firm than walls of
brass, or rocks of Adamant; that his enemies at the appointed time may fall
before it.

The only use which the Politician has made of this and like experiments, is
this: First, that Generals should be very wary what words should pass
throughout their army, and for this purpose to keep servants, women, or other
talkative or clamorous creatures, far from the army, when any service is
toward. Secondly, to accustom their Soldiers, only to respect their
Commanders speeches, and to account of others as wind, that blows afar off.
These caveats were given above 70 years ago; and yet have greater forces than
these Italians had, been upon as light occasions defeated in their intended
surprisalls of Cities by night, after they had blown open their Gates with
Petars. However, the admonition has its use and seasons, though oftentimes
observed without success, because it is too much relied upon. Mordecai spoke
with confidence unto Ester; If thou hold thy peace at this time, comfort and
deliverance shall appear unto the Jew out of another place; because as he
supposed, the counsel of God was for their good. But though Soldiers should
hold their peace, and Generals speak nothing but what the Politician should
prompt, yet shall destruction come upon them upon other occasions; if the
counsel of the Lord be once against them. Yea though the parties disagreeing
should lay all enmity aside, and consult for the establishing of peace, yet
shall they conclude in blood, if the Lord of Hosts be displeased with them.

9 A fit instance to this purpose is registered, as Camerarius tells us in
foraigne Annalls, though not intimated by our English Historians, who had as
much reason as any other to have recorded it, if the story had been true. But
seeing they have omitted it, I will not expect the Readers historical assent
unto it, but only commend it unto him as an example for illustrating the
probability of the last observation. The English and French Army being ready to
join battle in Normandy, the French Captains persuade their King to entreat a
parley with the King of England, that so all matters might be compromised
without further harm or danger to either party. The place agreed upon for the
parley was a ruinated Chapel, a little distant from both armies. A friendly
compromise was by both Kings resolved upon to be further ratified upon
deliberation of their several Counsels. But before their parting, a huge
Snake, whether stirred up by the noise of their attendants which waited
without, or upon other occasions, seemed by her hissing and swelling neck to
make toward them. Both of them alike afraid, draw their swords, and yet
neither willing to trust other within the walls, run out with their naked
Swords in their hands: their attendants upon this sight misdeeming some outfall
in the Chapel between them, do the like; and the Armies upon this view
join battle, and could not be recalled, until much blood on both parties
was, and more had been spilt, unless the night had come upon them.

10 Be this, as it may be, a true story, or a fiction: the possibility of such
unexpected occurrences (all which are at the Almighties disposition) are
infinite, and cannot be comprehended, much less prevented by the wit of man
which is but finite. So that although the plots and devises of man's heart be
many, yet has the Lord more counterplots perpetually in store, and therefore
of all counsels, the counsel of the Lord it shall stand.

Whilst I read some speculative Politicians, that seek by observing the
errors of former times in managing civil affairs or projects, to rectify or
correct their oversights, and take upon them to make an Ephimerides of future
events: their Discourses in my slender observation, argue a greater ignorance
in them, of divine Providence, than their practices would in the Mathematics,
that would labor out of a surd number to extract a perfect square. He that
knows the rules of Arithmeticall division, might in every working or attempt
of resolving a full number into its proper square, come nearer and nearer to
the square number, and yet be sure not to find it, though he spent Nestors
years in dividing and subdividing the same number, or resolving fractions into
fractions. The reason is this, how little soever a surd number exceeds the next
square, yet the overplus is in division infinite. And so are the events which
the Politician seeks to rectify or determine of, and therefore not certainly
rectifiable or determinable; save only by him whose wisdom is actually
infinite. It is an error incident to little children to think they might
easily shake hands with the man in the Moon, or with Endymion kiss the Moon
it self, if they were upon the next hill where it seems to them to set: and
if you bring them thither, they think they came but a little too late; if they
could be now at the next hill where they see it go down, they imagine they
might do so yet. Such for all the world is the practical Politicians error,
the cause of both in proportion the same. Children are thus deceived, because
they imagine no distance between heaven and earth, or between heaven and that
part of earth which terminates their sight. And so the secular Politicians
mind, reaches no farther than the hemisphere of his own faculty. Either he
knows not, or considers not, how far the height and depth of his wisdom
and counsel that sits in the heavens, and rules the earth; exceeds the utmost
bounds or horizon of his foresight and limited skill: in this only different
from the child, that his wit is more swift and nimble than the others body, so
that he is not so soon weary of his pursuit. But if he miss of his purpose
at the first, he hopes at his next flight to speed, and thus in seeking after
true felicity (which was hard by him, when he began his course) he runs
round all the days of his life, even as he is led by him that daily compasses
the earth. Better might Painters hope, by looking on the multitude of men now
living, to draw accurate pictures of such as shall be in the Age to come; than
any Politician can expect, either by observation of former times, or experience
of his own, to prescribe exact rules for managing of future projects. For if
we consider the whole frame or composition of circumstances, or all the
ingredients, (if I may so speak) of every event; there is as great a variety
in humane actions, as there is in men's faces. Never were there two events of
moment upon earth altogether alike; each differs from other, either in the
substance, number, or quality of occurrences, or in the proportion of their
consonancie or dissonancy unto the counsel of the Lord; as there is no visage
but differs from another, if not in color or complexion, yet in shape or
figure. I have been perhaps rather too long, then too bold in decyphering the
vanity of this proud Critic, which accuses Christianity of cowardice in
actions, and devotion of stupiditie and dullness in consultation of State. But
so might Bats and Owls condemn the Eagle of blindness, were trial of sight
to be made in that part of twilight, wherein darkness has gotten the victory
of light. Some men not able to discern a friend from a foe, at three paces
distance in the open Sun, will read their Pater noster written in the
compass of a shilling by moon shine, much better than others clearer sighted,
can read a Proclamation print. The purblinde see best by night, yet not
therefore better sighted than others are, because the absolute trial of ^ight
is best made by day. So is the mere Politician more quick fighted, than Gods
children in matters permitted by divine providence, to the managing of the
Prince of darkness. For albeit the righteous Lord do in no case permit, or
dispense with perjury, fraud, or violence; yet he suffers many events to be
compassed by all or some of these, or worse means. Now when matters usually
managed by special providence, come by divine permission once to catching; he
that makes least conscience of his ways, will show most wit and resolution.
For whatsoever falls to Satan's disposalls, shall assuredly be collated on him
that will adventure most. It is his trade and profession to lend wit, might,
and cunning, for satisfying present desires, upon the mortgage of souls and
consciences. And his Scholar or Client (the politic Atheist) perceiving fraud
and violence to prosper well in some particulars, imagines these or like means
thoroughly multiplied to be able to conquer all things, which he most desires.
But when Satan's commission is recalled, or his power by Gods providence
contracted; the cunningest intentions or violent practices of Politicians,
prove much like to a peremptory warrant out of date, which being directed to
one County is served in another. Both endanger the party prosecuting, and turn
to the advantage of the prosecuted. I conclude this Chapter and Section with
the observation of a namelesse Author, but set down in verses, related by
Camerarius.

Si vitam spectes hominum, si denique mores,
Artem, vim, fraudem, cuncta putes agere.
Si propius spectes, Fortuna est arbitra rerum:
Nescis quam dicas, and tamen esse vides.
At penitus si introspicias, atque ultima primis
Connectas, tantum est Rector in orb Deus.
Who looks on men, and on their manners vile,
Weenes naught is wrought, naught got sans force or guile:
Who nearer looks, spies (who knows what?) her wheel
Who coozneth fraud, and often makes force to reele.
But Eagle sights which pierce both far and near,
Eye One who only rules all this Sphere.
SECTION IV.
Of Gods special Providence in suiting punishments unto the nature and
quality of offenses committed by men.
CHAP. 31.
Of the rule of retaliation or counterpassion. And how forcible punishments
inflicted by this rule without any purpose of man, are to quicken the ingraffed
notion of the Deity, and to bring forth an acknowledgement of Divine
Providence and Justice.
1 ARISTOTLE did rightly deny retaliation or counterpassion to be (...), exact
justice; and yet it may be, Pythagoras his thoughts did soar much higher than
his, when he pitched upon the affirmative. In ordinary offenses committed by
unequal or extraordinary persons, Pythagoras his tenent, is not universally
true. As if a great person should beat his far inferior, without just cause,
it stands neither with the Law of God, Interrogavi paulo ante, quis habiturus
sit quaestionem de potentibus, quis illo accusabit, quis litem defi^iet, quis
poenam irrogabit? Certe querimoniae and lachrymae miserorum hominum, quos
crudeliter vexarunt, item viduarum and pupillorum gemitus atque suspiria, quos
parentibus atque maritis inhumane spoliarunt, breviter eorum, quos afflixerunt
and fortunis omnibus denudarunt, lamentationes atque planger, erunt
accusationis loco, quam illi coram suprem^ Dei tribunali sislent. Qui
magnitudine scelerum offensus, non semper concedit diuturniorem impunitatem,
sed illos aliquando verberat prasentibus poenis, ita quidem evidenter and
clare, ut dubitari non possit, ipsum esse justissimum impietatis nostrae
ultorem. Plerique vero Principes, imperiti quidem illi and inconsulti, quam diu
prospera utuntur fortuna, nihil tal^ metuunt, sed cum maxim securi sunt omnium
rerum, tunc ecce Deus repent illis adversarium aliquem excitat, de quo minime
suspicati fuerant. Cominaeus in fine lib. 10.
or rule of equity, to beat him in the same fashion, or according to the same
measure again. But when Kings and Monarks do extraordinary wrongs unto their
subjects, or practice prodigious cruelties upon their inferiors; they usually
suffer the like harms or plagues themselves. But who (says Cominaeus) shall
call Potentates in question, who shall accuse, who shall condemn, who shall
punish them? All (as he resolves) that can be required to a formal process,
shall be supplied by the complaints and tears of such as are agrieved by them;
by the sighs and groans of the fatherless and widows. These are more
authentic than any witnesses of fact, more powerful then any Attorney or
Advocate, before the supreme tribunal of God. So good and gracious a Judge is
He, and so compassionate to the oppressed, that even in this life he often
punishes Kings for their sakes, so evidently and so remarkably, as there can
be no place for doubt amongst the observant, that he is a most just avenger of
humane impiety. But most Princes (as the same Author notes) are so
unexperienced, so inconsiderate that whiles prosperous fortune smiles upon
them, they fear no storms, no punishment, no conviction. And for want of this
fear, which is the beginning of wisdom, God suddenly raises up some
adversary or other, when they least suspect.

Affliction in some kind or other is the surest friend, the most trusty
Counselor, that any Prince can use; for of all the rest of his retinue, it
only knows not how to flatter. And affliction or calamity of the same kind,
which they have undeservedly brought upon others (when that befalls them) is
the most sincere, most powerful Preacher that enters in at any Court gate, for
bringing Potentates to the knowledge of God and of his Laws, or to acknowledge
him to be as well the Judge of Judges, as Lord of Lords.

2 For as Justice cannot be done upon private offenders but by the warrant of
supreme authority; so when we see such judgments befall supreme Magistrates
themselves, as to the notions of natural reason are just and right, and as it
were exactly fitted to that which they have done to others; this clearly argues
there is a Supreme Tribunal in heaven, which has more sovereign Authority
over the highest Thrones and Principalities on earth, than they have over the
meanest subject that lives under them, or filliest wretch that sojournes within
their territories.

3 And if the tallest Cedars be not without the reach of Divine Justice, shall
it not control the lower shrubs? Never was there any man on earth (I am
persuaded) save one (who was more than man) but upon a diligent survey of what
he had done and suffered, might have taken just occasion to repeat that
lesson, which the suffrance of such calamity from the hands of men, as he had
procured unto others his neighbor Princes, had taught Adonibezech to say by
heart, Threescore and ten Kings having their thumbes and their great toes cut
off, gathered their meat under my table: as I have done so God has requited
me. Judge. 1. 7. This Tyrants offenses had been many and gross, more barbarous
than many Princes in this age would (perhaps) commit; yet an usual practice
upon the conquered in those ancient times; a politic emblem of slavery, in
thus fitting their hands for the oar^, and disenabling them to use the Pike, or
other like instrument of war. However; more at this day would be ready, upon
like provocation or custom to deal as boysterously with their vanquished foes,
as Adonibezech did with his, rather than to make the like ingenuous confession;
though God did call their sins to mind by such sensible remembrances, as
awaked him. This I have generally observed, that lighter touches of Gods
afflicting hand, did more affect the outrageous people of the old world
(unless such as were delivered up into a reprobate sense) than his severe
blows do many amongst us, which have the reputation of moderate, of civil,
yea of sanctified men. The minds of most men are so blinded and choakt with
cares of this world, that they look no further than into second causes; and
hence (like idiots) they suspect such blows as are reached them from heaven,
to be given by such as are next unto them. But even amongst such as look far
enough beyond second causes; amongst such as see God in his word, and daily
hear his promises, some there be which either distinguish too nicely between
Gods temporal punishments, and his fatherly chastisements, or else make not
right application of this distinction to their own particular. From the one or
other mistake, (perhaps from both) whatsoever affliction befalls them, after
they have taken special notice of their regeneration, is entertained as a
mere loving correction, sent for no other end than to work for their future
good, not as a touch of Gods punitive justice requiring serious repentance for
some particular sins past. But whatsoever may be thought of the distinction
it self, this application of it, was not in use amongst the ancient Saints and
people of God.

4 Few modern Spirits of ingenuous birth and breeding, but would scorn to be
suspected of such rude and vast behavior, as some of Jacobs Sons used
toward their Father, others toward Joseph, or the Shechemites. And yet, how
quickly does the fear, rather than the sufferance of lighter affliction than
Joseph suffered at their hands, call their offenses against him to their
remembrance. They knew themselves to be as free from the crime wherewith he
charged them, as he was from merit of death, when they put him into the pit, or
from desert of bondage, when they sold him to the Madianites. Notwithstanding,
his very not being so flexible to their requests, as their instant occasions
required, (though nothing so inexorable as they had been to him in his
extremity, when they knew him (as now they do not) to be their brother) caused
them to make this mutual confession one to another, [We are verily guilty
concerning our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul when he
besought us, and we would not hear: therefore is this anguish come upon us.
Genesis 42. 21.] This speedy relentance upon this warning, is an assured
testimony, that the fear of God and of his just judgments, did in some
measure lodge in all their hearts; but most abundantly, now, in Reubens, whose
former sins against his father, did equalize, if not superabound his
brethrens sins against young Joseph, of whose miscariage he was least guilty.
For unto the rest confessing their sins, as was set down before in the next
verse, he thus replies; Spoke I not unto you, saying, do not finne against
the child, and ye would not hear? therefore behold also his blood is
required. Yet was this confession uttered thirteen years after the fact was
committed, until that time never called in question.

CHAP. 32.
Of the Geometrical proportion or form of distributive justice; which the
supreme Judge sometimes observes in doing to great Princes as they have done
to others.
1 But these Sons of Jacob were private men. And God in putting them into the
same fear and anguish of soul into which they had put their harmless
brother, might observe the strict rule of retaliatio^ or counterpassion,
without swerving from the rule of equity, seeing their brother was their
equal: but does the righteous Lord observe the same rule betwixt parties for
condition or state of life most unequal? does he mete out punishment unto
Princes, in just equality to the harms which they have wrongfully done to
their subjects or inferiors? Surely he is no respecter of persons, in cases of
justice or revenge. But where the blow or matter of punishment, which lights on
Potentates is much less, the griese or smart may be fully as great, as their
fury can procure unto their subjects. In the case between Kings and Subjects,
properly so called, or between superior and inferior subjects, there is a
kind of allowance to be made, according to Geometrical proportion, without
swerving from the exact rule of Retaliation. It is a memorable comparison which
Compona^ ergo illius accrbitates ac dolores, quos pertulit ante mortem, ^um ijs
malis and incommodis, quibus alios affecit. Magnitudine quidem inter se
differunt, ac long aliud etiam fuit ipsius munus: verum, quo prosperiori fuit
usus fortuna, and quo major extitit ejus per omnem Europam authoritas: eo
quoque vehementius fuit af^ictus, dum praeter consuetudinem suam and naturam
aliquid perferre coactus est. Ineo, quem diximus, Eremica, summam perpetuo spem
habebat, ac subinde missis nuncijs interpellabat eum ut vitam sibi produceret.
Nam etsi res suas, quasi jam moriturus, constituerat: tamen redintegrato animo,
sperabat se posse evadere. Cominaeus lib. 10. in initio.
Cominaeus (according to this allowance) has made, between the evils which
Lewis the eleventh French King, had done to others, and the like evils, which
God, in the end of his reign, did bring upon him.

2 To be disrespected by them, whom he had advanced far above their deserts,
and graced with dignities whereof their education and profession was incapable,
could not but be a great grief unto this great King, as the like
ungratefulness would be unto any other: yet a just and usual award of Divine
Justice upon such Princes as thus neglect the rule of humane distributive
justice, in the dispensing of honorable favors. But for a Prince, which had
always required exact obedience, always accustomed to expect an observance
from his Subjects, more than ordinarily is given unto other Princes; to be, in
his old age, enforced to observe and flatter the churlish humor of his Medico
suo menstruum dabat stipendium, ut supr^ quoque diximus, december aureorum millia:
nec id modo, verum etiam Episcopatum Ambianensem ejus Nepoti, and munerae
publica multa largiebatur ejus propinquis and amicis. Et tamen Medicus tam erat
verbis in eum asper and durus, ut nihil supra: valde igitur eum Rex metuebat,
and ad suos familiares, de illine asperitate (...), saepe querebatur, neque
tamen andebat eum a se dimittere. Ibid.
Physician, whose untoward service he had recompensed with a standing fee of a
thousand Crowns a month, besides other gratuities extraordinary:* this was a
perpetual torment, whereof Lewis in his perplexity could not but often
complain unto others, yet could not remedy. Mortem nullus unquam veh^m^ntius
exhorruit: n^mo etiam majori studio and ratione de remediis unquam cogitavit,
quam ipse. Familiaribus suis per omnem vitam, and mihi quoque saepenumero
mandaverat, s^ quando ipsum in ea necessitatate positum esse conspiceremus, ut
nulla prorsuo fact^ mentione mortis, ad peccatorum expiationem solummodo
adhortaremur, ac videbatur essen^nc temporis molliori animo, quam ut adeo duram
sententiam audiret. Ibidem.
For this was a disease which he durst not make known unto his Physician,
whose displeasure he feared more than any thing else, besides death; which was
the only cause why he so much feared his displeasure. And is it not (as the
wise King speaks) a vanity of vanities, or more than so, a misery of miseries,
that the fear of this last point or close of life, should make great men
slaves, for the most part of their lives, and bring a necessity upon them, of
fearing every one with more than a slavish fear, that may in probability be
conceived as an instrument or messenger of its approach. Now this King was so
excessively afraid of death, that he had given it in strict charge unto his
friends and followers, not to give him warning of this his last enemy, by name,
whenever it should (to their seeming) approach: but to exhort him only to a
confession or expiation of his sins. Yet was it his ill hap or fate, after he
had set his house in order, and after his dejected spirits had been somewhat
raised with new hopes of recovery, to have death rung into his ears by his
servants, after such an indiscreet and unmannerly fashion, as if they had
sought to put him into purgatory, whilst he was alive. His Barber, with
others, (whom he had rewarded far above their deserts) without any preamble
or circumlocution of respective language, (as if they had come unto him, rather
as Judges to pronounce the sentence of death upon him, than as gentle
remembrancers of his mortality) told him bluntly and peremptorily, that his
hour was come, that he was not to expect any further comfort from his
Physician, or from the Hermit, who (as he thought) had prolonged his life. Jpse
d^os Ga^^^^ principes D^cem (...) and C^^nest ablium, capite mu^ctaver^, and
quod alteru^ n^^usset, ja^ cu^ esset moritur^^, ipsu^ punituit. Et quem
ad^^^dum illis per homines delectos, denunciatum fuit supplicium, paneis
verbis, and breve temporis spa^iu^, quo de solu to sua statuerent, co^cessu^,
ad eundem plane modum isti, nulla verborum (...) circuitione, cu^ ei
praesignificare^t mortem: ut officio nostro satisfaciamus, ai^bant^res ipsa
postulat. Spem nulla^ d^inceps collocare debes, vel in Eremita, vel in quovis
alio. Nam actu^ est de te prorsus. Ibid.


3 If we could unpartially weigh the quality and condition of the parties, who
were thus uncivilly and unseasonably bold with him, in the one scale of just
estimation, and the greatness of his person, his natively timorous disposition
and accustomance in the other; the disparity would move us to be of Cominaeus
his mind in this point; That this untoward remembrance or denunciation of
death, was more bitter and grievous unto Lewis, than the sharp message of
death, which he had sent by Commissioners, unto those two great Peers of
France, the Duke of Nemours, and the Earl of Saint Paul, giving them but a
short respite to marshall their thoughts, and order their consciences before
their final encounter with this last enemy of mortality; which they could not
fear so much as Lewis did. As this great King had done unto these great
subjects, so have his servants done to him.

4 Lewis again, had caused certain places of Carceres (...) ravit horrendos,
and valde tetros, nempe caveas aliquot, partim ferreas, partim ligneas, ferreis
laminibus coopertas, latitudine octo pedum, and altitudine paulo majori, quam
est staturae hominis. Excogit^verat hanc rationem Cardinalis Baluensis, and in
came, quae primum perfecta fuit, inclusus est ipse, perque totos quatuordecim
annos detentus. Ibid.
Little ease to be made, or (at least) did well accept the invention of iron
cages or grates, little more in compass than the square of a tall man's length,
wherein he detained such as offended him; some for diverse, months, others for
many years together. Et sicut per ipsius imperiu^ carceres illi funesti
fuerunt inventi: ad eunde^ plane modu^ ipse quoque ante mortem, consimilibus
omnin^ vinculis sese induit, inque majori versabatur metu, quam illi, quos
aliquando captivos detinuerat. Ibidem.
And through consciousnesse of this his rigorous dealing with others, he
confined himself (for a long time) to a custody or durance as strait for his
greatness, as the iron cages were for their mediocrity. They were not more
desirous to see these close prisons opened, or to hear of the day of their
deliverance from them, than he was careful to cause the iron. Fences,
Ingrediendum erat omnibus non quidem per patente^ portam, sed per parvnlu^
ostium, and praeter paucos aliquot familiares, quoru^ erat opera necessaria,
nemo quisquam, nisi voluntate ipsius, introibat. Ibidem.
wherewith he had encompassed the Castle, wherein he had imprisoned himself,
to be close shut; save only at such times, as he appointed them (upon
special occasions) to be opened. His miserable Captives were not afraid of
passengers, or of such as came to visit them, they needed no guard to secure
them: Lewis caused certain Archers to keep Centinell as well by day as by
night, to shoot at all that came near his Castle gates, otherwise than by his
special command or appointment. In fine, he was more afraid to be delivered out
of his Prison, by the Nobility of France, than his Captives were to be put in
such cages* That which he feared from his Nobility, was not death or violence,
but his deposition or removal from the present government, from which many
wise Princes in their declining age, have with honor and security sequestered
themselves.

5 Whether Lewis in entertaining the invention of iron cages, and the use which
he made of them, or the Cardinal, which to please his severe humor, first
invented them, were more faulty, I cannot tell, nor will I dispute; the rule
of retaliation was more conspicuously remarkable in the Cardinal. For as
^ominaeus tells us (who himself had lodged eight months in one of them) the
Cardinal was by Lewis command detained prisoner (fourteen years together) in
the first that was made. It was well observed, whether by a Christian or
Heathen, I now remember not,

-- Neque lex hac justior ulla est,
Quam necis artisices, art perire sua.
A law ^^^re just than this cannot beset,
Which cruel skill does catch in ijs own net.
One Perillus was the body or subject of the Emblem whereof this Motto was the
soul. He died a miserable death, in that brazen Bull, which he had made, at
the Tyrants request, for the deadly torture of others. And albeit, this
Cardinal did not dye (for ought I read) in the cage of his own invention,
yet had he a greater share of vexation in it, than was intended for others.
What good effect this long and hard durance wrought in the Cardinals soul, is
not specified by my Author. But it is an observation of excellent use, which an
Heathen Hierocles in haec aurea Pythagorae carmina:
Mortales quaecunque Deus mittentibus, angunt;
Vt tua sors tulerit; pati^^^ ne far recusts:
Nec speranda medela tamen, sed novis and istud*
Parcius ista viris immittere numina justis.

Philosopher has made upon like accidents in general; That law or rule of
equity (says he) which wretched men in effect deny whilst they do wrong to
others, the s^m^ law the sam^ men desire might be in force whilst they suffer
wrong or harms by ^t he^s. For example, he th^^ (...) wrong, does wish what the
F^^le says in his heart, there were no God: for so he might hope to escape
that vengeance which whilst he thinks of a God or justice divine, hangs over
his head uncessantly threatening to fall upon him. But he that suffers wrong,
is willing to believe there is a God, and heartily wishes it so to be, that by
his assistance he may be supported against the evils, which he suffers. It is
for this reason (says this Philosopher) expedient that such as grieve and
afflict others, should have experience of the like affliction, to the end that
being taught by their own loss or grievance, they might learn that truth,
which being blinded by avarice or other unruly desire, they could not see
before. And this truth or good lesson they may easily learn, so they will
undergo the mulct or punishment due to their offense, with submission or
patience.

6 Albeit the Cardinal had been a flat Atheist before, or one at least that
had not God in his thoughts, whilst he sought to please the rigorous humor of
this King, with an invention so displeasing unto others; yet after experience
had taught him how exactly that misery had befalne himself, which by his
furtherance had befalne many, or was likely to befall them; he did (no
question) often wi^h in his heart, that the rule of retaliation, wherewith he
was visited, might be constant and unpartiall; that King Lewis himself might
not be exempted from its visitation. Now unto what rule or law could so great
a King be subject, besides that one everliving rule or eternal Law it self?
He that heartily wishes Justice might be done on such, as have full power and
authority to do it, but will not do it; does implicitly, yet necessarily
acknowledge a Law or Judge supreme, Justice it self; so is God. Multos ipse,
per omnem vitam, perpetuo metu et solicitudine excruciaverat: and nunc ecce
videmus ^u^ ad con^imile^ plane modu^ affligi. Cui enim se co^mittat, qui
liberis etia^ suis, and genero fidem non habet? Haec autem non ad ipsu^ modo
pertineat: veru^ etiam ad cos omnes Principes, qui metui volunt: qua quide^ in
re quanta sit servitus, quu^ ad senectute^ pervenerunt, tunc demu^ aperte
sentiunt, quiae coguntur invicem plurimos formidare. Com. ibid.
And he that seriously desires mitigation of that pain or misery, which by the
irresistible force of humane authority is inflicted on him does, acknowledge a
mercy more sovereign than any earthly power, and this can be no other than
God, who is mercy it self. Many may cast the fear of God out of their
thoughts; but none all notions of divine Justice out of their hearts. These
notions or apprehensions of an everliving rule of equity, mercy, and justice,
are so deeply rooted in the consciences of all, and are themselves of such an
immortal nature, as they can never be so utterly extinguished in any, but that
affliction will inspire them with fresh life and motion, and make them breathe
out supplications to the supreme Judge, either for mercy toward themselves or
for justice upon other.

7 The particular evils which Lewis, by Divine Justice, in this life, suffered
(happily) had never come to the exact notice of posterity, unless Cominaeus his
wits, had been set on work to observe them, by his experience or
foresufferance of the like evils from Lewis, or by his procurement. Besides
this Authors imprisonment eight months in the iron Cage; another evil there
was, wherein no ancient servant or follower of this King, but had a large
portion. For, he had either a natural inclination, or a disposition acquired
by custom, to hold them, whom he did not formally sentence to any set
punishment, in a perpetual fear or anxiety of mind. Now the consciousnesse
of this his disposition and customary practice in his best and able days, did
(as it were) bind him over to endure the like torments in his feeble and
declining years. Metus pessimus Tyrannus, To live in perpetual fear, is to
live under the most cruel Tyranny, that can be. And unto this Tyranny
greatest Tyrants are more subject and more obnoxious, than their inferiors can
be to them. For though it be possible for one man to keep many thousands in
perpetual awe and fear, yet is it not so much for every man (of so many) in
his own particular to fear one man, (how greatly soever) as it is for one man
(how great soever) to stand in fear, but of half so many. Yet can no man be
so great or so well guarded, as not to have often and just occasion to fear
some harm or other, from every one, whom he has made to fear him more than
is fitting. Whence, he that seeks to sow the seeds of fear in the hearts of
others, does but thereby (as it were) consecrate his own heart or breast to be
the receptacle or storehouse of the multiplied increase or crop. For even in
this case that saying is most true, As every one sowes, so shall he reap.

What other issue could be expected from Lewis his rigid practice upon others,
and his own native timorous and ignoble disposition, than such tormenting
jealousies and perplexities, as Cominaeus tells us in his old age did seize
upon him, and enforce him to fear the virtue and worth of his dearest friends,
not daring to trust son or daughter, or son in law. Now it is more than a
Purgatory, even an Hell upon earth, for a man which can take no joy in
himself, to deprive himself of all comfort from his dearest friends, and them
of all comfort from him. So Borbonius and Comes Dunensis, Legatos Flandriae,
qui nuptius Deiph^^ interfue^ant Ambosae, honoris causa, quod fieri solet,
deduxerant. Vbi Plessiu^ revertissent magno cum comitatu; e stipatorum, and
satellitum suorum praefectis quendam accersit, and explorare jubet, an essent
arma^isub vest, sed ut dissimulanter faceret, mandat, interea dum familiariter
cum iis loquitur. Com. ibidem.
uncomfortable was the Duke of Bourbon his Son in Laws company to Lewis,
and Lewis his company unto him, that when he came to visit him in peace, and
out of loyal respect and duty, he caused a slye search to be made of him, and
of another Earl his companion, whether they did not bear offensive weapons
under their garments; thus polluting the nuptial joys of his late married
son and heir, with sordid jealousies of his son in Law.

CHAP. 33.
How the former law of retaliation has been executed upon Princes, according
to Arithmeticall proportion, or according to the rule of commutative justice.
1 But however Lewis of France were punished, according to the rule of
Retaliation or counterpassion: yet in the manner of retribution, the righteous
Lord did observe a kind of Geometrical proportion. The affliction or
visitation it self, was the just award of punitive Justice: and yet the form
of proceeding bears the character of humane distributive Justice, which has
usually some respect to the dignity of the persons awarded. So humane Laws, which
punish capital crimes with death, are dispensed with, by the favor of the
Prince, for the manner of death. That, is not so ignominious or dishonorable in
the execution upon Nobles, as upon inferiors involved in the same capital
crime, or treason; no not, albeit the Nobles be principalls, and inferiors but
accessories or assistants. But this favorable kind of punishment for the
external form, God does not always use toward Princes. If many times he may
seem to bear respect or favor unto their place or persons, this arises not
from their greatness, but from some other causes best known unto himself.
His judgments upon Princes and other Potentates, are often executed, according
to the most strict arithmeticall proportion that can be required in the rule of
Retaliation upon equals, as well for the manner as for the matter of
punishment. And although God in this life never plagueth any according to the
full measure of their offenses committed against himself: yet he often
visits Kings and Monarks, with a fuller visible measure of calamity, than
they have brought upon others, and with calamity of the same kind. Though
Pharaoh had been the greatest Monark, and his Court the most glorious seat of
Nobility (till their time) on earth: yet because he and his Nobles had plotted
cruelty against the innocent, without relentance or remorse, the dignity of his
or their persons procures no mitigation either for the matter or manner of
punishment. Their dues are fully paid them (as we say) in kind; the guiltless
blood of poor Hebrew infants is rendered seven ^old into the bosom of the
Egyptian Nobility and men of War.

2 Never did any State or Kingdom, since the foundation of the world were
laid, receive so terrible a wound within its own territories, in one day, as
at this time Egypt did, but females did in some measure feel the smart. Yet in
this last, as in the former plagues, no Egyptian woman had cause to lament for
her self, for her sister, or daughter; but many for their husbands, their
brothers or sons. What was the reason? The Exodus 1. 15. etc.
Egyptian Mid-wives (and they were women) if no other of their sex besides, had
been more merciful to the infant males of the Hebrews, than the Egyptian men
had been. And as they had done, so has the Lord requited the one and rewarded
the other. To the merciless Cour^iers, Politicians, and men of War, he has
rendered vengeance and judgment, without mercy, and punished them with
miserable and ignominious death, showing compassion on the weaker and more
pitiful sex.

3 It was a rare document of divine justice to ordain, and of divine wisdom
so to contrive, that the dogs should lap King Ahabs blood in the same 1 King.
21. 19.
place, where they had lapped the blood of Naboth (stoned to death through his
connivance or permission.) As sure a token it was of justice tempred with
mercy, and of the great Kings special grace or favor unto this graceless
King of Israel, that the 1 Kin. 22. 18.
dogs which lapped his blood should not so much as touch his body. Being slain
in battle, his death was honorable, as the world accounts honor, yet was
it not so much the dignity of his royal person, as his humiliation upon the
Prophets challenge, which made him capable of this favor; but not a dram either
of disgrace or misery from which Ahab was by Gods mercy in part released, which
did not fall into the scale of Justice, wherein the impiety of proud Iezabel
was exactly waighed. The measure of her husbands punishment is not so much less
as hers was fuller than Naboths had been. The sight of her commanding 1 King.
21. 8.
letters caused poor Naboth to be stoned to death by the men of his city: and
at Iehues call, her body is dashed against the stones by her own servants. 2
Kin. 9. 33.
The dogs lapped Naboths blood, but they devoured Iezabels flesh: she had been
shamelesly cruel in her life, and she has a most shameful and a most
fearful death. Nor would the all-seeing Judge suffer that respect to be done
to her corpse, which her cruel 2 King. 9. 34.
executioner intended, upon remembrance that she had been daughter to a King.
It was I must confess a ruefull case, and yet a judgment, more righteous than
rufull, that she which had issued from royal womb, she from whose womb had
issued royal progeny, (for she had been respectively lawful daughter,
lawful wife, and lawful mother unto three Kings) should be entombed, ere her
corpse were cold, in the entrails of Ibidem.
dogs, should have no better burial than the dead Ass or other carrion; albeit
she died in her own royal palace. But thus the Almighties arm sometimes
reaches greatest Princes even in this life heavier blows, than they can give
unto their poorest subjects. But where the blow or matter of punishment which
falls on them is much lighter, the wound or torment may be more grievous, as
was observed before, than their fury can procure unto their despised brethren.

4 But neither does the sacred relation concerning Pharaohs overthrow, or
Iezabels death contain a more perspicuous, ocular demonstration of Divine
Justice executed according to the rigor of Retaliation, than has been
represented or rather really acted upon a public Stage within the memory of
some now living. The subject of this rufull spectacle was Henry the second
French King of that name. The accident is not recorded by Gods Spirit, yet the
experiment (as unpartiall Writers, which I take it were eye witnesses of it,
have related) is as exactly parallel to the rules of Gods Spirit, and affords
as good instruction for modern Princes, as examples in the Sacred Story, did
to posterity. This youthful King in the beginning of his reign, had licenced
others to feed their eyes with the sight of a deadly Duel, authorized by him
in favor of Vivonus to the disgrace and prejudice (as the Court of France
expected) of Chabotius: whose hands notwithstanding the Lord did strengthen, to
kill the Favorite, who after many bitter provocations had drawn him within
the Lists, more against his will, than an old Bear is brought to the stake.
The death of Vivonus though most just, does no way excuse the barbarous
injustice of this King, who has this justice done upon him: he had made a
sport of shedding blood, Vide Thuanum ad finem lib. 20.
and he himself is slain in Ludicro certamine, running at Tilt: and slain by
that hand which had been his instrument to apprehend those Noble and religious
Gentlemen, which had been lately imprisoned, and in whose misery the Court of
France did then rejoice: and adding gall to wormwood, solemnized these and the
like triumphant shows or sportings in their sight: yet was it not Count
Montgomeries hand, but the right hand of the Lord, which did at one and the
same instant unty the Kings Bever, and guide the splinter or glance of
Montgomeries Spear into that eye, which had beheld a Duel, that could not be
determined without the death of the one or other combatant (both being
Frenchmen, and his natural subjects) with such delight, as young Gallants do
ordinary prizes, or other like spectacles of recreation. Of Vivonus his death,
few or none but Frenchmen were eyewitnesses; but of this Kings tragical
triumph, Spain and Germany with other countries were spectators by their
proxies or Ambassadors. As if the Lord would have these the^ present to carry
this message to their masters to be by the^ directed to the rest of Christian
Princes. Discite justitia^ moniti and non temnere divos.

Take warning by this Princes Fate, Not to approve what God does hate. God is
no accepter of persons: in respect of the execution of his most righteous law;
as is the people, so is the Prince: his word must be alike fulfilled in both;
not only subjects that kill one another, but Princes (be they Kings or Monarks)
that authorize murder, or suffer their subjects blood to be unjustly spilt, by
man shall their blood be spilt; if other executioners fail, even by the hand
of their dearest friends: such was Count Montgomery to this king.

5 The caveat, which from the untimely death of this Earl, a judgment
inflicted by divine justice, not so much for this, (though this were pretended
by the Queen Mother and Dowager to take away his life) as for other offenses,
has been elsewhere commended to young gallants or Princes servants, was (to my
remembrance) this, Not to be instruments though to Kings in the execution of
manifest injustice, seeing this noble Gentleman after much honor and many
victories ^otten by war, in defense of those of the reformed Religion, whom he
had formerly wronged, came at length to lose his head in that very place,
whither, by Henry the seconds appointment, he had brought diverse noble
Gentlemen to the faggot, and some of that honorable bench, which afterward
sentenced him to death.

CHAP. 34.
The sins of parents visited upon their children, according to the rule of
retaliation.
1 ALL the parties hitherto instanced in, were visited by the rule of
retaliation in their own persons, some of them not in their own persons
alone. But it is usual with the supreme Judge to visit the ou^crying sins of
irreligious parents, upon their children, according to the former rule. And to
this purpose the visitation of Ahabs, and of Iezabels bloody sins against
Naboth* may, by See the 1. Kings 21. 24. and 2 King. 9. 26. etc.
express warrant of Sacred Writ, be improved. But no Histories, profane or
sacred, afford more fit instances for the proof of this conclusion, than our
own Chronicles do. It was a question amongst the Heathen Philosophers, An res
posterorum pertineant ad defunctos; Whether the ill or welfare of posterity,
did any way increase or diminish the happiness of their deceased ancestors.
The negative part is determined by the great Philosopher in his Moralls. And I
know no just cause or reason, why any Christian Divine, should either appeal
from his determination, or revive the doubt. Yet if the affirmative part of the
former question, were supposed as true, or were it lawful to imagine or feign
such interchange of speech, or Dialogues, betwixt deceased Grandfathers,
Uncles, and their Nephews, as our Savior (I take it) not by way of real
history, but of fiction, does between Abraham and Dives; me thinks Edward the
third, and Lionel Duke of Clarence might have taken up Iothams parable against
Bullinbrooke and the House of Lancaster, If ye have dealt truly and sincerely
with us, and with the prime stemmes of this royal stock, then rejoice ye and
your posterity in your devises: but if not, Let fire come out from among your
selves, or from our stock, to devour you, and to make your posterity curse
your dealings with us. And in what region soever (...) soul did in the third
generation reside, it might have framed its responsary unto this parable out of
Adonibezeks song, As I have done to you and yours, so has the Lord requited me
and mine. And had this or the like saying (upon the deposition of Bullinbrookes
heir) been daily rung into the ears of Edward the fourth, Felix quem faciunt
aliena pericula cautum.
Amongst men, none more happy is than he,
That can his own by others harms foresee:
it might have wrought better effects for the bodily or temporal good of his
harmless sons, than any dirge could, after his death, procure unto his
soul. Few Chronicles else will exhibit such a continued pedigree of unhallowed
policies ill success, as our own Annalls of those times do.

2 Unto Richard the second and his misleaders, it seemed a branch of plausible
policy to banish his cozen ( Henry of Bullinbrook) this land; the vicinity of
whose heroical spirit was an heart-sore to this degenerate Prince. But what
success did the Counsel of the Lord award unto this jealous devise?
Bullinbrook by his presence amongst foraine Nations (which scarce knew him
before) gained so much honor, and so much love with the chief Peers of this
Realm (which had known him before) by his absence, that Richard the second
was taken in his own fear, and his Crown set upon Bullingbrookes head, with
general applause. But the less right he had unto it; the greater was his
jealousy, lest Richard the second, or some other more principal stem of the
royal Stock might take it off again. The only means, as he thought, for
securing himself from this fear, and for settling the Crown upon the House of
Lancaster, was, to put the poor deposed King to death; whose errors deserved
pity and compassion from every true English heart, if not for his
Grandfathers, yet for his heroical Fathers sake, that Gideon which had brought
so much honor to the English Nation. And after Richards death, the
masterpiece of his policy was, to suffer Mortimer the lawful heir unto the
Duke of Clarence, and now unto the English Crown, to live a miserable Captive
under the enemy, who had more reason to revenge himself upon the English by
Mortimers death, than Bullinbrook had to murder Richard the second. This soul
sin of Bullinbrooke was visited upon the third generation. His grandchilde
and heir, Henry the sixth, a man more free from stain of guiltless blood,
than either Richard the second or Bullinbrooke had been, is cruelly murdered
by Edward the fourth, a stem of Mortimers stock, and of Lionel Duke of
Clarence. For though God has sworn not to punish the children for their
fathers offenses; yet he has professed it, as a rule of his eternal justice,
to visit the sins of fathers upon the children. And from the equity of this
rule, many Princely Races have utterly determined and expired, in the days of
such Princes as were most free from the actual sins of their Ancestors,
which were the causes of their expiration; as is in other Meditations showed at
large.

3 But though it were just with God to visit Bullinbrookes sin on Henry the
sixth: did Edward the fourth commit no injustice by doing that which God would
have done? yes; he did therefore most unjustly, because he did do that, which
God would not have done by him. And therefore the Counsel of the Lord, which
overthrew the bloody devises of Bullinbrooke for settling the Crown of this
Kingdom on himself and his heir males, did more speedily overthrow the
devise of Edward the fourth. God visits his sin in the next generation upon
his lovely and harmless Sons in their nonage, before the devises of their
hearts were capable of any evil or mischief toward men, and did visit them
by the hands of their bloody uncle Richard the third, who, by their Fathers
appointment, had practiced butchery upon the House of Lancaster, that he might
become a more skillful slaughterman of the House of York. Thus did blood touch
blood, and for a long time run in the blood of his royal race, until the
issue was staunched by the blood of the cruel Tyrant slain in battle by
Henry the seventh. All these instances mentioned in this, with some others in
the former chapters, will fall under another more useful consideration, in the
Treatise of Prodigies. or Divine forewarnings betokening blood.

CHAP. 35.
Grosser sins visited upon Gods Saints according to the former Rule of
Counterpassion.
1 AS it is generally more safe to speak the truth of times past, than to open
our mouths against the iniquity of times present: so to trace the prints of
Divine Providence, in thus fitting punishments to men's enormities, will be
less offensive, whilst this search is made abroad, than it would be, were it
or the like made nearer hand, or at home. Yet were it well, and it might go
much better with this Land and People, if every ancient, every noble, or
private Family, specially such as have had much dealings with other men, would
make the like search within their own pale. Few Families there be of greater
note, but either have or might have had undoubted experience of some
visitations upon them, according to the rule of Counterpassion, within two or
three descents. That most private men do not find experiments of this rule in
themselves, this falls out for want of observation, or because they keep not a
true Register of their own doings or sufferings. No man can plead any
personal exemption from this Canon, by reason of his righteousness or
integrity; none can altogether secure his posterity, that some one or other of
his sins shall not be visited upon them. Nor can it justly be accounted any
tax or prejudice, unto any Family, to undergo with patience, that mulct,
which the righteous Judge has laid upon them. To murmr or grudge at our own
or others visitation, whose welfare we wish or tender, is blameworthy with God
and good men. And albeit this distemper be not (only) meritorious of death;
yet is it this, which for the most part brings a necessity of dying upon such,
as have otherwise deserved death, whether bodily or spiritual. For no man,
which with patience and humility, acknowledges the equity or justice of his
punishment, as it proceeds from God, but will, in some measure, recall
himself, or inhibit his progress in that sin, the smart of whose punishment
he feels. And unto every degree of sincere revocation or repentance, some
degree of mitigation is awarded. The best means for instilling the Spirit
either of meekness or patience, in suffering for offenses past, or of fear to
offend in the like kind again, will be to take the punishments or corrections
of Gods Saints, into serious consideration.

2* If for the manifestation of Gods justice, it must be done unto his dearest
Saints, as they have done unto others, either whilst they themselves were his
enemies, or made him their enemy, after their reconcilement had been wrought:
what may they look for in the end which still continue adversaries to the
truth. David was a man after Gods own heart (excepting the case of Vriah,) yet
not therefore free from disgrace, danger, or harm, after the Prophet had
solemnly denounced his pardon; Thy sins are forgiven thee: In respect of the
adultery committed by Bathsheba, Absolons offense against his Father David, was
much greater than David's had been against Vriah. The one was done in 2 Samuel
16. 21.
secret, the other in the open Sun. The death, 2 Samuel 12. 12
if not of Bathshebaes child, yet of his Son Absolon, was more bitter unto
David, than his own death could have been. So much he confesses himself,
and testifies the truth of his confession with his tears. And the King was
moved, and went up to the chamber over the gate, and wept; and as he went, thus
he said, O my son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom: would God I had dyed
for thee, O Absalom my son, my son. 2 King. 18. 33. So that here was more
than a full retaliation, if we consider his offense, as it had reference only
unto Vriah. For one man's life is as much worth as another, and Vriah lost but
one life, David was to suffer the loss of two. Yet this is not all that the
Prophet had to say to him for this offense; for so he says, 2 Samuel 12. 9. Thou
have killed Vriah the Hittite with the sword, and have taken his wife to be thy
wife, and have slain him with the sword of the children of Ammon. Now
therefore the sword shall never depart from thine house, because thou have
despised me, and taken the wife of Vrias the Hittite to be thy wife.

3 But when it is said that David was a man after Gods own heart, excepting
the matter of Vriah, this exception includes, if not an interruption in the
bond of grace, by which he had been entirely linked unto Gods favor, yet some
wound or breach in the estate of his wonted favor and liking with God. And no
marvel, if that sin which made this breach, and for a time removed the fence
of Gods favorable protection, were visited upon his person and upon his
posterity. But are the sins which men commit, whilst they are Gods enemies thus
visited upon any, after their full admission into the estate and favor of Gods
sons, or whilst the bond of their reconciliation remains unwounded and
entire? We do not read of any grosser sins committed by Saint Paul, after
our Savior had effectually called him. We may without breach of charity,
persuade our selves, that he was as free from that time forward, from wronging
any man, Jew or Gentile, as Samuel had been from wronging Israel. Saint
Stephen, at his death, prayed for him, not against him. But though he freely
forgave him, yet will not the righteous Judge suffer the wrongs, which he had
done, unto this blessed Martyr, pass without some solemn remembrance. Those
which stoned Saint Stephen, laid down their garments at Paul's feet; and his
willingness to take charge of them, argues he was consenting to his death:
Saint Paul acknowledges his consent unto Saint Stephens death, either as
expressly given by him or as included in his willingness to keep the garments of
such as stoned him to death.
so I think was not Barnabas. And for this reason, we do not read that
Barnabas was stoned, as Paul was, by the Jews which came from Antioch and
Iconium unto Lystra and Derbe; albeit both had been alike offensive for
preaching the Gospel at Iconium; where the same Acts 14. 5, 6.
violence had been likewise jointly attempted against both. Upon the matter
then betwixt Saint Paul and Saint Stephen (albeit Saint Stephen make himself
no party) this is the only difference; Stephen dyed by the hands of his
persecutors, so did not Paul. Yet, it seems, the righteous Lord suffered these
malignant Jews to do as much unto Saint Paul, Acts 22. 20. And when the blood
of thy martyr Stephen was shed, I also was standing by, and consenting unto his
death, and kept the raiment of them that slew him:
as had been done by his consent unto Saint Stephen, even as much as they
themselves desired, which did despite him no less than their countrymen and
brethren in iniquity, had done S. Stephen. For they drew him out of the City,
supposing he had been dead. Howbeit as the Disciples stood round about him, he
rose up and came into the City, and the next day he departed with Barnabas to
Derbe. Acts 14. 19, 20. Paul (we may conclude) was more extraordinarily
preserved by God, not less rigorously dealt withal by the Jews, than Saint
Stephen had been. That he was extraordinarily preserved, we have reason to
believe, because he was appointed to be a pattern of suffering more violence
than this, from the time of his calling. That he was appointed to be a
pattern of suffering evils, we must believe, because God himself does
expressly testify as much, at the time of his calling, unto Ananius, who was to
ratify his calling so far as the notice of it concerned the visible Church.
For when Ananias did demurre upon his admission into the Church, The Lord said
unto him, go thy way: for he is a chosen vessel unto me, to bear my name
before the Gentiles, and Kings, and the children of Israel. For I will show
him, how great things he must suffer for my names sake. Act. 9. 15, 16 And yet
(perhaps) Saint Paul had not been made such a spectacle to the world of
suffrance or persecutions, unless he had persecuted more than Saint Stephen;
unless he had made havocke of the Church.

4 It is not probable, that these Jews had any mind to punish Paul for his
offense against Stephen; of which if they had any notice or remembrance, this
would have made them more ready to pardon him, for preaching the Gospel at this
time, than to put him to death for persecuting such, as had preached it before.
Their resolution to stone him, at this time, rather than beat him with rods, as
their usual manner was, argues that their wills, though otherwise free (more
than enough) to do mischief, were, by the all-seeing Providence, determined
or guided in the manner of practicing mischief. To say, the Author of being,
and Fountain of goodness, did instill this spirit of fury and malice, into
the hearts of these Jews, or did, by any decree, absolutely necessitate them
to conceive so full a measure of mischief, as now possessed them, were (I take
it) to swerve from the form of wholesome words, and would give some advantage
to the adversaries of truth. It was Satan and themselves, which had charged
their breasts with this extraordinary measure of fury and malice. But these,
being so overcharged, as that without some vent or other they were ready to
burst; He, who is as well the supreme moderator of men's thoughts and
resolutions, as Judge of their actions, did not only permit or suffer, but
direct, appoint, and order, that they should exonerate or discharge their
furious malice upon Saint Paul, not upon Barnabas; and upon Saint Paul, by that
peculiar kind of violence, which now they practice, rather than by any other,
unto which they were more accustomed.

CHAP. 36.
Of sins visited or punished according to the circumstance of time or place
wherein they were committed.
1 IT may be, the circumstance of the time, wherein this visitation happened to
S. Paul, might suggest as much, as we have observed, unto himself, or unto
others then living, whom the remembrance or notice of his former trespasses,
might concern. But however it were in this particular, the identitie, whether
of the time, or of the place, wherein men have done, and afterward suffer
extraordinary evil, are in their nature, better Remembrancers of Gods justice,
than the exact identity or likeness of the evils, which they have done to
others, and from others suffer, is* If a man should meet with mischief in the
same place, or be overtaken by it on the same day, wherein he had done the like
mischief unto others: the event would naturally argue a legal and formal
process of Divine Justice, calling time and place (which are always witnesses
of actions done in greatest secrecy) to give special evidence against him;
and to make his own conscience confess that, which all the world besides were
not able to prove. Some within our memories, have concluded their unseasonable
sportings with death, sudden and casual in respect of men, upon the same day
after revolution of times, wherein they had deserved or cunningly avoided the
sentence of death, being more than due unto them, if Justice might have had its
natural course. And it might peradventure have gone better with them, if they
had hid themselves, for that day, in the house of mourning, or not adventured
upon the house of mirth, or fields of sport.

2 To particularize in, or comment upon domestique modern examples, would be
offensive; Beatus populus qui scit jubilationem: That people or Family is
happy, which knows the times and seasons of rejoicing and mirth, but more happy
are they, which know the times and seasons of mourning, or for preventing the
day of visitation. And the best means to foresee or prevent it, would be to
keep an exact Calendar of our own and of our forefathers sins, for these we
are bound to confess with our own. And if we would unpartially judge our
selves, for both, by unfaigned repentance and hearty contrition: we might
escape the judgments of God, which by our neglect hang over us, and, without
amendment, will fall upon us. It is a saying amongst the later Jews, Volvitur
meritum in diem meriti: Though punishments do not immediately pursue the fact
which deserves it, nor instantly overtake the party which committed such fact;
yet it rests not, but roules about until it meet with them or their
posterity at the same point of time, wherein it was deserved. The Temple by
their calculation, was twice destroyed upon the same day of the same month,
upon which Moses had broken the Tables. Though so it were de facto, yet this
revolution infers not this destruction to be fatal. It might have been, at
both times, prevented, had that generation wherein it happened, been as zealous
of Gods glory, as Moses had been; or had they held idolatry or hypocrisy in as
great detestation as Moses had done. Some foraigne Vide Thuanum.
writers have observed, that the hope of this Land, whilst he lived, Edward
the sixth, did dye upon the self same day (after revolution of some years) in
which his Father had put Sir Thomas Moore to death, a man otherwise faulty, yet
so true a pattern of moral justice, as it cannot seem strange, if the
righteous Judge did take special notice of King Henry's dealing with him, and
insert the day of his death in his everlasting Calendar, to be after signed
with the untimely death of King Henry's only Son. How the sins of parents are
often punished in their harmless, or less harmfull posterity, is elsewhere
discussed. I will not interrupt this Discourse, with any digression concerning
Divine equity in this point, nor with any Apology for these curious
observations, as some enstyle them: I relate only matters of fact, or
punishments answerable to offenses, as well for the circumstance of place, as
of time.

3 Pausanias in Achaic. lib. 7. p. 425.
Pausanias a famous Antiquary, or, to describe him better to a mere English
Reader, the Cambden of Greece, has observed as much, as now we do, in his
narrations of the wars between the Romans and the Corinthians, or Achaians,
managed by Metellus and Critolaus. The History, though brief (as being but an
appendix of his intended Topography) is fraught with many remarkable
circumstances, pointing out unto us a Divine Providence; of which, two
(concerning the selected band of Arcadia put to flight, but with more honor
than the rest of Critolaus army) are more specially parallel to the rule of
retaliation. These Arcadians after the foil, retired safe (to the number of a
thousand) unto Elatea, a City of the Phocenses; where they found good welcome
at the first, upon some ^ermes of ancient confederacy or alliance. But the
sudden noise of Critolaus and his companies overthrow, dissolved the links of
former amity. The poor Arcadians were commanded, by the State of Phocis,
forthwith to relinquish Elatea; and, in their return to Peloponnesus, meeting
unexpectedly with Metellus forces, were all slain by the Romans, in the self
same place, in which their fore-elders had forsaken the Grecian L^^guers, or
con^^derates against Philip of Macedon. Honest Countrymen see Meteors or other
appearances, as perfectly as Philosophers do; but they often err in guessing
at the place or subject where in the appearance is made. Thus many imagine the
Sun to be reddish, in a foggy morning; when as the redness is in the air.
So did this heathen Antiquary, expressly and fully discern the power of Divine
Justice in this event; from the circumstance of the persons (a race of
truce breakers) and from the place of their discomfiture. His eyesight or
apprehension herein, was as clear as any Christians. Wherein then consists his
error? In attributing this award of Divine Justice unto the Gods of Greece. But
did any Southsayer of Greece foretell, that the fathers breach of truce should
be thus visited upon their children as Elias foretold, that the dogs should lap
Ahabs blood, and eat Iezebel and their childrens flesh, in the same place
where they had lapt the blood of Naboth, whom Iezebel had caused to be stoned
to death? The identity of Justice done upon diverse people and Nations, rightly
argues that the God of Israel, did then rule and execute judgment unto the
ends of the world; although he did not deal so with any Nation, as he did with
Israel; neither had the Heathen knowledge of his Laws, much less such
distinct foreknowledge of his judgments or visitations as was usual in
Israel; unless it were in some cases extraordinary.

4 To have seen with our eyes, what we have read in a faithful and judicious
Dubravius in histor. Boem.
Historian, one to dye in a fit of the Falling Sickness, or, (as it was then
presumed) to be vexed to death by an evil spirit, at the time appointed for
his consecration, even whilst he did prostrate himself before the Altar to
receive the Holy Ghost, by the imposition of his Metropolitans hands, would
have moved the like question to that of Christ's Disciples, concerning him that
was borne blind; Lord, who did sin, this man, or his parents? Whose shame
did he foam out with his last breath, his own, or some others? Such as is here
expressed, was the ^ate of Strachyquaz son to B^leslaus the first, and
brother to B^lesla^s the second, King of B^h^me, who with the Bishop of Mentz,
was an eye witness of this prodigious fearful accident. And if consecration
dinners were then in use, (as doubtless they were, when Kings sons and
brothers thought it no scorn to be consecrated Bishops) Respondent ultima
primis; Strachyquaz did better brook his name after his death, than at his
birth or baptism, or (as my Author speaks) on his lustration day. The
realitie answering to his name, and portended by it, he left behind him: The
dinner provided, was indeed (terribile convivium) a banquet of dread or horror
to all spectators, a feast of whose d^^^^ies few (I think) would eat. And
thus much does the name Strachyquaz in the Bohemia^^ language import; A name
imposed upon this unfortunate person, at his birth, in triumphant memory of
that bloody banquet, unto which his father Bolestaus the first, had invited
Wenceslaus the King his Elder brother, with intent to murder him, as he did;
taking opportunity to accomplish this impiety, in the Temple of God, where
this King (afterward Sainted) was at his midnights devotions.

5. To sit as Coroners upon the souls of men deceased, is a thing which I have
ever misliked, though sometimes practiced by men, otherwise of deserved
esteem. And whosoever in this case will take upon him to sit as Judge, my
request shall be not to serve upon the Jury. Yet if my opinion were in this
particular demanded, [Whether this man dying (as the story presumes) of a
Devil, the manner of his death were any certain prognosticke, or probable
presumption of his damnation] my verdit should go in mitiorem partem, That,
thus to dye of a Devil, unless his former life had been devilish, (which
the history no way intimates) does no more argue his damnation, than the
untimely death of Ieroboams Child, did argue him to have been guilty of his
Parents actual sins; in the manner of whose death; notwithstanding, as well
as in Strachyquaz his tragical end, the sins of their Parents were
remarkeably visited, according to that rule of Justice, which now we treat of,
that is, by way of counterpassion, in respect, if not of time, yet of the
places wherein they were visited. That Ieroboams child dyed in Gods favor, the
text instructs us. 1 King. 14. 13. All Israel shall mourn for him and bury
him: for he only of Jeroboam shall come to the grave, because in him there is
found some good thing toward the Lord God of Israel, etc.

6 But to return to Strachyquaz: the manner of whose death, (as is apparent)
was more fearful and prodigious, yet no sign of damnation. For as there is
(vates praeteritorum and futurorum) a branch of prophecy in discovering times
past, as well as events to come; so there may be, and oft-times are prodigious
and portentuous accidents, which point at nothing (de futuro, s^^ a retro)
which look backwards, not forwards. The best use or signification of this
fearful disaster was to advertise the present generation, and their
successors, that the execrable and sacrilegious murder, committed by Boleslaus,
father to Strachyquaz, was not expiated as yet, but to be vis^^^d upon more
generations without hearty repentance and confession of this wicked usurpers,
and his accomplices sins, wherewith the land of Boheme had been polluted. The
first borne of Egypt, was slain for their fathers offenses against the infant
males of the Hebrews; And Strachyquaz dyed this fearful death by the
visitation of his fathers sins upon him? But he might (perhaps) have lived
much longer, and have dyed in peace, had he lived according to that rule whose
profession he had taken upon him; that is, if he had continued (as he once
resolved to do) a true p^nitentiarie, and not affected to be a prelate. For,
if God would not suffer his Temple to be built by David (a man otherwise after
his own heart) only because he had been a man of war: we may, from the
moral Analogy of this sacred emblem, collect that the same holy Lord would
not suffer the son of that malignant cruel Pagan Fratricide, which had
imbrued his hands in the blood of his Priests, and murdered his anointed King
in the holy place, to bear rule over his house, or Church. This his
unseasonable ambitious humor, without any other actual remarkable crime, might
in Divine Justice exact some print of the supreme Judges indignation. All this
(notwithstanding) being granted; does not prove, there was no good thing found
in the party, that was thus punished, as well as in Ieroboams child. It was a
favor to the one, that he dyed in peace, though in his infancy, and it might
be some matter of honor or favor to the other, that he had Christian burial
in the Church, wherein he died; and that he was not made a prey to the fowls
of the air. But this we speak skeptique wise, what became of Strachyquaz
after his fearful end, we leave it for the eternal Judge to determine.

7 Whatsoever became of him, the death of his grandmother Drahomira, was much
more terrible: as she had lived, so she dyed, a malicious blasphemous Pagan; a
cruel bloody step-dame to Christ's infant Church, in that Kingdom. The story
(I know) will unto many seem strange, yet in my observation very capable of
credit; if we consider the exigence of those times, and the then desperate
state of Boheme. Christianity and paganism lay then at stake, whether should
be entertained, whether expelled: the Pagans by their unconfeionable policy
(which aims at nothing but some private end, always ready to hazard
whatsoever lies within their level, rather then miss of it) had so cunningly
played the foregame, and, by their bloody plots, removed so many principal men
out of the way, that there was no possibility left, save only in the
Almighties immediate hand, to make any thing of the aftergame. Now in case of
such desperate extremities (specially when they happen during the infancy of
any particular Church) it cannot to me seem incredible, if the good spirit of
God do out vy those prodigious cruelties, which Satan devises against the
Saints, by sudden miraculous executions upon their Actors, Satan's instruments.
The Tragedy of Drahomira was briefly thus: This Queen Mother, had animated her
Pagan-sonne Boleslaus, surnamed Savus, the Cruel, to murder his elder brother,
and Liege Lord Wenceslaus, only because he had approved himself a zealous
professor of the doctrine of life. To terrify others from taking the sacred
function upon them, she caused the bodies of those Priests and Prelates, whom
Boleslaus had ^assacred, to lie unburied; and In^ a breve igitur tempus
va^cu^um Divi Wenceslai compictu^ fuit, vaticinantis, ^o e, ut a discessu suo,
a^^^^m Pauli Presbyteri Sacerdotibus vacuum redderetur. Co^^eptus inter
precipuos ad suppliciu^, Podivivus quoque totum biennium in Furca sub dio
pendena, nulla tabe violati, nedum corrumpi, consici^ue potuit, donec post
haustam terrae hiatu Drahom^^m, sepeliretur. Nam quo manifestior, graviorque
paena appareret, quae merito de crudelissima atque impiissima muliere exigenda
fuerat; eo loci* quo adhuc insepulta jacebant ossa occisorum Sacerdotum, terra
sua sponte dehiscens, vivam D^ahomiram, una cum curiu and qui simul vehebantur,
absorbuit, auriga solo incolumi, qui ad ara^ juxta sitam (nune haud extat) equo
desiliens, accurrit, eum sort tintinnabulum tinnire audisset, ut corpus domini
adoraret, execrante illum Drahomira on nibus maledictis. Quare locum eum
etiamnum, ut execratum funeslum^ue declinant viatores, qui arcem Pragensem ab
occidentali plaga petunt. Quar quam terra eodem loci in statum pristinum
cohaeserit. Puniti and illi divinitus, qui Boleslaum assectati, gladios etiam
suos adversus divum Wenceslaum strinxerunt. Pars enim eorum mente alienata, in
rabiem^ue versa praecipites ex alto deorsum se dabant: quidam in eos gladios,
quos nudaverant, incubuere. Ad haec Templi paries, quem pr^pe occisus fuit
Divus Wenceslaus, velut caedis ipse quoque conscius, aut potius, ut testis
foret sceletis sempiterni, nulla ullius opera abstergi, elui^ue potuit a
cruore, quo respersus ex corpore Divi Wenceslai fuerat. Haec tandem tot
prodigia, tam^ue varia supplicia, Boleslaum exterruerunt, ut mitius deinceps
cum Christianis agere, saevitiam^ue suam adversus illos remittere inciperet.
Dubravins in Histor. Boem. Lib. 5. p. 40.
one Podivivus, a man of principal note in his time, to hang two entire
years, upon the gallows. Upon these and many like provocations of Gods just
vengeance, her grave was made before she felt her self sick; her burial like
to that of Corah, of Dathan, and Abiram. Whether this opening of the earth were
truly miraculous, or whethet it happened in the period of some natural
declination (the supporters or pillars of it being dug up, or undermined
before) the opening of it at that time, wherein this wicked woman was to pass
over that very place, in which she had caused the Priests bodies to lie
unburied, was the Lords doing, and no less wonderful to Christian eyes, than
if it had been (as perhaps it was) a mere miracle. The truth of this story,
wanted not the testimony of many ages. For passengers, from the day of her
death, until the day, wherein mine Author wrote this Story, (which was within
this age current) eschewed the place wherein she dyed, as execrable and
accursed by God.

CHAP. 37.
What manner of sins they be, which usually provoke Gods judgments according
to the rule of Counterpassion. And of the frequency of this kind of punishment
foresignified by Gods Prophets.
1 Justice, as was intimated before, does not formally consist in retaliation,
and yet is retaliation a formal part or branch of Justice. And of this branch
Nemesis amongst the Heathen, was the ordinary Arbitresse. She was, in their
Divinity, a Goddess of Justice, not Justice her self; nor did every See the
Treatise of the original of Atheism and Idolatry. chap. 17. parag. 10.
wrong (in their opinion) belong unto her cognizance, but such insolent wrongs
only as deserved vengeance or indignation. Nor does the righteous most
merciful Lord and only God, usually punish ordinary or private, but public
and outcrying sins, by the severe Law or Rule of Counterpassion. And it is
observable, that most Prophesies, which are powered out against any Land, City,
or People, with fuller indignation, are so intermingled with threats of
judgment by way of Counterpassion, that the quality and circumstances of the
crimes may seem to serve the Prophets as glasses for representing the nature
and quality of the judgments to come. And if the crimes were as well known to
m^n as the judgments are, we would think the one were molded in the other.
This exact proportion betwixt the pattern of sins which Babylon had set, and
the manner of Gods judgments upon her for them, has been observed chap. 26.
before, and I will not make the prophesies concerning her destruction, any part
of this observation. The prophesies concerning other Nations and Cities, will
afford plenty of instances to this purpose.

2 Samaria shall be as an heap of the field, and as plantings of a Vineyard:
and I will power down the stones thereof into the valley, and I will discover
the foundations thereof. And all the graven images thereof shall be beaten to
pieces, and all the hires thereof shall be burnt with the fire, and all the
idols thereof will I lay desolate: for she gathered it of the hire of an
harlot, and they shall return to the hire of an harlot. Micah 1. 6, 7. The
wound of Samaria, as the Prophet adds, verse. 9. was incurable, but so was not
the wound of Judah as yet, although it was come to Judah by infection, and had
touched at the very gates of Jerusalem. For so he says verse. 12. The
inhabitant of Maroth waited carefully for good, but evil came down from the
Lord unto the gate of Jerusalem. Thither it came, but it found no entrance in
for the present, as it did into the gates of other Cities of Judah. Lachish of
all the Cities of Judah was the first which took the impression of Isreal's
idolatry, and did in part derive it unto Sion. And as she was the first and
principal in sin, so she was the first in the plagues here threatened. The
Chariots of Ashur did first triumph in her streets, and her inhabitants felt
the dint of the Assyrian swords, when 2 King. 18. 15 and 17 Esaias 36. 2. Esaias
37. 33
Jerusalem escaped with the lash of Rabshakehs tongue. That which is afterward
related in the sacred story, concerning Ierusalems defense against Senacherib,
(who had surprised most of the strong Cities of Judah, and had made Lachish his
seat of residence) was significantly charactered by the Prophet Micah in the
place forecited, Evil came down from the Lord unto the gate of Jerusalem, but
it entered into the gates of Lachish, for so he adds, O thou inhabitant of
Lachish bind the charet to the swft beast: she is the beginning of the sin
to the daughter of Sion: for the transgressions of Israel were found in thee.
They sacrifice upon the tops of the mountains, and burn incense upon the
hills under Oaks, and Poplars, and Elmes, because the shadow thereof is good:
therefore your daughters shall commit whoredom, and your spouses shall commit
adultery. I will not punish your daughters when they commit whoredom, nor your
spouses when they commit adultery: for themselves are separated with whores,
and they sacrifice with harlots: therefore the people that does not understand,
shall fall. Hosea 3. 13, 14.

3 The Children of Ammon, of Moab, and Edom, did triumph more then other
Nations in the day of Iudahs heavy visitatio^ by Nebuchadnezzar, and for this
cause they have an heavier doom read by Gods Prophets, which lived at that
time, then other Nations had. Ezekiel 25. 2, etc. Son of man, set thy face
against the Ammonites, hear the word of the Lord God; Thus says the Lord God,
because thou said, Aha, against my Sanctuary when it was profaned, and
against the Land of Israel, when it was desolate, and against the house of
Judah when they went into captivity: Behold therefore, I will deliver thee to
the men of the East for a possession, and they shall set their palaces in thee,
and make their dwellings in thee: they shall eat thy fruit, and they shall
drink thy milk. And I will make Rabbah a stable for Camels, and the Ammonites
a couching place for flocks: and ye shall know that I am the Lord. For thus
says the Lord God, Because thou have clapped thine hands, and stamped with thy
feet, and rejoiced in heart, with all thy despite against the Land of Israel:
Behold therefore I will stretch out mine hand upon thee, and will deliver thee
for a spoil to the Heathen, and I will cut thee off from the people, and I
will cause thee to perish out of the countries: I will destroy thee, and thou
shall know that I am the Lord.

Thus says the Lord God, because that Moab and Seir do say, behold, the house
of Judah is like unto all the heathen: therefore behold, I will open the side
of Moab from the Cities, from his Cities which are on his frontiers, the glory
of the Country Beth jeshimoth, Baal-meon, and Keriathaim, unto the men of the
East, with the Ammonites, and will give them in possession, that the Ammonites
may not be remembered among the Nations. And I will execute judgments upon
Moab, and they shall know that I am the Lord.

Thus says Lord GOD, Because that Edom has dealt against the house of Judah
by taking vengeance, and has greatly offended, and revenged himself upon
them: Therefore says the Lord, I will also stretch out my hand upon Edom, and
will cut off man and beast from it, and I will make it desolate from Teman, and
they of Dedan shall fall by the sword. And I will pay my vengeance upon Edom by
the hand of my people Israel, and they shall do in Edom according to mine
anger, and according to my fury, and they shall know my vengeance, says the
Lord God.

4 The doom of Moab is more particularly set forth by Jeremy. chap. 48. 2.
There shall be no more praise of Moab in Heshbon, they have devised evil
against it: come and let us cut it off from being a nation; (so Moab had said
of Israel) also thou shall be cut down, O mad men, the sword shall pursue
thee. And again, verse 25, 26, 27. The Horn of Moab is cut off, and his arm
is broken, says the Lord. Make ye him drunken; for he magnified himself
against the Lord: Moab also shall wallow in his vomit, and he also shall be in
derision. For was not Israel a derision unto thee? was he found among thieves?
for since thou spakest of him, thou skippest for joy.

The like doom of Moab is foretold by Zephanie. chap. 1. 8, 9, 10. I have
heard the reproach of Moab, and the revilings of the Children of Ammon, whereby
they have reproached my people, and magnified themselves against their border.
Therefore, as I live says the Lord of Hosts the God of Israel, surely Moab
shall be as Sodom, and the children of Ammon as Gomorrah, even the breeding
of nettles and saltpies, and a perpetual desolation, the residue of my people
shall spoil them, and the remnant of my people shall possess them. This shall
they have for their pride, because they have reproched and magnified themselves
against the people of the Lord of hoasts. The Lord will be terrible unto them:
for he will famish all the gods of the earth, and men shall worship him, every
one from his place, even all the Isles of the heathen. So far wide were Moab
and Edom in their divinations, when they said, the house of Judah is like unto
all the Heathen. (Ezekiel. 25. 8.) that all the yles of the Gentiles were to
become, such as the house of Judah had been, that is, professed worshippers of
the true God, who had now appointed to make himself known, to all the world,
by his judgments upon these proud Heathens, which for their blasphemies have
now forfeited their national interest in this blessing here promised to the
Isles of the Gentiles, for they ceased to be Nations.

5 Whiles Gods plagues are thus fitly suited to the matter or manner of men's
sins: the longer the punishments themselves are delayed, the surer document
they may afford unto the observant, that there is a watchful eye of an
alseeing Providence, without whose presence no fact can be committed; an
attentive ear which never shuts, always ready, always able to take notice
of every word that can be spoken, and to register proud blasphemous boastings
in the indelible characters of an everlasting book. It is an observation worth
the noting, which a learned Commentator has made upon the place last cited out
of Zephaniah. [Verbum audivi suam Emphasim habet] These words [I have heard]
are emphaticall, They intimate as much unto us, as if in the name of the Lord,
the Prophet had said, Though Moab saw not me, yet I heard him (for I was
present with him) when he pronounced the coast of Israel waste. And what I
heard I cannot forget, nor will I forgive: according to his intentions against
Israel at the time appointed, will I do to him.

6 The cryers of Edom against Jerusalem when Jerusalem was drowned with her
childrens tears, (which yet could not quench the fire then kindled in her
palaces) were more bitter then the cry of Edom and Ammon against Judah had
been. [Rase it, raze it, even to the foundation thereof.] The scope at which
their wishes did aim, was that Jerusalem and the Temple, might so be
demolished that they should never be raised again. And according to this
scantling of their malicious wish, the Psalmist proportions that imprecation
against Edom, which in the issue proved a Prophecy: Remember O Lord the
Children of Edom, in the day of Jerusalem, who said, raze it, raze it, etc. The
more full expression or ratification of this implicit prophecy, we have in
another Prophet, who lived about eighty years after the Edomites had uttered
that accursed cry against Jerusalem: I have loved you says the Lord, yet ye
say, wherein have thou loved us? was not Esau Jacobs brother, says the Lord?
yet I loved Jacob, and I hated Esau, and laid his mountains and his heritage
waste for the Dragons of the wilderness. Whereas Edom says, we are
impoverished, we will return and build the desolate places: Thus says the
Lord of hoasts, they shall build but I will throw down, and they shall call
them, the border of wickedness, and the people against whom the Lord has
indignation for ever. Mal. 1. 2, etc. Some good expositors have from the
litterall sense of this place collected, that Edom, not long after the
Babilonish captivity, did utterly cease to be a Nation. And whether any of
Esaus posterity be left upon the face of the Earth, some have questioned, and
(to my remembrance) determined for the Negative. These (whatsoever besides)
were the Effects of Gods professed hate to Esau. But there is a seed or Nation
yet on earth, which shall at the time appointed be made partakers of his
blessing so often promised to Jerusalem, and enjoy the fruits of his professed
love to Jacob.

7 These Prophetical passages concerning Ammon, Moab, and Edom, afford many
useful speculations, did either these times afford us freedom, or this place
opportunity to dilate upon them. But leaving the rest unto the juditious
Readers own collection, out of the several Expositors of the places by me
quoted, I shall only request him to take this one admonition from me, [Not to
rejoice, much less to triumph in any others calamity, although he knew it to
be the special award of divine justice, or a condign punishment purposely
suited by the All seeing Providence to some peculiar sin.] Edom and Babylon
knew that Jerusalem and Judah were justly punished for their offenses against
the righteous Lord, and themselves to be the appointed executioners of his
justice: yet all this does no way excuse them, for their presumption in the
manner of execution. My people have been lost sheep, their Shepherds have
caused them to go astray, etc. All that found them have devoured them, and
their adversaries said, We offend not, because they have sinned against the
Lord, the habitation of Justice, even the Lord, the hope of their Fathers. Yet
all this acquits not Babylon from guilt of Gods judgments in spoiling Gods
people: for so it follows; Remove out of the midst of Babylon, and go forth
out of the Land of the Caldeans, and be as the hee-goats before the flocks.
Ier. 50. 6, 7, 8. And again, Verse 10, 11. Caldea shall be a spoil; all that
spoil her shall be satisfied, says the Lord, because ye were glad, because
ye rejoiced, o ye destroyers of mine heritage. Not only the practice, or
real intention of mischief, but the delight, or joy, which men take in the
calamity of others by whomsoever it be procured or intended, does make men
liable to the rule of Retaliation. For every degree of delight or joy in others
misery, includes a breach of that fundamental Law of equity, [Quod tibi fieri
non vis, alteri ne feceris] Whatsoever we would not have done unto our
selves, we should be unwilling to do, or to see done unto others.] And all
visitation by the rule of Counterpassion, as it concerns wrongs intended or
done by one man to another, is but a resarcination or making up of that breach,
which has been made in the fundamental Law of equity, that is, of doing as
we would be done unto.

8 But besides the wrongs which Potentates or private men practice upon, or
intend to others, there is a peculiar disposition, which makes men liable to
the judgments which they fear, or at least hasten the execution of judgments
otherwise deserved. And that is a tempting God by the curiosity of
superstitious fear, or by dissimulation. An instance to this purpose (and that
is all which at this time I mean to use) we have in 1 King. 14. 1, 2.
Jeroboam and his wife, who went disguised unto the Prophet Ahijah, (as if it
had been unto some cunning man) to know what should become of her young son
Abijah then visited with sickness. The doom or punishment does so well befit
the temptation, that the circumstances of the time and place, etc. wherein the
discovery of her dissembling was by the spirit revealed unto the Prophet, may
seem to have suggested unto him the time of the Childs death, with other
circumstances. The Prophets eyes were dim, that he could not discern her by
sight, but the Lord so supplied this defect, that he knew her by the sound of
her feet, before she came in at the door. The verse. 5. etc.
Lord said unto Ahijah, Behold the wife of Jeroboam comes to ask a thing of
thee for her son, for he is sick. Thus and thus shall thou say unto her,
for it shall be when she comes in, that she will feign herself to be
another woman. And it was so, when Ahijah heard the sound of her feet as she
came in at the door, that he said; Come in thou wife of Jeroboam, why fainest
thou thy self to be another? for I am sent unto thee with heavy tidings, etc.
Arise thou therefore, get thee to thine own house; and when thy feet enter
into the City, the child shall dye, etc. And Verse. 17.
Ieroboams wife arose, and departed and came to Tirzah: and when she came to
the threshold of the door, the child dyed. But of that peculiar branch of
Divine Providence, which takes men in the nets of their own superstitious
fear or imaginations, we shall have fitter occasion to speak in the Treatise
of Prodigies or Divine Fore-warnings.

CAP. 38.
The conclusion of this Treatise, with the relation of Gods remarkable
judgments manifested in Hungary.
1 DID GOD always fit his plagues to exorbitant or out-crying sins
immediately after their commission, men would suspect that he did distrust his
memory. Should he defer all as long as he does sundry, for many years, and
some special ones till the second, third, or fourth generation; this would
tempt us in the interim to think he took just notice of none: Because
sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore the heart
of the children of men is fully set in them to do evil. Ecclesiastes 8. 11.
But the same Preacher to counterpoyze the sway of this inbred temptation,
adds; Though a sinner do evil an hundred times, and God prolongeth his
days, yet I know that it shall be well with them that fear the Lord, and do
reverence before him. But it shall not be so well to the wicked; neither shall
he prolong his days, he shall be like a shadow, because he fears not
before God, Verse 12, 13. Besides this authority of the Preacher (concerning
the determinate extent or meaning of whose words. I will not here dispute) we
have a prophetical general Rule, which never fails in it self, nor to the
apprehension of the observant. How mightily soever iniquity abounds in any
City, Land, or Country, yet the just Lord is in the midst thereof: he will
not do iniquity. Every morning does he bring his judgment to light, he
fails not; but the unjust knows no shame. Zephaniah 3. verse. 5.

2 But these sacred as well as other Maxims, have their peculiar subjects, in
which they are more remarkably verified at out time then at another. The
extraordinary documents of Gods punitive justice, had been no doubt more rise
in Judah about Zephanies time, than in former ages. And amongst modern
Christian States, none have been so fertile as the Kingdom of Hungary, since
it stood upon the same terms with the Turk, that Judah in Zephanies days did
with the Chaldaean. I will give the Reader only a hint or taste from one or
two particulars, to set his meditations (if it shall please him) on working to
observe the like out of the Histories of that Country.

3 Amongst all the persons of better place, or same mentioned in those
Histories, could there be found but ten (as for ought I know there may be
more) whose Legends either in, respect of wrongs done to others by them, or of
wrongs done to them by others, might afford so many pregnant proofs of Divine
Retaliation, as does the Legend of Friar George or (as Thuanus calls him)
Martinusius: the Prophets Proposition [Every morning he brings forth
judgment to light] might by exact Logical Induction be proved to have been
universally true in that Kingdom for more than ten years together. This man
by his valorous wit had advanced himself from a Turne-spit, or Cole-carrier to
be a Cardinal: otherwise for his temporal dignity and authority, full Peer
to most Princes of Christendom; no way inferior to many Kings, save only in
want of Royal Title. In the height of his prosperity he had entertained one
Marc Anthony de Ferraro, Secretary to Castaldie, Lieutenant to Ferdinand the
Emperor in those parts, as a secret Intelligencer to betray his Master, but
was in the end miserably betrayed by him. For this Assassinate ( Hac vero art
conjurati in Georgij cubiculum irruperu^t: Marcus Antonius Ferrarius, Castal do
ab Epistolis homo prostitutae audacia jam abaliquo tempore tantam cum Georgio
familiaritatem contraxerat, dum se berum prod^re simulat, ut cubiculorijs ejus
propterea factus noti^r, quavis (...) ad ipsum admiteretur. Thuanus lib. 9.
(Ferrarius) having at all hours free access upon this hope, took hence
opportunity to conveigh the rest of the bloody actors into the Bedchamber of
this usually well guarded Prince, or Tyrant, in a dismal morning, before he
was dressed. Ferrary himself giving the first wound, whilst he was reaching
pen and Inoke to subscribe unto the counterfeit Letters or Patents, which he
then did tender him. This Friar or Cardinal (Marlinusius) had played the
Hypocrite (as was then presumed) with his Christian neighbors, being either in
affection to his own country, or for his private ends, more engaged to the
Turk. And Captain Lopez, with the Spanish Harquebuzes designed by Ferdinand
and Castaldie to assist Marquess Pallavicino for effecting this plot, were
permitted, without suspicion of hostility into the Castle, being apparelled in
Turkish weeds or long gowns, under which they covered their Harquebuzes, and
such other armor, as they thought expedient for this feat.

4 His death though bloody and cruel in the highest degree did not so deeply
affect unpartiall hearts, either with pity toward him, or with indignation at
his murderers, as the strange and unusual neglect of his And so this assembly
was discomfited, every man taking his nearest and safest way, leaving their
Masters dead body to be a prey and spoil unburied. It remained there many
days above ground naked and without light, there being not any who respected
to cover or bury him, being so stiff with cold, that he seemed as a man made
out of marble, having in his head, breast, and arms, many wounds, upon which
was yet remaining the blood all frozen* which to say truly was an object worthy
of compassion: and on the other side it was execrable and enormous to see, so
great a personage so vildly lest without burial by those, who (God knows for
what cause) had practiced his death. Martin Fu^ee in his History of Hungary.
Book 4.
mangled Corpse, did their hearts, which either through partiality or
credulity, have professed a delectation of his tyrannical life, upon higher
terms than he deserved. His enemies it seems, were so careful to effect
their intended plot, and his friends so affrighted with his sudden disaster,
that his dead body remained many days together above ground, unburied, or
uncovered, with the blood frozen upon it; so stiff with cold that it might
rather seem to have been a blurred or besmeared statue of stone, or marble,
than a dead man. A fit relic for a sacrilegious Palace; such was the Castle
wherein he was murdered, for whose erection he had demolished an ancient
Church and Monastery of religious persons. And whether it were, that Si natura
negat, facit indignatio versum.
indignation does sometimes make men as well pieces of Prophets, as of Poets;
or whether it were spoken by way of bitter imprecation; the Behold now the end
of the proudest and insolentest man in the world, and the greatest and closest
Tyrant that ever lived. God permitting that he should in that very place end
his days, which he had caused to be built upon the foundations of an ancient
Church and Monastery of religious persons, which for that occasion he caused to
be defaced and pulled down; and for the ruin whereof his death was foretold
unto him by the Abbot of that place. See the History of Hungary in the place
before cited. See Thuanus Lib. 9.
Abbot upon the sacrilegious oppression, did foresignifie, that this Castle,
whose foundations were laid with others, should at length be seasoned with the
blood of him that built it.

Who builds so, me thinks, so builds he,
As if his house, should his Sepulcher be.
5 Though Gods judgments upon this man were (as all his are) most just; yet
were they unjustly done by these Assassinates. They were Gods instruments, but
the devils agents, in acting this plot: and by doing to this Cardinal as he
had done to others, they themselves become liable, in this life, to the rigor
of the indispensable Law, As they have done to him, so must it be done to them.
Gods will is fulfilled upon them, as the devils will was fulfilled by them.
He was a murderer from the beginning, and they are his sons. And, though
they afterward disperse themselves throughout diverse Kingdoms or Nations, yet
the cry of this Cardinals blood does still pursue them. Which way soever they
wander; the Almighties net is spread out for them, and being still hunted after
by Gods judgments, all of them are driven at length into it. This we are sure
of (says the forementioned Author of the Hungarian history) that all those
which were Actors of his death, in time fell into great misfortunes. The
Marquess Sforce, within a while after was overthrown and taken Prisoner by
the Turks, who inflicted great torments upon him. Captain Monin, was beheaded
at Saint Germans in Piemont. Marc Anthony Ferraro in anno 1557. ( which was
about six years after) was also beheaded in Alexandria (his native Country) by
the Cardinal of Trent his command. Another was quartered by the French men in
Provence. Cheualier Campegio in anno 1562. was in the presence of the Emperor
Ferdinand mortally wounded with a Bore in Bohemia. Certe percusseres Georgij
post ejus necem ad unum omnes p^nas dedisse plerique scripserunt: ac Sfortiam
quidem diuturna and morte pejore apud Turcos captivitate. Moninum vero
insubalpi^a regione ad Germani fanum cervice abscissa; Ferrarium denique qui
Alexandriae, quae ipsa patria erat, Cardinalis Tridentini ^^ssu sexennio post
securi percussus est. Postremo equitem Compegium, qui hujus, saeculi anno 62
inter venandum in Ferdinandi ipsius conspectu apri fulminio dente in Bohemia
discerptus est, honestiori, nec tamen minus infortunata morte. Thuanus lib. 9.
Thuanus relates the self same accidents, from the testimonies of more Writers
than this, save only that he omits the mention of him that was quartered in
Provence.

6 What one of many hundred mornings after this fact was there, wherein
Ferdinand did not lose soting either in Hungary or in Transylvania; wherein the
Turk did not sensibly incroach upon Christendom, and gain advantage against
Christians? The just comparison between the misery of Judah in Zedechiaes
days, and of Hungary under Lewis the second, with the parallel manner of
these two noble Kings and their adherents miscariage, must be referred for
breuities sake, to other Treatises. Only to shut up this exemplification of
the Prophets assertion verified in peculiar sort in Hungary: what example of
Divine Justice, either more pregnant or more durable was ever manifested in
Judea, than was to be seen every morning for more then twenty years together
in the fields of Moacz, where the horse and his royal rider (King Lewis) found
a miserable grave before they were quite dead; but where the bones of such as
were slain in that unfortunate battle, lay unburyed in such abundance as did
exhibit a woeful spectacle to every Christian passengers eye, from the year
1526. until the time of Quidex eo sperandum sit, satis eum docent superiorum
temporum exempla, acceptae ad Nicopoli^, and ad Varnam clades, absentesque
adhuc ^^^ibus caeseru^ Christianorum ad (...) Busbeq. epist. 4.
Busbequius his embassage to Constantinople (how long after I know not) which
was upon the marriage between King Philip and Queen Mary, about the year
1555. The Christian Hungars of those times after the loss of their late
mentioned King, had as just cause to insert that lamentation into their
Liturgy, as Jeremy had to take it up: The anointed of the Lord was taken in
their nets, of whom we said, under his shadow we shall be preserved alive
among the Heathen. Lamentations 4. 20. As full an interest in that complaint of
the Psalmist, as the ancient Jews had during the time of Nebuchadnezzar or
Antiochus his rage: The dead bodies of thy servants, have they given to be
meat unto the fowls of the heaven, the flesh of thy Saints unto the beasts of
the earth, their blood have they shed like water, and there was none to bury
them. Ps. 79. 2, 3. The pitiful women of Judea did eat their Children, when
Titus besieged Jerusalem. The women of Hungary (no less merciful (as may be
presumed) than other Christian women are, buried their Children alive, lest
their timorous outcryes might bewray the place of their abode, or latitation,
when Soliman and his furious helhounds did so greedily hunt after their lives.
The people of Hungary would not take example from the miseries which had
befallen Judea, nor break off those sins which brought this misery upon
them: GOD grant the Prophets and Seers of this kingdom, eyes to discern, and
this whole people, one and other, patient hearts to hear those sins, whether
of practice, or opinion discovered, which threaten the like judgments unto
this Land, as have befallen the Kingdom of Hungary, one of the most
flourishing Kingdoms in the Christian world, within a few years before its
ruin.

FINIS.

