A TREATISE CONTAINING THE ORIGINAL of Unbelief, Misbeliefe, or
Misperswasions concerning the Verity, Unity, and Attributes of the Deity:
with Directions for rectifying our belief or knowledge in the forementioned
points.

By THOMAS IACKSON Dr. in Divinity, Vicar of Saint Nicholas Church in the
famous Town of New Castle upon Tine, and late Fellow of Corpus Christi
College in OXFORD.

JOHN. 17.3. This is life eternal to know thee the only true God and Jesus
Christ whom thou have sent.

LONDON Printed by I. D. for John Clarke, and are to be sold at his Shop under
St Peter's Church in Cornehill. 1625.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir HENRY DANVERS, Knight, Baron of Dantesey, his
Honorable and singular good Lord.
RIGHT HONORABLE;
AS in drawing these and former lines I have had no other aspect or aim, save
only to discover the bypath which lead unto error, and to press forwards by
a clear way toward the truth: so in publishing of them I have taught them to
look backwards not forwards, as being more desirous to testify my thankful
respect, either to the known Honorable Patrons of good Acts, or furtherers of
my private studies, than to feed ambitious fancies with the humors of the
time, by obtruding my self upon the dispensers of great dignities or
preferments. My resolution being thus set, I save a labor in dedicating these
papers to your Lordship, whose Honorable favors and munificence toward that
famous University (whereof I have long continued an unworthy member, but to
which I shall ever continue the love and obedience of a faithful Son) do
challenge a better testimony of my observance than I can now express, or hope
hereafter to present your Lordship withal. But God be thanked, our famous
Mother has many sons a great deal more able than my self to undergo this
service. Leaving it therefore unto them, I shall give my self abundant
satisfaction and contentment for my labors past, and take encouragement to
continue the like, if it shall please your Lordship to accept these present, as
an undoubted pledge of that thankful respect and observance which I owe unto
your Lordship for your favors and bounty toward my self in particular, the
memory of which has been more grateful unto me, in that I was made to feel
them, before I was so much as known by sight unto your Honor. Thus with my
best prayers for continuance of your Lordships increase of honor and true
happiness, I humbly take my leave, and rest

From Penly in Hartfordshire March. 2. 1624. Your Lordships in all duty and
observance THOMAS IACKSON.

The Contents of the several Chapters handled in this Treatise.
SECTION I. Of the ingraffed Notion of a Deity, and the originalls of Atheism.
Chapter. 1. To believe in God is originally no more than to believe there is a
God, who is in all things to be believed. Of this belief, trust or confidence
in God is the necessary consequent in Collapsed men; Despair the necessary
consequent of the same or like belief in Collapsed Angels. Folio. 2 Chapter.
2. Disputation is not the readiest way to cure or reclaim an Atheist. Folio. 8
Chapter. 3. The Notion of the Deity or divine power is most natural unto all
men. How this Notion being most natural unto all, is eclipsed and defaced in
many. Folio. 10 Chapter. 4. Atheism, Idolatry, Heresy, Hypocrisy, etc. have
one common root. What estate or condition of life is freest from, or most
obnoxious unto Atheism, or temptations thereto tending. Of Atheism in passion
only, not habituated. Folio. 17 Chapter. 5. Of habituated or settled Atheism.
Why this disease was not so Epidemicall in ancient as in latter times. Of the
disposition or temper from which irreligion or incogitancy of divine powers
(which is the first and lowest branch of Atheism) usually springs. Folio. 31
Chapter. 6. Of Disputatiue Atheism; denial of the Godhead, or divine
providence; with the several curiosities which occasion it. Folio. 42 Chapter.
7. Of malignant Atheism. Of the original of enmity unto Godliness. That the
excess of this sin does bear witness to the truth which it oppugnes.
Folio. 56 Chapter. 8. Means for preventing infection of Atheism or
irreligion. In what temper or constitution of mind, the ingraffed notion of
God and goodness does best prosper. That affliction gives understanding in
matters sacred, with the reason why it does so. Folio. 67 Chapter. 9. In what
respects supernatural grace or faith infused is necessary to the right belief
of these truths, which may in part, be certainly known by diligent search of
natural reason. Folio. 80
SECTION II. Containing the original manner of right apprehensions, and
errors in matters natural or moral.
Chapter. 10. The several opinions of Philosophers concerning the manner how
Intellection is wrought or produced: what is to be thought of intelligible
forms. Folio. 86 Chapter. 11. How far Platoes opinion may be admitted, that
all knowledge is but a kind of reminiscence, or calling that to mind which
was in some sort known before. Folio. 89 Chapter. 12. After what manner the
Ideall or ingraffed Notions are in the soul. Folio. 92 Chapter. 13. Of the
office or service which the Fantasy performs unto the active understanding
or contemplative faculty, for the right apprehension or discernement of truths
specially insensible. Folio. 98 Chapter. 14. What qualifications are required
in the Fantasy or passive understanding for performing its duty to the
active understanding, specially for the right representation of matters moral
or spiritual. Folio. 107 Chapter. 15. In what sense it is commonly said that
Sense is of particulars and the understanding of vniversalls. Of the manner how
sense misinformes the understanding, with some general advertisements how to
prevent its misinformations. Folio. 113
SECTION III. Of the Original of Heathenish Idolatry, and multiplicitie of
Gods.
Chapter. 16. The general fallacy by which Satan seduced the world to
acknowledge false Gods. Folio. 125 Chapter. 17. The more special Fallacies by
which Satan seduced the Heathen to multiply their gods in excessive manner.
Folio. 135 Chapter. 18. The original of Superstition, properly so called, and
the preservatiues prescribed by God himself against this branch of Idolatry.
Folio. 151 Chapter. 19. Of diverse errors in Philosophy, which in practice
proved seminaries of idolatry and sorcerie. Folio. 167 Chapter. 20. Of the
special nutriment which the Poetry of ancient times did afford to the
forementioned seeds of Idolatry, with some other particular allurements to
delightful superstition. That the same nutriment which feeds superstition,
being rightly prepared, may nourish devotion. Folio. 185 Chapter. 21. Of
Idolatry occasioned from inordinate affection toward Friends deceased, or
ceremonious solemnities at Funerals. Folio. 203
SECTION IIII. Of the Identitie or aequivalencie of Superstition in
Rome-Heathen and Rome-Christian.
Chapter. 22. That Rome-Christian in latter years sought rather to allay than
to abrogate the Idolatry of Rome-heathen: that this allay was the most
commodious policy, which Satan could devise for venting his detected poisons,
utterly condemned by primitive professors of Christianity. Folio. 217 Chapter.
23. Of the general infirmities of flesh and blood, which did dispose diverse
ancient professors of Christianity to take the infection of Superstition. Of
the particular humors which did sharpen the appetite of the modern Romish
Church to hunger and thirst after the poisonous dregs of Rome-Heathens
Idolatry. Folio. 220 Chapter. 24. In what sense the Romanists deny or grant
that Saints are to be invocated. Whether the Saints by their doctrine be
mediate or immediate Intercessors between God and man. That they neither can
conceal, or will they express the full meaning of their practice. Folio. 229
Chapter. 25. What Worship is. How it is divided into civil and religious. In
what sense it is to be granted or denied, that Religious Worship is due to
Saints. That the Romish Church does in her practice exhibit another sort of
Religious Worship unto Saints, than her Advocates pretend in their
Disputations. Folio. 241 Chapter. 26. That the Worship which Satan demanded of
our Savior, was the very same wherewith the Romish Church worshippeth Saints,
that is, Dulia, not Latria according to their distinction. That our Saviors
answer does absolutely prohibit the offering of this worship not only to
Satan, but to any person whatsoever, besides God. The truth of this assertion
proved by John's authority and S. Peter's. Folio. 249 Chapter. 27. That the
respect which we owe to Saints deceased, (supposing they were really present
with us) does differ only in degree, not in nature or quality from the
respect which we owe unto true living Saints. That the same expressio^ of our
respect or observance toward Saints or Angels locally present, cannot without
superstition or Idolatry be made unto them in their absence. Folio. 263
Chapter. 28. The Romish Church in her public Liturgies expressly gives those
glorious titles unto Saints, unto which no other real worship besides the
worship of Latria is answerable. Folio. 271 Chapter. 29. Prooving by manifest
instances and confessed matters of fact, that the Romish Church does really
exhibit diverse parts of that honor or worship unto Saints, which by her
confession is only due unto God. That her nice distinction of Dulia and
Latria, or the like, argue no difference at all in the reallity or substance of
the Worship, but (at the most) diverse respects of one and the same Worship.
Folio. 282 Chapter. 30. Solemn vows are by confession of the Romish Church
parts of that Worship, which her Advocates call Latria. The Romish Church does
worship Saints with solemn vows, not by accident only, but by direct
intendment. Folio. 290 Chapter. 31. That the apprehension of different
excellencies in God and the Saints deceased, cannot prevent the contagio^ which
men's souls are naturally apt to take, by making solemn prayers and vows
jointly to God and to the Saints. Folio. 296 Chapter. 32. A parallel between
the affectionate zeal which the Jews did bear unto Moses and his writings,
and the like zeal which the Romanist bears unto Saints deceased, and their
Legends. That the Romanists zeal is obnoxious to greater hazard of
miscarriage, and the miscarriage of his affection more dangerous by his daily
practice of worshipping Images. Folio. 300 Chapter. 33. By what means the
public worship of Images was finally ratified in the Romish Church. Of the
unadvised instructions which Gregory the Great gave unto Austine the Monk for
winning the Pagan-English to the profession of Christianity. Folio. 310
Chapter. 34. Of the disagreements betwixt the Jesuits themselves in what
manner Images may be worshipped. Folio. 315 Chapter. 35. The principal
arguments which the Romanists use to prove the worshipping of Images to be
lawful. What difference there is between kissing of the book in solemn
oaths, and the Romanists salutations of Images. That Image Worship cannot be
warranted by Jacobs anointing the stone, or other ceremonies by him used.
Folio. 323 Chapter. 36. The Arguments drawn from Jacobs fact, and the like
examples answered by Vasques himself in another case, and by the Analogy of
civil discretion. Folio. 338 Chapter. 37. Whether granting that it were
lawful to worship such Saints, as we undoubtedly believe to be true Saints,
we might lawfully worship such as we suspect to be no Saints. Folio. 346
Chapter. 38. Rome-Christian as vain and foolish in making imaginary Saints, as
Rome-Heathen in making false Gods. Folio. 352 Chapter. 39. That the medicine
pretended by Rome-Christian for curing the former disease, did rather increase
than assuage it. Folio. 362 Chapter. 40. That the medicine on which the present
Romish Church does now rely is worse than the disease it self. That they make
the Pope a greater God than the Heathen did any other God besides Jupiter.
Folio. 367
SECTION V. Of the transformation of the Deity or divine power in his nature,
attributes, word, or will revealed.
Chapter. 41. Transformation of the divine nature does issue from the same
original or general fallacy, from which Idolatry and multiplicitie of Gods
was observed to issue, Chapter 17. Folio. 373 Chapter. 42. Aparallel between
the Heathen Poets and modern Roman Legendaries; between Heathen Philosophers
and Roman Schoolmen in their transformations, or misperswasions of the
divine nature, specially of his goodness. Folio. 379 Chapter. 43. Of
particular transformations or misperswasions of divine goodness alike common
to the corrupt professors of true Religion, as to the zealous professors of
corrupt Religion. Folio. 388 Chapter 44. Of misperswasions concerning Justice,
and Mercy divine. Folio. 398 Chapter. 45. Of transforming the word of God into
the similitude of our private or corrupt senses. Folio. 404 Chapter. 46.
Showing by instances of sacred Writ, that the same sense of Gods word which
sometimes most displeased, may shortly after most affect or please the self
same parties: with the manner how this alteration is wrought. Folio. 414
Chapter. 47. Of dreaming fancies concerning the sense of Scripture in the
Romanist, in the Jew, in the Separatist or Enthusiast. Folio. 418 Chapter. 48.
Of the more particular and immediate causes of all the forementioned errors or
misperswasions. Folio. 429
SECTION VI. Of qualifications requisite for conceiving aright of the divine
Nature and his Attributes.
Chapter. 49. The general qualification or first ground for preventing
misconceits of the divine Nature or Attributes, is purification of heart.
Folio. 437 Chapter. 50. What purification of heart may be expected and sought
after, before the liue-image of God be renewed in us. Of the directions given
by Heathen Philosophers for attaining to this purification, or to perfect
knowledge by it. Wherein their directions are defective. Folio. 441 Chapter. 51.
The best means to rectify and perfect our knowledge of God is to love him
sincerely. Of the mutual aid or furtherance, which the love of God and the
knowledge of God reciprocally and in a manner circularly afford each to other
in their setting and growth. Folio. 451
A TREATISE CONTAINING the Original of unbelief, misbeliefe, or
misperswasions, concerning the verity, unity, and attributes of the Deity:
with Directions for rectifying our belief or knowledge in the forementioned
points.
SECTION I.
Of the ingraffed Notion of a Deity, and the originalls of Atheism.

Atheism and irreligion are diseases so much more dangerous than infidelity
or Idolatry, as infidelity is than heresy. Every heretic is in part an
Infidel, but every infidel is not in whole or part an heretic. Every
Atheist is an infidel so is not every infidel an Atheist. The name of
Heretic is common to all, and proper only to such as either deny or
mis-beleeue any one Article in the Apostles Creed. Infidels all are to be
accounted, which either deny or believe not the Articles concerning Christ.
Such are the Jews, Turks, Mahumetans in general etc. whom no man calls
Atheists. An Atheist he is, Qui titubat in Limine, which either denies or
believes not the very first Article in the Creed, God or the divine providence.
Now seeing belief, as it is terminated to the first words of the Creed, is as
the Diame^rall line or Axis which severs Atheism or irreligion from Religion,
whether true or false, and does as it were constitute two distinct Hemispheres
of men; it will be necessary in the first place to examine the original
meaning of the first words in the Creed; I believe in God.

CHAPTER I.
To believe in God is originally no more than to believe there is a God, who is
in all things to be believed. Of this belief, trust or confidence in God is
the necessary consequent in Collapsed men; Despair the necessary consequent of
the same or like belief in Collapsed Angels.

1. TO believe in God has gone current so long, for as much as to put trust or
confidence in Him, that now to call it in, or make it go for less, will
perhaps be thought an usurpation of authority, more then critical, and much
greater then befits us. Notwithstanding if on Gods behalf we may plead what
Lawyers do in Cases of the Crown, Nullum tempus occurrit regi, that the
Ancient of days (unto whose soveraigntie all truth is from eternity
essentially annexed) may not be prejudiced by antiquity of Custom, or
prescription, especially whose original is erroneous: the case is clear, That
to believe in God, is in their intention which first composed this Creed, no
more then to believe there is a God, or to give credence to his Word. For
justifying this assertion, I must appeal from the English Dialect, in which
the manner of speech is proper and natural, were it consonant to the meaning
of the original, as also from the Latin, in which the phrase being foreign
and uncouth, must be valued by the Greek, whose stamp and Character it
evidently bears. Now the Greek (...), as also the Hebrew phrase, whereunto by
sacred Writers it was framed, is no more then has been said, To believe there
is a God; otherwise we must believe not only in God the Father, in Christ the
Son, and in the holy Ghost, but in the Catholic Church, in the Communion of
Saints, in the forgiveness of sins, and in the resurrection of the body,
and in life everlasting, seeing the Greek particle (usually expressed by the
Latin In) is annexed after the same manner to all these objects of our
belief, as is apparent in the ancient Greek Creeds. And he that diligently
reads the translation of the Septuagint, shall find the Greek phrase which is
verbatim rendered by the Latin, in Deum credere, to believe in God,
promiscuously used for the other credere Deo, to believe God.

2. Or if besides the evident records of the ancient Copies, personal
witnesses be required; amongst the ancient I know few, amongst modern writers
none, more competent then those which are expressly for us, as Beza, Comment: in
Gen 15. v. 6. Vide 2 Reg. 17.14.
Mercer, Observationum. lib. 3. cap. 1. The position prefixed by way of title
to his Chapter is Recte dici ex Hebraismo, [credo in Mosem, and in
resurrectionem mortuorum.]
Drusius, unto whom we may add Ribera in cap. 3. Ionae. numb. 29. Vide Coppen
in Psalm. 106. verse. 12.
Ribera and Lorinus. Now as to use the benefit of a truth known and testified
is always lawful, so in this case it is to us most expedient, almost
necessary. For either I did not rightly apprehend whiles I read it, or at
least now remember not, how the Schooleman remooues the stumbling block which
he had placed in the very entry to this Creed, [If to believe in God be as much
as to put trust or confidence in Him; by exacting a profession of this Creed at
all men's mouths, we shall enforce a great many to profess a lie.] For of such
as not only out of ordinary charity, but upon particular probabilities, we
may safely acquit from actual Atheism or contradicting Infidelity, a great
number do not put their trust or confidence in God; this being the mark
whereat the belief of novices must aim, not the first step they are to make
in this progress. And for my self, (until I be better instructed) if a poor
dejected soul should come unto me with a complaint of his distrust or
diffidence, I would not instantly urge him to make proclamation of his trust in
God against his conscience; for this were to quench smoking flax, by violent
blowing those weak and smoothered sparkles, which should be charily revived by
mild and gentle breathing. The contrary advice on my part, or practice on
his, should not want an approved pattern; To confess his present unbelief,
whiles he prays for future increase of such weak belief, as he may safely
make profession of. And, as the fire once thoroughly kindled, bursts out of its
own accord into a lasting flame: so belief, once inwardly planted, will
naturally bring forth steadfast confidence, without farther plantation or
superaddition of any new belief or persuasion. Many beginning their faith the
other way, may for a long time be stiffly persuaded, that they believe in God,
when in deed they do not truly believe him, his Word, or his mercies. These
no man firmly can believe, but he shall assuredly believe in him, yea put his
whole trust and confidence in his goodness. Howbeit, as much as now I write,
would hardly be permitted me, in most men's hearing, to speak, without this or
the like interpellation, [Shall we then believe in Saints or good Angels,
because we assuredly believe there be such natures? Or shall we say the wicked
Angels believe in God, because they believe his being more firmly then we can
do, and know his word as clearly?]

3. That inferior subjects salute not every officer in the Court after the same
manner they do the Prince, is not because they see not the one as perfectly as
the other: rather the more fully they discern them by one and the same
inerring sight, the better they conceive the different respect which is due to
their several presences. Angels we believe are ministering spirits, appointed
to execute Gods will, whose majesty they adore, as fervently as we do;
putting greater confidence in his mercy then we can do; even because their
knowledge of it is more clear, their experience of it more undoubted. But the
better we believe this their subordinatio^ unto God, the less shall we be
inclined to believe in them, the more to put our confidence in God, in whom
even the Angels trust. Again, admitting trust or affiance in God to receive
continual increase, according to the growth of our belief of his word or
being; That Devils albeit they believe or know both more clearly then the
best of us, should notwithstanding perpetually remain without any trust or
affiance in Him or his mercies; no man upon just examination of the difference
between their collapsed estate and ours, can deem strange or doubtful, much
less a doubt, as some in their writings suppose, insoluble, unless we make
trust or affiance in God, essentially to difference our belief of his being,
from theirs. If the Kings Majesty should proclaim a general pardon to a
number of known rebels, and vow execution of judgment without mercy upon
some principal offenders, which had maliciously and cunningly seduced their
simplicity: I suppose his will and pleasure equally manifested to both, and so
believed, would as much dishearten the one, as encourage the other to rely
upon his clemency. Such altogether notwithstanding, is the case of men and
wicked Angels: the one believes Christ took the woman's seed, and therefore
cannot, without such wilful mistrust of the promise of life as was in his
first parents unto Gods threats of death; despair of redemption by the
eternal sacrifice: The other as firmly believe, or rather evidently know, that
Christ in no wise took the Angelical nature, and without this ground, the
better they believe his incarnation, the less are their hopes of their own
redemption.

4. Briefly the bringing of souls to God being the end, as of our preaching,
so of our writing; the first point, as I conceive, we are to teach such as
desire to come unto him, is, to believe that he is: The second, that he is a
rewarder of all them that diligently seek Him. Not all the eloquence of Men or
Angels, not the most patheticall exhortations the one can frame, or the most
forcible impulsions the other can use; are half so powerful to draw our
hearts after our God, as the distinct orthodoxall explication of his Essence
and Attributes, of his power, his wisdom, and goodness, either general in
respect of all the works of his hands, or peculiar to Mankind, visibly set
forth unto us in the life, the actions, and passions of our Savior. What
belief so ever is not conceived from sober and frequent meditations of these
truths, what confidence soever is not brought forth by belief so conceived,
will by Satan one time or other easily be impeached of bastardie. Even when
this faith by which we now walk shall be converted into perfect sight,
everlasting confidence shall not outstart, but rather follow it. Much less
should we in this vale of darkness begin our edification in faith, at the
open profession of assured or consummate confidence, or seek to frame it by
imitation of such outward practices, as strength of faith, and full assurance
of Gods favors, have emboldened hearts, thoroughly enflamed with sincere zeal
of truth, to undertake. The truth then supposed as chief supporter to the
discourse following, is, That without some precedent defect of our
apprehensions, there can be no want of true confidence: and fail we may, as
most do, in apprehensions either of the verity, unity or of the Nature and
Attributes of the Godhead. The internal original or manner of our defects or
errors in these three points we are to set down in this Book; the right
explicaon of the Article proposd in the next.

CHAP. II.
Disputation is not the readiest way to cure or reclaim an Atheist.

TO dispute with such as deny manifest and received Principles, were to violate
a fundamental law of the Schools; which in matters of faith and sacred
morality, is to be religiously kept, as in other respects, so chiefly in this:
That general Maxims, whence particular truths, and conclusions of best use
must be derived, can hardly be prooved by arguments more clear and evident
then themselves. Now to interpose proofs of less truth or perspicuitie then
is the matter to be prooved, is but to eclipse the evidence of it, (which, of
it self, would in due season shine to calm and purified meditations) or to
provoke such as delight in trying masteries of strength or skill in arguing, to
assault truths otherwise safe enough from all attempts, did they not see them
so weakly guarded upon preparation. Thus the discovery of timorous looks, or
mean provision, often incourageth base and cowardly thieves to encounter
passengers, whose number or presence, they durst not behold, if they did not
betray themselves. For this reason, amongst others, I will not in the first
place use the benefit of diverse Schoolemens labors, to prove, by strength of
speculatiue reason, there is a God; although they bring abundance of reasons,
all irrefragable to an ingenuous well disposed contemplator: but, unto such,
this principle is of all others most clear and evident in it self, as being
most deeply implanted in the reasonable nature; not acquired by use of sense or
observation. The best method, in my opinion, to prevent Atheism, or cure an
Atheist, would be to hold the Mean betwixt the contemplative Philosopher, and
the practical Physician. I have heard of some so far over-growne with
melancholy, that they would eat no meat; conceiting, either they had no
mouths, or that their teeth were as soft as butter. For a Physician, to have
attempted remoovall of such fancies, by force of reason, or importunate
suggestion of contrary persuasions, had been cum ratione insamre, to have
prooved himself as mad, as his patients were melancholy. The readiest way (as
not long ago has been experienced) to relieve parties thus affected, is, for
a time rather to assent unto, then contradict them; that so, by promising a
remedy to the supposed malady, an entrance may be made to purge the humor
which breeds the false imagination. And he that would cure an ordinary Atheist,
should, as not sooth him in his impiety, so not directly or fiercely encounter
him with syllogisticall proofs, or discourses metaphysicall; for so (
aegrescit medendo) he will grow sicker by seeing the medicine: but labor
rather, secretly to undermine the internal disposition whence such unhallowed
imaginations spring. Atheism in grain is but a spiritual madness, arising
from the abundance of such distemper in the soul, as in proportion answers to
melancholy in the body. Would men look into their own hearts in time, before
they be over-shadowed with such griesly qualities; they might behold the image
of God engraven in them, and, as it were by an ocular demonstration, be better
informed in this point, then by the disputes of Philosophers.

CHAP. III.
The Notion of the Deity or divine power is most natural unto all men. How
this Notion being most natural unto all, is eclipsed and defaced in many.

1. THat the internal notion of powers divine which guide this visible work
of nature, is most natural to mankind, needs no further proof then its own
extent and universality. Vt porro firmissimum hoc afferri videtur, cur deos
esse credamus, quod nulla gens tam fera, nemo omnium tam sit immanis, cuius
mentem non imbuerit deorum opinio. Multi de diis praua sentiunt (id enim
vitioso more effici solet) omnes tamen esse vim, and naturam diuinam
arbitrantur. Nec vero id col^^cutio hominum, aut consensus efficit: non
institutis opinio est confirmata, non legibus. Omni autem in re consensio
omnium gentium lex natura putanda est. Tuscul: Quaest. Lib. 1^.
This sure ground we have (says Tully) to believe there be Gods, in that
there is no Nation so brutish or inhumaine, but is seasoned with some opinion
of the Gods. Many conceive amiss of them (for so much, bad custom in all like
cases, will effect) yet all suppose a virtue or power divine; not drawn hereto
by voices of others or debatements: This is an opinion established not by
civil laws or institutions. Now the free or vnsollicited consent of all
Nations concerning any matter, is to be esteemed as the Law of Nature.

2. This observation of times more ancient is fully acquitted from the
exception of modern Atheists by the plentiful experiments of the age late
past; wherein diverse Countries, peopled with inhabitants of different manners
and education, have been discovered, the very best being more rude and
barbarous then any Nation known but by hearsay to the Romans. And yet, even
in this refuse of Barbarians, the very worst, (such as for their rudeness and
vncivilitie could hardly be discerned from brute beasts) approve themselves to
be of better lineage ( Act. 17.29
(...)) in that they acknowledge Gods or superior powers, whom they honor with
sacrifices and other rites, in testimony of their gratitude for benefits
received from them. As if the signification of Man's obligements to an invisible
power for his life, his health, his food, and other necessaries; or, at least
for privileges from disasters, or mischances, Affluebat interea^ quotidie ex
omnibus locis noua eius gentis, et copiosa multitudo, vt inufitatas nostrorum
hominum barbam gestantium formas, cultumque viserent: fructus, pisces, aurum,
panem, and alia alimenta, vndique afferentes: ac simiaerum more vestigia
ritusque Christianorum imitantes: quoties hi genua flexerant, flectebant and
illi: Christiani reuerenter oculos in Coelum sustulerant, Indi pariter and ipsi
tollebant. Denique quicquid ab Hispanis ad recitandum Aue Maria mane, and
vesperi conuenientibus fieri soleret, itidem ab istis fiebat. Benzonus in
Descrip. America. lib. 4. cap. 8. page 35.
were as natural to him, as fawnings, or like dumb signs of love unto their
fosterers or cherishers, are to dogs, or other domesticke and tame creatures.
The civil wisdom which appears in Lycurgus Laws, Numaes Institutions, with
other like amongst the more civil sort of ancient Heathens, may probably
argue ability in them of framing many particular rites of Religion, as
politic Sophismes to retain the simple in awe and blind devotion to their
Hests. Albeit, the invention of such false worships, without imitation of some
true pattern formerly known, would have been very hard, if not impossible,
even unto these wise and prudent Lawgivers. Nor could their artificial
inventions have wrought so succesfully upon their minds that were seduced by
them; unless they had been naturally inclined unto the ingrafted truth of the
generals; under pretense of whose sovereign right these particulars were
commended. But who would father the first Notion of a Deity and Religion, upon
policy, rather than nature, when it appears not universal only, but
perpetual to the several generations of sundry people in whom no print of any
policy, save merely natural, is now extant?

3. Some scruple notwithstanding may here be ministered to young Students, from
these or the like vagrant Axioms, whose seat or proper subject is not so well
known as they are frequent. [1. That the decrees or injunctions of Nature
cannot be prejudiced by Custom or education. 2. That such general principles
as by her light are clear, can hardly be denied by any of her children] When
as the experience, of later times especially, presents unto us a great many,
(unto whom Nature in distribution of her other gifts has showed her self no
stepmother, but rather indulgent, as to her darlings,) all mightily oppugning
this truth, which we that are (as they deem) of duller capacity in matters
secular, devoutly obey as her undoubted Law. But here we may well doubt whether
bad education, or evil customs, have not better enabled these men to strive
against such practices as this Dictate of Nature prescribes, than utterly to
disclaim all sense of her suggestions, or shake off all secret notions of her
summons. How ever that be; (for we know our own hearts not theirs, nor can we
believe them, that will not believe there is a God, albeit they would interpose
an oath for our assurance one way or other) this we know, that nothing can be
more natural to man than reason. And yet, how many have we seen, in whom
nature and art have done their parts, by too much study or intemperance become
so utterly destitute of all use of reason or discretion, that such actions or
demeanure as nature prescribes to all men as they are reasonable, have been
more neglected by them, than by brute beasts; yea oftimes furiously inverted.

4. This instance amongst others may be our warrant for restrayning the former
Axiom [ that Nature cannot be prejudiced by Custome] to nature, either
altogether inanimate or merely sensitive; whose inclination is single and but
one way set: or if appliable to the reasonable or intellectual nature, whose
propensions as they are many, so are they freely fashionable to diverse means,
and apt to be directed to contrary ends; it is true only of the general
faculty or remote propensions, not of their actual promptness, use, or
exercise. Many there be so extremely vicious, that their minds seem now, de
facto, wholly bent to do others mischief: This notwithstanding proves not
that nature has sown no seeds of virtue in their souls, but rather their
wilful suffering these to be choked and stifled, by cherishing contrary
desires, or embracing pleasant allurements unto evil. If such blindness have
by bad custom crept on some, that they cannot now discern any lineaments of
Gods image in their hearts: it will not hence follow that this light of nature
whereby they might have seen Him, did never shine unto them, but rather that
they have smoothered it, because they loved the works of darkness better
then the deeds of light, purposely obliterating all resemblances of Him who is
the avenger of evil, whose pourtraiture their first parents had blurred by
imprinting his enemies picture upon it. Nothing more easy than for others (so
they will be observant) clearly to discern the live image, not of the old
man, but of the old serpent, in such as cannot, or will not see the image of
God in themselves.

5. Besides this difference between the inclinations of nature in man and in
creatures inanimate or irrational; a difference there is, not much observed,
but worthy of diligent observation, between common principles merely
speculatiue or abstract, and others practical or moral. The latter may be in
many intensiuely more clear than the former, as indeed they are more natural
in respect they are more deeply implanted in the very soul, not let into the
brain by external senses, albeit even for this reason they are by many less
regarded, as being more familiar then such speculatiue notions as these [ every
whole is greater than its part: twice two make four, or such like,] of whose
certainty no man at any time can doubt, not that our nature as reasonable, is
of it self more inclined to abstract speculations, than to moralities, but
that speculatiue notions are seated in the head or utmost confines of the
souls regiment, as in an Academie or Cloister, privileged from such
tumultuous broiles as might divert our intentions from beholding them, or
retract our inclinations from adherence to their truth. On the contrary, such
disturbances are most frequent in the Court or Palace of this little Kingdom,
wherein moral notions of God and goodness have their necessary abode, and
these notions are, upon this occasion, usually either tainted with the
contagion of such noisome lusts, or much weakened by the reluctation of such
contrary desires as lodge in the same room or closet with them.

6. Our readiness, in heat of passion, or interposition of causes concerning
our own commodities, to recall religious motions, whose undoubted truth and
equity, we could, in calm and sober thoughts, be well contented to seal (if
need were) with our blood, will easily induce minds capable of any vicissitude
of quiet and retired cogitations, after turbalent and working fancies, to admit
the former difference between dictates of nature seated in the brain, and
others ingrafted in the heart, to be, for the manner of their several
evidences or perspicuities, much what like the lightsomnesse of the inferior
and supreme region of the air. The Sunne-beames are sometimes more bright in
this lowest part than in the uppermost, wherein they suffer no reflection: yet
are they in this lower often so eclipsed with clouds, with mists, or storms,
as he that did never look out of doors but in such dismal weather, might
well imagine his day to be but night, in respect of that clearness he might
perpetually behold, were his habitation above the clouds. The continual smoke
of noisome lust, the steames of bloody and revengefull thoughts, the incessant
exhalations of other unclean and vast desires, which reign in the Atheists
heart, can never obscure the Mathematical or Logical notions of abstract
truths in his brain: The principles of morality or religion, which Nature
has planted in his heart and conscience, they quickly may, they always do,
more or less eclipse, according to the strength and permanency of their
infectious and incompatible qualities. Happy it is, that he can acknowledge,
and sometimes magnify, the light of nature in matters speculatiue, or
concerning the body only, and now and then brag, as if he were her son
elect, and others but reprobates, in comparison of that heroical spirit she
has enabled him with in businesses of State or policy. For, who is this his
Goddess Nature? Can he tell us? or what is her light that he should so much
glory in it? Does she not borrow it from the father of lights, whose habitation
is in that radiant brightness which is inaccessable? Thus I suppose, such as
dwell under the poles would commend the lightsomnesse of the air which they
daily behold and hourly breath in, but deny that there were any such glorious
body as the Sun that did enlighten it; did it never come further Northward
than within three or four degrees of Aries, or never move farther Southward
than within as many of Libra. Now as the only way utterly to dissuade men from
an opinion so palpably gross, as, by the former supposition, might be
conceived, would be to remove them out of their native clime into ours: so the
best means an Atheist can use to refute his impious errors in denying there is
a God, is, to relinquish his wonted courses in the ways of darkness, and to
have his conversation, for a time at least, or upon trial, with the sons of
light. And to make this trial, he may perchance be sooner induced by
discovering the several heads or first originalls of his sacrilegious
misperswasions, more particularly.

CHAP. IIII.
Atheism, Idolatry, Heresy, Hypocrisy, etc. have one common root. What
estate or condition of life is freest from, or most obnoxious unto Atheism, or
temptations thereto tending. Of Atheism in passion only, not habituated.

1. ALL of those almost numberless inclinations, which are united in the
indivisible humane soul, as lines sphericall in their center, being apt to be
impelled or poysed by their proper objects: it is impossible their several
bents should admit an equality of strength; seeing as well their internal
growth or eminencies, as the potencies of their objects, are unequal. Much
more, must many of their actual motions needs be incompatible, in as much as
the points whereon they are set, and whereto they move, are often times extremely
opposite and directly contrary. Hence, as in the former Of Justifying faith.
Book is observed, our assent unto such branches of supernatural truth or
goodness, as are stiffly counterswayed by natural desires or affections,
either for quality or intention, most repugnant, is always wrought with
greatest difficulty. For even this assent which we term Christian belief, is
but an inclination or bent of the humane soul unto matters revealed by the
spirit; whose divine attractions or impulsions are always oppugned by contrary
lustings of the flesh; more or less, according to the diversity of their
strength or impetuousnesse, whether in their acts or habits. Now seeing
Atheism is but a complete or total Vide Coppen in Psalm. 10. v. 11. Col. 165.
eclipse, whether of celestial irraditions, as yet external not illuminating
the soul, or of that natural and internal light which men have of heavenly
powers and providence divine; we are not to seek an original of it altogether
new or diverse from the original of ignorance or unbelief of particular
revelations, but only a more direct and fuller opposition of those earthly
parts of the humane soul, whence these lesser defects are caused. After those
Jews (whose hypocritical shufflings with the Prophet Jeremy was in the
former Justifying faith Section 1. cap. 11.
Book at large deciphered) had fully experienced all hopes of good, from their
late elected Goddess, The Queen of Heaven, to be as vain as their Princes
trust in Egypt: the next point whereat their floating imaginations could have
arrived, had been to deny there were any God or Gods, at least any that cared
for them or could do them good. The truth of what we here suppose, as
necessarily consequent to our former discussions, will better clear it self
in the issue of these; to wit, that Atheism, Idolatry, Heresy, Hypocrisy,
etc. spring all from one common root, (i.) Indulgence to corrupt affection:
only the manner of their growth is different.

2. Some desires of the natural man, though tainted with the deceiveable lusts
of corruption, yet have no repugnancy with natural notions of divine goodness
indefinitely considered; only they sway too much unto secondary causes, best
suiting with themselves, or aptest to satisfy their intemperate longings; and
as it were by popular factions, set up these secondary causes or means as
Gods, without consulting the Laws of Nature; never demanding reasons voice or
approbation. Some parts of the old man again there be, which include only a
dissonancy to some particular passages of the rule of life, or partial
opposition to our natural notion of God or his attributes, and these sway
only unto hypocrisy, heresy, or transfiguration of the divine will, or word,
into the similitude of our corrupt imaginations. Other lusts of the flesh there
be, either for quality, multitude, strength, or abundance, so mainly opposite
to the most essential and general notions of the Godhead, that sometimes, by
being directly crossed, other whiles by being fully satisfied, they introduce,
either oblivion, or flat denial of any divine power, or providence.

3. The Attribute most inseparable from the divine nature, and most sovereign
title of the Godhead is his goodness. The very names or literal elements of
God, and good, are not in our Country dialect so near allied, as the conceits
which their mention or nomination suggests, are in nature. So necessarily does
goodness presuppose a God or Deity, from which, as from a fountain, it
flows; and so essential is it to this fountain to send forth sweet streams
of joy and comfort, that the Heathen Philosopher, upon the interview of good
and evil, seems to suffer torture between the contrariety of his unsettled
conceits concerning the truth or vanity of the Godhead, Si deus non sit vnde
bona? Can there be any good without a God? Si deus sit vnde mala? If there be a
God, how chances it, of things that are, all are not good, many evil? Others,
not altogether heathenish, from curiosity of like contemplation, not guided by
the rule of faith, imagine two eternal ind^fectible creatiue powers; the one
good, and sole fountain of all goodness: the other evil, and maine sou^se of
all evil and mischief in the world. Of both these errors and the ignorance
that occasioned them we shall have fitter occasion to speak hereafter. Both of
them suppose a true notion of divine goodness indefinitely considered,
whereunto a conceit or apprehension of divine providence, in most Heathen, was
subordinate. Many great and famous Philosophers there be (says Tully) which
ascribe the government of the world unto the wisdom of the Gods: not herewith
content they further acknowledge all necessary supplies of health and welfare
to be procured by their providence. For corn and other increase of the earth,
variety of times and seasons with those changes of the weather whereby such
fruits as the earth brings forth do grow and ripen, are, in the same men's
opinions, effects of divine goodness to mankind. From the perpetuity of such
visible blessings, as, these Heathen Philosophers derive from the bounty of
their imaginary Gods, does the Doctor of the Gentiles and his fellow Apostle
seek to win the Inhabitants of Lystra unto the worship of the only true
invisible God. How readily, experience of uncouth goodness, brings forth an
express conceit of a Godhead, and causes the often mentioned ingraffed
notion to bud or flourish; these Heathen had openly testified by their
forwardness to sacrifice unto these messengers of our Lord and Savior, as
unto great Gods, because strange Authors or rather instruments of unexpected
good to one of their neighbors. This confused branch of piety though
misgrowne and set awry, was notwithstanding flexible and pliant to these points
of life proposed by the Apostle; Acts 14. v. 15, 16, 17.
Sirs, why do ye these things? we also are men of like passions with you, and
preach unto you that you should turn from these vanities, unto the living God,
which made heaven and earth, and the sea, and all things that are therein, who
in times past, suffered all Nations to walk in their own ways. Nevertheless,
he left not himself without witness, in that he did good, and gave us rain
from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness.
From this one stream of divine goodness, experienced in giving rain, did the
Heathens Christen their great God Jupiter with a Name importing his procurement
of this effect: the Greeks calling him (...), the Latins Pluvius. So
effectual a witness of the Godhead is the accomplishment of any much desired
good, that such, as doubt whether the good we enjoy on earth be derived from
heaven, are often unwittingly enforced to think and speak of whatsoever does
them any extraordinary good, or satisfy the vehemence of their desires, as of
their God.

4. The more indissoluble the mutual conceits of God and goodness are, the
sooner we loose the one, whiles we remain without experience or apprehension
of the other. Two conditions of life there be alike hurtful to this engraffed
notion of the Deity: 1. Affluence or abundance of things desired without
interposall of indigence: 2. Perpetual indigence or sordide want without
vicissitude of ordinary competency or contentment. The latter usually starues
the natural notions or conceits of God, which must be fed with sense or taste
of some goodness, the former [ affluence or abundance] chokes it. Amongst all
the Barbarians which Fenni^ mira feritas, foeda paupertas, non arma, non equi,
non penates: victui herba, vestitui pelles, cubile humus. Sola in sagittis
spes, quas inopia ferri ossibus asperant. Idemque venatus viros pariter ac
foeminas al^t. Passim enim comitantur partemque praedae petunt. Nec
aliudinfantibus feraru^, imbriumque suffugium, quam vt in aliquo ramorum nexu
contegantur. Hus redeunt iuuenes, hoc senum receptaculum. Id beatius
arbitrantur, quam ingemere agris, illaborare domibus, suas alienasque fortuu^s
spe metuque versare. Securi adversus homines, securi adversus deos, rem
difficilliman assecuti sunt, vt illis ne voto quidem opus fit. Tacit. lib. de
moribus German.
Tacitus mentioned in his description of Germany, he blemisheth one sort only
with a glauncing touch of irreligion; as being so entirely and familiarly
acquainted with beggarly need, that they needed not the help of God or Man,
more than the beasts of the field. Yet that they were altogether Atheists or
abettors of infidelity, is scarce credible; but very likely that they gave
less signs of any Religion than others did, which had oftener and better
occasions to supplicate the divine powers, either for protection from such
evils, or for collation of such benefits, as these Fenni had little cause
greatly either to fear or hope. Household Gods they had none, because they
cared not for houses: Gods or Goddesses of Corn, of Wine, of Oil, or the
like, they never sought to, because never accustomed to sow, to plant, or
reap. But whether they used not to pray for good success in their huntings,
or in skirmishing with their rude neighbors, or amongst themselves, is more
then can be determined from Tacitus censure, interserted as it seems rather to
please the Reader, than seriously to empeach them of any greater crime or more
loathsome disease, than usually haunts men of their constitution or condition.
As of the mighty and noble, so of those vile and despised creatures, which
continue their circular and slothful range from house to house (liking best
to live (as these late mentioned Barbarians did) from hand to mouth,) not many
there be which give any just proof of their calling. The sense of God and his
goodness is in most of them stupid and dull, save only when hunger and
thirst, or hope of an alms instantly craved by them in his name, and usually
granted by others for his sake, shall whet or quicken it. But as well in life
spiritual as in corporal, fewer by much, (though to many) loose their
stomachs through extreme penury or long fasting, then there be of such as
spoil or dead their taste by continual fullness. As, long or hard want does
sometimes sterue; so the perenniall current of wealth, of peace, or ease, with
other outward blessings, does usually drown all sense or notion of that
goodness, whence these and all other good things flow. Did that part of the
Moon which is next us always shine, we should have less occasion to enquire,
and greater difficulty to determine, whether the light it has, were derived
from the Sun. Generally, such effects as admit interruption in their
existence sooner lead us unto the true knowledge of their first and immediate
causes, then if they enjoyed permanent duration. A Ista vices magis in nobis
excitant sensum divina bonitatis, qua^ co^ti^^^^ tenor falicitatis, quo nos
in^briat: tum enim bona cognoscimus postqua^ amisimus. Praesentium oritur
tadiu^, absentiu^ excitatur desiderium. Coppen. in Psalm. 136 verse. 23, 24.
body subject to some vicissitude of sickness better discernes what causes
health, then he whose health has been perpetual. And this advantage he has
again that though a disease, in it self equally grievous, do assault him,
yet is it less assisted by impatience: From former experience he is better
enabled to see what did him hurt, and what is likely to do him good, and as it
were nurtured to expect a change.

5. The best diet then to avoid this morbus fatuus, whose fits come upon us as
well by fullness as by vacuitie, is that which Solomon has prescribed. Give me
not poverty, nor riches: feed me with food convenient for me, lest I be full
and deny thee and say, Who is the Lord? or least I be poor and steal, and
take the name of my God in vain Prove. 30. ver. 8, 9.
: Yet neither can mediocritie of fortunes without moderate desires, nor
vicissitude of want, unless the soul be inwardly purged, much avail. Our
minds may be much set on little matters, and our desires of others prosperity
(especially the flourishing estate of the Weal public, wherein we live a
poor contented private life) may be too stiff and peremptory. Now such is the
blindness of our corrupted nature, such is our partiality toward our own
desires (though of others welfare) as will hardly suffer us to distinguish that
which is absolutely good, from that which seems best to us, as for the present
we stand affected. From these originals, minds by nature or education in their
kind devout, but subject withal to stiff and settled desires of mutable and
transitory good, being either divorced from delights, whereon they have long
doted, or frustrated of those hopes, for whose accomplishment they have
solicited divine powers with great earnestness and importunity, are most
obnoxious to such impulsions as throw men into Atheism and irreligion. These
diseases were scarce known or heard of amongst the Romans, so long as their
state after recovery from many crazes and sore wounds received dail^ ^^crease,
by means (which in their observation might have challenged greatest praise for
their prudent care of public good) more then humane, but after it once
(contrary to all politic expectation) began to reele and totter, and threaten
ruin to the best pillars it had left to support it: these and the like
querulous mutterings began to assay her most ingenuous and devoutest children;
Heu faciles dare summa Deos, Lucanus.
eademque tueri Difficiles!
Ah facile Gods to rear up states to greatest height,
But most averse to keep them so vprear'd, upright!
But much worse then these (it seems by Cottaes complaint) were more frequent
in corrupt minds a little before. If the gods (says he) have a care of
mankind, they should in reason make all men good; or if not so: at least,
tender the hap and welfare of such as are good indeed. Why then were the two
noble valorous and victorious Scipioes oppressed in Spain by the perfidious
Carthaginians? A great number of worthy Patriots he there reckons besides; all,
either exiled or slain by their turbulent and factious enemies, or (which was
worse than death to a Roman spirit) beholden to tyrants for their lives and
fortunes. Another Poet not long after the uttering of this complaint, (perhaps
moved thereto by the indignity of Tullies untimely death,) ingenuously
acknowledges the like distrust of divine providence in himself, as Tully had
vented under the person of Cotta: Ovid.
Dum rapiunt mala fata bonos, ignoscite fasso,
Solicitor nulles esse putare Deos.
What often I think, once let me say,
Whilst bad Fates take best men away;
I am provoked Gods to disclaim,
For Gods should give death better aim.
The like cogitations did work more desperately in such as had been more
deeply interessed in Pompey's faction, after they saw so many noble Senators
(worthy in their judgment, to have been honored like gods, after death)
deprived of all funeral rites and exequies; whilst the dead relics of mere
carcasses, whilst they lived, of parasiticall mecanicks, or devoted
instruments of tyrannical lust, were graced with Princely Monuments. The very
sight of these, did by a kind of Antiperistasis revive and sublimate the
former offenses taken against their gods, for the indignities done unto their
Nobles: Marmoreo Licinus tumulo iacet, at Cato parvo,
Pompeius nullo: Quis putet esse Deos?
Base Licinus has a pompous Tomb,
of gaudie marble stone:
Wise Cato but a foolish one,
the mighty Pompey none.
Yet all this while we dream of Gods,
and dream we do I wis:
For Gods are none; or if there be,
how can they suffer this?


6. That vengeance belonged unto God was another branch of the general notion
ingraft by nature in the hearts of Heathen. And if he did not show himself an
awful judge and avenger of prodigious cruelties, which ordinary laws could not
redress, this neglect of duty (as they took it) made them bolder with
Jupiter himself, than the poor woman was with the Emperor, that asked him,
Mentimur regnare Iorem Lucan.
Why then do then reign if thou be not at leisure to hear my cause. They
questioned whether Jupiter reigned indeed or were but a name without authority,
unless he gave instant proof of his powrefull wrath or displeasure, against
such as displeasd them most. Idem erat non esse and non apparere. A perfect
Character of this passion has the sweet Tragedian expressed in Ulysses, led into
the Cyclops den as a sheep unto the shambles. After his orisons to his
sovereign Lady Pallas, he thus concludes with Jupiter Hospitalies himself:
(...), Eurip: Cyclops.

(...). etc.
O Jove: no Jove nor strangers God in true esteem:
Unless my woeful case thou see, and me redeem.


7. The Psalmists complaint is much more moderate, yet such as argues his faith
to have been assaulted, though not quaild with like distrust; Psalm. 44. v. 22
etc.
For thy sake are we killed all the day long; we are counted as sheep for the
slaugh^er. Awake, why sleep thou O Lord, arise cast us not off for ever.
Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and forgettest our affliction and our
oppression. For our soul is bowed down to the dust, our belly cleaves unto
the earth. Arise for our help, and redeem us for thy mercies sake. Psalm. 94.
v. 1.
O Lord God, to whom vengeance belongs, O God to whom vengeance belongs
show thy self. Pettish desires of private hopes contrived with greatest
policy, and solicited with all possible care and industry, finally crossed,
brought many Heathens (as yet they do sundry Christians) unto a point of
Atheism somewhat short of the former, yet as dangerous for any professed
Disciple of Christ to harbor at; usually discovered in bitter exclamations
against fates, ill luck, or fortune. But many discontented speeches in both
kinds, proceed oftimes from the heat and impulsion of present passion; whose
frequent interposition often caused all former apprehensions of the divine
providence or goodness, to vanish, as vnevennesse of ground makes travelers
loose the sight of steeples or turrets, which they lately beheld. But as these
present themselves again unto their view, as soon as they ascend, unto the
former level; so is it likely many of these querulous Romans, did resume
their wonted persuasions of divine powers, and their favor toward mankind;
after their turbulent thoughts begun to settle, and their disquietted minds
recover their natural seat or station. Others more blinded by obstinacy, did
finally mistrust all former apprehensions (being neither clear nor perfectly
observed) for mere fancies; as weak or dim sights, usually suspect, whether
they truly did see such things as in far distances appeared by short and
sudden glymses, or their eyes did but dazzle.

8. But all in this place we intended, was to search out the original, if not
of all, yet of some more principal branches of habituate, and obdurate
Atheism: unto which search, this observation of indulgence to violent
passions, or pettishnesse of hopeful desires not satisfied, was thus far
pertinent; that these do settle men, otherwise by nature, and education not
irreligious, in the very dregs of these impieties. Nor is man, as was lately
intimated, like unto inanimate creatures, whose natural disposition, or
inclination cannot be prejudiced by custom. Stones though they be moved a
thousand times one way, their aptitude notwithstanding unto such motion is no
way greater in the last course, then in the first. Far otherwise it is with
man, who as he has natural apprehensions of goodness, so has he
inclinations unto evil no less imbred, or natural; the strength of whose
bent to burst out into all ungodliness is always increased by their actual
motions, unless reason exercise her authority over them, either by
substracting their incernall nutriment, or by preventing outward occasions
which provoke them, or by taking them at best advantage (when they have spent
themselves) in the retire. Not thus prevented or controuled in time, the habits
which naturally result from frequencie of their outrage, may come to be no
less stiff than they are violent. The manner how these fits of passion grow
into such grievous rooted diseases, is, as if we should imagine a stone by
often mooving downwards, every time to retain some one, or few, until it had
at length incorporated all those degrees of gravitation, which naturally accrue
in the motion, into its permanent weight: so as laid in a just balance the
settled sway of it should be as great, as the actual force of its wonted
descent; perpetually able to counterpoise as heavy, and massy a body, as the
fall of it from an high tower (supposing it had fallen into the opposite scale)
could have stirred or elevated. Of all passions, such as work inwardly are
most dangerous; because their growth is insensible, and vnobservable. Such are
fretting iealousies, ambitious discontents, eagerness of revenge, or other
desires overmatched with impotencie of effecting them. Generally all
grievances, which have no vent; without which humane affections, like to
liquors kept in close vessels, or nipt glasses secretly multiply their natural
strength. Strangulat inclusus dolor, atque exaestuat intus:
Cogitur and vires multiplicare suas.
As all passions obscure the understanding for the present: so the settling of
them into habits brings a perpetual blindness upon the soul, always
breeding either obdurate Atheism, pernicious Heresy, or Idolatry.

CHAPTER V.
Of habituated or settled Atheism. Why this disease was not so Epidemicall in
ancient as in latter times. Of the disposition or temper from which irreligion
or incogitancie of divine powers (which is the first and lowest branch of
Atheism) usually springs.

1. THE Pharisee, though for his conversation and civil carriage precise and
strict in respect of most his ancestors, did yet exceed them farther in
hardness of heart, than he came short of them in outragiousnesse of passion.
The sight of our Saviors miracles, and experience of his good life, would (I
am persuaded) sooner have won the most Idolatrous, or boisterous of his
forefathers; than him or his sober associates unto true belief. From
consideration of this his temper, besides other inducements, I have elsewhere
observed, people ancient (whether in respect of the general course of the
world, or of succession in several kingdoms) to have been usually more rash,
and impetuous in their attempts, but not so settled in resolutions, which were
impious, as their successors in time are, and have been. The bent of their
nature did sway a larger compass, and (to use the Mathematicians dialect)
described a greater circle by it actual motions. Hence were they more easily
drawn by the peculiar inticements of those times to greater outrages, than men
of their rank commonly by ordinary temptations now are. Howbeit for the same
reason they were more quickly reclaimed by such corrections, as move not our
minds once set amiss.

2. And this in part may be the reason why Atheism was not so habituated, nor
the denial, or doubt of divine providence so stiff in them, as in the
irreligious of our days. Consonant hereto are the causes before assigned of
posterities mistrusting the reports of antiquity; unto which we may add this
observation, not altogether the same with them, nor quite different: The
visible characters of this great book of nature were of old more legible; the
external significations of divine power more sensible, and apter to imprint
their meaning: both purposely suited to the disposition of the worlds nonage,
which for secular cunning, or artificial observation was for the most part
rude and childish in respect of those times, and Countries, wherein Atheism
through man's curiosity came to full height and growth.

3. Those Mariners with whom Jonas sailed, in calling every man unto his God,
and rousing their sleepie passenger to join in prayer with them, did no more,
then many of their profession in this age upon like exigences do. A raging sea
will cause the natural notions of God and goodness to work in such as have
taken little or no notice of them by land; as one upon this experiment wittily
descants: Qui nescit orare, discat navigare. But few of our time would trouble
themselves in such perplexity, with searching out the causes of sudden
storms, or if they did, the causes ordinarily assigned by the experimental
Weather-wizard, or natural Philosopher, would content them. Fewer I think
would make enquiry for whose special sin their common prayers for
deliverance were not heard; seeing God daily accustometh us to like repulses in
particular dangers: the oftener no doubt, because we examine not our hearts with
like diligence in like extremities, nor power forth our souls with such
fervency, as these Mariners did. Their resolution to find out the author of
their ill success, as Iosuah did Achans, by lot, persuades me the observations
of grace, and nature did not then jar so much, as now they do; They, says
the Psalmist, that go down to the Sea in ships; Psalm. 107.23, 24. etc.
that do business in great waters; These see the works of the Lord, and his
wonders in the deep: for he commands and raises the stormy wind: which
lifts up the waves thereof: They mount up to the heaven: and they go down
again to the depths: their soul is melted because of trouble. They reele to
and fro, and stagger like a drunken man; and are at their wits end. Then they
cry unto the Lord in their trouble, and he brings them out of their
dristresses. He makes the storm a calm: so that the waves thereof are still.
The like good lessons had been communicated, at least to the wiser and more
sober sort of Heathens, (such as these Mariners were) by the remarkable
experiments of those times. And their arrival at their desired haven was
attributed not to their Pilots skill, or good structure of their ships, but to
the mercy of their gods, as the Psalmist having so good matter to work upon
as these, and the like known experiments in that Psalm above others,
reiterates his patheticall invitations to joy and sacred thankesgiving. Oh that
men would praise the Lord for his goodness: Ver. 31, 32.
and for his wonderful works to the children of men. Let them exalt him also
in the congregation of the people, and praise him in the assembly of the Elders.

4. Or if the parties, whose reformation I seek, distrust ^his story of these
Heathen Mariners devotion, and the issue; because not related by any
Heathenish writers; Xenophons observation shall justify mine, he thought it no
disparagement to the valor, but rather an argument of that noble Generals
wisdom, whom he had chosen as a real pattern for posterities imitation,
that he had fruitfully improved those experiments of religious navigators
favor with God, and good success unto the discipline of War. Cyrus (says
this So under correction I have good reason to esteem him, albeit Tullie as
mere a child in Eastern antiquities as mature in Roman Oratory, otherwise
censure him.
Historian) made account the religion, and piety of his soldiers would be
profitable unto him, herein following their resolution, who upon good reason
choose rather to sail with men known to be religious, than with such as are
suspected to have committed some impiety Cyrus ipse religiosam suorum pietatem
sibi quoque vtilem ducehat esse, quum rationemeandem sequeretur, quam illi, qui
certo iudicio cum religiosis potius, qua^ cum ijs, qui designasse aliquid impie
videntur, nauigare maluns. Zenoph. de Instit. Cyri. hist. lib 8.
. The manifold deliverances of sea faring men (more devout than skillful in
approach of danger) publicly testified by their solemn thankesgiving, and
pictures consecrated to the memory of such mercy as they had found, did
furnish another Heathen with arguments to evince the providence of divine
powers, and their flexible ears unto unfeigned prayers; The quick reply of
his adversary, More have perished that have not been painted, whether uttered
by way of disputation, in jest, or out of former resolution, or good earnest,
was not so witty, as sophistical. For, that the supplications of as many,
which had perished and were no where painted, were not heard; this ratheir
proves their demerits had made them incapable of that favor which others
found, then any way disproueth the former conclusion, that these were favored
by divine providence. Nor can the miscarriage of ten thousands prejudice the
truth of ones confession, whose escape could not be attributed to his skill, or
the working of second causes, but unto some latent disposer of their
combinations; which did appoint the limits, times, and opportunities of their
working or ceasing. And this divine disposal was more conspicuous when the
interposition of man's industry, or inventions for his own good, was less;
Vide Coppen in Psalm. 10. v. 14. col. 169.
God then supplied the defect of artificial cunning in every kind by such
eminent and outstretched branches of his providence, as we see yet over shadow
children and men scarce masters of themselves, whom danger often approaches
but ceazeth not on them, though most enable to make resistance.

5. But after the world was grown ripe in judgment and experimental
inventions, the Lord did alter those legible and conspicuous characters of the
common book of nature fitted for the use of children, or elementary scholars,
and set forth a newer and perfecter edition of his sacred will, b^^ in letters
less legible to beginners. Now, as his written word revealed (in the Gospel
especially) contains a far more exquisite model of his incomprehensible
wisdom, than in former ages had been manifested; so does it requite more
mature, more diligent, and observant readers: otherwise as many weak brains,
by light or confused tempering with artificial terms, which they are not able
to master or digest, utterly poison common sense; so we by negligent,
irreverent or careless hearing, reading, or meditating on these great
mysteries of the spirit, shall quite extinguish that general light of nature
which did shine unto the heathen; and by disvse forget to read the book of
Gods visible creatures. Such notwithstanding is the preposterousnesse of humane
choice, whereto the old serpent still enticeth us, that although it be the
first rudiment of Christian Religion to renounce that worldly carfulness
wherewith the minds of best Heathens were overgrowne: yet no age or people
since the world began, did wilfully trouble themselves with more matters or
more impertinent to the maine point whereat all aim, then we Christians of
these times do. What would the Heathens say that should compare our practice
with our principles? surely those Christians seek to imprison their souls in
those thickets, wherein man as their writings teach, first lost all sight of
heaven, of God, and goodness. Or if Gods word did not; the different faces of
times, and characters of men that lived in them, set forth unto us by Heathen
writers, may inform us that Atheism and irreligion had never grown to such
maturitie as to propaga^^ their seed unto posterity, but from those two
principal roots. First, the intricate perplexities and incessant cares
wherewith the mannaging of most humane affairs was daily more and more
invol'd, through multiplicitie of inventions and solicitous inquisition after
worldly means supposed as necessary for every man to make himself by, or in
one kind or other to outstrip his neighbor: the second, an intemperate
affectation of perfection in arts or sciences, unto which once invented or
enlarged men attribute more then was besiting and more to themselves than was
their due for inventing and enlarging them. In both they rob God of much
honor, willingly ascribed unto him by the ancient, who still acknowledged the
first principles of those arts (in whose propagation posterity gloried, as if
themselves had been petty gods) to have proceeded from the divine powers.
(...), Fortune befriendeth Art, was but the solecisme of degenerate ages; such
rules as the ancients light upon by chance, they knew not how, did so
naturally imprint a feeling of the finger of God thus guiding their thoughts,
that they instantly sacrificed, not to their own wits, but to the unknown
suggestors of these inventions, which in the first teachers of arts or
experiments were indeed true revelations; what latter ages called fortune or
blind chance, primary antiquity instiled God; and ages much declining from
ancient innocence and devotion took blind chance or fortune for a Goddess.

6. The branch which issues from the former root, is in respect of true belief
of the Godhead rather defective than contradictory, and resembles that defect
or want which in Arts we term Ignorantiam purae negationis; as the other
positive contradicting, or malignant Atheism, does, Ignorantiam pravae
dispositionis. Unto the imputations of this Atheism, which consists in mere
carelessness, and incogitancy, many are justly liable, which never perhaps so
much as in their secret thoughts expressly deny the Godhead, or divine
providence; but rather have some surmise of their existence. But this blossom
comes to no proof, because it springs not from the internal notion in graffed
by nature in their hearts (whose growth the cares of life do quickly choke)
but is acqui'rd by custom, unwitting assent, or consonancy to others
asseverations with whom they converse. This customary believer, or careful
worldlings careless temper in matters spiritual, is like to a man in a dead
sleep, or so drowsy that he apprehends no impression of any phantasmes, yet
can answer yes or no to any that vrges him with a question. Briefly the utmost
degree of belief that men thus buried in cares of this world have of the
Deity, is no better than such idle persuasions of love to Christ and
Christianity, as have been observed in the former book. The only ground of
it in many, did they well observe it, is their unwillingness to be accounted
what indeed they are, mere Atheists, a title displeasing to such as live
amongst professed Christians. To charge a man, though on a sudden with
matters distasteful, will extort^ peremptory denial of that whereto he had
formerly been altogether indifferent, as knowing nothing either for it or
against it. As what soldier is there of better spirit which hearing his
Contrymen vpbrayded with cowardice, or his Country blemished with
treacherous base infamous dealing, would not undertake to make good the contrary
with his body against the obiecter; albeit altogether ignorant, what domesticke
and foreign impartial Chronicles had testified to his prejudice concerning
the carriage of the impeached proceedings. The more peremptory the one were in
avouching, the more confident the other would be in disclaiming the crime
objected. But should a practical head skillful in humoring such an hot brain,
strike in with them aright, and by way of sociable and friendly conference,
insinuate plausible reasons to misperswade him of his Countrey-mens deserved
praise; (which in general, to believe he had better positive reasons than to
deny the former particular imputations) a lesser matter than loss of good
fellowship would make him willing to let all controversy fall, or put it off
with a jest. Should we thus resolutely charge the most grovelling minded
earth-worme this day breathing, with open shame for never looking up to heaven,
for living without a God in this present world; we might perhaps provoke him to
pollute his first positive and serious thoughts of his creator with false and
fearful oaths in his name, that he had thought on him, that he feared and
loved him ever before, as much as others. But with greater cunning than can be
matched with any skill of man can the old serpent insinuate himself into our
most secret thoughts, and covertly fortify our inclinations toward such baits
as he has laid, always watching opportunities of pushing them, whether he
sees them most inclined for his advantage. Finally, by this slight he works
the wisest of worldly men to confess that to him, ere they be aware, with
their hearts; which with their lips they would deny before men, even unto
death, whiles urged with it under the style of disgrace. Or if he cannot thus
far work them; he puts fair colors of discretion upon indifferency for
positive resolutions, whether there be a God or no, or whether it goes better
with him that serves, or with him that serves him not.

7. And albeit either the strength of intended argument, or casual occurrents
of some strange mishaps befalling others by means more than humane, may often
rowse some actual and express acknowledgement of a divine providence in this
worldling: yet these imaginations coming once to opposition with his stiff
desires, or being counterpoised with fresh proposals of Satan's riddles, or
instantly dispelled as utterly as if they had never been conceived. His
belief then of this first Atticle in the Creed is at the best no better than
his was of the souls immortality, which held it as true so long as Platoes
book of this argument was in his hand, but let the truth slip out of his mind
as soon as he laid the book aside, or had not the Philosophers reasons in his
eye; what shall we think of him then as of an Atheist, or as a true believer?
No man holds it any point of wisdom to attribute much unto a misers oath in
matters of gain, yet he that is ready to swear falsely by his God, does in
this taking loose his former belief of him, if any he had. For perjury is the
natural brood of Atheism, sometime best known by the parents name, though
now it has changed his coat, and covered it self with protestations of
Christianity, renouncing nature with the tongue, as it does the Deity in the
heart. Iuvenall condemns a generation of Naturalists in his time as more
Atheistical and periurous than Rome formerly had known: Iuvenal. Satyr. 13.
Sunt qui in fortunae iam casibus omnia ponunt,
Et mundum nullo credunt rectore moveri;
Natura volvente vices and lucis and anni,
Atque ideo intrepidi quaecunque altaria iurant.
Some now there be, that deem the world by slipperie Chance does slide,
That days and years do run their round, without or rule or guide,
Sieve Nature and dame Fortunes Wheel: and hence sance shame or fear
Of God or Man, by Altars all they desperately do swear.


8. This careless Neutralist holds the same correspondency between the true
Christian and the Heathenish Idolater or Infidel, that Mungrels do with the
diverse Countries between whose wast borders they have been so promiscuously
brought up, that no man knows to whether people they belong, usually
traffiking with both without profession of absolute alleigeance or personal
service to either, save only as private occasions or opportunities shall
induce them. The contradicting Atheists are as half Antipodes to the
Neutralist, and full Antipodes to true Christians. Their seat is darkness
always destitute of the Sun, seldom partaker of any twilight. To impell the
one sort as far from truth as may be, and the other no farther than the mid
way between it, and the most opposite error, is alike behoouefull to Satan's
purpose: a great part of whose chief cunning is to suite his temptations to
men's several dispositions Now some men there be of heavier metal, who as
they have minds perpetually touched with hopes of gain; so their gain is not
gotten by gluts or heaps, but receives a slow and constant increase by
continual cares and pains. These if he can but bring to this kind of
incogitant Atheism, or dull ignorance of God and his goodness, he has as
much as he desires of them. Those whom he labors to malignant or disputing
Atheism, have usually such nimble wits, and resolutions (until they settle
upon their lees) so ticklish; that did he suffer them to hover a while betwixt
light and darkness, they would quickly turn upon that level whence the
right aspect of heaven and heavenly powers is taken. But, lest having this
liberty of trying all, they should come to fasten on that which is best; His
policy is to cast them so far, one wrong way or other in youth, that either
they shall have no thought or inclination to retire in mature age, or no
strength left when they grow old to recover the miscarriages of fresh and
lively motions. To sway themselves that way which nature first inclined them,
or grace does call them, is not easy to be attempted, almost impossible to be
effected by men that have been long fettered in some link of sociall lust or
other filthiness; by men whose minds have been perpetually enwrapt in the
curiosities of their proud imaginations. Those are the two special snares
whereby Gods enemy detaines stirring spirits in the dregs of contradicting
Atheism. But the men of whom we now speak such as have wedded their souls to
the earth, and count toyling and moyling in gainefull businesses greatest
pleasures, are (as the tempter knows) of a clean contrary constitution; apt
they are not to move many ways, either upward or downward, but only to
waggle to and fro within a narrow compass: without whose lists should he tempt
them to outray much in any notorious dissoluteness, outrageous villainy or open
blasphemy; the vncouthnesse of their distemper procured by these unnatural
motions, might happily admonish them in good time to seek a medicine. The
only means he has herein to prevent them is continually to feed this their
deadly disease so kindly and gently as it shall never bewray any danger, until
they be past all possibility of recovery. They go to Hell as in a lethargy
or deep slumber. Much what to this purpose it is in other parts of these
comments observed, that the equable moral temper, which never alters much from
it self, is most obnoxious to final miscarriage; because seldom so fiercely
assaulted by the enemy as to occasion any extraordinary terror of conscience.
And it is the less assaulted, because it seldom or lightly rebels against
him. Now men never much affrighted with the danger wherein all by nature stand,
nor enflamed with love of a better Country than they enjoy, cannot address
themselves to any resolute or speedy departure out of the territories of civil
moralities, within which if Satan hold us, he makes full reckoning of us as of
his civil or natural subjects; and this, as Hostis noster quanto magis nos
sibi rebellare conspicit, tanto amplius expugnare contendit; eos enim pulsare
negligit, quos quieto iure se possidere sentit. Gregor. Homil.
S. Gregory observes, is the reason why many are not molested by him.

CHAPTER VI.
Of Disputatiue Atheism; denial of the Godhead, or divine providence; with
the several curiosities which occasion it.

1. Foreign supportance is seldom rejected by deserved fame, and men of no
deserts always seek to underprop their ruinous reputation or groundless
praise; some by the place which they hold, or by the society wherein they
live; others by their ancestors, birth, or education; many, by the subject of
their thoughts, or worthiness of matters which they unworthily handle. To
profess noble sciences, or (at the most) to have taken degree in any, is
ground enough for some men to raise themselves far above such, as but
yesterday were their full equals; or to stand upon terms of comparison with
the best. And few there be of their own Coat, that would not willingly yield
to them what thus they challenge as their due, would they show themselves
either able or willing to repay that credit and estimation to the common
profession, which like bankrouts or decayed Merchants, they are enforced either
to borrow or beg from it as from the public stock. For all of us are glad to
see our own profession graced or exalted; the rather, because we hold it not
safe to have our heights measured only by our personal stature, unless
withal we take in, the advantage of the ground whereon we stand.

2. A second maine stem of habituated Atheism arose (as was lately intimated)
from this partial desire in professors, to establish the soveraigntie of those
arts or faculties wherein they were best seen or most delighted. And the best
means for advancing or establishing their soveraigntie, was, to extend the
limits of their wonted authority by reducing all or most effects to their
principles; as great Lawyers strive to bring most causes to those Courts,
wherein their practice or authority is greatest. Another principal vein,
serving to feed the disease whereto this partial and intemperate appetite of
curious artists ministered first matter, we may (if we mistake not) fitly
derive from a general aptitude of the humane soul, to take impression from
those objects with which it is most familiar; and to judge of others by their
correspondency with these. Hence as sollicitors seeking after means conducible
to any end, usually interceps our desires or intentions of the end it self,
for whose sake only the means in reason were to be sought: so does the
curious speculation of creatures visible divert the minds of many from the
invisible creator unto whom the fight of these by nature not misleveled by
inordinate or unwieldy appetites would direct all. And our general facility to
believe with speed what we much affect or strongly desire, brings forth
peculiar pronesses in the professors of several arts to frame universal rules
(whether negative or affirmative) from broken and imperfect inductions. Now the
power and wisdom of God being especially manifested in the works of
creation, in the disposition of things created, and in matters manageable by
humane wit or consultation; Satan by his sophistical skill to work upon the
pride of man's heart, has erected three maine pillars of Atheism or irreligion,
as so many counter sorts to oppugn our belief or acknowledgement of the
divine providence, in the three subjects mentioned. Many natural Philosophers
out of a partial desire to magnify their own faculty, observing none
brought forth without a mother, nothing generated, without pre-existent seed
or matter, forth with concludes the course of things natural which we daily
see to have been the same from everlasting; that generation had no beginning,
that corruption can have no ending. The imperfection of this induction, and the
overreaching inference which some in this kind have framed from a Maxim most
true in a sense most impertinent; [ Ex nihilo nihil fit] falls in our way
again in the Article of creation. The Astronomer likewise finding the
influence of stars by experience to have great force in this inferior world,
seeks to extend their dominion over humane actions or consultations; as if all
matters of state or private life were by their conventicles or conjunctions
authentickly predetermin'd without possibility of repeal. And thus as the
Moon eclipseth the Sun, or lower Planets sometimes hide the higher, so have
the Sun, the Moon and Host of heaven excluded his sight from approaching
unto the Father of lights. Or if through them he can discern the truth of his
existence, or see some glimpses of his general attributes: yet the eyes of his
mind are so dazeled with contemplation of their effects, that as the
Sunne-beames put on the hue of colored glasses, through which they shine: so
does the sweet disposition of divine providence appear to him in the
similitude of stoicall fate or star gasing conjectures. The politician again
noting many which profess their steadfast relying upon Gods providence either
often to miss of what they have sought, or never attaining to that whereto he
thinks they should in reason and by example of the whole world aspire,
straight way collects, The world has no oeconomicall guide or over-seer, but
that every man may be his own carver of good hap or fortunes. And seeing all
things (as he imagines) revolue by uncertain chance; to appropriate some part
of blind fortunes store unto themselves, to such as have wit to watch their
opportunities, will be as easy as for a thief to catch a prey in a tumult, or
for soldiers to rifle unguarded villages, or houses which no man looks unto.
This kind of Atheism often participates with the two former. For such events
as manifest the power of God, the politic Atheist usually ascribes to
fortune, fate, or nature: such as rightly observed set forth his wisdom, he
reduces them to the mysteries of his own act. These errors incident to the
Astronomer and Politician with the false inductions to persuade them, shall by
Gods assistance be rectified in the Article of divine providence.

3 Many not overswayed by affection to any peculiar faculty whereto they were
above others engaged, became most fools of all by curious prying into others
folly. By no other means were Protagoras, Diagoras (and perchance the crew of
Epicures) brought, either to deny there was any divine power at all, or else to
think it so uncertain, as men should not trouble their wits about it, than by
contemplating the multitude of errors concerning the Gods or vanity of heathen
men amongst whom they lived; many holding opinions about the Deity so diverse,
that some must needs be false; and the best (to an observant speculator) but
ridiculous. The great dissension (says Tully) amongst the learned in such
importancies enforces such as think they have attained to some certainty in
this point to reele and stagger. Tullie. 1. lib: de nature. Deorum. From the
same infirmity of Nature many Christians this day living, are flexible to a
branch of Atheism very dangerous and much labored by Jesuitical disputes,
all addressed to evince this universal negative [ there can be no certainty
of private persuasions about the truth or true sense of Scriptures] by
representing the variety of ancient heresies or differences amongst modern
professors. The Jesuits propension to this persuasion is but a relic of the
aboue-mentioned Heathen Romans disposition, more apt perchance to be impelled
unto absolute Atheism, by how much the multitude of their false Gods had been
increased. For having long sought (as it were in policy) to win the gods of
every Nation they knew unto their faction; and amongst all, finding none able
to support their reeling state, or prevent the working mischiefs of civil
discord; they first began generally to suspect there were no gods, or all
Religion to be vain. But the manifestation of the son of God and daily
increase of true Religion, quickly revived the dead notion of divine powers in
these Heathens, and enforced them to adhere to their wonted Gods, in hope the
truth revealed (which was to evil doers very offensive) might by their help
quickly be extinguished. Nor did they want the broken inductions of Antiquaries
or Philosophers to work a prejudice, or disesteeme of Christian faith. The
Christians, says Post haec Celsus opinatur nos qui comprehensu^ damnatumque
supplicio colimus, idem facere quod Getes qui Zamoluim venerantur, and Cilieas
qui Mopsum, and Arcananas qui Amphilochum, et Thebanos qui Amphiaeram and
Lebadienses qui Trophonium: quos omnes inunerito nobiscum conferri declarabiums
etc. Origin. contra Celsum. lib. 3.
Celsus, which adore a person comprehended and put to death, do but as the
barbarous Getes which worship Zamolxis, or as the Cilicians do Mopsus, the
Achernanians Amphilochus, the Thebanes Amphiaras, and the Lebadij Triphonius.
It was to him no doubt a point of wisdom and matter of glory to be so well
seen in foreign Antiquities, as not to believe the new fangled devices of
rude and illeterate Galileans.

4. Had not Chronologers noted a greater distance of time between them, than
any one man's age (since the Flood at least) could fill up; I should have
thought Rabsakeh had spit Celsus out of his mouth. No son can be more like to
his father, than the ones irreligious induction against the son of God is to
the others Atheistical collections for infringing the omnipotency of God the
Father. Obey not Ezechiah (says Rabsakeh to the besieged Inhabitants of
Jerusalem) when he deceives you, saying the Lord will deliver us. Has any of
the gods of the nations delivered at all his land out of the hand of the King
of Assyria? Where are the gods of Hamath and of Arpad? Where are the gods of
Sepharuaim, Henah and Iuah? have they delivered Samaria out of my hand? Who are
they among all the gods of the Countries that have delivered their Country out
of mine hand, that the Lord should deliver Jerusalem out of mine hand? This was
a common place so plausible in those times, that the proud Assyrians took the
universality of their prosperous success as a sure note that the true Church,
if any there were, was amongst them; that Ezechiah and his subjects were but
rebellious schismatickes, and their pretended piety but stubborn folly or
hypocrisy. And Zenacharib himself when he sent the second embassage to
Ezechiah, has no better argument to empeach the omnipotent power whereon he
trusted, than the former induction stuffed only with some few more examples of
fresh memory. Thus shall ye speak to Ezechiah King of Judah, saying; 2 King.
19.10, 11, 12.
Let not thy god in whom thou trustest deceive thee, saying, Jerusalem shall
not be delivered into the hand of the King of Assyria, behold thou have heard
what the Kings of Assyria have done to all lands by destroying them utterly,
and shall thou be delivered? Have the gods of the nations delivered them whom
my Father has destroyed, as Gozan and Haran and Rezeph and the children of
Eden which were in Thelassar? Where is the King of Hamath, etc. In like manner
when the old fornicator in the comedy had abused the notion of Gods providence
in disposing of Lots, to fortify his hopes of good luck in an evil cause:
not the Hypothesis only but the Thesis it self or general Maxim, which
Solomon had left registered in fitter terms, [ The lot is cast into the lap,
but the disposition thereof is the Lords] is disproved by his officious slave
from the multitude of experiences of men, whose confident reliance on their
gods had been defeated: Plautus in Casina. Act. 2. scen. 5.
Quid si sors aliter, quam voles, evenerit.
Benedice, dis sum fretus, deos superabimus.
Abode well, and have well, on the Gods I am bold,
They favor such as trust them, I Ken them of old, says the Master.
Non ego istuc verbum emsitim titi vilitio,
Nam omnes mortales Deis suat freti: sed tamen
vidi ego dis fretos soepe multos decipi.
Tush that is a saw, which with wast thrummes I would not buy,
Not one there is that cannot thus on the Gods rely,
Yet such I have known full mightily deceived perdy.


5. This kind of Argument Satan knows to be most forcible in all ages for
working Atheism or Infidelity in such as detest nothing more than to be held
silly or credulous. To this purpose in former ages he has had his false
wonders to discredit all reports of true miracles: and in these latter has
wrought many otherwise famous for no good qualities, to counterfeit possessions
by unclean spirits, that men out of their observation of such gulleries, or
distaste of those impostors persons, might begin to suspect the Evangelicall
story of imposture. To some degree or other of like impious resolutions, does
the natural pride of heart, or strength of inordinate desires, solicit most
men of better parts or place. Confident wits joining with curiosity of diving
into secrets of what kind soever, not able to find what they have long
sought, are easily drawn to believe it is no where to be found; for who should
sooner find it then they? In this conjunction of the former propension to
overreach our selves in gathering the product of delightful inductions, and
of this jealousy, lest others by Gods graces might excel our natural parts,
fall out many fearful eclipses; which though they utterly obscure not the
whole glory of the Godhead, yet they often bereave us of the illumination of
his providence, or influence of graces; suspected by many in heat of emulation
and opposition, to be but fancies. As what man almost is there that has
overtopped others by height of place, which will acknowledge any of his
inferiors (though never liable to the least suspicion of such cunning tricks,
as he may be daily taken with, and will not stick to maintain as lawful) to
be more sincere than himself; not that he always mistrusts other men's present
protestations, or professed resolutions for tendering the safety of their
consciences, to be but feigned; but these he imagines would alter with change
of place; from whose height every man would learn (as he has done) either to
discern wonted strictness to be but unexperienced scrupulositie, or in
charity to esteem such blemishes as appear great in little ones, to be but
little in great ones. And it may be, curious observance of bad patterns set by
others, first emboldened him to adventure upon like courses. Thus finally from
experience of their own, and inspection of others liberty in matters
disputable, or rather in impartial judgments, damnable: the worldly minded
labor to make up this complete induction; That such strictness or sincerity
of life as some would profess, is, in these latter days but an affected
fancy, a shadow or picture taken from the ancient, whereunto no substance can
now be found proportionable. To suspect antiquity of fabulositie or hypocrisy,
is a degree of Atheism whereunto ordinary pride or emulation, (unless joined
with cutiositie) can hardly impell them, because few enter comparison with the
dead without as great danger of disgrace for the attempt, as can befall them by
yielding superiority to the living, with whom they are, or can be compared for
Christian integrity or sincerity. But could the opposition be as direct in
the one case, as in the other; could jealousy, lest former Saints might go
before them, as much exasperate their proud thoughts, as preferment of their
present corrivals does; they would be more ready to give Gods spirit the lie,
than to take the foil: rather should divine goodness it self be denied, than
any be acknowledged (simply better than themselves. Take them as they be, they
differ not much from Epicurus his temper, who thought the gods were not of a
gracious and benign nature, because men in his opinion, were such from
imbecillitie only; more sottish was his collection to prove the gods had
humane bodies, because he never had seen a reasonable or intelligent mind but
in such bodies. For, as Tully well replies, he should by the same reason have
denied them to have either body, soul, or being, in as much as they had been
unto him always invisible. Thus to conclude, whilst men of proud minds and
insincere are so backward to believe any better things by others then they know
by themselves, or their consorts, they prove themselves to be neither wiser nor
honester than he that said in his heart, There is no God. Though Nabals be not
their proper names, yet foolishness is with them: and if all be as they are,
all are corrupt, all are abominable, all without understanding, without God,
whose people they eat up as a man would eat bread, making a mock of the
poor because the Lord is his trust. Consonant to this secret language of these
polypragmaticall ambitious politic hearts, were the collections, which their
cousin Nabal uttered with his lips. Having known perhaps some fugitive
servants in his time, he can hardly persuade himself that David's messengers
were any better than vagrant persons, worthy to be laid fast by the heels for
demanding a deed of charity on their masters behalf at his hands. Or
admitting they be his true servants, why what is David? or who is the son of
Ishai? what excellency is either in father or son? Would either of them take
their bread, their water and flesh, which they had killed for their sheerers,
and send it to him by men whom they know not whence they were? 1 Samuel 25. v.
10. In every covetous churlish proud, and ambitious mind, we may to this day
observe the like promptness to suspect truth of falsehood, to put good for
evil, and evil for good, to malign or vilify the best graces of God
bestowed upon his servants, rather than their substance should be diminished by
paying them tribute; or their reputation or worth disparaged by suffering others
to tender them such respect as is due to Gods faithful messengers. And if by
these devices they did not hope to set themselves without the reach of their
check, whose right esteem standing in direct opposition to them, would breed
their reproach; the Godhead it self, the rule of goodness, should at the next
push be impugn^d. But this is an accursed plant, which though it never grow to
such height as to deny there is a God, yet may it be much more deadly than the
former branches of pertinacious disputatiue Atheism. What it wants of them in
full height or growth is more then fully containd in the deadliness of the
root. The other often springs from curiosity of fancy or artificial tricks
of wit, or superfluity of brain, whereas nothing but satanized affection
deeply rooted in the heart could afford such store of malignant nutriment as
this hellish slip must be fed with. Nor do Satan and his Angels deny there is
a God, whose power they often experience to be much greater than their own.
But that he is better than they are, or would be, had they his power; that he
is more holy true and just, or more favorable to mankind, than they would have
proved, might they have gotten that place in heaven which they sought for, is a
comparison which they can in no way digest. The chief art they exercise to
misleade man from the ways of truth and life, is to empeach God of falsehood,
as if he would lie for his advantage as they do, without any such necessity
as they have, or finally to cast such suspicious aspersions upon his laws and
promises, as their incarnate instruments do upon the lives and resolutions of
his Saints among whom they live. The virulent censures which these slaves of
corruption vomit out, give us the true taste of their Masters loathsome rancor
against God.

CHAPTER VII.
Of malignant Atheism. Of the original of enmity unto Godliness. That the
excess of this sin does bear witness to the truth which it oppugnes.

1 AS there is no passion for the present more impetuous than the burning fits
of incontinency: no corruption that can work such strange suffusions in the
eye of reason as the smoking of fleshly lust: so is there no permanent
disposition of body or soul so apt to quench or poison all natural notions of
God, or religion, as dissolute intemperancy once rooted by long custom.
Incontinency, as the Aristotle in Ethi^.
Philosopher observes, draws us to a blindfold choice of particulars, whose
vniversals we condemn and reject; but intemperance corrupts the very root or
first principles whence all touch or conscience of good or evil springs. If
temperance according to the inscription which it bears in Greek, be the
nursing mother of morrall prudence, or safe guardian of the mind and
conscience; what other brood can be expected from dissolute intemperance but
that folly of heart which so disordereth all our thoughts and actions as if
there were no God to over see them. Civil wisdom in Platoes judgment may
sooner entombe, than enshrine her self in bodies full stuffed twice every day,
unaccustomed to lie without a bedfellow by night: and we Christians know that
vigilance and abstinence are as two Vshers which bring our prayers unto Gods
presence. His spirit delights to dwell in breasts thus inwardly cleansed by
abstinence and outwardly guarded with sobriety and watchfulness. But
drunkenness and surfeiting (as a Basil.
Father speaks) drives him out of the humane soul, as smoke does Bees out of
their hiues; howbeit that which goes into the mouth, does not so much offend
him as that which comes out of the heart, as adulterous or unclean thoughts.
Yea the heart may be undefiled with lust, and yet vnqualified either for
entertaining Gods spirit speaking to us, or for offering up incense unto him.
That Gods testimony of himself, Exodus 19.15.
I am the Lord thy God which brought thee out of the land of Egypt might be
imprinted in the Israelites senses, they are commanded not to come at their
wines, when they came to hear it. And there must be a separation for a time
between them whom God has joined and made one body, that they may by fervency
of abstinent prayers, be united to him in spirit. 1 Cor. 7.5.
Strange then it is not, nor can it so seem, that sociall lust should have
such peculiar antipathy with that holiness, which makes us capable of Gods
presence, without which we are but Atheists, when as matrimonial chastity
consorts no better, than has been said with the purity of Angelical life;
when as the children of the resurrection (as our Savior tells us) shall no more
brook the marriage bed. Now as they which in that other world enjoy the sight
of God, can have no mind of such bodily pleasures as may be lawful to
mortality: so neither will the intemperate appetite of unlawful lust suffer
mortality to see God in his Word, his threats, or promises. This is the will
of God even our sanctification, that we should abstain from fornication, that
every one should know how to possess his vessel in holiness and honor. 1
These. 4.2, 3, 4.
Not in the lust of concupiscence as do the Gentiles which know not God.
Ignorance of God brought forth these lusts of concupiscence in the Heathen: and
the like lusts as greedily affected by Christians, breed not ignorance only,
but a denial of God, or of that holiness which he is, without whose symbol
no man shall ever see him.

2. To have wrought the wise King to such gross Idolatry as he polluted his
soul withal, by any other means than by tempting love of strange women, or
other consorts of carnal pleasures, had been perchance a matter impossible to
the great tempter himself. To have allured him in that age unto Atheism, had
been bootlesse, when as most of the gods which he worshipped, were held as
countenancers or abetters of luxury, riot, and intemperance. But now destitute
of these pretended indulgences, or dispensatio^s from supposed divine powers,
by whose authority the old world was easily enticed to impurity, he labors to
harden latter ages in this sin, (whereto most of us are naturally as prone as
were our forefathers) by persuading them there is no true God, that will
undoubtedly call them unto judgment for giving the raines to headstrong lust.
Hardly can Atheism be so absolute in any, as utterly to free them from all
contradiction or check of conscience whiles they wallow in uncleanness, but
such contradictions, compared with the strength of opposite desires, seem to
argue rather light surmises or iealousies, then any firm belief (so much as
moral or natural) that there is a God, or righteous judge eternal. To hold
it more probable, there is such a God or judge, then none, is the lowest degree
imaginable of belief, if not rather the one extremity or vltimum non esse of
infidelity or unbelief. But this strong bent of lust where it reigns, keeps
men's conjectures of divine providence, or final judgment, below this pitch. As
men of highest place or hautiest spirits, so desires of greatest strength are
always most impatient of cross or opposition. Against them, conscience cannot
mutter, but shall be as quickly put to silence, as a precise Preacher that will
take upon him to reform the disorders of a dissolute Court Dubium no^ est quia
tanto quisque minus dolet, quod desint aterna; quanto magis gaudet quou adsint
temporalia. Greg. in cap. 31. Job. cap. 2.
. For whiles the delight or solace which men take in sensual pleasures exceeds
(without comparison) all sense or feeling of any spiritual joy: they cannot
but wish to exchange their remote hopes of the one, for quiet fruition of the
other, and once possessed with eager desires there might be no King in Israel,
but that every man without any fear of after reckonings might do what seemed
good in his own eyes: their often longing to have it so, easily impels them to
think it is so; for miseri facile credunt, quae volunt: and this conceit once
entertained sets loose the sensual appetite to run its course without a
curb: so does presumption of uncontrollable liberty still whet the taste or
sense of wonted pleasures which have been formerly abated by restraint.
Lastly, from experience of this change and manifest improouement of accustomed
delights, necessarily arises a detestation or loathing of all scrupulositie,
as chief enemy to their greatest good. Thus they fall from one mischief to
another, until their consciences become cauterized with the flames of lust,
and being past all feeling, they give themselves over unto lasciviousness, to
work all uncleanness with greediness Ephesians. 4.18, 19.
.

3. All dissolute behavior is dangerous, and serves as fuel to this
infernal fire, which will excruciate that soul after death, whose conscience
it seares in this life: but that is much worse which is matched with hautie
vastness of mind, for the most part transfused from gluttonish appetite, or
the Epicurean disposition. As Boares and Bulls or other creatures by nature or
breeding tame, only through hugeness of body or fullness of plight, grow
often wild, fierce, or mankene: so men from a like disposition of body or
indulgence to brutish appetites, come to a gyantly temper of mind, ready to
proclaim war against heaven and heavenly powers. What shall we think the
Giants were (says Lib. 1. Saturnae. cap. 20.
Macrobius,) but a wicked generation of men which denied the gods, who for this
reason were thought to have attempted their deposition from their heavenly
thrones. He was not pacified (says a better Writer) toward the old Giants,
who fell away in the strength of their foolishness. Hence the same Author
prays jointly against these sister sins and twinns of hell; Ecclus, 16.^.
O Lord father and God of my life leave me not in their imagination, neither
give me a proud look, but turn away from thy servant a Gyantly mind. Take
from me vain hope and concupiscence, and retain him in obedience that
desires continually to serve thee. Let not the greediness of the belly, nor
lust of the flesh hold me, and give not me thy servant over to an impudent or
gyantly mind Eccl^s 23. v. 4, 5, 6.
. This he prays against, was the very temper of the Cyclops, as Homer and
Euripides have pictured them. After Ulysses and his mates had besought the
Giant to be good unto them for Jupiters sake the supposed protector of the
helpless stranger; He answered him in this or like language. (...), Hom.
Odiss. lib. 9. page 261, 262.

(...), etc.
My petty guest a fool thou art,
or sure thou comm'st from far,
Thou hop'st with names of heavenly Gods.
the Cyclops stout to scarre:
Unto the Gods we owe no fear,
we no observance show,
Our selves to be as good as they,
or better, well we know.
For Goate-nurst love, his love or hate,
I weigh it not a whit,
Nor thee nor thine for him I Will spare,
but as I think it fit.
His picture as Euripides has taken it, is more Gyantly vast. For he paints
him proclaiming his belly to be the only or greatest God, unto whose sacrifice
the fruits and increase of the earth are due by title so sovereign, as neither
heaven nor earth could withdraw or deteyne them. Speeches altogether as
unsavory will the belly-servers of our time belch out, though not directly
against God (because they live not in an Anarchie destitute of humane laws as
the Cyclops did) yet against the messengers of his sacred will revealed for
their salvation, whiles we dehort them from these shameful courses wherein
they glory to their destruction. And albeit they use no such express form of
liturgy, as did the Cyclops while they sacrifice to their bellies: yet S.
Paul's testimony is express, that their belly is their God Phil. 3.19.
. And of the two Priests or grand sacrificers to this domesticke Idol; the dry
Glutton (me thinks) resembles the Land-serpent, as his brother the beastly
Drunkard does the Water-snake. This latter is more unsightly and ugly to the
eye; the former more noisome and venomous to religious society. His enmity
against the Woman's seed more deadly, but less avoydable, because the working
of his poison is less offensive and more secret.

4. Simple Atheism consists in an equilibration of the mind, brought as it
were so to hang in its own light, as it cannot see whether way to incline, but
hoovers in the middle with Diagoras, de Dijs non habeo quid dicam, etc.
Concerning the Gods I have nothing to say for them, or against them. Howbeit to
men thus minded it seems the safest course lite pendente, to sacrifice only
to their own desires, and to hold Gods part by sequestratio^. The curious or
disputing Atheist strives to draw himself down a little below this level, by
matching the attractions of divine goodness with the motions of his own
imaginations. But the malignancy of this Atheism which arises from
combination of the late mentioned distempers, may grow so great, as to turn
the notions of good and evil topsie turvie: transposing these inclinations
which nature has set on heaven and heavenly things, toward hell. As all
inordinate affections, more or less, abate or countersway our propensions unto
goodness; so the excess of such as are most malignant, bring the soul to an
utter distaste or loathing of whatsoever is truly good, and to delight in
doing mischief. Now the very procurers or advancers of mischief much
affected, shall be deified with rites and titles due to God alone, as it were
in factious opposition to the holy spirit. The same unwieldy or vast desires of
sensual pleasures or contentments, which disenables men to distinguish that
which is truly good, from that which seems best to their distempers, will
with the same facility draw them blindfold to a like sinister or preposterous
choice of their patrones. As the truly godly, worship the true God, because
his greatness is so good to all; so unto these wicked or malignant Impes, That
shall be Lord, That shall be God, whatsoever it be which they esteem their
greatest good, or under whose protection they may quietly possess what they
already enjoy. We see it too often experienced, that stubborn desires of
lucre, honor, lust, or revenge, draw men destitute of other means for
accomplishing their hopes, unto express and wilful compacts with Devils, or
performances of sacrifices to infernal powers. The observant Poet makes Juno
speak, as great Personages in like remediless crosses, usually resolve:
Flectere si nequeo superos, Acheronta movebo. Virgil.
nor does the language of that other, ought vary from the common practice of
forlorn hopes, suggested by vast desires: -- Vos mihi manes Idem.

Este boni, quoniam superis aversa voluntas.
If these and the like prayers or wishes of heathen supplicants found grateful
success, their second edition in plain English was thus: What Heavens have
marred, whiles Hell amends,
Fiends go for Gods, and Gods for Fiends.


5. With many men otherwise of sober disposition, only too much wedded to the
world, or to their own wills, a sorcerers charm will be as acceptable, as a
godly prayer, so the event ensuing give present content or satisfaction to
their desires. Yet many Atheists (as Vasquez in primampartem, quest. 2. artic.
3. disp. 20. cap. 4. number. 10.
Vasques counts it a point of special observation) upon wicked practices,
sometimes recoyle, and come to believe there is a God or guide of nature, by
evident experience of magic feats, far surpassing the power of man, or
creatures visible.

6. It seems to me an object worthy deeper speculation of the observant, that
albeit some Atheists may so far abortivate, or dead the seeds of religion
sown in their souls, as that they shall never bring forth any express
thought, or live apprehension of their Creator; yet can they not utterly
evacuate nature of their remainder. Either in their speeches, actions, or
resolutions, they still bewray some corrupt relics of celestial infusions.
And as wine and strong waters, which through ill keeping, have lost their
native force and proper relish, become most loathsome and unpleasant; so the
imbred notions of God and godliness after they be themselves tainted, do
sublimate the corruptions of nature (with which they mingle) into a kind of
rancor more than naturally irreligious, such as the Psalmist calls the poison
of Aspes. In all the contentious quarrels usually picked by dissolute and
godless persons against men of religious and unspotted life, there appears a
root of bitterness supernatural or diabolical. The piety that shines in the
one, the other holds in execration, and persecuteth with such a kind of zealous
hate as true piety does execrable villainies. If they be men of better place
which be thus badly minded, they exact respect and duty in such strains of
passion, as if it were sacrilege to deny it them; albeit in other cases
nothing to them is sacred, or worthy of religious esteem. The threats
likewise of revenge breathed out by them in their braver humors, are usually
besprinckled with some flowing notions of a divine Majesty, whereof in this
humor only they are apprehensiue; because the personal offense committed
against their dignities, cannot seem so great as they desire to make them,
without deriving Gods right or sovereignty upon themselves, or making him
sharer in their wrongs.

7. Of some affinity, or rather of the self same progeny with this
observation, is that sweet discourse of S. Austine, wherein he proves the
desire of peace to be so deeply implanted in every man's soul, as spirits most
turbulent and unquiet can never utterly shake it of, but rather of necessity
(though preposterously) follow it, even in such seditious and tumultuous
broils as wilfully and causl^sly they have kindled. Quis milvus qua^tumlibet
solitarius rapinis non circumuolat: non coniugiu^ c^pulat, ^idum congerit, ^ua
confouet, pullos alit, and quasi cu^ sua matre familias societate^ domesticam,
quanta potest pace conservat, etc. Aug. de Civit. Dei. lib. 19. cap 12. Omnis
homo etiam belligerando pa^em requirit, nemo autem bellum pacificando. Nam
etilli qui pacem in qua sunt perturbare volunt: non pacem oderunt, sed came pro
arbitrio suo cupiunt commutari. Non ergo vt sit pax uolunt, sed vt casit, quam
^olu^t. Aug. ibidem.
What Kite is there so much addicted to solitude in soaring after his prey,
which has not his mate, whom he helps in hatching and cherishing their common
brood, which preserues not the laws of domesticke society with his female
consort, with as great peace as he can? How much more is man led by the laws
of nature to maintain peace as far as in him lies with all men: when as
even wicked and naughty men, will fight for the welfare of them and theirs:
and would (if it were possible) that all men and all things else might do them
service, unless they conspire together for their peace, either through love or
fear? Thus does pride though preposterously imitate God, it hates equality
with all fellow creatures under God, but seeks to exercise dominion over them
in Gods stead. So then it hates that just peace which is of God, and loves its
own unrighteous peace, but not to love some one kind of peace or other it
cannot choose. For (...) is so contrary to nature, as to (...) out all print of
natures laws. Those (as the same Father adds) which disturb the peace
wherein they live, do not simply hate peace, but rather covet to change it at
their pleasure. It is not their will then to have no peace, but to have such
peace as they will. In like manner, the Fool of Fools (the irreligious
Politician) when he wishes in his heart there might be no God, desires
himself might be as God. The observances which he exacts of his inferiors are
many times such, as natural reason not infatuated may easily discover to
belong unto a greater power than he is capable of, whose authority he abuses
as ungracious servants do their gracious Lords and Masters.

CHAP. VIII.
Means for preventing infection of Atheism or irreligion* In what temper or
constitution of mind, the ingraffed notion of God and goodness does best
prosper. That affliction gives understanding in matters sacred, with the
reasons why it does so.

1. THe chief causes of Atheism being discovered, the means to prevent it
cannot be difficult and these consist in this ^iple care: First, To preserve
the heart, or fountain pure and clean from all mixture of earth or dregs of
lust, in which the image of God either cannot be imprinted, or will quickly be
defaced. Secondly, To keep it calm and free from agitation of boisterous or
tumultuous passions, whereby the representation of impressions acquired, or
naturally inherent, are always hindered. Thirdly, To avoyde the intangling love
of wrangling arts, whose impertinent curious disquisitions, wooven for the most
part, with obscure perplexed terms s^re as a cataract upon the eye of reason,
intercepting its rays from piercing into the heart; that, being a deep into
whose bottom ordinary sights without these helps as well for right proposal
or representation of the object, as for the right qualification of the
faculty, cannot diue. To the set the Reader may add the qualities before
required for the right growth of faith Justifying faith. Section the last.
. Whatsoever hinders it must needs hinder all belief of the true God* and
whatsoever is availeable for furthering it, must needs be alike availeable for
raising belief of Gods existence, his goodness, or other attributes. But of
that purity of heart, wherein the right and perfect representation of the
divine nature is only seen, we are to speak more particularly in the last
part of this Treatise.

2. Besides avoidance of these general encumbrances, a peculiar disposition or
temper there is, wherein the common notion of the Deity or divine power gives
a more sensible Crisis of its inherence in our soul. The nature of which
disposition cannot better be expressed, than by a temper contrary to the
gyantly vastness of mind, or unrelenting stubbornness of heart. It is well
observed by the H^artes in his trial of Wits.
Examiner of wits, that he which is by nature vnapprehensiue of danger, is
nearer allied unto foole-hardinesse than to fortitude; seeing the truly
valourous, will in many cases be afraid, though not affrighted out of their
wits, or farther dei^cted than occasions require. Howbeit the valor it self
so much magnified amongst the Heathen, or with the world to this day, is no fit
consort for Christian humility, rather to be reckoned amongst the mighty
things which God has purposed to confound, than with the weak which he has
chosen to confound them. The true reason why it was so much extold above other
virtues, was not (the great Aristotle in his Problemes.
Philosopher being judge) because it was by nature better, or did internally
more beautify the parties minds where in it rested, but because it did much
benefit others. The disposition which now we see^e, is somewhat lower, more
apprehensiue of death, of danger, or other humane infirmities* ^pter to be
stricken with fear at consciousnes of internal evils, than to be driven upon
imminent perils by popular Fame. To the framing of this middle temper between
^elation of mind and timorous deiection, was that Counsel of Cyprian
directed, Vt cognoscere Deum possis, te ante cognosce. Nothing is farther from
us (says a learned Writer) than we are from our selves; and naughty men (as
Seneca says) are every where, besides with themselves; yet the farther from
our selves we are, the farther we are from our God. Therefore says God by the
Prophet Esaias; Hear you that are a far of. And in the language of Solomon in
his purest thoughts, 2 Chronicles. cap. 6. verse. 37, 38.
to turn to our own hearts, and to turn to the Lord with our hearts, are of
equivalent signification. Now to know our selves (as Tully observes) binds us,
as well to a modest esteem of our own worth, or (to speak more
Christian-like) of our place amongst Gods creatures, as to a notice of our
infirmities. Too much deiection (as S. Cyprian concludes) disposes to
Idolatry, as Ingenuous fear does to the knowledge of the true God. Howbeit of
such devotion, as the Heathens had, fear (it seems) was the mother: hence
(perhaps) were they so observant first to offer placatory sacrifices to such
Gods as might do them harm, and afterward propitiatory sacrifices to those of
whom they expected good. Observabant Antiqui in sacrificijs, vt ante adversos
placarent, et postea propitios invocarent Gyraldus Syntag. 17.
. Thus much, if best Grammarians are to be believed, is curiously charactarized
unto us by the Roman Poet, who (as this late Writer complains) was much
better seen in Heathen rites, than Christian Divines are in the mysteries of
sacrifices offered unto the true God. For instance to our present purpose, when
Aenaeas and his followers had resolved to offer sacrifice for a fair Wind and
merry passage toward Candie, they offer first to Neptune, then to Apollo; to
the stormy winter, before the sweet spring Winds: Virg. Aeueid. lib. 3.
Ergo agite, and divum ducunt qua iussa, sequamur:
Placemus ventos, and Gnosia regna petamus.
Nec longo distant cursu (modo Jupiter adsit)
Tertia lux classem Cretaeis sistet in oris.
Sic fatus, meritos aris mactauit honores,
Taurum Neptuno, taurum tibi pulcher Apollo,
Nigram Hyemi pecudem, zephyris felicibus albam.
Again when Dido wooed the Gods with sacrifices to further her intended
marriage with Aeneas: though Juno were the first in her intention and esteem,
as being finally to bless the Match; yet she begins with Ceres whom she feared
would be most averse as detesting all marriage for the stealth of her daughter,
married against her will; and in the next place with Apollo, who never had wife
himself; and therefore bore no great affection unto marriage. Virg. Aeneid.
lib. 4.
Principio delubra adeunt, pacemque per aras
Exquirunt: mactant lectas de more bidentes
Frugiferae Cereri, Phoeboque, patrique Lyaeo:
Iunoni ante omnes, cui vincla iugalia curae.
The sum of these, and like instances, is, That fear was the beginning of
such wisdom, as the Heathens had concerning divine powers. Not Ignorance, but
Fear was the Mother of their devotion.

3. There is no sinewe of carnal strength, but secretly lifts up the heart,
and sometimes the hand and voice, against the God of our strength and health.
Might Caligula whenever it thundered, have had the opportunity of scouting
into a place, as well fenc't by nature as the Cyclops den, he would have
thought as little, or lightly, as the vast Giant did of the great God, whom he
never thought of but with fear; whom he never feared, save when he spoke to
him in this terrible language, which yet would have stricken small terror
through thick rocks, into such a brawnie heart, as the anatomy of the Cyclops
represents, Vide Euripid. Cyclops.
who thought so much of the noise as came to his cares, might easily be
counter-blasted with the like within. Minds altogether as gyantly, and vast,
are often lodged in bodies not half so huge. What is wanting to the
supportance of such security in personal strength and greatness, is made up
by multitude of consorts; As imagine a garrison of good fellows, so qualified,
as Syracides prayed he never might be, should meet in a nooke or sconce, as
well guarded against storm and tempest, and as well stored with victuals as
was the Cyclops cave; what other note might be expected whiles good liquor
lasted, but let the Welkin roar. The best vent we can give to this natural
pride that makes us thus prone to blasphemy, would be to make our infirmities
the chief matter of our glory or boasting.

4. As the fear of God is the beginning of wisdom, so the beginning of this
fear, is from a temper apprehensiue of terrors represented in his creatures.
Primus in orb Deos fecit timor, was a speech uttered by an audacious
Hare-braine in a furious passion; no marvel if it did overlash. The present
advice of the Oracle did contradict his foole-hardy desire of war, and to
persuade his desperate companions the ominous signs related, were but
pretended by the Prophet; He calls the original of Religion in question, as if
divine powers had no true subsistence, but were represented only by gli^mering
fear, or faint-heartednesse. And faint-hearted he counted all, that were not
so furious as himself. But unto this suspicion, ingenuous fear had not been
liable, unless common experience had taught him, or the Poet which painted him
in this humor, that men in perplexities, unexpected troubles, or fears, (in
humane censure) remediless, are usually most mindful of God. Extremities,
indeed cause the natural notions, which are ingraffed in our hearts to work:
they imprint not the opinion or persuasion of Religion. But it is a fallacy
too See the 5. Section of this Book, the last Chapter.
familiar unto sober thoughts, even in their accurate disquisitions of natures
secrets, to esteem that as the total cause, or first producer, which sets
nature only a working, or does but cherish or manifest effects truly
pre-existent, though latent. Perchance the letting out of a little hot blood,
or some other more grievous print of divine punishment, would have restored the
Bedlem to his right mind, so as others might have taken out that lesson from
him, which Pliny the younger did from his sick friend, not much unlike to that
of our Apostle; When I am weak, then am I strong. Nuper me cu^usdam amici
languor admonuit, optimos esse nos dum infirmi sumus. Que^ eniminsirmu^ aut
avaritia aut libido solicitat? non amoribus seruit, non appetit honores, opes
negligit, and quantulumcunque vt relicturus, satis habet tunc Deos: tunc
homine^ esse se memini^ inuidet nemini, neminemmir atur, neminem despicit, ac
ne sermonibus quidem malignis aut attendit, aut alitur, balinea imaginatur and
fontes: Haec summa curaru^ summa votorum, molemque in posterum and pinguem si
contingat euadere, hoc est, innoxiam beatamque destinat vitam, Possum ergo quod
pluribus verbis, pluribus etiam voluminibus Philosophi docere conantur, ipse
breuiter tibi mihique praecipere, vt tales esse sani perseueremus, quales nos
futuros profitemur infirmi. Plin. Epistola 26. ad Maximum. lib. 7.
The languishment of a certain friend (says this Author) has taught me of
late, that we are best men when we are sickly; what sick man is tempted with
avarice or lust? he is not subject to love, or greedy of honor, wealth he
contemnes, how little soever he has, it suffices him, being shortly to leave
it. Then he reme^bers there be Gods, that he himself is but a man; he envies
no man, he admires no man, he despises no man; maligning speeches neither
win his attention, nor please his inclination; his imagination runs on baths
or fountains: This is the chief of his care, the prime of his desires, if it
please God he may recover his former health and plight, he purposes an
harmless and an happy life. What Philosophers labor to teach us in many
words, yea in many volumes, I can comprehend in this short precept; Let us
persevere such in health, as we promise to be in our sickness. That this
Heathen whiles thus well minded otherwise, should be so mindful of his God, is
a very pregnant proof from the effect, that the natural ingraffed notions of
the Deity proportionably increase or wane with the notions of moral good or
evil. The cause hereof is more apparent, from that essential link or
combination, which is between the conceit of vice and virtue, and the
conceit of a Judgment after this life, wherein different estates shall be
awarded to the virtuous and to the vicious; hence the true apprehension of the
one naturally draws out an undoubted apprehension of the other, unless the
understanding be vnattentiue or perverted. For that any thing should be so
simply good, as a man might not upon sundry respects abjure the practice of it;
or ought so absolutely evil, as upon no terms it might be embraced, unless
we grant the soul to be immortal and capable of misery and happiness in
another world, is an imagination unfitting the capacity of brutish or mere
sensitive creatures, as shall be showed by Gods assistance in the Article of
final Judgment.

5. That sickness and other crosses or calamities are best teachers of such
good lessons, as Plinies forementioned friend had learned from them, Elihu long
before him had observed: whose observation includes thus much withal, that
such as will not be taught by these instructions, are condemned for trewants
and non-proficients in the school of Nature, Virtue, or Religion, that is, for
Hypocrites and men unsound at the heart. For if the root or seed of moral
goodness remain sound, the Maxim holds always true, [ maturant aspera
mentem] Adversity is like an harvest Sun, it ripeneth the mind to bring
forth fruits of repentance. He withdraws not his eyes from the righteous;
but with Kings are they on the throne, yea he does establish them for ever, and
they are exalted. And if they be bound in fetters, and be holden in cords of
affliction, then he shows them their work, and their transgressions, that
they have exceeded. He opens also their ear to discipline, and commands
that they return from iniquity. If they obey and serve him, they shall spend
their days in prosperity, and their years in pleasures. But if they obey
not, they shall perish by the sword, and they shall dye without knowledge: but
the Hypocrites in heart heap up wrath; they cry not when he binds them Job.
36. ver 7. etc.
. The truth as well of Plinies, as of Elihues observation is presupposed by
most of Gods Prophets, with whom it is usual to vpbraid his people with
brutish stupiditie and hardness of heart; to brand them with the note of
ungracious children, for not returning unto the Lord in their distress: as if
to continue in wonted sins or riotous courses, after such sensible and real
proclamations to desist, were open rebellion against God. Senslesnesse of
pains in extreme agonies, does not more certainly prognosticate death of
body, or decay of bodily life and spirits, than impenitency in affliction does
a desperate estate of soul. For the people turns not unto him that smites
them, neither do they seek the Lord of Hosts. Therefore the Lord will cut off
from Israel head and tail, branch and rush in one day Isaiah 9. v. 13, 14.
. And in that day did the Lord God of Hosts call to weeping, and to mourning,
and to baldness, and to girding with sackcloth. And behold joy, and gladness,
slaying oxen, and killing sheep, eating flesh, and drinking wine: let us eat
and drink for to morrow we shall dye. And it was revealed in mine ears by
the Lord of Hosts; surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you, till ye
dye, says the Lord God of Hosts Isaiah 22. v. 12, 13, 14.
.

6. The reason of this truth it self thus testified by three ranks of
witnesses, is not obscure in their Philosophy, to whom I most accord; who teach
that the seeds of all truth are sown by Gods hand in the humane soul, and
differ only in reference or denomination from our desires of knowledge
indefinitely taken. As to our first parents, so unto us, when we first come
unto the use of reason, knowledge it self, and for its own sake, seems
sweet and welcome; whether it be of things good or evil, we much respect not.
But this desire of knowledge, which in respect of actual apprehension is
indifferent, neither set upon good nor evil, is usually taken up by actual or
experimental knowledge of things evil, or so unprofitable, that our
inclinations or adherences unto them, either countersway our inclinations unto
goodness, or choke our apprehensions of things truly good. Now after our
hopes of enjoying such sense-pleasing objects, be by affliction or calamity
cut of: the soul which has not been indissolubly wedded unto them or
already given over by God unto a reprobate sense, has more liberty than
before it had, to retire into it self, and being freed from the attractiue
force of allurements, unto the vanities of the world, the Devil, or flesh: the
natural or implanted seeds of goodness recover life and strength, and begin
to sprout out into apprehensions, either in loathing their former courses, or
in seeking after better. And every least part or degree of goodness truly
apprehended, brings forth an apprehension of the author or fountain, whence
it flows, that is, of the divine nature. Psalm. 30. ver. 6, 7, 8.
In my prosperity I said, I shall never be moved. Lord by thy favor thou have
made my mountain to stand strong: thou did hide thy face, and I was
troubled. I cried to thee, O Lord: and unto the Lord I made my supplication. It
may seem strange to our first considerations, as Calvin with some Sicut onim
Ferrum quod diuturna quiet rubiginem contraxit, accommodari ad nullos vsus
potest, nisi in ignem coniectum recoquatur and malleo contundatur: sic post
quam semel pravaluit securitas carnis, nemo alacriter animam ad Deum attollit,
nisi cruce maceratus and probe subactus. Mollerus in Psalm. 30 9.
others upon this place observe, that God should enlighten David's eyes by
hiding his face from him, without the light of whose countenance, even
knowledge it self is no better than darkness. But so it is, that prosperity
does oftentimes infatuate the best men, and adversity makes bad men wise. The
saying is authentic, though the Author be Apocryphal, Baruc. cap. 3. verse. 1.
Anima in angustijs and spiritus anxius clamat ad te. O Lord God almighty, God
of Israel, the soul in Anguish, the troubled spirit cries unto thee. So is
that other, Castigatio tua disciplina est eis; Thy chastisement is their
instruction. Cogor hic meinor abilem historiam refer. Accidit nobis in
diversario quodam coenantibus, vt profanus Dei contemptor sermones nostros de
spe coelestis vitae deridens, subinde ludibrium hoc euomeret, Coelum Coeli
Domino Illic repent correptus diris torminibus coepit vociferari, O Deus, O
Deus: atque vt erat patulo gutture, boatu suo replebat totum canaculum. Ego qui
in eum seue e excandueram, perrexi meo more, stomackose denuncians vt tunc
saltim fentiret non impune Deo illudi. Vnus ex convivis, qui hodie adhuc
superstes est, homo probus and religiosus, sed tamen facetus, hac opportunitate
in alium finam vsus est: Tune Deum invocas? an Philosophiae tua oblitus es? cur
non in suo coelo finis quief^ere? Et quot es ille tonabat, O D^us, hic alter
subsannans regerebat, vbi nunc est illud tuum, Coelum coeli Domino? Ac tunc
quid in l^vatus est: sed quodreliquum (...) vitae, in suis impuris sordibus
transegit.
Calvin has a memorable story of a profane Companion, that in his jollitie
abused these words of the Prophet; The heaven, even the heavens are the Lords:
but the earth has he given to the children of men. Psalm. 115. verse. 16. The
use or application which this wretch hence made, was, that God had as little to
do with him here on earth, as he had to do with God in heaven. But presently
being taken with a sudden gripe or pang, he cried out, O God, O God. Yet this
short affliction did not give him perfect understanding, for afterward, he
returned again unto his vomit and wallowing in his wonted uncleanness. This
relation of Calvines, serves as a testimony to confirm the truth of
Tertullians observation, which serves as a Document or sure experiment of our
last assertion. Vultis ex operibus ipsius tot ac talibus quibus continemur,
quibus sustinemur, quibus oblectamur, etiam quibus exterremur; vultis ex anim^
ipsius testimonio comprobemus? Qua licet carcere corporis pressa, licet
institutionibus prauis circumscripta, licet libidinibus et co^cupiscentijs
euigorata, licet falsis Dijs exancillata, cum tamen resipiscit, vt ex crapula,
vt ex somno, vt ex aliqua valetudine, and sanitatem suam patitur, Deum nominat,
hoc solo quia proprie, verus hic vnus Deus, bonus and magnus, Et quod Deus
dederit, omnium vox est. Iudicem quoque contestatur illum, Deus videt, and deo
commendo, and Deus mihi reddet. O testimonium animae naturaliter Christianae.
Denique pronuncians haec, non ad capitolium, sed ad coelum respicit. Novit enim
sedem Dei vivi; ab illo, and inde descendit. Tertullianus Apolog. adversus
Gentes. cap. ^7.
Shall I prove unto you (there is but one God) from his manifold works by
which we are preserved and sustained, with which we are refreshed, yea by which
we are astonished? or shall I prove the same truth by the testimony of the
Soul it self, which though it be kept under by the prison of the body, though
surrounded by naughty and dissolute education, though infeebled by lust and
evil concupiscence, though enslaued to false Gods: yet when she returns unto
her self out of Vide annocationes Ludouici de La Cerda in hu^c locum.
distempers (surfeit) sleep or other infirmity, and enioyes some gleames of
health, she calls on God without addition of other titles, because this God
which she calls upon, is truly one, truly good, and truly great. What God
shall award, is a speech rise in every man's mouth: unto this God, the Soul
appeals as unto her Judge. God he sees, to God I commend my cause, Let God
determine of me or for me. A worthy testimony that the Soul is naturally
Christian. Finally, the Soul whiles she acts these or the like parts looks
not to the Capitol (the imagined seat of such Gods as the Romans worshipped)
but up to Heaven as knowing the seat of the living God, from whom and whence
she is descended. Many other authorities which might here be avouched to the
same purpose, do sufficiently argue, that the multiplicitie of Gods, was a
conceit, or imagination seated or hatched only in the brain; that even the
very Heathens themselves which worshipped many Gods, and would have maintained
their profession of such service in opposition to their adversaries unto death;
being thoroughly pinched with calamity, or occasioned to look seriously into
their own hearts* did usually tender their supplications unto the Deity, or
divine power it self, which fills all places with his presence, whose
tribunal is in heaven. Seeing anguish of soul, contrition of spirit, or
(generally) affliction, cause natural notions of God and goodness, formerly
imprisoned in the earthly or fleshly part of this old man, to shoot forth and
present themselves to our apprehensions; in case, no calamity or affliction
do befall us, we are voluntarily to consort with others, whom God has touched
with his heavy hand, or as Solomon advises us, to visit the house of
mourning, more then the house of mirth. Or in case the Lord vouchsafe not to
send these his seuerer visitors, either to us, or to our neighbors; yet he
always gives us liberty, to inuit another guest in afflictions room, which
expects no costly or curious entertainment; fasting I mean; now to fast
according to the prescript of Gods law, is to afflict our souls.

CHAPTER IX.
In what respects supernatural grace or faith infused is necessary to the
right belief of these truths, which may in part, be certainly known by
diligent search of natural reason.

1. But if to nature not blinded by vain curiosity nor polluted with the dregs
of lust, if to men free from passion, or chastised by the hand of God the
apprehension of the Deity be clear and evident: the habit of supernatural
assent unto the first Article of this Creed, may seem either altogether
superfluous, or not very necessary. Unto this difficulty proposed in terms
more general, ( whether faith may be of objects otherwise evident and exactly
known) some schoolmen acutely thus reply; He that by reasons demonstratiue
knows this or other like truths believed, that there is one God, and no more,
which has created the world: may, (notwithstanding the evidence of motives
necessitating his will to this assent,) either doubt, or deem it a truth very
obscure and vnevident, whether God ever revealed thus much; otherwise, than by
the common light of Nature, or helps of Art. Consequently to their divinity,
they might reduce the resolution of the difficulty proposed to fewer terms
and more constant, thus, [ the habit of faith or supernatural assent is not
necessary to ascertaine us that the matters believed by us, are in themselves
true (seeing this much (as is supposed) may be prooved by reasons more evident
than faith, which is always of objects vnevident (at least wise as apprehended
by us) but to assure us, that their truth was testified or avouched by God,
whose testimony cannot be known but by his express word written or spoken.

2. But if our former assertion [ that our knowledge of any object cannot be
more certain then it is evident] be orthodoxall: he that could demonstrate any
Article of belief, should be more beholding to the evidence of Art or
demonstration, than to the supernatural habit of vnevident faith. Wherefore
with better consonancy to former discussions, and (if we be not in both
mistaken) unto the truth we may thus resolve the doubt proposed. The necessary
existence of a Godhead or supreme cause with the possibility of other things
believed, may be indefinitely known by light of Nature or demonstration; but
so much of these or any Article in this Creed contained; as every Christian
must believe, or (which is all one) the exact form of any one Articles entire
truth, can never be known by Art or Nature, but only by Gods word revealed,
or the internal testimony of his spirit refashioning his decayed image in men's
hearts, according to the pattern wherein they were first created. That the
resurrection (though this truth to corrupt nature seems most difficult) is not
impossible, yea that it is impossible there should not be a resurrection or
judgment after death, may be demonstrated; but that the wicked shall rise to
torments, the righteous to joy and glory everlasting, is a stream of life
which naturally springs not within the circuit of the heavens; it must be
infused from above.

3. The natural man left to himself, or using mere spectacles of art, yea
though admitted to the glass of Gods word, will always in one point or other
conceive amiss of the Deity, and transform the incorruptible nature into the
similitude of corruption. Yet further, admitting the natural man might attain
unto an exact model or right proportion of faith, and assent unto the objects
themselves rightly conceived, as evident and most certain, whilst their truth
were oppugn'd only by speculatiue contradiction: yet these persuasions would
quickly vanish, and his assent once assaulted with grievous tentations of the
flesh, or suggestions framed by Satan, forthwith recoyle. Unto every Article
then in this Creed, faith infused by the spirit of God, is necessary in two
respects. First, for framing an entire exact form of things believed.
Secondly, for quickening or fortifying our assent unto them as good in the
practice, against all assaults of the Devil, world, or flesh. Or more briefly;
it is necessary both for refashioning and reviving the decayed image of God in
our souls. Or, to notify the manner of our renovation by the manner of
creation: the ingraffed notion is the matter or subject, out of which Gods
spirit raises the right and entire frame of faith, as it did the frame and
fashion of this visible world out of that mass, which was first without form
though created by him. The indefinite truth of this notion, which is the
subject, whereon (as the spirits instrument) we are to work, will better
appear from the consent of the Heathen: the original of whose errors or
misconceipts about the essence, unity or nature of the Godhead, will direct
us for the right fashioning of his image in our selves.

4. But as it is the safest course for any man, to make trial of his skill at
foyles, before he adventure to give proof of his valor at sharp* so it will
be behoouefull for us in the next place to observe the original of
misapprehensions or misleadings of the Imagination in matters ordinary and
secular, wherein error is usually greater than the loss, that we may be the
better provided for preventing the like in matters sacred, wherein error is
always accompanied with danger; wherein finally to loose the way is utterly to
loose our selves.

SECTION. II.
Containing the original manner of right apprehensions, and errors in matters
natural or moral.

THough light of Nature and consent of Nations moved See Section the first,
cap. the 3.
Tully to that undoubted acknowledgement of divine powers, which we mentioned
before: yet when he came to discuss the nature of the Gods or Godhead in
particular, the very multiplicitie of opinions in this argument caused him to
reele and stagger. And had we no better guide then Nature to direct us in this
search, the best of us perhaps would quickly subcribe to his opinion in his
Preface to that Treatise; Non sumus ij, quibus nihil ver^m esse videatur: sed
ij, qui omnibus veris falsa quedam adiuncta esse dicamus, tanta similitudine,
vt i^ ijs nulla insit certa iudicandi, and assentiendi nota. etc. We are not
of their opinion which think nothing is true, but rather of theirs who think
all truths have some falsehoods annexed unto them, in such cunning and suitable
disguise, as there is scarce any certain rule left for discerning the one from
the other. etc. Cicero ad M: Brutum de natura Deorum. lib. 1. To a mere
natural man or Philosopher, it might well in the first place be questioned,
how he can possibly attain by light of nature to any knowledge of things
spiritual or imperceptible by sense.

CHAPTER X.
The several opinions of Philosophers concerning the manner how Intellection
is wrought or produced: what is to be thought of intelligible forms.

1. TWo Maxims there be in our vulgar Philosophy, which were they fully
stretched according to that propriety of speech, wherein Maxims should be
conceived, would sound too harsh to ordinary experience to consort well with
Philosophical truth; The one, that our understanding is Similis rasa tabula,
like to a plain Table, wherein nothing is, but what you list, may be written.
The other consonant enough to this; Nihil est intellectu, quod non prius erat
in sensu, that the Intellectiue soul is like an empty room, into which
nothing can be admitted, but what passes first through the gates of sense. The
necessary consequences of these Axioms, were they true, would be these. We can
understand nothing, but what we hear, see, smell, touch, or taste, nothing
otherwise than it appears to these senses. Does sense then bring us in love
with virtue? does it make us hate vice? or is the shape of good and evil
imprinted upon our sight, our hearing, or other organ? or how do we gather the
Sun to be always splendent, though it appear red, or wanish in a foggle or
duskie morning, or in the night appear not at all? To say the Active
understanding does refine the Phantasmes, or representations made by the Sense
from all material conditions annexed to them, as dross to metal; as it no
way meets with the former, so neither can it fully put off the latter objected
inconvenience. The reply it self, were it tried by the touch as accurately as
some have done it, has no fundamental soliditie of pure Philosophical truth,
to commend it unto forraigners, but a bare stamp of artificial language,
current only by compact in the Vide Hieronymum provenzalem de sensu and
sensibilibus.
Latin schools, as brass or leather tokens are in some particular places.
The very inscription it self would be misliked in Greece or Athens, which
never admitted any intelligible forms representative. Let such as have coined
them, tell us how they should be instampt upon our understandings by the
Phantasmes after the same manner, that the Phantasmes are imprinted upon the
senses by sensible objects? so should the understanding be a faculty as
merely passive and brutish as sense, and the object of sense should be the
principal agent in this work. It is true (at least in our first
contemplations) (though denied by Ac^arombonius, etc.
Aristotelian Interpreters of best note to be necessary in perfect
Contemplators,) that as there is no actual sight or vision but by beholding
colors, so non intelligimus nisi speculando phantasmata, we actually
understand not, but whiles we speculate the Phantasmes. Yet hence it follows
not, that as vision, so intellection should be accomplished by intromission of
the refined phantasmes into the understanding, but rather by extromission of
the intellectiue rays or beams into the Fantasy. Not altogether averse from
this opinion is an acute Schoolemans Interpretation of the former Axiom;
Intellectum conuerti ad phantasmata nihil aliud est, quam mouere imaginationem
ad formatione^ Phantasmatum. Forrariensis in cap. 65. Aq contra Gentes.
Admitting then the active understanding do irradiate, agitate, divide, and
compose the phantasmes, I would demand whether it know the things represented
before it behold their representations in the fantasy? If it knew them
before, it had somewhat in it self which was not commended to it by sense. Or
i^ no understanding be gotten but by impression of extracted phantasmes or
intelligible forms upon the passive understanding: seeing this extraction is
wrought in the fantasy, the understanding should know no more than the
fantasy does, because it has nothing in it which was not first in the
fantasy illuminated by the active understanding: nor could it ever reject any
information given in by the fantasy thus enlightened (as is supposed) by the
noblest faculty of the reasonable Soul.

2. Vide Phillippum Contarenum de perfectione rerum.
Others there be who have well refuted all intelligible forms, or impressions
of abstract Phantasmes upon the understanding, which nevertheless by going too
far against Platonicall Ideas, or notions imprinted by nature, have made
their own opinion (otherwise allowable) obnoxious to the former
inconveniences. Actual Intellection or understanding (to their apprehensions)
consists wholly in the true imitation of things presented, and then we are said
to understand, when the reasonable soul, Proteus-like transformes herself
into new similitudes; not when it puts on their form, as it were already made
fit for her, by the active understanding and the fantasy. All this being
granted, the former difficulties full remain: first, how we should rightly
understand the material entities never presented by sense: secondly, how the
reasonable soul should make undoubted trial, whether her own imitations of
what sense presents unto her, be exact and true. The great Philosopher
himself, from whose discourses the former broken Axioms are borrowed, graunts
that brute beasts have no sense or apprehensions of their sensitive functions,
although they have oftimes a more lively sense of external objects than man
has; it is then man's peculiar to have a true sense and judgment of all his
own functions, whether sensitive or intellectiue. This reflexed apprehensions
or revise whether of sensitive impressions or intellectual functions excited
by them, necessarily supposes some rule or copy pre-existent, by which their
examination should be tried. Imposble it is, this rule or copy should be taken
from sense, or any actual intellection by sense occasioned; both these being
to be ruled or examined by it. Regula autem est prior regulata.

CHAP. XI.
How far Platoes opinion may be admitted, that all Knowledge is but a kind of
reminiscence, or calling that to mind which was in some sort known before.

1. PLATOES opinion (that all acquired science is but a kind of reminisence)
though it suppose a gross error, is not altogether so erroneous, but that it
may lead us unto that truth, from whose misapprehension happily it first
sprung. That our souls whiles they lived (as he supposed long time they did) a
single celestial life, should be plentifully furnished with all manner of
knowledge, but instantly loose all by matching with these harlotrie bodies; was
a conceit more witty in him, than warrantable in us, unto whom God has
revealed the true reason of that Problem; the desire of whose resolution
enforced him to this supposall of the Souls existence before the body. More
divine we know by much then Plato could imagine any, was that knowledge
wherewith our first Parents soul though concreated with his body, was
instamped. Not Aristotle himself, with the help of all the Philosophers which
had gone before him, not after his laborious works de Hist. animal. could so
readily have invented names for living creatures, so well expressing their
several natures, as Adam (not a full day old) gave them at their first
appearance. Such notwithstanding as his was, might our knowledge of all things
have been, unless his fall, by Gods just judgment had been our ruin. That
oblivion then or obstupefaction wherein our souls as Plato dreams, are
miserably drencht by their delapse into these bodily sinks of corruption, we
may more truly derive from that pollution which we naturally draw from our
first Parents; wherewith our souls at first commixture with our bodies are no
less soiled, the characters of truth imprinted in them, no less obliterated,
then if they had been perpetually soakt in them, since the first creation. All
of us by nature seek after knowledge, as an inheritance whereto we think we
have just title, and ancient copies (could we read them) of the original
evidences which our ancestors sometimes had.

2. For what should impell us to this sollicitous search, no humane wit can
divine, unless we grant some such relics or fragments of universal truth,
once had but now lost, to reside yet in our collapsed natures, as oftimes run
in our thoughts, whiles surprised with oblivion of some particulars which we
much desire to call to mind. As we cannot call ought to mind which we have
not actually and expressly known before: so is it impossible we should
certainly know any things actually or expressly whose notion or Character was
not in some sort formerly imprinted in our intellectiue faculty. Remembrance,
knowledge, (express or actual) and these ingraffed notions, differ only as
Adam, Seth, and Enoch did, not by nature but in manner of descent. Seth had a
father as well as Enoch, yet a father not begotten by a former father, but
created. In like manner, knowledge express or acquired, cannot but proceed
from knowledge pre-existent, not acquired or express, but implanted and
vnapprehended. And as remembrance is but a reiteration of actual knowledge: so
is actual knowledge but an apprehension of imprinted notions pre-existent,
though latent. These two parts of Platoes assertion we must admit as absolutely
true. First, We can understand nothing without us but by recourse unto these
Ideall notions which are within us, not abstracted, or severed from us, as he
is wrongfully charged to have taught. Secondly, As for a Master to seek his
fugitive servant amongst a multitude were vain, unless he had some
pre-notions, marks, or notice of his shape or favor, or carried some picture
drawn by others to compare with his face never seen by him before: so for us
to seek the knowledge of any matters before unknown, unless we had some
model or character of them framed by nature, would be altogether as bootlesse.
Those Ideall notions whereof this Philosopher and his followers so much speak,
are in true Divinity the prints or characters of truth engraven upon our
souls by the finger of our Creator. And so many of these prints or relics of
divine impressions, as we can distinctly hunt out, or discover, so much of
Gods image is renewed in us.

CHAP. XII.
After what manner the Ideall or ingraffed Notions are in the soul.

1. THe difficulties whose accurate discussion would clear this whole
business, are especially two: first, the manner of these notions inherence or
implantations in our souls. Secondly, by what means their distinct notice or
apprehensions are suggested. Their opinion which think these characters
(though latent) should be in our souls after the same manner as Letters
written with the juice of Onions, are in paper (though not legible) admits
some difficulty. For were they so distinct and well severed in the soul,
though not apparent; error would not be so ri^e when they appear, nor should
the sense delude the understanding with such false shows or resemblances as it
often obtrudes unto it: the flesh could not entice the spirit to embrace that
for an undoubted and inestimable good which has less similitude with true
felicity, then a Cloud with Juno. The favorers of the former opinion would
perhaps reply, that the manner of the inherence of intellectual characters in
the soul might in some sort be such as has been said, though they be often
mutually diffused one through another, as if two should write with the juice of
Onions upon the same paper, the one not knowing what or where the other had
written; or that their fashion by the souls too deep immersion in this
fluxible matter might be so soiled, that they could not be read, but by
confused conjectures, as letters written in moist paper; or it may be a
Platonicke would require some chimicall purification of the soul unto the
extraction of the distinct and proper idea of truth: how ever it be, it is an
error common to him and some Divines, but very inconsequent to other points of
both their doctrines, that the soul of Man though truly immortal should be of
the same nature with angelical substances, which are neither apt physically to
inform bodies, nor to participate of their infirmities, or to loose their
first natural light, although they were imprisoned or confined within them.

2. More pertinently to the point proposed it may be questioned whether every
specificall nature, which we understand or know, have a distinct and several
character answering to it in the soul. Or whether the fabric or compositure
of the understanding it self includes only such a vertuall similitude to the
forms or essences of all things; as the organ of every sensitive faculty do
to all the proper objects thereto belonging. The perception or representation
of green colors is not (I take it) made upon any one part of the eye whose
constitution has more particular affinity with green then with blew or red:
but the whole humor wherein vision is made, being homogeneall, has not color
in it actually; is not more inclined to one then to another; framed of purpose
as an Aequilibrium or indifferent receptacle of all impressions in that kind;
as apt, according to every part as any, to receive the shape or image of any
one color as another. Nor does the common sense perceive sounds and colors by
two Heterogeneall parts, whereof the one does better symbolize with hearing,
the other with sight: rather the internal constitution of this faculty
includes an Homogeneall aequabilitie of affinity unto both these senses.

3. The soul of man being created after the image of God (in whom are all
things) though of an indivisible and immortal nature, has notwithstanding
such a vertuall similitude of all things as the eye has of colors, the ear
of sounds, or the common sense of these and other sensibles, woouen by the
finger of God in its essential constitution, or internal indissoluble temper.
Out of mixed bodies are drawn by art Quintessences, whose substances (though
subtle and homogeneall) vertually contain the force or efficacy of many
ingredients. The same proportions which these Quintessences have to their
materials, has the soul of man to all sensible creatures, of which it is the
pure extract or perfection, in nature and essential qualities more resembling
celestial then subluminary substances, albeit vertually including as great
affinity to sublunaries as spirits or Quintessences do to their compounds out
of which they were extracted. From this vertuall similitude which our souls
have with all things, springs our eager thirst after knowledge, which is but a
desire of intimate and entire acquaintance with their nature and properties;
besides which means, there is in truth no other possible for them to come
acquainted with themselves. The more they understand of other things, the
better they understand themselves. Hence says the Philosopher, Intellectus cum
factus fuerit omnia, intelligit seipsum, When the understanding is made all
things, it understands it self. Nor could we take delight in the knowledge of
any thing, unless in knowing it the soul did know it self, and become more
intimate with it self. It is as truly said optimus, as proximus quisque sibi,
nothing could desire its own preservation most, unless its own entitie were
to it self the best, and most to be desired, if it knew rightly how to enjoy
it self. The reason why Simile gaudet simili, is because the actual sympathy
which mutually arises from presence of like natures in creatures sensible or
reasonable, causes their several identities to reflect upon themselves, and
each as it were to perfuse it self with its own goodness, which it likes
best, but whereof, without such mutual provocations it was vnapprehensiue or
incapable; nothing can rightly joy but in the right fruition or enioyment of it
self. Sense which is the foundation of pleasure, is but a redoubling of the
sensitive quality or temper upon it self. Touch is but an apprehension or
feeling of its own tactike qualities, being actually moved by other of the
same kind. If this motion be according to nature, it is pleasant, and this
pleasure is but a reflection of the mo^ue faculty upon it self, or motions
fruition of it self. The delight in like manner which we reap from
contemplation, is but a reflection of these vertuall Idaeas or internal
characters, which are instampt upon the very substance of the soul, as the
color of fire is in blades newly come out of the forge. The divine nature has
fullness of joy in himself and of himself, being all-sufficient to
contemplate and entirely to enjoy his own infinite goodness, without any
externalls to caul or occasion such reflection as we need. The Angelical
natures can thus likewise reflect upon themselves and enjoy as much felicity
as they contemplate of their own entitie, both which they have from and in
their Creator. The soul of man in as much as it has some relics of Gods
image in it, must needs have some seeds of moral, besides transcendentall
goodness, neither of which it can of it self enjoy, because not able to
reflect upon it self, or contemplate the seeds of truth and goodness
imprinted in it, without the help of some externalls sympathizing with them
and provoking them to make some Crisis of their own inherence. All the
felicity any nature is capable of, is the entire vncumbred fruition of its
total entitie; the only means of man's fruition of himself or of his own
soul, is his knowledge. The full measure then of man's felicity must consist
in the mutual penetrations and embracements of entitie and knowledge; when
these be thus intimately and exactly commensurable according to every degree of
diuisibilitie which either of them has, there can be no more addition of
delight to the humane nature, than of water to a vessel full to the brimme.
And seeing as well our entitie as knowledge does essentially and entirely
depend on God, it is impossible our joys should be full, until we see him,
and our selves in him. In this life as we know, so are we happy but in part,
or rather in spe not in re, when we shall know as we are known, we shall be
wholly and fully happy. In the mean time to bring our souls acquainted with
other of Gods works, or themselves wherein they see him darkly as in a glass,
the help or ministry of sensitive informations is always or to most men
necessary. For as a cunning architect may contriue the exact frame of a
palace, or a Geographer the proportion or fashion of a Country in his
fantasy, and yet cannot express the true conceit of either unto others but
by some visible Map or Model: so although the intellectiue soul bear the
exact similitude of all things imprinted in its substance, yet is it not able
to express or represent it to it self, but by sensitive forms or phantasmes,
whose representation sometimes please, sometimes dislike this supreme
faculty, as the apprentice his workmanship oftimes does his Master, because
not conformable to that artificial idaea which he has in his fantasy. Nor
can it any way disparage this similitude that the architect, and he to whom the
representation is made, are two diverse parties; for so the intellectual soul,
though but one in the work of understanding, undergoes two parts; one to
represent, another to judge of the representation; the latter is wholly its
own. In performing the former it always uses the help and ministry of
sense. We may conclude then as we began; It is impossible the understanding
should be displeased with any sensitive representation, or censure of their
suggestions, either as false or imperfect, unless it had some ideall rule or
copy pre^^xistent, from which the disproued representations do vary.
Although it cannot apprehend this copy distinctly, or discern the true figure
of its own idaea, until it light upon some phantasme, or sensible model,
that may exactly fit or cause it reflect upon it self. Thus by touching the
former difficulty as nearly and closely as we could, and this Treatise would
permit, we have been enforced in a manner to grate upon the second which now
presents it self to more particular and full discussion.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the office or service which the Fantasy performs unto the active
understanding or contemplative faculty, for the right apprehension or
discernement of truths specially insensible.

1. THe Aristotelian Maxim, Non intelligimus nisi speculando phantasmata, We
do not actually and distinctly understand, but by speculation of Phantasmes;
no Platonicke, I take it, would deny, but whether the Phantasmes rowse or start
the latent notions, or rather be stirred or rowsed themselves by the necessary
co^nexion which the fantasy has with the understanding, thus seeking to
express or figure its own indefinite conceits, is questioned by some which
deny all effluxions from objects sensible, or at least all permanent
impressions of their forms, or images upon the organs of sense. Whiles
sensible objects (for example, colors) are present, they grant a resultance of
such a form or stamp of them in the eye, as the seal imprinteth in the wax,
which notwithstanding straight way vanishes with the removal of the object,
only the sensitive faculty (in their Philosophy) being thus far acquainted
with them, can transform it self at its pleasure into the same likeness
again, as a cunning Actor can imitate any man's motions, speech, or gesture,
whom he has heard or seen, and the more he converseth with him, the better
will his imitation be. This manner of producing phantasmes I must confess is
most agreeable to the usual manner of producing effects more real, which have
no sensible form or shape. Thus when one yeawnes, another yeawnes, and many
motions begun in one, excite the like in others, not by impressions of their
forms, but by mere imitation. The blood of many beasts will rise at the sight
of red colors, whose forms or images cannot be imprinted upon it, because
more red than they. But blood, being like them, it is excited by their presence
or representation made in the eye; and so may this form, or representation it
self be only excited by the presence of the real object. In like manner may
the actual motion or representation of the phantasme, excite the intellectual
notion answering to it. For, the intellectual faculty, being more active then
sense, may from the vertuall similitude which it has with all things, put on
the actual shape of any which shall be represented, or suggested to it. The
manner we may conceive to be such as if the eye could represent any color
being once named, without the presence of a real object. By this declaration
we may conceive how the phantasmes do raise a conceit of an higher or
different nature, then they formally represent. As red colors do not only
produce their own resemblance in the eye, but withal stir or move the blood;
so attentive inspection of sensible effects most exactly represented in the
fantasy, may engender a conceit of an invisible and latent cause, which we
cannot distinctly figure or express, and yet be more ravished with the
consideration of it, then with the exactest representations possible of that
which caused it. The manner of our delight in this case is wrought as it were
by a secret sympathy or contract not apprehended, as shall herafter be
declared. The like symptomaticall conceits oftimes accompany the formal
representations of mere sense; as sight of the Wolf imprints with his bodily
shape a terror in the silly Lamb, whereof there can be no distinct or formal
representation. So with the shape or physiognomie of some men, a secret dislike
does often insinuate it self into our fantasies, of which we can give no
better reason than the Epigrammatist does, though that no better than the Lamb
perhaps could give why he flies the Wolf, could this silly creature speak:
Non amo te (Sabidi) nec possum dicere quare,
Hoc tantum possum dicere, non amo te.
I love thee naught, Sabidius, ne can I tell thee why.
It Is all I wot, I love thee not, ne can I love thee, I.


2. It is questionable whether motion make any distinct impression, or
representation upon the senses, or affect them only by concomitancie with
objects properly sensible, especially with the senses of sight and touch.
Howsoever it be, apprehension of time we have small or none, save only by
motion; nor can we limit or bound the parts of the one but by designing some
definite and constant parts of the other. He that neither dreams nor stirs
whiles he sleeps by night, thinks he is but newly lain down when he awakes;
whereas he that lies waking the same time, would think a short night longer
than a summers day. How the year goes about we could not tell, but by the
motions of the heavens; what a year is we cannot better express, than by the
Suns revolution from some point of the Zodiac to the same; nor what a day is
but by its circumvolution in a part of the Aequinoctiall, or other parallel
circle. An hour likewise we define by the elevation of the Zodiac fifteen
degrees above the Horizon. Thus the Philosopher defines time by motion numbered
or distinguished into parts, which definition notwithstanding is not essential
but causall or connotatiue. For as place surmounts all magnitude or surface
physical (seeing the highest sphere is as properly in its place as any lower)
so time is transcendent to all kind of motion, and has a conceit more abstract
and metaphysicall, though not easy to be expressed without motion. Joshua in
pursuing the Amorites lost no time by the Suns standing still; nor should we
Students gain any, albeit the heavens should double their wonted pace, or the
Stars elevate themselves thirty degrees in the space, a common-houre-glasse
is in running. Or though both clockes and houre-glasses moved twice as swiftly,
as now they do, time would be the same, but so could not the distinction or
apprehension of it be to us, unless we knew in what proportion their
swiftness increased; certain withal that they had an equal and constant
course. If upon their variation or inconstancy we should have recourse unto
the motions of our own souls or bodies, or keep a perpetual account of time
(as for a space Musicians do) with our hands; these would deceive us. The same
motions or bodily agitations seem much longer to men well nigh wearied, than
to such as are lusty or fresh. Solitariness without corporal employment
seems long and tedious to illiterate souls, so does vain iangling or toyings
real or verbal to minds bent for contemplation, because in this latter case,
men are enforced to take too deep notice of external motions; in the former,
of their own unsettled cogitations or working fantasies. All sicknesses,
pains, or eager expectations, whether of release from evils, or of
accomplishing vehement desires or hopes, do double or treble the length of
time in our conceit according to the excess of pains or pleasure felt or
expected. The reason is because the notice of every several motion is more
deep and pearcing, and the motions are in a manner multiplied. In sickness
there is a conflict betwixt nature and the offensive humor, both which have
their several swayes or motions. In expectation likewise the soul is moved
two ways, and being thus affected the difference betwixt our conceit of times
length, and theirs that pass the time in sport and merriment, is much what
such as is between their progresses or mensurations which run the same race
for length, the one directly and by a straight plain way in summer, the other
by way of indenture, or in winter, or in a deep soil. All these argue time to
have a nature of its own distinct from motion more abstract and immateriall.
And if we consider it only indefinitely or under the general conceit of space
contradistinct to distance local, the conceit of it is as familiar and obvious
as of any thing sensible, but very hard to define what it is distinctly, as S.
Augustine who has sifted this point as accurately as any Philosopher could
do, well observes.

3. Quid autem familiarius, and notius in loque^do commemoramus, quam te^pus?
Et intelligimus vtique cum id loquimur, intelligimus etiam cum alio loquente id
audimus. Quid ergo est tempus? Si nemo ex me quaerat, scio, si quaerenti
explicare velim, nescio. Lib. Confess 11. cap. 14. Sed quomedo minuitur, aut
consumitur futurum, quod nondum est? aut quomodo crescit praeteritum, quodiam
non est? nisi quia in animo, qui illud agit, tria sunt. Nam expectat, and
attendit, and meminit; vt id quod expectat, per id quod attendit, transeat in
id quod meminerit. Quis igitur negat futura nondu^ esse? sed tamen iam est in
animo expectatio futuroru^ Et quis negat praeterita iam non ess^? sed tamen
adhuc est in animo memoria praeteritorum. Et quis negatpresens tempus carere
spatio, qu^a in pu^cto praterit? sed tamen perdurat attentio, per quam pergat
^besse quod aderit. Nonigit^^ longum tempus futuru^ quod non est; sed longu^
futuru^, long a expectatio futuri est. Neque (...) ^^mpus prateritum, quodnon
est, sed longum prateritum, longa memoria prateriti est
What is there either more familiar or better known in ordinary discourse than
time? And surely we understand our selves when we mention it, we do not
mistake others when we hear them talk of it. What then is time? If no man
ask me this Question, I can tell. But if any man shall urge me to express the
nature of it, I am at a stand. He finally concludes, That time future or to
come cannot properly be said long, because it is not. But our expectation of it
(who have souls, whose souls likewise have their true and proper duration) is
long. Time past likewise is not properly long, but our memory of that which is
past, and now is not, continues still and is long Vide Plotinum Eunead. 3. lib.
7.
. As we could not measure or account motions, unless our souls had some
internal motions, or numerable designements, nor conceive of time without an
imbred sense of our own duration or extension of our existence: So neither
could we understand any thing without us, unless we had some vertuall
similitude of them within us, as homogeneall and commensurable to their forms
or essences, as our internal duration is to the duration of externalls. As
much as in this whole discourse we do, he did suppose which said Homo est
mensura rerum omnium, Man is the measure of all things. Howbeit to the distinct
expression of these internal similitudes, or latent measures of all things the
correspondency of Phantasmes either borrowed from sense, or framed by imitation
of sensibles, wherewith our souls have been acquainted, is always necessary.
For this reason in this life we cannot apprehend, at least not comprehend,
things insensible and immateriall in such manner as we do matters sensible,
especially visible. But to recompense this defect, the reasonable soul is more
affected with the tacit indefinite suggestions, or internal notions of some
things vnse^sible indistinctly notified, than with any sensitive
representations. And no marvel, seeing the similitude betwixt her and them, is
more immediate and exact, their sympathy (though secret) more internal, their
kindred proper and entire. With sensitive objects she has only alliance or
affinity by matching with corporal organs, without whose mediation no bodily
or material natures find any access unto her, nor can she be delighted with
their presence, unless she see them, or distinctly view their proper shapes
or figures. Discourses of colors do little delight a blind man, although his
other senses be exact; he that is deaf is as incompetent a judge of soundes,
albeit endued with perfect sight and accurate knowledge of all colors. In
respect only of these or other proper objects of sense, that common Maxim in
the propriety of speech, is true; Nihil est in intellectu, quod non prius erat
in sensu, that is, There can be no proper intellectual conceit of things
sensible, unless they be first formally represented to sense and distinctly
perceived by it. Fully equivalent to this Maxim thus limited (whether for use
or extent) is that other Maxim; Deficiente sensu deficit eiusdem sensus
scientia; For him that is blind or deaf from his nativity, to be either a
skillful painter or musician, it is impossible. Howsoever, as well for
attaining such knowledge of things immateriall as in this life we have, or for
rightly conceiving of things sensible, the fantasy serves as a glass to the
understanding, and the motion or agitation of phantasmes, as a Nomenclator to
the inherent notions, whose notice or expression we seek, whose apprehension
till we light on phantasmes fitting, is but such as we have of matters which we
well know we have forgotten, but cannot distinctly call to mind. Yet, if other
shall guess or name diverse persons or places (suppose the names of men or
Cities, were the matters we had forgotten and would call to mind) we can
easily discern whether they miss or hit, when they go near, or wide of that
we seek, because in hitting or coming near they start either the former
distinct representation we had of it, or some especial circumstance that
draws it nearer to the second birth, or new apprehension. After the same
manner does the intellectual ingraffed notion, before it be distinctly
apprehended, either mislike the suggestion of sundry phantasmes, as apt rather
to smoother or obscure than to manifest or express it, or like of others as
coming near it, or being some necessary adiunct of it: but finally approues
only such as have exact correspondency with it, or clearly represent it to it
self or the intellectiue faculty wherein it resides or moves. Hence perhaps
may that maine question of questions be assoyled, How we become certainly
persuaded of any truth: this certainty can never be wrought but by a
repercussion of the ingraffed notion upon it self. Thus in all contemplations
fully evident and certain, we feel a grateful penetration between the
object known, and the faculty knowing, and as it were a fastening of the truth
found, unto that part of the soul, whence the desire of it sprung. The soul
it self by this penetration becomes so fully satisfied, that the inclination
which before wrought outwardly, seeking where to rest, delights now rather to
retire inwardly and enjoy it self. Our manner of examining the certainty of
truth supposed to be found out is by a kind of Arietation, a trial which
floating conceits or phantasmes not perpendicularly settled upon the
intellectual notion cannot abide. And without convenient and settled phantasmes
the intellectual intentions glaunce away without reflection or repercussion,
and consequently without all sense or notice of the Idaeall rules or notions
whence they flow as lines from their center. Some glimerings they may leave of
their indefinite truth, none of their goodness, as the Sunne-beames leave some
light or impression of light in the middle or upper region of the air, none of
heat until it meet with some solid body to reflect them.

CHAPTER XIIII.
What qualifications are required in the Fantasy or passive understanding for
performing its duty to the active understanding, specially for the right
representation of matters moral or spiritual.

1. FOr avoiding of erroneous conceits as well in matters sensible as
immateriall, it would be requisite to know somewhat more particularly, what
qualification is required of the fantasy, what of the whole humane soul,
what peculiarly of the intellectual, and supreme faculty which sets all the
rest a working, and calls all their several operations to precise examination
and strict account. Seeing every thing almost that is, has some affinity with
others, and nothing can be known without speculation of phantasmes, it will be
hard to understand either more excellent and transcendent natures truly, or
ordinary matters fully, without variety of phantasmes. The next thing that can
be required in the fantasy thus furnished with store of modells or
representations, is, that it be stayed or settled. Non sum adeo informis nuper
me in littore vidi,
Cum placidum ventis staret mare;
I am not so ill favored, I saw my self ere while,
In calmer sea, a glass most true, which can no man beguile;
says the Shepherd in the Virgil.
Poet. But who has seen his bodily shape at any time in a raging Sea, or
swelling stream, although that concourse or efficiency, which our faces or
bodies afford to the production of their own images or similitudes, be in all
places, and all times the same. So is the irradiation or agencie of the active
understanding in the Philosophers opinion perpetual, nor works it by fits or
glimering. So we were always alike apt to learn or apprehend, it is always
alike ready to make us understand. For as nothing can be weary of its essence,
so neither can the intellectiue faculty be of this its proper operation, which
as the Philosopher thinks, is the self same with its essence. The proper
essence and operation of it, is to diffuse these intellectual rays or
ingraffed notions of truth: but these we always apprehend not, we remember not
their apprehensions, because the passive or fashionable understanding (which
some take to be all one with the fantasy) is subject to change and
corruption, often so ill disposed, that either no representations are made in
it, or else such as are false and imperfect. This I take to be the Philosophers
meaning in these words; (...). To think he should here give a reason, why our
souls after separations from their bodies remember not what they knew in them,
would make his soul I am persuaded, yet to smile, could it but read the
Interpreters glosses upon these words to this purpose. Not to insist upon his
authority, nor to wrangle about his particular meaning in this place, which
perhaps he purposely left obscure and doubtful, all that can be gathered from
his reason or from experience is this, that the humane soul has a perpetual
operation independent of the body, which sufficiently proves it to be
immortal; but so is not humane knowledge, because in the production of it the
soul must be patient as well as agent, and does not work upon it self
directly, but by repercussion or reflection. And seeing these are not wrought
without some concurse of the fantasy, whose operations as it self is, are
subject to corruption and change, our Intellection whether it be made by
imitation or impression of phantasmes refined, cannot be perpetual or
immortal.

2. That potentialitie or aptitude which the soul has to be linckt, and made
one substance with the body, must needs abate some part of that perfection
which is in Angels. They are pure acts and perpetually apprehend their own
perpetual operations: the soul of man has an immortal desire to do the
like, but is held down by the earthly and mortal body, whose motions and
unruly appetites do still counter-sway these inbred desires, which the soul
has to contemplate her self, as containing the ingraffed notions, or
similitude of all things. Hence is that which the same Philosopher elsewhere
excellently observes, that sense and prudence do in a manner voluntarily
result from the stay or settled estate of the soul without variation. Now these
disturbances, or turbulent motions of the soul which hinder knowledge, arise
for the most part from alliance with the body, or from the allurements of
external senses. For his reason, as we said, before when bodily calamity or
affliction cut off the hopes of temporary or sensual pleasure, and untie or
burst the strings which held us fast unto the pomps or vanities of the world:
the ingraffed notions of Gods power or providence, the natural dictates of
conscience, have liberty and opportunity to notify and express themselves.
Then as Pliny says, we know our selves to be but men, and our souls begin to
understand themselves, and their former errors; they now see what precious
seed was sown in them, so they had not suffered it to be smoothered, and
choked with worldly cares, nor suffered it to starve by nourishing vain hopes
of reaping foreign pleasures. And yet even whiles the reasonable soul
condemns the senses for hiding this inestimable treasure of ingraffed
knowledge, she cannot discover it without their help; the representation is
always effected by some concourse of the fantasy, in which it is first
begun, as bodily pain or malady oftimes manifestes it self not in the part
which is principally affected, but in some other which has some near bond of
nature, or peculiar sympathy with it. And the former fault, to speak the
truth, is not in sense or fantasy, but in the reasonable soul which suffers
her self to be misled by these her servants, whose right nurture or making for
hunting out latent truths, is in her power. But as the French by often using
the Switzers service upon some especial occasions, were sometime Machiavil.
said to have brought themselves to such a pass, that they could not manage
any war without them: so the reasonable soul being upon necessity beholding
to external senses for perceiving objects sensible, by too much relying upon
their informations difenables her self for more noble employments. The strict
vxorius confederacy which is too often, enters with these two gross senses touch
and taste, and her too much familiarity with their adherents, utterly
dissolues her native correspondency or acquaintance with intellectual or more
noble essences, which are of the same descent and progeny with her. Thus
abused or misinformed as great men are usually by their servants, she neither
can desire, conceive, nor entertain truth spiritual, but after a fashion
merely carnal. The original or manner of these preiudices wherewith this
image of God is by the suggestions of sense surprised, are but such as common
experience witnesses to be most rife in every particular sense: the right
frame or constitution of whose organs, always suppose a vacuitie of those
real qualities, whereof they are sole competent, and should be indifferent
judges. For if any one of these qualities have once gotten possession, and
planted it self in the organ, it excludes all the rest, or makes what
composition it listes, often charging the external sense with that, whereof it
self is sole cause. As if any gross or malignant humor have incorporated it
self into the tongue or palate, it either quite takes away all taste of meats
or drinks, or makes such as are indeed sweet and pleasant, seem just such
as it self is. Or if any tincture of brighter colors, whereon we have long
gazed, stick in our eyes, it either dazells our sight, or makes us think
other objects to be of the same hew with that whence it was taken. In like
manner does the contagion of every sense, or studies unto whose pleasures we
are partially or too much addicted, dissolve that aequilibrium or vertuall
proportion, which our souls have with all things, and whereby they are
qualified for understanding their natures, essences, or properties. Bewitching
delight in Mathematical speculations (though of all sensibles these be most
abstract and immateriall) has been as a false glass to pervert the sight of
some in matters philosophical, and cause them transform material natural
bodies into imaginary or motionlesse figures. From this root spring all
transformations of the divine nature, or attributes, whether in the Heathen,
the Romanists, or true professors. Of the particular branches, with the two
remedies to prevent their growth ( Purification of the heart, and Sublimation
of our spirit) somewhat shall be said by Gods assistance in some Treatises
following. Thus much only was here to be praemised, That our ingraffed notions
of Gods goodness or inclinations either naturally are, or by evil custom
become indefinite and indistinct, more flexible to goodness sensible, than to
intellectual; to carnal, than to spiritual; always apt to settle, or
continue their course, where they find first issue or vent, and to be most
addicted to their old acquaintance.

CHAPTER XV.
In what sense it is commonly said that Sense is of particulars and the
understanding of vniversalls. Of the manner how sense misinformes the
understanding, with some general advertisements how to prevent its
misinformations.

1. THat pit wherein Democritus imagined Truth to be buried, was questionless
the heart of man. Not much unlike unto his riddle, was the saying of the wise
King; Counsel in the heart of man is like deep water, but a man of
understanding will draw it out. Prove. 20. verse. 5. But he must be a man of
understanding indeed, that can draw any consultations Godward out of his own
heart. The relics of Gods image in us, are so buried in sense, that no
intellectual conceit of his goodness can be fashioned without his especial
providence, and the best that can be fashioned by his providence, must be
revived by his spirit.

2. Sense, says the Philosopher, is of Particulars; and every Particular in
his language, though presented to sense, but as one, includes an heap, or
cluster of ingredients, or circumstances; every one in nature much different
from other. We see the quantity, the color, shape, and proportion of
Socrates, with other adherents not mere Socrates, or the Individual humane
essence. Sense then is of concretes or congests, not of abstracts, or essences,
whether apprehended as universal, indefinite, or singularized. Those things we
are properly said to understand, whose natures, or entities are represented
unto us as pure, and immixt, and as it were dissolved from the bundle, wherein
they were apprehended only in gross by sense. Whatsoever we discern can be
truly avouched, or denied of any thing thus considered apart, and limited by
its own proper bounds, must needs be avouched, or denied of every like nature
so considered. And seeing things are thus considered by the understanding
only, to whom this power of ventilating, and sifting Phantasmes, or of
dissolving, or severing those combinations which delude sense, properly
belongs; Intellection, or understanding is said to be of Vniversalls, not of
Particulars. Every nature thus abstracted, or conceived only by it self,
without any foreign adherents, or admixture, serves as a common measure for
comprehending all of the same kind, and is apt to found an universal Rule, or
definition. The falsehood, or imperfection of all Rules suppose some precedent
defect in the abstracting, or dissolving the parts, or ingredients of sensitive
representations. Many things we cannot rightly, or perfectly conceive but by
composition of phantasmes, which can never be rightly compounded, unless they
be first rightly dissevered, or abstracted. Sometimes we may attribute that to
one nature, or ingredient, which is proper to some other, linked with it in the
same subject, but not discerned; and then the observation is false, or true
only ex Accidente; vt Musicus aedificat; as if a man should think a
Metrapolitane should do that as privy Counselor, which belongs unto his
spiritual place, because the actions of both kinds proceed from one and the
same party, who notwithstanding is endued with a twofold authority. Sometimes
again we may attribute that to one circumstance, or ingredient, which jointly
issues from two, or more. And in this case the Rule fails, when the
Conjunction is dissolved. As if we should think the Moon should always be
Eclips't when it is in the full, or when after exact calculation it is found to
have the same distance from the Sun, which had been noted by us in two or
three former Eclipses. For equality of the Moons distance from the Sun,
unless it fall out in the Eclipticke line, is not sufficient to infer this
effect, if an Eclipse, or deficiency may properly be termed an effect. This is
a rule most universal, and transcendent [ That every Rule which holds true in
some cases, and fails in others, is taken from sensitive observations, or
presentiments not perfectly sifted, or abstracted, whose ingredients
notwithstanding dissociate themselves in those particulars, wherein they
fail.] Thus Hippocrates Rules of Winds, and Waters held true in those
Regions, wherein he made his observations, but not in ours: because the soil,
which lay East, West, North, or South of his habitation was of a different
temper from those Countries, which have the like situation (in respect of the
Heavens) from us. Many rules again are oftimes not acknowledged so general as
they are; because we take some concurrence of circumstances, or accidents, or
somewhat annexed unto the latent nature, whence the effect i^ derived, as a
concause, or necessary condition, when as it was only present, not accessory
to the event. Thus many people in this Land are afraid to begin a good work
upon the same day, that Innocents day fell on the year before: because they
held the circumstance of time as a necessary concurrent to prosperous
proceedings. And unless experience did teach the contrary, a mere disputant
would hardly grant hot water could quench fire; because it wants that
quality, which may well seem to be as a necessary concurrent to the
destruction of the contrary form. The evidence of this event has occasioned
Philosophers to observe a property in the fire distinct from heat, and
another in the water distinct from cold, perhaps in part from moisture. Which
properties sense without the help of understanding could never have
distinguished from heat or cold. Thus are heat and cold for want of like
abstraction taken for those qualities, wherein the Medicinal virtue of herbs
or other physical simples properly consists. He that never had seen any
creatures endued with sense, and motion, but such as with these have reason; no
reasonable creatures but Ethiopians, nor blackness in any subject, but in this
kind of men, would imagine all those to be one, or each to infer others
presence. And if the understanding should not upon new observations correct
sense, these collections would presently offer themselves. [ Whatsoever has
sense, or motion, or is black* is endued with reason, and discourse;
[Whatsoever is not capable of these latter adjuncts is incapable of the
former]. But once observing motion, or sense in many creatures wanting the use
of speech, or observing many men whose complexion is far from black, or
blackness in diverse subjects, which neither have life, motion, sense, or
reason; the abstraction of each from other offering it self, would manifest
the folly of former inferences. Generally, the more in number, and more
different in nature the subjects be, wherein we observe any accident, or
property* the more easy and evident is the abstraction of it from others,
with which it often has conjunction. The true reason why Algazel in his Logic.
Mathematical rules are so perspicuous and evident, is because lines and
figures are found in every matter, that is subject to sense, as numbers and
unities accompany all things we can understand. Quantity we may find in many
bodies without any such concomitance, as it had in others. For sundry
substances much differing in all things else, agree only in shape, or figure.
But where one attribute, or quality is linked with another in all, or most
subjects, wherein either can be found, the distinction between them is more
difficult, unless they belong to several senses, or so belonging we usually
confound their causes, or observe small diversity betwixt them. Seeing
permanent colors are not usually seen but in mixed bodies, and all mixture is
wrought by heat and cold, moisture and dryness; we often imagine the
diversity of colors should arise from the diverse mixture of these prime
qualities (as they are reputed) when as the diversity indeed is from the
mixture of two more simple, more immateriall, and more general and prime. As
light and darkness were first created: so their of-springs, or propagations (
Opacitie and Perspicuitie) have first place in all bodies, alike communicable,
to single, or compounded, to corruptible, or incorruptible substances. There is
no mixed body without their mixture, and oftimes where the one is really, the
other there will be by participation, whether in the elements, or in bodies
perfectly, or imperfectly mixed. Vide Antonium Scarnalion de Coloribus.
From the different proportions of their mixtures, or combinations arises all
diversity of colors. It skilleth not whether the fire were hot or cold, or
whether the coals were dry or moist, so the one be bright, and the other
sootie or dustie; the flame at first kindling will seem black, afterward
reddish, or bluish, lastly yellow, and splendent. The original of real
colors (as they call them) is no other, only the perspicuitie, and opacitie,
whence they spring are more permanent, as being deeper incorporated into the
matter, and the bond of their mixture more firm.

3. Most objects (as they are presented to us by sense) resemble the first
Chaos, or confused Mass. The understanding by sifting, and ventilating the
several ingredients, and assigning such as are of like natures (sorted
together) to their several, and proper places, imitates the great Creator of
the world in extracting light out of darkness, and distinct bodies out of
confused heaps, and pure celestial substances out of earthly dross. The
right constitution of every Art or Science, is a kind of Creation, and their
Inventors come nearest to God in wisdom; yet not herein to glory, or rejoice,
save only that by this clear resolution of every effect, or object into its
simple and prime Elements, the beams of the Creators wisdom, and
distillations of his goodness, which lay buried in the confused Congests,
which sense presents, become clear and sensible, if the wind be once touched
with grace, which should never be excluded, but full implored in the search of
what truth soever. For no truth can be so mean, or slender, but being made
clear, and evident, it may elevate the mind, to which it so appears, to
contemplation of the first truth, and is as a step or approach to that light,
which is inaccessible. Nor was it the search, no not the curious search of
Sciences natural, Astrologicall, or Politic, but the professors slothful
readiness to rely upon the representations of sense not accurately sifted,
from which these three maine streams of Atheism before mentioned did first
issue. All three (with the source of Superstition, or Idolatry to be
prosecuted in the next Cap. 18. Sect. 3.
Discourse,) we may derive from a further head, then there we did, and somewhat
more particular and proper, then was now intimated.

4. It is a dictate of nature engraffed in all [ That every thing, which before
was not, must have a cause of its now being]. And if the cause manifests not
it self in the production, we are ready by nature to father the effect upon
that, which is represented by sense as nearest unto it. Thus the Philosopher
took the matter, the Astrologer the stars for sole or chief causes of all
things: the Politician his own plots for principal accomplishers of all those
proiects, whereto they concur as the dropping of a petty Conduit to the
overflow of a mighty river, out of which the whole stream, which feeds it,
and many other, was first cut. And if the event be such, as has no permanent
duration, or fixed seat, but falls out now and then without any certain
observation; the time, and place, wherein it was brought forth, are usually
supposed to be sole compartners in the begetting, or conceiving of it; and
shall according to the goodness, or badnesse of this their supposed brood,
reap the same praise or dispraise, the same thanks or imprecations, which
Parents, or Tutors have for furnishing the Commonweal with towardly, or
ungracious plants.

5. Nor does sense entise unto Atheism, or Idolatry, only by putting that
usual fallacy of non causa pro causa upon the vnobservant. But this error
supposed, seeing the link betwixt causes, and their effects is most strict,
the multiplicitie of the one suggests a multiplicitie of the other. So does
every term of Relation multiplied in the Individual, occasion us to conceive
a like number of correlatiues. The same error often insinuates it self into
the proper acts of understanding. For no things in Nature truly diverse can be
so indivisibly, or essentially continued in representations made by sense, as
the object, or nature conceived by us, and our intellectiue conceit of it: no
things really different more apt, than these to present themselves as one. Now
seeing our understandings cannot comprehend the entire entitie of many natures
in themselves most intelligible by one conceit, but must view them
peece-meale, as we do many sided bodies, or measure them by reiteration of the
same or like acts, as we do large quantities by often application of the same
palm or spanne. We slide by this means into a common error of imagining as
many distinct natures conceived, as we frame conceits of it, being indeed but
one, and the same. Thus does error become circular; for by conceiving things by
nature diverse whilst represented in one heap or cluster, or mutually linked
together, to be but one; we come to imagine that, which is but one, to be many.
Sometimes we imagine a diversity in the cause, which is still one, and the
same, from See cap. 18. Sect. 3.
diversity of Place and Time, which intrude themselves into our conceit of
it: And sometimes again an unity, or Identitie of causes, where there is
great diversity, from the unity of time, of place, of temporary or local
adherents, or other correlations always united in our conceit. The manner of
the Heathens error mentioned by S. Austin, was the same, only different in the
matter. Aliquando vnum Deum res plures: aliquando vnam rem Deos plures faciunt
August. de Civit. Dei. lib. 7. c. 16.
. If these errors usually obtrude themselves in matters sensible, whereof we
have distinct, and formal representations, their insinuations must needs be
more frequent in matters merely intellectual, of which we can have no
specificall resemblance, but must be enforced to mould them in some sensible
conceit. Things rare and admirable, though in their own nature visible, yet
not seen by us, but known only by report or fame, we cannot better
apprehend, then by comparing them with the best we know of the same kind.
Vrbem quam Romam dicunt, Meliboee, putaui,
Stultus ego huic nostrae similem.
Fool that I was, great Empress Rome be crowned with lofty Towers,
I ween'd to have been some Market Town, not much unlike to ours.
Though Mantua had been a meaner Town, then it was; yet being the fairest,
and best he knew, his distinct conceit of Rome unseen could not have
surpassed the Idea of it, save only by addition of some streets, or greater
store of such ornaments, as he had observed in building. But his error upon the
view of Rome was easily rectified, albeit the manner of his misconceipt, the
party in whose person he speaks, could not better express unto his fellow,
then by mistaking the damme for the suckling: Sic canibus catulos similes, sic
matribus haedos Noram. nor the measure of it better than by comparing the
Cypress with lower shrubbes. Verum haec tantum alias inter caput extulit vrbes,
Quantum lenta solent inter viburna Cupressi.
But sure this City other Towns, in state no less exceedes,
Then Cypress tall wild limber vines, then pleasant vines do weeds.
More gross by much will our present conceits of the divine nature appear,
when our faith shall be changed into sight: The best remedy not to err much
is to hold our minds in suspensiue admiration, not presuming to be peremptory
in particular representations: not to content our selves with any resemblance
as sufficient, though some be more apt, then others for bringing forth a more
lively conceit of his inconceivable glory, or a more distinct apprehension of
his incomprehensible wisdom, or majesty, or more determinate notice of his
immensitie, or infinity: but of these hereafter.

6. The sum of this Discourse is to admonish every one, that meditates on
God, or his attributes, to take heed to his imaginations. For besides the
aforementioned purity of heart, the intention of mind, or understanding to
ventilate, sift, or illuminate phantasmes borrowed from sense, there is
required a vigilant attention in the judicatiue faculty: otherwise the same
errors, which happen in recalling things long forgotten to mind, or dreams
will surprise our waking Imaginations of God, or matters divine. He that would
remember Timotheus, Theodorus, or Orosius, unless his apprehension of their
names have been formerly very distinct, and his present examination attentive,
would easily entertain in stead of them Theotimus, Dorotheus, or Osorius. In
men ignorant of Latin Etymologies, conference will sometimes be taken for
confidence, offense for defense, etc. Now our knowledge of matters insensible,
being (as I said before) like unto reminiscence, in that we have but an
indefinite or vndeterminate notion of their natures, and qualities; and herein
short of them, that we never had an express, or actual notion, whereby to
examine their resemblances: the substitution of any thing, which has ordinary
similitude with them, will hardly be avoided without great attention. The
manner of many errors in this kind differs only in degree from such delusions
as fall out in dreams; wherein our apprehensions of proper sensibles are most
quick, and lively, but their compositions, or suggestions oftimes ridiculous,
and absurd. Such was the temper of the Heathen in respect of this
Polypragmaticall age. Many effects, which move not us, made deep impression of
a Deity, which they strangely multiplied, or transformed.

SECTION III.
Of the original of Heathenish Idolatry, and multiplicitie of Gods.

CHAP. XVI.
The general fallacy by which Satan seduced the World to acknowledge false
Gods.

1. THe manner how indefinite notions of the Deity did branch themselves into
Idolatry, though many have attempted to handle at large, none in my judgment
have so directly hitt, as the Aristotle in his Politickes.
Philosopher does in a touch, or glaunce. The fallacy was in converting that
Maxim, or general notion simply, which was convertible only by Accident. All
conceived of God, as the best object they could conceive; whence, many finding
contentment to their desires beyond all measure of good distinctly known
before, forthwith collected that to be God, which had given them such
contentment. Others more desirous to gratulate their extraordinary benefactors
with more then usual respect, then able to distinguish between the several
degrees or sorts of honor, made bold to borrow such, as was due unto the divine
power (therewith to gratify men) and so by custom or bad example brought
posterity to pay that as an ordinary debt, which in heat of affection, or
unwieldy exuitation of mind, had been mis-tendered by way of complement, or
lavish gratuitie. In minds not well acquainted with the several kinds of
things desirable, nor with the degrees of their goodness, it is always easy
for any good of higher degree, or rank, then has been formerly tasted, to
intercept that respect, or affection, which by rule of justice belongs only
to the best. And the affection thus alienated, or misguided, disenables our
inclinations for aspiring any higher. For although the capacity of the humane
soul be in a manner infinite, and all of us infinitely desire to be happy, yet
our apprehensions of goodness, or happiness it self are confused, and
indistinct. The best of us until Gods spirit become our guide, are no better
then blind men, in the choice of things good. From this native blindness of
our appetites, and apprehensions, we infinitely desire that which first or most
frequently possesses our souls with delight, though in its nature but a
finite good, and our desires being infinitely set on that which is but finitely
good, do dull our sight, dead our appetite, and abate our capacities of that
infinite goodness, which we naturally long after. Thus, as heretofore is
observed Lib. 4 sect. 3. cap. 6.
, our desires of good ends, which admit no bound, or limit, are often taken up
by the means, whose acquaintance was only sought, for better compassing the
end. And many young wits finding unusual refreshing in extemporary exchange of
j^sts, of pleasant discourse, or in opening some vein of Poetry, are in short
time brought to confine themselves wholly to this kind of diet; contented to
be continually fed with froth; otherwise framed for contemplation of such
mysteries, as might perpetually distill Nectar and Ambrosia.

2. By a witty resemblance directly subordinate to this general occasion of
error ^re intimated, does the noble Mornay express the manner of some Heathens
seducements to worship the Host of Heaven. This (says he) so fell out, as if
some Rustique, that thinks a great deal better of himself, when he has on
his holy days suite, permitted to come within the Court, should mistake the
first gawdie coat he met with for his Prince, or Sovereign. Heaven they
conceived to be the seat, or court of divine powers, and the Sun, Moon, and
Stars, being bodies glorious in themselves, and sensible procurers of common
benefits to men; partly by reason of their place, partly by that high rank of
excellency, or goodness, which they enjoy amongst the parts of this visible
world, might easily be adored for gods, by such as had small, or no relish of
any other good, than what was sensible. Some Barbarians, as is said, to this
day think us Christians but a kind of senseless creatures, for worshipping a
God, whom we neither see, hear, nor feel, neglecting the Sun to whose
comfortable beams more senses, then one, are beholding. This report, though
not avouched by any authentic Relator, whiles related in my hearing by some,
who avouched themselves eare-witnesses of such expostulations with Barbarians,
I could not reject as incredible, because not vnconsonant to Caesar's Narration
of the ancient Germans: Germani de Deorum numero eos solos ducunt, quos
cernunt, and quoru^ aperie operibus adiuvantur; Solemn scilicet, Vulcanu^,
Lunam, reliquos nec fama acceperunt. Caesar Comment. lib. 1.
The Germans, says he, which worshipped no Gods besides the Sun, the Moon,
etc. of whose beneficence they were sensible. Their manner of life, as is well
known, was but simple, without variety of trades for supplying of
necessities, much more destitute of good arts, or curious inventions for
ornament of public State; otherwise their gods had been more. Vide
Forcatulum. lib. 5. page 617.
Had the mystery of Printing (to omit other profitable inventions of modern
Germans) been invented in those ancient times, whereof Caesar writes,
Gutenberg of Ments, to whom the Christian world is under God most beholding for
this sacred Art, might have been a God of higher esteem throughout Germany,
than Mercury, or Jupiter himself, or any other God of the Germans by Caesar
mentioned. For with most people of those times (as Cic. lib. 1. de natura
Deorum. and Petrarch. de vita Solitar. l. 1. c. 6. Vide Forcatulum lib. 6. page
833. ex Strabone lib. 7.
Zenoes scholar had observed) any profitable Invention was title sufficient to
challenge the esteem, or honor of a God; even the things themselves so
invented, if rare, or extraordinarily beneficial, were enstiled with the
attributes of divine powers. Thus as the wise man had observed, the Heathens
multiplied their gods according to the variety of the matters, which they
principally desired, or feared. And Cicero lib. 1. de natura Deorum.
Cotta deriding the Somnolent and sluggish gods of the Epicures, does in
comparison acquit the Egyptians from their gross foppery, in that they
consecrated no beasts, but for some public benefit in their opinion received
from them.

3. Of public benefits, freedom from danger was held a part; whence those
beasts, how loathsome soever, unto whose annoyance they were most obnoxious,
were reverenced and feared as gods. Not the Crocodile, but had his peculiar
rites, or pacificall ceremonies: howbeit his worshippers held it a point of
religious policy to hold like correspondency with Iohneumon, a kind of water
Rat, which devoured this gods young ones. To attribute divine honor unto
beasts, how beneficial soever, may seem to us very gross, and without some
other collateral impulsive causes scarce derivable from the former original
of this error. But whatsoever the causes might be, experience has proved the
effect not unusual amongst barbarous people in this age. Sunt etiamnu^ in
Samogithia Idololatrae quampl^^es, qui serpents quosdam quatuor brevibus,
lacertarum instar* pedib^^, nigro, oboes^que corpore trium palmarum
longitudinem non excedentes, Gi^^o^tes dictos, tanquam p^tes do^i sua ^utriunt:
eosque lustrata domo statis diebus ad appositum cibum prorepentes, cum tota
familia, quoad saturati in locum suum revertantur, timore quodam venerantur.
Sigismund. Baro de Rebus Moscou. page 113.
There be at this day in Samogithia many Idolaters which nourish a kind of
Serpents that go or creep upon four short feet like Lizzards, their bodies
blackish and fat, about some three handfulls in length, and these they nourish
as their household Gods. And whilst they come or creep upon set days by
ceremonial invitation unto their meat, the Master of the house with his
family attends them with fear and reverence to their repast, at their repast,
until they return unto their place. It is a strange Narration which this
Author in the same place commends unto us upon the credit of his Host. Which
how far it is to be taken, I refer it to such as will take pains to read
the Author himself, or his words here quoted in the Margin Cum priori ex
Moscovia itinere rediens, in Troki venissem, referebat hospes meus, ad quem
forte diverteram, se eodem, quo ibi eram anno, ab eiusmodi quodam serpentis
cultore aliquot alvearia apum emisse: quem cumoratione sua ad verum Christi
cultum adduxisset, utque serpentem, quem colebat, occideret, persuasisset;
aliquanto post cum ad visendas apes suas eo reversus fuisset, hominem facie
deformatum, ore aurium tenus miserabilem in modum diducto offendit. Tanti mali
causam interrogatus, respondit, se, quod serpentideo suo manus nefarias
iniecisset, ad p^aculum expiandum, luendamque poenam, hac calamitate puniri:
multaque graviora, si ad priores ritus suos non rediret, eum patioportere* Vide
Sigismund* Baronem de Rebus Moscoviticis. Page 113, 114.
. But leaving these barbarous worshippers of venomous or noisome beasts: to
adore men well deserving of them with divine honor, most Nations have been by
nature more prone, and many have had peculiar impulsions to push forward their
pronenesse unto this sin.

4. That God in the similitude and substance of man should communicate
inestimable blessings to mortality, was a tradition undoubted from the
propagation of mankind. This notion supposed; That the several authors of
benefits as hard by means ordinary or observable to be accomplished, as they
were highly esteemed, should be taken by silly Heathens for gods in men's
likeness Paru^ abfuit, quin tot prouocati beneficijs, et praeclare inventis
rebus Gallica gens Saronem ipsum in deoru^ numerum referret, qui vetustissimus
fuit mos gratiam benemere^tibus refere^di, consque lice^tiae pro grediens, in
barbari quidam, quales Aegyptij bovem agroru^ culturae aptissimu^ adorare^t.
praeterea feras aliquot numinum loco habuer^t, quarum opera sibi sub ventum
intelligerent. Forcat. de Gallorum. Imp. etc. l. 1. p. 73.
; is an essential branch of the former promptness to invest every
vnexperie^ced good thing, with that conceit they had of the very best
imaginable. Amongst the gods of the Heathen, Jupiter was commonly esteemed
supreme, because the imagined author of greatest benefits; yet greater than
Paul bestowed upon that poor soul of Lystra, which had been a creeple from
his mothers womb, no fabulous Poet had reported as done by him in all his
supposed transfigurations on earth. The excellency of the good turn, whereof
their eyes were witnesses, did exactly fit the best notion they had of any
divine power. Hence was that exclamation; Acts. 14.11.
The gods are come down unto us in the likeness of men. And because Princes,
or men of greatest places on earth, for reservation of state, deliver their
minds by Orators or Interpreters: Barnabas for his silence is taken for
Jupiter, and Paul for his dexterity of speech is named Mercury: both, if so
they would, might have robbed Jupiter of his honor by the consent and
furtherance of his own Priests. From this peoples pronenesse to adore them,
as the greatest gods, which they had heard of, we may gather how easily the
title of petty gods might have bin purchased by any impostor, that could
obstupifie rude people, as Simon Magus did, with appearances far surpassing
their observation or capacities. How natural the apprehension of divine power
is upon unusual events; how apt, and flexible apprehensions so occasioned are
to be misplaced upon wrong objects, cannot better be exemplified by any
instance, then by the Barbarians various censure upon S. Paul. The manner of
the Vipers creeping out of the fire, and hanging upon his hand (after a
dangerous escape by Sea) they apprehend as a document of divine Justice,
making inquisition for blood. Acts. 28. ver. 4, 5, 6.
When the Barbarians saw the venomous beast hang on his hand, they said among
themselves; no doubt this man is a murderer, whom, though he has escaped the
sea, yet vengeance suffers not to live. But after they had looked a great
while, and saw no harm come to him, they changed their minds, and said, that
he was a God. Had he himself said, Amen, to their motions, he might have
received divine honor from them by public decree. Much better was the
indistinct, or confused notion, which this kind hearted people had of the
godhead, or of divine powers, then the speculatiue acquired knowledge of the
true and only God, which the malicious hard-hearted Jews had translated out
of Gods book into their own brains.

5. The Jews in that they had entwined their own vainglorious hopes of
honor and earthly dignity, with that preconceite or action, which they had of
their Messia's glory, were often enraged against him for chalenging, or
accepting divine honor for blessings more miraculous, then that last mentioned
wrought by Paul; usually bestowed by him upon their poor. For these blessings,
although far surmounting all conceit of any good before experienced, or
expected by the poor souls relieved, were ( not good, but rather) offensive
to such spectators, as had fed their fancies with confident hopes of a Monarch,
to crown them with external sovereignty over others, not a Physician to cure
their inward wounds, or to set them free from Satanicall slavery. Howbeit his
handy-workes, seconded with his words of life, usually left a true print of
his divinity in the parties, whom he cured; because the good they felt, was
greater then could be expected from any but him, whom God had sent. And I am
persuaded, the poor creeple of Listra, not otherwise instructed by his mouth,
which had made him sound, would have taken him either for Jupiter, or some
greater god: albeit Jupiters Priests, or other Citizens of best respect had
maligned, or vilified the cure wrought in him, in such manner, as the Scribes,
Pharisees, and Jews did our Saviors restoration of the blind man to sight,
the deaf, the lame, the dumb, and such as he had raised from death, or
dispossessed of devils, were always ready to worship him as a God, because
extraordinarily good to them. The Priests, the Scribes, and Pharisees would not
acknowledge him for a good man, because not willing to feed them with hopes of
such good, as they most desired.

6. It is an error most incident to drudging minds, not to distinguish betwixt
goodness it self, and what is good to their affections. Once I heard a poor
creature complain of her deceased neighbor, that he was an hard man toward
the poor. Being asked what reason she had so to censre him; the reply was,
that he had given somewhat to every poor in the Parish, besides her self;
though she, as far as I could learn, was only forgotten, not excepted
against upon any spleen. From some spice of this drowsy error the best of us
are not free, always by nature not rectified or overruled by grace, prone to
love that best, which seems best unto us, not what absolutely, and in it self
is such. From this partial inclination were many obscure imaginary powers,
scarce known to neighbor Countries, more honored in some private Cities to
which they had been principal bencfactors, than Jupiter, or other famous
gods. Alabandenses, sanctius colunt Alabandum, a quo est condita vrbs illa,
quam quenquam nobilium Deorum. Cicero. lib. 3. de natura Deorum. Et Gyraldus.
page 65.
The Alabandenses (says Tully) do more religiously worship one Alabandus, the
Founder of their City, then they do any of their greater or more famous
Gods. Cominaeus Crudeliter iste et superbe imperauerat, sed largitionibus
plurimu^ poterat. Vide sepulchrum eius in Carthusianorum templo Papiae, cumque
exijs quidam inter specta^du^ mihi virtutem eius praedicaret, ac sanctimoniam
tribueret: cur inquam ego, san^tum appellas? vides ibe multorum populorum
insignia depicta, quos ille sibi nullo iure subegit. Tumiste: Nos inquit,
consuetudine quadam sanctos vocamus eos, qui nobis benefecerint. Philip.
Cominaeus de Bello Neap. lib. 1.
has acquainted us with the like humor in certain professed Romish Catholic
Christians, which made no scruple of worshipping such men for Saints after
death, as in their lives and actions had more resembled Satan, and his wicked
Angels. From the common notion; [That Saints are the best of men;] They did by
the usual fallacy misconceiue, and, upon their misconceit, admit all such for
Saints, as had dealt best with them, though perhaps much better, then in
conscience they ought, and to the great prejudice of many others much better
deserving favor, and beneficence.

7. Unto a more detestable kind of Idolatry many Heathens were, many
Christians yet are brought by mere excess of the like self-love, or partial
and corrupt affection; even to Deifie any kind of delightsome fithinesse, or
beneficial villainy, or to imagine some one or other divine power, patron of
such practices, as they fear might otherwise be controlled by man's authority.
Whatsoever it be, whereon our affections are most set, that is indeed and truth
our only god, and would be solemnly adored with divine worship, did not our
natural fear of civil shame, or public infamy, likely to redound, for
revolting from the rule of life generally acknowledged, restrain our motive
faculties from acting those parts, which have been designed unto them by the
vain imaginations of our wicked hearts. In as much as the heart of man is Gods
peculiar inheritance, with whose entire faculties he requires to be adored, and
served, this inheritance being once alienated from him, does naturally draw the
appurtenances after it, even all such homage and services, as are due unto his
sacred Majesty, bestowing them upon those matters, whatsoever they be, upon
which it has once bestowed it self. Thus might the wanton Strumpet have been
invested with the most glorious attributes of divine goodness, that the
lascivious Poet in heat of lust could have invented.

Horace.
Ilia et Egeria est: do nomen quodlibet illi. 8. Covetousness (in S. Paul's
Divinity) is Idolatry Ephesians. 5.5.
. With this written verity most agreeable was the natural notion of those
poor barbarous Indians, which imagined the Spaniards had no other God besides
gold, or none so dear unto them as this metal was, because they saw them
hunt so greedily after it both by sea and land. Their inordinate and excessive
coveting after it made the Barbarians to commit Idolatry with it. Vide Casau^.


CHAPTER XVII.
The more special Fallacies by which Satan seduced the Heathen to multiply
their gods in excessive manner.

1. ALthough it be true, which has been said; That nothing was by nature, or
condition so vile, as not to be capable of high place amongst the Heathenish
gods; yet unto that extremity of multiplying their gods according to the
number of their conceits, the Heathens did not slide but by succession and
degrees. The Persians (as S. Aug. lib. 5. de Civit. Dei. cap. 21.
Austine tells us) worshipped no more gods then two, one good, and another
evil, whom they likewise accounted good, so long as he did no ill to them. How
evil should be without a cause, or how good and evil should both proceed
from one cause, or finally how evil (being no part of nothing) should come
into the world, (seeing the worlds creation was but an effect of the almighty
Creators goodness in communicating his being unto all things) are points so
ill expressed by most Christians, that the grossest errors of the Heathens
concerning them, may seem very pardonable. From these Persian Magies the
Manichees (it seems) derive their heresies, both of them, as most other
Heathens, had a true apprehension, (though both failed in their judgment, or
composition) of those divine Oracles; 1. Is there any evil done in the City,
which I have not caused Amos. 3. verse. 6.
? 2. Every good gift is from above James 1. verse. 17.
.
Before multiplicitie of businesses, or artificial curiosities be nummed the
sense of nature, every extraordinary, or remarkable effect was unto men a
sensible sign and witness of an invisibie power, bringing things that were
not, to light. Romans 1. verse. 20.

2. The first roots of that unrighteousness, wherein they held the truth thus,
in a manner, desirous to manifest it self, were;

1. [Carelesnesse in observing the notifications of divine power.]

2. [Neglect to tender such dutiful service, as the more evident
manifestations of his goodness did in a sort demand.] The prime seed of both
these roots was the imbecillitie of corrupted nature, whose chief and supreme
faculties, though well instructed, are always apt to be over-borne with the
imbred and accustomed desires of sense. Of the forementioned apprehension, or
acknowledgement of some invisible power, as chief author of good and evil,
one immediate consequence was this; That the same power; whether one, or more,
was the rewarder of such, as sought to please him, and a revenger of those that
neglected, or offended it. Whence, in minds misled by their corrupt
appetites, the best and final consequence of the former apprehensions or
notions, was to woo the supposed divine powers by all means possible to
patronize themselves, and their actions, though unjust, dishonest, or
suspicious; rather than to submit their wills, and affections wholly to their
disposalls, or so to frame their lives, as they might be capable of their just
favors. And as unskillful Empyricks seek remedy from every medicine they have
read, or heard of, because they know not the distinct virtue of any, or how it
is proportioned to the effect they aim at: So these poore-blind Heathen, daily
more and more ignorant in the grounds of true Religion, did as it were grope
after a new invisible power in every visible effect, until at length they came
to subdivide, and break the general notion according to the distinction, or
number of the sensibles, which they best or worst affected. That every visible
effect had an invisible cause, was rightly proposed; but from this principle
they slipped into an erroneous assumption; That there should be as many invisible
causes, as there be distinct or visible events. The fallacy is easily put upon
vulgar, or Somnolent wits; as if one should say, he had ten brethren, and
every of them a sister; some men's minds would forthwith run upon two and
twenty brothers and sisters. Whether there be as many paternities, or
fatherhoods in the father, as he has sons, is sometimes questioned in the
Schools, and hard universally to determine, whether in this sense [ Quot modis
dicitur vnum Relatorum, tot modis dicitur and alterum] Whether terms formally
relative always multiply according to the number of their proper
correlatiues? Now to distinguish aright between the formal Relation, and its
immediate ground, will in many subjects trouble greatest Artists. Well then
might the Heathen (though ill they did in so doing) imagine as many invisible
powers, as they observed effects produced by causes invisible; or (as the
learned Hooker says) dream of as many guides of nature, as they saw guides of
things natural.

3. After once their scattered imaginations had given admission to this
erroneous representation, or conjecture of many invisible powers; distinct
names, or titles were sought for them from the effects, which they had caused.
As in this Land before surnames continued in succession, men commonly took
their names from the places of their birth, or dwelling, or from events
peculiar to them; as strangers in some places yet (if their names be hard to be
pronounced or remembered) are usually called by the places from whence they
came, if these be famous, or have sent forth few, or none besides to the coasts
where they remain. So the image, which Titus Tatius found, because the party,
whom it represented was altogether unknown, was named Cloacina, from a very
homely place, if it should be expressed in English. Or as they framed several
gods according to the variety of their intemperate desires; so they usually
derived their titles from the matters, whose avoydance or fruition they most
desired: As we give extrinsecall denominations to objects from the reference
they have to our internal faculties; As some we say are intelligible, others
amiable; Goddesses of this rank were Volupia and Libentina, etc.

4. Not a joint almost in a man's body, but had a peculiar god among the
Romans, whereby they witnessed some scattered relics, or imperfect
Characters of what the Psalmist says (in other terms) to have been written
in their hearts; Psalm. 139.16.
In thy book were all my members written, when as not one of them was yet
made. All at least in their opinion were under the tuition of some divine
powers, by whose means they hoped they might be preserved sound, or to have
them healed if they were amiss. And not knowing unto what peculiar God or
Goddess to tender their service, or direct their prayers, for this purpose
they gave names to the supposed latent powers from the place affected; See
Blondus.
In ipsa terra aliud Terram, aliud Tellur^m, aliud Tellumonem putant. Aug. de
eivit. Dei. lib. 4. cap. 10. The variety of transmutations conspicuous in the
growth of corn brought forth a multiplicity of gods, distinguished only by
names proportionate to the effects. They could not find (says S. Augustine)
one Segetia, or Goddess of corn, unto whose care and trust, they might safely
commend it from the sowing till the reaping. Corn sown whilst under the
ground was under the protection of Seia, after it came up, vt segetem faceret,
it changed the former Guardian for Segetia. Not the very knottes of the straw
or reed, but had a protector from his office entitled Nodotus. Because they
feared rust or canker, rightly imagining that both these usually came (as some
Northern men speak) by the Seand of God: they dreamed of a god of rust, or
canker; doubtless a rustie god, yet in their opinion to be pacified with
solemn rites, and ceremonies. Every housekeeper (says the same father) sets
but one to keep the door, and being a man but one suffices: unto this office
notwithstanding were three gods deputed by the Romans; Forculus foribus,
Cardea cardini, Limentina limini: One Forculus to the fore door, another to
the hinges, or turnings, and a third to the thresholdes, all taking their
titles from these petty places, whereof they were reputed Presidents. Aug. de
civitate Dei lib. 4. cap. 8.

5. But many other events fell out besides, or above men's expectations, wanting
permanency of being, or such peculiar references, or determinations of
circumstances, as might derive a perpetual name to their supposed authors.
Howbeit rather than these should be seized upon, as excheats falling to men
without the knowledge, or direction of divine powers, unto whom they were to be
accounteable for them; even these were ascribed to some God, though they knew
not to whom. So most learned Expositors probably think that Altar, which S.
Paul found at Athens, had been erected upon occasion of some famous victory,
whose procurement the Athenians not knowing by any circumstance unto what
known God it might be ascribed, and hence fearing lest by attributing it to
any of those gods, whom they worshipped, the true author of it might be
wronged, or neglected; they ascribed it Ignoto Deo, to the unknown God; well
hoping he would make himself known by granting more victories, being thus
honored for the former. With like gratifications did the Romans strive to
win the gods of all the nations they had conquered, to favor their conquests.
Some good perhaps they had heard done by them unto their followers (as God (in
opposition to Atheism and Irreligion) did reward the blind devotion of the
Heathen with extraordinary temporal blessings:) and that any Nation should be
in greater favor, though with their own gods, then themselves, this proud
people did brook as ill, as great corporations do to be out-vied by lesser in
meriting the favor of great personages by rich presents, solemn invitatio^s,
or costly intertainments. Nor is it strange the ignorant Heathen should be
overtaken with this humor, wherewith an untoward branch of David's stock was
desperately tainted. In the time of his tribulation did he yet trespass more
against the Lord. (This is King Ahaz, so unwilling is the spirit his name
should be conceiled:) For he sacrificed unto the gods of Damascus, which
plagued him, and he said; Because the gods of the King of Aram helped him, I
will sacrifice unto them, and they will help me 2. Chron. 28. ver. 22, 23.
. These were gods, which his fathers had not known, perhaps not heard of; he
only knew them from the place.

6. From the former Principle, [ That every visible effect must have a cause;]
did the ancient Romans as ^eligiously, as wisely collect; That such events as
fell ^ut besides the intention of man, or any ordinary or observable course
appointed by nature, were even for this reason in some peculiar sort to be
referred unto the providence of some divine power. And rather than the
invisible author should loose his right for want of a distinct name, the manner
of the event was made a godfather or godmother. Hence had Fortune more Temples
in Rome than any god or goddess besides. And seeing of such events as have no
observable cause in nature, or humane intention, but fall out (as we say) by
chance, some were very good, others disasterous; bad Fortune had her rites, and
honors as well as good Fortune. The one propitiatory sacrifices, lest she
might do more harm; the other gratulatory, that she might continue her wonted
favors Cicero. lib. 1. de natura Deoru^.
. The superstitious division of Fortune into good and bad, was but a
subdivision of the Persian, or Manichees misconception of one God as author of
good, of another as the author of evil. These latter fooleries of the Romans
are excellently refuted by S. Austin in his fourth book de civitate Dei. cap.
23. Si cultorem suum decernit, vt profit, Fortuna non est. If she can know her
worshippers, or deservedly respect them, she is not Fortune, because not
blind; If she cannot respect them, nor take notice of their service, it is in
vain to worship her. Howsoever, the cost they were at in her service had bin
much better bestowed on that other female Foelicitas, (who if she had bin a
living Goddess) had all good things man's heart could desire at her disposal.
But as the same Father acutely concludes; Aug. de Civit. Dei. lib. 4 cap. 23.
Hic enim carere non potest infoelicitate, qui tanquam deam foelicitatem colit,
and Deum datorem foelicitatis relinquit; sicut carere non potest fame, qui
panem pictu^ lingit, and ab homine, qui veru^ habet non petit. He that adoreth
the goddess Foelicitie, balking that God who is the donor of Foelicitie, shall
be as faithfully attended by misery, as he whosoever he be, shall be by hunger
which solaceth himself by licking or kissing painted bread, disdaining to
beg or ask substantial bread of men that have it.

7. Howbeit by this foolish service of Fortune, whether good or bad, the
Romans showed themselves more wise, and more religious, than most such amongst
us as would be esteemed Prophets of state. As they want not wit, nor other
means to do good to the house of God, so they would cease to sacrifice to
their own brains, or disclaim all title to Gods honor offered to them, by
their Parasites. But as the Heathen fathered vnobservable, or strange events
upon new fained gods, or Lady- Fortune; so the trencher-mates of our times,
resolve all good success of state into some great men's wit, or valor, whom
they admire, or love to flatter for their own gain. Not the discovery of the
Powder Treason it self, but has been in our hearing ascribed to the Oracle
of Intelligence, as if the plotte had been known to some Demigods of state
before the plotters fell a digging. He should not much wrong this Table-tatling
crewe, in word, or thought, that thinks, and speaks of them, as of Idolaters
more detestable, than the most superstitious Heathen Romans; or if they come
short of them in the proper nature of this particular sum, we are to take the
abatement, not so much from any less measure of false religion, as from
excess of Atheism and irreligion. But from what School they take these
lesso^s I know, and must hereafter have Machievill their Master in examination
for his impudent animadversions, and hypocritical corrupt glosses, quite
contrary as well to the professed meaning of that very Text he took upon him
to expound; as to the unanimous tenent of best Roman Writers, even Senators
themselves, concerning the causes of their States advancement.

8. But questionless such of the Romans, as adored Foelicitie for a goddess,
were not of those Philosophers mind, which denied felicity to be the gift of
God: for what could have nursed in them this desire to please her, save only
hope, that she could reward with happiness such as diligently sought her, and
could prosper industrious and careful indevours, for private or public
weal, in which cases only they did solicit her furtherance. Such good
successes as grew rather from mere hap, than good husbandry, were taken as
favors of Mris Fortune, not graces of the great Queen Felicity, or Lady
Virtue. The worshippers likewise of this inferior goddess did by their service
acknowledge, that some divine power must give increase, and maturitie to such
seeds of moral honesty, as by nature had be one planted, or watered by civil
education, or good discipline. That the blessings of this supposed goddess
were as necessary and beneficial to the labor, or culture of the mind, as
the blessings of Ceres or Segetia were to tillage, or works of husbandry.
Hence we may gather Cotta's mouth to have been a great deal too wide, when it
uttered that unsavory observation, which Tully (as I conceive) observing the
decorum of the parties disposition, or the part which he was to act, brings him
in rather b^lching than speaking: his tautologies are so abrupt and tedious;
part of which are to this effect: Virtutem nemo vnqua^ accepta^ Deo retulit:
nimirum recte: atque hoc quidem omnes mortales sic habent, externas
commoditates, vineta, segetes, oliveta, vbertatem frugum, and fructuum, omnem
denique commoditatem, prosperitatemque vitae a Dijs se habere; Virtutem autem
nemo vnqua^ accepta^ Deo retulit: nimirumrecte: Propter virtutem enim iure
laudam^r, and in virtute recte gloriamur; quod non contingeret, si id donum a
Deo, non a nobis habe^emus. At vero aut honoribus aucti, aut re familiari, aut
si aliud quidquam n^cti sun^^s fortuiti boni, aut depulimus mali, cum Dijs
gratias agimus, tum nihil nostrae laudi assumptum arbitramur. Cic. de natura
Deorum. lib. 3.
No man did ever acknowledge God for the Author or donor of virtue. And this
stands with reason, for we are justly commended by others for virtues, and we
our selves rightly glory in our virtues, which could not be so, if virtue were
the gift of God, not a quality of our providing. But for the increase of
honor, or revennues, for the attayning any good which might have mist us, for
eschewing any evil which might have befallen us, we thank the Gods,
disclaiming our own praise or deseruings. Doubtless he had never asked the
consent of his honest Neighbors to this peremptory determination, which alike
concerned them all; but used his own proud irreligious spirit, as an allowed
measure of others thoughts. Number quis, quod bonus vir esse:, gratias Dijs egit
vnquam? At quod dives, quod honoratus, quod incolumis, lovemque optimum maximum
ob eas res appellant; non quod nos iustos, temperato^, sapientes efficiat, sed
quod salvos, incolumes, ^pulentos, copios^s. Neque Herculi quisquam decimas
vovit vnquam, si sapiens factus esset.
Did any man over thank the Gods for making him a good man? For what then? For
his riches, honor, or safety. Jupiter had his titles of greatness and
goodness from these effects, not for making us just, and temperate, or wise
men; nor did ever any man vow tithes to Hercules for being made wise by him.
From these unsavory ejaculations of Cotta, and also from the Roman Poet who
acknowledged himself to have been of Epicures brood, we may infer; That
this Sect amongst the ancient Romans did not absolutely deny the divine
providence, but only as it respected the soul of man. A special providence
over men's bodies and temporal estates they did with reverence acknowledge,
herein much better than the Libertines of our times, than careless professors
of Christianity, or those Heathen Epicuraeans Section. 1. Chap. 5.
before mentioned in Iuvenalls time.

Horat. Epist. lib. 1 p. 275.
Sit mihi, quod nunc est, etiam minus; vt mihi vivam,
Quod superest aevi: si quid superesse volunt dij:
Sit bona librorum, and provisae frugis in annum
Copia: neu fluitem dubiae spe pendulus horae.
Sed satis est orare Iovem, qui donat and aufert:
Det vitam, det opes; aequum mi animum ipse parabo.
With what I have or if it be less; unto my self to live
I am content: if longer life the Gods shall please to give.
Of books I chiefly plenty wish, of other things such store,
As may my mind from floting thoughts to settled state restore.
Of Jove who gives and takes away, all that I mean to crave,
Is life and means: an upright mind, I of my self can have.
9. Not to cloy the Reader with multitude of instances without variety of
observation: scarce was there a blessing, or good gift, any manner of
punishment, or reward, which we Christians derive from God, whose form or
abstract, the Romans and Grecians did not conceit as a God or goddess,
according to the Grammatical gender of the noune or word, whereby the nature
was signified. Pauor [Dread] was a god; Paena [Punishment] a goddess; Praemium
[reward] I know not whether a god or goddess, but to them a deified power.
Though in no case we may legitimate this misconceite of these Heathens; yet
must we acknowledge it to be but one degree removed from that truth, whereof it
is the degenerate offspring. He that wills us, to be perfect, as our heavenly
Father is perfect, supposes the ideall perfection, or exemplary form of all
goodness required in us to be originally, essentially, and supereminently in
him. Of which truth this is the immediate consequence; [ That the exact
definition of virtues (especially intellectual, or of any essential branch of
goodness) is more proper to the divine pattern, or Idea, than to the
participated impressio^, which it leaves in us. That definition which did
either breed, or abette some needless controversies amongst Schoolmen and
moralists; [ whether Justice be a moral or intellectual virtue,] was intended
by Vlpian the author of it, for a description of the heathen goddess Justice,
as the learned Hottoman, with some other good Lawyers avouched by In his
preface to his Comments upon Pancirola.
Salmuth, to my remembrance, have rightly collected from the words annexed:
Iustitia est perpetua, and constans voluntas suum cuique tribuendi, cuius no^
[Iurisconsulti] sacerdotes sumus; Justice is a perpetual and constant will of
rendering to every man his due, whose Priests we are that profess the Law.

10. There is no attribute of God as conceived by us, or rather no conceit we
have of his attributes, but has its distinct bounds or limits. We cannot say;
that his justice is formally his mercy, or that his love is altogether the
same with his iealousy or indignation, nor are these terms, whilst applied to
God by us, of synonymall signification. Every one has a proper, and several
notion, capable of a distinct definition or notation. Now if with some
Schoolmen, or Logicians we should argue a multitude of really distinct natures
answerable to the number of definitio^s really distinct, or such a difference
in the matter conceived, as there is in our conceits of it; the argument would
conclude as well in the divine attributes, as in any other subject. And as the
evident apprehension of real distinction between our express conceits of
any matter, is always apt to suggest a conceit of real diversity in the
matter so conceived: so this diversity betwixt the divine attributes once
admitted into the understanding (or the contrary not excluded) would cause us
to hunt after a proper phantasme, or representation of every attribute; and
(lastly) internal representations of them as really distinct, would be
delivered of so many external Images or Idols answerable unto them. Justice
would be apprehended as one goddess, Clemency, as another, Indignation, as a
third; each should have a tribunal, or form of supplication distinct from
others, as the parties that had occasion to implore divine assistance, were
affected. Malefactors or dissolute livers would be delighted with the picture
of clemency, affrighted to look upon the visage of Justice. Such as suffer
grievous wrongs, without all hope of being righted, or men naturally thirsty
of revenge, would feed their fantasies with Emblematicall representations of
(...). Pausanias. l. 1. p. 62.
Nemesis: Giraldus Hist. Deorum. Syntag. 17. page 447.
(...),
(...).
With bridle and square I act at large,
my Prologue thoughts not long;
By unruly hand, by unbridled tongue,
see no Man man do wrong.
This Nemesis was in their opinion a goddess of Justice, unto whose cognizance
belonged not every unjust speech or action, but only such as were outrageous.
For this reason was she pictured with a bridle in one hand, and a square or
ruler in the other, to teach moderation in speech or action.

11. In the observation of best Christian Writers, the wiser sort of Heathen
did acknowledge but one supreme power or deity, the several branches of whose
efficacy, or operations while they sought to set forth in In altero vero arcae
latere, quod est a laeva, ordinem operis in orbem oculis persequenti* faemina
cap essa est pueru^ consipitum dextra albu^ sustinens, nigrum sinistra, and
hunc dormientis effigy, distortis vtrinque ped bus* Indican^scriptiones, quod
facile tamen, vt nihil scriptum sit, conijcere p^ssis, e^rum puerorum vnu^
M^rtem esse, alt^ rum Somnum, mulierem illam Noctem, vtriusque nutruem. At
form^sa illa m^he^, quae foedafacie alter^m, sinistra obstracto collo trahit,
dextera fuste caedit, Iustitiam significat, ^uae Iniuriam male mul^tat. Paus l.
5. p. 321.
Emblemes, Hieroglyphics, or Poetical resemblances, these sluices late
mentioned were opened to augment the former deluge of superstition and
Idolatry. And I know not whether in our forefathers times theological
virtues, as faith, and charity came to be worshipped as Saints from such
emblematicall devises or representations, as are yet to be seen in the picture
of S. Sunday In the parish Church of East Wickham in Buckingham shire. The
picture seems to represent our Savior Christ. And the importance of the
Emblem in charitable construction may be this, that he has received more
wounds by profane Sabbath Breakers, than he did by the Jews.
; which without the Sextons commentaries, that showed it me, or sight of the
tradsmens tools, that had wronged this Saint, (or rather violated the Sabbath)
I should have taken for a character of the Jewish Synagogue in Isaiahs days;
so miserably was this Saint wounded from head to foot. These two occasions of
heathenish error in multiplying gods, are to my seeming, at least since I made
this observation, briefly touched by Lib. 2. de natura Deorum.
Tully; unto whom I refer the latin Reader. Multae autem aliae naturae
Deorum ex magnis beneficijs eorum non sine causa, and a Graeciae sapientibus
and a maioribus nostris constitutae nominataeque sunt. Quicquid enim magnam
vtilitatem generi afferret humano, id non sine divina bonitate erga homines
fieri arbitrabantur. Itaque tum illud, quod erat a Deo natum, nomine ipsius Dei
nuncupabant: vt cum fruges Cererem appellamus, vinum vero Liberum: ex quo illud
Terentij; Sine Cerere, et Libero friget venus. Tum vero res ipsa in qua vis
inest mayor aliqua, sic appellatur, vt ea ipsa vis nominetur Deus; vt Fides, vt
Men's, quas in Capitolio dedicatas videmus proxime a M. Aemilio Scauro, ante
autem ab Attilio Catalino erat fides consecrata. Vides virtutis templum, vides
honoris a M. Marcello renovatum, quod multis ante annis erat bello Ligustico a
Qu. Maximo dedicatum. Quid opis? quid salutis? quid coxcordiae? Libertatis?
Victoriae? quarum omnium rerum quia vis erat tanta, vt sine deo regi non
posset, ipsa res Deorum nomen obtinuit. Quo ex genere Cupidinis and voluntatis
and Lubentinae veneris vocabula consecrata sunt vitiosarum rerum, neque
naturalium; quanquam v^lle^us aliter existimat; sed tamen ea ipsa vitia naturam
veheme^tius saepe pulsant. Vtilitatum igitur magnitudine constituti sunt ij
dij, qui vtilitates quasque gignebant; atque his quide^ nominibus, quae paulo
ante nominata sunt a me, quae vis sit in quoque declaratur Deo. This Libro 3.
de Oratore in Initio.
author elsewhere thought the ancient Philosophers, which held, omnia esse
vnum, had soared much higher, than the Pygmey-wits of his time could reach; and
multiplicitie of Rules concerning one and the same subject, does always argue
imbecillitie of understanding, either natural or for want of art. On the
contrary, such as by profunditie, or strength of wit are able to diue into the
depth of sciences, always reduce multiplicity to paucity, and draw most
particular conclusions from one, or few common principles. Some maxims there
be, which in every science hold the same, into which all truths must finally be
resolved, without whose breach, or violation, nothing can justly be impeached
of falsehood. With greater facility and perspicuitie may the causes of all
visible or known effects be resolved into one cause of causes, or into that
unity, whence all multiplicitie flows. But of this hereafter.

CHAPTER XVIII.
The original of Superstition, properly so called, and the preservatiues
prescribed by God himself against this branch of Idolatry.

1. AS contrarieties in opinions oftimes agree too well in falsehood, so one and
the same falsehood may sometimes spring from contrary causes. The same
Idolatrous error of the Heathens, which principally descended from too nice
abstractions, or conceiving of that unity (or incomprehensible essence) as
many whose attributes they could not apprehend, but under more conceits, was
much increased by confounding the abstract with the concrete, or by conceiving
of those things as one, which indeed were many. Were wool or paper of all the
subjects or bodies which we had seen only white, every white thing which we
see a far off would be taken for wool or paper. Our answer to this Question,
Quid est albedo? What is whiteness? would perhaps be no better, than Plato in
his Hippias.
Hippias made to the like; Quid est pulchritudo? What is beauty? Mulier
formosa, aut equus pulcher; A fair woman, or a comely horse. No sensible, as
was Chap. 15.
observed before, is ever represented without a train of circumstances, or
concomitants. Of all circumstances time and place are necessary adherents to
every passenger, that approaches the gates of sense. And were not one and the
same sensible often manifested at sundry places, at diverse times, or with
other different circumstances: or contrariwise, did not diverse effects
oftentimes appear in one and the same time and place, or accompanied after one
and the same fashion, we should hardly so far distinguish them, as that the
presence of the one should not represent the other, or the remembrance of the
one, not suggest a several notice of the other. The coexistence of the one,
would always be taken as a cause of whatsoever event had before accompanied
both. In events, which have no permanent existence, nor observe any certain
course, to sever or abstract each circumstance from other, is a matter not so
easy to be effected by such as intend it, as to be altogether forgotten, or
not intended. The want notwithstanding of such abstraction, or winnowing of
circumstances, is the essential root of superstition, whose nature cannot be
more fully notified, than by a misdeeming of such circumstances, or adjuncts,
as accompany extraordinary, or unusual events befalling us, either for the
true causes, or procurers of them, or for practical associates, or
coe-workers, fit to share with them in our love or hate. For this reason is
gross superstition most incident to minds either great in themselves, or
puffe't up with externalls, but with all illiterate, and rude. Thus Annonius
lib. 1. cap. 15.
Clowis King of the then heathen Franks, attributed the death of his first
borne unto the Christian Religion, which his Queen professed, or unto Christ,
in whose name the Infant had been baptized. Quia Puer in dei vestri baptizatus
est nomine, Dij nostri illum praesenti luce fraudaverunt: Because the poor
child was baptized in the name of your God; therefore have our Gods bereft him
of his life. And albeit the admirable patience, and cheerful thanksgiving of
his Queen unto her God, for taking her child into a better kingdom, might
have been an undoubted testimony of greater comfort in calamity, than Clowis
his wonted Religion could afford him; yet he gives his second son for dead,
upon his first attachment by sickness; only because baptized, as the former
had been in Christ's name; Et hic propter superstitionem vestram incurrit
offensam: This child also through your superstition has incurred the
displeasure of our Gods. As if he had heard old Jacob from remembrance of
Joseph's miscarriage, bitterly complaining of Beniamins loss; I shall be robbed
of my child as I have been Gen 43. verse. 14.
. But this childs recovery of his bodily health did so far rectify the King
his fathers mind, as to take Christian Baptism for no necessary sign, or
forerunner of death to French Children. It did not (though) enlighten him to
see the grossness of wonted heathenish or his national superstition, still
apprehended by him as a true cause, because a perpetual concomitant of his
former good success in battle. But when he saw this begin to fail him in
time of need, and victory so far gone unto the Almanes his enemies, as there
was small hope his gods could call her back: out of the memory of his believing
consorts, reverend mention of Christ, and declaration of his goodness, he
burst out into this prayer; Christ, potentis^me Deus, quem Crotildes coniux
mea colit pura me^te, Trophaea meae tibi voueo fidei, tribuas si his ab
hostibus triumphum victoriae. His peractis (says mine Author) Alemannos
invasit timor, victores Fra^ci, victi, and Tributa^^ facti Alema^ni. Annonius.
lib. 1. cap. 15.
O thou most powerful God Christ, whom my wife Crotilda worshippeth with a
pure heart, behold I vow the Trophies of my faith unto thee, so thou will give
me victory over these mine enemies. This being said (says mine Author) fear
came upon the Almanes, the French were Conquerers, the Almanes conquered, and
made tributaries. This present help from God at the very point of peril, and
extreme danger, was a sure document, That sincere profession of Christian
Religion was no bare adiunct, or concomitant, but an authorized messenger of
health, of peace, and victory.

2. The like superstition did more desperately possess Maximinus, the chief
matter of whose accustomed glory was. That his reign had neither been
pestered with famine, war, or pestilence: the especial cause of freedom,
from which annoyances was by him imputed to his careful worship of other gods,
and zealous impugning of Christians. As if the temporaneall coexistence of
these two effects had sufficiently argued the ones causall dependence upon the
other. But God shortly after falsifies these foolish collections by fulfilling
our Saviors prophecy; [ Cum dicunt pax and tuta omnia, tunc repentinum eis
imminet exitium: Whilst they proclaim peace and security, sudden destruction
comes upon them;] very remarkeably in this boaster. For all these three
Pursevants of Gods wrath came upon him, and his people, like Jobs messengers
each treading on others heels for have. Eusebius. lib. 9. cap. 7.

3. More grossly did some late Mahumetan Thuanus lib. 7. anno. 1550. Cum
paternae cladis caussas superstitiosi Mauriassignarent, quod rex captivus a
Christianis vinu^ Fessam comportari passus esset, and Leones aleret, ille
reip^b* emendationem prae se ferens, protinus quicquid erat vini in cellis per
vrbem effundi, et Leones sagittis configi iussit. Terram non ferro, sed ligno
proscindunt, quod eo magis mirandum, cum terra eorum tenax* et non arenosa sit,
quaque Pinus nunquam crescit. Araturi ligna complura, quibus terram subigunt,
lo^oque vomeris vtuntur, secum portare solent: scilicet, vt vno fracto, aliud,
atque aliud, ^e quid in mora sit in promptu habeant. Quidam ex Provinciae
Praefectis, quo Provinciales graviore labor levaret, multos ferreos vomeres
adferri fecerat. Cum autem eo, sequentibusque aliquot annis segetea aliqua
coeli inte^perie, expectationi Agricolarum non responderent, vulgusque agrorum
sumum sterilitatem ferre^ vomer^ adscriberet, nec aliud quicquam in causa esse
pataret, Prafectus veritus seditionem, am^to ferro, suo eos more agros eolere
permisit. Vide Sigismundum Baronem de Rebus Mosco viticis. page 113.
Moors ascribe their public calamities unto their lately deceased Kings,
bringing in of Lions, and sufferance of Wine to be brought in by Christians.
And whether in hope of successful reformation, intended by him, or to
satisfy his ignorant peoples expectation of it: the Lions were killed by his
newly elected successors appointment; and the Wine brought in by Christians
powered out in their open streets. This superstitious jealousy of these
barbarous Africans, though in these latter times more gross than credible, may
be exactly paralleld by the like disposition of modern Russians. It shall
suffice to quote the Author the matter related by him has such semblance with
the former, that the addition of discourse, would rather obscure, than add
luster to their mutual representations.

4. All are alike apt to search, though all not alike able to find the true,
or discover the colorable causes of every effect, which much concern them.
And as Land, for want of direct heirs, falls often to collateralls of the same
progeny; so time and place, because of kin unto every effect, are by the
ignorant, or misaffected reputed Lords, or disposers of success, good or bad,
to which no cause apparent makes evident claim. A lively character of this
disposition, thus apt to take the impression of error, we have in that
Poetical description of Aeacus and his people, which wrongfully indicted their
beds and houses of the disasters which befell them......... Fugiuntque penates
Ovid. Met. lib. 7. fabula 26.
Quisque suos, sua cuique domus funesta videt^,
Et quia causa latet, locus est in crimine notus.
The houses deemed to breed their bane,
the owners quite disclaim;
And since the cause they do not know,
the known place bears the blame.
And in that other of Cadmus.....Serieque malorum Idem. lib. 4. fab. 14.
Victus, and ostentis, quae plurima viderat, exit
Conditor vrbe sua, tanquam fortuna locorum,
Non sua se premeret:
Affright with many a direful sight,
the Founder leaves the Town;
As if the ill luck which hunted him,
had been its, not his own.
It was a blast of the same superstitious doctrine, or blind persuasion which
impelled the Philistines to carry the Arc from place to place. 1. Sam. 5.
verse. 7. vsque ad cap. 6. v. 8.

5. The confidence of a good cause would scarce so much have animated the
Princes of Germany; as the very name of the places Hic exitus pugnae ad
Mulbergum commissae fuit; cuius loci nomen viris principibus male ominosum
semper fuisse a curiosis rerum Germanicarum observatum est. Si quidem ad
Mulbergum Baioaria Ludouicus IV. Fridericum ducem Austriae et Henricum fratrem
anno. S. MCCCXXIII. Rupertus item Imperator, centesimo circiter anno post,
Bernardum Badensem Marchione^ ad Mulbergum supra Nemetes C^pit. Iac Aug. Thuan.
Histor. lib. 4. page 77.
, wherein some of their rank have been foiled, would have deterred them from
adventuring battle upon terms otherwise equal. And the Scottish nation,
unless our Writers have wronged them, would sometimes have sought with the
English upon any festival day in the year sooner than upon Magdalene day, as
fearing lest the ill hap, which it brought them, had not been expiated with
the reiterated penitential sacrifices of many widows tears. Howbeit I may
not condemn all wariness, or serious observation of ominous significations,
which time or place, with their circumstances may afford. There is a mean,
though not easy to find, and harder to hold, between superstitious fear,
and presumptuous boldness in this kind. That natural inclination, which in
many degenerates into impious devotion, requires as well a skillful moderator,
as a boisterous corrector. But this is an argument, wherein I had rather be
taught, than teach, though somewhat hereafter In the Treatise of Prodigies, or
the third Section of divine providence.
must be said for mine own, or others information. Of much heathenish
superstition in this kind, the Monasteries of our Land have been fertile
nurseries; as the Grecian clergy is this day tainted with curiosities of this
rank, as unjustifiable, as the scrupulosities of many old women to begin
any work of their vocation, upon the same day of the week on which the feast
of Innocents, or Childermas, (as they term it) did fall the year before.

6. But neither can ancient Story, Poetical description, or known experience
of any modern disposition so well set out the manner how these natural seeds
of superstition are set on working by intemperate desires, or jealous fears,
as does that sacred relation of Balaak and Balaams conspiracy to curse the
Israelites. Whatsoever Balaam thought of this business; Balaak out of his
inbred superstition was persuaded, that the very place or prospect had been a
cause concurrent to produce the effect, for which he supplicated unto his god.
Balaak took Balaam, and brougt him up into the high places of Baal, that
thence he might see the utmost part of the people Number. 22.41.
. But Balaak feared (as by the words following it seems) that Balaam saw too
many at once, that this place was too high, a fitter level for a blessing than
for a curse. And Balaak said unto Balaam; what have thou done unto me? I took
thee to curse mine enemies, and behold thou have blessed them altogether. And
he answered, and said; Must I not take heed to speak that which the Lord has
put in my mouth? Yet this protestation persuades Balaak only to alter his
station, not his mind. And Balaak said unto him; Come I pray thee with me unto
another place, from whence thou may see them; thou shall see but the utmost
part of them, and shall not see them all, and curse me them from thence. And he
brought him unto Sede-sophim (a place by the very name apt to enchant a
superstitious mind with expectation of success) to the top of Pisgah, and
built seven Altars, and offered a bullock, and a ram on every Altar Number.
23. ver. 11, 12, 13, 14.
. As before trial made, he hoped the change of place would have altered his
luck; so after return of the like answer, he suspects the Prophets words as
causes of his mishappe, and would hire him to be silent. And Balaak said unto
Balaam; neither curse them at all, nor bless them at all. But Balaam answered,
and said unto Balaak; Told not I thee saying; All that the Lord speaks, that
I must do Ver. 25, 26
? So strong is the conflict between the ingraffed notion of Gods power to
bless or curse whom he pleased, and the unrighteousness, wherein it is
detained, that after a sentence passed against him, he will yet remove his
suite to another Court. Again Balaak said unto Balaam; Come I pray thee; I
will bring thee unto another place, if so it may please God that thou may
thence curse them for my sake Ver. 27.
. And lastly perceiving his triple attempt to curse had procured a Trinity of
blessings (perhaps a blessing from the Trinity given by each person in course)
the last more effectual than the former; he abandons the Prophets company as
an unlucky guest. Of Israel says Balaam: He coucheth, and lies down as a
young Lion, and as a Lion: who shall stir him up? Blessed is he that blesses
thee, and cursed is he that curses thee. Then Balaak was very angry with
Balaam, and smote his hands together. So Balaak said unto Balaam; I sent for
thee to curse mine enemies, and behold thou have blessed them now three times:
Therefore now flee thou to thy place Chap. 24. ver. 9, 10, 11.
. Had God upon some extraordinary provocation of this peoples vnexpiated
sins, permitted the hireling Prophets curse to have hit them; the place,
whence it was directed, should have been either joint sharer with old Baal in
sacrifices, and other divine honors, or else have brought forth some other
like new God. Or if the second arrow had spedde, Baal Pisgah, or Sede-sophim,
had been more famous amongst the Moabites, and their affrighted neighbors,
than Baalzebub, or Baal Peor; until the memory of this success had been
Eclips't by events more glorious, elsewhere manifested.

7. The multiplicitie of Topicke gods amongst the heathen could hardly have
been hatched without a conjunction of the before observed imbecility of man's
understanding, or confused apprehensions of time, and place, as cogenitors of
effects begotten in them, and of such affections or dispositions, as the holy
Ghost deciphers in Balaam. The invisible power, which fills every place with
his presence, comprehended by none, was confined within the circumference of
that peculiar room, wherein it had been sensibly manifested. From his
dominion over the fields, testified sometimes by abundance, sometimes by
scarcity rare and unusual, they imagined a god of the field distinct from
gods of the woods or waters. From declaration of his power, or secret touches
of his presence in their houses or bodies (whether by participation of his
goodness, or permission of evil Angels to torment them, Dij Tutelares,
Penates, or Lares; Gods Protectors of their houses, or families, or Guardians
of their persons had their original. And seeing there was no corner of the
world, wherein the invisible and hidden power of God was not sometimes
remarkeably manifested in his effects: the former gap once opened; there could
be no restraint of this superstitious vanity. Idolatry from this one root
might spread as broad, as the world was wide. The visible and known Elements,
having one common matter for their mother, each symbolizing with other in some
homogeneall quality, were allotted to three brother gods; The earth to Pluto,
the water to Neptune, the air to Jupiter, from whose Tribunal, lightnings
were sent out, as proclamations, to affright these inferior rebellious regions,
and thunderbolts as arrows of vengeance, or executioners of his denounced
wrath. The several Quarters of every regiment (of the earth especially) were
assigned to Deputy Gods, or Presidents, yet so, as variety of time had
sometime joint suffrage with distinction of place for erecting these lesser
gods, which were as Tenants or Cottagers to the three great Lords, or supposed
heirs of this visible sphere. Night lightnings by the ancient Romans were
entertained as messengers of Summanus. Such only as came by day were accounted
as sent by Jupiter.

8. These experiments, which are as so many probats of the Philosophical rules
premised, should hardly merit so much credit with me, unless the holy Ghost,
in registring the idolatrous errors of some heathens, had warranted as well the
truth of the instances, as the causes assigned by us of the error. The Aramites
had felt the power of Isreal's God in the mountains to their smart, and yet are
confident to find succor from other gods as powerful to plague the
Israelites in the plain. ^. King ^0. ver. 23, ^4, 25.
And the servants of the King of Syria said unto him; Their gods are gods of
the hills, therefore they were stronger then we; but let us fight against them
in the plain, and surely we shall be stronger then they. And do these things;
Take the Kings away, every man out of their place, and put Captains in their
rooms: And number thee an Army like the Army that thou have lost, horse for
horse, and Charet for Charet: and we will fight against them in the plain, and
surely we shall be stronger then they. And he hearkened unto their voice, and
did so. The Romans superstitious confidence in the vanquished Troiane gods,
was happily nursed by the same ignorance, a spice whereof we may observe in
rustique unthrifty gamesters, which hope to avoid ill luck by changing place.
That querulous complaint, which the Israelites vented in the wilderness, had
been settled upon the lees of Arams and Moabs Idolatry. These heathens were
not so credulous of success against evident signs of Gods displeasure; as the
Israelites, after experience of his miraculous refections in their thirst, were
incredulous of his power to provide meat in their hunger. Psalm. 78. ver. 15,
16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
Can God (said they) furnish a table in the wilderness? Behold he smote the
rock, that the waters gushed out, and the streams overflowed; Can he give
bread also? Can he provide flesh also for his people? It was but an easy
step in heathenish times to translate the divine powers a loco ad locatum,
from the place, wherein the effects wrought by them were encompassed, to such
inanimate creatures, as were their instruments in producing them. So Augustus
lying weatherbound, and suspecting lest his suite to Jupiter his brother, the
supreme Lord of the air, might find as vnspeedie admission or dispatch as
poor men's petitions did with such great Kings as Augustus was, forthwith
sacrificed to the wind, that lay fittest for bringing him to the haven of his
desires. They that go down into the deep (says the Psalmist) see the
wonders of the Lord. The like documents of Gods immediate hand in raising and
asswaging storms by sea, as inspired this sacred breast with prophetical
hymns of his praises, enticed the Romans to sacrifice to the floods or waves
for the safety of their Navies; Cic. lib. 3. de natura Deorum circa medium.
Nostri Duces mare ingredientes immolare hostiam stuctibus consueverunt; Our
Generals when they go to Sea, use to offer Sacrifices unto the floods. And
upon special deliverance from a dangerous storm, they invested the latent
power of the unknown God with the known name of the much feared effect
prevented, as they supposed, by their Idolatrous devotions: Te quoque tempestas
meritam delubra fatentur,
Cum pene est corsis obruta puppis a^uis.
When ships on raging Cor-sicke Seas,
by storms were well nigh lost;
To garnish Lady Tempests Shrine,
our Fathers spared no cost.
Their folly was less in seeking to appease the tempest which stirred the
waves, than in supplicating to the waves, which could not cease so long as the
tempest lasted.

9. These foolish practices of such as the world accounted her wisest sons,
though they cannot justify the like foolery in illiterate, or meaner persons;
yet may they justify the learned critics correction of the poor Fishermans
speech in Vide Cau^ in c 8. ^ 9. Athenaei.
Athenaeus; albeit by amending his words, Antique sic. (...).
he has made his meaning a great deal worse, then it was formerly conceived
to be. For he brings him in sacrificing to the North wind, as the most of his
profession in ancient times usually did. A^exandru^ ^ Eleu^tem A^aeorum p^r^m
na^^ga^e plure^ scrib^nt, nauisque praetorae gubernatorem fa^e: qu^mque tamin
medys Hellesponti flactibus versaretur, taurum Neptuno ac Nereidibus macta^,
aureaque Phiala in mare profusa Liba^e. Arrianius de expedit. Alexandri lib. 1.
Alexanders sacrificing in the midst of Hellespont unto Neptune, and the
sea-Nimphs, was no less Idolatrous, but neither so properly, nor grossly
superstitious. Howbeit even the most gross, and superstitious mistakings of
these Heathens last mentioned, differ rather in subject, and matter, than in
form, from an error common and usual, and in a manner the fatal consequent
of a necessary practice in modern Schools, to wit, of Denominating or
notifying things indistinctly apprehended by their references, or vicinitie
unto certain and known circumstances. Thus because we know not the
determinate distance of the Moon from the Center, or supreme sphere, we define
the place of it (as of every other body) by the convexe surface of the sphere,
which environs it. And by this concretion, or confusion of the external
reference, or notification, with the thing we seek to notify; the highest
orb, or supreme sphere has in the conceit of many, lost all right to any
distinct proper place, because it is destitute of a surface, or superior
covering; so again by notifying the differences, or set parts of time by the
numerable, and known parts of motion, which accompany it; the proper and
essential notion of time is utterly drowned in our conceit of motion. And as
we imagine those bodies, which are not contained under some other, to be in no
place: so we misconceiue there should be no time, unless it were ensheathed in
motion. Whereas the Aristot. 2. Physic.
Philosopher did not intend, that the Definitions either of time or place by
him assigned should be essential; But (as all Physical definitions (by his
precepts are, and ought to be) causall, or connotatiue, such as is that; Ira
est ebullities sanguinis circacor: Anger is the boiling of the blood about the
heart.

10. This pronenesse of man's imagination to be misled by circumstance of time
or place, by other adjuncts, or instruments of his manifested power, the Lord
foresawe in his chosen people, and sought in sollicitous manner to inhibit by
his Law and Prophets. To this purpose is the unity of his infinite, and
incomprehensible Majesty, so often and usually emblazened by variety of
glorious attributes framed from the multiplicitie of subjects, or variety of
effects, wherein the efficacy of his power, justice, or goodness are, or have
been most remarkably manifested. Men by this means, (so they would by any)
might be occasioned to abstract, and purify their conceits of him from those
concrete, and vnpurified apprehensions, wherein the Heathen did either bury,
or imprison such notions as either nature had engraffed in them, or traditions
communicated unto them. From discovery of his powerful hand in managing wars
he is enstyled the Lord of Hosts, or the Lord strong and mighty in Battle:
and yet with all, a God of peace, and one that makes wars to cease; A God of
wisdom, and a God of glory, and yet, a God that has compassion on the
poor, and despises not the weak, and silly ones. And as if he had feared,
lest Israel upon such occasions as seduced the Romans, might misdeliver
devotions, confusedly intended to him, unto stormy waves, or tempests, or with
the Aramites, confine his power to valleys, or mountains, or with others, make
him a God of the sea only, not of the land; He has sounded a counterblast to
those impulsions, where with the heathens were driven headlong into Idolatry,
in that excellent song of Iubile; The Lord is a great God, and a great King
above all Gods. In his hand are the deep places of the earth, the strength of
the hills is his also. The sea is his, and he made it; and his hands formed the
dry land. O come let us worship, and fall down; let us kneel before the Lord
our maker. For he is our God, and we are the people of his pasture, and the
sheep of his hand Psalm. 95. ver. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
. It was his pleasure to try them Exodus 17. ver. ^, 3, etc.
with penury of water after he had tried them Exodus 16. ver. 3, 4. etc.
with scaricitie of bread, that by his miraculous satisfaction of their
intemperate desires of both, as also of their lusting after flesh, he might
bring them to acknowledge him for a God, as powerful over the fowls of the
air, as over the fish in the sea, as able to draw water out of the hard rock,
as to rain bread from heaven. And having indoctrinated them by their
experience of his power in these, and like particulars, he commends this
general precept, or moral induction to their serious consideration: Has God
assayed to go, and take him a nation from the midst of another nation, by
temptations, by signs, and by wonders, and by war, and by a mighty hand,
and by a stretched out arm, and by great terrors, according to all that the
Lord your God did for you in Egypt before your eyes: Out of heaven he made thee
to hear his voice, that he might instruct thee, and upon earth he showed thee
his great fire, and thou heardest his words out of the midst of the fire.
Know therefore this day, and consider it in thine heart, that the Lord he is
God in heaven above, and upon the earth beneath, there is none else Deuteronomy. 4.
ver. 34, 36, 39.
. And lastly; That no senseless, or living creature, through the faulty
ignorance of man, might unawares purloine any part of his honor, the Psalmist
has invited all to bear consort with his people in that song of praise, and
acknowledgement of his power: Praise ye the Lord from the heavens; praise him
in the hights. Praise ye him all his Angels; praise ye him all his hosts.
Praise ye him Sun, and Moon: praise him all ye Stars of light. Praise
him ye heavens of heavens: and ye waters, that be above the heavens. Let them
praise the name of the Lord: For he commanded, and they were created. He has
also stablished them for ever, and ever: he has made a decree, which shall not
pass. Praise the Lord from the earth ye dragons, and all deepes, etc. Let
them praise the name of the Lord, for his name alone is excellent: his glory is
above the earth and heaven Psalm. 148. ver. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 13.
.

CHAPTER XIX.
Of diverse errors in Philosophy, which in practice proved seminaries of
Idolatry and sorcerie.

1. THe best Apology, which the greatest heathen clearks could make for
themselves (for the grosser fopperies of the vulgar, they would not undertake
to defend) was borrowed from a plausible Philosophical opinion, thus expressed
by the Poet: Virg. 4. Georg. page 94.
His quidam signis, atque haec exempla secuti,
Esse apibus partem divinae mentis, and haustus
Aethereos dixere: Deum namque ire per omnes
Terrasque, tractusque maris, coe^umque prosundum:
Hinc peci^des, armenta, viros, genus omne serarum,
Quemque sibi tenues nascentem arcessere vitas,
Hence perhaps did that Paradoxe maintained by some Philosophers take his
beginning [ Deus est materia prima]. The proposition in it self considered may
be salved from heresy with a distinction of formaliter and eminenter. But the
same proposition simply converted [ Materia prima est Deus] includes heresy,
if not Idolatry. The truth is [ Deus est materia prima eminente non
formaliter. [Materia prima non est Deus aut e^^nen^e e^^ut formaliter.]
Scilicet huc reddi deinde, ac resoluta referri
Omnia: nec merti esse l^cum, sed viva volare
Syderis in numerum, atque alto succedere coelo.
Some by these signs and these examples thereto drawn have taught,
The souls of Bees to be divine, of heavenly spirits a draught;
For God say they, as find they may, who Natures works per use,
Through earth, through seas, through heavens profound live goodness does
diffuse.
From his live presence, Cattle, men, birds, suck the spirit of life,
From him all springs, in him all ends: though death be nere so rife,
Yet nothing dies: what earth forsakes finds place in starry sky,
What we think into nothing slits, above the Heavens does fly.
This opinion was worse construed by some, than either the Author, or
Commentator meant: many, the most ancient especially, agree in this; That Deus
was Anima mundi, That the world was animated by God, as our bodies are by our
souls. Whence they concluded, as some later Romanists do; That all or most
visible bodies might be religiously worshipped, or adored, with reference to
Gods residence in them. The Antecedent notwithstanding being granted, the
practices which they hence sought to justify, are excellently refuted by S.
Austine Lib. 4. de civit. Dei. cap. 11, 12.
, who has drawn them withal a fair and straight line to that mark, whereat
they roved at random or blind guess, by ways successively infinite. For
answering any objection the Heathen Divines could make against us, or refuting
any Apology made for themselves, I always refer the Reader to this good
Fathers learned labors, of excellent use in his time. But my purpose is not to
make men believe these heresies are yet alive by hot skirmishing with them. The
lines of my method rather lead me to vnrippe their originalls, so far only
as not discovered, they might breed danger to our times. Now in very truth the
opinion pretended by them to color the filth of their Religion, did minister
plenty of fuel and nutriment, (as learned Recolligamus quae diximus,
videbimusque in primo nos gradu discere Deum non esse corpus, vt Epicurei;
neque formam corporis, vt illi volunt, qui Deunt asserunt anima^ esse coela vel
vniversi, quod et Aegiptij vt Scribit Plutarch existimarunt, et Varro ^heologus
Romanus, vnde vtrisque magnum fomentum Idol laetria, vt al^bi declarabimus
Mirandula de ente et vno. page 249.
Mirandula has observed) to those monsters, whose limbs, and members had
been framed from the seeds of errors hitherto mentioned; and the illiterate in
all probability took much infection at eyes and ears, from Poetical
descriptions, or Emblematicall representations of Gods immensitie; such as
Orpheus (if we may believe Clemens Alexandrinus) did take out of the Prophet
Esaias. cap. 66. vide Ciem. Alexand. lib. 6. Strom.

Ipse autem in magno constans, and firmus Olympo est,
Aureus huic Thronus est, pedibus subiectaque Terra,
Oceani ad fines illi protenditur ingens.
Dextera, montanas atque intus concutit illi
Ira bases, motus nec possunt far valentes.
Ipse est in coelis, terram complectitur omnem,
Oceani ad sinus expansa est, and manus illi
Vndique dextera --
Not held by them He heavens does firmly hold,
Whole earth's but footestoole to his throne of G^ld;
Ins mighty Palm the Ocean vast does roll;
The roots of mountains shake at his controlle.
Or e Heavens, through earth his right hand does extend,
It all inclasps, all it, not comprehend.
2. Jupiter (though acknowledged by many to be the only God) from the former
opinion became answerable to as many names as the world had principal parts,
and upon diversity of relations to effects, or motions presumed to issue from
his amiable, or live presence, subdivided into both sexes; termed Vide Aug. de
Civit. Dei. lib. 4. cap. 11.
Neptune in the sea; Liber in the vineyard; Vulcan in the Smiths forge, and
Vagitanus in the Infants mouth; in the air Juno; in the earth Tellus; Venilia
in the sea-waue whilst current to the land: Salatia in the same wave
reciprocating. The mere variety of names, or alteration of the sex, or
gender, would naturally suggest a multiplicity of gods and goddesses unto the
ignorant: so would the diverse forms or shapes of those bodies, whereof they
imagined him to be the soul and spirit, unto the learned; specially seeing the
motions, or operations of the elements, or other inferior bodies have no such
vital dependence upon any one, or few principal parts of the world; as in
man, all other members with their functions have on the heart, the head, and
liver, or perhaps all originally on the heart. And yet the evident
prerogative of these three parts has persuaded great Philosophers to allot
three several souls really and locally distinct, to each principal part one.
From which opinion it would with probability follow; that in one man there
should be three living creatures: A plant, a sensitive, and a rational
substance. And Varro the most learned amongst the Romans, graunts that the
ancient Romans did worship mother Tellus, Ops, Proserpina, and Vesta, for
distinct goddesses. Though these titles in his refined Theology rather
imported so many several virtues of the earth, whose soul or spirit was but
one: And not absurdly (as he thought) might other goddesses be reduced to this
old Grandame Tellus. But S. Austine demands how this can stand with the
doctrine of his ancestors, which had ordained several rites to all these, as
unto goddesses in nature different, and consecrated peculiar votaries unto
Vesta? It is not all one for one goddess to have many names, and to be many
goddesses, or shall multiplicitie and unity be avouched of one and the same?
It may be (says Varro) that in one, many may be contained; but this avoydes
not the intended check. Saint Lib. 7. de civit. Dei. cap. 24.
Austine replies; That as in one, and the same man there may be many entities,
not many men: so in one and the same goddess there might be several virtues,
not several goddesses. Varroes attempt to justify his forefathers jolly, and
reconcile their gross ignorance with his learned errors, evidently bewrayes
whose successors the Jesuits or other quaint modern refiners of School
Paganismes are, which hope to salve the contradictions of their doting
forefathers, and erring counsels, and patch up the unity of their broken and
divided Church by School glue or Philosophical querks.

3. But concerning the animation of the world, and its several parts, the
opinions of Philosophers varied, and their variation caused variety of
Idolatry: Every body had a peculiar spirit, or genius besides Jupiter, to whom
the moderation of all was assigned; whence we may without breach of charity
suppose the worshipping of dumb and senseless creatures to have been a
practice though wicked in all, yet not altogether so brutish and senseless in
some heathen as it is often generally censured without distinction. For even
the elements or inanimate creatures, which they adored, had, in the opinion of
some Philosophers, their proper spirits, though not to inform them, as our
souls do our bodies, yet to assist, or guard them; each of which spirits was
held divine, and endued with some peculiar power or virtue, for producing or
averting certain effects proportionable to the bodies. Vide Georg. Agricol. de
animalibus subterraneis etc.
Authors for skill as well practicke as speculatiue, not easy to be deceived,
and for their gravitie and moral honesty exempt from all suspicion of
purposed deluding others, have related strange apparitions about Mines. The
like might seduce some heathen to adore gold and silver, not as mettalls, but
rather as visible pledges of an invisible Mammons presence, conceived by them
as a spirit, or guardian of treasure, by whose favor (solicited in peculiar
rites or services) wealth might either be gotten or increased. The like
conceit, no question, moved the Sea the Bishop of Casae in his India^ Relations.
^ndians to present a Casket of gold and jewels, with such a solemn mask, or
superstitious dance, as they held most acceptable to their country-gods, in
hope Gold the Spanish God, as they deemed it, being pleased with their
devotions would appease the Spaniards cruelty. Why those semi-Christians
should so hunger and thirst after gold, and mettalls, which could neither allay
their hunger, nor quench their thirst, could not enter into these silly
caitiffs hearts; unless it were to sacrifice it unto some Mammon, or spirit of
Gold.

4. Julian the Apostata, albeit he spared no cost to make Jupiter his friend,
whom he adored as King of gods, and chief moderator of the world, yet thought
it no point of thrift or wisdom to neglect the Elementall spirits: because
these in the heathenish divinity, which he followed, were powers truly
divine, able to qualify their worshippers with the spirit of divination.
Neither was this opinion of their Deity in the censure of those times or
sects, any Paradox, nor the offering of placatory sacrifices, any unlawful or
superfluous practice. Otherwise Amianus his plea to acquit his Master from
suspicion of sorcery, or Magical Exorcismes had been as ridiculous in the
sight of Heathens, as it was impious in the judgment of Christians; Et quoniam
erudito, and studioso cognitionum omnium Principi malevoli pranoscendi futura
pravas arts assignant, advertendum est breviter; vnde sapienti viro hoc quoque
accidere poterit doctrinae genus haud leave. Elementorum omnium spiritus, vt
pote perenniu^ corporu^ praesenti motu semper and vbique vigens, ex his, quae
per d^sciplinas varias affectamus, participat nobiscum munera divinandi; Et
substantiales potestates ritu diverso placatae velut ex perpetuis fontium venis
vaticina mortalitati suppeditant verba. Quibus numen praeesse dicitur Themidis,
Quam ex eo, quod fixa fatali lege decreta praescire fas sit in posterum (quae
Tithemena sermo Graecus appellat) ita cognominatam, in cubili solioque lovis
vigoris vivifici Theologi veteres collocarunt. Ammiam, Marcellin lib 21.
Because this Prince a professed lover of all sciences, is by some maligned to
have gained the foreknowledge of things future by naughty Arts: we are
briefly to advertise by what means a wise man (as this Prince was) may
attain unto this kind of learning, or skill more than vulgar. The spirit of
all the elements (says this Author) being enquickned by the incessant motion
of the celestial bodies, participate with us the gift or faculty of
divination: and the favor of the substantial powers (or immortal substances)
being purchased by respective rituall observance; the praediction of Fates or
destiny is conveyed unto mortality from them, as from so many perpetual
springs or fountains. Over these substantial powers the goddess Themis sits
as President, so called by the Grecians, because the i^revocable fatal decrees
by her mediation become cognoscible. This Themis the ancient Theologi have
therefore placed in the bedchamber and throne of Jupiter, fountain of life and
liuelihood.

5. Yet this conceit of Vide Staphanum Pighium de Dea Themide.
Themis soveraigntie was not the opinion of all, or most ancient heathen
Doctors. For some have taught, that Vide Gyraldum de Tellure and nocte.
Tellus (or the spirit of the Earth) did give Oracles before Themis meddled in
these businesses. During the time of both their regencies; Nox by others was
esteemed at least as midwife of Revelations, whereof sometime she had been
reputed Queene-mother, because these secret praedictions of destiny, or fatal
doomes were usually brought to light in silent darkenesses. Not much different
from Ammians Philosophy are many of Plutarchs conjectures of the inspiration
and expiration of Oracles. Julian (it seems) from Plutarchs Principles hoped
to encourage these divining spirits to follow their former studies, and recall
them to their wonted seats, by reviving their ancient rites, and
reestablishing their privileges: as if Honos alit arts had place amongst
these petty gods.

6. This Philosophical opinion did fit the forementioned temptation to
superstition, as the claspe does the keeper. And with their impulsive help
were able to draw the present Christian world not well catechized, into the
bottomless sink of foulest Idolatry. And though from consciousnesse of our
ignorance in the works of Nature, we allow the issue of many practices,
whereof we can assign no probable special cause, but only in charity to our
selves and others, suppose they have some right unto their being by the
ordinary course of nature: yet some disorderly over-growne stemmes there be of
this charitable credulity, which bring forth little better fruit, than that
which the Christian world condemned in Julian. As for example, such as from
uncertain traditions can conceive hope, and attempt the practice of curing
diseases by Amulets, or by application of supposed medicines apparently
destitute of any natural active force, will quickly be set over to acknowledge
some hidden virtue, or supernatural efficacy concomitant, or assisiant, which
in plain terms they will not call their God or Creator, yet will think of
it, as of a good spirit, ready to help in time of need, so it be sought unto
by such means, as the Cabalists of these secret mysteries shall prescribe.
Whatsoever the matter of the medicine may be (though oftimes it be rather
verbal, than material) the manner of applying it, is for the most part
merely magical, and serves (though not in the intention of the patient or
Physician) as a solemn sacrifice to the founders of these Arts. Or if the
manner of applying or wearing medicines be not superstitiously ceremonious, the
solemn professing (though always not verbally expressed) of credence, or
belief prerequired unto their efficacy, is Idolatrous. Of practices in this
kind (though the practitioners will or can assign no reason, save only
traditions of luck good or bad to follow; yet may we safely presume the most
part to be naught; because we may evidently derive the original of many from
conceits merely heathenish and Idolatrous. Such is the use of Vervine, of our
Ladies gloves, and S. John's grass at this day in no less request amongst some
rude and ignorant Christians, than sometimes they were amongst the ancient
Grecians or Romans, to whose manners Theocritus and Virgil in their Poems do
allude: Eglog. 8.
-- Bacchare frontem
Cingite, ne vati noceat mala lingua futuro.
Lest naughty tongue whilst Poet's young,
his brain do blast;
Let luckie grass 'bout his Temple pass,
to bind them fast.
That other piece of the same Poet concerning the use of Vervine, smells too
rankly of magical sacrifice or incense: Verbenas adole pingues, and mascula
thura. It may be questioned, whether the Roman Eo magis obtinuit, vt Legati
publici sancti habeantur: adeo vt, siquid Iurisconsulto Martiano credimus,
sanctum vocari caeperit a sagminibus, id est, ve benis, quas herbas Romanorum
Legati ferebant, ne ab vllo v^^larentur adversus ius gentium. Quod si quis
ipsus pulsasset, hostibus dedebatur ex sententia Q. M^tij. Fo^cat. Iurisconsul:
de Gallorum Imperio and Philosoph. lib. 5. page 685. Greg. Tur^nensis tradit
Legatos Francorum mittisolitos cum Virgis consecratis, ne a quoquam
offenderentur. Forcat. Ibi^em.
Legates did wear Vervine upon superstitious confidence of some hidden virtue
in it, or as an emblematicall allusion to the superstitious conceit of the
vulgar. But wonted they were to wear bunches of it in their solemn embassages,
whether in token that their persons ought not, or out of vain hope, that their
persons could not be violated so long as they were under the protection of this
herb, accounted sacred. The most superstitious hopes, implied in these, or
the like practices of the Heathen, may be more then paralleld by the vain
confidence which some ignorant Christians put in the secret virtue of these,
and like herbs for curing strange diseases, or for their safeguard against
thunder, fiends, or wicked spirits. To this purpose I well remember a
tradition, that was old, when I was young, better believed by such as told it,
then if it had been Canonical Scripture. It was of a maid that liked well of
the devil making love to her in the habit of a gallant young man, but could
not enjoy his company, nor he hers, so long as she had Vervine and S. John's
grass about her: for to this effect he brake his mind unto her at last in
rhyme: If thou hope to be Lemman mine;
Lay aside the St John's grass, and the Vervine.
To rob a Swallows nest built in a fire-house, is from some old bell-dames
Catechismes, held a more fearful sacrilege, than to steal a chalice out of a
Church. Besides tradition they have no reason so to think. The prime cause of
this superstitious fear, or hope of good luck by their kind usage, was that
these birds were accounted sacred amongst the Romans, Vide Gyraldum etc. de
dijs penatibus.
Dijs penatibus, to their household gods, of which number Venus the especial
patroness of swallows was one.

7. Such a presidency as Ammianus assigned to Themis and the substantial
virtues of the Elements, is to this day given by these magic Cabalists unto
spirits over mettalls, stones, and herbs; each have their several Patrons.
And if the practice be for the practitioners conceived good; the spirit which
prospers it shall not be reputed evil. Thus are the Fayries, from difference
of events ascribed to them, divided into good and bad, when as it is but one
and the same malignant fiend, that meddles in both; seeking sometimes to be
feared, otherwhiles to be loved as God, for the bodily harms, or good turns
supposed to be in his power. And permitted (no question) he is to do both in
just punishment of their heathenish superstition or servilitie, that can
esteem him worthy either of religious love or fear.

8. It was my hap since I undertook the Ministry, to question an ignorant
soul, (whom by undoubted report I had known to have been seduced by a
teacher of unhallowed arts, to make a dangerous experiment) what he saw, or
heard, when he watched the falling of the Ferne-seed at an unseasonable and
suspicious hour. Why (quoth he) (fearing (as his brief reply occasioned me to
conjecture) lest I should press him to tell before company, what he had
voluntarily confessed unto a friend in secret about some fourteen years
before) do you think that the devil has ought to do with that good seed?
No; it is in the keeping of the King of Fayries, and he I know will do me no
harm, although I should watch it again; yet had he utterly forgotten this
Kings name, upon whose kindness he so presumed, until I remembered it unto him
out of my reading in Huon of Bordeaux. And having made this answer, he began
to pose me thus; Sr, you are a scholar, and I am none: Tell me what said the
Angel to our Lady? or what conference had our Lady with her cousin Elizabeth
concerning the birth of St John the Baptist? As if his intention had been to
make bystanders believe, that he knew somewhat more in this point, than was
written in such books, as I use to read. Howbeit the meaning of his riddle I
quickly conceived, and he confessed to be this; That the Angel did foretell
John Baptist should be borne at that very instant, in which the Ferneseede, at
other times invisible, did fall: intimating further (as far as I could then
perceive) That this Saint of God had some extraordinary virtue from the time or
circumstance of his birth. So fair a color had his Instructor, by profession
a Mathematician, by practice a Conjuret, cast upon this superstitious, and
ungodly experiment; as the most part of Magical ceremonies or observances,
pretend their warrant from some resemblances of sacred actions, or from
circumstances of miraculous cures wrought by our Savior, his Prophets, or
Apostles. Many instances to this purpose are to my remembrance gathered by
Delrius. This upon mine own knowledge, and observation I can relate; of two,
sent more than a mile, after the Sunsetting, to fetch South-running water,
with a strict Injunction, not to salute any either going or coming, no not
their dearest friends, if they should chance to meet them (as by chance they
did.) Such silence had well beseemed them in Gods Temple; but in this case was
the sacrifice of fools, an offering up of their tongues and lips unto the
service of Devils; yet colorable amongst the credulous by Elishaes
instructions given to Gehazie, when he sent him to cure the Shunamites child;
albeit these literally import rather have, than hope of good speed by their
observance. All the hidden virtues of the forementioned seed, invisible, save
only to the superstitious, I now remember not, nor were some of them fit to be
related. But the rarer, or stranger efficacy it or other herb or seed may be
conceived to have, the more eagerly are they sought after by the needy or
distressed; in body especially. Miserifacile credunt quae volunt.
Extreme misery, or distressefull penury, occasioned by course of nature, not
by violence, is by nature credulous, and apt to breed a good conceit in the
simple of any thing, that is publicly disliked or disallowed by the learned.
And credulity matching with eagerness of desire brings forth vain hope, or
stubborn confidence, without any just external occasion to beget it; as some
females are fruitlessely fertile without the male. And hopes enlarged or
augmented are forthwith in travel of action, and long after practices for
their accomplishment; although it be to offer solemn sacrifice to infernal
powers: whose sacraments are the oftener, and more zealously frequented;
because such grace, or good luck, as by divine permission ensues upon their
celebration, is always conferred ex opere operato. No strict examination of
the communicants conscience; no patient expectation of Gods providence (from
which as from a yoke burdensome to flesh and blood, they exempt all that put
confidence in them) is required unto their efficacy. If they fail in
operation, the present damage or bodily danger is not great, only so much
labor lost: and speediness of resolution, or quick manifestation of fatal
doom, be it good or bad, naturally excites men beset with fear, or hope, to
attempt the trial of such experiments, as are prescribed them. The Heathen
Magica^ vanitates saepius quidem antecedentis operis part, vbicunque causae
locusque posceba^t, coarguimus, detegemusque etiamnum: in p^ucis tamen digna
res est de qua plura dicantur, veleo ipso, quod fraudal^ntissima artium
plurimum in toto terrarum orb plurimisque saculis valuit. Autoritatem ei
maximam fuisse nemo miretur; quaen loquidom sola artium tres alias
imperiosissimas humana mentis complexa in vnamse ^edegit. Natam primum e
Med^cina nemo dubitat acspecie salutari irrepsisse velut altiorem sanctioremque
quam Medicinam: ita blandissimis desideratissim^sque promissis addid^sse vices
Religionis, a^ quas maxim^ etiamnum caligat humanum genus. Atque vt h^c qu^que
suggesserit ^s^sse arts M^the^cas, n^llo^ n^uido futura desesesciendi, atque
ea de^ coelo ver^s^ime peti cre^eme. (...) hominum sensibus triplici vinculo,
in tantum sastigij adole^^t, vt hod^eque etiam immag^^ae part gen^^um
preualeat, and in orient regum regibus imperet. Vide Plin not. h^st. lib. 30.
in principio.
Pliny, well observes Magical vanities or observances to have drawn their
first lineaments from Physic, creeping into men's opinions under fair shows,
and sweet promises of health, much desired by all, but proffered by Magicians
in extraordinary measure, and by means more sacred, than medicines sensible;
and thus lastly to have fastened their throne throughout all ages by a triple
bond, by weaving Religion and Mathematical Arts into their warpe, which was
first spunne from Physic. This opportunity of associating Mathematical
sciences was easily gained from that inbred desire, which all men have of
foreknowing things concerning themselves, and from a prenotion, that the
foreknowledge of them is from heaven.

8. The greater soveraigntie these curious Arts had gotten in the Eastern
Nations, the more they commend the majesty of Christ's new erected kingdom,
which could so suddenly put them down, and cause the Vide Acts. 19. verse 19.
contemplators of such grand mysteries to sacrifice their books and labors to
the simplicity of the Gospel. It may be want either of leisure well to
examine, or of capacity to conceive, or perhaps of present memory to recall
exactly what I conceived of some Paracelsian writings, when I read them, makes
me yet strongly jealous, lest as one Devil more than the Players had dressed
is said to have appeared upon the Stage: so some spirit more than natural does
sometimes insinuate himself into their curious extractions of spirits, and
pretended search of medicines metaphysicall. In Paracelsus himself, though I
understood not all, yet some passages, I am certain, are so plainly impious,
that no man, which understands the principles of Christian Religion, will
undertake to make any orthodoxall construction of them. Besides the
suspiciousnesse of their matter, the character of many of their writings
ministered more just occasion for us to think, that one and the same spirit did
breath in their Riddles, and in heathen Oracles; than the congruitie of
Averroes and Mahomets style did unto Ludcuicus Vives, to avouch that he which
liked well the writings of the one, could not much mislike the others Alkaran.
As their pretended mysteries are usually covered with the same veil of
ambiguitie and obscurity, wherein seducing heathenish Oracles were enwrapt: so
the evasions to salve their Authors credit, when success no way answers the
expectation, are as obvious. Either the right meaning of the Rule was
mis-taken, or else there was some defect in the practice. That Paracelsus and
his followers, are schismatic Physicians, is too well known, unless Galene
and Hippocrates be not so orthodoxall, as the world accounts them. But how
justly Omne^ porro Mab metano um alidaciam superat* quoa homo, non dica^ impius
(nimis enim leave est hoc verbum) sed plane Tartareus audet affirmare, spiritu^
mundi (quiadem set spiritus cum spiritu corporis nostri) filium De^esse
conspicuum, minus purumet perfectum calore il^o suo solari. Eras^^ Disputat:
par^tertia. page 43.
Paracelsus, and his followers His accedit, quod se Paracelsi discipulum esse
non negat. quem Arianum suiss^ nimis consi^t, etc. Sane quo^ paul^ ^^tiores
habe^ Par^celsicos (de illis l^quor praecipue, qui magistru^ s^um omnibus
cl^ssici sc^^ptoribus non exaequare ^antum, ve^um etiam praeponere audent) vel
ex certis argumentis, vel ex eorum scriptis, vel ex amic^rum and fami^^arnem
ipsorum n^^ratione, pers^exi magia per quam stu^io^^sesse Cabalam et adep am
Philosop^iam Paracelsi in os nol is pala^l^^dare non crubescum: qua^ tam certum
est scelestae magiae parts qu^sdam esse, quam est certum me virere dumista
scribo. Erastus. Ibidem.
are charged by Erastus with the Arrian heresy, and with other doctrines of
devils, with superstitious charms, and magic spells, either unknown unto
the ancient Heathen, or detested by the more ingenuous sort of them; I leave it
to their censure, which have better leisure and opportunity to examine;
greater experience and deeper judgment to debate the controversy betwixt
them: only this perhaps I might in charity wish, that as no man may minister
ordinary Physic unto others without license; so none might be admitted to
read their speculations, or try the truth of their professed mysteries,
without public approbation, not only of their sufficiency in learning; but
of their sincerity in Religion. For certainly great are the temptations,
whereunto this new, or late revived Philosophy exposes wits (young especially)
or addicted to curiosity; so great, as they cannot be prevented, or resisted,
but only by minds thoroughly grounded in the orthodoxall faith. Hyperbolicall
force, or pretended virtue, assigned by them to their medicines, and the
magnifiecence of the end proposed naturally inspires indefatigable alacrity in
seeking or trying means possible to effect it. And curiosity of long and
eager search, not satisfied, will at length be ready to claspe with practices
superstitiously curious, rather than fail. Such of their principles, as are
approueable, perhaps more to be esteemed, than the received maxim^s of common
Philosophy, or Physic; are so interlaced with other stuff, or intimation of
more hidden secresies, that they may seem laid but as baytes to draw youths to
an implicit belief of their high mysteries, always clothed with a color of
Religion, as if they were the only men, which understood the grand mystery of
the creation, and the precise manner of the resurrection. I should not much
digress, though I should enlarge this caveat, intended only for young
Students, lest they should be deceived through vain Philosophy. Even in
Quicunque talem negat medicinam dari posse, quae valeat incorruptibilitate sua
quan uis corruptionem indifferenter cor^igere, caelion inferiora sustentare
velgubernare negat. Sed ne videamur natura secreta Lenocinio prostituere velle,
pauca de his sapientiae filijs sufficiant: hifacile quid per haec velimus
intelligunt. Qui veronostram ignorant artem etrident, fugiant hinc procul,
quoniam illis in ruinam est posita: vt quaerentes non inueni^nt, et audientes
non intelligant. Non est proijciendum rosas et margaritas ante porcos, ne
pedibus cas, tanquam betas labijs eorum insuitas, co^culcent. Sapientiae filij
spiritu, non orehauriunt al^ment^m, vt mante magis quam corpo^e viu^nt. Interim
tamen, vt sit men's sana in corpore sano. cup^^n^, donec a naturae vinculo
soluta, triahae in vnum rursus vnita, vi vant in aternam. Dornaeus in Clave
Philosoph. Chymisticae. lib. 3.
Dorney (though he write more Christianlike than his Master) there appears
some spice of that spirit of pride, which first sublimated Physic into
Magic. It contents him not, that the matter of his medicines should be
reputed truly celestial; but his doctrine must be enstyled heavenly; he and
his followers must be wisdoms children; their controvenaries sons of folly,
the brood of darkness.

CHAPTER XX.
Of the special nutriment which the Poetry of ancient times did afford to
the forementioned seeds of Idolatry, with some other particular allurements
to delightful superstition. That the same nutriment which feeds superstition,
being rightly prepared, may nourish devotion.

1. HE that is a Poet by nature, or an habitual practitioner in the Art of
Poetry, has his wits always tuned to such an high key or strain, as ordinary
wits cannot reach, unless they be thereto intended or stretched by the actual
impulsions of externalls much affected, or some occasioned ferve^cy of desires.
Fervency of desires though lodged in muddie breasts, not seasoned with a drop
of Helicon, will intertaine bruit or inanimate creatures with such speech, and
gestures, as if the one had reason, or the other sense. Often does extremity of
heat impell day-labourers, or fear of rain the husbandman to entreat the
wind, as if it could hear as well as it is heard; Blow wind, Gentle wind
blow, etc. Many out of deep and inveterate discontent, will vent their curses
in Poetical fury, though in rustique phrase, against the place, wherein
deserved mischief has befallen them. Others out of the fulness of love,
courteous nature, or affectionate complement, will kiss the ground, from which
they have received extraordinary good. As Charles the fifth after he had
resigned the Empire, and bid the wars farewell, bestowed his osc^lum Pacis
upon the Spanish earth, whereto in liew of all benefits hence received, he
solemnly bequeathed the residue of his retired life, and his wea^ied limbs,
when death should take them. And Mariners after a tedious and dangerous voyage,
will salute the shore with complement very suspicious to be daily practiced by
inhabitants. True imitation of affection, whilst it vents its fulness, is
the best artificial motive to breed or stir affection in our auditors, or
spectators. From imitation of men's speeches, and gestures in like exigences of
affection, or plunges of vehement disires came Prosopopeia's first in request
amongst Rhetoricians; a form of speech very effectual, and approueable in its
right subject, the circumstance of time and place duly observed. But the
frequent use of it in Panegyricall Orations about Martyrs graves, did first
occasion that gross Idolatry of invocation of Saints; although it came not
till long after by degrees insensible (as it were an huge cesterne filling by
continual droppings) to that height, wherewith it so swelled in the Romish
Church, as it had almost overflowne the whole world besides. Yet as these
Panegyricks were ancient: so the first beginning of Prosopopeia's might as
easily occasion the Heathen to mistake Christian devotions as the unseasonable
imitation of their first use, did seduce Christians afterward to an heathenish
conceit of deceased Martyrs. So short had the usual passage from these
figurative and affectionate exclamations to idolatrous invocation of men
departed been: That the heathen either out of their own experience, that such
Prosopopeia's were introductions to Deifications of men deceased, or from some
relics of their first leaders dispositions propagated unto them, did dig the
bodies of noble Martyrs out of their graves, throwing others after torture into
the sea, as fearing lest their Encomiasts should adore and worship them after
the same manner they themselves did their grand Patrons, great benefactors, or
Heroicks, whom breath of flatery, (as the next discourse shows) sought of
dead men to make living gods.

2. These exclamations were more rifely, more dangerous in Poets, than in
Orators, or such as used them not but upon external impulsion, and in a manner
against their wills. As are the Poets names, so is their nature: Makers they
are, and herein they imitate the maker of all things, that they call things
that are not, as if they were, and strive to infuse the spirit of life and
motion into every subject they take in hand; as they feign Pygmalion did into
his Image. So womanish are we all, that are borne of women; that our
delightful and choice conceits desire always to have their pictures draw in
seemly luster and proportion, and we solace out internal fancies with looking
on these outward Images; as Gentlewomen do themselves by gazing on their own
faces represented unto them in a favorable glass. Of thoughts or fancies, the
Poet is the only picturer. Such amongst the Heathen as had the right trick of
this art, would always either invest their matter with the shape, or grace it
with the presence of some goddess; nor matter nor manner of speech ordinary,
or merely humane could content them. From this strong bent of affection,
joining with the high strain of speech, or invention peculiar to Poets, did
their fervent wishes or eiaculations hitte that point in a moment, whereto
others affectionate exclamations or Rhetorical Prosopopeia's did rather slide
than fly. The wind whiles it is apprehended as a messenger of love, is placed
above his rank: Virgil.
Daphni ferat tibi ventus ad aures! So is the Air made by another Poet in a
manner joint sharer with God in invocations for revenge: Ovid.
Audiat haec Ether, quique est Deus vltor in illo.
O Heavens, O God hear this,
Who in the Heavens Avenger is.
These artificial forms of speech, by process of time and opportunity,
became patterns of practice in earnest unto others; and liuelesse creatures,
to whom such prayers or wishes were thus by way of Poetical complement
tendered, did sometimes encroach upon the express titles of God, to whom
invocation is only due. Somne quies rerum, placidissime somne Deorum,
Pax animi, quem cura fugit, tu pectora duris
Fessa ministerijs mulces, reparasque labori.
O sleep the sweetest of all Gods,
that give all things rest;
The peace of mind, that scarrs all cares,
with labor hard oppressed;
Our bodies thou do recreate,
and with new strength invest.
Another Heroical Poet makes the Princess (which had exposed her husband to
the sword by instigating him to recover his right by it) present her
supplications to dumb creatures, whilst she sought her husbands corpse by
night amongst the slain in such a style, as were enough to cast a musing
Reader into a waking dream or imagination, that the walls, the houses, the
very soil whereon she trod, had been animated with some peculiar Genius,
capable of friendship and foehood: Horruit Argia, dextrasque ad moenia tendens,
Vrbs optata prius: nunc tecta hostilia Thebe:
Si tamen illoesas reddis mihi coniugis vmbras
Nunc quoque dulce solum Statius.
.
With grief o'regrowne to Theban-walls her suppliant hands she bends,
Oh City late too dearly loved (since love in sorrow ends)
Now hostile Thebes: yet so thou willest my Consorts Corpse restore,
Still shall thou be, a Soil to me, as dear as heretofore.
These, or the like speeches of heathen Poets, if by Christians they may not be
uttered without reproof; Lactantius his censure of Tullie for his too lavish
Rhetorical Prosopopeia made unto Philosophy, shall save me a labor. O vitae
Philosophia d^ (inquit) ovirtutis indagatrix, expultrixque v^tiorum, quod non
modo n^ssed omnino vita hominu^ sine te esse non potuisset! Tu Inventrix legu^,
Tu magistra moru^, ac disciplinae fuisti: Quasi vero aliquid per se ipsa
sentiret, ac non potius ille laudandus esset, quieam tribuit? Potuit eodem modo
gratias agere cibo, and potui; quia sine his rebus vitae constare non possit,
inquibus vt sensus, ita beneficij nihil est. Atqui illa corporis alimenta sunt,
sic animae sapientia. Lactan. de falsa sapientia, lib. 3. cap. 13.
O Philosophy, the guide of life, the searcher out of virtue, the banisher of
vice, without thee not only we thy followers should be no bodies: but even
the life of mankind could be nothing worth, for thou have been the Foundresse
of Laws, the Mistress of manners and discipline. As if forsooth (says this
Author) Philosophy it self could take any notice of his words, or as if He
rather were not to be praised which did bestow her. He might with as good
reason have rendered the like Rhetorical thanks to his meat and drink; for
without these, the life of man cannot consist, howbeit these are things without
sense. Benefits they are, but they can be no Benefactors. As they are the
nourishment of the body, so is wisdom or true Philosophy of the soul.

3. That the seminaries of Poetry should be the chief nurses of Idolatry,
argues how apt the one is to bring forth the other; or rather how both lay like
twins in the womb of the same vnpurified affection, usually begotten by one
spirit. Woods and fountains, as every Schoole-boy knows, were held chief
mansions of the Muses, to whose Courts the Poets resorted to do their homage,
invoking their aid, as the goddesses whom they most renowned, hereto allured
by the opportunity of the place. The pleasant spectacle and sweet resounds,
which woods and shadie fountains afford, will sublimate illiterate spirits,
and tune or temper minds, otherwise scarce apt for any, to retired
contemplations. They are to every noise as an organized body to the soul or
spirit, which moves it: Gentle blasts diffused through them, do so well
symbolize with the internal agitations of our minds and spirits, that when
we hear them, we seem desirous to understand their language, and learn some
good lesson from them. And albeit they utter not expressly what we conceive; yet
to attentive and composed thoughts, they inspire a secret seed or fertility
of invention, especially sacred.

4. But is, or was the notion of the Deity naturally more fresh and lively in
these seminaries of heathenish Poetry, than in other places? Yes, every
unusual place, or spectacle, whether remarkeably beautiful, or ghastly,
imprints a touch or apprehension of some latent invisible power, as President
of what we see. Seneca's observation to this purpose will open unto us one
maine head or source of heathenish Idolatry, which well cleansed might add
fertility to Christian devotion. In vnoquoque virorum bonorum (quis deus
incertum est) habitat deus. To prove this conclusion, that God is near us,
even within us, thus he leads us. Si tibi occurrit vetustis arboribus, and
solitam altitudinem egressis frequens lucus, et conspectum coeli de^sitate
ramorum alioru^ alios protegentium submo^^ns: Illa proceritas sylvs, and
secretum loci, and admiratio vmbrae in aperto tam densae, atque continuae,
fidem tibi numinis facit. Et siquis specus saxis penitus exesis montem
suspen^erit, non manufactis sed naturalibus causis in tantam duritatem
excauatus, animu^ tuum quadam Religionis suspicione percutiet. Magnorum
fluminum catita veneramur: subita, and ex abdito vasti amnis eruptio aras
habet: Coluntur aquarum calentium fontes, et stagna quaedam velopacitas, vel
immensa altitudo sacrauit. Seneca. Epistola. 41.
If thou light on a grove thick set with trees of such unusual antiquity and
height, as that they take away the sight of Heaven by the thickness of their
branches over spreading one another: the height of the wood, the solitariness
of the place, and the vncouthnesse of the close and continued shade in the open
air, do jointly represent a kind of Heaven on earth, and exhibit a proof
unto thee of some divine power present. Or if thou chance to see a den whose
spacious concauitie has not been wrought by the hand-labour of men, but by
causes natural, which have so deeply eaten out, and consumed the stones, that
they have left a hanging mountain to over spread it like a Canopie, the sight
likewise will affect the mind with some touch or apprehension of Religion. We
adore the heads of great Rivers, etc. Vide Parag. 8. and 9. of this Chapter.

5. And because superstition can hardly sprout, but from the degenerate and
corrupt seeds of devotion, wicked spirits did haunt these places most, which
they perceived fittest for devout affections. As sight of such groves and
fountains, as Seneca describes, would nourish affection: so the affection
naturally desirous to enlarge it self, would, with the help of these Spirits
sleights and instigations, incite the superstitious to make their groves more
retired, and sightly. Thus like cunning anglers they first bait the places,
and then fish them: and their appearance being most usual, when men's minds
were thus tuned to devotion: the eye would easily seduce the heart to fasten
his affections to the place, wherein they appeared, as more sacred than any
other. And to the spirits thus appearing, as to the sole Lords and owners of
the delightful soil, and chief Patrons of these bewitching rites and
customs, they thought their best devotions were not too good.

6. Throughout the story of the Judges and Kings of Israel, we may observe how
groves were as the banqueting houses of false gods; the trappes and ginnes of
sacrilegious superstition. For this cause in all suppressions of Idolatry, the
commission runs jointly for cutting down groves, and demolishing Altars. So
God Deuteronomie the 5. after commandment given to destroy the Amorites,
adds this iniunction withal; Ye shall overthrow their Altars, and break
down their pillars; and ye shall cut down their groves, and burn their
graven Images with fire. And unto Gideon the first (in my remembrance) to whom
this warrant was in particular directed; Throw down the Altar of Baal that thy
Father has made; and cut down the grove that is by it. Judge. 6. v. 25. And
Ezekiah, whiles he removed the high places, and brake the Idols, cut down the
groves. 2. King. 18. v. 4. The like did Josias after him 2. King. 23. v. 14.
How availeable either this destruction of groves was to the extirpation, or the
cherishing of them to the growth and increase of Idolatry, the good success
of ^agello his like religious policy in winning the Lithu^nians (his stiffly
Idolatrous, and strangely superstitious Country men) unto Christian Religion,
may inform us. I relate the Story at large as I find it; because it conteines
fresh and lively experiments as well of this present, as of diverse other
observations in this Treatise. And no man will easily distrust ancient
reports, when he sees them parallele by modern and neighbor examples. Actum
autemmeo conventu, Vladislao Rege auctore, dep antanda Catholica in ^^thu^ni.
fide, and Idolo u^ cult^ D^^itus a^^^e^do memo a u^: vbi Rex non modo boni
principis, sed and Apostoli munus suscepit. Nam non s^lum propenendis vulgo
pramijs; sei docendis etiam, et voce, ac orat one mou^^dis, erudiendisque
topulis tanta eiu^ occaluerat patientia, vt nemo hac in part rege superior,
vix similis aliquis spectaretur Dura por^o, et inexorabilis admodum vetericultu
relinquendo extiterat multitudo, vt pote quo ignem prodeco^e^e, fulmini divinos
honores defer, ^ucos, et excelsas arbores in syluis sacrosanctas h^bere
^ntiquitus consueuerat, quas vi, ferro, aut flamma, aut denique vlla alia
violare ratione, ^e^fas, neque tu^um rebatur. Verum enimu^ro cum iussu, and
autoritate Regia illa partum oppres^, partim e^scissa, de vastataque essent,
neccuiusqu^m aut interitus, aut l^sin exinde sequeretur: tum vero sensim
effecti Li^^uam moll^ores, Regio mandato, and autoritati cedere caperunt, and
tandem etiam Christo norren da^e, and Catholicam religionem certatim suscipere
minime dub^a^unt. Va^seuitius in Parall.
The common sort (says mine Author, speaking of the Lithuanian about two
hundred years ago) was very stiff, and would hardly endure to be entreated
to relinquish their Religion, being formerly accustomed to worship the fire for
Go^ and to adore the thunder and lightning with divine honor, set groves or
trees in common woods of unusual height, had such authority from antiquity
for their sacred esteem; that to cut or burn them, or offer them any
violence, was reputed a sacrilege so fearful, as would instantly provoke
vengeance divine. But the woods and groves being at length cut down and
wasted, without the destruction or harm of any employed in this business,
they grew more tractable, and (as if the woods had taught them obedience) began
to believe the Kings authority and command, becoming at length forward
professors of Christian Religion.

7. The like superstitious fear had Constantines resolution in reformation
expelled out of the Egyptians, who would have persuaded him, that if he took
their sacred ell or fathom out of Serapes Temple, the River Nilus, which was
under this conceited Gods patronage, would cease to flow. -- At ille
Labitur, and labetur in omne volubilis aenum.
But whether Angels had not graced these nurseries of devotion by their
appearance unto Gods servants in them (especially before the Law was given) is
easilier questioned, than determined. The general observation of errors
springing from ancient truths imperfectly related, makes me suspect, that the
apparition of Angels, or manifestation of Gods presence in like places unto
holy men, and their demeanor upon such manifestations, was, by preposterous
imitation, drawn to authorize the Idololatricall worship of such spirits, as
the heathen had seen in visible shape; as also of the supersticious esteem,
or reverence of the places themselves. For, in Constantines time, as Eusebius
tells us, the Heathens had erected their Altars in the oaken grove of Mambree,
in which the three Angels appeared to Abraham.

8. But whether Constantine though much offended with the Altar, did with it
destroy the grove, is uncertain. For albeit the title of the Chapter
containing this story in our English Eusebius, takes it as granted, that he
did; the text notwithstanding leaves it doubtful, if not more probable, that
he did not. Nor was it necessary he should in this case follow the example of
Josias or Ezekias, having that liberty, which they had not, to build a Temple
in the same place to the Lord; unto zealous devotion in whose service the grove
might afford no less plenty of fuel, than it had done to heathenish
supersticion and Idolatry. For that which feeds superstition through want of
instruction only, or through licensed opportunities, not naturally, not of it
self, would prove best nutriment of true devotion to such as have the spirit
of grace, or wisdom to digest it; especially if the practices which nourish
superstition, be controlled by plausible custom or authority. No affection
more fertile of either than the Poetical temper, according as it is well or
ill employed. No place yields such opportunities for growth either of root or
branch, as woods or groves, or like shrowdes, or receptacles of retired life:
nor could the sight, or solitary frequenting any of these, have nursed such
strange superstition in the heathen, but only by suggesting a liuelier notion
of the Godhead, than usual objects could occasion. And if other men's minds be
of the same constitution with mine, our apprehensions of the true God as
Creator, have a kind of spring, when he renewes the face of the earth.
Praesentemque refert qu^elibet herba Deum. The suddain^ growth of every grass
points out the place of his presence; the variety of flowers and h^^rbes,
suggest^ a secret admiration of his inexpressible beauty. In this respect, the
frequency of Sermons seems most necessary in Cities and great Towns, that
their Inhabitants, who (as one wittily observes) see for the most part but the
works of men, may daily hear God speaking unto them: whereas such as are
conversant in the fields and woods, continually contemplate the works of God.
And nothing naturally more apt to awaken our minds, and make them feel, or
see his operations, than the growth of vegetables, or the strange motions, or
instincts of creatures merely sensitive. The secret increase or fructification
of vegetables, without any inherent motion, or motive faculty, and the
experience of sensitiues, accomplishing their ends more certainly without any
sparkle of reason, then man does his by reasonable contriuance, or artificial
policy, moved some heathens to adore groves, woods, birds, and sensitive
creatures almost of every kind for gods; who yet neither worshipped dead
elements, or living men. Dead elements they neglected, because their qualities
less resemble the operations of the living God, with some notions of whose
nature they were inspired. Living men they much admired not in that the cause
of every actio^ which they effect, and the manner of bringing their ends about,
was too well known. They saw little (it seems) in their neighbors, but what
they knew to be in themselves, whom they had no reason to take for gods: and if
one should have worshipped another, perhaps the rest would have called them
fools, as birds, or other creatures would have done, so they had known what
worship meant: howbeit such men in every age as could either reveal secrets to
come, or bring things to pass beyond the observation or experience of former
humane wits, were even in their life accounted as gods, or near friends unto
some god.

9. Others again, that would have scorned to worship men, or almost any other
liue-creature, otherwise then upon these terms, did adore the heads or first
springs of Vide Annotationem ex Seneca parag. 4. huius capitis.
Rivers, whose continual motion to feed the streams that flow from them
without any visible original, whence their own store should be supplied, is
by nature (not stifled by art) a sufficient motive to call the invisible
Creator, and fountain of all things to man's remembrance. And some again, whom
sight of ordinary fountains did less affect, were put in mind of some divine
invisible cause, or prime mouer, by the annual overflow of Adeo autem natura
hunc amnem supra reliquos omnes extulit, vt eo impore increscat, quo maxim
vlta feruoribus terra aquam desiderat, expletura annuam ficim: cum in ea part,
qua Aegyptus in Aethiopiam vergit, nullis aut raris imbribus adversus
sic^itatem adiu ve^^^r. Cuius incrementi foecundissimi ratio solid uinitati
accepta ferend^ est: frustrae em^ alias quisquam rations scrutabitur. Et forte
hoc pramio a mundi origin Deus Aegyptum remunerari voluit, prasciens fore vt
Christus s^curus in ea lateret, and Herodem cruentum evaderet. Fo^cat. lib. 2.
page 229.
Nilus, or the like experiments inscrutable by course of nature. The admirable
effects of Nilus overflow, were the cause of that irreligious and brutish
disposition, which Gymno^ot hista Nilum venerantur magno cul^u, ipsumque aquam,
t^rramque simulesse praedicant. Ibid page 230.
Seneca notes in the Egyptian husbandmen. Why the Egyptians neglecting
heaven, did overesteem the River Nilus; See Section 1. chap 4. par. 4. of this
Book.
Nemo Aratorum in Aegypto Coelum aspicit.
No Plowman in Egypt looks toward Heaven.
The like has a Roman Poet: Vide Plin in ^anegy^.
Te propter nullos Tellus tua postulat imbres,
A^ida nec plu vio supplicat herba Jove.
Egyptian earth save Nilus streams no water knows;
No parched grass, or Jove, or moistened air there wo'es.
The soil being mellowed with this River, seemed less beholden to heaven,
than Athens was; where (as some collect) the art of tilling the ground was
first invented amongst the Graecians. Albeit I rather think it was the
dryness of the soil, wherein that famous City stood, which occasioned that
Idololatricall emblem, whence some have taken occasion to conjecture, that the
art of tillage was first manifested there. Athenis vbi ratio colendi agrum
primum ostensa esse Graecis dicitur, simulachrum terrae extitisse suppliciter a
Jove pluviam comprecantis scribit Pausanias. Cornar de Re vinitoria. lib. 1.
cap 8 page 56. Some whether half Christians or mere Pagans, ranked by the
ancient in the bed-rolle of heretics, have held the Marigold, and like
flowers, not incapable of divine honor, by reason of their liue-sympathie with
the Sun. The ancient Galls did offer sacrifice unto the Non est om^^te^
dainea re et Gall^arum admirati^. Nihil habent D^uidae (^a su^s appellant
mago^) vis^o, and arbore, in qua ^^gua^t^r (simodo sit rob^^) ^acratius. Iam
per se roborum eligu^t lucos; nec vlla sacra sine ea fron^e confic^unt, vt inde
appellat^ quoque interpretatione Grae^apossint Dr^^da vide^i. Enimaer^ quicquid
adnascatur illis e coelo missum putant, signumque esse electae ab ipso Deo
arboris. Esta tem^d raru^ ad^^du inuentu, et repertu^ magna religione petitur:
et ante omma sexta Luna, qua princitia mensiu^ annoru^que his facit, et saeculi
post tricesimu^ annu^, quia ia^ v^^u^ abunde habeat, necsit (...) Omnia
sanante^ appella^tes suo vocabulo, sacrificijs, epulisque ^^e sub arbore
prepa^atis, duo admo ^e^t ca^didi coloris taur^s, quoru^ cornua tu^c primu^
vin^^atur. S^c^edos ca^dida vest cultus arbore^ sca^dit. falce aurea demetit:
Ca^dido id excipitur sago (...) p^ecantes ^t suu^ denu^ Deus prosperu^ faciat
his, quibus dederit. Fac^nditate^ e^ po^^dar^ ^^^u^que animali s^e (...)
arbitra^tur, co^traque venena omnia esse remedio. Tantagentium ^^rebus fr^^^lis
p^e^umque religio est. Plin not. hist l 16. p. 409.
Mistleto, because the manner of its original is without example in
vegetables, being caused (as they conceived) rather by secret celestial
influences, than by any earthly or material propagation. So easily are minds,
apt to admire things strange and uncouth, drawn through curiosity of
observation, unto superstitious and idololatricall performances. That in
strange predictions we should apprehend the working of a divine wisdom, which
we apprehend not in our ordinary cogitatio^s, though in them he always work,
falls out no otherwise, than the like error in the common sort of heathen, in
whom trees of unusual height, or like spectacles, did raise an imagination of
Gods presence, which sight of grass, of ordinary herbs, or lower shrubbes
(though in the lowest of them he be continually present) could not prompt unto
their drowsy fantasies. As seldom are our imaginations so thoroughly awaked,
as to take express notice of Gods presence without strong pushes of unusual
accidents, or violent incursion of unacquainted obiects^ Much familiarity
breeds contempt of their persons, whose presence, were it rare and uncouth,
would beget admiration, awe, and reverence. This experiment so certain in
civil conversation, that it is now grown into a Proverb, is rooted in that
undoubted Maxim in matters natural: A consuetis nulla fit passio, and it
bears no better fruit in matters Theological. For albeit Gods presence be
most intimate in our souls, and his working in other creatures, manifested
unto our eyes; yet because this contact of his presence is perpetual, and the
manifestation of his power continually obvious, we usually have no sense, or
feeling of the one or other, until it touch us after some unusual manner; or
open our eyes by presenting them with wonders. Howbeit whilst these are
absent, to shake of the slumber, and to inapt us, that are Christ's Ministers,
to be affected with Gods presence; such abstraction of our selves from secular
turbulencies, as the Poets used, would be much availeable. Ovid.
Carmina secessum scribentis, and otia querunt.
Good verses always do require,
A vacant mind and sweet retire.
Another thought he always lost himself in the great preasse at Rome, without
hope of finding himself, till he and his wits met again at his rural home; [
Horace.
Mihi me reddentis agelli.] And is it possible we should not perceive a great
loss of Gods presence, so long as we continue in places filled only with the
sound of secular contentions or debatements? wherein the world and devil find
opportunity to instampe their image upon our souls, preventing all impression
of matters heavenly But when we come into solitary or uncouth places, either
decked with native comeliness and vnborrowed beauty, or never soyled by
secular commerce or frequency: the conceit of God and his goodness gains
first possession of our vacant thoughts, and ravisheth our minds with the
fragrancy of his presence. To have some place of retire, which has been
witness of no thoughts but sacred, is a great help unto devotion; the renewed
sight, or remembrance of every circumstance, or local adjunct, occasions us to
resume our former cogitations without any curb or impediment; which in places,
wherein our minds have much run on other matters, we can hardly prosecute
without interruption or mixture of worldly toys.

10. Would God it were free to make that harmless use or application of these
observations unto others, which I have often made, and hope to make each day
more than other unto my self. And though I expect not the concurrence of many
men, no not of my brethren and companions to second me in my desire of that
reformation, which I have no great cause to hope I shall ever see in this Land,
yet can I not deem it a fruitless labor, to power forth my wishes in the
worlds sight, before Him, who alone can do all things. And what is thy
servant, O Lord, could most desire to see, or hear, before he go hence, and
be no more seen or heard amongst the sons of mortal men? That thy Temples
throughout this Land might be more secluse, and the lives of thy Ministers more
retired: That no action, speech, or gesture, which bear the character of
conversation secular, or merely civil, should once so much as present it
self to our senses, whiles we approach thy dwellings: That in these short
passages from our private lodgings to thy secluse and silent Courts, we might
perceive as great an alteration in our behavior, and affections, as if we had
gone out of an old world into a new, or traveled from one kingdom to another
people.

11. Had not those privileges of retired life, wherewith superstition had
blessed her children, been held too glorious by reformers of Religion, for
reformed devotion to enjoy; the ingenuous poverty of the English Clergy,
might have made the whole world rich in all manner of spiritual knowledge. The
loss of Monasteriall possessions had been light, if as in temporal States,
the honor (with some competent portion of ancient inheritance) remains
entire unto the next heir male, while the greatest part of the Lands possessed
by the father, goes for dowry unto his daughters; so that liberty of enjoying
themselves which had been peculiar to them before all privileges of secular
Nobility, which impaired them, might have been reserved to the sons of
Levi, though but with some corners of their ancient retired mansions, whose
magnifice^ce had brought them unto nothing. Retired life it self, is such an
hidden treasury, as were it within kenne of possibility to be regained in
these our days, Ecclesiastical dignities, though offered gratis, would
without equivocation be freely refused, even by such, as best deserve them. He
that now brings iron would bring brass, in stead of brass we should have
silver, in stead of silver gold, toward the rebuilding of Gods Temple; or, he
that now scarce brings any quantity of better metal well refined to this
good work, would bring Pearl, Topas, the Onyx and every precious stone in
great abundance. But now, through want of these sacred gardens, which might
have been stored with spiritual simples, the infectious disease of these
Atheistical and sacrilegious times, is become incurable in the Physicians
themselves. Ambition, even in Gods messengers over-groweth age, and makes us
more indiscreet and childish in the period of maturitie, than we were in any
part of our infancy. For few, if any of us, or seldom, if at any time of our
childhood, have longed to put on our best apparel toward bedtime. And yet
what tricks and devises, over and above all that Machiavill has meditated,
do we put in practice, rather to over-burden, than invest our souls with
titles of dignity and honor; whilst our winding sheets do expect us, as
having one foot in the grave; within whose territories, Plowmen are full
compeeres to Kings; where the spade may challenge precedence of the scepter;
where the miter may not contest with the mathooke.

CHAPTER XXI.
Of Idolatry occasioned from inordinate affection toward Friends deceased,
or ceremonious solemnities at Funerals.

1. THe implanted notion of the Godhead, which with diversity of affections,
has its spring and fall, was in some Heathens so buried; that nothing but
sorrow for friends departed, or affection toward public benefactors, could
reviue it. Such were the Augilae, and ipsi Africa populi, nullos Deos putaru^t
prater defunctoru^ manes, a quibus responsa petere solebant, sepulchris
incubantes, vt Mela abijque prodiderunt. Gyraldus histor. Deorum, Syritagma. 1.
page 6.
Augilae, a people of Afric, which had no gods besides the ghosts of men
deceased. Their error, though gross, was linked in a double chain of truth:
the one, that souls of men deceased, did not altogether cease to be: the
other, that the things which are seen were ordered and governed by unseen
powers; yet loath they were to believe any thing, which in some sort they had
not seen, or perceived by some sense. Hence did their general notion miscarry
in the descent unto particulars, prostrating it self before sepulchers filled
with dead bones, and consulting souls departed. Though not in the negative,
yet in the affirmative part of these men's verdit concerning the gods, most
Heathens upon occasions did concur. The superstition might easily be either
bred or fed from an opinion so probable to most in speculation, as opportunity
would easily draw all to the practice. The Aristotl. 1. Ethicorum.
grand Censurer, while he denies; Deceased ancestors to be any whit affected
with the weal, or misery of posterity, implies this to have been a received
opinion before his time, for such, for the most part, he either refutes, or
refines. This principle being once settled in men's minds; strong impulsions
either of hope or fear, would extort such prayers and supplications to
friends, or ancestors departed, as upon like occasions should have been
tendered to them living. And the supplicants, not knowing any set means of
procuring audience before patrons now absent and out of sight, would try all
they had known in like cases practiced by others, or could invent themselves.
Sacriaces amongst other means, were as the common lure to woo ghosts or
spirits unto familiar conference, or (at least) to take notice of suits
exhibited, and to manifest their answers by the effect. Thus Vigesimo post quam
dom^ disce^serat die, Sesto^ peruenit. ^ide in Eleunta profectus, Protesilao
super ipsius tumulum sacrificat: quod Prote^^^^ c^^ditur Graeco (...), quis ^^^
(...) ad (...) militaruns, primus in Afi^^^ ^edem intulisse. Sacr^ficij vero
scopus hic erat, vt felicior ipsi quam Pretesilao d^sc^nsus in As^am esset.
Arrianus de expedit. Alex lib. 1. page 12.
Alexander, though a Prince of Aristotle's instructing, being now bound for
Asia, offered sacrifice to Protesilaus upon his Tomb, with supplication for
better success, then he, to whom he offered sacrifice had there found; being
slain in the Trojan war. Did the great Monarch (as we may conjecture) think
that the soul of this Grecian Worthy, not pacified with such offerings, would
envy better success unto his successors of Greece? or did he rather hope, that
Protesilaus, by resolute adventure, and untimely death, had merited a warrant
from the gods to grant safe conduct unto Grecian Nobles, that upon just
quarrels invaded Asia? For the reason, why Alexander should sacrifice to him
before any other, was in that he of all the Grecian Captains, had set first
foot in Asia; as if by death he had taken possession of Protectorship over his
Countrymen in like expeditions. But whatsoever motive Alexander had to this
Idolatry, from that general improument of men's esteem of others worth, and
virtue absent, in respect of them present, many nations were prone to adore
them as gods after death, whom they honored and reverenced above others, yet
with humane honor only, whiles they lived. From this observance amongst the
Grecians, Arrian. l. 4 page 85.
Callisthenes ingenuously and wittily refutes Anaxarchus, persuading the
Macedonians to give divine honor to Alexander, ready enough to receive it
before his death. Whatsoever the Barbarians may practice (faith this Grecian
Philosopher) Greece (I know) has no such custom, nor did our Ancestors
worship Hercules as a god, so long as he conversed among them in humane shape,
nor after his death until the Delphicke Oracle had so appointed. Anaxarchus on
the contrary, thought it a great Indecorum, not to give that honor to the
Emperor whiles he lived, which he doubted not, would by public consent be
designed unto him after death. The like Parasiticall humor of the T^asians, a
people of Greece, had travailed before of like Idolatry, but brought forth
only a memorable j^st in that wise King Vide Platarch^^.
Agesilaus, unto whom such proffered service smelled too rankly of base
flattery My masters (quoth he) has your City the authority, or art of
making gods? If it have I pray let us see what manner of gods you can make your
selves; and then perhaps I shall be content to be a god of your making.

2. The Platonicall opinion of the souls enlargement in her principal
faculties after delivery from this walking prison, which she carries about with
her, did secretly water and cherish the former seeds of error. For consequently
unto this doctrine, men might think, that they who by their wit (especially)
had done much good whiles they lived in the body, would be able to do much
more after their dissolution. So Then King Herod heard of him (for his name was
spread abroad) and said; John Baptist is risen again from the dead, and
therefore great works are wrought by him. Mark. 6. verse. 14. Vide Matthew. 14.
verse. 1, 2.
Herod thought John Baptist had brought more skill out of that world, whereunto
he had sent his soul before the natural time of her departure, then in his
first life he had been capable of; for John in his life time wrought no
miracles. Not only the commonly conceived dignity of the soul separated from
the body, but the time or manner of its separation, did much instigate minds,
otherwise that way bent, to gross superstition and Idolatry. The Magicians
that lived at Athens when Plat^ipse ad senect^ten. se diligentia per tulit.
Erat quidem corpus validu^ ac forte spiritus, et illi nomen latitudo pectoris
fece^at: sed nauigationes at pericula multum detiaxerunt viribus: parsimonia
tame^ et eorum quae auiditate^ euocant modus et diligens sui tutela, perduxit
illu^ ad senectutem, multis probibentibus caufis. Nam hoc scis, puto platoni
diligentia sua beneficio co^tigisse, quod natal^ suo decessit, and annum vnum
atque octogesimum impleuit, sine vlla deductione. Ideo Magi, quiforte Athenis
erant, immolauerunt defancto, amphoris fuisse sortis quan humanae rati, quia
consummasset perfectissimu^ numerum, quem nouem nouies multiplicata componunt
Seneca Epistola 58.
Plato died, offered sacrifice to his soul, supposing him to have been more
than man, because he died on his birthday, having fulfilled the most perfect
number in his course of life, whose length was just fourscore years and one.
But to this particular superstition, the causes mentioned in the eighteenth
Chapter, had their joint concurrence. Quirinus and Hinc etiam Romulus, quem
quidem eundem esse Quirinum putant: quorum remanerent animi, atque
aternitatefruerentur dij rite sunt hab ti cum et optimi eflent et aterni.
Cicero lib. 2. de natura D^orum.
Romulus (whether two or one) were in Tullies judgment rightly reputed Gods
after death, because good men whilst they lived, and (as it seems he thought)
no way disenabled for doing good still, in as much as they enjoyed eternity in
their souls. And A^us enim. tuus, o Asc^epi, medicinae primus inuenter, cui
templum consecratum est in monte Libya circa Litius Crocodilorum, in quo eius
iacet mundanus h^rno, idest, corpus. reliquus enim, vel potius totus, si est
homo totus in sensu vitae, meliorremeauit in coelu^, omnia etiam nunc homin^bus
adiume^ta prastan infi^mas numine nunc suo, qua ante so ebat medician
a^teprabere. Ecce dixit mortuum colipro Deo in eo loco vbi habebat sepulchru^:
failu ac fallens dicendo quod remeauit in coelu^, omnia etiam nunc hominibus
adiumenta prasians infi^mis Aug de Civit Deiad Marcelimu^^ l 7. c 26 Terrenis
euim dijs atque munlanis facile est trasci: vt ^ote qui sunt ab homin^bus ex
vtraque natura facti atque couipositi. Ex vtraque natura dicit, ex anima et
corpore: vt pro anima sit damon, pr^corpure simulachrum. Vnde contigit, mount,
ab Aegyptus hac sancta animalia nuncupari, c^lique per singular civitates eorum
animas, qui eas consecrauere viuemes, ita vt corumlegibus incolintur, et coru^
nominibus nuncupentur. Augustinus ibidem.
Trismegist catechizing his son in the Egyptian Art of making gods, tells him
his grandfather, (who was the first inventor of Physic) being gone to heaven
in soul, or (to use his phrase) according to his better man, did still work
all those cures by his secret power, which before he wrought by art; the only
place where this divine soul would be spoken with, was the Temple, wherein his
mundane man, or body lay entombed; wherein likewise he had an Idol or Image,
as every other Egyptian Temple had, unto which by Exorcismes or Invocation,
they wedded either spirits or souls of men, after they had relinquished their
own bodies. By this art were most Egyptian gods procreated, until error by
Gods just judgment did reciprocate; and idolatry ascend from beasts to men,
from whom it first descended. For in process of time, the hurtful or
profitable beasts, which Princes had consecrated, were adored as Trismegists
father had been, and the Princes likewise, which had consecrated them, were
coadored in their images. The manner of this last errors intrusion, as In his
Commentaries upon the forecited place of S. Augustine. Litera. q.
Vives has well observed out of Diodorus, descended (in part at least) from
the devises or emblemes, which Princes bare in their Shields or Crests. Some
best liking dogs, others, Lions, Wolves, or Cats; every one as sympathy of
nature, fancy, or chance misled them. The solemnity used at their
consecration (that is whilst they were taken for arms) being great, did taint
the spectators minds with superstitious fancies. And unto minds thus tainted,
their liuelesse pictures, being borne as crests or ensigns, were reputed for
no bystanders, but for authors or coadjutors, whether of vict^tious success in
wars, or of prosperous events in peace. The Princes afterward fell in love
with the names of the beasts, and propagated the incestuous title unto Cities.
This speedy transportation of affectionate minds from curious ceremony or
solemnity unto gross and formal Idolatry, the eternal Lawgiver did best
know to be too natural unto man; and therefore sought to prevent the disease
by euacuating the antecedent cause. To this purpose are those prohibitions of
curious ceremony in mourning for friends deceased. Ye shall not cut your flesh
for the dead, nor make any print or mark upon you; I am the Lord Levit 19.28.
. This remembrance [ I am the Lord] intimates unto us, that these prints or
marks were the badges of another Master, who by those curious expressions of
mournful sorrow for their dead, sought to bring them unto a never dying sorrow
of body and soul. The same prohibition is more particularly directed to the
house of Aaron, with special restraint from using such ceremonies, as in other
families of Israel were not unlawful, unless for parents, brother or sister
before marriage deceased, no son of Aaron might mourn. For want of such
laws to moderate and bridle this natural affection of lamenting the dead,
both Priest and people among the heathens ran headlong into this Idolatry of
invoking men deceased. For (as the wiseman observes) when a father mourned
grievously for his son, that was taken away suddenly, he made an Image for
him that was once dead. This at the first was but to solace grief by an
imaginary or representative presence of him, that was truly absent. Cum
Mamer^^^: freti a^^^lae ad ses^^^^ dorum des, ques Rheg^^^ ^ole^^^ ^tu
agitab^nt, ^ue^os triginta qumque cu^que his Ch^^ magist^um, and tib ^^xem
(...), naues acta ad vnum onmes periere. Mame ^tiui istu^ pu^ orum in te ^^um
luxc^e, and c^m ali (...) and (...). Vetu inscriptiod^n mess Mamertinorum
indurat fieti accolarum Interiecto dein temp^^e, Hippias, qui inter Graecos
sapientiae laud claruit, elegis titulos earum statuarum fecit. Pa^^san. lib 5.
page 337. If not the fathers, certainly the mothers of these children would
sola^e themselves with such ^jaculations, whilst they beheld their statues, as
Andromache did. O mea sola mihi super Astyanactis Im go; siccul^s, sic ille
manus, sic ora ferebat, and n^ne a ^ualitecium pubesceret au^. Virgil Aeneid. 3
Marc. Tullius, qui non tantum perfectus Orator, sed etiam Phil^s^ph^ fuit
(siquidem solus extitit Platonis imitator) in eo libro, quo se ipse de morte
silia consolatus c^, non dubitauit dicere Deos, qui public colerentur, homines
fuisse. Q^^d pius testimonium, co debet grauissinum iudicari, quod et augurale
habet sacerdotium, et e^^dem se colere venerarique testatur. Itaque intra
paucos versiculos duas res nobis dedit. Nam dum Imaginem filiae eodem se m^do
consecraturum esse profiteretur, quo illi a veteribus sunt consecrati: et illo^
mortuos esse docuit, et origmem vanae superstitionis ostendit. Cum vero (in
quit) et mares et faemmas complares ex hominibus in deorum numero esse
videamus, et eorum in v^bibus atque agris augustissima delubra veneremur;
assentiam^ eorum sapientiae quorum ingenus et inuentis omnem vitam legibus et
institutis excultam, constitutamque habemus. Quod si ullum un quam animal
consecrandum fuit, illud profecto fuit. Si Cadmi, aut Amphionis progentes, aut
Tyndari in coelum tollenda fama fuit; h^^^ idem honos certe dicandus est, quod
quidemjaciam, teque omnium optimam, doctissimamque approuantibus Dijs
immortalibus ipsis in eoru^ caetu locatam, ad opinionem on^nium mortaliu^
consecrabo. Fortasse dicat aliquis prae nimio luctu delirasse Ciceronem Atqui
omnis illa oration, et doctrina, et exemplis, et ipso loquendi genere perfecta,
non agrised constantis animi ac iudicij fuit, et hac ipsa sententia nullum
praefert indicium doloris. Neque enim pato illum tam vary, tam copiose, tam
ornate scribere potuisse, nisi luctum eius, et ratio ipsa, et consolatio
amacorum, et temporis longitudo mitigasset. Lactantius. lib. 1. cap. 15. page
49.
But that tender respect which parents bear unto their sick children (for
whose releife or ease no cost can seem too great, no attendance, so it please,
too curious) does naturally enlarge it self after their death; and having a
picture, whereon to gaze, will hardly refrain to present it, in more
ceremonious and to (...) sort, with all those respect; and services, which were
due to the party living, or like to die. So the same wise man couples solemn
Idolatry, as the immediate effect, to such curiosity or ceremony. Now he
worshippeth him as a God, and ordained to his servants ceremonies and
sacrifices, Thus by process of time this wicked custom prevailed, and was
kept as a law, and Idols were worshipped by the commandment of Tyrants.
Wisdom 14 verse. 14 and 1^. The first degree of this temptation observed by
him, every man (I am persuaded) may in some sort experience in himself. The
multiplication of the practice by imitation and flattery, is plentifully
experienced in most heathen stories. But the original of the temptation was
thus.

3. Impotent desires of still enjoying their companies to whom we have fastened
our dearest affections, will hardly take a denial by death. But as some
longing to be delivered of a well conceited argument, have set up their cappes
for Respondents, and disputed with them as with live Antagonists: so we go on
still (as in a waking dream) to frame a Vide Lactantium l. 1. de falsa
religione, c. 15.
capacity in the dead of accepting our respect and love in greater measure,
then without envy of others, or offense to them, it could have been tendered,
whilst they were living. Did not the spirit of God awake us, the Idolatry
issuing from this spring, would steal upon us like a deluge in a slumber.
Many, who by their preeminencie amongst men, have affected to be reputed gods,
have of other men's Lords become such slaves to their own affection, as to
worship their dead favorites with divine honor. Arrianus de expedit. Alexan.
lib. 7. page 165. Vide Diodoru^ lib. 17.
So Alexander having testified his love to Hephestions corpse, with such curious
signs and ceremonies of mourning, as God in his Law had forbidden, seeks
afterward to solace his grief by procuring Mortmaine from the Oracle for his
dead friend to hold greater honors, then this great Conqueror of the world
could have bestowed upon him; though he had lived to have been his heir. To
qualify him by dispensation from Jupiter Ammon for an heroicke, or halfe-god,
and thereby to make him capable of sacrifice, could not suffice without a
Temple, whose curiosity and state would (as the wiseman observes) thrust
forward the multitude to increase their superstition. The more beautiful the
Temples were, the better god would be seem to the multitude, easily allured,
through the beauty of the work, to take him now for a god, who a little
before was honored but as man Wised. 14.17, 19.
. And good encouragement Cleomenes the Deputy, or over-seer of these edifices,
had to see them most accurately finished, Arrianus loco citato.
having a pardon for all his faults, disloyal practices, or public wrong^
done by him to the Egyptian Nation, upon condition there were no fault in the
Temples erected for Hephesitons honor. If all did follow the pattern, which
Cleomenes in the first sacrifice would set them, few of the ancient gods were
like to go before this new half god, or heroicke. The issue of Adrians
immoderate love unto his minion (...) ceciderit, vt Hadrianus scribit; sieve
quod i^m latus, id quod ve^um est, fuerit. Number quum Hadrianus maxim curiosus
esset, (...) pradixi, t^m vero ^vi tat^nibus vtebatus, et m^g^cis artibus
cu^usuis generis ltaque (...), qui vel eb amorem ipsius, vel ob aliam causam
voluntariam mortem ob^erat (nam (...), qua parabat ^pus erat anima voluntaria)
tanto honor affecit; vt v^be (...) coluce, in quo ille obijsset, restitutam ex
co nominari voluerit; statuasque et, vel (...) erem be terrarum coll cauerit.
Sidus etiam Antinoi ipse se videre dic^ (...) it cos qui dicerent v^e ex
Antinoi animo stellam quae tum primum (...) Romans lib. 69. Hadrianus 15. page 797.
Antinous whiles he lived, was, after his death, superstitious fopperie
altogether as gross unless perhaps it were tempered (as some think) with
Necromanticall impiety. An Oracle was erected to speak for him, who could not
now speak for himself, albeit Oracles I take it, at this time were dumb, but
so much the fitt^r for a dead dog: as the name of God speld backward, would
best befit him and others of his profession; his sepulcher was according to the
Egyptian fashion; he had a whole City called by his name. And to establish an
opinion of the Of this Emperors f^lly in th^^ k^nde see Spa^tian* in Adrian.
canibus sepulchra statuit.
Emperors authority to create gods, a new star was either seen or fained,
as if the heavens by this apparition had ratified this earthly Monarchs grant,
or charter. Perhaps some Comet might at the same time, be presented by the
Prince of the air to delude the inhabitants of the earth.

4. But leaving these gross fooleries; That general fallacy, which opened
the first gappe to heathenish Idolatry, had a peculiar efficacy in men,
honorably addicted to their deceased worthies. From conversion of the common
notion, that divine nature was beneficial and good, every great benefactor was
by the rude and ignorant adored as god. Now the warlike and valourous, were by
every Nation held best deservers of the weal public; and fortitude, though
(as the Philosopher excepts against it) not the most laudable virtue in it
self, was most honored among the people, because most profitable to them.
Hence the valourous, in lieu of their readiness to sacrifice their bodies for
their native Country, had Elei Heroibus etiam, et corumuxoribus libant, tum ijs
qui passim in Elea terra, u^ et illis qui apud Aetolos in honor sunt. Pausan.
l. 5. p. 317.
sacrifices and other acknowledgements of honor divine, publicly assigned to
them after death. The most curious and superstitious solemnity in this kind,
that comes to my present remembrance, was that Festivitie Vide Plutarchum in
Aristide.
annually celebrated every September by the Citizens of Platea, in honorable
memory of those Worthies, which there had laid down their lives for the
liberty of Greece The like vanity of Graecians and other people is recorded
by Strabo. lib. 5. by Lucius Florus. lib 4. cap. 12 ^^omedi equum candidum
v^aetos, vt Nummi, mactasse accepimus, et id honorificum dux^cut Mysij, qui cum
Marco Crasso co^flixere statim ante aciem immolato equo conc^^cre votum sane
quam Barbarum, vt caesorum ducum extis litarcu^. Forcatulus lib. 1.
. Amongst other conditions, upon which the Oracle promised the Grecians victory
over the Persians in that famous battle, a principal one was, offering of
sacrifice to the ancient Heroicks of Greece; one of whom, by name Andr^crates,
had his Temple (near to that place) environed with a thick and shadie grove;
a fit nest for hatching that superstition, which had been conceived from other
circumstances Plutarch. ibidem.
. As they had vanquished the Persians in fight: so they scorned to be overcome
by them in lavish ceremony toward their well deserving dead. The pomp and
magnificence of this festivitie, continuated from Aristides to Plutarchs time,
did much exceed the sooner decayed solemnities decreed to Z^nophon.
Cyrus by the Persians: the gardians of whose sepulcher notwithstanding had
every day a sheep, every month an horse allowed them to sacrifice unto the
soul of this chief founder of their great Monarchy; the pattern of valor
and royalll government.

5. Thus this superstitious adoration of the dead, at the first Achilli non
a^a, sed inane monimentum est ex oraculo dedicatum. Ad illud Eleae m^tronae,
primis ladoru^ mitijs, die sta^o, inclinante iam in vesperu^ sole, inter
cateros, quos Achilli habent, honores, solenni ritu pectus plangunt. Pausan l.
6. page 389.
extorted from the fulness of respective affection, wanting right vent, did
afterward mightily overspread the world by imitation. In the later and more
dissolute times of the Roman Empire, it was annexed by flattery as an
essential part of civil ceremony or solemnity due to greatness without any
respect of goodness. And whereas the old worlds custom had been only to
deifie the inventors of useful trades, or authors of public good; later
Epicures, or worthless favorites did adore beastly Tyrants as great Gods,
because they fed them with some offalls of public spoils, or authorized them
to suck the blood of the needle. Vide Aug de Civit. Dei. l. 18. c. 24.
Tullie urges it as an argument of Romulus praise, that he should merit the
reputation of a god, in that civil and discreet age wherein he died: for so
he accounts it in respect of former times, wherein rifenesse of error and
ignorance mingled with rude affection, had brought down the price of the gods,
by too great plenty. But from Romulus (the fabulous occasion of whose
consecration was an illustrious type of modern Romish forgerie for canonizing
Saints) until the Emperors, the Romans I take it consecrated no King or
Governor as gods, though great benefactors to their states. They only adored
such gods, as tradition had commended unto them, committing Idolatry, (to use
S. Vide Aug. lib. 4. de civitate Dei. cap. 31. Vide Vivera in Comment.
Austines words) Errando potius, quam adulando; through error rather than out
of flattery. And as the same father observes, the use of images, unknown unto
their ancestors, did much increase this impious superstition in posterity,
and (according to the wisemans observation) concurred as a concause, or
coadiutor to base flattery. The same observation is wittily expressed by Minutius
Felix; Similiter ve^o erga Deos quoque Maiores nostri impreuidi, creduli, rudi
simplicitate crediderunt: dum R^ges suos colunt religiose, dum defunctos eos
desiderant in Imaginibus videre: dum gestiunt eorum memorias in siatuis
detinere: sacra facta sunt, quae s^rant assu^pta solatia. Minutius Foelix. page
375.
As for those that were so far of, that men might not worship them presently,
they did counterfeit the visage that was far of, and made a gorgious image of
a King, whom they would honor, that they might by all means flatter him that
was absent, as though he had been present Wised. 14 verse. 16.
. And partly by this devise, and partly by that other of deceiptfull Oracles,
many fabulous crimes, which more civil and sober times had never charged their
gods with, were by posterity (thus polluted) set forth in solemn shows or
plays, in honor of these counterfeit or painted powers. Not the Poet only,
but the picture-maker also did help to set forward the superstition. The
relations and representations of their gods vicious lives, might well embolden
the most dissolute amongst the ^ace of Caesar's to look for such divine honor
after death, as flattery had proffered to them living. Much worse they could
not be than their S^u^us Marcus Tullius qui Caio Verri adulterium obiecit:
eadem enim Jupiter, quem colebat, admisi: qui Publi^ Claudio incestum Sororis:
at illi optimo Maxi: eadem fuit et Soror et (...). Lactan. l. 1.6.10 Vide Aug.
lib. 2. de civit. Dei. cap. 9. et 10 For^at lib. 4. page 538.
forefathers, or Poets did make their gods: nor did they perhaps conceit any
fitter cloak to cover their shame, than the public and solemn
representation of their lewdness, who had already purchased the fame and
reputation of celestial inhabitants. And has not the tacit consent of our
times almost established it as a Law; That greatness may give authority unto
villainy, and exempt filthiness from censure of impiety? What has been
committed by any whilst private men, cease (in their own opinion) to be
theirs, by their becoming public Magistrates. For then they think not
themselves to be the same men they were, and what is another man's sins to
them? This is a root of Idolatry, which did not determine with the
destruction of heathenish groves or Idols, nor with the dissolution of Romish
Abbeys; the very dregs of their impiety are yet incorporated in men's hearts,
of whatsoever Religion they be, that seek to be great before they be good. But
of this and of other branches of transcendent Idolatry, that is, of Idolatry
alike frequent and dangerous, throughout all ages, all Nations, amongst the
professors of all Religions, elsewhere, by Gods assistance. The next Inquiry
is; Whether the Idolatry of Rome-Christian (by profession) be fully
aequivalent to the Idolatry of Rome-Heathen.

SECTION IIII.
Of the Identitie or aequivalencie of superstition in Rome-Heathen and
Rome-Christian.

CHAPTER XXII.
That Rome-Christian in latter years sought rather to allay than to abrogate
the Idolatry of Rome-Heathen: that this allay was the most commodious policy,
which Satan could devise for venting his detected poisons, utterly condemned
by primitive Professors of Christianity.

1. HAD either the Romish Church no Orators at all, or heathen Temples as many,
as skillful and subtle, as it has, to plead the lawfulness of their service;
such as devoutly serve God in spirit and truth, would in the one case make no
question, in the other admit no dispute, whether were worse. The forms of
their Liturgies represented to impartial eyes without varnish or painting,
would appear so like; that if the one were adjudged naught, the other could
not be approved as good; or both equally set forth by art, if the one seemed
good and current, the other could not justly be suspected for naught or
counterfeit. That the Romanists generally make better profession of the unity,
the nature, and attributes of the true and only God, than most Heathens did,
argues not their daily and solemn service of him to be better, but rather
referres the issue of the controversy between them, to the determination of
another like case, [ Whether the settled and habitual carriage of a drunkard be
worse in him that is daily drunk indeed, and has his senses continually
stupefied, or in one that has wit at will to conceive and speak well in
matters speculatiue or remote from use, but wants will or grace to temper his
carnal affections with sobriety of spirit, or season his conversation with
civilitie]. Were ratsbane as simply and grossly ministered to men, as it is to
rats, few would take harm by it. And of Popes and Cardinals, more have used
the help of ratsbane than of ratcatchers to poison their enemies. It were a
brutish simplicity to think the devil could not, and a preposterous charity
to think he would not, minister his receipts in a cunninger fashion, since the
promulgation of the Gospel, than he did before; although the poison be still
the same. To ear figgs, or other more cordial food, with the infusion of
subtle and deadly poison, exempts not men's bodies from danger. Much less can
speculatiue orthodoxall opinions of the Godhead free men's souls from the
poison of Idolatrous practices, wherewith they are mingled.

2. Taking it then as granted, (what without paradox we may maintain) that
the devil had as great a longing since Christ triumphed over him, as he had
before, to work the bane of men's souls throughout Europe: He had been the
arrantest fool, that ever either undertook to contriue a dangerous and
cunning plott, or adventured to act any notorious mischief or difficult
villainy, if he had solicited men to gross Heathenisme, or open profession of
allegiance to those gods, in whose service they had known their fathers
perish, the sudden downfall of whose Idols they had seen miraculously
accomplished. To have persuaded them hereto, had been a more palpable
importunity, then if a man in kindness should profer a cup, wherein he had
squeized the poison of Spiders, to one which had seen his mate fall down dead
by taking the same potion. Now admitting a resolution in the great professor of
destructive Arts, so to refine or sublimate his wonted poisons, as they might
the more secretly mingle with the food of life: where can we suspect this
policy to have been practiced, if not in the Romish Church; whose idolatrous
rites and service of Satan in former ages have been so gross, that if we had
seen the temptation, unacquainted with the success, we should certainly have
thought the great Tempter had mightily forgotten himself, or lost his wonted
skill in going so palpably about his business? Nor could any policy have so
prevailed against Gods Church, unless it had first been surprised with a
lethargy, or brought into a relapse of Heathenish ignorance. To entise men
unto Heathenisme since Romish rites and customs have been authorized or
justified in solemn disputes; he had less reason than to have tempted the
old world unto Atheism, whiles there was no delight or pleasure, which the
flesh can long for, but had some seigned god for it is patron. And what branch
of implanted superstition can we imagine in any son of Adam, which may not
sufficiently feed it self with some part or other of the Romish Liturgy, or
with some customs, by that Church allowed, concerning the invocation of
Saints, the adoration of relics, or worship of images. By entertaining either
more orthodoxall conceits of the Godhead, than the Heathens had, or better
persuasions of one Mediator between God and man than the morderne Jews or
Mahumetans do, they give contentment to many carnal desires, especially
covetousness, preposterous pride, and hypocrisy, which would be ready to
mutinier, if simple Idolatry should be restored to it is wonted soveraigntie.

CHAPTER XXIII.
Of the general infirmities of flesh and blood, which did dispose diverse
ancient professors of Christianity to take the infection of Superstition. Of
the particular humors which did sharpen the appetite of the modern Romish
Church to hunger and thirst after the poisonous dregs of Rome-Heathens
Idolatry.

1. IN Churches of Paul's planting and Apollo his watering, the seeds of sound
and wholesome doctrine took root with greater facility, than sundry
heathenish rites whereto they had been so long accustomed, could be
extirpated. That caveat [ But I would not have you to be ignorant brethren,
concerning them that sleep, etc.] given to the Thessalonians, 1 These. cap. 4.
ver. 13.
(otherwise most cheerful imbracers and zealous professors of the Gospel)
argues some relics of such superstitious demeano^ toward the dead, as they
had practiced, whiles they lived without hope of a resurrection to a better
life; unto which practices (perhaps) they were so much more prone than others,
as they were naturally more kind and loving. Now if the first receipts of life
ministered by a Physician so wise and well experienced as S. Paul, did not
forthwith purify this good natured peoples affections from the corrupt humors
of Gentilisme; it was no wonder, if other less skillfull doctors, by seeking
the speedy cure of this disease, did cast more untoward patients then these
Thessalonians were, into a relapse of a contrary, more hereditary and natural
to most Heathen. Whether for preventing unseemly and immoderate mourning for
the dead, or for encouraging the living to constancy in persecution; the
solemn celebration of their Funerals, and public blazoning of their
blisfull and glorious state after death, which had lived Saints and died
Martyrs, was a method very effectual and compendious. Howbeit in hearts not
thoroughly purified and settled by grace, these panegyricall encomiasmes did
reviue the seeds of superstitious respect to famous men deceased, as fast as
they quelled the relics of hopeless fear, or abated natural inclinations
unto immoderate mourning. And happily that point of truth, wherewith the
Romanist seeks to condite or sweeten the poisonous fruit of his idolatrous and
superstitious speculations, might in part occasion or embolden the ancients to
scatter some seeds of them, before they had experience unto what degree of
maligna^cy they might grow, when they grew ripe. When the first Reformers of
Religion demanded a difference between Heathenish adoration of inferior gods,
and Popish worshipping of Saints; the usual and almost only answer was, that
the Heathens adored naughty and wicked men, either altogether unworthy of
any, or worthy of disgraceful memory after death; whereas the Church did
worship such as deserved as much respect as men are capable of; men, to whom
who so omitted performance of sacred respect or religious worship, did thereby
commit most grievous sacrilege.

2. To outstrip our adversaries in their own policies, or to use means abused
by others to a better end, is a resolution so plausible to worldly wisdom
(which of all other fruits of the flesh, is for the most part the hardliest and
last renounced) that almost no sect or profession in any age but in the issue
mightily overreached or entangled themselves by too much seeking to circumvent
or go beyond others. The known success of worldly policy in nursing
Martial valor, and resolute contempt of life, by decreeing divine honor to
their heroicks after death, did quickly set over the Christian world, being
almost out-wearied with continual opposition of Gentilisme, to foster and
cherish spiritual courage, by the like means. The practice whereof
notwithstanding (as do all like attempts by common course of nature) did
continually, though insensibly grow more dangerous in the process. This
original of superstitious performances toward the dead has been set down
Chap 20, 21. Sect. 3.
before, and is particularly prosecuted by Chemnit. in Exam Council. Tridert.
sess^n 9. and vlt. de Iuvo. Sanct.
Chemnitius, to whose labors I refer the Reader.

3. Again the sweet comfort which some ancients of blessed memory, took in
the consort of mutual prayers whiles they lived together, made them desirous
that the like offices might be continued after their decease. Hence some in
their life times (if my memory fail me not) did thus contract, that such of
them as were first called into the presence of God, should solicit the others
deliverance from the world and flesh, and prosecute those suits by personal
appearance in the Court of heaven, which they had jointly given up in prayers
and secret wishes of heart, whiles they were absent each from other here on
earth. To be persuaded, that such as had known our minds, and been acquainted
with our hours of devotion, whiles we had civil commerce together, might out
of this memory after their dissolution, take notice of our supplications, and
solicit our cause with greater fervency than we can, is not so gross in the
speculatiue assertion, as dangerous in the practical consequent. But if
magical feats can put on colorable pretenses, and See Chap. 19.
Magitians make fair shows unto the simple of imitating Gods Saints in their
actions; what marvel, if Romish Idolatry having in latter years found more
learned patrones than any unlawful profession ever did, do plead its warrant
from speculations very plausible to flesh and blood, or from the example of
some ancients; the prejudicial opinions of whose venerable authority and
deserved esteem in other points, may, with many, prevent the examination of
any reasons which latter ages can being to impeach their imperfections in this.
Yet experiments in other cases approved by all, manifest the indefinite truth
of this observation, Vide Vinc^m L^t^en. Ma. (...) lau^an^ar, D^pui^ damnantur.
That such practices a^ can no way blemish the otherwise deserved same of their
first practitioners, usually bring forth reproach and shame to their
unseasonable or ill qualified Imitators. Now the pardonable oversight, or
doubtful speculations of some Ancients, have been two ways much malignified
by later Romanists: first by incorporating the superfluity of their Rhetorical
inventions or eiaculations of swelling affections in panegyricall passages,
into the body of their divine service: secondly by making such fair garlands
as Antiquity had woven for holy Saints and true Martyrs, Collar^ (as a Car^us
Tie^cellinus Rup^ma^us antiqui m^ris c^ues. m^rd^ re^o^g nabu^^ ^epius d^xit,
torque^ C^nchyliatum, postquam indignis p^^mis^^e c^mmuni^ cep^e^ (...) vi^o^um
in^ign^ (...) P^arum (...) Thuan^ 2^.
French Knight, in a case not much unlike said) for every beast; or chains for
every Hinc co^^ prophetia^is, ^nem^ calorum (...) tractat. 8. partitio 3. de
custodia Ang^.
dead dogs ne^ke, which had brought gain unto their Sanctuary Tou^hing the
former abuse [the incorporating of the^oricall expressions of the Ancients
affection toward deceased Worthies, into the body of their divine service]
(...) de S^n^t^ beatitud. lib. ^. cap 19.
Bellarmine is not ashamed to Apologize for the solemn form of their public
authorized Liturgy, by the passionate ejaculation of Nazianzen his poetical
wit in his panegyricall Oration for S. C^priu^, and for his kind acquaintance
while she liv^d with Basil the great. It is enough, as this Apologizing
Orator thinks, to acquit their service from superstition, and themselves from
irreligion* that this Father, who spoke as they do, was one of the wisest
Bishops Antiquity could boast of. As in granting him to be as wise as any
other, we should perhaps wrong but a few, or none of the ancient Bishops or
learned Fathers; so we should much wrong Nazianzen himself, if we took these
passages, on which Bellarmine groundeth his Apology, for any special
arguments of his wisdom and gravitie. Howbeit Nazianzen might (without
prejudice to his deserved esteem for wisdom and gravitie) say much, and for
the manner not unfitly of Cyprian and Basil, which was no way fitting for
latter Roman Bishops to say of their deceased Popes, or for the Popes whilst
they lived to speak of their deceased Bishops. But such a sway has corrupt
custom got over the whole Christian world, that look what honor has been
voluntarily done to men in office, as due unto their personal worth, their
successors will take denial of the like or greater, as a disparagement to
their places; albeit their personal unworthiness be able to disgrace the
places wherein they have lived, and all the dignities that can be heaped upon
them. Upon this carnal humor did the mystery of iniquity begin first to
work. The choicest respect or reverence which had been manifested toward the
best of Gods Saints or Martyrs, either privately out of the usual solecismes
of affectionate acquaintance (always ready to entertain men lately deceased
with such loving remembrances as they had tendered them in presence) or in
public and anniversary solemnities for others encouragement unto constancy in
the faith; were afterterwards taken up as a civil complement of their Funeral
rites, or enjoined as a perpetual honor to their birthdayes, whom the Pope
either of his own free motion, or at the request of secular Princes, or some
favorites, would have graced with famous memory. The true reason why the order
of the Carthusians have had so few Saints: whereas the order of St Rennet (as
may appear by a begging Brief sent some few years ago out of Spain here
unto England by the Provincial or General of that order) does brag of fifty
thousand Saints, a^l Bennets Disciples: the number is more by ten thousand,
than we read sealed of any Tribe of Israel.
Rome-Christian has been in this kind more lavish than Rome-Heathen. And as
in great Cities it is a disparagement to any Corporation or Company to have had
few or no Majors or chief Magistrates of their Trade: so in process of time
it became matter of imputation unto some religious orders, that they had not so
many Canonized Saints as their opposits (less observant of their Founders
less strict rules) could brag of. For want of such stars to adorn their
sphere, the order of the Haec sub brevitate contra eos qui impugnant ordinem
Caribusiensium, quia non fiant in eis miracula, immo nec velient, potius vero
facientes occultarent, ^eut sapius repertum est. Quod autem similiter dicitur,
quod ne habeant canonizatum, nisi vnum ^cilicet S. Hugonem, Linconiensem
Episcopum; Restondeo quod necidem ex eorum voluntate, sed regis Anglia and su^
^an ^a est canonizatus, quanquam sanct^ssimae fuit vitae, magnis miraculis
claruerit and procarator Carthusia magna professisque ex^iterit. Gerson^ de
abstinentia Carthusianorum, sieve contra impugnantes ordinem Carthusiensiam Page
514.
Carthusians, otherwise famous for austeritie of life, was suspected not to be
celestial. The fault notwithstanding was not in the Carthusians, or their
Religion unless a fault it were not to seek this honor at the Popes hands,
who did grant it against their wills to one of their order and our Countryman,
at the King of Englands suite. And left any part of Heathenish Superstition,
that had been practiced in the Roman Monarchy, might be left vnparalled by
like practices of the Romish Hierarchy; as the Deification of See Chap. 21.
parag. 3.
Antinous was countenanced with feigned relations of a new stars appearance
and other like Ethnicismes usually graced by Oracles: so were Qua hora B. Virgo
(Catharina) anima^ reddidit, Thomas Penna Protonotarius Apostolicus vidit
coelos apertos, eamque sublime ascendentem inter choros argelorum. Eandem pta
vidua Semia triplici corona insignitam, vidit a Christo sponso in throno
sadente suscipi. D. Catharina Senensis Selectiora miracula formis Aeneis
expressa. Antuerpia apud Philippum Gatlaum. 1603. To prepare the credulous
Readers heart the better to believe this vision of Saint Catharines ascension
into Heaven, opening it self to receive her, and her coronation with a triple
Crown, another relation perhaps was premised by the same Author, the effect
whereof is, that having overthrown the Devil after a grievous conflict, she
resigned her soul unto God in the same year of her age, wherein our Savior
Christ (unto whom the blessed Virgin, as this Legend relates, had espoused her
with a ring) did resign his soul into his Fathers hands. See Section fifth,
Chap. 41.
Revelations pretended in the Papacy to credit their sanctifications, which
stood in need of some divine testimony to acquit their sanctity from
suspicion.

4. To give the blessed Virgin a title unto far greater honor then any Saint or
other creature by their doctrine is capable of, it has been maintained, that
she was conceived without original sin. And wanting all warrant of
Scripture, or primitive Antiquity for this conceit, they support it by
revelations, which must be believed as well as any Scripture, if the Pope allow
them. By whose approbation likewise every private man's relation of miracles
wrought by any suitor for a Saintship, becomes more authentic than Apolloes
Oracles; by whose authority Hercules and other Heroickes were enjoined to be
adored as gods amongst the Heathen.

5. It was an Prebatio autem sanctitatis per miracula tamen plurimum est
suspecta, quia (vt supra d^ctum est) malis sunt conmunta, and multa non
Christiana, s^d magicae artis ostentamenta sunt, qua a simplicibus qua^^
sanctitatis miracula acceptantur. Gerson ibidem. Demden ^tandum quod in Legis
temp^re per Moysen siebant signa ingentia, quibus mag^ quidam per incantationes
fecer unt similia, etc. ibidem Hac autem antiqua miracula (per deum scilicet
facta) qu^tidie in mysterio r^no vantur in Ecclesia, quae etiam tanto
maiorasunt, quanto non corporalis sed spirtiuilia. ibidem.
ingenuous and wise observation of reverend Gerson, That famous miracles were
to be suspected for lying wonders, unless they had some special use or
extraordinary end. Now the only use or just occasion, we can observe of Popish
miracles in later times, has bin either to purchase the reputation of Saints
to such as wrought them whiles they lived, or to gain a current title to
canonizatio^ after their deaths. And the true reason in my opinion, why the
Carthusians of all other religious orders, wrought not many miracles, was
because they had no desire to be Saints of the Popes making. If they had sought
to be graced by his Holiness with public sanctity, they must have graced
themselves and their order with a fame of wonders: otherwise that exception
which was brought against Thomas of Aquine, would have taken place against
them. For even this Angelical Doctors title to canonization, was impeached by
some, because Vnde quum in canonizatione sancti Thoma de Aquino opponeretur,
quod non fecerat miracula in vita, vel non multa, dictu^ fuit per Papam, non
esse curand^m. Gerson ibidem p. 512. Vide Plura Gerson. tractat octauo super
Magnificat, partiti one tertia de custodia Angelica.
he had wrought no miracles: until his Holiness cleared the doubt by a more
benign interpretation then Apollo's Oracle could have given: Tot fecit
miracula, quot quaestiones determinauit; Lock how many doubts he has
determined, and he has wrought so many miracles. But by this reason he should
have placed him above most Saints, amongst the Angels. For it is scarce
credible, that any Saint has wrought half so many miracles, as are the doubts
which this Doctor after his fashion has determined; appositely enough for the
Romish Hierarchy. And has not the Pope good reason to make the Church
militant adore their souls as gods in heaven, which have made his Holiness more
than a Saint, a very god on earth? But because they deny, that the Church makes
gods of such as the Pope makes Saints, we are in the next place to discuss
whether invocation of Saints, as it is publickely maintained by them, be not an
ascription of that honor to the creature, which is only due to the Creator.

CHAPTER XXIIII.
In what sense the Romanists deny or grant that Saints are to be invocated.
Whether the Saints by their doctrine be mediate or immediate Intercessors
between God and man. That they neither can conceal, or will they express the
full meaning of their practice.

1. BEllarmine lib. 1. de Sanctorum beatitudine, cap. 16. See Chap. 29. parag.
1.
accounts the former imputation for one of Calvin's malicious slanders. Quis
enim deo dicere auderet, Sancte Deus, ora pro nobis? We must not think they
are so foolishly impious, as to say, Holy God pray for us. Nor did Calvin
charge them with pulling down God as low in every respect, as the Saints; but
for exalting the Saints in sundry cases into the throne of God; howsoever they
salute them by an inferior style. Nor will it follow that the Heathens did not
worship many gods, because they did not equalize all with Jupiter, or use the
same form of appellation unto him and to their demigods or Heroikes. Or
admitting the Romanists make no Saints equal to God the Father, or to any
person in the Trinity considered according to his Deity alone: is it no
sacril^ge to invest them with Christ's royal titles or prerogatives, as he is
our high Priest and Mediator? It will upon examination prove no slander, but a
just accusation, to say they make the Saints both sharers with Christ in his
office of mediation, and with the glorious Trinity in acts essential to the
Deity. But let us first hear in what sense they themselves grant or deny
Saints may be prayed unto or otherwise adored, and then examine whether their
answers to our arguments can stand with the form of their Liturgy, or fit the
maine point in question betwixt us.

2. Some more ancient then Epiphanius (for he refuteth their heresy) held the
Virgin Mary was to be prayed unto after the same manner we pray to God.
Between this excessive honor thus ascribed unto the chief of Saints, and the
other extreme (as they make it) consisting in defect or denial of invocation
of any Saints, Bellarmine labors to find out a mean, which he comprehends in
these propositions following. Non licet a Sanctis petere vt nobis tanquam
authors divinorum beneficiorum gloriam vel gratiam aliaque ad beatitudinem
media concedant. Bellarmin. de Sanctorum beatitud. lib. 1. cap. 17. It is not
lawful to request the Saints, that they as Authors of divine benefits, would
grant unto us Grace or Glory, or other means availeable to the attainement
of Faelicitie His second proposition is; Sancti non sunt immediati
intercess^res nostri apud Deum; sed quicquid a Deo nobis impetrant, per
Christum impetrant. Ibidem: The Saints are not our immediate Intercessors with
God: but whatsoever they obtain of Cod for us, they obtain it through Christ.
I know not whether out of cunning or incogitancie, he has expressed himself,
(or rather left their full meaning unexpressed) Nota, tre^ pers^nas p^sse
conside^ari, qua^^^ nos Deum oramus; vnam ipsius Dei, a quo petimus beneficia;
alteram Christi, per cuius meritum ea c^pi^nus nobis dar^; tertiam eius, qui
pe^i^en. ^^c^a* per Christ^^n. Ex his tribus personis n^n potest prin^^ Sanctis
trib^^, vt iam prebauimus: sed s^^u^ tertia. Bellar. cap. 17. de Beat. Sa^.
in these terms, per Christum, not adding withal propter Christum. In the
declaration he commends three parties to our consideration when we pray to God.
1. The person of whom we crave every good gift. 2. Him through whose merits we
request they may be given us. 3. The party which craves them. Saints by his
doctrine cannot supply the first, or second, but the third and last place. The
only meaning, whereto upon better examination he will stand, is this, that
Saints cannot be substituted in the stead of God the Father, or of Christ as he
is the principal Mediator or primary Intercessor. But to say that we may not
request favor of God the Father, propter merita Sanctorum, for merits of
Saints; or request Saints to interpose their merits with Christ's for more sure
or speedy expedition, can neither stand with the profession or practice of the
Romish Church. Bellarmine well urged, will quickly be enforst to deny the
conclusion, which he thus gathers from the premised propositions. Itaque
Sanctos invocamus ad hoc solum, vt faeciant id, quod nos facimus qui melius et
efficacius ipsi facere possunt, quam nos, melius illi et nos simul quam nos
soli. Probatur iam co^clusio; solus Christus est, qui mund^m reconcilia ^t Deo,
and qui meruit n^^is gloriam and gratiam and omnia necessaria ad salutem
Bellar. ibidem.
We pray (says he) to the Saints only to this end, that they would vouchsafe
to do what we do, because they can do it better and more effectually than we
can; at least they and we together may do it better then we alone. And again;
we may request nothing of the Saints besides their intercession with God, that
Christ's merits may be applied to us, and that through Christ we may attain
grace and glory. For praying thus far to Saints, that speech of S. Bernard
warranteth them; Opus est mediatore ad mediatorem, nec alter nobis vtilior quam
Maria; we have need of a mediator to our mediator, and none more fit than
Mary. Hence they learn that Christ only is the immediate intercessor, who is
heard for his own sake; the Saints are only mediate intercessors, and can
obtain nothing which they ask without Christ's mediation. Thus much is
included in the form of their prayers upon Saints days, which are all
conceived in this tenor; Bellarminus ibidem.
Grant us these or these benefits at the intercession of such or such Saints.

3. The first part of his second proposition [That Saints are not immediate
Intercessors for us with God] he proves by places of Scripture so pregnant,
that some of them directly disprooue all mediate or secondary Intercessors or
Mediators, as Coloss. 1. It pleased God that in him should all fullness dwell.
If all fullness, the fullness of mediation or intercession: and absolute
fullness excludes all consort. 1. Tim. 2.5.
As there is but one God, so there is but one Mediator between God and man, no
secondary God, no secondary Mediator. 1. Ioh. 2. He is the propitiation for our
sins: the absolute fullness of propitiation. And Ioh. 10. he enstileth
himself the Door and Way, such a door, and such a way, as no man may come
unto the Father, but by Him. This restriction in our Divinity, makes him the
only door, and the only way; not so in theirs: For we must pass through
other doors, that we may come to this only immediate door; that is, he is
the only door, whereby the Saints are admitted into Gods presence, but Saints
are necessary doors for our admission unto him; Opus est Mediatore ad
mediatorem. Were this Divinity, which they borrow from S. Bernard, true, they
much wrong Aristotle and Priscian in calling him, Immediatus Intercessor aut
Mediator, and are bound to right them, by this or the like alteration of his
title; He is, vnicus vltimus, aut finalis Mediator, He is the only final or
last Mediator. For a Mediator is not of one; whence to be an immediate
Mediator, essentially includes an immediate reference to two parties. Christ is
no Mediator but between God and Man, and between them he is no immediate
Mediator, unless men have as immediate access to him, as he has to God the
Father. As God, he best knows the nature and quality of every offense against
the Deity, unto what sentence every offender is by justice liable, and how far
capable of mercy; as man, he knows the infirmities of men, not by hearesay or
information, but by experience; and is ready to solicit their absolution
from that doom, whose bitterness is best known unto him, not at others
request or instigation, but out of that exact sympathy, which he had with all
that truly mourned, or felt the heaviness of their burden. Whiles he was
only the son of God, the execution of deserved vengeance was deferred by his
intercession. Nor did he assume our nature and substance, that his person might
be more favorable, or that his access to God the Father might be more free
and immediate, but that we might approach unto him with greater boldness and
firmer assurance of immediate audience, than before we could. He exposed our
flesh made his own, to greater sorrows and indignities, than any man in this
life can have experience of; to the end he might be a more compassionate
Intercessor for us to his Father, than any man or Angel can be unto him. We
need the consort of their sighs and groans, which are oppressed with the same
burden of mortality here on earth, that our joint prayers may pierce the
heavens but these once presented to his ears need no sollicitors to beat
them into his heart. Surely if the intercession of Saints had been needful at
any time, most needful it was before Christ's incarnation or passion; when by
the Romanists confession it was not in use. The son of God was sole Mediator
then.

4. As the impiety of their practices does grieve my spirit, so the dissonancy
of their doctrine, does as it were grate and torture my understanding, while I
contemplate their Apologies. Sometimes they bear us in hand that God is a
great King, whose presence poor wretched sinners may not approach, without
means first made to his domestique servants. The conceit it self is grossly
Heathenish, and comes to be so censured in the next Sect. 5. Chap. 42. Parag. 4.
Discourse. Now, seeing they pretend the fashion of preferring petitions to
earthly Princes, to warrant the form of their supplications to the Lord of
heaven and earth, let us see how well the pattern does fit their practice.
Admitting the imitation were lawful, how could it justify their going to God
immediately with these or the like petitions; Lord I beseech thee hear the
intercession of this or that Saint for me through Jesus Christ our Lord. What
fitter interrogatories can I propose unto these sacrilegious supplicants, then
Malachy has unto the like delinquents in his time? If I be your Lord and King
(as you enstyle me) where is my fear? where is my honor, says the Lord of
Hoastes, to you Priests that despise my name? and yet (being challenged of
disloyalty) they scornefully demand, Wherein have We despised thy name? Ye
bring polluted offerings into my Sanctuary: and yet ye say wherein have we
polluted thy Sanctuary? If ye offer such blind devotions, as these, is it not
evil? Offer them now to thy Governor, to thy Prince, or Sovereign; Will he
be pleased with thee or accept thy person, says the Lord of Hoastes? He would
either be thought to mock the King, and come within just censure of
disloyalty; or else be mocked out of his skin by Courtiers, that durst exhibit
a petition in this form unto his Majesty; Vouchsafe, I beseech you, to pardon
my offenses against your Highness, and admit me into good place at the
intercession of your Chauncellor, Treasurer, Chamberlain or Controller, in
honor of this his birthday, for the Princes sake your son my good Lord and
Master: yet if we change only the persons names, this petition (which could
become none but the Princes fool to utter) differs no more from the form of
Popish prayers upon Saints days, then the words of Matrimony uttered by John
and Mary do from themselves, whilst uttered by Nicolas and Margaret. The
former respectlesse absurdity, would be much aggravated, if the Courtiers
birthday, whom the petitioner would have graced with the grant of his petition,
should fall upon the Kings Coronation day, or when the Prince were married. Of
no less solemnity with the Romanist is the feast of the Crosses invention, it
is Christ's coronation or espousals: and yet withal the birthday of two or
three obscure Saints, whom they request God to glorify, with their own
deliverance from all perils and dangers that can betide them, through Christ
their Lord. This last clause must come in at the end of every prayer, to no
more use than the mention of a certain sum of money does in feoffements or
deeds of trust, only pro forma. Praesta quoesumus omnipotens deus, vt qui
sanctorum tuorum Alexandri, Eventij, Theodoli atque (...) ^nalis natalitia
colimus, a cunctis m^lis imminentibus, eorum intercessionibus liberemur per
Dominum, etc. In festo inventionis Sanctae Crucis.
Grant we beseech thee Almighty God, that we which adore the nativity of the
Saints, of Alexander, Event, Theod. and Iuuenal, may by their intercession be
delivered from all evils that hang over us, through Jesus Christ our Lord. To
be delivered from evils at or by the intercession of such Saints, is as much in
ordinary constructio^, as to be delivered from them for their merits. And this
is to share or divide the mediation of Christ betwixt him and such Saints, by
even portions. For of the two principal parts of Christ's Mediatorship, which
the Ancient and Orthodoxall Church did exactly distinguish in the form of
their prayers, the first is, our hope or belief to be heard propter Christum,
for Christ's sake, for whose sake alone God graunts whatsoever He grants unto
mankind: the second is, our belief or acknowledgement, that those blessings
which God does grant for Christ's sake, are not conveyed or imparted unto us,
but through Christ, or by Christ. He is not only our Orator to God, but Gods
hand to us. Now the Romish Church in their solemn Liturgy expressly gives the
first part of this mediation unto Saints, and leaves the latter only unto
Christ. The hymn sung or said unto the Cross upon the same day, conceived in
the character of magic spells falls under the same censure, that worshipping
of Saints Images or worshipping God in every visible creature does. Of which
Chap. 35, 36. The Hymn is thus; O crux splendidior cunctis astris, mundo
celebris, hominibus multum amabilis, sanction vniversis: quae sola fuisti digna
portare talentum mundi, dulcia ferens pondera: salua praesentem cateruam in
tuis hodie laudibus co^gregatam, halleluia, halleluia. ibidem. O Cross more
splendent than all the stars, famous throughout the world, most amiable
amongst men, more holy than the Universe (or all things besides) which alone
wast worthy to carry the Talent (or price) of the world, save this present
Congregation this day assembled to set forth thy praises. Praise the Lord,
praise the Lord. They that can be thus familiar with God, as to indent with
him, at whose intercession their requests should be granted, do they in
modesty need Mediators unto Christ?

5. Were there any hope of full or direct satisfaction, I would press this
demand to any learned Papist; What order those three parties whom Bellarmine
makes joint Commissioners in the audience of prayers, observe in prayers of
this form: Whether they expect that God the Father should first take their
petitions and acquaint Christ with them, and Christ the Saints; or that the
Saints should take them immediately and deliver them unto Christ, that he may
acquaint his Father with them. They grant the Saints can hear no prayers
immediately from our mouths, much less discern their conception in our
hearts: they understand them only by seeing God; and for this reason happily
prayers of this form, are in the first place directed to God the Father, or to
the Trinity. Is God then, as the book wherein they are written, altogether
senseless of their meaning, until the Saints, whose intercession they crave,
read them unto him? or hearing them, is he unwilling to grant them, until the
Saints have expounded them? But what is Christ's office in the mean time? to
request his Father that he would hear the Saints for his sake? or
contrariwise, does he and the Saints mediate for sinful men both together, as
joint advocates? or does He first open the case, and leave the Saints to
prosecute it? or do the Saints only sue in his name, that God would
communicate his merits unto them; as sometimes in earthly Courts one of
principal note bears the name, whilst another manageth the business? The
supplicant should, methinkes, in good manners frame some petition to Christ, or
ask his leave, to use his name in such suites as they would have managed by
this or that particular Saint, in honor of his birthday.

6. Perhaps this form of prayer was first invented by such (for such in the
Vide Riberam in 7. ad Hebrae: number. 72.
Romish Church there are, and aunciently have been) as deny Christ any kind
of intercession with his Father, besides the representation of his Humanity.
And men's hearts once wrought to this persuasion, would forthwith take the
impression of artificial begging, as the best form of tendering their devout
supplications unto God. Now amongst beggars commonly one shows his maimed
limbs, or other rufull spectacle, to move pity; and others read the lecture
upon them. And thus do these sacrilegious supplicants upon great Festivals
make Christ and their peculiar Saints, such sharers in the office of
intercession, as the Creeple and the Gabler are in men's benevolences at Faires
or Markets. The one must move Gods eyes, and the other fill his ears.

7. If it shall please the Reader to compare Bellarmines pretended detection of
fraudulent dealing in our Writers (Chap. 16.) with the declaration of his
second proposition hitherto discussed; He will easily assent unto me, that the
only trick this cunning Sophister had to save his mothers credit and her
sons, was to call Reformed Churches whores first, and their children liars.
For who but the impudent son of an adulterous Mother, or one accustomed to
shuffle beyond the compass of a professed liars art memoratiue; could have
avouched, what in the declaration of this second proposition he does; Sanctos
invocamus ad hoc solum, We pray to Saints only to the end, they may do what
we do, that is, as he expounds himself afterward, that Christ's merits might
by intercession of Saints be applied unto us. This (were this the only end of
praying to them) were in effect to request them, to stoop a little below their
rank, and become joint supplicants with us for relief of our necessities, and
advancement of Gods glory. Is it then all one to request them to join with us
in the honor and service of God for our good, and to intend their honor and
service in the prayers and requests which we make; either to them, or to God,
that he would accept their intercession for us? Now it is but one part of the
question between the Churches Romish and Reformed, [Whether it be lawful to
request Saints deceased to join in prayer with us, as they did, or might have
been lawfully requested to have done, whilst they lived;] The other part
(whereto Bellarmine should have framed his answer) is; [ Whether it be not
formal Idolatry to offer up our devotions to Saints by way of honor, or to
intend a religious worship or service of them, in those prayers, which we
offer up to God in his Sanctuarie]. It is so constantly agreed upon by all
professed members of the Romish Church, (and was so expressly set down by
Bellarmine himself, as nothing but extreme necessity of playing tricks,
could have shuffled it out of his memory,) that of the seven parts of
Religious Worship due to canonized Saints, the second is Invocation in public
Liturgies, the fourth, sacrifices of prayer and thanksgiving, which they offer
up to God in honor of such Saints: and of this latter kind are the prayers
before mentioned, usual upon every Saints day. And Bellarm. de beatitud.
Sanct. l. 1. cap. 15.
Bellarmine thus begun the chapter next save one before that wherein his former
declaration is contained; Demonstravimus sanctos esse colendos, sed quia
peculiaris difficultas est de cultu Invocationis, etc. We have already
demonstrated that the Saints are to be worshipped: but because the peculiar
difficulty is concerning the worship of Invocation, etc.

8. This indeed, is the principal point in question, upon whose denial they
endite us of sacrilege against the Saints, as we do them of flat Idolalatry,
or robbing God of his honor, for avouching the affirmative by their practice.
Cultus Invocationis, the worship of Invocation, we know well, is somewhat more
then Invocation; and to invocate Saints in ordinary language, is more then
only to request their prayers: albeit to request these after their death, is
but a relic of Ethnicke foolery; a superstitious impiety in professed
Christians. What then? Does that glory wherewith God arayes his Saints, utterly
strip them of all honor and respect from men? Is the felicity which they have
gotten, Bonum magis laudabile, quam honorabile? Are they worthy of praise and
not of honor? Their memory is honorable, but their persons not to be honored
by us. Their absence makes them incapable of such petitions, as we may (without
danger) make unto others less holy, with whom we have not only mystical
communion, but civil commerce. And civil worship without the support of
civil commercement, is but a phantastique groundless ceremony, and an Apish
observance. From these considerations did Calvin justly deny all civil worship
or signification of such respect to Saints deceased, as was due unto them
whilst they lived; and utterly disclaimed all religious worship either of them
or of other creatures dead or living. And because the Jesuits delude the
ignorant or vnobservant by tricks of that art, wherein they are best seen; to
unfold these terms, with whose aequivocall use they play fast and loose, will
be no loss of time, nor interruption of discourse.

CHAPTER XXV.
What Worship is. How it is divided into civil and Religious. In what sense it
is to be granted or denied, that Religious Worship is due to Saints. That the
Romish Church does in her practice exhibit another sort of Religious Worship
unto Saints, than her Advocates pretend in their Disputations.

1. THat some worship or honor more then civil is due to Saints, whether
living with us or departed, is the chief hold whereat our Adversaries in this
controversy aim; whose cunning surprisall, as they presume, would make them
entire Conquerors without farther conflict. Worship or adoration of what kind
soever, has, (as both acknowledge) two degrees or parts.

Bellarm. l. 1. de Beatitud. Sanct. c. 12.
1. The internal affection or serviceable submission which is as the soul or
life.

2. The external note or sign of such submission (as bowing, kneeling,
supplication) these are the body or material part of Worship or Honor.

The internal submissiue affection (without which the external sign or
gesture would be interpreted but a mockery) is due only unto Intellectual
Natures; and must be differenced by the diversity of their excellencies. Now
intellectual excellency is either Co^municatiue and finite, or infinite and
incommunicatiue. Such only is the excellency of the divine Majesty, whereunto
they appropriate a correspondent Worship or service, which they enstampe Cultus
latria: Nor do we disprove it as counterfeit, though lately coined, if we
respect the express difference it bears for its distinction from all other
kinds of worship. Thus much only might be added for explication; [ We are
bound not only (...), to Honor God, infinitely more than man for his infinite
excellency; but (...), to do him service and bear allegiance to him
infinitely more absolute then we owe to Princes, in that he is our Lord,
Creator and Redeemer.] Though both be alike due, yet service is more peculiar
to him, than Honor. For in as much as we bear his image, we are in some sort
partakers of his intellectual excellency, but altogether incapable of its
Infinity: but the glorious prerogative of Creation or Redemption is altogether
incommunicable. In these works he admits no isntrumental service; much less
can he brook a partner in the glory redounding from them.

2. Intellectual excellency communicated to his creatures, consists; 1. In
Natural, Moral or Civil endowments, as in Wisdom, Valor, Magnanimity,
Nobility of birth, eminency of place, or authority. 2. In gifts and graces
of the Spirit, as sanctity of life, heavenly wisdom, and favor with God.
Unto the former, which we may term temporal excellency, they assign civil
respect or moral Worship; unto spiritual excellency, a peculiar respect or
reverence of a middle rank, inferior to latria, or the worship which they give
to God, superior to that wherewith they honor Kings and Princes, secular
Nobles or men in authority. And this for distinction sake they call cultus
duliae, a Worship of service. Howbeit Peresius part. 3. de Tradit. considerat.
7.
one of their principal Advocates for customary Traditions, will not in this
case allow the pretended custom of the Schools, to prescribe against the
evidence of the natural and Grammatical use of this word in all good Writers:
(...), says Peresius, is to serve, and we are not the Saints servants, but
their fellow servants. And Bellarm de San^t beatitud. l. 1. cap. 12.
Bellarmine should either have spared to censure this his good friend for
scrupulositie, or else have given a better resolution of his doubt, than he has
done; by alleging only one place in Scripture, wherein (...) is taken not for
slavery or servitude, but for honorary subjection. As when the Apostle says,
Galat. 5.13. Use not your liberty as an occasion to the flesh, but by love
serve one another. [(...)]. Indeed, to serve one another by course, is no act
of servilitie; but a twisting of brotherly love or chain of good Fellowship:
but if the bond of service be legal and not mutual; he that is bound to
serve, is properly a servant, and he that has right to demand service of
another, is truly a Master: such is the case between the Saints and us, by
our adversaries doctrine. We are bound in conscience to serve and worship
them, cultu (...): so are not they (I hope) bound to serve us. Bellarmines
instance makes more for Peresius than against him. But seeing their tongues are
their own, and no man may control them in the use of words: let them enjoy
their dialect; we will take their meaning and follow the matter. The nature
and quality of this cultus (...) they express (in opposition to us) by
Religious Worship.

3. Partly under the multiplicitie of importances which these terms involue;
partly, under a color of real distinction between the habites or fountains
whence these several kinds of Worship must be derived, their sleightie
conveyance is not easily discerned, unless they be well eyed. To admit no
greater multiplicitie of habites or graces, than we have need of, is a point
of good use in every part of Divinity. And setting aside Vide Bellar. de
Beatitud. Sanct. lib. 1. cap. 12. parag. 5.
Aquinas his authority (which we may ouersway with S. Austines) what
necessity is there of clothing our souls with two distinct habites of
Religion; one of latria, wherewith we serve God; another of dulia, whereby we
tender such respect and service as is fit for Saints and Angels? For every
abstract number, without addition or subtraction of any unity, without any the
least variation in it self, necessarily includes a different proportion to
every number that can be compared with it: and so does every sanctified or
religious soul, without any internal alteration, or infusion of more habites
or graces, than that by which it is sanctified, naturally bring forth three
several sorts of religious and respectfull demeanor, 1. toward God, 2.
toward Saints or Angels, 3. toward Princes, men in authority, or of moral
worth. As it is but one lesson, Give honor to whom honor, love to whom love,
tribute to whom tribute Romans 13.7.
: so it is but one religious habit or rule of conscience that teaches the
practice of it. And in some sense it may be granted that men in authority or
of moral worth, must be worshipped with religious worship; in another sense
again, it must be denied, that Saints are to be worshipped with religious
worship, though worthy of some peculiar religious respect, whereto Kings and
Princes (unless Saints withal) have no title.

4. The respect or service which we owe to others may take this denomination of
Religious from three several References: First, from the internal habit or
religious rule of conscience, which dictateth the acts of service or
submission: secondly, from the intellectual excellency or personal worth of
the party to whom they are tendered: thirdly, from the nature and quality of
the acts or offices themselves, which are tendered to them, with the manner or
circumstances of their tendering. According to the first denomination, we must
worship ungodly Magistrates, and irreligious Princes with religious Worship.
For if we must do all things for conscience sake, and as in the sight of God,
our service wheresoever it is due, must be no eye service, no feigned respect.
All our actions and demeanours must be religious, as Religion is opposed to
hypocrisy, dissimulation, or time-serving. And in this sense religious and
civil Worship, are not opposite but coordinate. Men truly religious, must be
religiously civil in their demeanor toward others. If our respect or service
take the denomination of Religious from the personal worth or internal
excellency of the party whom we worship; it is most true, we are to worship
Saints with more than mere civil Worship. None of our Church (I dare be
bound) will deny that godly and religious men, must be reverenced not only for
their virtues merely moral or politic, but for their sanctity and
devotion. Yet is this all that the modern Papist seeks to prove against us.
And from this Antecedent (which needs no proof) he presently takes that for
granted, which he shall never be able to prove, either from these or other
premises, to wit, That Saints are to be worshipped with religious Worship, as
it is opposed to civil Worship. His meaning, if it reach the point in
question, must be this; We are bound to offer up the proper acts of Religion
as prayers, with other devotions, by way of personal honor or service to the
Saints. This we say is formal Idolatry.

5. It is one thing to tender our service in lowliness of spirit for
conscience sake unto the Prince; another to tender him the service of our
spirit or subjection of our consciences. Religion binds me to bow my knee, or
use other accustomed signs of obeisance, in unfeigned testimony that I
acknowledge him Lord of my body; armed with Authority from the Maker of it to
take vengeance upon it, for denial of its service. Or, in case he punish me
without cause, the bond of conscience and Religion ties me to submit this
outward man in humility of spirit, to the unlawful exercise of his lawful
power, rather than I should grant him the command or disposal of my Religion;
or honor him with the acts or exercises of it. In like sort the sight and
presence of any, whom God has graced with extraordinary blessings of his
Spirit, will voluntarily extort signs of submissiue respect from every
sanctified and religious spirit, in undoubted token that they reverence Gods
gifts bestowed upon him, and heartily desire their souls might take some
tincture or impression from his gracious carriage or instructions, which they
can hardly do without some nearer link of familiarity and acquaintance: or
at least, would do so much better, by how much the link were closer, or their
vicinitie greater. The right end and scope whereto the instinct of grace
inherent in our souls does direct these external signs of submission, is to
woe their souls and spirits whom we thus reverence, to some more intimate
conjunction. This submissiue reverence, though not required by them, is on our
parts necessary, for holding such consort or just proportion with the abundant
measure of Gods graces in them, as we may draw comfort and perfection from
them. Contemplation of others excellency without this submissiue temper in our
selves, either stirs up envy, or occasioneth despair: and yet all that
these outward and unfeigned signs of submission can lawfully plight unto them,
is the service of our bodies or inferior faculties. These we could be content
to sacrifice not to them, but for their sakes: always provided that we do not
prejudice the right or dominion, which our own spirits and consciences have
over our bodies, immediately under God. But to offer up the internal and
proper fruits of the Spirit unto them by way of tribute and honor, is to
dishonor, to deny that God which made them. The seeds of grace and true
Religion are sown immediately by his sole powerful hand; and their native
offspring (acts of faith especially) must be reserved entire and untouched for
him. Prayers intrinsecally religious, or devotions truly sacred, are
oblations, which may not, which cannot without open sacrilege be solemnly
consecrated to any others honor, but only to his who infuseth the Spirit of
prayer and thankesgiving into men's hearts. The principal crime whereof we
accuse the Romish Church, and whereof such as purposely examine the indictment
put up by Reformed Churches against her and her children, are to take special
notice; is her open professed direct intendment to honor them which are no
gods, with those prayers or devotions, with these elevations of minds and
spirits, wherewith they present the only wise, immortal King, in Temples
dedicated to his service. He that prayed in old times to an Idol in a Grove
destinated to his worship, did wrong the true God, after the same manner that
he does, which robs him of his Tyths, before they be set apart for his house.
But to come into his house of prayer, with serious purpose to honor him with
the sacrifice of a contrite or broken spirit, and in the time of oblation to
divert our best intentions to the honor of our fellow creatures, is worse than
Ananias and Saphirahs sin: a lying to the holy Ghost, or a mockery of him; a
sacrilegious put loyning of that which was brought unto the Sanctuary, and
solemnly consecrated to the Lord of the Temple.

CHAPTER XXVI.
That the Worship which Satan demanded of our Savior, was the very same
wherewith the Romish Church worshippeth Saints, that is, Dulia, not Latria
according to their distinction. That our Saviors answer does absolutely
prohibit the offering of this worship not only to Satan, but to any person
whatsoever, besides God. The truth of this assertion proved by S. John's
authority and S. Peter's.

1. THe doctrine delivered in the former Chapter, was a truth in old times so
clear, and so well approved by the constant practice of living Saints, that
the very quotation of that Law whereon we ground it, did put the Devil
himself, for the present, to a nonplus. But he has bethought himself of new
answers since, and found opportunity to distill his intoxicating distinctions
into modern brains through Jesuitical quills. Howsoever, to eyes not darkened
with the smoke of hell, it will never take the least tincture of probability,
much less any permanent color of solid truth, that the Tempter should demand
cultum latriae (as now it is taken by the Jesuits) of our Savior. Or,
although he had set so high a price at the first word upon so fair commodities
as he proffered; there could be no doubt of his readiness to fall lower at the
second, rather than to hazard the loss of his Market. For he loves to play at
small games, rather than altogether to sit out. And if the Jesuits answers to
our arguments were current; their Master with half of one of their skill in
Sophistry, might have put ours to a new reply, as he did him twice, to a
scriptum est. It is written (says our Savior) Thou shall worship thy Lord thy
God, and him only shall thou serve St Austine (whose authority they wrest to
this effect) was mistaken in the use or signification of the word Latriae. His
error was, in that he thought it did always signify religious worship or
adoration of spirit: and this kind of worship he knew only to be due to God;
whereas he had observed the Latin word adorare to be common both to civil and
religious worship. The same Father in 61. Question upon Genesis, acknowledges
no medium or mean between Civil adoration and Latria, that is, between
civil worship and the worship which is due only unto God. The occasion of S.
Austines distinction may be best gathered from his words; Quaeritur quomodo
scriptum sit, D^minum deum tuum adorabis, and illi soli seruie^, cum Abraham
sic honorauerit populum quendam gentium, ut etiam adoraret. Sed animaduertendum
est in eodem praecept^, nondictum, Dominum deum tuum selu^ adorabis, sicut
dictum est, et illi soli seruies, quod est Graece (...). Talis enim seruitus
non nisi Deo de^etur. Aug. quest. 61. super Genesis
. True, says the Jesuit, cultu latriae: for it is written, (...), but not
(...). For this kind of worship (expressed by the Greek (...)) by our Vide
Vasques lib. 2. de adoratione disp. 8. cap. 12. number. 366.
Adversaries doctrine is due to Saints. What was it then which the Devil did
expressly demand of our Savior, Latria or Dulia? neither expressly, but (...),
Adoration. But this Worship may be demanded upon some higher style than befits
Saints to accept or use. It may be demanded in testification of homage royal,
or in acknowledgment of the party to whom it is tendered for Lord and
Sovereign of the parties which tender it. To him that would thus reply, the
reioynder is ready out of the text: for the Devil did not exact any external
sign of submission unto himself, as unto the supreme disposer or prime
fountain of the temporal blessings, which he promised. The tenor of his
promise was thus; Luke 4. verse 6, 7. Matthew. 4. verse. 9.
All this power will I give thee, and the glory of the kingdoms: for that is
delivered unto me. By whom? questionless by some Superior and more sovereign
Lord, from whose right he sought to derive his warrant to bestow them; To
whomsoever I will, I give it. The warrant pretended in respect of the parties
capable of the donation of it, is very large, but not without conditions to be
performed by them: If thou therefore wilt fall down before me, and worship me,
all shall be thine. (...), or falling down before him, being all the Tempter
did demand; our Saviors reply had neither been direct nor pertinent, unless
the exclusive particle only be referred as well to (...) worship or
prostration, as to (...) or supreme service. Is it then but a mere trick of
wit, or point of Sophistry without sin thus palpably to divide that sense of
Scripture which God had so closely joined? Is it a petty presumption only,
for a Jesuit to think he could have caught the Devil more cunningly in his
own play, or have gone beyond him with a mental reservation, or evasion; if
the like proffer had been made to him, as was to our Savior? For this in
effect is the Jesuits answer. The Law forbids (...) only, the Devil required
only (...): therefore he demanded nothing forbidden by the Law. To be able
thus to play fast and loose with the sacred bond of Gods Law at his pleasure;
or to loose the link of absolute allegiance to supreme Majesty with
frivolous distinctions pretended from some slips of the Ancients, is that
wherein the Jesuit glories. Such of this sublimated sect as stiffly maintain,
that not only all Image Worship, but all civil use of Pictures was forbidden
the Jews, are not ashamed to stand upon the former gloss, as the best rock
of their defense for maintaining the distinction between Dulia and Latria. But
the words of the Law are still the same, and therefore can admit no distinction
now, which they might not then have borne. Howbeit, were that Law abrogated so
far as it concerns the use of Images, it could not disanull this new
distinction, were this grounded upon any other pregnant Scripture, but so
grounded it is not, it cannot be.

2. Such as would blush at the former Gloss, will perhaps reply, that the
lowest degree of any worship was more than the Devil had right to challenge,
and more than might be tendered to him by any Intelligent creature. The
exception I grant were good, if our Savior had only refused to worship him,
because he was Gods enemy; but it no way touches the reason of his refusal,
which is universally perpetual. For he took no notice of the Devils ill
deserts, but frames such an answer to the demand it self, as was to stand for
an unalterable exposition of that indispensable Law in respect of every
creature either tempting or tempted in like sort, to the worlds end. None may
worship or serve any Creature with religious Worship; all of us must so worship
and serve God alone. The words of the Text it self, as well in the Septuagint
as in the Hebrew; are no more than these: Thou shall fear thy Lord thy God,
and him shall thou serve. The super-eminent dignity of the party whose fear
and service are enjoined, does (in our Saviors Logic) make the indefinite
Form of the Commandment, fully aequivalent to this universal Negative: [ No
man may tender any act of religious fear, worship, or service, to any man or
Angel, to any thing in heaven or earth, or in the regions under the earth, but
only to him who made all, who is Lord of all; whom all are bound to fear and
worship, with all their hearts, with all their souls and all their might]. And
of all kinds of religious fear or service, Cultus duliae is either most
improperly or most impiously tendered to Saints and Angels. For though as in
Gods house there be many Mansions, so no doubt there be several degrees or
ranks of Attendants, yet the highest and the lowest members of Christ's
mystical body are brethren; the greatest Angel, and the least amongst the
sons of men, are fellow servants. Do we speak this as men unwilling to bow
their knees unto their betters without hope of gain, or loath to spend their
breath without a fee; or does not the Scripture say the same? Do not such of
our Lord and Masters servants as are clothed with glory and immortality, and
daily behold his presence in perfect joy, inhibite the first proffers of such
obeisance to them present, as the Romish liturgy solemnly consecrates to the
shrines and statues of others much meaner, in their absence? How beautiful
were the feet of that heavenly Ambassador, how glorious and joyful were the
tidings he then brought unto the Inhabitants of the earth; Rev. 19.9.
Blessed are they which are called unto the marriage supper of the Lamb: these
are the true sayings of God. Such was the state of the messenger, and such his
message, as did well deserve to have an Apostle for his Scribe; for He bid him
write. And yet when this his Secretary fell at his feet, verse. 10. to worship,
he said unto him; See thou do it not: I am thy fellow servants, and of thy
brethren that have the testimony of Jesus: worship God. Did S. John want wit to
reply; So I will, cultu latriae; but Thee my Lord (his Ambassador,) also cultu
duliae? This is a distinction of such subtlety, that it surpasses all skill
or spirit of prophecies. Otherwise, S. John might have known the use of it,
when he had better opportunity to use it, than any had since. Yet if he had
been so disposed the Angel prevented him, I am thy fellow servant, and it is
the duty of servants, not to seek honor one of another, but to be
yoke-fellowes in their Masters service; conforts in setting forth his honor.
Bellar. l. 1. de Sanctor. beatitudine. cap. 14.
Bellarmine was conscious that his first answer to this place, (though
borrowed from Antiquity) was erroneous or impertinent; Corrigendus fuit
adorator non propter errorem adorationis sed propter errorem personae: Saint
John was not to be reformed for offering to worship Him whom be took to be
Christ, but in that he mistook the Angel for Christ. Saint Aug. questione.
61. in Genesis
Austines words, upon which Bellarmine was too wise to rely too much, are
these; Talis apparuerat Angelus ut pro Deo posset adorari, et ideo fuerat
corrigendus adorator; The Angel did so appear, as he might seem to be God, or
to be worshipped as God, and therefore the worshipper was to be rectified.

3. But let us try whether his second cogitations be any sounder. Saint John
did well in preffering to worship the Angel; as Abraham, Lot, and other of his
godly ancestors had done: but the Angel did prohibit him in reverence to
Christ's Bellarmin. ibid de Sanc. beatitud^
humanity. For since the Angels themselves have done homage to Christ's
humanity, they will not receive that homage from men, which before Christ's
incarnation they did. Let him pretend what authority he list for the truth of
this reply, it is impertinent to the point in question; and we may drive him to
another shift by pressing this evasion. For if the Angels since Christ's
incarnation have released men of their wonted homage; or rather wholly resigned
it into Christ's hand, abandoning the least acknowledgment of religious worship
when they come as Gods Ambassadors in person: we demand whether the Romish
Church did well or ill in commanding her sons and daughters to worship them
still in this latter age, wherein we expect Christ's coming in glory to
Judgment? The form of Bellarmines second answer is very strange, and such,
as he derides Brentius, for using in a matter far more capable of it. We
rightly worship Angels, and the Angels rightly refuse to be worshipped by us.
For after the Angel had given out his prohibition, Vide ne feceris, cap. 19.
ver. 10. See thou do it not: the Apostle offers to do the like again, cap.
22. ver. 9. as well knowing that he did well in worshipping, and the Angel as
well in refusing to be worshipped. Nor may we suspect, that Saint John was
either indocile or forgetful. Much less may we suspect that God Almighty
would have his children of the Church militant and triumphant to complement it
all the year long, in such manner as strangers will for a turn or two at
their first meeting: the one in good manners offering, and the other better
refusing the chief place or precedence; least of all may we think, that one
of Gods glorious Ambassadors, could out of maydenly modesty be driven to
maintain false doctrine. To have avoided the first proffer of worship so
peremptorily forbidden, [ See thou do it not,] had been enough to disprooue
the solemn practice of it in whomsoever. But not herewith content, he gives a
general reason of his prohibition; See thou do it not: for I am thy
fellow servants, worship God. May we not supply his meaning by Analogy of our
Saviors Comment upon the Text of the Law, [ Worship him alone, whom the Angels
can never worship too much, nor any man on earth enough].

4. It is a warrant to our Churches, fully sufficient, not to do homage unto
Angels absent, because in presence they refuse and forbid it. By what warrant
the Romish Church can obtrude it upon them against their wills, let her sons
look to it. We have cause to suspect, and they to fear, that the Devil and
his swift messengers have played Gehazies with their Naamans; run to their
Rulers in these heavenly Prophets names, to demand such gratifications, upon
false pretenses, in their absence, as they resolutely refused, when in all
reason they best deserved them, if at any time they might have taken them. The
Disciple is not above his Master; much less is the pupils practice to be
imitated before the Tutors doctrine. S. John in this Dialogue was the pupil:
do they then grace him by taking his proffer to worship this Angel for their
warrant, or rather wrong the Angel in not admitting his twofold inhibition (at
both times obeyed by this his scholar) for a sufficient caveat to deter them
from making the worshipping of Saints and Angels a special part of their
solemn service? But this is the curse which by Gods just judgment is fallen
upon them for detayning the truth in unrighteousness; That as the Horse-leach
sucketh only the melancholy humor out of men's blood: so these Locusts having
relinquished the pure fountain of truth, must long after the dregs of
Antiquity in their doctrine, and in their practice feed principally upon such
infirmities of the flesh, as sometimes mingle them selves with the spiritual
behavior of Gods Saints. For even the souls of Gods dearest Saints have their
habitation, during this life, with flesh and blood. And albeit we sinful men
may not pass our censures upon S. John, nor measure his carriage in the Angels
presence, by any the least oversight in our selves, who are never raught beyond
our selves, in such admiration of spirit, as he then was: yet the holy Angel
with whose glorious appearance he was astonished, might discover the misplaced
motions of his spirit or affection by some such outraying or mis-fashioned
lines in his bodily gesture or outward behavior; as an expert Courtier would
quickly epsy in a mere contemplative Scholar, called into some Court-like
audience. This carriage was for the present more pardonable in him, than the
continual imitation of it can be in any. A gracious Prince would take little
or no displeasure, if a man in a dream or trance, or in some extraordinary
passion of fear arising from apprehension of imminent danger, or of joy for
unexpected safety; should bestow royal titles on his special benefactor, or
prefer extemporary petitions or gratulations ore tenus in such submissiue
style or gesture, as might impeach, as well the greatest subject in the
Kingdom that should accept them, as the meanest that could offer them, of
disloyalty, if they were drawn into legal form or daily practice. Admitting
the Angel had not twice disallowed the worship proffered by the Apostle: yet if
we consider the ecstasy or strange exultation of spirit, whence it was wrested;
the delinquencie of the Romish Church (using his example for a pattern of
their behavior in public and solemn service, when no occasion of like
passion is offered either by Angelical presence or joyful Embassage) argues
more wilful and contemptuous disloyalty toward God, than the former
supposition implies toward earthly Princes. And as it is a point of
indiscretion to show such peculiar observance to great Personages in the
Princes presence, as good manners elsewhere would exact; so to tender such
solemn worship to Saints and Angels in the Church or house of God, is a
circumstance which much aggravateth the haynousnesse, or rather induces an
alteration of the quality of the Worship it self; enough to make it
superstitiously Religious, though otherwise decently civil, or offensive only
in excess.

5. But to what end did the Apostle so carefully register the Angels twofold
prohibition, or his own reiterated check? To blazon his own dignity and
high respect with Angels; or to embolden others of meaner place in the Church
Militant, to fasten that kindness upon them absent* which would not be
accepted from him whiles he spoke with them face to face? Vide Bellarmin l^c^
citat^.
Some Romanists think such lowly obeisance did not so well become S. John,
because he was a Priest, others, because he was a Virgin: and the office of
Priesthood, is, in their doctrine, as great; Virginity, in a man of his age, a
greater dignity than Angelical excellency. Virginity, (I think) is more
scarce and rare in Romish Priests, than the gift of Prophecy or familiarity
with Angels, is in other men; and this is the reason that they set so high a
price upon it. Others conjecture the spirit of Prophecy did privilege this
great Apostle from the common service of Angels. But the greater skill he had
in heavenly mysteries, the greater were his motives to worship this Angel
(under God) his principal Instructor. And Saint Peter's refusal of like
obeisance from Cornelius, does so crush all these, and whatsoever pretenses can
be brought, that they can never seem whole or sound again to such as first
made them.

6. Cornelius was neither Prophet, Priest, nor Virgin, a Gentile by birth, and
a novice in faith; committed by the Angel of God to S. Peter's instruction. He
was in conscience and Religion bound to reverence this great Apostle; not only
for his religious and sanctified life, but as his Father in God, his chief
Guardian under Christ. But might he therefore worship him with religious
worship, as his intermediate advocate or intercessor with God, as his peculiar
patron? No: when he offered no other sign of submission to S. Peter's person,
than every Romish Priest and Prelate does unto his Image; he took him up, and
warnes him not to fall down before him, or any Saint so again: I my self
also am a man. But may not this speech imply that Cornelius took him at first
sight for a god, and so polluted his external worship with this internal
misconceipt? Sure he that was so well acquainted with the Jewish Religion, and
Acts. 10. ver. 5, 6.
so well spoken of by the Jews, did not acknowledge more Gods than one. And he
could not be ignorant, that one Simon Peter, which lodged with one Simon the
Tanner, was neither this one God whom he before had worshipped, nor any God.
For would the Angel have willed him to send to Ioppa for God to come unto him?
But albeit Cornelius from the first to the last did perfectly know Simon Peter
to be a man, yet he knew him to be a man sent from God to instruct him in the
way of life. And out of that natural infirmity of flesh and blood, which
(wanting such as S. Peter was, to check or control it,) brought forth
Idolatry in the Heathens and the Romanists, he sought to entertain Gods
Ambassador in most lowly and submissiue fashion. To set their hearts too much
upon such creatures as are Gods instruments for their extraordinary good, is a
temptation wherewith good natured men, (such as Cornelius was) without
spiritual instruction are soonest overtaken. And out of the abundance of
affectionate desire to testify his thankfulness in the best sort that he
could; he renders that to the Ambassador which was due only to his Master.
Plinius in Historia. Similia habet Lactantius
Hic est vetustissimus referendi been merentibus gratiam mos, vt tales
numinibus ascribant; The most ancient manner of expressing thankfulness to
special benefactors, is to inroll them in the Kalend^r of Gods or divine
powers. After the holy Ghost to the astonishment of the circumcision had fallen
upon all that heard Peter's words, in testimony that they were the words of God;
did either Cornelius himself, or the meanest Gentile present, fall down and
worship S. Peter, though not as the author and fountain of that in^stimable
blessing, whereof all were made partakers, yet as the immediate Intercessor
which had procured it? No: S. Peter had so well instructed Cornelius before,
that as the Acts. 10.46.
Text resolves us, the first fruits of their new tongues, were offered up
immediately in sacrifice unto God which had given such gifts to men. The spirit
whereof they were partakers, taught them to glorify the giver only; not man,
which had nothing, which he had not received.

7. Never had any man juster occasion to worship an Angel than S. John, or a
Saint than Cornelius and his company had? The reason why the Lord in wisdom
would have, as well their willingness to worship, as the Angels and S. Peter's
unwillingness to accept their proffered submission, so expressly registered, was
to imprint the true meaning of that Law in the hearts of all that should read
those Stories: Thou shall worship thy Lord thy God, and him only shall thou
serve; as also the necessity of that caveat which another Apostle had given to
posterity: Coloss. 2. ver. 18.
Let no man beguile you of your reward, in a voluntary humility and
worshipping of Angels, intruding himself into things which he has not seen,
vai^ely puffed up in his fleshly mind. If so maine a pillar of Christ's Church,
as S. John (who foresaw the general Apostasy from the sincere worship of God
to Antichristian Idolatry) were thus shaken with this temptation, it was not to
be expected, that any (after that Satan who can transform himself into an
Angel of light, was let loose) should be able to stand without vigilant
attention unto John's admonitions, and these fair warnings which God had given
the world in him and Cornelius. A senseless and reprobate stupiditie more than
Jewish, has befallen most of the modern Romanists for their wilful relapse
into Heathenish Idolatry. What heathenish Priest did ever frame an answer to
the objections of the Orthodoxe, either so ridiculous in it self, or which
might argue such a respectlesse esteem of the divine Majesty, whom they were
challenged to wrong, as Vasques. l. 1 de Adorat. disput. 5. cap. 3.
Vasquez and Salmeron, with others, have made to this instance of S. Peter and
Cornelius. St Peter, say these Jesuits (in part approved by Bellarm. de
Sanctor. beatitudine. lib. 1. cap. 4.
Bellarmine, who loves to have two strings to his deceiptfull Bow) disclaimed
the worship offered him, not as if it were not due unto him. How then? In
modesty. Does this make for them or against them? If it were his modesty to
refuse it from Cornelius, it would be good manners in them not to offer it till
they know more of his mind, or meet him face to face as Cornelius did; who
yet did not press him to take it, as in good manners he should, if out of
modesty only he had refused it. But they have made S. Peter's Image of such a
metal, as it will not easily blush, and charmed it with such new
distinctions, as it shall not tremble, whiles they do such homage to it as
would have moved S. Peter himself, no less than the peoples dancing before
the golden Calfe did Moses. The Image they think does well approve of their
service, in that it does not disallow it, nor bid them stand up, saying, (what
it could not truly say, albeit these Impostors could teach it to speak) for I
also am a man. Yet if S. Peter himself hear their prayers, and see their
gestures to it, as well as if he were amongst them, will he not be as modest in
Gods presence, who is always an undoubted spectator of this their service, as
he was before Cornelius? Will he not disavow their practice as quite contrary
to his example; and their doctrine, as directly contradictory to his
instructions? And do they truly honor, or rather foully vilify S. Peter and
the rest of Gods glorious Saints, in obtruding greater honor to their Images
of liuelesse wood and stone; than any Christians offered to them whilst they
lived, or, were they present, yet are capable of?

CHAPTER XXVII.
That the respect which we owe to Saints deceased, (supposing they were really
present with us) does differ only in degree, not in nature or quality from
the respect which we owe unto true living Saints. That the same expression of
our respect or observance toward Saints or Angels locally present, cannot
without supersitition or Idolatry be made unto them in their absence.

1. SVppose St Peter, or the Angel whom St John proffered to adore, should
undoubtedly appear unto us, and vouchsafe us liberty of proposing our desires
unto them: we might and would tender them respect and reverence (not for their
civil dignity, or hopes of promotion from them, but for their personal
sanctity) which should exceed all the reverence we owe to ordinary godly men,
as much as the civil Honca^ we give to Kings does our civil respect of any
subject that is our better. But, as our sovereign observance of Kings or
supreme earthly Majesty, may not transcend the latitude of civil honor; so
neither might we tender such honor, reverence, or worship to S. Peter or the
Angel, (were they present) as would transgress the utmost bounds of that
respect or reverence, which is, in some measure, due to every godly man. The
difference between our respect to Angels, the blessed Virgin, or to Saints
of the highest rank, and the lowest, may be greater in degree, than the
latitude of civil honor, (in respect of Monarchs and their meanest officers)
can afford; because the amplitude of sanctifying grace does (for ought we know)
far exceed the measure of moral virtues or latitude of civil dignity. But
the several observances which we owe to Kings and to others that are our
betters in the rank of subjects, differ more in specificall quality and
essence; than the several respects which are due to Angels or Saints of the
highest order, and to religious Lazarus, were both equally present. For Kings,
in matters concerning our goods or bodies, have a soveraigntie communicated to
them from God, not communicate by them to their greatest subjects: so have no
Saints or Angels in matters spiritual any Lordship or dominion over us; we
owe no allegiance of our spirit, save only to one Lord. Christ in these cases
is our sole King (whose felicity is communicated to all his followers, his
soveraigntie to none:) in respect of him, the greatest Saints and Angels be our
fellow-subiects. What respect or reverence then do we owe them in respect of
prayers or invocations, suppose we might speak with them face to face? As our
necessities would compel us to request their prayers to God for us; so good
manners would reach us to fit the manner of our observance or submissiue
entreatie, to the measure of their sanctity, or of that favor which they have
with God, in respect of ordinary godly men; whose prayers we crave with due
observance of their persons. The rule of religious discretion would so
proportion our obedience to their instructions, as their instructions are
proportioned to the directions of usual Pastors: we would be ready to do
them any bodily service with so much greater fidelity and better affection
than we do to others, as we conceive them to be more faithful and fervent in
Gods service than others are. But Religion it self, and the rule of Gods word,
which they most exactly obey, would restrain us from falling down before them
with our bodies, with purpose to lift up our minds unto them, as to our patrons
or secundary Mediators. To offer up the fruits of the spirit, or consecrate
the spirit of prayer and thankesgiving to the honor of any, save only of him
that made, redeemed and sanctified our souls and spirits, is, (we maintain
it unto death) sacrilegious heathenish impiety. Yet must dulia which these men
consecrate wholly to the honor of Saints, be of necessity an essential part
of the spirit of prayer, if the prayers themselves, which it brings forth be as
they contend, Cultus ver e religiosus, true or intrinsecally religious worship.
Religion is the bond or link between the Creator and the creature: the
essence of religious prayers consists in the elevation of the spirit: the use
and end of the spirits elevation, is that we may be joined in spirit with
Christ. To fix our hearts on anything besides God, is a spiritual fornication
or adultery; but thus to elevate our spirits which Christ has espoused unto
himself by grace, unto Saints and Angels (as they do, that direct religious
prayers unto them) in the house and Temple of God, is like an incestuous
pollution of the marriage bed; as if a woman betrothed unto the eldest brother
and heir apparent unto the Crown, should prostitute her body upon her
marriage-day to his kinsman or younger brother.

2. But admit S. Peter or some Angel should by Gods appointment vouchsafe
their local residence again amongst the Inhabitants of the earth, work
miracles, heal diseases, and instruct viva voce, in the remote deserts of
Afric or in the Indies, where we could neither have personal access unto
them, nor commend our suites unto them by letter, or interposed messenger;
might we here in England kneel down, and turning our faces toward the place
of their residence, pour forth the requests of our hearts unto them as Daniel
being in exile did his toward Jerusalem, wherein God had promised to dwell?
This were to outstrip the Heathen as well in the essential form of Idolatry,
as in the degrees of superstitious or magical folly? What heathen did ever
exhibit solemn worship, or pour forth their petitions for aid or succor
unto Apollo, Mercury, or Aesculapius, much less unto their Demigods or
Heroikes, save only in places where they supposed them resident, as in their
Temples, about their Oracles, or before shrines or Idols, which (according to
Ethnicke Divinity) were in a sort animated with their presence? Or, admitting
any heathen living in Asia, should have directed his prayers toward Hercules
his Temple in Greece, might not his folly have been justified by the same
Apology, which the Romanist brings for his, if that were just and orthodoxall?
Jupiter est quodcunque vides, The supreme power adored by him under the name
of Jupiter, he might (with good approbation of the Learned,) have avouched to
be every where able and willing to acquaint the lesser Gods (his more intimate
friends, with whom he might be bolder) with his petitions in so great distance.
To be persuaded that any Saint should be able at all hours of day and night,
to take notice of all the petitions, that are or can be made unto him in Italy,
Germany, France, and Spain, or throughout the whole world, is to ascribe
greater divinity unto him, than any Heathens did to their ordinary Gods, whom
notwithstanding they conceived worthy of divine Honor. The fruition of his
presence who knows all things at all times, cannot make Saints or Angels so
capable of this perpetual vbiquitary knowledge, as personal union with him,
who is every where essentially present, might make Christ's body of vbiquitary
local presence: yet to maintain it to be so present every where, is in our
Adversaries judgment, an heresy; but a far greater to ascribe this
vbiquitary knowledge unto Saints. And out of this conceit to direct prayers to
them in heaven from every part of the earth, is formal Idolatry, as well in
practice as in opinion; For God even God only knows the hearts of all the
Children of men. 1. King. 8. ver. 31.

3. To conclude; with what manner of respect or observance (in particular)
glorified Saints or Angels are to be entertained by us mortal men, is a point
impossible to be determined, until we have just occasion to dispute it. And
other occasion we can have none, save what their presence or commerce with us
shall administer. Or, admitting their undoubted apparitions were at this day as
rife, as heretofore they have been pretended, it would be the first part of
our duty to fashion our selves unto such observance as they would prescribe
us, not to prescribe them what manner of honor they were to receive from us.
Gods word concerning their worship is silent, save only that Saint Paul has
advised us to content our selves with ignorance in these secrets, unto whose
search we are not called; to affect whose knowledge, we can have no
provocation or impulsion besides the vaine-swelling of our fleshly minds. But,
whatsoever respect or observance might lawfully be tendered to their infallible
appearance, cannot without impious folly be seriously proffered to them whilst
they appear not: and solemnly to consecrate it to their Images whose persons
we never saw, is the height of impiety. Civilitie and common sense may
inform us that to tender such respect or signs of submission to Princes or
great Personages, whom we see a far of, as would become us being admitted to
conference with them, would argue either distraction of mind, or clownish
simplicity. Though it were lawful to express our necessities with bended
knees to Saints or Angels vouchsafing their presence, and to implore their
intercession for us with sighs and tears; yet may not such as have eyes, pray
to them or any whom they cannot see, save only to him who is invisible. None
that have sense, may pray to any of whose vertuall presence or acquaintance
with our affairs, we have no sensible undoubted pledge; save only to him whom
we know not by sense, but by the spirit of grace and faith, every where to
hear and know all things that are done or said any where. Howbeit for every
man at all times, in every place, upon all occasions to worship him in such
manner, as they without offense, with true devotion, have done, unto whom his
extraordinary presence has been manifested, would be but a superstitious
observance. For although we be fully assured, that he sees our gestures, knows
our hearts, and hears our petitions, at all times and every where alike; yet
he sees that we have not always the like occasions, which they had, to pray or
worship as they did. And any extraordinary manner of worship without
extraordinary impulsion, is will worship. More particularly; Religious prayers
being proper acts of faith, unless they be made in faith, are most properly
(...) not of faith, quite contrary to the rule of faith, which in any point to
cross, is a presumptuous sin; but to contradict it in matters of religious
worship, is the sin of Idolatry. Now religious prayers cannot be conceived
or exhibited to any in faith, without certainty of faith, that they to whom
they are exhibited, do hear us. Seriously to tender requests to the souls of
Saints deceased, farther distant from us than any one part of the earth is from
another, after the same manner we might do, upon certain notice of their
presence, or mutual pledges of commerce with us, is but to offer the sacrifice
of fools unto the wind, or to sow the element wherein we breath, with the
poisonous seeds of Ethnicke superstition. And so in fine the Romanist does not
enrich the Saints, but stocks and stones (the works of his own hands) with
that honor whereof he has robbed his God. His adoring, his kissing and his
worshipping of Saints and Images with bended knees and other signs of
submission, is but a solemn invitation of infernal ghosts to keep residence
about them. These are the Harpies which defile Gods service, and devour the
peoples offerings, which their enchanted Priests would persuade them were
presented to and accepted by Gods Saints. To think the Saints should be
permitted to receive our particular petitions, and not be permitted to return
their particular answers; or not be enabled as freely to communicate their
minds to us, as we to impart our desires to them, is an imagination so gross,
that it can have no ground either of faith or common reason. We may retort
Bellarmines and his Consorts arguments for invocation of Saints upon
themselves. That the Saints, whom they invocate, do not impart their minds
unto their supplicants in such particular manner as their supplicants impart
their desires to them, it is either because they will not, or they cannot. To
say they will not if they can, is to impeach them of pride or want of charity:
to say they cannot, is to slander them with impotencie, or with want of favor
with God. For He that enables them as they suppose He does to hear us speak
from earth to heaven can questionless enable them so to speak or express
themselves, that we might hear them from heaven to earth. It is but one and
the same branch of his infinite power and goodness to give Saints deceased the
like use and exercise of spiritual tongues, as He graunts them, by the
Romanists doctrine, of spiritual ears.

CHAPTER XXVIII.
The Romish Church in her public Liturgies expressly gives those glorious
titles unto Saints, unto which no other real worship besides the worship of
Latria is answerable.

1. SEeing as well prayers in the first place directed unto Saints, as these
which they tender immediately unto God upon Saints days, are offered up in
honor of the Saints, in the same place wherein, and with the same external
signs of observance wherewith they solemnly worship God: what note of
difference have they left to distinguish themselves from gross Idolaters?
Only the internal conceit which they have of divine excellency, as much
greater then Angelical dignity. But how shall we know this different esteem
of God, of Christ and of his Saints to be truly seated in their hearts,
without open confession of the mouth, making some distinction in the solemn
and public profession of allegiance to both? Is the form then of their
devotion to God and Christ, as accurately distinguished by any sovereign title
from their supplications unto Saints, as petitions to Kings and Princes are
from petitions made unto their officets? One of the most peculiar titles of
Christ as Mediator, (by Bellarmines confession) is that in the tenth of John,
Ego sum ostium, I am the door; for from this attribute he proves him to be the
only immediate Mediator. If He who is the door be the only immediate
Mediator, what manner of Mediatrix must she be which is the gate, the blessed
gate by which the righteous enter. Did he conceive his second proposition
before mentioned in terms more wary then we were aware of; Sancti non sunt
immediati intercessores, Saints are not our immediate intercessors, but some
Saintesse may make immediate intercession? For so they pray unto the blessed
Virgin; Vide Rosariun Maria.
Ave maris stella,
Dei matter alma,
Atque semper virgo,
Foelix coeli porta;
Hail, star of the Sea,
Gods sweet Mother (and Mate,)
Everlasting Virgin,
Heavens happy gate.
And yet it seems they make her withal the foundation or foundresse of our
faith: for so it follows in the same hymn; Funda nos in pace. Yea the
fountain of sanctification, from whose fulness we receive grace for grace:
Virgo singularis,
Intra omnes mitis,
Nos culpis solutos,
Mites fac and castos.
Vitam praesta puram,
Iter para tutum.
Of Virgins the very prime and flower;
Whose breast of meekness is the bower:
From guilt us free, which soul does waste;
And make, oh make us meek and chaste.
Our lives vouchsafe first to make pure;
Next that our Journey prove secure.
And because God is called the King of heaven and Father of mercy, who has the
issues of death in his hands, she must be entitled the Mother of mercy, etc.
Vid De^ri. l. 4. c. 1. q 2 s. 2 Bellar. lib. 1. de Sanctor. beat^t. c. 17.
Concipitur et Deiparam Virginem vt sponsam, ^uasuram fuisse summipatris, cum
illi ediderit vnigenitu^* nec non mairem futuram verae vita, and per hoc long?
melioris quam Heua: quandoquidem ficut Adamus, ita et Heua, in anima^ est ficta
viventem: at Maria sicut and Christus, in spiritum est electa viuificantem.
Vnde and matter, nedum dicitur, vita, sedgratia et dilectio ^pulchra: sicut et
de illa sacra canit Ecclesia. Ia^^bus Nacla^tus ^piscopus Clugiensis in
seri^turaemedulla f^l. 37. page 1^6.
Maria matter gratiarum,
Matter misercordiae;
Tu nos ab host protege,
Et hora mortis suscipe.
Mary of grace, Mother mild,
Who have mercy for thy child;
Hide and save us from our foe,
When from bodies souls shall go.
From this her mild and merciful temper, they hope (it seems) that she is
able to let some into heaven by the window, which may not be allowed to come in
by the ordinary door or foregate: Coeli foenestra facta es. Officium B:
Mariae, etc. The attributes of Wisdom, Ecclus the 24. are sung or said as
part of her honor; Ab initio, and ante secul. creata sum, and vsque ad futurum
seculum non desinam, et i^ habitatione sancta coram ipso ministravi. Of this
stamp^ is that Hymn to the Apostles, cited by Bellarmine without blushing.
Lib. de Beatitud. Sanct. cap. 17. Compare these and the like eiaculatorie hymns
with the eiaculations of heathen Orators and Poets. chap. 20.
Quorum praecepto subditur,
Salus and languor omnium;
Sanate aegros moribus,
Nos reddentes virtutibus.
By whose decree all like or pine;
To soule-sicke Patients health resign;
And unto Virtue us incline.
But more sacrilegious by much is that Hymn unto S. John, so well known and
so common, that the notes for Plaine-song were taken out of it, ( vt, re, mi,
fa, sol, la) which we might have just cause to mislike did not the syllables
sound otherwise extra dictionem than in dictione they did. Vid. Putean. in Mod.
Pallade.
Vt queant laxis Resonare fibris,
Mira gestorum Famuli tuorum;
Solve peccantis Labij reatum,
Sancte Johannes.
That with free hearts thy servants may,
Thy wondrous Acts and praise display;
From sinful lips guilt take away,
O Holy Saint John.
Did not such as first conceived or commonly used this song, intend to honor
S. John with the best kind of worship that was in their breasts, when they
desire their hearts and souls may be purified, to the end they might more
clearly sound forth his praise? Could the sweet Singer of Israel have
consecrated his best devotions in more solemn sort unto God, then these words
imply? In as much as we never read, that S. John did either send down fire
from Heaven, or cause the mouths of these Priests of Bell to be stopped with
hair and pitch; this is to me, and will be unto the impartial Reader, a
better argument that this blessed Saint did never hear those or like prayers
directed unto him; than the Romish Church shall be able to bring, That Saints
deceased are (ordinarily) acquainted with men's petitions or desires in
particular. Yet unto all these and many like we must expect no answer but one:
but that we may well expect should be a sound one and worthy the noting: Est
ergo notandum cum dicimus non deberi peti a sanctis, nisi vt orent pro nobis,
nos non agere de verbis sed de sensu verborum. It is to be noted (says Bellar.
La. de Sanctor. beat. cap. 17.
Bellarmine) that when we affirm, it is not lawful to request any more of the
Saints, than that they would pray for us, our meaning is not to be tried by the
words which we use; but by the sense and meaning of them.

2. They think they may safely use these forms of words; Saint Peter have
mercy on me, save me, open me the gate of heaven, give me health of body,
patience, virtue, etc: so they make this mental or tacit construction, save
me, or give me this or that by thy prayers, by thy merits. Are these the
blessings then which they crave by his merits? If so, what need is there to
pray to God for them? For, if they be his by right of purchase, he may dispose
of his own at his pleasure. But what warrant have they for this form of
prayer? Bellar. ibid.
Nazianzene so speaks in his funeral Oration for S. Cyprian; and so does the
universal Church in the hymns to the blessed Virgin. The more universal the
practice has been, the more universal should the reformation be. For albeit
every Romanist which uses the forementioned prayers, should use withal that
mental expression or tacit reservation of his own meaning (which Bellarmine
commends unto him as an Antidote) to the Saints and himself: yet for all this,
he should truly and really dishonor God by verbally honoring the Saints with
His glorious Attributes. Yea the denial of real honor to the Saints fully
answerable to the titles, which he gives them, must needs be as true and real
a mockery of them, as it would be to a Baron or Gentleman, if their Inferiors
should thus petition the one; I beseech your Majesty or excellency, that is,
your Lordship or Honor to hear me; or thus salute the other, God bless your
Honor, meaning your Worship.

3. But is it credible that either Nazianzene, or the Romish Church took that
speech of S. Paul for their pattern, which Jesuits now use ( post factum) for
their defense. Paul says of himself that he saved some, not as God, but by
his ministry of preaching and praying. Where says Paul so? Romans 11. verse. 13,
14. I speak to you Gentiles in as much as I am the Apostle of the Gentiles; I
magnify my office, if by any means I may provoke to emulation them which are
my flesh, and might save some of them: and 1 Cor. 9. I am made all things to
all men, 1 Cor. 9. ver. 12.
that I might at least save some. Durst Bellarmine or any of the Romish Church
have sung the former hymn in solemn service unto S. Paul, or have enstyled
him Savior in their devotions and religious prayers; upon this warrant of his
own words? To have entitled him Savior, much more to have prayed unto him for
saving-health, had been a great deal more inordinary construction, than to
have said Iam Paul's, though that in his doctrine were to devide Christ. The
first sound of such sacrilegious congratulations in his cares, would have rent
his heart, and made him tear his clothes with greater indignation, than he did
at the Lycaonians idolatrous behavior toward him when they took him for
Jupiter. He had seen as plentiful fruits of his Apostolical function, as
any other had done. Yet all he ascribed or would permit to be ascribed unto
himself, was pain and travail; he was (...), a co-worker with God, who in
the efficacy or increase (to whose doner the worship of invocation is only
due) could have no sharer. In respect of these neither was the external work,
nor the visible workman any thing.

4. But be it granted, for disputations sake, that the title of ministerial or
secondary Savior, might well have become S. Paul, whilst he travailed in the
Gospel: yet seeing the chief means he used for others safety, was submission
of his high calling to their frailty, and symbolizing with their weakness;
the excellency of his ministerial function or Apostolical power, did not
enlarge it self but rather expire by his dissolution. The ground of this our
Assertion is so firmly laid by our Apostle him self, that, whiles the world
stands, it shall never be shaken by any assault the Romish Church can make
against it: nor shall any distinction which the Jesuits can frame, be ever
able to undermine the Conclusion which we ground upon it. Thus we argue: Had S
Paul's favor with God been so mightily improoved by death, as they contend,
and his affectionate notice of his followers necessities continued the same or
greater; His speedy dissolution or departure to Christ had been as expedient
for the Churches which he planted, as for himself. For so (to use the Romish
language) they might have had a patron in the Court of Heaven, the incessant
intercession of whose effectual prayers might have procured pardon for their
sins, and plenty of teachers to water what he had planted. But S. Paul has
expressly said it, and we must undoubtedly believe it, that to Heb. 7. ver. 25.
live for ever to make incession for us, is the essential prerogative of the
unchangeable Priesthood, the peculiar title of the everlasting Priest. Ioh. 16.
ver. 7.
It was expedient for his disciples that he should leave them and go to his
Father, otherwise that Comforter would not have come unto them. But it never
was expedient for any Church or Congregation, to be deprived of their godly and
faithful Pastors bodily presence. The only reason of this diversity is,
because Christ lives for ever, and has an everlasting Priesthood; whereas
Saints and godly men which are departed this life, although they still live
unto God, are, (touching intercession or other acts of their ministerial
function) dead to us. Upon these advantages we may here constrain Cardinal
Bellarmine either to call in his unanswerable argument (as he enstyles it) or
to admit of that answer to it, which our Writers have given: Why the invocation
of Saints should be unlawful or unprofitable, no other reason can be alleged
but either because they cannot hear the prayers which we make unto them, or
will not pray as heartily to God for us, as they did when they lived, or are
not in such favor with God to obtain what they ask. Bellar. l. 1. de
Sanctorum beatitud. cap 19. I only reply; if Saints deceased can both hear
our prayers, and be sooner heard of God for our good, which (as our Adversaries
suppose) they still tender in particular so much the more then living here they
did, as their charity is increased: it is expedient for the Church militant
that the godliest and best Ministers die the soonest, and the fastest. For so
of ordinary Pastors they may become more than Apostles, able to heat the
prayers and undertake the patronage of many thousands, with whom they could
neither have commerce or conference while they lived in the flesh.

5. How utterly these men evacuate the eternity of Christ's Priesthood as well
by continuing a successiue multiplicitie of sacrificers to reiterate his
everlasting sacrifice here on earth, as by joining other everlasting
intercessors with him, as his assistants in heaven, is an argument more
directly pertinent to some Articles following in the Creed. My present
observations must be limited by the references to the maine conclusion
intended. [ That the Romish Church in her public Liturgy, does often give
the realtie of Christ's sovereign titles, sometimes the very titles themselves
unto Saints, sometimes leaving not so great difference between the divine
Majesty or glorious Trinity and other celestial inhabitants, as the
Heathens did betwixt their greater and lesser Gods, or as we do between
ordinary Princes and their subjects.] Ty^urne or Bedlam would quickly take
order with him, that would seek, or suffer an act of the prerogative royal
(as granting of pardons, creation of Barons, calling of Parliaments) to pass
jointly in the name of the Kings Majesty, of the Queens or Princes, and in
the name of all the officers of the Court and Commonwealth, descending as low
as Bay liffes, Constables, Churchwardens, and Tythingmen. And the Pope would
take it as an heretical diminution of his plenary power, if every Bishop
should receive his Pall, every sinner his indulgence, every soul in Purgatory
her dismission, in his Holiness name, and in the name of all his Cardinals,
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons. Yet in the translation of a Christian soul from
this life to a better; after they have directed their supplications to all the
several orders of Saints for their intercession with God; in the very agony of
death they draw their safe conducts in this form: Depart out of this world in
the name of God the Father Almighty, who has created thee; in the name of
Jesus Christ the son of God, who suffered for thee; in the name of the holy
Ghost, who was powered forth upon thee; in the name of Angels and A^changells;
in the name of thrones and dominations, in the name of principalities and
powers; in the name of Cherubims and Seraphims; in the name of Patriarckes and
Prophets; in the name of holy Apostles and Evangelists; in the name of holy
Martyrs and Confessors; in the name of holy Monks and Eremites; in the name of
Virgins, and of all Gods Saints and Saintesses. This day let thy soul be in
peace and thy habitation in holy Sion Brevia^^u^ Roman. de ordine
commendatu^nis an^mae Deo.
. If thus they pray with their lips only, they mock God as well as the
Saints. If thus they pray with internal affection of heart and spirit, they
really worship Saints with the self same honor, wherewith they honor God.
Nor is it credible, they do intend, or possible (though intended) they should
in one and the same prayer or continued supplication, produce the like change
in the affections of their heart and spirit, as an Organist does in Music by
changing the stoppes. Or though they could produce the like change in every
several ejaculation, yet the honor wherewith they honor God and the Saints
should continue still of the same kind, and differ only in degree or
modulation. Or might they not with less impiety admit a Christian soul into
the Church militant, than translate it into the Church triumphant in other
names besides the Trinity? They might better baptize them, only in the name
of God the Father, and of S. Francis, S. Bennet, and S. Dominicke, etc. without
any mention of God the son and holy Ghost, rather than join these as
commissioners with them, in dismissing souls out of their bodies. To censure
this part of their Liturgy as it deserves, it is no prayer but a charm,
conceived out of the dregs and relics of Heathenish Idolatry, which cannot
be brought forth but in blasphemy, nor be applied to any sick soul without
sorcery.

CHAPTER XXIX.
Proouing by manifest instances and confessed matters of fact, that the Romish
Church does really exhibit diverse parts of that honor or worship unto Saints,
which by her confession is only due unto God. That her nice distinctions of
Dulia and Latria, or the like, argue no difference at all in the reallitie or
substance of the Worship, but (at the most) diverse respects of one and the same
Worship.

1. THe more upon these occasions I look into the Roman Liturgy, the more I
am enforst to commend the Heathen Philosophers ingenuous reply to Anaxarchus
sophistical allegations, for honoring Alexander as a God. Equidem Anaxarche,
Alexandrum nullo plane honor, qui quidem hominibus convenia^, indignum esse
censeo. Caeterum statuta sunt inter homines divini and humani honoris
discrimina; cum multis alijs rebus, tum Ten plorum exaedificatione, and
statuarum erectione. Dijs enim delubra consecramus, ijsque sacra facimus and
libamus. Rursus hymni deorum sunt, lauds hominum sed non cum adoratione
coniunctae. The Greek is, (sed praecipue adorationis ritu.) Hominibus siquidem
a salutantibus oscula dantur; eos ve^o edita loco positos ne contingi quidem
fas est, ideo adoratione coluntur. Tripudia etiam salutationesque dijs fiunt
and paeanes cant^ntur. Neque vero mirum id est, qu^m ex dijs alij alijs honores
tribuantur, and quidem heroibus alij etiam ipsi a diuinis honoribus diversi.
Non est igitur consentaneum haec omnia inter se confundere, neque hominem
nimijs honoribus supra humanum modum extollere, and deo^ ad statum ab illorum
dignitate alienum redigere, vt nimirum eodem quo homine^ cultu colantur. Neque
enim pateretur Alexander privatum aliquem regios honores electione s^ffragusque
illegiti^^s vsurpare. Multo itaque iustiu^ deos indignaturos, si quis mortalium
divin^s h^n^^es sibi arroget, aut ab alijs delatos sustineat. Arrianus de
Expedit Alexand^^. l. 4. page 86.
I for my part (says Callisthenes) do not think Alexander unworthy of any
honor which is convenient to be given to men. But the differences betwixt
Honor humane and divine are determined, Cap. 29.
as by many other things, so by the building of Temples, by the erection of
Statues. We consecrate shrines and offer sacrifice and incense to the Gods:
unto the same Gods Hymns are due, as praises are to men. But the honor due to
the Gods is specially differenced by the manner of adoration. Men are greeted
with kisses; but the Gods are saluted with adoration, being placed so high that
we may not touch them. Unto the Gods likewise we express our joyful
thankesgiving in solemn dances and songs. And no marvel, if the honor which
we give to Gods be distinguished from the honor which we give to men, seeing
diverse kinds of honors are allotted to diverse Gods. The honor given to
Heroickes deceased differs from honor truly divine. It is therefore
unfitting to confound these; unfitting to extol men by lavish honor above
humane state, or to coarctate the Gods unto a state unfitting their dignity,
or to worship them after the same manner as we do men. Nor could Alexander
himself be well pleased, if a private man should usurp royal titles by
election, or unlawful suffrages. Much more justly will the Gods be moved with
indignation, if any mortal man shall either arrogantly affect, or willingly
accept divine honors, though proffered by others.

2. Yet thinks the Romanist either God will not be angry, or else his anger may
be quickly appeased with the mental conception of former distinctions never
uttered. Albeit they make the Virgin Mary Queen of Heaven and Mother of
mercy, and bestow his other best titles (in hymns or solemn service) upon
the Saints: it must suffice him that some few other parts of divine honor
mentioned by this Heathen, as offering of sacrifice, erection of Temples and
Altars, are reserved only to his Majesty. These, by their own confession, are
proper acts of that religious worship, which may not be communicated to any
Saint or Angel; and so are vows conceived in solemn and legal form. Let us
see then how well their practices suit with their speculations in these points,
and what need the devotions of vulgar breasts have of sublimated brains to
preserve them from the poison of damnable and more than Heathenish Idolatry.
If I should ask one of them, What service is this you celebrate to day? Whose
Church is this wherein you celebrate it? they would make no scruple to say the
one was S. Peter's Church, the other his Mass. If both Church and Mass do
bear his name, and be consecrated to his honor, may they not offer that unto
S. Peter which is S. Peter's; and present him with a sacrifice upon that Altar
which bears his image and superscription? No^ they may not offer a sacrifice,
save only to God. But they may offer it unto God in honor of S. Peter; or in
testimony that S. Peter is the patron of that place, or of such as in it
supplicate unto him, or in token of their desire that his intercession for them
might be accepted.

3. Or to gather the resolutions into such distinct terms, as younger or
weaker capacities may strike at their errors without injury to the truth which
they would make us believe does underprop them: Deus est vnicus terminus, non
vnicus finis sacrificij oblati; God is the only party to whom the sacrifice is
offered or solemnly presented, not the only party whose honor is by the
offering or solemnity intended. They have as true an intention to honor S.
Peter as to honor God, though in a lower degree; and (for any construction I
can make of their assertions) S. Peter's honor though in it self less, is
notwithstanding more specially and principally intended. So that by offering
sacrifice unto God only, we may in some respects grant they honor God more
than S. Peter, in others we must accuse them for honoring S. Peter more than
God. For illustrating this collection, I will alter only the matter and
persons, not a whit of the form of the Action or order of intention. The case
is the same, as if some great Family or Corporation should tender the King a
royal present in most submissiue and loyal manner, but petition withal to
have some favorite, whom they most affect, made Baron or Governor and
Fee-farmer of the City or Territories which under his Majesty they inhabit,
reserving all rents and services, aunciently due out of the lands, unto the
Crown; or ready, if need were, a little to raise them. A wise King in this
case would need no spectacles to discern the true reason of their professing
more than ordinary loyalty to his Highness, at this time and place, to have
bin their extraordinary affection unto the party whose honor they sought for
their own patronage; unto whose coffers more gain were likely to accrue for
the propriety of the revenewes granted, than could come to the Chequer from
the Fee-farme or Royalty. And the Romanists (I am persuaded) would be more
ready to deride our simplicity than to commend our charity, if we could not
suspect that S. Peter in Rome, S. Dennis in Paris, S. James in Compostella, the
Lady Marie in Loretto, or other worse deserving Saints in the places whereof
they are Patrons, in the Churches and Temples dedicated to their memory, did
not gain a greater portion of the peoples hearts, and a truer propriety in
their devotions, under the title of Dulia, than is reserved for the great King,
under the title of Latria. If then we consider not the physical form of the
sacrifice only, but the end and circumstances of the whole service, they
honor God with greater titles of Religion, but with less realtie of religious
respect or affection, then they do those Saints, whom they conceive as their
immediate Lords, their peculiar Patrons or especial Benefactors. As for the
Son of God, seeing they make him the matter of the offering wherewith they
hope to induce his Father to grace the Saints, (by granting immunitie unto
themselves under their patronage and protection) they no way honor, but (as
much as in them lies) disdignifie him in such solemnities. The indignity
offered by them unto Christ, though for its measure much less, is in proportion
much what the same, as if a saucie petitioner or dishonest supplicant, should
seek to work the King to grant his petition for his own gain and his
friends honor, by presenting his Majesty with rarest Jewels of the Prince
his only Son, without his express consent, or upon presumptuous hopes of
his presumed approbation.

4. But let us take their confession concerning the other points proposed in
their own language. We demand, whether S. Peter have no better interest in the
Churches and Altars that bear his name, of which his image has taken
possession, than he has in the service that is celebrated in the one, or in
the sacrifice that is offered up on the other? Here such as join hands and
hearts in the repairing of the new Babell, are somewhat divided in their
language. Some grant the tenor of his interest to be one and the same in both,
and therefore make the same plea they did before, [That one Church is called S.
Peter's, another S. Mary's, admits (in their doctrine) this exposition; Both are
dedicated unto God, but the one in the name and memory of S. Peter, the other
of S. Marie: or they are dedicated unto God, to the end that they may use the
intercession of S. Peter or S. Marie in that place]. As the Mass is called S.
Peter's mass, not that the sacrifice is offered unto him, but unto God, by way
of thankesgiving for the grace bestowed on S. Peter, and Peter withal may be
there prayed unto as their Patron and Advocate with God Bellar. l. 3. de
beatitud. Sanct. cap. 4.
. This, says Bellarmine, is a godly exposition and conformable to the rites
which the Church observes in the consecration of Temples. For sometimes the
Bishop, amongst the prayers belonging to such solemnities, professes that he
consecrateth the Temple in honorem Dei, and nomen talis, vel talis Sancti; to
the honor of God and name of such a Saint: but directly to God under the title
of Latria, to the memory of the Saint under the title of Dulia. But Bellarmine
foresaw, that their practice and form of consecration, well examined, might be
enforced to confess more then this exposition implies; and upon this foresight
has framed another more wary plea to our indictment: for whose better success
he had conceived his fourth proposition concerning the right use or end of
building Temples in these terms; Sacrae domus non solum Deo sed etiam
Sanctis, etc. Sacred palaces or religious houses may be lawfully built and
dedicated not only to God but unto Saints. To bring in this conclusion in due
place and order, not Fathers and Counsels only but holy Scriptures also must
be wrested to countenance blasphemy; and blasphemy (having put on an impudent
face upon presumption of their warrant) must man in such heathenish Idolatry,
as not so guarded would blush or be afraid to appear amongst Christian
spectators. Salomons Temple (says he) was erected not only to be an house of
prayer or of sacrifices, but to be withal an habitation for the Arc, as
David's intendment (1 Chronicles. 17. Psalm. 132.) and Salomons accomplishing of it (2 Chronicles. 5. cap:) bare manifest record. This being proved which no man denies,
he thus assumes: The same or greater honor is due to the sacred relics of
Christ and his Saints, than unto the Mosaicall Arc. Ergo, it is as lawful to
erect a Temple over the sepulcher of Christ, as over the Arc: and if over the
sepulcher of Christ, then over the sepulcher of the Saints, for there is one
and the same reason in all: they differ only secundum magis and minus. He
adds withal, (lest the people should be too scrupulous) that under the name
of sacred relics he co^prehends not only the bones or garments of Saints, but
the places where they suffered, where they dwelt, or did any famous act; as S.
Cyprian had two sacred houses erected to him, one where he suffered, another
where his body lay. Nay such houses may be erected to Saints in any place;
only to preserve or enlarge their fame or memory, by retaining their Images or
names, to the intent that such as enter into them being put in mind of their
duty by the image, or known name of the Temple, may remember Saint Peter,
etc. and worship him in that place as their patron, and pray to him.

5. He has brought the point to this issue for us; Temples may not be erected
to any besides God formaliter, they may be erected to Saints materialiter; that
is, one and the self same sacred house, which is a true Temple, and wherein
sacrifices are offered up to God, may be erected in honor of this or that
Saint, but not as it is a Temple. How then? As it is a sacred seat or
receptacle of the Saints body, or as a monument of his fame: as (that he may
justify one impiety by another) one and the same stone is both an Altar and a
Tombstone, or Sepulcher; an Altar in as much as they offer sacrifice upon it
unto God, a Tombstone or Sepulcher in as much as it covers the body of some
Martyr. For (as he tells us for our learning) all Altars are Sepulchers or
Tombstones of Saints. His final resolution is, [As the same stone is rightly
dedicated to this or that Saint, not in consideration that it is an Altar, but
in consideration that it is a Sepulcher: so the same house, which is a Temple,
is truly dedicated to the Saint; non sub ratione Templi, sed sub ratione
Basilicae (not as a Temple but as a sacred Palace, for the Saint to rest or to
be worshipped in). Now, as it would be plain Idolatry to erect Altars to
Saints, but no Idolatry to erect the same stones unto them which are Altars: so
it would be Idolatry to erect Temples to Saints, under this respect, that they
are Temples; but no Idolatry to erect the same houses unto them, which are
Temples, not as they are Temples, but as they are sacred Palaces]. Did the
Masons or Carpenters, or such as set them a-worke about a thousand year ago,
either lay the foundation, raise the walls, or put on the roofes of Temples,
which they built to Saints, by the rule of this distinction? If they did not,
they committed gross Idolatry. And, for ought I can gather from Bellarmines
Apology, he makes no scruple to confess that Roman Catholics do still
commit Idolatry; all his care is to avert the imputation of committing this
foul sin quatenus ipsum, or formally, as it is Idolatry, that is, of
polluting their souls with it by art and method, or of begetting it by
express conceit of it is essential difference; with which none but the
Schoolmen have especial acquaintance. Nor will I (for mine own part) charge
them thus deeply, for dedicating Temples unto Saints* it suffices me to
prove, that they are in this point plain downright Idolaters. But I would
gladly in the next place, be resolved how they can acquit themselves from the
imputation of committing Idolatry quatenus Idolatry, in solemnizing Vows to
Saints.

CHAPTER XXX.
Solemn Vows are by confession of the Romish Church, parts of that worship,
which her Advocates call Latria. The Romish Church does worship Saints with
solemn vows, not by accident only, but by direct intendment.

1. IT was a received doctrine in Aquinas his time, that Vows were part of
divine Worship, or cultus latriae. And whereas their custom of vowing
obedience unto Governors, might seem to impeach them of giving that to men
which belonged only to God: He divides vows into their matter and form;
bequeathing the former part to glorified Saints and living men, the latter
only unto God. This arbitrament betwixt God and living men (though such as the
harlot, before Solomon, did plead for) likes Lib. 3. cap. 9. de cultu Sanctorum.
Bellarmine very well, because in vowing obedience to Prelates or Governors,
men intend not to honor them but God. On the contrary, he that vows a fast or
pilgrimage unto Saints; intends directly to honor them with religious worship.
Unto this part of Aquinas his arbitrament, Bellarmine will not subscribe.
Because Caietan before him had condemned Aquinas his resolution out of the
mouths of preaching Friars. For they, whilst they profess or promise the
material part of their vow to men, tender the formal parts as directly to
Saints as unto God. I vow to God, to S. Marie, and all the Saints, that I will
faithfully obey my Governor. Caietans answer to the difficulty proposed, is
so slight that it seems he cared not much, if there had been no
practitioners in this kind, or that their practice might want Patrons. Somewhat
notwithstanding he was to say for fashion sake. But his distinction is so
acute, that indeed he denies any vows or promises to be truly made unto
Saints; as they are reasonable creatures, or for their internal excellency.

2. Bellarmine to avoid this scandal; avoucheth it as a general agreement
amongst all Catholics, that they make promises as directly and truly unto
Saints as unto God. For if it be lawful to build sacred ^^alaces, to erect
Sepulchers, and burn Lamps before them, why should it not be as lawful to
make solemn promises unto them? Thus one impiety being allowed and admitted
into their Church, must in charity approve another. Now every promise that is
made to God or Saints deceased, is a formal vow, as he very well declares; nor
can the Church, by his acknowledgement, make the same plea in this case as in
the former, that their vows are directed only unto God, though in memory and
honor of the Saints; for they are terminated jointly and directly unto God, and
to the Saints. Here (methinkes) they should invoke the aid of some Saint or
other, to untie this knot, which he vainly thinks will untie it self, by the
former distinction. The promise (says he) is indeed one and the same, but is
not made after one and the same manner: They bind themselves unto God, in token
of their thankfulness toward him as the fountain of all good, and in
recognition of blessings received from him, as from the first author of all
things. And, by this apprehension or recognition, solemn promises made to him
become cultus latriae, proper acts of divine worship. But they bind themselves
unto Saints only in sign of their thankfulness toward them, as Mediators or
Intercessors by whose favor they receive blessings from God; and this
acknowment of their subordination unto God, makes the same vow or solemn
promise unto them, to be but cultus duliae. But the question was, whether
solemn vows be not essential parts of latrie, and if such they be (as most
of their Church do hold them to be:) no mental respect or consideration of
such as make, allow, or authorize them, can transform them into Cultus dulia.
Besides; the distinction is naught: this great Champion did either evidently
misapply it to this difficulty, or else did much amiss, in not applying it to
the former. For might he not as well have said; They erected Temples or offered
sacrifice to Saints in sign of thankfulness to them, as Mediators or
Intercessors; but unto God only as to the first fountain of blessings
received.

3. It is confessed by our adversaries that the name of Vow in sacred writ or
dialect, always imports a promise made to God, and yet they think it no
Idolatry to perform that religious service unto Saints which the holy Spirit
has appropriated unto God; because the Canon of Scripture was accomplished
before the Custom of vowing unto Saints begun, (or rather the authority of it
was abandoned by introduction of this custom, if not before.) This reply
seems to insinuate, that if Gods Spirit had committed ought to writing since
vows were enacted, as parts of religious worship due unto Saints deceased, He
would have fitted his language to their custom. How ever, this answer takes
but a part of our objection, though more by much than this Goliath was able to
deal with. For we argue not only from the use of the word in Scripture, but
from the reason, why it is so used. Now the reason why vows in Scripture are
appropriated unto God, is because they are a more immediate and especial part
of his worship than sacrifices are. He that offered legal sacrifices of his
Cattle or of the fruits of the earth, did thereby testify his gratitude unto
God, as unto the supreme Owner of these, and sole author of all other
blessings: and as unto him which gave man power to gather substance. But he
that vowed unto the Lord, did acknowledge him to be the searcher of the heart,
the just avenger of perfidious negligence; the bountiful rewarder of
fidelity, and diligence in his service. Hence it was, that legal sacrifices,
were oftimes the matter of religious vows. The form of religious worship or
service and the immediate end of such sacrifices, was See Psalm. 50. ver. 7.
etc. and the 14.
performance of the vows; whose neglect plenty of sacrifices could not
recompense. But fidelity in performance of what was lawfully vowed, did please
God without the offering of sacrifice. And whether the vow were conceived out
of gratitude unto God for benefits past, or out of sorrow for sin, or former
ingratitude: the religious observance of it was a true part of that living
sacrifice or reasonable service, which our Romans 12. ver. 1.
Apostle requires at our hands, as the pattern or prototypon of Leviticall
offerings. May we then offer any part of our reasonable service to any other
besides God, unto whom only his people were to offer legal sacrifices? The
apprehension of greater excellency in God than in the Saints, can no more alter
the nature of the service, than the different titles of the King and his Nobles
do alter the nature of the debt or tenor of the obligation, wherein we stand
bound to him and them jointly. Now Romish Votaries bind themselves by one and
the same solemn act to God and the Saints jointly. And is it possible that the
performance of one and the same act, should be Dulia in respect of the one, and
Latria in respect of the other? Rather, as sometimes it falls out, that one of
meanest place may be principal creditor in bonds jointly made to him and
others: so in some cases, as in vows of Virginity solemnly made to God, and
to the blessed Virgin jointly; of pilgrimage to Saints (whom they conceive as
special patrons of those places) the Saints shall have the principal interest
in the Votaries affections.

4. The Subdit statim Tharasius ex Anastasioratione^. Quid enim aliud est, quam
honoris alicui exhibiti veluti emphasis, adoratio? Latria vero nequaquam. Ac fi
dicat, ideo adorare licet, quia adoratioest emphasis, hoc est, symbolum et
signum interioris cultus, et submissionis; et tale signum imaginibus
praeberipotest: Latriam vero tribuere nequaquam licet. Nam cum hac sit seruitus
in spiritu, et non in solo signo co^sistat, imagini suli, qua non sentit,
nonpotestexhiberi. Subiungit; Neque etiam licebit (...) (nempe imagiues) quod
est proprie Deum adorare. Verbum enim (...) deprecari, vota nuncupare, vel
peragere significat: quod soli Deo fieripotest. Vasque^. lib. 2. de Adoratione.
Disput 8. c. 12. number 368.
Fathers in the second Nicene Council, and others more ancient whose
authority they pretended for establishing that abominable decree (as one of
our Historians many years before Luther was borne, does censure it;)
concerning Image Worship, did divide Adoration into two parts, external and
internal.

1. The external (as they describe it by note of submission or emphaticall
expression of affection) they did assign unto Images.

2. The internal adoration or adoration in spirit, which they call Latria,
they appropriated unto God. And of this internal adoration or Latria, they
make intercession or nuncupation of vows essential parts. But Bellarmine
after he had prooved by authority and reason, that solemn vows are parts of
Latria, and after he had given it us for granted by their whole Church, that
the worship of Latria is proper only unto God; finally attempts to share this
worship of Latria (which is a great deal more indivisible than was our
Saviors garment) between God and his Saints. But sooner shall the Jesuits be
able to teach an Art of dividing indivisibilities, or of setting unity at
variance with it self, than to justify this division, or sharing of vows
betwixt God and his Saints. We shall be ready to justify and maintain these
inferences against them (if need shall require, or occasion be offered) by
logical remonstrance. If the worship of Latria, and in particular the
nuncupation of vows be proper only unto God, than he or they, or whosoever
they be, every person to whom Latria or nuncupation of vows is solemnly
tendered (either alone or jointly unto God) is a God in their esteem that so
tender or make them. But the Roman Catholic does directly and solemnly offer
his vows to S. Dominicke, S. Francis, and S. Bennet, etc. Therefore S.
Dominicke in his divinity is a God, S. Francis a God, S. Bennet a God; so is
every Saint to whom he makes his vows jointly with God. To say they
acknowledge the three persons in the blessed Trinity to be a greater God than
all or any of these persons mentioned, as it cannot excuse them from Idolatry,
though it were true; so neither can it in their divinity be absolutely true,
but only in part. It is true in respect of the apprehension or esteem of
divine powers, which is seated only in the brain, untrue in respect of the
esteem or religious respect of divine powers, which is seated in the heart or
affection.

CHAPTER XXXI.
That the apprehension of different excellencies in God and the Saints
deceased, cannot prevent the contagion which men's souls are naturally apt to
take, by making solemn prayers and vows jointly to God and to the Saints.

1. RELIGION, as Bellarmine well observes, consists not in the apprehension
or speculatiue acknowledgement of excellency in the party worshipped, but in
the inclination of the will or affection. The former is, as the warrant, the
latter as the execution. And as sentence may be often given, but not executed;
so may this apprehension be in the understanding without the inclination of the
will or affection; as greatest schoolmen have not been always devoutest
Saints. Or again, as many things are acted upon presumption of some custom,
without just or express warrant of law; so the inclination of the will (in
which the nature of religious worship in their divinity consists) does often
prevent the distinct or right apprehension of the understanding; as many things
are often most affected, sometime or other by all of us, which the
understanding seasonably consulted, would not esteem the worthiest of our best
affection. And is there any likelihood that he, which conceiues a vow in one
and the same thought, and professes it with one and the same breath, jointly
to God, to the blessed Virgin, and to other Saints, should scholastically
distinguish their several excellencies or proper titles, and proportion the
degrees of several worships to them? The very terms whereby they express
them as Latria, Dulia, Hyperdulia, argue only difference in the apprehension
of the object; no diversity of internal habits or graces in the heart; much
less diverse inclinations of the will, or elevations of the mind and spirit,
wherein religious worship does consist. Or admit the apprehension of Gods
excellencies and the Saints were always express and distinct, and had
several degrees or ranks of internal affection, exactly proportioned unto
them, and expressly intended in the conception or first profession of the Vow;
it is no way credible, that our speculatiue conceits or apprehensions of the
understanding should carry their correspondent affections so level and
parallel in the practice or performance, as they should not intermingle, or one
cross another. We see in other cases of common life, wherein the danger in all
likelihood is much less, how quickly our affections flag in pursuit of those
marks, whereto our soaring contemplations did first direct them. No man's heart
in his first aim is set on money for it self, but as it is the viaticum to
some better end. And yet how rare a thing is it, to see a man much acquainted
with this metal, not to affect it as his God, to whose service he consecrates
his best intentions? True felicity is the center whereto all our thoughts do
naturally sway, but most men's cogitations, are usually drencht in the dregs
of misery and baseness, being drawn awry or pulled down by the contagious
filth which their senses have sucked in from too much familiarity with their
natural objects.

2. And shall not the affectionate apprehension of such excellency as these men
ascribe unto Saints whom they conceit as live spectators of their inward
thoughts and outward carriage, get much greater attractiue force, than gold or
pearl can have over their souls; these being daily powered out unto them in
prayers, in vows, and other enticing issues of devotion? Especially, seeing
their worship of what kind soever, is not intended only as a mean or passage
to the worship of God, but as the mark or scope of that religious affection,
which they call Dulia. Or admitting there were a twofold affection or
inclination of the will, (as they imagine) it were impossible that this
inferior one which they call Dulia seizing so heartily upon the Saints, should
not interrupt the others flight toward God, and misperswade men that his
worship did consist in devotion toward them; as men are drawn as it were in
a dream to think felicity is seated in those means which are subordinate
and subservient to it. Finally it would so fall out in this case especially, as
by corruption of nature it generally does in others: Communia negliguntur, The
common good though most magnified is most neglected: and, Qui multis benefacit,
a nemine gratiam reportat, Public benefactors, though their bounty extend in
large measure to each particular, are less remembered or respected, than such
as gratify us in our private superfluous desires, though perhaps to the
prejudice of others necessities. Thus, howsoever the divine excellency, as
well in respect of it self, as of the benefits flowing from it to all mankind,
might still be most admired in every man's speculatiue apprehension or conceit;
yet in as much as he is good to all without respect of persons, few or none
will respect him so much in their affections, as otherwise they would, if every
one may have his supposed private benefactors, or the inhabitants of several
places their peculiar patrons in heaven. The distinction of Dulia and Latria,
though ministered fasting to such as vow fasts or pilgrimages unto Saints, will
not purge their hearts (especially if they be rude and illiterate) from that
gross humor which Tullie observed in the Alabandenses, or See Section. 3. cap.
16.
Cominaeus in the Inhabitants of Pauia. If such as builded them Cities or
endowed their Churches with lands, may have their Images curiously wrought and
adorned to be daily saluted with the same outward signs of submission which
they tender unto God or Christ: the Wisd. 14.
Wise-mans observatio^ is not out of date in respect of these latter days. And
S. Sic apud ipsos legitur: Romani veteres nescio quem Summanum, cui nocturna
fulmina tribuebant, coluerunt magis quam Iovem, ad quem diurna fulmina
pertinebant. Sed post quam Ioui templu^ insigne ac sublime constructum est,
propter adis dignitatem sic ad eum multitudo confluxit, ut vix inueniatur, qui
Summani nomen, quod audire tam non p^test, se saltem legisse memi^^rit. Aug.
lib. 4. de Ciuitate Dei. cap. ^3.
Augustine tells us, that the erection of a stately Temple unto Jupiter
eclipsed the honor of Summanus, who had been held the more honorable God
before.

CHAPTER. XXXII.
A parallel between the affectionate zeal which the Jews did bear unto
Moses and his writings, and the like zeal which the Romanist bears unto
Saints deceased, and their Legends. That the Romanists zeal is obnoxious to
greater hazard of miscarriage, and the miscarriage of his affection more
dangerous by his daily practice of worshipping Images.

1 WHether Images of the Godhead, of the Trinity, or of the several persons,
of Angels or other invisible substances may be lawfully made, whether of these
or other Images any lawful, profitable or pious use be granted to Christians,
which was denied unto the Jews; are parcels of that maine Question, Whether
the second Commandment according to our division were moral or ceremonial;
of which (if God permit) in the exposition of the Decalogue. In the mean time
it is to us, it ought to be to the whole Catholic Church, a great presumption
that the Commandment is one and the same to both Jew and Gentile, of as great
authority now as ever, in that the primitive Church did not reenter upon this
ancient liberty, if at any time it had been free to bow down to graven
Images, to adore the pictures of Gods appearances or of men deceased. The use
of Images in Churches or sacred Liturgies was held so incompatible with
Christian worship of God in spirit and truth; that when Adrian intended to
honor Christ as a God, he commanded Temples to be erected without Images. But
his good purpose wanting effect, the Temples so erected did bear his name not
Christ's, or any other Gods, as wanting Images to take possession of them. And
not their names only, but their revenewes might quickly Escheate unto the
Emperor, without some visible patron to lay some claim unto them. Varroes
testimony ratifies the Wise man's observation in Rome-heathen, and Lampridius in
Rome-Christian. Whether we begin our account from the Law of Nature amongst the
Nations, or from the promulgation of the Gospel, Images were not from the
beginning. Wisdom 14. ver. 12. But after the Church which during the time of
her infancy had kept her virginity unspotted, began in her full age to play
the harlot in vowing, in praying, in erecting Altars and Temples to Saints; the
instinct of her impurity did lead her to use Images, as secular wantons do
lascivious pictures for provoking lust. They were rather the fuel, than the
beginning or first kindling of Rome-Christians spiritual whoredom. Her
downfall into these dregs of Idolatry or soul acts of more than brutish
bestialitie, was the just reward of her wantonness with the Saints. after she
had been betrothed to Christ. That which she falsely pretends for her excuse,
is usually true of secular adulterers or adulteresses. These for the most part
delight in pictures for their prototypons sake, with whose live beauty they
have been taken. And yet many deprived of their Minions real presence by
death or other separation, have been so besotted with doting love of their
resemblances, as to loath the company of their lawful Consorts. Howbeit no
unchaste doting lover did ever tie his fancy with so many loueknotts unto his
Mistress picture, as the Romanist does his soul and spirit unto the Images
which he adores. The maine bond, is Religion it self, the lesser cords are
kissing, bowing, kneeling, imbracements, and pouring forth his very heart
before them. Besides all these, he suffers this peculiar disadvantage in
respect of secular doteards; these commonly have seen their feature whose true
resemblances they joy in; the Romanist never had any acquaintance by sight or
other sense, with the persons of those Saints, unto whose Images he makes all
this love; but frames these material and visible representations of them out
of his own brain or fancy. These and the like circumstances, were they duly
examined by the rules of true Philosophy or known experiment, how quickly the
pursuit of ordinary means does in most cases alienate our desires from the
end unto which we seek to be directed by them; it would appear to be without
the compass of any moral possibility, that the Images which these men make
their visible spokesmen unto the Saints, should not play false with both
parties, and betroth the souls of doting suitors unto themselves, or rather
unto the devil, whose stales indeed they are.

2. But what if some honestly minded understanding Papist should solemnly
swear unto me, that he loves S. Peter, not his Image; or S. Peter himself
much better than the Image which he loves only for his sake: shall not his
religious oath be taken before any man's conjecture, concerning his own
affections? Can any search his heart better than his own spirit can? I will in
charity believe, that he speaks and swears as he verily thinks and is
persuaded. But if out of like Christian charity, (though not toward me, yet
toward himself) he will give me leave to unsold some practique fallacies,
with which his sceptique Catechizers seldom meddle; I shall give him just
reason to mistrust his own thoughts or persuasions, as altogether groundless,
and incapable of any solid truth. Can the most devout Franciscan or
Benedictine, conceit either the truth or fervency of his love unto S. Francis
or S. Bennet, more strongly than the latter Jews did the integrity of their
zeal to Moses? For that Moses sake which they had made unto themselves, they
would have died with greater patience, than a Friar could suffer imprisonment
for S. Francis. But from the true Moses and his doctrine no Heathen under the
Sun were so far alienated in affection as were his successors in place, and
kinsmen according to the flesh, the sons of Aaron and Levi. To have enstamped
their souls and affections with his true and lively Image (whereto alone so
great love might be safely tendered,) the only way had been to have laid his
sacred rules unto their hearts; to have worshipped God in spirit and in truth
as he did. Quite contrary, they fastened their proud affections unto that false
picture or Image of Moses which had surprised their humorous fancies, before
they had seriously consulted their hearts, or examined their imaginations by
the rules of his doctrine.

3. And whether we speak of Adultery carnal or spiritual, the first acts of
both are always committed within us; between the fancy or imagination and
the corrupt humor which sets it a working: every predominant humor or
corruption of the heart, delights to have its picture drawn in the brain. The
fancy is as a shop of devises, to adorn it; and so adorned, it grows mad
with love of its own representation; as Narcissus did with his shadow. Thus
corruption of heart and humorous fancy pollute each other, before they can be
polluted by any external consort: whose use is only to accomplish the delight
conceived, or to confirm this internal combination, between the heart and
the brain; and this service every visible or sensible object well suited to
delightful fancies, succesfully performs. As imagine the Jews might have had
some gaudie picture of Moses in the Temple, whereunto they might have made
daily profession of their love, by kissing, kneeling, and other like tokens,
which the Romanists use unto the relics and Images of every supposed Saint:
how would this practice have fortified their foolish imaginations? every kiss
bestowed upon his picture would have been as a wedding ring or visible
sacrament, for confirming the internal league between their corrupt
affections and humorous fancies. But Image Worship was a brood of impiety so
base and ugly, that the devil durst not so much as mention the match between
it and the latter Synagogue; though he have espoused the modern Romish Church
unto it. Howbeit (so inevitable are his entisements, unless we abandon all
familiarity with his visible baits, when we come to do our homage to God) he
has stolen away the Jews hearts from God and his servant Moses, by drawing
them to such dalliance with the book of the Law, as the Papists use with the
pictures of Saints. Kissing and solemn adoration of Moses his writings, upon
no other occasion than for testification of their allegiance to God by
reverencing them; are held no acts of wantonness, no whorish tricks, by the
faithless Synagogue. And to speak the truth, her protestations of chaste and
loyal love to God and his servant Moses, will sway more with every indifferent
arbitrator, than any oath or other assurance which the Romish church can make
of her fidelity to Christ, or sincere respect to those Saints, whose liuelesse
Images she adores with no less devotion, than the Jew does the dead letter of
the Law. For, though no protestation may be taken against a fact; yet the fact
is more apparently idolatrous in the Romanist, in as much as bowing down to
carved Images, kissing or worshipping them, are expressly forbidden by Moses
his Law, as acts of open and palpable adultery. The last and most miserable
sanctuary, whereto these malefactors closely pursued are glad to betake
themselves, is, That this commandment, Thou shall not bow down to them, was
merely ceremonial, and concerned the Jews only, not Christians. Our
Saviors manifestation in the flesh has manifested the Synagogues pretended
love to God and his Law, to have been but carnal, false and idolatrous, being
indeed a love only of their own humorous superstitious fancies. Now the
symptoms and signs, subsequent as well as antecedent, being the same in the
Romish Church, sufficiently testify her disease to be the same, but more
dangerous, because it is morbus complicatus. Her whole Religion, we may
without offense to God, or wrong to it, though not without some distaste to her
children, fitly define to be a mixture or complication of Jewish vainglorious
delight in worthy Ancestors, and of Heathenish gross and palpable
superstitious worship of their Images, in whose memory she so delights. The
brazen Legendaries by how much more they are in other cases incapable of any
trust, yield us so much greater plenty of canonical proof for evincing the
truth of this definition or observation concerning the original matter of
Rome-Christians disease. So great is the multitude of her Saints, so prodigious
are the manifold miracles wherewith she graceth every Saint in particular
whilst he lived, or his image after his death, and all avouched with such
confidence; that if the old Roman which cut a whetstone in pieces with his pen
knife, were to arbitrate between the Legendaries, the latter Jewish Rabbines,
and the Poetical Encomiasts of heathen Gods or Heroikes, and were bound to
reward every one according to his deserts, he could not bestow less than nine
parts of ten upon the Legendaries. The symptoms notwithstanding of this
vanity, has been perpetual cruelty, as well in the Romanist as in the Jew.
The distempered zeal which the one bare unto a Moses of his own making and
magnification, did empoyson his soul with deadly hate of the true prototypon
exhibited in presence of life, and of his Disciples, which were the live Images
of Moses and Abraham, Abraham's sons as truly by real likeness of holy
life, as by descent of body. The flames of the others wild and ill-kindled
love to such dead Images of Christ and his Saints, as he has fashioned to
please his fancy, has caused his stony heart to boil over with
vnstaunchable bloody malice against the liue-images of Christ, and truest
successors of his Saints; against all within these thousand years that would
not run a whoring with them after their imaginations. As Antiochus Epiphanes
was an illustrious type of the Roman Antichrist, so his short and furious
persecution of the Orthodoxall Jews, was but a Map (though an exquisite one)
of the Papacies continual jealous rage against all that will not bow their
knees unto the Idols, or offer sacrifices upon the Altars, which they have
erected to unknown Gods in holy Temples.

4. This carnal vainglorious love whether unto imaginary Patriarcks in the
Jew, or to fancied Saints in the Romanist, did never swell so much in either,
as when themselves were most unlovely in the sight of God and his Saints. Both
begun to be most affected with their worthy Ancestors praises, when
themselves were least prayse-worthy. As it commonly falls out in other cases,
from a secret instinct or working of hypocrisy, they sought to stuff their
fancies with imaginations of their holiness, from whom they carnally
descended: that as fresh colors bring some comfort to sore eyes, or gentle
plasters ease to festered wounds; so the reflex of their Ancestors integrity
upon their hearts, might in some sort allay the smart of their galled
consciences. And their consciences by this means finding ease, afterward
being lulled asleep with the continual sweet sound of others praises; they
dreamed the substance of that holiness to be rooted in their hearts, whose
shadow or representation floated in their brains: as the L^bro de Somno and
vigilia.
Philosopher observes that a drop of sweet Phlegm tickling the taste in
slumber or light sleep, makes men think they swallowe honey, or that they are
glutted with sweet meats. For wedging in this selfe-deceiving fancy, and
perpetuating the pleasant frenzy whereinto the Jew and Romanist had cast
themselves; the visible monuments of Prophets and Saints did the old serpent
very great service. To embolden the Jew in cruel practices against our Savior
and his disciples, he could devise no fitter sophisme, than to employ them in
adorning the tombs or other like testifications of love unto the Prophets
relics, whom their Fathers had slain; being by this means persuaded that
they loved the Prophets themselves and their doctrine much better than their
Fathers had done; they could not easily mistrust their hate of our Savior for
unjust. For if he had been a true Prophet, would not they which loved all
other Prophets, and justified them before their fathers, have loved him and
maintained his doctrine? The conclusion of these Fallacious collections was,
that from this vain confidence or presumed freedom from guilt of their
fathers sins, they came by degrees to make up the full measure of them, in
crucifying the hope of Israel. The like success has the same fallacy had
over Rome-Christian: she by adoring the Images and relics, by lavish
garnishing the monuments of those Saints, which Rome-heathen had persecuted
with fire and sword, has been fet over by the great Tempter to accomplish and
consolidate that mystery of iniquity, whose shape or surface the irreligious
tyranny of Rome-heathen, had drawn in bloody lines. For mistaking this strong
internal affection which she bare unto her own fancy (and by consequent to
Saints of her own imagination, and to their relics) for an undoubted pledge
of great zeal unto that truth which they professed, her conscience became so
seared with this wildfire, that she persecuted all that did control her
without remorse or scruple, as greater enemies to Religion, than Heretics or
Infidells. And thus the Romanist, as well as the Jew, by rejecting the written
word for the rule of life, have kindled the Almighties wrath and indignation by
those very sacrifices, which without his warrant, they instituted to appease
it. Both of them presumed their zealous costs upon Saints monuments, should
either supererogate for their predecessors sins, or clear all reckonings
between God and themselves, for any wrong done to his servants. This
triumphant confidence in exercising remorslesse cruelty upon all (without
exception) that contradict her idolatrous doctrine, upon presumption that they
are sacrilegious contemners of Gods Saints, is that which the Prophetical
Apostle terms drunkenness with the blood of Saints: she has drunk so deep
of the cup of abominations, that she takes blood for milk, and feeds on it,
as on the food of life. Thus much of the original, the effect and Symptoms
of Romish Phreneticall zeal to Images.

CHAPTER. XXXIII.
By what means the public worship of Images was finally ratified in the
Romish Church. Of the unadvised instructions which Gregory the Great gave unto
Austine the Monk for winning the Pagan-English to the profession of
Christianity.

1 IT is a very observable observatio^ of some See the second tome of Homilies,
page 32, 34.
reverend and learned writers of this age, that the Pope should make the first
step or entry to his oecumenicall Supremacy by stickling for Images against
the Emperor. God (methinkes) by the circumstances of the Story, and this
brief Phocas igitur, vt praemissu^ est, extincto Mauritio eiusque filijs,
Romanorum regnu^ inuadit. Per octo annorum curricula principatus est. Hic,
rogante Papa Bonifacio, flotuit fedem Romanae Ecclesiae, vt eaput esset omnium
Ecclesiarum: quia Ecclesia Constantinop lita^a primam se omnium Ecclesiarum
scribebat. Idem, alio Papa Bonifacio petente, iussit in veieri fan, quod
Pantheon vocabatur, ablatis Idololatriae sordibus, Ecclesiam beatae semper
virginis Mariae, and omnium sanctorum martyrum fieri^ vt vbi quondam omnium non
Deorum, sed Daemoniorum cultus agebat^r, ibi deinceps omnium fieret memoria
Sanctorum. Paubus D^acon. lib. 18 c^ca medium. Vide Fo. cat lib. 1 page 33. It
is likely Phocas did consecrate his Temple upon the same motives, that Domitian
did his to the Heathen Gods. Verisim^le est D^^^^tia^^um nefandes criminibus
spurcatum elui curasse fanorum molitionibus. Nam callida fuit crudesitatis, iti
vt lenitatem tum maxim simularet,cum erat cruciaturus aliquos. Fratris quoque
Titi Imperatoris morte^ accelerasse traditur, quo vno nihil elemantius fuit;
nihil generosius. Forcatulus. lib. 3. page 120.
Comment upon it, would give us to understand; that to serve graven Images was
to fall down and worship Satan; seeing the admission of their worship into
the Church, gave the Pope liverie de seasin of that heritage which Satan
proffered to our Savior, upon condition he would fall down and do him homage
for it. The devil had too much wit, either to tempt our Savior to adore
Images in that age, wherein this service was so detested by the whole seed of
Abraham, or to solicit professed Christians to adore his person immediately;
seeing our Savior had so foiled him in this attempt. His best policy to bring
the visible Church to acknowledge this allegiance to him, was to appoint dumb
Images (with which he had been so well acquainted in time of Gentilisme) his
Feoffees in trust. If any inquire more particularly of the opportunities which
he took for bringing this match about, they were in part these.

2. As in secular States we see those factions which have been expelled the
Court with indignation at one gate, to wind themselves in again by gracious
favor of new alliance at another; especially after the impression of their
vile practices in most men's memories be abated; or after Courtiers begin (as
within the compass of one age they often do) to change the old fashion of
contention: so, that Image service which the primitive Church had abandoned as
the Liturgy of hell, did, out of an affected desire in Christians to hold
correspondencie or to symbolize with the Heathen Barbarians which had seated
themselves throughout Europe, find opportunity to gain readmission into
Temples, to bear the same place and sway in the Courts of God, that they had
done in the Synagogue of Satan. The execution of such instructions as Gregory
the Great gave unto Austine the Monk for winning the Pagan-English unto
Christianity, would in any indifferent Politicians judgment (that duly
considers the estate wherein these western kingdoms then stood,) bring over
Christians unto Paganism, or occasion these Converts to propagate a medley of
both religions to their posterity, whose religion being conquerors was likely
to continue longest. Greg. l. 9. Ep. 71. Cum vero vos Deus omnipotens ad
reverendissimum virum fratrem nostrum Augustinum Episcopum produxerit; dicite
ei quod diu mecum de causa Anglorum cogitans tractaui: viz. quia fana idolorum
destrui in eadem Gente minime debeant; sed ipsam quae in eis sunt idola
destruantur. The use of holy waters as it seems was first borrowed from the
Heathens, and in process of time perverted from a civil to a magical
Ceremony. Ferunt vulgo Tolosates Exuperium pro muris conciona^tem, lustrali
equa sparsos Vandalos t^rruisse ac fugasse, quod praeterire non potui, et si
seueriores fabulis a inumerent Plane constat veteres genere quodam caeremoniae
aquam and ignem adhibuisse, cum aliquos extrudere aut a^cere volebant a suo
consortio; vnde exulibus aqua and igni interdic^baturiure civili and hod
evsurpatur in ijs, quibus sacrorum communium vsu rite verbis conceptum
interdicitur. Idque aduotauit Servius, alij fontemque ignemque ferebant
velatilino, and verbena tempora vincti. Itaque Antistes inter commiluones non
omnino Christi religione imbutos veterem ritum minune n^xium ad arcendos hosts
pro tempore retinuit. Forcatulus. lib. 6. fol. 856.
Aqua benedicta fiat, in eisdem fanis aspergatur, altaria construantur,
reliquiae ponantur: quia si fana eadem been constructa sunt, necesse est vt a
cultu daemonu^, in obsequium very Dei debeant commutari; vt dum gens ipsa eadem
fana sua non videt destrui, de cord errorem deponat, and Deum verum cognoscens
and adorans, ad loca quae consueuit familiarius concurrat. Et quia boves solent
in sacrificio Demonum multos occidere, debet etiam his hac de re aliqua
solennitas immutari: vt die dedicationis vel natalitio sanctoru^ Martyrum,
quorum illic reliquiae ponuntur, tabernacula sibi circa easdem Ecclesias, quae
ex fanis commutatae sunt, de Ramis arborum faciant, and religiosis convivijs
solennitatem celebrent. Nec Diabolo iam animalia immolent, sed ad laudem Dei
inesu suo animalia occidant, and Donatori omnium de satietate sua gratias
referant; vt dum eis aliqua exterius gaudia reservantur, ad interiora gaudia
consentire facilius valiant. Nam duris mentibus simul omnia abscindere
impossible esse non dubium est: quia is qui locum summum ascedere nititur,
gradibus vel passibus non autem saltibus elevatur. Sic Israelitico populo in
Aegypto Dominus se quidem innotuit: sed tamen ei sacrificiorum vsus quos
Diabolo solebat exhibere, in cultu proprio reservavit; vt eis in sacrificio suo
animalia immolare praciperet: quatenus cor mutantes aliud de sacrificio
amittere^t, aliud retinerent: vt et si ipsa essent animalia quae offerre
consueverant, veruntamen Deo haec and non Idolis immolantes, iam sacrificia
ipsa non essent. Haec igitur dilectionem tuam praedicto fratri necesse est
dicere, vt ipse in praesenti illic positus perpendat qualiter omnia debeat
dispensare.

3. A great part (I dare avouch) of his advice had no pattern either in the
Apostles doctrine or practice of the primitive Church. The warrant it self
which he pretends from Gods example in the old Testament (though what was
Gregory the Great if we compare him with the Almighty, that he should usurp
the same authority) is merely counterfeit. God did not only permit the Jews
to offer sacrifice for the hardness of their hearts, but commanded oblations
as part of his service. He required them of Abraham, yea of Abel before the
devil sought them of any heathe^s. Nor had he ever sought them unless God had
required them first: for the devil is Gods ape, and always sollicites men
either to institute such rites unto him as he knows God requires, or (which is
an equivalent sin) to obtrude such unto God, as for the time present he has
abandoned. To have offered such sacrifices (then) unto that holy one, as
Gregory there commands, had been the same sin (only inverted) as to have
offered sacrifice, before Christ's coming, unto Idols. And yet we may presume
that Gregory the Great, was not the most indiscreet reformer of Paganism
amongst all the Roman Bishops or Prelates throughout Europe, that lived during
the time that those Barbarians invaded Christendom or settled themselves
amongst ancient Christians. Nor did the peculiar disposition of the English
draw him to permit greater liberty unto them, than he, his predecessors, or
successors either were enforced, or thought fit to grant unto other Pagans,
whose spiritual salvations they sought, or whose temporal Arms they feared.
And somewhat, in both respects (I grant) might lawfully be tolerated, which to
continue after such extraordinary occasions ceased, was heresy in doctrine,
and Idolatry in practice. For the retaining of those laws as necessary
injunctions for all ages, which the Apostles had commended as expedient only
for late converted Gentiles, was by orthodoxall antiquity adjudged no less
than an heresy in the sect of Nazarens. To have suffered an historical use of
Saints images in Temples, might, upon peculiar circumstances of times have
argued religious discretion in Church governors: but to permit their daily
worship, upon these mentioned or like occasions, was from the beginning most
inexpedient and unlawful. To continue or authorize it so begun is
Idololatrical. And yet as well the very arguments which some pretend for their
religious use, as the circumstances of the time wherein their broken title
prevaild, perswads me they could never have gotten readmission into the Church,
but from such indulgence to Heathen Converts, as Gregory granted to our
Forefathers. Gregory himself as well blames their superstition for
worshipping images in the Church, as Serenus for breaking the images, because
they had been worshipped. He aggravates his fault (nor does that mistaken
example of Ezekia's crushing the brazen serpent any way warrant the exercise of
Serenus zeal) that he had his habitation amongst the Gentiles, quibus pro
lectione pictura est. Lib. 9. Epist. 11. and lib. 7. epist. 110. But now that
custom, by the analogy of laws politic has confirmed their ancient
dignities unto them; the lawfulness of their religious service is by their
worshippers justified partly from reason, partly from instances of like
practices, in the Patriarchs and other godly men.

CHAPTER XXXIIII.
Of the disagreements betwixt the Jesuits themselves in what manner Images may
be worshipped.

1. BELLARMINE, and his second, Sacroboscus, with most others of Aquinas his
latter followers, will have the worship or adoration to be terminated
immediately to the Image, and accomplished in this termination; although so
terminated, it redound unto the honor of the party whose image it is. That
is, (as they express themselves) although they worship the image of God or a
Saint only with reference unto God or the Saint; yet they neither worship the
image of God with the same worship, wherewith they worship God immediately in
spirit, nor the image of any Saint, with the same worship which they would
exhibit to the Saint himself, were he present. This explication they further
illustrate by this similitude; As to be sent in Embassage by a King puts
greater honor upon the Ambassador for the time being, then would fit his mere
personal worth, and yet invests him not with honor royal: so the Image of
God, for the reference it has unto his Majesty, is worthy of greater honor,
than the stuff or workmanship is capable of, yet incapable of that honor
which is due to God. Sacroboscus in defens. Decret. Triden. Council. and
sentent. Bellar. par. 1 page 102.
Some of them add withal that albeit the actual worship which they perform
unto the Image may perhaps proceed from the same habit of Latria wherewith they
worship God: yet it does not follow in their opinion that they should worship
the Image cultu Latriae. The acts, whatsoever the habit be, are much different
and must be expressed in diverse terms; especially seeing in this subject not
only error it self but every least show of error ought with carfulness to
be avoided. At in vitium ducit culpae fuga, si caret art. Their vnscholasticke
wariness to avoyde offense in the words, wherewith they express their
doctrine, draws these factions and their followers to commit real Idolatry
in the practice, as Vasques copiously and very acutely proves against
Bellarmine. Vasques lib. 2. Disp. 8. cap. 8. etc. His arguments we shall by
Gods assistance be able to make good against any solution or evasion that can
be brought by the Cardinals favorites. Sacroboscus would feign have said
somewhat to them, but he had so accustomed himself to play the scoffing
mimicke with the reverend Doctor Whitaker, that he could not leave his wonted
lightness when he met with his fellow Jesuit. Hate and love (says he) of
diverse objects as of good and evil are from one and the same habit, and yet
hate is not love, nor love hate. No more (in his opinion) would it follow, that
we should worship Gods image cultu latriae, albeit the act of worship proceed
from the same habit, wherewith we worship God himself. The grounds of his
illustration have no coherence with the point which he intended to illustrate.
We may rather thus retort; Though neither love be hate nor hate love; yet if
the love of any spiritual good be truly religious, the hate of the contrary
evil must needs be religious likewise, because they proceed from one and the
same habit of religion. So if the acts wherewith we worship Gods image, for the
reference which it has to him, proceed from the same habit of Latria wherewith
we worship God: men must of necessity worship the Image as well as God cultu
Latriae. The rules which Bellarmine and others set for worshipping Images, do
by Vasques his verdict teach the people to act Idolatry. And the method which
Vasques prescribes for ratification of this error, is by Verum modus isle valde
difficilis est, meoque indicio minime ordinarius, Sacrobos. loc. citat.
Sacroboscus his testimony so scholasticke and hard, that ordinary capacities
cannot follow it. Were it not the part of a wise religious moderator (such as
the Pope professes himself to be) to cut of all occasion of subtle disputes
about the manner of worshipping Images, by utter abandoning the matter it self
or substance about which they contend: or at the least to inhibite the people
from all practice in this kind, till their Schoolmen could agree about the
rules or pattern which they were to follow? None of them I think hold the
worshipping of Images to be in it self any necessary part of religion, but
necessary only from the Churches iniunction. All the general that can be
pretended for the convenience of it, can no way countervaile the danger that
will necessarily ensue upon the practical mistakings of their Schoolmens
prescripts: yet the one party must of necessity err in prescribing the
manner how Images must be worshipped. The manner as Vasques and some other more
ancient think, is thus.

Quare and site dicitur, quod vtique adoratur imago, et non secu^dum qua^
volueris ratione^, sed secu^dum eam, qua prototypon relucet in illa; vnde etsi
imago colitur, ratio tamen absolute ipsa non est, quodcolatur; sedres
repraesentata, ac in ea contenta, ratio adorationis est. Et quoniam ficut vnum
de facto non est diuisum ab alio, quoniam etsi prototypon absolute aliud ab
imagine est, vt tamen in ea emicat, ab illa segregatum non est: ita nec amborum
diuisus est cultus aut adoratio, sed vnus idemque vtriusque est, sicut ex
Philosophorum placitis liquet. Si quidem tradunt vnum eundemque motum ad
imaginem, and remcuius imago est, terminari: eo quod and vnum ratio est alteri,
vt vnus integerque constituatur terminus a quo, and vnus denominatur motus.
Ergo non solum fatendum est, fideles in Ecclesia adorare coram imagine, vt
nonmilli ad cadrelum forte loquuntur, sed et adorare imaginem, sine quo
valueris scrupulo: quin and eo illam venerantur cultu, quo and prototypon eius;
propter quod, si illud habet adorari latria, et illa latria; si dulia, vel
hyperdulia, et illa pariter eiusmodi cultu adoranda est. Jacob. Naclantus
Episcopus Clugiensis in cap. 1. Ep. Pauli ad Romans folio 41, 42.
It is rightly said, that even the Image is worshipped, and yet not worshipped
after what manner we list, but in as much as the prototype is represented in
it. Whence albeit the Image be worshipped, yet is not the Image it self the
cause why it is worshipped, but the thing represented by it; and contained in
it, is the cause or warrant of the adoration. And in as much as one of these is
not altogether divided from the other, (for albeit the prototype be in it self
one thing; and the image another, yet in as much as the prototype is
conspicuous in the image, it is not segregated from it:) so the worship of them
both is not divided, but is one and the same, as is apparent from the sentence
of the Surely Aquinas and Naclantus with their followers read Aristotle's book
de S^mno and vigilia, when themselves were in a dream. For he speaks only of
the Phan^asmes, and the objects represented by them. Vide Mirandulam.
Philosophers. For they teach, that one and the same motion is terminated to
the image, and to the object whose image it is, by reason the subordination
betwixt them is such as to make but one entire Te^me of the motion, and the
motion takes its unity or identitie from the unity or identitie of its Term.
Therefore it must be granted, that faithful people in the Church do not only
worship before the image, as some, desirous perhaps to speak cautelously,
affirm, but that they worship the very image without further scrupulositie:
and worship it they do with the self same worship wherewith they worship the
prototype. Wherefore if the prototype be to be worshipped with Latria (as God
is to be worshipped) the image must be worshipped with Latria If the prototype
be to be worshipped with Hyperdulia (as the blessed Virgin by their doctrine
ought to be worshipped) the image likewise is to be worshipped with Hyperdulia.
If the prototype be to be worshipped with Dulia (so ordinary Saints by their
doctrine ought to be worshipped) the Image likewise must be worshipped with
Dulia.

I have made his declaration somewhat more plain in English than it is in
Latin, and yet I think, if any English Roman Catholic should adventure to
practice Image Worship by this Authors rule, he should find Sacroboscus his
words before cited, true, Modus iste valde difficilis est, This manner of
worshipping Images is very hard to be observed by the simple and ruder sort
especially. But leaving this Bishop Naclantus and his declaration, to the
censure of that But Naclantus blows forth his blasphemus Idolatry, willing
Images to be worshipped with the highest kind of adorat^o^ and worship: and
lest such wholesome doctrine should lack authority, he groundeth it upon
Aristotle in his book de somno and vigilia, that is, of sleeping and waking,
as by his printed book noted so in the margin is to be seen: whose impudent
wickedness and idolatrous judgment, I have therefore more largely set forth,
that ye may (as Virgil speaks of Sinon) of one, know all these
Image-worshippers and Idolaters, and understand to what point in conclusion,
the public having of Images in Temples and Churches has brought us:
comparing the times and writings of Gregory the first, with our days, and the
blasphemies of such Idolaters, as this beast of Belial Naclantus is. The 2.
Tome of Homilies, folio 59.
worthy and learned Author of the Homilies concerning the peril of Idolatry,
(who I take it was a reverend Bishop;) the manner of worshipping images which
he took upon him to declare, as Vasquez (who has most diligently read the
diverse Authors, and most accurately sifted their several opinions) tells us,
was both very well known and very ancient, according to the antiquity of
Image Worship and School Divinity. His words with the Authors names avouched
by him I have here set down at large.

Pervulgata et antiqua Theologorum sententia, quam ego veram existimo, est
motum adorationis in imaginem, ita in eius prototypon, et exemplar transire, et
vtrumque sub eandem venerationem cadere; vt nec sola cogitatione, imago per se
sine illo, vel ab eo separata adorari possit: non solum quia necesse est
propter exemplar, tanquam propter rationem remotam, sicut Legatu^ propter
Regem, imaginem coli, sed quia qui imaginem adorat, in ea quoque et per eam
exemplar, vt terminum et materiam proximam adorationis, necessario venerari
debet. Hanc sententiam, ex Theologis scholasticis tradiderunt Alex. 3. p. q.
30. m. 3. ar. 3. sect. 1. S. Thom. 3. p. q. 25. ar. 3, 4, 5. Caietanus et
recentiores aliqui ibidem. Alber. in 3. d. 9. art. 4. Bonavent. eadem d. art.
1. q. 2. and q. 4. S. Thom. eadem d. q. 1. ar. 2. Ricard. ar. q. 2. and 3.
Palud. q. 1. sect. Inquirendo tam de his. Capreol. q. 1. art. 1. conclus. 2.3.
art. 3. ad argumenta contra easdem conclusiones. Almain. q. 1. conclus. 5.
Mayor. 1. qui de cruce Christi dicit, non esse terminum adorationis secundum
se, sed ratione exemplaris: idemque de imagine dicere debet. Eandem sententiam
securi sunt Mars^^n 3. q. 8. art. 2. dub. 2. conclus. 3. Them. Vuald. t^mo 3.
c. 156. number, 6, 7. Ferrariens. 3. contra Gentes, cap. 120. sect. Circa latriae
adorationem. Sotus L. 2. de Just. q. 4. ^rt. 2. in fine, Turre cremata in cap.
Venerabiles de consecrat. dict. 3. Antonius. 3. p. titulo 12. cap. 9. sect. 4.
Hier^nimus Angestus contra Lutherum cens. 10. ad. 3. obiectionem Haereticorum,
versiculo, Hinc enim est colendi modus, and inter Compendiaria d^gmata.
Clichtoueus in propugnaculo ecclesiae. l. 1. cap. 10. Iac^bus Paiua. l. 9.
Orthodoxarum explicationum. sect. At Kemnitius. Franciscus Turrianus. l. 1. pro
canonibus Apostolorum. cap. 25. and l. 3. de dogmaticis Characteribus satis
ante medium; Alphonsus de Castro adversus haereses, verbo, Adoratio. De cuius
modo loquendi, atque Almaini, qui fuit etiam Gregorij Magni, diximus disput. 6.
huius lib. cap. 1. and in hac disputatione cap. 12. nonnihil dicemus. Vasquez.
lib. 2. de Adoratione, disput. 8. cap. 3.

2. This opinion concerning the manner of worshipping Images, he strongly
proves, first by such counsels; secondly by such of the Fathers as favored
the worshipping of Images; 3ly, by reasons effectual in his judgment amongst
all such as himself was, that is, Roman Catholics. For to worship them any
other way is by his collections superstitious and idololatricall. His arguments
are all reducible to this common principle; That albeit every act of justice be
not an act of Religion, yet every act of Religion and adoration in particular,
is an act of justice. For adoration is but a serious rendering of religious
honor unto whom such honor is due. Now we cannot do justice to any liuelesse
or reasonlesse creature, although we consider it as the goods or possession of
this or that man. A man may be wronged or disgraced in his goods or reasonlesse
creatures, but they are altogether incapable of right or wrong, of disgrace or
respect. Nor was Tiberius his horse though considered as Tiberius his horse,
more capable of a Consulship or of the honor due unto a Consul, than any other
reasonlesse creature in Rome was. For the same reason no reasonlesse or
liuelesse creature can in it self, though considered with its references,
Nulla res inanima aut irrationalis sine rationali capax est secundum se
honoris, cultus, and reverentiae seu adorationis; sed imago res irrationalis
and inanima, quantumuis vt imago, sieve exemplari tam^n consideretur: ergo
secundum se, sine exemplarinon est capax adorationis and reuerentiae. In hac
autem ratione, sola mayor propositio explicatione indiget et confirmatione; ex
qua, euidenter sequitur id, quod contena^^us* ^^a ve^o ex natura et definatione
actu^ religionis, qui est adoratio, tradita in primo libro di^qutat. 1 cap. 4.
demonstrari potest. Est enim voluntas exhibendi alicui excellenti notam and
signis ^ submissionis, excellentiae ipsius debitum: Sic enim ex Damasc: ibidem
ostendimus, adorationem in^ncta submis^ionis consiste^e. Quareh^c adorationis
actus duobus constat and completur: sign^ videlice: externo, vt inclinatione
corporis; et affectu illi respondente. Sicut autem sign^m externum indicat
submissionis and seruitutis affectum, sic animus, ex quo procedit, talis esse
debet, vt vera et non ficta sit adoratio. Animus vero submissionis et
seruitutis erga illum solam ve satur, quem quis apprehendit sibi superioreme^
excellentia praeditum. Nam minoriqui nulla ratione, vt mayor, potest
apprehe^di, ^em^ se subijcit; multo ergo minus creaturae irrationali et
inanimae. Qui enim et notam exhiberet submissionis ex affectuillo verae
seruitutis erga illa^ secundum se, perverse ageret; essetque abiecto animo: imo
vero crimen, et genus quoddam superstitionis and Idololatriae committeret.
Diceretur enim ex animo creaturae irrationali secundum se serv^re, greece (...)
aut (...), ac proinde eam, vt excellentem sibique* superiorem, agnosceret.
Vasquez l^b. 2 Disp^t. 8 cap 8
be capable of adoration. Whence Vasques acutely thus inferres; Every image
however it be considered as an Image (whether it be of S. Peter, or of S. Paul)
is still a liuelesse creature, and therefore incapable of any Adoration (of
kneeling or bowing) save only as it is coadored with the Saint, whose Image it
is. The mayor proposition, to wit, [ No liuelesse reasonlesse creature is
capable of adoration, but only of coadoration with some reasonable creature]
he demonstrates from the nature and definition of that act of Religion wherein
adoration consists: and this act of Religion is a will or desire of exhibiting
such note and sign of submission to any excellent nature, as is due unto the
excellency of it. Adoration it self consists and is accomplished in these
two. First, in the external sign (as bowing or inclination of the body).
Secondly, in the internal affection answering to the sign. Now as the outward
sign does notify an affection of submission and service: so the mind whence
it proceeds ought to be so qualified that the Adoration be sincere, not
feigned. And this sincere mind or unfeigned desire of notifying submission or
service, can only be placed upon him whom we apprehend as our superior,
endued with some excellency which we want. For no man submits himself to any
so far his inferior, that he cannot be apprehended as his better: much less
can any man subject himself to a reasonlesse or liuelesse creature. He that
should exhibit any note or sign of submission to such a creature out of any
true affection or intention of submitting himself or doing service unto it in
it self considered, should not only declare himself to be of a perverse and
abject mind, but should withal incur the crime of superstition and
Idolatry.

CHAPTER XXXV.
The principal arguments which the Romanists use to prove the worshipping of
Images to be lawful. What difference there is between kissing of the book in
solemn oaths, and the Romanists salutations of Images. That Image Worship
cannot be warranted by Jacobs anointing the stone, or other ceremonies by him
used.

1. REferring the discussion of Authorities alleged in favor or dislike of
Image Worship, to the explication of that commandment wherein this
controversy has his proper seat: the only reason either worth their pains
to fortify or ours to oppugn, is that general one whereon Vasques grounds his
Apology for adoration of Images and relics. And it is this; Every creature
of God (seeing none are destitute of his presence, none without some print of
his power,) may be adored in such a manner as he prescribes; Vasques. lib. 2
disp. 6. cap. 3.
Nulla est res mundi ex sententia Leontij, quem saepius citavimus, quam sincere
adorare non possumus; and in ipsa Deum. and lib. 3. disp. 1. cap. 2. Cum
quaelibet res mundi sit opus Dei, et in ea Deus continuo sit et operetur:
facilius in ea ipsum cogitare possumus, quam virum sanctum in vest etc. There
is nothing in the universal world which (by the opinion of Leontius often
cited) we may not sincerely adore, and God in it. And again, Seeing every
thing in the world is Gods handie work, in which he continually resides and
works, we may with better facility consider God in it, than an holy man in
his weed or garment. The same reason he further fortifies by this instance:
Vasques de ador. lib. 3. disp. 1. c. 2. n. 8.
Si enim Jacob Genes. 28. erexit lapidem in titulum vnxitque oleo, and per
illum and in illo Deum adoravit, post quam eo loco mirabilem visionem in
somnijs vidit, et expergefactus dixit; vere locus iste sanctus est; non quod in
eo loco aliquid sanctitatis esse putaret, sed quod in eo loco sanctus Deus
apparere dignatus est: cur quaeso non poterit quisque rect a and syncera fide
Deum in qualibet re intime praesentem considerans, in ipsa and cum ipsa
adora^e, and hoc animo sibi in titulum and recordationem erigere etc. If Jacob
did erect a stone for a monument, and anoint it with oil; if in this monument
so erected he adored God after he had seen a miraculous vision in that place;
if upon his awaking he said; This place is truly holy, not that he thought
there was any holiness inherent in it, but because the holy Lord had there
vouchsafed to appear: why, I pray you, may not every man by faith sound and
sincere consider God as intimately present in every thing that is, and adore
God with it and in it, and with this intention make choice of what creature he
list for a monument or remembrancer of Gods presence? Vasques ibid. n. 10.
Praeterea creatura irrationalis et inanimata potest esse materia iuramenti,
qui est actus religionis: ita vt dum per illam iuramus, nullam aliam in ipsa
veritatem agnoscamus quam divinam, nec ipsam vt superiorem nobis, in testem
vocemus, sed Deum cuius veritas in ipsa relucet. Idemque dixit Dominus Math. 5.
Nolite iurare per coelum, quia Dei thronus est, neque per terram quia etc.
quaevis ergo creatura poterit esse materia adorationis, quae non ad ipsam
secundum se, sed ad Deum in illa terminetur. The reasonlesse and liuelesse
creature may be the matter of an oath which is an act of Religion; so that
whilst we swear by it, we acknowledge no other truth in it besides the
divine truth: nor do we call the creature (by which we swear,) to witness,
as if it were our superior, but God only whose truth shines in it. And seeing
our Savior has said as much in these words, Math. 5. Swear not by the
heavens, because it is the throne of God; nor by the earth, because it is his
footestoole: therefore every creature may be the matter of adoration which
nevertheless is not directed or terminated to the creature as it is a
creature, but unto God in the creature. From these suppositions he elsewhere
inferres, that as we may worship God in every creature wherein he is present,
and coadore the creature with him, that is in his language exhibit signs of
submission or reverence to it our of that internal adoration in spirit which
we owe only unto God: so men may worship S. Peter or S. Paul in their Images
with Dulia, and coadore their Images with them with such external signs of
submission, as the internal worship of Dulia would outwardly express unto
them were they present. Many learned expositours are so far from granting
every creature to be the object of a lawful oath, that they hold it unlawful,
upon what occasion soever, to swear by any. Yet besides the slipperinesse or
questionable soliditie of his supposed ground; the frame of his inference from
it is so concise and imperfect, that in stead of an answer we might without
^^^ng dismiss it with this Item; Go and learn your message better and you
shall have audience. But because it is a stranger in our coasts, and seems to
conceive more than it well expresses, we will allow it the benefit of an
Interpreter to acquaint it with our customs. Now, might it be admitted into
our courts of Justice, I suppose it would plead that the Romish Church does no
otherwise divide her devotions between God or his Saints and their Images,
than we Protestants do solemn oaths (which many of us grant, as Vasques
presumes, to be acts of religious worship) betwixt God and the sacred book
which we kiss. For if we truly reverence it, for the relation which it has
to God, but with an inferior kind of reverence and submission, than we owe
to God; Ipsa igitur natura reru^ et adorationis perspicue docet honorem
exhibitum imagini necessario ad ipsum primu^ fontem, scilicet exemplar,
transire: quare et adorationem imaginis, sicut etiam iuramentum per res
creatas, et inanimas, esse actum verae religionis, non quatenus ad ipsas
refertur secundum se, sed quatemis ex affectu per illas ad Deu^ transit.
Vasquez lib. 2. De Adoratione. Disput. 8. cap. 8. n. 366
This will make strongly for that manner of Image Worship which Bellarmine and
Sacroboscus commend to us. Or, if out of that internal reverence and
submission of mind which we bear only toward God, we derive this outward
sign of reverence to the book, not that we acknowledge it in it self (though
not of it self) capable of any respect or submission of mind, but only
reverencing God in it as in a visible and lively pledge of his presence; we
shall hardly be able to make any better plea for this solemn custom against
the accusations of the Anabaptists, than Vasques has done for kissing and
saluting Images.

2. Few things are in color more like to honey than soap or gall, though none
more unlike in taste. And these instances, though they may seem to have some
similitude at first appearance, will upon a more particular trial easily
appear most dislike. First, if we speak of particular oaths given only for
satisfaction of men, they include or presuppose a religious profession of our
allegiance unto God; as to our supreme Judge: they are not such proper acts of
his service, as supplications, thanksgivings, and solemn vows are. The true
end and use of their institutions is to give satisfaction unto men in cases
wherein no asseveration will be taken for sufficient, such as is solemnly and
deliberatly conceived and uttered, as it were in the sight and presence of him,
whom we acknowledge to be the searcher of all hearts, the supreme judge of all
controversies, and the avenger of all falsehood and wrong. And, for this reason,
solemn oaths are not to be administered by any but by those whom he terms
gods. These just occasions or necessity of taking oaths presupposed; the
general resolution or public iniunction to swear only by the name of the
true and everliving God, is an honor to him, because we hereby profess our
selves to be only his servants, and him to be the clear fountain of truth,
the severe avenger of all falsehood in deed, word or thought. But his honor
would be no whit less, if the use or necessity of oaths amongst men were
none; as in case every man's yea or nay were as good as his affirmative or
negative oath; much better than his bond. But taking men as they are; to
confirm every word uttered or promise made by them, with a solemn oath; would
be a profanation of his name, by whom they swear; although they swear or
promise nothing but the truth. For it is one thing to swear the truth, another
to swear in truth and judgment. This can never be performed without due
observance of the end and occasion why oaths were instituted.

3. Far otherwise it is in supplications and thanksgivings; the more often and
solemnly we praise God or pray unto him, the more we honor him; because these
are direct and immediate acts of his service, not instituted to give
satisfaction unto men but only to glorify his name, and to better our own
souls. Besides this difference in the subjects wherein they are used; the use
and end of Images in Romish devotions, is altogether different from the use or
end of the book in administration of oaths. The image is used by them as the
mean or messenger for transporting devotions or religious affections unto God
or the Saints, whose honor is principally and expressly aimed at, in their
unwieldy ejaculations before stocks and stones; yet so, as the image is, in
their intentions, a true sharer with the prototypon in such honor. We use the
book only as a complement of the civil act whereby we give satisfaction unto
men, or as a visible remembrancer partly to bystanders or spectators, whose
eyes by this means may become as true witnesses as their ears, that such
protestations have been made; partly, unto him that makes them, who will be
more wary and circumspect what he avoucheth and protests; when he perceiues
his speeches must be sealed with such remarkable circumstances, as they cannot
but be often recalled to his own and others memory. To the same end men of
honorable place or calling, use to lay their hands upon their hearts, when
they take a solemn oath: yet no man will think that they intend hereby to
honor themselves, or to share with him by whose name they swear; although we
grant oaths so taken to be true and proper acts of Religion or Gods service.

4. Nor do such as swear, or (at least) are thought to swear by ordinary or
obvious creatures, as, by this bread, by this light, intend the transmission of
any peculiar honor by them to the creator. Nor can such attestatio^s though in
some cases, (for ought I conceive) not unlawful, be in any case or upon any
occasions, more proper acts of divine worship or service than other
asseverations of truth are; from which they differ not in nature but only in
degree of seriousnes or vehemency. There is in all men by nature a pronesse or
desire to make them, upon provocation or mistrust: which natural pronesse may
(perhaps) by religious discretion, be severed from that corruption of nature,
wherewith even oaths expressly conceived in Gods name, are often polluted.
Though the form be not always so express, the intent and meaning of such
attestations may, for the most part, be the same with that which Iosuah used,
cap. 24. ver. 27. And Iosuah wrote these words in the book of the Law of God;
and took a great stone, and pitched it there under an Oak that was in the
Sanctuary of the Lord. And Iosuah said unto the people, Behold this stone
shall be a witness unto us; for it has heard all the words of the Lord which
he has spoken with us; it shall be therefore a witness against you, lest you
deny your God.

5. Again, it will be granted but by a few of our writers (though Vasques
take it for unquestionable) that Jacob did truly worship the stone, but God
alone present lapide, as Vide Naclantum epist. ad Rom cap. 1. loco citato.
some of his sect persuade themselves they honor God in the Images presence,
not the Image. Of many expositions, to this purpose, I might make better use
against Bellarmine and Sacroboscus than I can against Vasques, who has drawn
the controversy about Image Worship to such a strait and narrow issue, that by
pinching him too hard or too hastily in these passages, we may give him
opportunity to brush us of, or occasion him to stand at bay. Whereas if we
give him leave to take his own course through them, he will quickly run
himself so far out of breath, that we may easily overtake him on plain ground,
or drive him into that net, out of which there is no possibility of evasion. Be
it granted then (to this end, and no farther) that Jacob did not only adore
God praesente lapide, but salute or adore the stone withal, in such a manner
as Vasques would have Images worshipped, together with their prototypons: will
it hence follow that such as frame their devotions by Vasques his rule, do not
transgress the law of God, do not remove the bounds of the ancient, or commit
no more Idolatry than Jacob did? Their pretended warrant from this instance
rather proves, that the devil wrought the Romish Church unto Idolatry by the
same fallacy which seduced the Heathens, rude Pagans, or vncatechized
Christians, unto sorcery. For what professor of magical secrets at this day is
there, which cannot, which does not pretend the like examples of Patriarchs or
Prophets for their superstitious practices? As Satan is Gods ape; so Idolatry
and sorcery, (the two principal parts of his service) have their original for
the most part, from an apish imitation of some sacred actions, rites or
ceremonies used by Gods servants. He is a counterfeit Lord, and his professed
or domesticke servants must be clothed in such liveries, as may bear some
counterfeit color of Saints garments. The reason why most men slide more
easily and farther into these two sins, than into any other (without all
suspicion of any danger, oftimes with presumption of doing well) may be
gathered; partly from the property of man's nature assigned by the Philosopher;
partly from the Apostles character of the natural man: Qui non percipit quae
sunt spiritus Dei; who cannot perceive matters of the spirit. Man by nature is
of all creatures most apt to imitate, and the natural man most unapt rightly
to imitate or express the suggestions or motions of the Spirit, which cannot
be otherwise than spiritually discerned; much less managed. Now he that has
no touch or sense of the spirit, must needs remain altogether senseless of his
mistakings in imitating the spirit, wherein he glories no less; than apes do
in counterfeiting man.

6. In matters of secular civilitie or morality, many things well beseem one
man, which are very uncomely in another. Even in one and the same man's
behavior or deportment, many things are decent and lawful whiles they are
drawn from him by special or rare occasions; whose usual practice, upon
dislike or no occasions, becomes (according to the nature of the subject)
ridiculous or dishonest. Now in subjects of highest nature, as in the service
of God or matters spiritual; the least digression or declination from proposed
patterns (though it be not so observable to common sense) is far more
dangerous, than a greater error in morality; the precipitation once continued
is irrecoverable. The best and most Catholic remedy against the two
forementioned Catholic mischiefs, would be the serious observation of this
general rule: [ Such actions as have been managed by Gods spirit, suggested
by secret instinct, or extracted by extraordinary and special occasions, are
then only lawful in others, when they are begotten by like occasions or
brought forth by like impulsions.] Their purposed or affected imitation is
always unseasonable and preposterous, and, by continual use or custom,
becomes magical or Idololatricall. Jonathan did not sin in taking an Omen
(whether by the spirit of prophesing or by some inferior kind of instinct)
from his enemies invitations. For another to attempt the Vide Aug. quaest. 62.
in Genes.
like enterprise by warrant of his example, upon like speeches, would be a
superstitious tempting of God; no better than a magical sacrifice. The same
observation will fit the prognostication of Abraham's servant, sent to be speak
his young Master Isaac a wife, Genesis 25. Cottoniola. vid. inter alios Varcevicium
in Parall.
An Italian in latter-times of greater spirit than means, going out to his
work with his axe, whilst a great Army was passing by, comparing the
hopeless possibilities of his present profession with the possible hopes of a
martial life; out of this doubtful distaste of his present estate, whose best
solace was security from bodily dangers, frames a presage unto himself not
much unlike unto that of Ionathans, and it was to throw up his axe into an high
tree, having conditioned with himself, that if it came down again, he would
take it up and follow his wonted trade; but if it should chance to hang in the
boughs, he would seek to raise himself and his family by the wars; as
afterward he strangely did: for he himself became so great a Commander, that
Sforza his son, upon the foundations which he had laid, did advance himself
to the Dukedom of Millaine. For every repining discontented peazant to put the
forsaking or following of his wonted calling unto the like casual devolution,
would be a tempting of God: to prognosticate the same success, from experience
of the like event; albeit he had opportunity to try the conclusion, with the
same axe, upon the same tree, would be superstitious: to rest confident in such
persuasions, would be to settle upon the dregs of sorcery. Charles the fifth did
once salute the Spanish shore, whereof he was, (under God,) the supreme Lord,
in such an affectionate and prostrate manner, as his meanest vassal could not
ordinarily have saluted either him, or it, without just imputation of gross
Idolatry. And yet I should suspect him to be way wardly superstitious or
superstitiously peevish, that would peremptorily condemn this his strange
behavior, of superstition, or censure it as ill beseeming so heroical a
spirit, for the present; though at other times it might have seemed, not vain
or foolish only, but Apishly impious. His late farewell to the wars and
resignation of the Empire, his longing desire to give solemn testimony of his
love to the Spanish Nation, his safe arrival (after long absence and escapes
of many dangers) in that soil, many of whose sons had spent their lives in
his service, and wherein he purposed to spend the rest of his life in the
service of his God, in that soil, unto whose custody he then publicly
bequeathed his bones, did extract these significant and extraordinary
expressions of his extraordinary and swelling affection from him. And such
expressions as are ridiculous or rather impious when they are affected or
fashioned by forced affection, are always pardonable, for the most part
commendable, when they proceed from an unexpected instinct or vnmasterable
impulsion. All extraordinary dispositions, as love, joy, sorrow, or fear,
whether natural or sacred, naturally desire a speedy vent, and that vent is
fittest, which first presents it self without seeking. The sudden motions
wherewith such full passions seek to express themselves, are incapable of
rule or method. To put the characters of ordinary complement or behavior upon
them; breeds greater violence or encumbrance, than gyues or fetters to a man
disposed to dance, or manicles to one provoked to boisterous fight. And as the
Sun in his strength cannot directly ejaculate his beams upon any body
capable of heat and illumination, but others adjoining will be secondary
participants of these qualities by reflection; so cannot our affections be
strongly and intensiuely set upon any object extraordinarily amiable or lovely,
but some rays or branches of them will redouble upon those sensible creatures
which have special affinity with it, though of themselves incapable of any
love. Tender and endeared respects to men's persons, will always leave some
touch of grateful affection toward the place wherein we have enjoyed any
memorable fruit of their presence. Thus Andromache bereft of her young sons
company, desires his garments to rest her unwieldy affections upon them. Nor
dare I censure this her desire as unlawful, lest I should condemn the
generation of the just. For did not old Jacob express the tender affection
which he bare to the son of his age whom he now never looked to see again, by
kissing his coat? yet to have hanged it up about his bed or table, that it
might receive such salutatio^s evening and morning, or at every meale-time,
might have countenanced many branches of superstition. Once and use it not, in
most like cases is the true rule of discretion; continual use of that, which
upon all occasions is not unlawful, degenerates (no man knows how) into
abuse. God in his Law permits a kind of ceremonious mourning for the dead, but
prescribes a mean withal. So then to mourn is natural; but to mourn
continually, or to feed our grief by artificial representions, is
superstitious.

7. To the instance of Jacobs worshipping the stone: the internal sense or
touch of Gods extraordinary presence, inspired his breast with extraordinary
passion. And to reflect or exonerate themselves upon sensible circumstances, is
altogether as natural to the fullness of those affections which proceed from
supernatural causes, as to their fullness, whose causes are merely natural.
The mere imitation of natural motions is always artificial, never natural.
The imitation of such motions or external actions, as naturally flow from
supernatural inspiration, is hypocritical; artificially Sathanicall. Howbeit
the Romanist cannot so properly be said to imitate, as to invert Jacobs
behavior, whiles he seeks to raise his affections by saluting or adoring
Images, or to transmit the affection which he so raises, to God or the Saints
by Images of his own erection. This is in truth not to invocate but to conjure
God or the Saints. The imitation (if so we call it) is as preposterous, as if a
man should strive to prophecy or counterfeit visions by affecting to speak
nonsense, because some Prophets in their visions have been raught beyond
their senses. In fine, the scholasticke ape, while he exactly imitates his
master Satan that sets him a work, and his manner of worshipping God by
Images, has the same proportion to Jacobs worshipping (which he pretends for
his warrant) that the voices or motions of bodies assumed by wicked spirits,
have to the vital motions or speeches of living men. The one move themselves
as the spirit which God has implanted in them directs; the other suffer such
motions as malignant spirits put upon them. The old Saracens adoration of a
stone, may with better probability be justified by Jacobs example, than the
usual worship of Images in the Romish Church.

8. Many passages in the Fathers though cruelly rackt by the Romish Church,
will reach no further than the former instance in Jacob. Adoration, in many of
their languages, is no more than decent salutation. The phrases (as Vasques
observes) are with them indifferent, nor were they sollicitous in what terms
they expressed those expressions of their love or reverence unto those visible
objects, which had affinity with their extraordinary passions, or peculiar
reference unto God or Christ; as knowing the respect, which they tendered, to be
void of superstition when it flowed only from abundance of internal
affection, or was drawn from them upon special impulsions. They did not
affect submissiue salutation, or that emphaticall expression of their
affections which they often used, as a part of religious duty or daily
worship, but as a point of decent behavior. And decent behavior does change
the subject only, not alter its own nature or form, whiles it is used in
matters sacred. Nor is the habit of civil complement or good manners such an
unhallowed weed, as must be laid aside when we come into the Sanctuary, or
into places sometimes graced with their extraordinary presence, whom we
reverence for their Religion and piety. The use or frequencie of it
notwithstanding must be limited by just analogy to the known or approved use
of it in matters civil.

CHAPTER XXXVI.
The Arguments drawn from Jacobs fact, and the like examples answered by
Vasques himself in another case, and by the Analogy of civil discretion.

1. WIth what secret joy or exultation, the undoubted sight of our Saviors
sepulcher, of mount Tabor, or like sacred Monuments would feed my soul and
spirit; or in what external testifications the abundance of these internal
dispositions would vent themselves, I cannot tell, until I have just occasion
to try them. But my heart (I am persuaded) should not afterward smite me much,
if, upon our first meeting, I saluted them in such a manner as did I daily
repair unto them, with purpose to tender them the like salutations, or to
invite the former affections or exultations by kissing or bowing to them, would
convince my conscience of transferring the honor of God, to stocks and
stones. The most learned amongst our Adversaries whiles they seek to give
satisfaction to our objections, are enforced, to acknowledge not only the
equity of this liberty, which we grant, but the necessity of the restraint
(which to their prejudice) we make; from the authority of a story more
canonical with them then with us. For Mordecai to have bowed his knees to a
mortal man was not (even in Romish glosses upon Gods Laws given to the Jews)
altogether unlawful. Nor did Haman desire to be adored Cultu latriae, though
some Alanus Copus, Thomas Aquinas, Lyra, etc.
Romanists for want of a better answer have been put upon this shift. But
their dreams Vasques lib. 1. de adorat. disp. 5. cap. 3. number. 156. etc.
Vasques has very well refuted. First, because Assuerus himself never
affected this kind of honor, and Haman could not be so foolish, though so
impious, as to exact greater honor than had been done unto his sovereign.
Secondly, because Mordecai protested his readiness to do Haman greater honor
than was exacted, so his people might have bin preserved or advanced by his
deiection. Yet to have honored Assuerus himself, or any mortal man, with
divine honor, had been such an open wrong unto the God of his Fathers, as
Mordecai would not have done for prevention of any mischief that could have
befallen his people. However; if the protestation of his readiness, to kiss
the soles of Hamans feet, upon condition the state of his people might be
thereby bettered: what truth is there in his pretense that being a Jew he durst
not bow his knee to Haman, lest by so doing he should transfer the honor of
his God to a mortal man, specially seeing the safety of his nation was at
that time so deeply endangered by refusal of worship which had been tendered
by his religious ancestors not only to Kings and Prophets of Judah, but even
to heathen Princes. To this scruple Vasques ibid. n. 158.
Vasques out of Caietane has made answer very appositely for Mordecai and for
us; Noluit illud signum honoris praebere, quia indignum ei videbatur, vt solum
reverentiae civilis gratia, nisi magna aliqua causa exigente, homini quotidie
signum illud exhiberetur, non quod lege Iudaioa id prohibitu^ esset, sed quia
ex co^muni consuetudine non nisi magna aliqua ex causa regibus et principibus
illud signum exhibebatur: sed soli Deo tanquam supremum co^muniter erat
reseruatu^. Atque hac ratione dixit Mardochae us, Timui ne honorem Dei, id est
signum quod consuetudine populi nostri, dei cultui applicatum est, in hominem
transferrem. The brief or abstract of his reply is this: The sign of
submission which Haman exacted, was usually tendered only unto God; to Kings
or Prophets or others in preeminence very seldom, and upon special occasions;
as in testification either of unusual sorrow, or of thankfulness more than
ordinary. The truth of his observation is apparent out of Ruths behavior to
Boaz, of Iudeths to Holofernes, of Abigails and Mephibosheths to David, and of
the Captains to Eliah. 4. King. 1. And albeit Haman was bent to do the Jews
an extraordinary mischief for Mordecais sake; yet Mordecai had no opportunity
offered him by divine providence to prevent it by submission of himself to
Haman, but rather by standing out against him. In this general then, Vasques
and we well agree, that such external worship as upon special and rare
occasions may be lawfully exhibited to some creatures, becomes Idololatricall
by use or continuance, without concurrence of like occasions. The issue which
we desire to join with him and his fellows, from these grounds, shall be
this First, whether the homage, which they do to Images be not in it self
much greater, and, in respect of many circumstances, far more solemn than
Haman required of Mordecai? Secondly, whether the exhibition of it in Gods
Temples be not more frequent and usual, than Mordecais occasions and
necessities of saluting Haman could have been in Assuerus Court? Herein only
they truly follow Mordecais example, that they seldom or never communicate
Gods honor to secular Princes; but on stocks or stones they usually bestow
all the signs of submission or other solemnities that can be appropriated to
Gods service.

2. The strict tenor of Gods commandment, and that significant character,
whereby he expresses his special observance of men's demeanor in this point,
evidently condemn the Romish Church of abominable Idolatry; yet in my
judgment it does no way prejudice the performance of such external respect,
or such testification of reverence unto true relics of Saints, or uncouth
places (sometimes extraordinarily graced with Gods presence) as Jacob tendered
unto the stone. We ought in these cases to moderate the impulsions which their
sight would procure, by the analogy of that liberty, which discretion and
good manners grants us in other points, wherewith the occasions of Idolatry
have most affinity. For Idolatry is but a spiritual fornication or adultery.
Now there is no man of discretion, though otherwise more jealous than he has
just cause, but will permit his wife to salute his friends upon special
occasions, or at first meetings after long absence. But suppose a wanton, upon
this liberty, should presume to continue the same salutations evening and
morning, or most hours of the day, for a month together, and plead her excuse
from the analogy of Romish Catechismes in cases of conscience concerning
spiritual adultery, thus; Sir, I thought I might as freely kiss my friends
and yours, at one time, as at another; at all times, as well as at any, so long
as I kiss them only with kisses of love and kindness, not of lust and
wantonness. Would this distinction give just satisfaction to any husband, no
farther jealous than he has occasion? I think no Jesuit would rely upon it,
if he should be detected to be thus over familiar with another man's wife of
better spirit. And yet in express denying the equity of this apology, they
implicitly grant that their mother does presume farther upon the patience of
the Almighty (who in this case has protested his especial jealousy) than
any secular Strumpet dare, upon the patience of her loving or doting husband.
She has done all the works of a presumptuous whorish woman, building her high
places in the corner of every way, and making her high places in every street,
and has not bin as an harlot that despises a reward, but as a wife that
plays the harlot, and takes others for her husband Ezekiel. 16. ver. 31, 32.
. She is contrary, Other harlots receive rewards of their lovers, which for
the most part repair unto them. She compasses sea and land and rangeth
through all the Courts of the great Kings dominion, with gifts in her hand to
entice, with the sacrifice of praise and hymns in her mouth to enchaunt the
chaste and loyal servants of her Lord unto her lust. And being deprived of
their company prostrates her self, evening and morning, all the hours of the
day and night, unto carved Images of both sexes; with whom her Lord and husband
has so strictly forbidden her all familiarity. And yet, in pride of her
whorish cunning, presumes she is able to bleare that all-seeing eye, unto
whose brightness light it self is in comparison but as darkness; to whom
the most secret corners of darkness shine more clearly than the noone-light
does unto us; if she have but leisure to wipe her lips with this
distinction, I did kiss thy servants, unto whom I prostrated my body, only
with kisses of dulia, not of latria. The sent of dead corpse cannot draw the
Vultures half so far, with such greediness, as every unsavory tale or
ridiculous wonder does her children, to feed their souls with the sight of
counterfeit and putrified relics. The wisest of her sons are now become so
foolish, as to publish with their mouths, what she had long since said in the
pride of her heart: Tush God was a jealous God in the days of the Synagogue
his former wife, which wanted discretion and proved unfaithful: but this his
new Spouse, our holy mother the Catholic Church, is more wise and gracious in
his eyes, able to warrant whatsoever is done by her appointment; she knows how
to humor and please her loving husband, who is not like man that he should be
jealous of her carriage, that means no harm and cannot behave her self
amiss, though, to unfaithful eyes, she may seem outwardly to do as wantons
do.

3. God indeed is never jealous as men are, without grounds of just occasion,
yet more tenderly observant of his spouses demeanor in this kind, than any
husband is of his wifes; because he knows (as by his law he would give us to
understand) that familiarity or dalliance with strange and wanton lovers, is
not so powerful to corrupt the weaker sex, as kissing or solemn salutations
of graven Images, is to pollute the wisest souls, or to enveigle the strongest
faith. And unless we knew he had determined to confound the wisdom of the
wise, it would seem more than miraculously strange, how such great scholars
as are the Jesuits, should be ignorant, that the visible exhibition of Christ
in the flesh, makes all service of graven Images more abominable in the
Christians, than it could have been in the Jew. It is a truth sealed by the
new Testament as well as by the Law, We heard a voice, we saw no similitude
besides the engraven Image of Gods substance, by whom, though he speak most
plentifully to the world, yet spoke he nothing concerning Images. Neither is
there any instance or matter of fact in all the new Testament, that can be
pretended for worshipping Images or other visible creatures, with such show of
probability, as the former instance of Jacob may be. But whether Jacob did
only worship God, praesente lapide, or whether he did in some sort externally
worship or coadore the stone with God; or whether he did make unto himself
such sensible attestation of his solemn vow, by anointing the stone, and
erecting it into a pillar, as we do of our solemn oaths by kissing of the
book: I leave it to the Reader; though for mine own part I like this last
form of speech the best. But however men's opinions may vary concerning the
form of speech, the matter most to be considered by all (which seems to me a
truth unquestionable,) is this: If the wisest or most circumspect man on earth
should worship God in every place, after the same manner (for every
circumstance) that Jacob did God in Bethel; or, if the most accurate Anatomist
of his own thoughts or affections, should take every stone into such
consideration, whilst he worshippeth God, as Jacob did that stone: He should
become a gross Idolater without all help from any distinction, wherewith the
Romish Church can furnish him. The truth is, that Jacob did so worship God in
the presence of the stone, as his posterity were bound to worship him before
the Arc of the Covenant. Both worshipped him in or by those creatures, after
such a manner, as we may not worship him in any created visible substance,
save only in that created substance wherein he dwells bodily. The manner of
his presence (then) at Luz or Bethel, and in the Arc, were shadows or pledges
of his inhabitatio^ in the man Christ Jesus; in whom, were he present on earth,
we might and ought to adore God in such a manner, as would be sacrilegious to
adore him in any other man or body.

4. But it is the property of whoredom as well spiritual as carnal, to lead
such as taste her baytes with delight, like Oxen to the slaughter, without any
apprehension of dangers approach, until death surprise them. Lots mischance is
become the Romish Churches perpetual heritage; she is so besotted with the
grapes of her own planting, that she knows not what abomination she
commits, nor with whom. Like an harlot drunk in a common Inn, or a frantic
whore in an open market, she prostrates her self to every passenger, and sets
open all the temples of God, whose keys have been committed to her custody,
that they may serve as common stews for satiating the foul lusts of
infernal spirits; whom she thither invites by solemn enchantments, as by
sacrificing and offering incense unto Images. And finding pleasure in the
practice, dreams she imbraceth her Lord and husband, whilst these unclean
birds, encage themselves in hers and her childrens breasts.

CHAPTER. XXXVII.
Whether granting that it were lawful to worship such Saints, as we
undoubtedly believe to be true Saints, we might lawfully worship such as we
suspect to be no true Saints.

1. IF to honor true Saints and heirs of bliss with prayers, temples,
sacrifices, and vows, be Idolatry; we shall want terms to express the
abomination of their sacrilege, in performing these points of service unto
such as the world has either no warrant to account members of Christ's
mystical body, or just reason to suspect for sons of darkness. In
doubtful cases of this nature, some honestly minded Romanists used to conceive
their prayers with such conditions as the Frenchman did his to S. Cuthbert, Si
sanctus sis, ora prome, If you be a Saint, pray for me. It was a desperate
resolution, better befitting an impudent Monk, than Sr. Sr Thomas More in his
Treatise of Invocation of Saints.
Thomas More, to censure this caution of scrupulositie, or to reject it as no
less superfluous or unmannerly, than this form of request unto one of our
living neighbors; If you be an honest man, I would request you to remember me
in your prayers; if not, I will not trouble you. The good Gentleman was out of
his element, when he wrote controversies in Divinity; for he would have sooner
taken an Apple in stead of an Nut at a banquet, than have judged two cases of
civil justice, so dislike, as these which he here brings, by one and the same
rule of law. There is no man honestly wise, but would sooner request his
prayers whom he knows to be dishonest or of irreligious life, then bear a
solemn testimony of his honesty or religion. Mutual prayer, is a duty
enjoined us while we live together* the practice of it, is the best mean to
make bad men good, and good men better. But men deceased, whether elect or
reprobates, are incapable of amendment, either by our prayers for them, or
theirs for us. Nor do the Romanists enjoin us to pray to supposed Saints,
with purpose to increase their happiness, or, as if they stood in need of our
devotions. To pray for any whom it is lawful publicly to pray unto, is by
their doctrine a foul disgrace unto the Saint; a point of infidelity in the
supplicant. Praying to Saints is by their opinion on our part a duty or
tribute wherewith we are bound to honor them: their prayers or intercessions
for us, are Princely favors or graces which must be sought, not as acts of
debt or mutual duty, but by religious service and supplication. Now,
admitting it were lawful to supplicate thus unto S. Peter, or unto others whom
we believe and know to be true Saints; yet, in public liturgies, to offer up
our prayers and vows upon our knees, either in honor of those with whose
lives and deaths we are altogether unacquainted, or of those whom we suspect to
have lived and dyed not so well, as we could wish to do our selves, is a
sin, so much more grievous to good consciences, than bearing testimony upon
oath for men's positive honesty whom we know not; as stealing of treasure out
of the Church is in respect of simple theft or burglarie. Testimonies given
upon oath require certainty of sense or experiment; and tendering of prayers
as a tribute or honor, or in testification of our religious respect, requires
certainty of faith, that the party to whom they are tendered, is worthy of
them.

2. The ground of this difference between praying to living men, and praying
to deceased Saints, (which the superstitious Doctors seek to conceal from the
simple) may very well be gathered by analogy of Bellar. l. 3. de Sanctor.
beatitud. cap. 9.
Bellarmines resolution in another point of their service. Promises (says he)
religiously made to living members of the Church militant, are but promises:
but so made unto Saints or members of the Church triumphant, they are truly
and properly vows. His first reason is, because a vow is but a promise unto
God, and our promises unto Saints are liker our promises unto God than unto the
promises, which we make to mortal men. For, as that which we promise unto God,
is unprofitable unto him, but profitable unto us, and is tendered only by us
in sign of honor and thankfulness; so whatsoever we promise unto Saints, it
cannot profit them but our selves. Their happy estate stands in need of
nothing that is ours; all that we offer and promise them, is in testimony of
the honor which we owe them, or in sign of our thankfulness to them. But
performance of our promises, either is or may be profitable to living men,
because mortality stands in need of many things. Secondly, the Saints can
have no title to our vows, Nisi quatenus sunt Dij per participationem; but in
as much as they are Gods by participation. Now we know the Saints which reign
with Christ to be such: but that such as live with us, are partakers of the
divine nature, we may hope well, certain we cannot be. Thirdly, the Saints
in heaven are happy, glorious, the sons of God, Gods by participation,
because they are confirmed in their estate, and are not subject to change or
Apostasy; to both which all in this life having their bliss and glory rather
in spe than in re, are (in his judgment) still obnoxious. From these
resolutions we thus infer. If promises, then the prayers which we make to
Saints, have greater affinity with the prayers which we make to God, than with
our request to living men, that they would pray for us. To speak properly, we
pray men, we do not use to pray unto them. But as unto God, so unto Saints,
men of the Roman Churches catechizing use to pray, and that solemnly, because
they hold them Gods by participation. Now as we might not worship our redeemer
Cultu latriae with divine worship, unless we were by faith assured that he
were truly God: so admitting the invocation or worshipping of true Saints
Cultu Duliae, were warranted by the word of God; yet might we not worship any
with this kind of worship, without like certainty of faith, that they are
Gods by participation, or heirs of glory. Had this great Clerk been
mindful, in his third book concerning the worshipping of Saints, of what he
had said before in the first, he would in wisdom have concealed these
conclusions. Or if he had in the first book foreseen the necessity of this
resolution concerning vows, shame would have made him disclaim the practice of
praying though privately unto vncanonized Saints, whose lawfulness, he there
maintains by the same plea, that Sir Thomas More used; Oramus viuentes etiamsi
nesciamus esse Sanctos, cur non defunctos quando maiori ratione confidimus esse
sanctos, We pray living men to pray for us, albeit we know them not to be
Saints; and why not men deceased, whom we may on better reasons hope to be
Saints; though this we may not do in public Letanies and sacred Service?
Now; they may not invocate such Saints in public Liturgies, because the
Church has forbidden it, otherwise Nazianzens Prosopopaeia, in his Panegyricke
to Basil or Athanasius might have been a sufficient warrant to have conceived
a public hymn in the same form. But (as I said) we pray living men to pray
for us, as we are ready to do for them; we pray not unto them; we give no
solemn testimony of their sanctity, whose sincerity we mistrust; though this
were less sacrilegious and dishonorable unto God, then praying unto them whom
we know not to be Saints, albeit to pray unto known Saints, were no
sacrilege. For what preposterous partiality is this? that God must manifest
his right to supreme honor by his works of creation and providence; that our
Savior which died for us, must plead his title to the like, by miracles,
whilst he lived; by his resurrection from the dead, and glorious ascension
into heaven: and yet men that were subject to the same passions as we our
selves are, must be worshipped after death, with such worship as is more like
to the honor which we owe to God, than any respect or reverence, which is due
to the best man living; and all this without any evidence of their sanctity,
or just proof of their right unto such obsequies.

3. The infinite extent of this Idolatry with suspicious Saints in times past,
is so well prosecuted by many, that it needs no long declaration. No Jesuit
will take the defense of the Churches practice upon him. For reformation of
such palpable abuses as no distinction can salve, all of them plead a
necessity of having Saints canoniz^d, that is, of having their supposed
incorporation into the Church triumphant authentickly published, and their
worship authorized by the Church, whose testimony may ground certainty of
faith. Bellarmine tells us a story, out of Sulpitius, of one that was
worshipped for a Martyr, whose soul notwithstanding made his appearance before
St Martin, (who suspected the service as unlawful, because not warranted by
tradition of antiquity,) and ingenuously confessed that it was the danmed
ghost of a certain robber, which had been sentenced to violent death by
course of law. And Pope Alexander the third checked some of his time, (nor were
they altogether without blame) for adoring one as an holy Martyr, which had
been slain in a drunken fray. But granting this story of St Martin to be
true, unless there be some authentike judges to determine, which are true
revelations, which not; the doctrine of praying to Saints, being indefinitely
allowed, it is altogether as likly, that many thieves might be worshipped upon
false or pretended revelations, as that the worship of one thief should be
recald by revelatio^ made to St Martin. Has the Pope then passed this
infallible censure upon all the revelations that have been in this case
pretended? or taken other order to secure the world from all possibility of
imposture? If he have, we would desire to be acquainted with his
determinations. In the mean time, we will enquire first whether the disease
without some sovereign medicine be not alike dangerous in Rome-Christian, as
it was in Rome-Heathen? Secondly, whether the medicine pretended by
Rome-Christian be applied according to her own prescriptions? Thirdly, whether
so applied it be not more deadly than the disease?

CHAPTER XXXVIII.
Rome-Christian as vain and foolish in making imaginary Saints, as
Rome-Heathen in making false Gods.

1. THe solemn worship of See Section 3. cap. 18 par. 7. etc. and cap. 21. in
the two last Parag.
local Saints, did either first begin or multiply its first beginnings
throughout these parts of the world with the inundation of Barbarians, as the
Reader may gather out of Gregory of Towers, and Beda, etc. Nor would I deny,
that many of these late converted Paynims prayers to God, though conceived out
of an opinion of the Saints mediations, were often heard; as the ancient
Romans, though their devotion were clad with Idolatry, as bones with flesh,
were often rewarded with such temporal blessings, as God in justice denied to
other Idolaters, less devout in their kind. The Carthaginians might have
sacrificed unto Fortune for victory, or unto storms and tempests in their
distress, with worse success, than some Roman Generals did, because their
respect or esteem of divine power and providence indefinitely considered, was
not so good. So might those prayers of the French Kings tendered unto St Martin,
be sometimes better heard, than the prayers which their enemies made unto their
Gods. All this notwithstanding being granted, the decrees of solemn honor to
their Images might be as Idolatrous as Rome-Heathens erection of Temples unto
fortune or storms. In opposition to Atheism or irreligion God usually accepts
devotio^ though tainted with superstition. And unto this case, I will reduce
those prayers which that devout Virgin (whose chastity Nazianz. in orat. pro
Cypriano.
Cyprian, before he was a Saint sought to expugne by help of magic)
presented to the Virgin Marie in extremity of conflict with foul lusts. That
prayers thus made, out of ignorance, whether to Saints or false Gods, have
sometimes found success, is to be ascribed to the abundant mercy of the true
God: to continue the like practices, upon these experiments, is the fruit of
man's superstitious impiety, and has been the mother or nurse of much
Idolatry.

2. As Fortune upon experiments of good success in doing her service had more
Temples in Rome than any other God or Goddess: so the blessed Virgin upon such
relations as this of Nazianzene concerning the forementioned Compare this
practice in Rome-Christian with the practices of Rome-Heathen. Sect. 3. cap.
17. par. 2, 3, 4, 5* etc.
maid, has been presented with more Ave Mary's by maids and women (and that
with better devotion) than God with Pater nosters. Though the lawful honor
which was given to her redounded to Gods glory: yet in honoring her more than
him, they dishonor him more, than if they adored fortune whom they cannot
dishonor, because she is not: but the blessed Virgin they much dishonor in
honoring her as a Goddess, or a compeere of God; and her dishonor is by their
own confession Gods dishonor. But as to pray to her, suits best with women's
desires; so other perplexities or conditions of life had peculiar Saints, to
symbolize with them; whose respect upon particular occasions or exigences, will
(from the temptation before mentioned) be much greater than Gods, if their
invocations may be permitted. From this opportunity did the multitude of
Rome-Christians local Saints exceed the number of Rome-Heathens topicke Gods.
Thus as Rome-Heathen had a Goddess for corn before it was sprouted, another
for it after it was come up, a third for the straw, a fourth for the knot, and
a fifth for the ear; so has Rome-Christian one Saint for this part of man's
body, another for that; one for the pestilence, another for fevers, one for
toothach, another for pain in the side, etc. And would not men, women, or
children, deeply affected with these bodily grievances, pray as heartily and
vow as devoutly to their supposed patrones as unto Christ? It is usual with
merry companions, when they hear gamesters pray for good luck, to say; God
was never good player at cards and dice. Every man in sense of extreme pain,
would be as ready to say; Christ I know is a good man, and has experience of
all infirmities, but we never read that he was so much troubled with the
toothache, as S. Apollonia has been, or with the side-ach, as S. Roccha. Has
not S. Sebastian upon these motives berest him of his titles for his cure of
pestilence? An heathen that should read Gods attributes of wounding and making
whole, or Christ's miraculous cures of all diseases, albeit he neither believed
one or other, would undoubtedly believe, that the hymns which have been sung
unto S. Sebastian, had been consecrated to the Christians God and Redeemer; or
they might well think that to avoid the censure of Paganism, the Papists did
honor their Aesculapius under another name; or that out of envy to his
universal skill in curing diseases, this Empyricke had been set up to eclipse
his fame and rob him of patients in cure of the pestilence.

Tu qui Deo es tam charus,
Et in luce valde clarus,
Sana tuos populos,
Et a peste nos defend:
Opem nobis hanc impende
Contra morbi stimulos.
Thou who art a God so dear,
And in light exceeding clear,
Health unto thy people bring,
Us from pestilence defend:
Aid unto thy people send,
Against diseases that them sting.
3. Experiments registered in the Records of Antiquity pretended against us,
will confirm our observation, that as Conquerors usually change the names of
Towns and titles of Regiments, with whose emoluments or real titles they
grace their followers: so the Quare tum primum illuxit, and invaluit splendour
Christiana pietatis, Tolosani proceres ^ectorio inaurat^ speci^sum fanum, antea
Palladi dedicatum, Maria Virgini consultissime transcripserunt: tum quia Pallas
virgo ex Iovis paremis cerebro nata finga^ur, tum quia consilio and opibus
abunde fortunet mortales, and Maria virginitatem naturae obstupendam etinuit,
and in Dei Opt. Max. mente ante solemn and tempora versabatur, and aurea^ nobis
aetatem prorsus reduxit, ac pariu m^rifico miseros agrosque prosperavit. etc.
Forcat. lib. 1. page 32.
professors of Christianity having expelled the profession of Paganism,
before their hearts were thoroughly cleansed from the relics of it, shared the
dignities or signiories of the old Heathen Gods, amongst the Saints or Martyrs,
which they best affected. Thus was the Temple of Pantheon, that is, of all the
Gods, with the rights or honors due unto it, alienated by Rome-Christian to
all Saints, whose service (by aequivalency) is celebrated as superstitiously by
Rome Christian upon the day which we solemnize in the memory of all true
Saints deceased. The lake in Cyrene, which had been Pallas her jointure and
bare her name, was in S. Augustines time bequeathed to S. Marie, and instead of
Tritonidis Palus, named Mariae Palus, that is, of Pallas her lake, made our
Ladies lake. Civil modesty would not suffer latter ages to make the blessed
Virgin Patroness of Wantons; therefore was this part of Venus honorable
office, bestowed on Marie Magdalene, See Chap. 28. par. 1. A vt maris stella.
and on one Afra; but Venus regencie over the Sea fell to S. Mary's lot upon as
little ground, I suppose, as the Heathens had to entitle Venus to it. Apollinis
delubrum Clodoueus quintus Francorum Rex, eiecto numine amoribus illicitis
infamato, Virgini Mariae very solis genetricico^secra vit. Forcat. lib. 5. page
669.
Venus orta mari mare praestat eunti
-- Tranquillum.
Venus (as thought the Heathens) took nature and substance from the froth of
the Sea, and the blessed Virgins name imports as much as a Sea or multitude of
waters; and is enstyled in their Liturgies Officium Beatae Mariae.
Stella maris. This will worship begun upon these motives, did multiply Gods
by subdivisions (occasioned from the diversity of sexes or other references) in
as prodigious sort as the Heathens had done. If the good man pray to Pelagius
for the welfare of his Oxen, the good-wife would pray to S. Bride for the
welfare of her Kine. S. Anthonies extraordinary and tender care over swine,
could not content them without another peculiar and more immediate president of
Sowes. Their shameless and sottish vanity in this kind, is prosecuted at
large by others; the Reader, if it be worth his contemplation, may view it with
less pains than I can draw the Map or survey of it. Amongst others it is
wittily set down by the famous St David Linsey.
Knight of the Mount or Lion King at Arms, who for conclusion challenges the
Heralds of will worship to blazon the difference, if any there were, between
Heathenish and Romish Idolatry. He though as well skilled as any of his time
in titles of honor, could discry no difference between their services.

4. Rome-Heathen in the (...) or full growth of superstition made he Gods of
the masculine, and she Gods of the feminine names of affections, as Pavor,
Clementia, etc. Rome-Christian clothed imaginary Saints with formed names,
fitted of purpose to their humors which were to worship them, lest their
merchandise should want chapmen. For humorous affection is always charitable
to believe that has real existence, whose imagination is pleasant. It would
be hard for any Legendary to produce the warrant of any Writer sacred or
ecclesiasticke, why Vrbanus should be reputed a Saint. Horace, I think, is the
most canonical Author he can allege, Faecundicalices quem non fecere
disertum? Pleasant companions were to have a patron as well as others, and
none so fit for them as Vrbanus. As a coat given by the Herald makes a clown
a Gentleman: so this name devised by a writer of Legends, was matter enough for
men so disposed to create a Saint out of it. Or perhaps some such, as they name
in sports, had been killed in a drunken fray, and taken for a Martyr of his
followers. But out of question some good fellows in mere merriment set up
Gutmannus for the Warden of pudding-makers. The pedigree of many other solemnly
worshipped in times past, and in some places (perhaps) at this day, cannot be
derived from any real ancestors, but had names from the matters, whereof they
are supposed presidents, as mammon in the Syriack and Plutus in Greek. In
minds once wrought to this effeminate levitie and credulity, the very sight
of emblematicall or hierogliphicall devices would make impression of real
Saintships. Unto this topicke we may refer the raising of S. Christopher or
mounting of S. George. Both in some Countries had been adored as Gods, though
but men of the Painters or Heralds making. That most natural branch of
superstition which had spread it self, like the Vine amongst the Heathens
(exemplified heretofore in Balak) did recover sap and leaf again in greater
quantity in the Roman Church. The prayers which the blessed Virgin either
could not hear, or would not grant at Winchester, were so effectually heard
at Walshingham or Loretto, that the Lady of Winchester, Walsingham and Loretto
did in vulgar esteem, differ as much in person as these Towns did in place,
and were conceipted to emulate each other no less, than as if they had been
Ladies of diverse families in the Princes Court.

5. This leaven of Gentilisme, which had thus diffused it self through the
Romish Mass, or the Romish Churches pretended service of God, and thus shared
his heavenly regiment amongst the Saints; (as Conquerors do the Lands which
they conquer, among their followers) making them not proprietaries only, but
in a sort absolute Princes within their Territories, and God only a titulary
Monarch of the whole or proprietary in some principal parts; after it had thus
wrought downward did in the issue reflect upward. The intellectual conceit
of Gods proper attributes, their prayers immediately directed to the Trinity,
to the Godhead or Christ, were tainted with a spice of that sorcery or vain
observance, which was before observed in the Heathens. Some of their Liturgies
argue as great a confidence in altering Gods attributes in their supplications,
as Balaam did in the change of places for his sacrifice. Of four or five
Letanies, which the Church of Ravenna had in S. Gregory's time (but more
corrupted since) all now abrogated, not for any superstition but for
conformity to the Roman Church, this here following was doubtless the best;
because the writer of that History would not have the pattern lost, and the
beginning is good, but all the rest naught. Creator mundi Deus, miserere
nostri. Hieronymus Rubeus in his History of Ravenna.

Pater de Coelis Deus, miserere nostri.
Fili Redemptor mundi Deus, mis: no:
Spiritus sancte Deus, mis: no:
Trinus and vnus Deus, mis: no:
Rex regum mis: no:
Rex exercituum mis: no:
Archangelorum aeternitas mis: no:
Bonitas Patriarcharum mis: no:
Charitas sacer dotum mis: no:
Diuitiae Prophetarum mis: no:
Electio Apostolorum mis: no:
Fides Martyrum mis: no:
Gloria Confessorum mis: no:
Haereditas Levitarum mis: no:
Just Iudex mis: no:
Charitas Potestatum mis: no:
Lux Gentium mis: no:
Misericordia captivorum mis: no:
Navigantium gubernator mis: no:
Orphanorum pastor mis: no:
Pacis conditor mis: no:
Qui es indultor, mis: no:
Remissio peccatorum mis: no:
Sanitas infirmantium, mis: no:
Tutela virginum, mis: no:
Consolatio viduarum, mis: no:
Excitatio mortuorum, mis: no:
Initium saeculorum, mis: no:
Zelus and corona Martyrum, mis: no:
Salvator totius mundi, mis: no:
Pacem and concordiam da nobis, Domine.
Sancta Maria, mis: nob:
After a Catalogue of particular Saints and Saintesses first invocated by their
proper names, and afterward by way of an universal conclusion made up out of
the induction of particulars, Omnes Sanctae virgins Dei interced:
Omnes sancti and sanctae deae interced:
They return again to Christ and rank his attributes in a short rhyme:
Christ fili dei vivi, mis: no:
Tu es Deus omnipotens, mis: no:
Qui in hunc mundum venisti, mis: no:
Qui pro nobis flagellatus fuisti, mis: no:
Qui in cruce pependisti, mis: no:
Qui mortem propter nos accepisti, mis: no:
Qui in sepulchro iacuisti, mis: no:
Qui ad inferos descendisti, mis: no:
Qui tertia die resurrexisti, mis: no:
Qui in Coelos ascendisti, mis: no:
Qui Spiritum paracletum in Apostolos misisti, mis: no:
Qui seeds ad dexteram Patris, mis: no:
Qui venturus es iudicare vivos and mortuos et seculum per ignem, mis: no:
Miserere nobis Domine, miserere nobis:
Kyrie eleison.


6. Whiles I read these and other Letanies used by the Romish Church, I cannot
but congratulate the wisdom and moderation of the Church wherein I was borne
and baptized; which has so well extracted the spirit of primitive devotion
from the grossness of later and declining ages superstition. These admitted
new Mediators into their Liturgies, with as great facility, as our
corporations do strangers, (whom they would have graced) into their
fraternities, or as Universities do Students into their Registers. Gregory
the Great had crept into this Letanie of Ravenna, (as mine Author thinks)
after his death, but it seems they had allotted him his place whilst he
lived; otherwise they might, without offense unto posterity, have set him
below S. Hierom and S. Augustine. Our Letanie, as it admits no compeers with
Christ, no secundary Mediators or Intercessors; so it uses no interpellations
of him or any person in the Trinity, but such as well becomes the sincerity
and gravitie of orthodoxall devotion. Howbeit, the next point I am to
prosecute, is the ill success, which the Romish Churches intended reformation
of abuses in praying to Saints has found, not the good success of our own: of
which in this place I have no more to say, save only; The Lord of his mercy
grant, that we may be as well inwardly as outwardly conformable to the good
orders which our religious Ancestors have prescribed.

CHAPTER. XXXIX.
That the medicine pretended by Rome-Christian for curing the former disease,
did rather increase than assuage it.

1. AS ordinary Bishops have their distinct diocese without which their
pastoral staves cannot reach: so some Saints were particularly honored in
this or that Province, not in others. Every Bishop, by custom more ancient
than the Romish Religion which now is, might have enjoined his flock to do
homage unto Saints of his own erection; though to bind the whole Church unto
the service of any has been an act of oecumenicall jurisdiction, ever since
this custom came up. But to permit the same liberty to every Bishop within
his Diocese, which the Pope challenges over the whole world, seemed too much
unto later Popes. For Alexander the third and Innocent the third, seeing the
abuses which grew by this licentiousness, made a restraint that none after
their times, should be enrolled in the Catalogue of Saints or worshipped,
though in some particular Country or Province only, without the approbation of
their successors. So approved, it was a point of sacrilege to deny them solemn
worship, or doubt of their admission into the Church triumphant. To invest the
souls of men deceased with robes of glory, is by this reckoning but an
exercise of the same authority, which gives Bishops their palls: we will
suppose so. But did Basil, Ambrose, Hierom, Austin, Gregory the Great, or
others adored for Saints by the Catholic Church Roman, attain to this
dignity by any Popes donation? Were they as solemnly canonized as S. Bernard,
S. Thomas Becket, S. Francis, S. Dominick, S. Thomas of Aquine, or some others
that died since Innocent the second? If they were not; either the Popes
approbation is nothing worth, or S. Francis and S. Dominicke are so much better
Saints, than Hierom, Ambrose, or Austin, as it is worth. Or were these men of
such extraordinary worth that they needed no Papal testimony? Rather to
affirm this were to deny the Popes Supremacy: a point of greater danger in
Rome, than to say in England any could be made Dukes or Earls without the
Kings Majesty's consent or approbation. How then came these reverend Fathers by
such honor, as has bin done unto them for many hundredth years by the
universal Church? More by custom than by express law or solemn warrant.
Bellar. de Sanct. beat. lib. 1. cap. 8.
Bellarmine out of Aquinas, prima secundae quaest. 97. Articulo 3. gives us to
understand, that as customs in other cases have the force of laws, from the
tacit consent of the Prince (without which they have no force at all; but
rather antiquity of error and continuance of corruption:) so the worship of
Saints though brought in by the general custom of particular Churches, has
just force and authority either from the express or racite approbation of the
Pope. He is the sole spiritual Monarch Bellar. ibid.
. I have often read it (though I never believed it,) that the visible head of
the Church speaking ex cathedra, cannot err in matters of faith: but I never
suspected it had been any where written what now I read in Bellarmine, that
the body of the Church cannot err in matters of fact, made public only by
example and custom, (whose original is more hard to be found out than the
head of Nilus) if it shall please the Pope to be silent or not to pronounce
against them ex cathedra. But we must cease to be men, before we can believe
his Holiness to be such an omnipotent God, as can make all them Saints whom
the people throughout most Churches have made choice of for their Patrons. Such
abuses as bad custom had brought into some places about the time of Alexander
the third, might, for ought we know, have overspread many Churches in times
before.

2. But if the Popes approbation be sufficient to warrant the public
adoration of Saints, Alexander the third was two ways too blame. First, in
seeking to reform the abuses or bad customs of most particular Churches;
seeing these by his connivence would have been no abuses, or by his
approbation lawful services. Secondly, in so applying his medicine as there
was no likelihood but it should rather exasperate, than assuage the present
disease or prevent future contagion. For how far did he restrain the people
from wonted superstition? Did he prohibit all men to present their devotions
upon their knees, or to vow pilgrimages to any that were not canonized by him
or his Successors? No; in that the words of the Decree expressly forbid all
public worship of Saints not canonized; the Interpretors gather, it was his
purpose to allow them private worship. They may yet have household Saints of
their own choosing, to whom they may tender all the points of religious
obsequies hitherto mentioned, not in secret only, but as many looking on as
lift, so it be not in the open Church or in solemn service. For public
worship, (such as in that Decree is only forbidden) is not opposed to secret
or private worship, where none besides God and good friends be present. The
prohibition of it, unless the penalty be great, and the inquiry strict,
licenceth any worship, that is not tendered in the name, and as the institution
of the whole Church. Now, as Printers sometimes gain more by forbidden books,
then by such as are authorized for public sale: so has the devil found
opportunity to enlarge his service, by this unseasonable restraint of it. The
universal prohibition to worship any for Saints in public Liturgies that
were not canonized, has, by a kind of Antiperistasis, intended the peoples
superstitious bent to worship more private Saints than otherwise would have
been thought on, with greater devotion in their chambers or private chappells,
than if their open service had been authorized in Churches. A man may take a
deadly surfeit as well at home as at a public feast; and spiritual
surfeiting or drunkenness being the disease, which Pope Alexander sought to
cure, his prescript was no better, than if a Physician should strictly charge
an intemperate glutton or drunkard to be abstemious at great feasts abroad,
leaving him to his bellies discretion, at his own Table or amongst his
companions in private meetings.

3. This our judgment (by these Analogies) upon Pope Alexanders successe-lesse
medicine, wants not approved experiments. For the intolerable abuse of
submissiue servitude to a numberless rout of base and obscure private Saints,
was never greater, never more rise than in the ages between the reformation
pretended by Pope Alexander, and Luther. And (it seems) the Sess. 25. de
Invocatione.
Trent Council was partly of this mind, in that to Bishops within their
Diocesses, it leaves more authority in judging of miracles, in admission of
new relics, in setting up new fashioned images, than the former decree (by
Bellarmines interpretation) did. Yet if any doubtful case, or questionable
abuse of greater moment, should any where happen: the consent and advise of the
Metropolitan and other neighbor Bishops must be demanded in a provincial
Synod, before the Bishop of the Diocese take upon him precisely to determine
one way or other; always provided that no novelties or rites, before unusual
in the Church be established before they know his Holiness pleasure.

CHAPTER XL.
That the medicine on which the present Romish Church does now rely is worse
than the disease it self. That they make the Pope a greater God than the
Heathen did any other God besides Jupiter.

1. FRom this positive decree we may infer, that not all their private doctors
only, as Valentian and Bellarmine in the name of the rest avouch, but their
whole Church representative, the Council and Pope, jointly agree in this
conclusion, Whatsoever religious rite or form of worship is once approved by
the Pope (thus consulted) may not be suspected of superstition, etc. And when
the Council professes their desire, that all superstition may be abandoned in
the invocation of Saints, the adoration of relics, or worshipping of images;
their meaning was, as if they had prayed that the Pope would approve of
whatsoever the people should publicly practice; for it is but another part of
the former conclusion, that all whom he shall vouchsafe to canonize, may be
lawfully adored by the universal Church in public and solemn Liturgies; so
that to worship such, is now more necessary than it was before.

2. Never had the infernal powers, since their fall, so just occasion given
them by any creatures, of insultation and triumph at the wonderful success of
their policies, as by these latter Romanists; who as well by Apologizing for
their superstition toward the dead (whereof others have challenged them,) as by
seeking to reform some gross abuses whereof themselves were ashamed, have
been fetched over to commit more detestable and more blasphemous idolatry with
living men, than any Heathen ever did with their deceased Heroicks, with their
false Gods, or true devils. Such as worshipped those beastly Roman Emperors,
whom their Successors consecrated, were not bound to believe, nor could their
Successors persuade themselves, that the Senate could not err, or do amiss
in decreeing divine honor to them. That people not knowing what faith meant,
did only as their chief Magistrates commanded them, nor did these command all
throughout the Empire to be partakers with them in their idolatrous worship.
But now to dispute whether the Pope do well or amiss in canonizing men after
death, whom he knew not living; is held a point of heresy or infidelity. His
absolute infallibility as well in declaring who are Saints, as in determining
what honor is due unto them, is pressed upon us as a Maxim of faith. And is not
this to worship him with divine honor? That conceit which the old Romans had
of their consecrated Emperors, came as far short of this divine excellency,
which Papists imagine in the Pope, as the Jews opinion of their Messiah whom
they expected should be a King, does of that esteem which true Christians make
of Christ, whom they adore as God. The superstitious knowledge, or rather the
practical ignorance of the true God differs no otherwise in Rome-Heathen*
and Rome-Christian, than the ordinary knowledge of Christ in the old Testament
and in the New. The idolatry of Rome-Heathen agrees with the idolatry of
Rome-Christian, as the type or shadow with the body or substance.

3. Bellarmine gives Melancthon the lie for saying the Romish Church ascribes
a divine power to Saints in knowing men's thoughts. I ask them, not knowing our
thoughts, how can they know our petitions? No Catholic (says he) did ever
teach, that they know our prayers as they are co^ceived in our minds, but as
they are in God, who reveals them to his Saints and Angels. He would not thus
fiercely avert the imputation of the Antecedent, unless he knew the inference
to be legal and unavoidable. To pray then to Saints, out of presumed belief
that they know the secrets of our hearts, were by his confession to ascribe a
divinity unto them, and to worship them with divine honor: plain idolatry.
Therefore they pray unto them out of assurance that God who sees our hearts,
acquaints them with our hearts desires. Yet that one Saint, that every Saint
should by this means know every man's prayers, that is enjoined to pray unto
them, necessarily supposes a participation of that infinite knowledge, which
is incommunicable. To see the secrets of man's heart, is one of Gods peculiar
titles. If Saints by enjoying his presence, enjoy this sight; no reason can be
conceived why in seeing him they may not see all things that are in him, all
that he sees. And so they shall not be only Gods, but (as was observed before)
Gods Almighty by participation. But admitting that all such as enjoy Gods
presence do hear our prayers; I demand what ground of belief Roman
Catholics can have that many whom they must pray unto, are partakers of Gods
presence? Only this; The Pope has canonized them. But seeing the world is
full of dissimulation and hypocrisy; seeing men are partial to give better
testimony of such as they seek to prefer, than they can deserve: how can his
Holiness know them to be true Saints, unless he know their hearts by better
testimony than humane? As a Christian, he knows that only the pure in heart
enjoy the blessed sight of God. But how can he so infallibly know, as becomes a
Pope, whether such as lived in England, in Spain, in Asia, America, or other
remote parts of the world, were pure in heart or but hypocrites? If he may err
in this knowledge, the people must err in practice.

4. Their resolution of this point comes to this final issue. Saints
celestial see our hearts in seeing God. Roman Catholics see the integrity
and purity of their hearts, whose faces they never saw, in the Pope or by
reading his decrees. He stands as God to them on earth, as the true God is to
the Saints in heaven. He knows as certainly who goes to heaven, and what they
do there, as God knows what is done in earth. And out of this confident
belief of his infallible all-seeing spirit, his creatures pray to S. Francis,
Dominicke, Aquinas, as unto secondary or intermediate Intercessors, with the
same assurance of faith, that they do to Christ, as to their principal
Mediator. And reason they have so to do. God Almighty has said that Christ
is in heaven; and the Pope has said of Aquinas, Dominicke, or some other, they
are in heaven. Thus like foolish Mariners or Fresh water Soldiers, after they
had been long carried up and down with the blasts of vain doctrine, fearing
ship-wracke in the open Ocean of former ages idolatry, (and yet ashamed to
return to the Haven whence they loosed, lest wise men should laugh at them)
they put in at the jaws of hell for Harbor.

SECTION V.
Of the transformation of the Deity or divine power in his nature, attributes,
word, or will revealed.

CHAPTER XLI.
Transformation of the divine nature does issue from the same original or
general fallacy, from which Idolatry and multiplicitie of Gods was observed
to issue, Chapter 17.

1. AMONGST the Heathen, many, who did not altogether so vainly multiply
their gods, did most grossly misfigure the divine nature or Godhead. The
common root to both these branches of error, but from which the latter does
more directly spring and take more kindly, was pronenesse to conceive of
matters heavenly and invisible according to the best form or pattern, which
they had of matters visible or earthly. Now to be sole Lord of the whole earth,
without consorts of like nature, would be a life (to the wisest and healthiest
of men) most irksome. And the Philosopher out of a popular opinion, either of
his own or times more ancient, makes competent store of friends or
alliances, necessary supporters of faelicitie. Now as that happiness which in
this life they hoped for, supposed friends or other contentments; so the common
notion of the Godhead included in it a conceit of happiest life. Jupiter
himself, by whose provident care and magnificence, the security and good
estate of all the rest was procured, and their necessities abundantly
furnished, could not in their opinions sufficiently enjoy himself, or be (...)
without associates. Hence they imagined such a corresspondency between him and
other gods or goddesses of meaner rank, as is between the father of every
family, his wife and children and other domestickes: or as is between the
chief of every Tribe or Clan, and his alliance or dependants; or at the best
such as is between Princes and the several orders of their Nobility. All the
difference for the most part apprehended by them, consisted rather in the
diversity of degree or order, than in any difference of nature. Parallel to
their several notions of felicity (whether private or public) were as well
the nature and attributes of the greatest God, as his manner of government
proportioned. The form of celestial regiment was by most voices held
Monarchical or Royal, because that by consent of Nations was esteemed best.
Howbeit in as much as Tyrannical abuse of Kingly authority had made it
odious, it seemed good to have it tempered in heaven, as it usually was on
earth, by admixture of Aristocraticall Subpeeres, by Tribunitiall inhibitions
of fates, or intercession of other imaginary powers supposed as absolute for
some particular purposes, as Jove himself was for right disposing the
universal Such as held external feature no small part of their felicity,
imagined the Gods and Goddesses to be of most rare and admirable feature. But
the belly had neither eyes nor ears, nor can it be pleased with pleasant
sonets though of feastings, or with fairest pictures of daintiest meats. Men
pinched with hunger or ready to perish for want of looking to, have small
desire of wealth or greatness, save only for bettering their fare or
attenda^ce. Such smell-feasts, as Homer was, or rather such as he sought to
please, or set forth unto us, conceived the life of their Gods to be such, as
themselves would have led, had they been in their place. The greatest part of
heavenly joy seemed to consist in the quintessence of such delicates as they
had seen or tasted, or in the magnificent variety of royal service. Not much
better was the degenerate Jews conceit of the sacrifice appointed by their
God. For that reproof; [ Think thou that I will eat the flesh of Bulls, or
drink the blood of Goats?] seems to argue a like faultiness in them of
measuring the Almighties delight by their own appetite.

2. Others out of a Philosophical derision of high prized vanities or
superfluities, transformed the nature of the Gods into that disposition, which
liked them best. Vacancy from care was the body, innoxious merriment or
recreation the soul of that happiness, which they affected as their portion
in this life: the whole world was to them but a stage, wherein Princes and
Statesmen served as Actors, the alteration of States and Kingdoms, but matter
of Comoedie to feed their fantasies and pass the time. Agreeable to this
humor their opinion was, that the chief use or care the Gods had of men of
best wit, place, or fashion was no other, than men had of Apes or Munkeies, or
then great ones have of fools and jesters, or Lords of misrules; which kind
of ridiculous creatures are ofttimes better kept and attended, then befits
their quality, merely for their sport that maintain them.

3. Such as had rightly valued the secret joy of contemplation in regard of all
other contentments or solaces of mortality, rested secure they had done the
divine nature no wrong, but grace rather, in admitting it to be chief sharer
in this kind of pure delight. Aristotle thinks, that if the sweetness of that
joy, which sometimes had raught his spirits, could be continued fresh and lively
without interruption of contrary disturbances, defatigation, or satietie, it
might make up so full a measure of felicity, as might well befit the
principal mouer, or supreme disposer of the heavenly Orbs, that is the
supreme power, which he knew or did acknowledge.

4. Out of the grossest speculations of heathen concerning God much matter of
no vulgar consequence might be extracted. Howbeit the best of their wisdom
was always mingled with folly, and the purest truth, that can be found in
their writings, still detained in unrighteousness. As in that book De Mundo
ad Alexandrum (ascribed to Aristotle by greater authorities of the ancient,
then will easily be overswayed by noetericall Criticismes, or modern
conjectures) how many passages be there consonant to Christian truth about the
unity, the wisdom, and glory of the Godhead: and yet while he seeks to
surpass himself in exemplifying the excellency of divine Majesty, he finally
transformes it into the corrupt likeness of the Persian Monarchy. To reserve
causes of principal importance to the Prince, referring others of ordinary
moment to the inferior Judges, was a point of wisdom apprehended by the
ancient heathen, yet quickly assented unto by Moses, the man of God and chief
governor of his people. This advise, which he followed upon necessity, was
afterward entertained by secular Princes as the mother of ease or nurse of
pleasure; by many improved to the maintenance of their Majesty. The author of
the former book could measure the Persian Monarchs greatness by multitude of
subjects and amplitude of dominions. But to match these with an equal extent
of provident care for the good of most particulars, was to diminish his pomp
or glory; a great impeachment to his happiness. Glorious and happy he rather
seemed in this, that having the absolute command of so many, he needed to
trouble himself with the governance only of some few Provinces, by nature
more choice and delicate, much beautified by art, as so many pleasant gardens
to entertain his royal presence with variety of delight. The charge and
oversight of others, affording less solace and more toil, was assigned to
Vicegerents; whose accounts (if called they were at any time to account) were
as speedily dispatched, as the brief instructions for their proceedings were
given. This over-prizing the contentments of Monarchical life, whose practice
could plead no warrant besides the limited perfection of humane excellency,
occasioned a like transfiguration of the divine Majesty as well in the
Latins, as in the Graecians: Magna Dij curant, parva negligunt. Cic. 2. de
natura Deorum prope finem. The Gods have a care of great matters, but neglect
the smaller. Non vacat exiguis rebus adesse Iovi. He who had made the earth and
all therein, must leave the charge and government of it and all the rest of
this inferior tumultuous Globe (as little beseeming so great a Majesty) unto
his Angels or Deputie-gods. The super celestial region must be to him as was
Susa or Ecbatana to the Persian Kings, not only the sole garden of his delight
or total sphere of his residence, but the complete horizon of his glorious
sight: the immortal inhabitants thereof, the only pupills, of whom, without
disparagement to his dignity, or impairement of his joy or happiness, he
might vouchsafe to take immediate and personal charge.

5. Some relics of this Gentiles error, which had been abandoned upon the
promulgation of the Gospel, have been broacht again in Schoole-disputes,
which usually smell too much of those Heathenish Caskes, whence much of them is
drawn. Vorstius his denial of the vbiquitie or absolute immensitie of the
divine nature, or his essential coexistence to every place, whether real or
imaginable, has been distilled out of the very dreggs of the former
transformation. Nor does these Schoole-mens doctrine relish better, which after
a formal discussion of an unquestionable truth; (Whether Gods providence
extended in particular to flies or gnatts or such like diminutiue creatures, as
may rather seem fractions, or scattered offalls of Gods working, than any
entire or directly intended substances) have finally determined for the
negative. But were the whole host of flies or gnatts or baser creatures in
persuasion of the vulgar once exempted from Gods peculiar jurisdictio^, parties
much molested with them would easily be tempted to elect a new President for
them, and so Beel-zebub or Jupiter muscarum abactor might in time recover his
wonted rites by usurpation.

CHAPTER. XLII.
A parallel between the Heathen Poets and modern Roman Legendaries; between
Heathen Philosophers and Roman Schoolmen in their transformations, or
misperswasions of the divine nature, specially of his goodness.

1. TO prosecute all the transformations of the Deity made or occasioned by
heathen Poets or Painters, would be an endless work. Nothing more common,
though nothing in them more abominable than the representation of such factious
contentions or of such siding and banding betwixt the Gods, betwixt Jupiter
himself and Juno his supposed Consort; as they had observed in secular States
or Societies. Premente vno, fert Deus alter opem, One God protects the party
which another persecutes. Vulcan is against Troy, and Apollo stands for it.
Juno with the help of Eolus persecutes the Trojans by Sea, after the Graecians
had driven them out of their own Land. And whilst she expostulates with
Jupiter like a smart Huswife that takes her self for Quartermaster over her
own family, See Virgil in that passage: Tristior, et lachrymis oculos suffusa
nitentes, etc. Virgil Aeneid. l. 1.
Venus pleades Aeneas cause whom Juno persecutes, with such importunity that
Jupiter himself is enforced to humor her with such courteous language and fair
promises, as a tender hearted father would use unto his darling Daughter much
offended or cast down with discontent.

2. It will be no paradoxe I hope to affirm or suppose, that the preeminence
of the only son of God over the Saints whether in heaven or on earth, is or
ought to be in Christian Divinity much greater than Jupiters preeminence in
Heathenish Theology was in respect of other Gods. Notwithstanding the fabulous
Roman Legendary makes inferior Saintesses such Consorts to our Savior, as
Juno in the Heathen Poets Divinity was to Jupiter. In respect of the blessed
Virgin, whom they make Queene-mother and Regent of Heaven, He is but as the
young Prince or pupil, whom this his supposed Gardianesse may and does give in
marriage to her hand-maides. The whole solemnity of the marriage betwixt him
and S. Catharine, besides the historical narratio^ as authentic to them as
the Gospel, is so lively represented in most exquisite cutts, as every
credulous Roman Catholic might if need were be ready to make affidavit,
that he saw the blessed Virgin give Ips^ bacc^analibus mundo in v^t^a effuso,
oranti apparet Christus eum S. S. matre virgin, D Paulo, S. Iohanne Evang. B.
Dominico and Davide Rege (...) pu^sante, De^a^a virginis dextram Christo
porrigit, qui eam sibi in sponsam suscipit and (...) a^lo pretioso exo^nat. D.
Catharinae Senensis Selectiora miracula formis Aeneis expressa A^verpia apud
Philippum Gallaeum. 1603.
S. Catharine in marriage to her son, that he saw Christ putting the ring
upon her finger, and that S. Paul, S. John the Evangelist, S. Dominick and King
David were present at the marriage, King David playing upon the Harp or
Psalterie. Had this story been extant only in some ancient Legend before
Luthers time, I should have spared the mentioning of it, but finding it in a
book dedicated by a Dominican Friar to the Provincial of that order
throughout the lower Germany, and licenced to the Press at Antwerp within
these two and twenty years, I leave it to the Readers consideration, whether
Romish Monasteries be not privileged from the reformation of superstition
pretended by Pope Innocent the second, by Alexander the third, or by the Trent
Council. And lest Rome-Christian should be out-vied by Rome-Heathen or other
Heathens foolish conceits concerning their Gods or Goddesses, the most
fabulous or most hideous metamorphosis of Jupiter into diverse shapes mentioned
by any Heathen Poet, is more than reciprocally paralleld by the transformation
of S. Catharine into our Savior Christ. And lest the Reader might suspect that
the eyes of Raymund her Confessor did but dazzle, or that the vision which he
saw was but deceptio visus, the Legendary has painted her speaking unto him
with the voice and mouth of God Multis pressa morbis decumbens, dum B. Raymu^do
Confessario quadam Divinitus revelata communicate; ipso in quibusdam
subdubitante, subito facies virginis front ac oculis solis instar micantibus,
in Christi faciem commutatur. Territo autem atque inclamanti Confessario; Quis
est qui mecum loquitur? respondit, est qui est. The same Author. Ibidem.
himself.

3. The Roman Catholic that would take upon him to justify the truth of
this Metamorphosis, might allege for himself and in favor of this Legendary,
that the new heart which our Savior upon her earnest and often entreatie put
into this his Spouse, S. Catharine, was such a heart as the voice was, non
hominis sed Dei, not the heart of a woman but of God. That our Savior did pull
out her old heart, and put in a new one in very deed, the Diu sponsum precata
vt cor mundum et novu^ traderet, apparet ei Christus, divellitque ab eius
pectore cor vetus, novumque restituit. Quod sane vsque adeo reipsa factum est,
vt sacri vulneris cicatrix in virgineo pectore perpetuo manserit. The
forementioned Author, to wit, Michael Ophouius, a licentiate in Divinity and
Dominican Friar of Antwerp in his forementioned book dedicated to the right
reverend Father. Andrew H^ynfius Provincial of lower Germany.
Legendary avoucheth in good earnest. And if any man had been as hard of
belief in this point as S. Thomas was in the article of our Saviors
resurrection, the scarre of the sacred wound which our Savior made when he
pulled out her old heart and put in a new one, did perpetually remain in the
Virgins breast, as an ocular demonstration to convince the incredulous. Though
both be without excuse, yet heathen Poets are less inexcusable in that many of
their fabulous metamorphosis may admit an allegorical meaning or emblematicall
importance, whereas the Roman Legendaries for the most part tie themselves and
the Readers that can believe their miraculous narrations, to a plain literal
historical sense.

4. Altogether as gross and less excusable than any heathen Philosopher, is
the Romanist in seeking to persuade, or justify the daily implored
intercession of Saints by the vulgarly approved practice of Court-petitions,
which on poor men's parts seldom well succeed without the intermediation of
some great favorite or domestical attendant of the Prince. This course, though
by necessity made lawful to all, few subjects to our present Sovereign would
follow, were they fully persuaded his Highness could without declarations ore
tenus or written petitions, either perfectly understand their unjust grievances
or hear their hearty prayers, though far distant, or afford time sufficient
to take notice of their miserable estate, without molestation or disturbance to
his health, contentment, or more weighty consultations. Now lest the people
should think too meanly of the Romish Church or her children, if they should
openly confess such erroneous practices, as could have found no entrance into
any Christians heart but through ignorance of Scriptures and incogitancie of
divine providence; they secretly nurse in their auditors an Heathenish
misconceipt of Gods power and goodness, as if either he cannot or will not
take immediate notice of all petitions faithfully exhibited. To say he cannot
hear all that sue unto him, is to deny the infinity of his wisdom; to say
he cannot redress their wrongs or effect their prayers heard, is to gainesay
his omnipotency: to say he will not both ways do, what is best for all
faithful petitioners, is to make his mercy and loving kindnesses to his
people, less than most Princes bear unto their meanest subjects, and to
debase his fidelity and veracitie below the rate of common honesty. For
should (I say not, any royal hearted Prince or nobly minded Potentate, but)
any honestly disposed, able to succor us, solemnly invite us to open our
grievances unto themselves engaging their credit to hear us, as readily as any
for us; we should much disparage their fidelity by bribing or soliciting their
followers to be our spokesmen. Yet says the wisdom, the son of God, God
blessed for ever: Come unto me all ye that are weary, and heavy laden; and I
will refresh you. And must we with young Samuel run from the Lord thus solemnly
by his own mouth inviting us, unto old Elies, which never call us? No: it is a
way as more compendious, so far more safe, to say as often as this or the
like everlasting invitation sounds in our ears, Speak Lord; for thy servant
hears: or, Hear Lord; for thy servant asks. Thou have commended continual
prayer, directed not to others but to thy self or thy Father for thy sake, as
a duty necessary to all. Thou have assured us we can never be too importunate
with him, though we never cease to implore his favor; yea that for our
importunity we shall be heard. O remember this ye that have forgotten God and
his goodness, lest he tear you in pieces, and there be none that can deliver
you: lest of that infinite number of Saints, whom in worshipping you have not
honored but disgraced and slaundered as Jewish receptors of your sacrilegious
devotions, not one appear to make intercession for you but all against you.
For why? ye have robbed God of his honor as despitefully and shamefully, as
did those idolatrous Israelites, for whose plagues that great Prophet and Saint
of God became solicitor.

5. Every inclination unto evil is apprehensiue of opportunities; the greater
always readier to take occasion, where none is given, of doing amiss; and
ofttimes apt to be most provoked by such motives, as in reason should restrain
it. As for the son of God begotten of his Father before all worlds, to
vouchsafe to be conceived and borne of a woman in the fullness of time and in
this decrepite age of the world, was a wonderful document not only of Gods
unspeakable love toward mankind, but also of his inconceivable wisdom in
contriving the Redemption of the weaker sex, the manner of whose transgression
had made their estate more desperate, and the means of their recovery more
difficult. Yet how has the conceit of Christ's humiliation here on earth, of
his dependence on his mother during the time of his formation and birth, and of
his subjection to her in his infancy, brought forth preposterous and more than
heathenish transformations of his glory in the superstitious daughters of the
idolatrous Church? They cannot conceive Christ as King, unless they
acknowledge her as Queen Dowager of heaven: her title of Lady is ^quiparant to
his title of Lord; her authority for some purposes held as great, her bowels
of compassion (toward the weaker sex especially) more tender. And as the
Heathens frame Gods suitable to their own desire, soliciting them most (though
otherwise less potent) whom they conceive to be most favorable to their
present suites: so has the blessed Virgin throughout the Romish Church
obtained (what she never sought) the entire monopoly of women's prayers in
their travailes; as if her presence at others distressefull labors (for she
her self by their doctrine brought forth her first borne and only son
without pain) had wrought in her a truer feeling or tenderer touch, than the
high Priest of their souls can have of their infirmities; or as if she would
use more faithful and effectual intercession with her son, than he can or
will do with his Father. Some in our times, out of the weakness of their sex
matching with the impetuousnesse of their adulterous and disloyal zeal, have
in this kind been so impotently outrageous, as to intercept others
supplications directed to Christ, and superscribe them in this form unto his
mother; Blessed Lady, command thy son to hear this woman's prayers, and send
her deliverance. These, and the like speeches have moved some good women, in
other points tainted rather with superstition than preciseness, to dispense
with the law of secrecy seldom violated in their parliaments: and I know not
whether I should attribute it to their courage or stupiditie, not to be more
affrighted at such blasphemies, than at some monstrous and prodigious birth.
This and the like inbred inclinations unto superstition in the rude and
vninstructed people, are more artificially set forward by the fabulous Roman
Legendary and his Limmer; than the like were in the Heathen by Heathen Poets
and Painters. Witness that Page in the Legend of S. Dominicke written by a
Dominican Friar of Antwerpe and dedicated to the General of that order in the
year 1611. The device is, our Savior Christ ready to dart his three arrows
of famine, war, and pestilence upon the inhabitants of the earth for their
wickedness, and the blessed Virgin his mother staying his hand upon her
undertakings for a speedy reformation to be wrought to his contentment, by S.
Francis and S. Dominicke.

Vita et miracula S. P. Dominici praedicatorij ordinis primi Institutoris
Antuerpiae apud Theod. Gallaeum. 1611. Author. Fr: I^an. Nys Dominican. See the
same story in prose in the festival for the Sunday called Sexagesima, printed
in the second year of Henry 8. Anno. 1511.
Vindicibus scelerum telis Deus impetit orbem.
At virgo; Iratam comprime, Nate, manum.
Spondeo, ait, meliora, homines quicorrigat, ille
Est mihi Franciscus, quin mihi Dominicus.
The world with sinne-revenging darts to smite,
the Lord He threats:
Her Son to stay his wrathful hand,
our Lady thus intreates;
All shall be well, men will amend,
I promise, do not fear:
St Francis He this cure shall work,
with Dominick my dear.
6. But that, which surpasses all misconceipts of ancient Heathens, of
Turks, Mahumetans, or other modern infidells, is contained in their implicit
belief of the Catholic Church, since it was contracted into the bosom of
the Pope. In the former point of Intercession; amongst many false ones sundry
true Saints were entitled to some part of that honor, of which they have
spoiled God: in this they disrobe him of his fundamental and most glorious
attributes, to adorn and beautify wicked monsters; fashioning the
infallibility of his promises and immutable counsel of his most sacred will,
to the inconstancy of tyrannical lust, or fluctuant resolutions of treacherous
and perfidious miscreants. In the former point, Saints and Angels were but
abetters of their idolatry. In this latter God himself is made the sworn
patron of murder, incest, and all manner of cruelty; the heavenly regiment of
his Church on earth is transformed into a Machievillian tyranny, not contented
to have stained the beauty of the spouse, lest her deformities being openly
descried, should publicly be detested; they seek in latter days to disfigure
the bridegroom, and, with the wicked one in the Psalmist, misdeeme their
Redeemer to be like unto them, because he holds his peace at these
abominations; impiously presuming, that in the day of final judgment Christ
shall ratify, whatsoever the Pope ex cathedra has determined: as if your
judgment for this infidelity or their credulity, that herein believe you,
were not already past, as if Gods vengeance did sleep, while he were silent.
This point though prosecuted upon other occasions more at large before, I could
not in this place so quickly leave, were it not that I shall have cause to
meet with it with fuller indignation hereafter. For I will yet pray against
this their wickedness, from which this Land can never be sufficiently purged,
until the whole seduced flock be constrained by severe execution of wholesome
laws to do public penance in their Apostaticall Pastors, and blasphemous
seducers ashes.

CHAPTER. XLIII.
Of particular transformations or misperswasions of divine goodness alike
common to the corrupt professors of true Religion, as to the zo^lous professors
of corrupt Religion.

1. Grossness in opinions solemnly avouched, reduced to method or instamped
with the public seal of authority, is easily discovered by all, to whom
long accustomance has not made their poison in a sort familiar, or as part of
daily food. Every punie rightly catechized in the points of doctrine
publickely established in our Church, can clearly discern the late mentioned
or other like transformations of the Deity, whether Heathenish or Romanish.
But did each of us privately use the orthodoxall form of wholesome doctrine
publicly professed as a true glass for discovering as well the obliquitie of
our own practical resolutions, as the errors of others known opinions; most
of us might see just cause to think, that we did secretly wrong the divine
essence no less, than they do whom we condemn of open sacrilege and
idolatry. No man's passions in this life can be so moderate (if happily
immoderate love of his moderatenesse make him not so partial, as not to
observe them) but may afford him experimental grounds of this conclusion.
There is no habitual exorbitance of desire or affection, but secretly works a
Parallel transfiguration of the Deity; no stain or foul deformity in life
or manners, whereto we give indulgence and dispensation, but will cast the
like aspersion upon the immaculate Majesty. To imagine him, that is the best
of all, to be like us in those things, which we best like or most approve, is
an error almost inseparable from the corruption of our nature, oftimes rather
lopped than utterly extirpated by infusion of grace.

2. Dispositions by nature austere and rigid, or otherwise by height of place
emboldned to practice severitie, as the supporter of awe and reverence, or as
an Antidote against contempt, conceit no sacrifice so acceptable unto God, as
strict execution of laws for the most part preposterously partial and severe.
And if the great Moderator of heaven and earth permit the accomplishment of
their designs, he is apprehended as a favourer of their desires. What seems
good to them, the same once effected is entertained as an effect of divine
goodness. So Saul would make God the author and approver of the Ziphits
kindness toward himself, and bestow a blessing upon them, as presuming of
the Lords consent: 1. Sam. 23.21.
Blessed be ye of the Lord; for ye have compassion on me: when as not the
least degree of compassion or kindness toward him, but was extreme cruelty
against poor David, a man after Gods own heart. And it is a point very
questionable; Whether the deformedly zealous or hard-hearted Magistrate (I
mean no Atheist,) or the Jews that offered their children unto Molech, do God
more wrong? The one mistook the father of murder and cruelty for a God; the
other make the only and true God, which has no pleasure in sacrifice or burnt
offerings, to be delighted in blood; not of Bulls and Goats, but of poor and
miserable men. Every rigid exactor of his own, whether by using the permitted
benefit of humane law, or misconstrued warrant of laws divine, disfigures his
Creator and makes him a God of justice only. On the other side, such as are
ready to kill themselves and their friends with kindness, frame a God of mercy
and bounty; utterly dismembered of justice, of indignation, and severitie. The
dissolute and wanton condemn even necessary austeritie of discipline or any
set rules of life, of Pharisaisme or enimitie against Christ; whom by the same
error, they misconceiue to be much what like themselves, though no consort of
their riotous or dissolute courses, yet one, that will save them sooner, than
most of such as seem more holy. For did he not open heaven gates to Publicans
and open sinners, when they were shut to Scribes and Pharisees? But alas poor
souls, they consider not, that Publicanes and notorious sinners found mercy
unsought for, to the end that succeeding ages, how great soever their offenses
were, should not despair to find it, when they diligently sought it. Though
God have mercy in as great store for us, as for these first Converts of the
Gentiles, yet may we not desire it by such extraordinary means, as they had
it. We in the search of it must frame our lives to the pattern which they had
set us, after it had found them. They meeting with it, took a solemn farewell
of their former sinful courses: so then mercy showed to them, when they were
alients from faith, and blasphemers of the truth, did bring forth true
repentance. And all our hopes of mercy or persuasions of actual being in the
state of grace, unless they be mingled with a correspondent measure of true
repentance, are but the painted fruits of Pharisaicall and Jewish blasphemy.
To the former sort of these delinquents, to the rigid, and hard-hearted
offender, he will declare himself to be such, as they secretly imagine him to
be, a God of judgment without mercy, because they have showed no mercy to
their brethren. To the latter (to the dissolute and presumptuous,) he will
approve himself such, as they expect not; his justice, which they least fear,
will suddenly overtake them, while his mercy, with which they have dallied,
shall fly from them.

3. It is hard for any man seasoned with the rudiments of Christian faith to
have his heart so full stuffed with malice, as shall leave no confused notion of
Christian charity in his head, with whose abstract beauty or amiable aspect
simply considered, the most wicked are enamoured. But as the natural knowledge
of God was by the Heathen; so the notions of his graces are still detained in
unrighteousness by Christians, in whom any kind of iniquity reigns. Nor is
it strange, if self-love, which is the common nursery of all misconceipts in
moralities, bring forth delusorious imaginations of brotherly loves inherence
in hearts, wherein outrageous malice keeps close residence; seeing to be
charitably minded toward others, is a quality, that makes us most
commendable. No man, that thinks too charitably of himself, but will easily
be persuaded, that he is as charitable, as any man living toward others;
toward such especially to whom charity is most due. To speak well of Christ
and their King, no man more forward, than some kind of drunkards. What they
have heard concerning Christ's loving kindness toward men, they never
apprehend so affectionately, as when their hearts are dilated with pleasant
liquor. Of other love and benignity, than what the cup does minister, they
have no distinct notion or experience. And, if at any time they be sweetly
merry without quarrelling or offense; or if each tickle other with exchange of
mutual applause or delightful toys; they mistake their meetings for feasts
of charity. Some of this sect, will not stick to profess how highly they
scorn, that any dull sour Stoics devotion, at Gods board, should be so well
seasoned with love, as are their friendly pastimes at Bacchus table. But if
Gods Ambassador, as time and place require, shall open his mouth against them,
it is in their construction but to give a vent unto malice, with whose
abundance his heart would otherwise burst. To think thus maliciously of
others, is held by them in this humor especially, rather an effect, than breach
of charity. For not being able to distinguish that true and absolute good,
which they ought at all times most to affect, from that, which seems good to
them thus affected, they kindly well-come their eager desires of enjoying the
wonted pleasures of good fellowship without molestation, for the fruits of
peace. There is no foul of the air nor beast of the field, either by kind or
breeding so wild or brutish, as to abandon all terms of love, or desire of
peace with some others; but that excessive love, which ravenous beasts bear to
their young ones or consorts, does still animate them with rage and fury against
man, their lawful Sovereign, and whets their appetite to devour and prey with
more than wonted greediness, upon silly and harmless creatures. In like sort
that love, which bad minded men mutually foster among themselves, always
proves the mother of deadly hatred and uncharitableness toward all such, as
love God and his laws; for these are greatest enemies to that kind of peace,
which they only know, and most desire. Thus by a worse error, than can rightly
be emblematized by lxions fabulous imaginations* the fumes of wine are often
mistaken for the motions of the spirit, factious amity goes current for true
Christian society, riotous mirth or other unhallowed solace is entertained as
the comfort or peace of conscience: and (which is worst of all) Christ is worse
slaundered by such consorts, than he was by the Scribes and Pharisees; not for
a companion only of Publicanes and sinners, but for a Patron of riot, a friend
of dissoluteness.

4. Yet are not these the principal offenders in this kind, because their
offenses, though oftentimes fowlest in the sight of men, are not so odious unto
the Searcher of all hearts, as the enormities of others, who presume more of
his special favor and approbation. Many biting usurers or oppressors will be
ready to interpret the extraordinary increase of their estate; Merchants or
great dealers, their success in cheating or unconscionable bargainings;
ambitious minds, the atchieving of their bad suites or unlawful promotions,
as undoubted blessings of their God, and sure pledges of his peculiar
providence: when as in truth they are but baytes, laid by Satan to make them
sacrifice in heart to their own devises, or to his lusts, while with their
lips they offer praises unto the Lord. All the misperswasions hitherto
mentioned, are but so many reciprocations of that deception, which was observed
before to be the maine Conduit or common spring of Idolatry in the Heathen. As
they admitted all for gods, which had done them any extraordinary good; so the
carnal minded Christian deriues every notable branch of sense-pleasing good,
from the only true invisible God. The transfiguration of divine essence is in
both cases, for quality, the same; albeit the Heathen Delinquent in ascribing
wealth to Mercury, luxury to Bacchus, (the one conceived as a god of cunning,
the other of riot, both flexible to men's desires, that would worship them) did
less offend, than Christians, aequally exorbitant, do in making the pure
immaculate Essence, author, abettor, or approver of their exorbitances. Any
furtherance of naughty desires or approbation of unrighteous dealing, suite
worse with the known nature of the true God, than the imagination of false
gods (fitted to such desires) did with those broken notions, which the vulgar
Heathen had of the Deity. The worst that can be objected to any Heathen, was
their adoration of monstrous, of vile or ugly creatures for gods. The Christian
in what kind soever alike exorbitant (if we compare his secret persuasions, or
presumptions either of Gods favorable affection or indulgence toward his
person, or approbation of his enormous actions, with his professed belief of
the same Gods absolute purity, justice, holiness, and vnpartialitie) makes
the Almighty Creator, which made him man (that is the comeliest of all visible
creatures) an hideous deformed monster. The fashioning of this invisible
Creator in visible shape; the multiplication of supposed divine powers so
fashioned, were rather accessaries than principalls in the nature of this sin
which we now reprove. At the least, to distract or divide the divine power into
several forms or portions not much disagreeable to some particular distinct
attributes of the true God, is less abominable than to frame a multiplicitie
of contrary wills, or commixture of dissonant affections or resolutions in one
indivisible, eternal, immutable Essence. The divine nature (says Nyssen. in
orat. Dominicam.
Nyssen) whatsoever it be besides, (for who can comprehend it?) is goodness,
holiness, power, glory, purity, aeternitie. Who is he then, may safely say
to him, My Father? He whose nature is goodness, can be no favourer of bad
desires, no patron of wicked purposes. He whose truth shines in whatsoever is
good, can be no countenancer of the oppressor or malefactor. If one, whose
conscience is branded with foul sins, shall before repentance claim kindred
of God; and being unjust and filthy, say to that just and holy one; My father!
his mouth (whiles he repeates his Pater Noster) vents no prayers but
contumelious slanders against God. For by calling him Father (whiles he
nourishes any known sins in his heart,) he makes him author, and
countenancer of his mischievous imaginations. These and the like declarations
of this ancient and learned writer upon the Lords prayer, may serve as an
orthodoxall Paraphrase or just Comment upon these sacred Texts of Scriptures:
Unto the wicked says God, What have thou to do to declare my statutes, or
that thou should take my covenant in thy mouth; seeing thou hate
instruction, and castest my words behind thee? When thou saw a thief, then
thou consentedst with him, and have been partaker with Adulterers. Thou give
thy mouth to evil, and thy tongue frames deceit. Thou sit, and speak
against thy brother; thou slaunderest thine own mothers son. These things
have thou done, and I kept silence: thou thoughtest, that I was altogether such
a one as thy self; but I will reprove thee, and set them in order before
thine eyes Psalm. 50. verse. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21.
. And if ye call him Father (says the Apostle) which without respect of
persons judges according to every man's work, pass the time of your dwelling
here in fear 1 Pet. 1. verse. 17.
.

5. Many excellent sayings, much what to the same effect with the former, has
Nyssene in the Treatise alleged; none more homogeneall to my last observation,
then his censure of such, as desire God to avenge their quarrels or plague
their enemies. This, as was late said, is to make him a monster, or (as much as
in us lies) to torture him; whilst we labor to work him to be of a quite
contrary disposition toward others, than we desire he should bear toward our
selves. Does a fountain (at the same eye or outbursting) send forth sweet
water and bitt^* But they, which thus pray, strive by one and the same breath
to quench and kindle the wrath of God. The issue of their prayers is; That he,
who is Lord and maker of all, to whom the destruction of many cannot be more
commodious, than the weal and safety of all, should be as a consuming fire or
malignant star to some, but as a sweet gleaming Spring Sun to warm and
cherish others. And yet much happier were this age, than any before it has
been, wore not the incomprehensible goodness of Omnipotent power, more
prejudiced by some modern Catechismes or Theological explications of his
nature and attributes, than by the uncharitable prayers of the Heathen, or of
rude and vncatechized Christians. Their errors, or unwarrantable glosses, shall
by Gods assistance elsewhere be severed as well from the ancient orthodoxall
truth, as from the sacred Texts, whereon they seek to ground their doctrine:
both being usually corrupted, or their purity not discerned by reason of their
commixture with man's corruption or the aspersio^s which it cast upon them. At
this time we only take opportunity to draw the poison of their opinions
rather than their opinions themselves, unto the same head, whereto the former
corrupt humors have been gathered.

CHAPTER XLIIII.
Of misperswasions concerning Justice, and Mercy divine.

1. THere is in all of us by nature (and it is the remediless remainder of our
first Parents pride) a greater desire to be great than to be good: by the
strength of this exorbitancy or sinister sway of inbred appetite, men of higher
place or estimation, for the most part, become more willing to do that, whence
their inferiors may receive wrong, than to have the case disputed or their
credit called in question, whether the harm redounding to others from their
peremptory resolutions be in its nature a wrong, or rather a necessary effect
of just authority. The aspersion, which this corruption of nature secretly
casts upon the Almighty, is that he may, yea does predestinate most souls
created by him to an endless life more miserable than this mortal life,
whereof some through sickness, others through age, most through one or other
miseries, are often weary: that he did preordaine Adams fall as an unavoidable
means for accomplishing this his irresistible will; and that all this may be
done without any impeachment to his infinite justice, goodness, or mercy so
solemnly avouched and much magnified in Scriptures. Peremptory positions or
determinations to this purpose, are in these men's judgments, far more safe,
than to question (though but for private satisfaction or resolution) whether
Gods absolute dominion over all creatures, may fully acquit him from all
suspicion of wrongful or hard using these supposed sons of reprobation? The
rigor of this opinion, in part occasioned by this means, finds opportunity
of enlarging it self in men, either more inclined or better able to effect
what they purpose by strong hand; then to forecast the certain atchieuements
of their purposes by multiplicitie of means severally sufficient, and all in
their kind moderate and just. For from this prejudicial approbation of those
courses as best, which breed them least trouble in dispatch of private
businesses, they pass over their assent, without further examination, to a
misgrowne branch of the former doctrine, [That Gods absolute decree for
manifesting his glory is like their peremptory resolutions for accomplishing
what they intemperately affect.] And these know no tenor, but one; [ Thus it
shall be, and no otherwise.] Such they are as leave no variety of means, no
possibility of choice, or indifferency for their instruments or actors. Yet
were the course of every secondary agent so infallibly levelled by the first
cause to those determinate effects which they produce, as that they could not,
without violation of the law, whereto his absolute will has tied them, be
inclined to any other; the perpetual operation of an infinite wisdom would
be superfluous to the continual governemen^ of heaven and earth. Wisdom more
than ordinary* (perhaps greater than Aristotle required in his principal
Mouer) might seem requisite for the first ordering or fixing the several
branches of the irresistable power, upon their determined and appointed ends;
unto which notwithstanding being once indissolubly chained (the number of
effects possible being in this opinion no more then are determinately and
inevitably future;) the same wit or skill, which serves to keep a clock,
would without further improuement abundantly suffice to order the whole course
of nature, to guide and moderate the everlasting revolutions of time.

2. Some offend, as lately has been debated, in seeking to enlarge Gods
justice by subtracting from his mercy, or contrariwise, every one semblably to
the suggestions of his peculiar disposition. The fault properly issuing from
the confluence of these humors last touched, is an extension of his power
beyond the circuit of his wisdom, and other attributes of like infinite
extent; which in undoubted consequence is to restrain and bridle that power,
which they would seem above others to enlarge, from extending so far as reason
with out Scripture may rightly conceive the force and efficacy of the first
cause may reach. As we may not give his honor to men or graven Images; so may
we not rob one of his attributes to enrich another. Although to speak, as
the truth in this case requires; he that minisheth any one attribute, does in
conclusion maime the rest.

3. The several places or instances of Scriptures, whereon the diversity of
opinions concerning Gods love or hate to his creatures is grounded; I must
hereafter warily touch and examine with that humility which becomes every true
Christian, especially such a mean member of the English Church as my self. In
the Interim (not intending to prejudice the conclusions usually received, or
well approved by learned Reformers of Religion) I may presume of every
charitable and impartial Readers leave, here and there to untwist so much or
so many of their premises, as were they granted, have not so much force to
draw forth the conclusions, whereto their authors tie them; as to maime or
mangle the Omnipotent power, or rather to disarme their Maker of omnipotency.
Yet is not this the worst: for unto me it has ever been a continual eyesore
of mind or hearts grief, to see modern spirits (in the pride of their
presumed wits) take upon them to grace or countenance conclusions most ancient
and orthodoxall, by such new and quaint flourishing proofs, as had they true
life or solid strength in themselves, were able to dead the principal stemmes
of divine goodness, or at lest to break off the farre-spreading branches of
it, and to engraffe partial favor and uncouth austeritie in their places. And
I know not whether (besides the motives mentioned) a niggardly contraction of
our kindness to some few friends or acquaintance (occasioned from too much
experience or consideration, how quickly the fountain of man's benignity dries
up, by deriving it unto many;) do not secretly and unwittingly move
dispositions, otherwise mis-inclined, to cut the wings of Gods mercy toward
others shorter, that their growth, so far as they shelter themselves and some
few more, may be the fuller, and their protection under them more safe and
comfortable.

4. This stream of error (arising from the former heads, with whose swift and
violent course many are carried away without their express consent, and in a
manner against their minds,) receives oftimes an unpleasant relish from an
humor, wherewith all are in some measure tainted, though the crisis be most
evident in great ones. With exaltation to high place or fortunes, there usually
shutts up a plausible delight to adorn and beautify their own creatures (as
they term them) though it be with the disgrace and spoils of men, whom God
has made by birth, education, and other ornaments of nature, far more noble.
Secret consciousnesse of pronenesse to imitate the Mighty in this partial
humor, covertly suggests an imagination, that the Almighty is herein like them,
whom we would be like, were our means the same; one, to whom nothing, not the
death and everlasting torments of infinite millions, all created by him, can be
displeasant, whilst their dejection serves as means for advancing his mercy
toward some few predestinate unto glory and happiness.

5. Only in this I can commend this rigid opinion for its kindness, that it
is so forward (...), and might well bear this inscription; Matter me genuit,
eadem mox gignitur ex me, Men's natural inclination to partiality first begets
this persuasion of Gods special favor toward some, and extraordinary
severitie toward others, as they are his creatures: and this persuasion being
once settled in the brain, does animate augment, and sublimate the inbred
partial humor, which resideth in the heart. Toward some sort of men, no men
living are more kind and loving; toward others, not the wildest creatures
breathing are more merciless and cruel, than many favorers of absolute
Reprobation are. But in the points of Reprobation and Election, as in diverse
others; the best and safest method is to begin with the practice of known
precepts concerning men, and to end in contemplatio^ of the divine decree. Now
the sincere practice of the Apostolic Rule of doing good to all, though
special good to such, as are visible members of Gods family or Christ's Church
on earth, will best organize our hearts for the right conceiving, and qualify
our brains for the commodious expressing of our heavenly Fathers goodness.
For seeing his mercy and loving kindness are absolutely infinite in
themselves, why should we deny them to be truly and sincerely extended unto
all men? Though in the issue intensiuely infinite to his chosen only; on whom
notwithstanding his sweetest bounties are never multiplied without some
proportioned increase of bounty toward others. So often as the Ocean of his
loving kindness toward them does overflow, many drops are distilled, many
showers diffused, yea whole streams of his good blessings derived to such, as
take no permanent relish or durable tincture of his goodness: not that it is
his will, his blessings at any time should be fruitless, but that men would
not bring forth fruit, where fruit justly was expected.

CHAPTER XLV.
Of tranforming the word of God into the similitude of our private or corrupt
senses.

1. SVch are the mutual imbracements or intertexture of truth and goodness:
that rightly neither can we judge ought for good, which is not true; nor deny
any known truth to be in its own nature good. Goodness it self, were it to
be defined by me, should be no more then a solidity of truth: and to fasten our
inclinations upon any object as good without an apprehension or presumption of
it as true, is less possible, than to pierce into the substance of massy
bodies without passage through their surfaces. And because our appetite or
affection cannot fasten upon any conceited good without a settled persuasion,
that our preconceit of it for such is true: it hence comes to pass, that when
our eager appetites have so far gotten the start of deliberation, that we
cannot curb or recall them; they draw our minds to be of their opinion, or
bring the soul by this colluctance into a kind of waking dream, [that all
such particulars are true and warrantable, which either the understanding for
the present cannot be persuaded peremptorily to condemn for evil, or that
part or faculty, wherein affections are seated, not be dissuaded from
approving as good.] Even such as deny there is a God, or unchangeable Rule of
truth or goodness, by whose pattern our persuasions and affections should be
framed, strive to apprehend this their wicked imagination as true: because not
so apprehended it could give no shadow of present case or contentment to their
galled consciences, always as apt to be grieved with every representation of
infinite goodness accompanied with infinite justice, or of infinite truth
though wedded with infinite mercy, utterly devoide of partiality, as sore eyes
are to be offended with every glimpse of splendent light, albeit seconded with
cherishing heat or warmth comfortable to the whole body. Nor can the mind
dissuade the affection, or sensual part from any misaffected good, but by
suggesting these or the like contrary conceits; [That it is a true evil, and
only a seeming good. That this desire to have it countenanced with the
authority of truth is unlawful. Now whiles these opposite inclinations stand
in equal balance, there can be no settled resolution or actual choice. Nor is
it possible the affection should, after such debatements, sway the soul to any
unlawful practice, unless the understanding (or if any other middle faculty
there be, which holds the scales or has as it were, the swaying voice betwixt
them) relent or decline from the point whereat it stood, and either assent unto
the suggestions of sense for the time being, as true and good, or at least not
expressly condemn them for false, nor courageously withstand them.

2. Truths or mandates divine considered in general or without incombrances
annexed to their practice, many there be, which affect more vehemently, than
their more honestly minded brethren. But this fervent imbracement arising not
from a clear intellectual apprehension of their abstract truth, or live touch
of their goodness, but rather from a general affectionate temper Volendi
valde quicquid volunt, of willing eagerly whatsoever they will at all;
becomes the shop of transforming or mispicturing Gods will revealed in his
word, whiles they descend to actual choice of particulars proffered in their
course of life. Men of this temper (says S. Augustine) Ita veritatem amant, vt
velint vera esse quaecunque amant: Such lovers they are of truth, that they
wish all might be true which they love. And vehement desires often reiterated,
multiply themselves into persuasions. Sometimes it may be they eagerly affect
vnopposed truth for its own sake, but withal more eagerly affect those
sensual pleasures, which most oppose it. Oftimes again some thing in its
nature truly good is mixed with or included in those particulars, which they
strongly affect: and whiles this combination lasts; goodness it self is
embraced with them ex accidente. But being embraced only upon these terms,
when the same particulars, (after the combination is dissolved,) come
accompanied with other distasteful adherents, it is loathed by them according
to the degrees of former liking. Cum Socrates apud Platonem censet amorem esse
pulchri desiderium, adiicere debuerat, nisifallor; Amanti nihil non pulchrum
esse, quod Theocritus expressit, (...).
Socrates (says a witty Writer) when he defined love to be a desire of that
which was beautiful or comely, should have given this Caveat withal; That
nothing almost is in it nature so vnbeautifull or uncomely, but will seem
fair and lovely, so it might have a lovers eye for its looking glass. But
Socrates his meaning was perhaps better than this witty Writers apprehension,
and was (if I mistake not his Dialect) this; That not every desire of any
seeming good or comely appearances, but only that desire, which is set on
goodness, beauty, or comeliness it self, is to be graced with the title of
love. Howbeit love or desire thus set, cannot secure affectionate tempers from
being tossed or shaken with sense-pleasing opportunities or temptations.

3. That our Saviors advise is to be followed before any contrary counsel, is
a point so clear, as no Christian can deny the obedience of speculatiue assent
unto it: yet many men, almost every man, in matters of practice, prejudicial
to their private interests, will traverse the meaning, whether of his clearest
Maxims or most peremptory Mandates. His reply to Martha complaining of her
sister for not helping her to intertaine him; [ Martha, Martha, Thou art
careful and troubled about many things; but one thing is needful. And Mary
has chosen that good part, which shall not be taken away from her. Luke chap.
10. verse. 41, 42.] includes a Maxim of sacred use, and will warrant this
Aphorism; [That a life privileged with vacancie from secular employments for
better meditation on heavenly matters, is the most compendious course to that
endless life, which every Christian proposes as the sole end of this
wearisome pilgrimage.] Were our hearts constant in themselves, and steadfastly
settled upon the former general truth; it were impossible our inclination or
assent to it, should not be swayed as strongly to the practices subordinate.
Does then our inclination or assent remove from the former general, whiles it
bears off from these or like particular practices? Yes; and would draw our
souls to contradictious Atheism, did they not by a nimble trick of
sophistical inversion, retire backwards by a contrary way unto the points,
from which they shrink. Their recovered assent or adherence to former
generalities, may in some sense be rather accounted the same, then altogether
diverse. So might the Mariners needle be more truly said to be fixed upon the
same points, rather then diverted from them, albeit that end, which was set
upon the South-pole, were instantly turned unto the North. The natural
situation of the former general assent was thus; [ The true sense and meaning
of our Saviors advise is always best, and to be followed before any contrary
counsel.] But when free choice of opposite particulars is presented, it turns
thus; [ That which is the best course and most to be followed, is certainly
such, as our Saviors words, truly understood, do advise unto.] The assent is
in effect the same, only inverted. But from this inversion we usually draw
Iustifications or Apologies for our most sinister choyces. The ambitious mind
from the inverted general assent, thus assumes; [Practicall employments for
preferment (my opportunities and qualifications considered) are the best course
I can take, either for mine own or others good: wherefore our Saviors advise
to Martha, rightly limited or interpreted, is no way adversant to my intended
choice. And if he can light of other sacred passages, which mention the
advancement of Gods Saints to civil dignities; as Daniells wearing a purple
robe, and furtherance of the Churches cause by his high place in the Court;
these he takes as sealed warrants to authorize his ambitious desires or
selfe-exalting projects.

4. How many vnbeneficed men in our times have with great zeal and presumed
fervencie of that spirit, by which holy Scriptures were written, preached
damnation against pluralities of benefices; afterward allured by the sweet of
one to swallow more, and not so content, to condemn their former opinion as
conceived from schismatic expositions of Scriptures worthy of
excommunication? What was the reason? In want or discontent, they were
persuaded, that if no Clergy man should have more livings than one, they might
hope to have one at least amongst their neighbors. And the necessity of this
doctrine being to them, as they were now affected, the better, was apprehended
by equal strength of the same affection, as the more true and warrantable by
Gods word. But their appetite, first sharpened by want, being once fed with the
fat of one, did inflame their desires with undoubted hope of more good, likely
to redound from two or more. And because their first opinions or resolutions
included less hopeful means or matter of contentment to their present
desires, it was to be condemned as untrue, or less probable, than this, which
they now embrace; especially in that the former had been conceived by them,
when they were scarce men, or men of mean place, or little experience in the
world; worse by three hundred pound a year, than now they are.

5. To maintain their opinions with cracking flashes of burning zeal, or to
overlash in commendations of men's persons, is a temper in young men especially,
very suspicious, and more truly argues abundance of ambitious humor or
vnpurified affection, than any degree of sincere love to truth or goodness.
For this reason, when either their purposes or affections change, they are so
ready to sing Canticum novum, ditties so strangely contrary to their late
passionate songs, that no devise can better emblazen the inconstancy of their
boysterously blind persuasions, than Polyphoemus, as the Poet pictures him in
his woeing fit; Candidior folio nivei Galataea ligustri,
Floridior prato, longa procerior alno,
Spendidior vitro, tenero lascivior haedo,
Laevior assiduo detritis aequore chonchis,
Solibus hybernis, aestiva gratior vmbra,
Nobilior pomis, Platano conspectior alta,
Lucidior glacie, matura dulcior vua,
Mollior and cygni plumis, et lacte coacto;
Et si non fugias, riguo formosior horto:
This was his note, whiles his love did kindle in hope: much changed with
alteration of his possibilities; Saevior indomitis eadem Galataea iuvencis,
Durior annosa quercu, fallacior vndis,
Lentior and salicis virgis, and vitibus albis,
His immobilior scopulis, violentior amne,
Laudato Pavone superbior, acrior igne,
Asperior tribulis, faeta truculentior vrsa,
Surdior aequoribus, calcato immitior hydro.
Et, quod praecipue (si possem) demere vellem,
Non tantum cervo claris latratibus acto,
Verum etiam ventis volucrique fugacior aura.


6. Is it not a miserable condition, whereunto the inconstancy of humane
passions seeks to bring the inflexible rule of truth, usually wrested to hold
as exact consort with our Palinodies or recantations, as with our first
approved lessons; although the one be more dissonant to the other, than the
latter part of Polyphoemus his song was to the former. For without some
apprehension of consort with Gods word, no dogmaticall assertion can be
conceived or maintained as true, by any Christian, though a Christian only in
his own conceit. So true it is which was before generally observed and often
intimated, that even the worst of Heathenish humors for the most part alter
only their course, not their nature, in those parts of the world, which of
heathens have turned Christians. As the Seawater is no less salt in the
reciprocation or stanch, than while it boyles or over-flowes the banks. And,
if it be not tedious to resume the burden of this discourse; As the common
notion of Gods goodness occasioned the heathen to conceit every procurer of
any good much affected for a God: so this affectionate love of divine truths in
general, fastens our vnpurified persuasions unto whatsoever we vehemently love
or much affect, as to a truth divine, or practice either warranted or commended
to us by the word of God. Love or hatred toward any object divine or humane,
if it be vnpurified, affectionate, or excessive, is always prone either to
slander divine justice, where men are faulty, or to miscensure men's actions
in cases overruled by divine justice. (...). Hom. Ili. Par. 1. Page 112.
Priamus doting affection toward his unlawful daughter-in-law misswayed his
mind to accuse the gods as authors or direct causes rather than to suspect her
as any occasion of the evils, which he feared or suffered. And that vnpurified
affection, which many bear unto truths or goodnesses divine confusedly
apprehended, will not suffer them to see or acknowledge Gods special
providence in their punishments. Ready they are at all assayes to inveigh
against, or meditate revenge upon their brethren for chastisements appointed to
them by the finger of God, though executed by the hand of man. God is too good
to be the author of evil unto them, though of evil only temporal. That is,
in the true resolution of their secret thoughts, they are so well persuaded of
themselves, that nothing to their apprehension is borne or bent to do them
harm, besides the envy or malice of other men. Every portion of Scripture,
which reproues or forbids malice, does by their interpretation in this taking,
condemn all such of malice or envy, as any way vex or displease them.

7. What poisonous humor can we condemn in any Heathen, whose very dregs
are not incorporated in the grand tyrannous monster of our times, faction I
mean with its members. To ears animated with the spirit of this blind beast,
the least jar in opinion, though concerning matters of greater difficulty
than consequence, and better able to abide long search than speedy
determination, sounds as a deadly heresy, already condemned by Gods own
mouth. Not to consort with these men in their occasionlesse vociferations
against others presumed errors, is in their verdit, to be backward in religion,
to renounce the unity of faith, to give our hearts to the enemy. As he that in
singing observes due time or a constant tone, amongst such as regard neither,
but following the ear, rise and fall with most or sweetest voices, shall by
immusicall hearers be censured as the author of discord. No sect or profession
almost throughout any age, but has been haunted with one or other violent
humor, with whose tincture if a man can cunningly temper or color his
discourses, he may vent whatsoever he pleases, albeit compounded of the very
lees and refuse of that heresy, which he seems most to oppugn. Blasphemy
breathed from some men's mouths, so it be spiced or interspersed with holy
phrase, is sucked in as greedily by their followers as if it were the Spirit of
life: the very poison of Aspes distilling from others lips, so it be tempered
with the infusion or expression of prophetical fervencie in reproving sin,
does relish to their factious consorts as the quintessence of zeal. Finally
whilst one factious mind inveighs against his opposites, bitterness it self
becomes sweet to his associates: but if an indifferent man, shall lift the
doctrine, refute the error, or reprove the passions of the one or other; his
discourses, though seasoned with the spirit of meekness, of sincerity, and
judgment, breeds a grievous disgust in both.

8. The true original or root of this accused partiality, in putting good
for evil, and evil for good, honey for gall, and gall for honey, will better
appear from a more particular inquiry or Philosophical search of the means
by which it comes to pass; That the self same sense, or exposition of
Scriptures, which ere whiles did most offend, should forthwith best please the
very same parties. And lest I should give offense to any Christian Reader, the
instance shall be chiefly in those, with whom all Christians are justly
offended.

CHAPTER. XLVI.
Showing by instances of sacred Writ, that the same sense of Gods word which
sometimes most displeased, may shortly after most affect or please the self
same parties: with them manner how this alteration is wrought.

1. Actual fruition of excessive pleasure either hinders the working, or dulls
the apprehension of inherent grief. So does satisfaction of vehement desires
(because most pleasant) drown all taste of petty annoyances, and dead the
impression of such ungrateful qualities, as accompany the quality eagerly
afected. Extremity of thirst will make a man to be in charity almost with any
kind of moisture, and cover a multitude of faults in drink, of which no one
but would be very offensive to a taste not misaffected. For thirst is but an
appetite of cooling moisture, and this appetite being intended by violent heat
or dryness; the organ, wherein it resideth, takes no notice of any other
quality, besides that which best contents it for the present. All others that
accompany it, are well-come or pass unquestioned for its sake, so the sense of
cooling moisture be not abated by their presence. From a cause, in true
Philosophy, much what the same, it is, that if one string be stiffely bent and
another slack, only one does sound, though both be touched. For the same
reason violent passions, intensiue desires, or strong affections, either
strain out or suck in only so much of the sense of Scriptures, as
symbolizeth with themselves. Such circumstances, as in sober examination would
make most against us, leave no impression in our minds much bent upon any
private purpose. What could have been more offensive to the Pharisees (not
moved with bitter opposition to the Sadduces) then S. Paul's doctrine of Christ's
appearance to him after his resurrection. The very mention of his appearance to
him once in the way to Damascus, afterward in the Temple, persuading him the
second time to preach his resurrection to the Gentiles, had made them ere while
cry out; Away with such a fellow from the earth, for it is not fit that he
should live Act. 22.22
. But as the Philosopher says; (...), Common dread will unite most disagreeing
hearts. For this reason professors of contrary opinions, (so both steadfastly
hold the general,) will join forces against the third, that contradicts or
undermines the common foundation. All inclination to exercise enmity, is
rooted in a hope or possibility of preserving proper entitie safe and entire.
What could it then boot the Pharisees to brangle with S. Paul about Christ's
resurrection or appearance, whilst the Sadduces by denying all apparition of
spirit or Angel, or hope of resurrection from the dead, did not so much
oppugn him as the very foundation of their Religion? Unto this passionate and
vehement distaste of the Sadduces doctrine, Paul's conformity with the Pharisees
in birth, education, and generality of belief, does relish so well, that his
particular differences or dissentions from them no way disaffect them. He
avouched expressly, that Christ whom they had crucified, did appear unto him;
but they apprehended it to be after such a manner as Gods Angels did in times
past to their fathers. Now this kind of appearance witnessed the truth of the
Pharisees opinions, that there be spirits or Angels: and Paul's seasonable
proffering of this testimony, does so please their humor, that the Scribes,
which were on the Pharisees part, acquitted him by Proclamation, (...). Arist.
Rhetoricorum 2. cap. 4.
[ We find no evil in this man; but if a spirit, or Angel has spoken unto
him, let us not fight against God. Act. 23. verse. 9. That thus far they
favored him, was not out of true love either to his person or any part of the
truth he taught, but from love of themselves and their opinions, from jealous
impatiency of contradiction in public place by an inferior sect. So likewise
we read in the Gospel, when our Savior from Gods word to Moses had most
divinely proved the Resurrection; [ I am the God of Abraham etc.] and fully
satisfied a curious question so captiously proposed by the Sadduces, as would
have puzzled the greatest Rabbi amongst the Pharisees; certain of them
answered; [ Master thou have well said. Luke 20. ver. 39.] They like well he
should be a witness of the Resurrection, that being one special point, which
their credit lay upon to make good unto the multitude against the Sadduces: but
as ready they are to adjudge him to death, for avouching himself to be the
great Judge of such, as were raised from the dead; howbeit his raising of
himself from the dead, did prove his words to be most true; and so would the
manner of his appearance unto S. Paul (which now they grant) have clearly
evinced both his Resurrection and coming in glory unto judgment, (whereof it
was a transient, but real representation) so their assent unto S. Paul in that
assembly had been sincere and free, not forced by factious opposition to the
Sadduces. The inconsequent issues of this general truth acknowledged by them,
testify that their approbation of our Savior, for being a witness of the
resurrection, and their condemnation of him, for avouching himself judge of
such as were raised from death, did issue from one and the same corrupt
fountain: from love of authority over the people and applause of men; from a
stubborn and envious desire to excel their opposites, and not to be excelled
by any. With their affections thus set, our Saviors doctrine indefinitely
considered sometimes had conjunction, and then they mightily applaud him; but
oftener opposition, and then Polyphoemus-like they more maligned him.

2. Admit we could justly acquit our selves from other points of Pharisaisme;
that spirit of contention and waiward emulation, which this day reigns
throughout Christendom, and rages oftimes no less in defense of good causes,
then in maintaining or abetting bad, will as easily set over such as retain
the general or public form of sound doctrine, to concur with heretics
or godless men in transforming particular places of Scripture, which make for
private desires; as factious opposition to the Sadduces did the Pharisees to
consent unto our Savior and to S. Paul in the points late mentioned; albeit
they did detest the principal Articles, the very pattern of that belief,
which they propagated to the world. That admonition to the Philippians as it
concerns these times, as much as former; so does it the maintainers of true
Religion most of any. The admonition was; Let nothing be done through
contention or vainglory, but that in meekness of mind every man esteem
other better than himself. Phil. 2.3.

CHAPTER XLVII.
Of dreaming fancies concerning the sense of Scripture in the Romanist, in the
Jew, in the Separatist or Enthusiast.

1. IT were easy to instance in many controversy Writers, which in hot
pursuit of their adversaries have swallowed down passages of Scripture or
other authorities, whose true sense, if so sifted, as every circumstance might
make full impression upon their composed and settled apprehensions, would be
more against them, then for them; as their authors (no question) agreed no
better with the allegators doctrine, than Paul did with the Pharisees. The
impertinent collections of Monks and Friars to prove Purgatory from such
places of Scripture, as have no other semblance with it, save only that they
mention metaphorical fire, would make an impartial Reader call to mind (if
so he had read it) the fable of the Apes, which espying a Glow-worme in a
winters night, gathered sticks and blowed themselves breathless, to make them
burn. Did not this imaginary flame produce such a real warmth to the
malignant crew, as is able to hatch an extraordinary desire of having the fire
by what means soever still maintained: impudency it self would blush, and
stupiditie tremble at their senseless petulancy in this argument. As the
learned Papist has no parallel (the Jew excepted) in this kind; so in the
maine points of their Religion, as in the doctrines concerning the authority
of the Church, and the sacrifice of the Mass, they do not go so much beyond
others, as besides themselves. The weight or consequence of the matters
contained in the mentioned controversies, breeds an extreme desire to have
their profitable tenants countenanced by sacred authority; and extremity of
desire, an insatiable thirst or greediness of lucking and wringing those Texts
of Scripture, which in color of words or literal show do seem at first
sight to make somewhat for them, but in truth and substance manifest the poison
of their doctrine, and argue their eager appetite in maintaining it to be a
spice or symptom of spiritual madness. To prove the sacrifice of the Mass,
some not content to urge that of the Prophet, [ And they shall offer a pure
oblation to me in all places;] or Melchisedeckes offering consecrated bread and
wine, (which being once granted would everlastingly overthrow it;) would
persuade us the latin Missa was coined in the Hebrew mint from (...) Masas,
which in the first signification imports as much as to blow; whence the Verbal
(...) Missah in a secondary sense signifies tribute or Pole Money. The
implication is, the very name of the Mass imports that this oblation or
sacrifice is Gods tribute, to be paid unto him as duly* as Peter Pence is to
the Pope. Their own acknowledgement of this doting fancy in some of their
writers leaves a suspicion, whether it were a true relation, rather then a
mere jest put upon that ignorant Priest, who being put to find the word Mass
in the Scriptures, after a long and wearisome search, when he was ready to give
over or fall asleep, lighting upon those words in the first of John,
[Invenimus Messiam] cried out; We have found the Mass; we have found the
Mass to the confusion of the Heretics.

2. I know not whether the Prophets interpretations of dreams and visions were
of greater force to persuade the Heathen, that the spirit of the immortal Gods
did dwell in them, than such dreaming interpretations as latter Jews do make
of Prophecies or other divine Oracles, are or might be of for confirming
Christians belief, that the Lord has sent a spirit of slumber upon them; so
like they are in their comments or meditations upon Scriptures concerning
Christ, unto such as dream. The same phantasmes which by floting in our
brains breed dreams by night, present themselves to our waking thoughts by
day; but want opportunity to deceive; so long as our eyes and ears are open
to receive foreign information. But whiles the external senses, which serve
as witnesses, and that principal internal sense which sittes as chief
Magistrate in the inferior part of the soul are surprised by sleep; the
vainest fancies the brain can represent, pass for current without examination
or check. The fantasy or common sense is as credulous of their suggestions
or obtrusions, as illiterate, ignorant, or unexperienced people are of
counterfeit commissions or pretended warrants. As at this instant, though I
think of my good friends in London, yet the sight of Oxford and other undoubted
pledges of my presence in this place, wherein I am, will not suffer my soul to
be miscarried with false imaginations of being elsewhere; whereas whiles the
gates of these outward senses are shut, and the passages from the principal
sense internal or examinatiue faculty stopped; the model of that famous
City rouling in my fantasy would forthwith breed an imagination that I were
in it in their presence, whose image or representation only is present with
me. Upon appearances altogether as light and frivolous, are the Jews
transported from Christ, now fully manifested and presented to them, to embrace
such shadows or prefigurations of him, as had fallen out in the days of their
Patriarchs or ancient Kings. No man that reads their writings, but will
perceive many phantasmes or modelles of Evangelicall truth swimming in their
heads: but the veil being laid before their hearts disenables their judgments
for distinguishing figures from substances, or apparitions from realities.

3. The relics of orthodoxall truths, which unto this day work in this
heartlesse peoples brains, would be sufficient to form Christ crucified in
the hearts of Heathens, not given up to a reprobate sense. For example, that
practical pre-notion, Gebher has sinned and Gebher must be punished, whereon
they ground their ceremonies in the feast of atonement; being construed
according to its literal and natural sense, is in effect the same with that
divine Oracle, As by man came death, so by man came the resurrection of the
dead, or with that fundamental Article of our belief, that man was to
satisfy for the sins of men. But the passages of these latter Jews
internal senses, being locked up in a deeper slumber in the day of their
solemn feasts, then our external senses are in the dead of the night, the
clear representatio^ of the former Christian truth, makes no impression in
their heart, but vanishes into a heathenish dream. Like so many men that use
to walk and rave in their sleep, they unwittingly act our Saviors sufferings
after the manner of an Interlude, Vide Buxdorf. Synagoga Iudaic. cap. 20.
putting Gebher, which in their Rabbinicall language signifies a Cock, for
mere affinity of name (for Gebher in Hebrew signifies a man,) unto all the
tortures they can devise; adding withal, that every Gebher, every man amongst
them, deserves to be so dealt withal, as they deal with this poor creature.
Nor is any creature of this kind so fit for this purpose in their fantasy, as
a white one. Their several phantasmes or pre-notions concerning this mystery,
rightly put together and examined by vigilant thoughts, signify thus much,
that the matter of the sacrifice by which the atonement for man's sin was to be
wrought, was to be a Gebher, a man without blemish or spot of sin.

4. If any prophecy include the least historical reference or allusion to
Abraham, to Moses, David, or Solomon (as the first draught almost of every
Prophecy is some former History) this is a motive sufficient to these blind
guides to interpret the place as wholly meant of these types alone: Christ who
is the body therein presented (God blessed forever, which vpholdeth all things
by the power of his word, the very Center, (though they perceive it not,)
whereon their souls do rest,) has no more place in our thoughts, than the
bed wherein we lie, has in our night imaginations of walking or talking with
our friends either deceased or far absent. Every metaphor or resemblance
borrowed from things visible, as mouldes for fashioning our conceits of matters
spiritual or invisible to be accomplished in the life to come, make these
miserable wretches quite forget the estate as well wherein they are, as whence
they are fallen, and cast them into pleasant dreams of glorious Monarchies or
Kingdoms here on earth; still bragging as if they expected every next morning
should be their coronation day; as if they would make the world believe the
Sun did daily rise to grace or attend their reespousalls to their glorious
God.

These are the offspring of those, sometimes virgins, but foolish ones, who
having out-slept the time of the Bridegroomes coming, have not till this day
been able to repair their lamps; but since his departure have sat in
perpetual darkness, bringing forth children in such deep midnight sleep,
that the slumber cannot to this day be shaken out of their eyes, nor their
brains delivered of this hereditary drowsinesse.

5. Many partakers they have in this frenzy from originalls much what the
same or very like. For from a reason not much unlike unto the cause of dreams
it is, that external noyses oftimes consort so well with internal musings, as
if the one were but the tune and the other the dittie, or one the base and the
other the treble. Perhaps the sound either starts some notion afresh, or
causes us in this temper to resume our former thoughts, whence we imagine it
tells us, as it were, by word of mouth, what it only suggests by natural
motion. And sometimes as if we meant to save our selves a labor or spare our
breath, which would be spent in speaking, we tacitly articulate the sounds of
bells, or other tuneable bodies, as if they did audibly speak what we inwardly
muse. Musing and dreaming are of near alliance; the fancy in both is apt to
weaue in every circumstance or occurrent, that has the least semblance or
connection with the principal matter represented or thought upon. In dreams
the principal or judicatiue sense is so bound with sleep, that it cannot
examine intimations given by the fantasy. In musing the fantasy is so
contracted within it self, that it can neither receive instructions from the
understanding, nor give it perfect information from representations made by
external senses. But from what original soever these erroneous imaginations
or fallacies proceed, they insinuate themselves after the same manner into such
as dream, and such as rather muse than meditate upon Scripture. Nor is there
any other means to prevent their insinuations, besides vigilant and attentive
alacrity, to sift and examine every circumstance, by setting our imaginations
a-worke to countersway our extemporary conceits or apprehensions with all
contrary inducements possible. He that thinks on nothing, but on confirming
his own conclusions or apprehensions, will quickly persuade himself, the word
of God (specially if he hear it alleged, or see it quoted by others,) speaks
just so, as he thinks, and proffers it self as a witness to give testimony
viva voce to the truth of his present cogitations. To the superstitious
Palmester or Chiromancer that saying of Moses, Exodus 13. [ And it shall be a
sign unto thee upon thine hand etc.] and that in Job. cap. 37. verse. 7 [ Qui
in manu omnium hominum signat, vt no^int omnes opera sua,] sound as
fundamental theoremes of the art which he professes, that is, of making such
prognostications of all the changes and chances incident to this mortal life
by inspection of the lines or wrinckles in the palms of men's hands, as the
Astrologer does change of weather, or of men's fates or fortunes, by observing
the positions or aspect of stars. Generally brains apt to busy themselves
with curious thoughts or scrupulosities, frame such compositions of sacred
lines, as men in frenzy or other like grievous distemper, do out of scrabled
walls or painted clothes. The one makes foolish or monstrous pictures of true
colors; the other draws senseless and ridiculous inferences out of divine
and supernatural Antecedents. Unless I had compared the marginall quotations
of some Anabaptisticall and schismatic discourses with the Text, and both
with the conclusions intended by their authors; I should hardly have conceived
it as possible for a man to speak nothing but Gospel, and yet to speak scarce
a true or wise word.

6. This kind of dreaming temper in many, hinders the breaking out of the
former general seeds of error, unto whose workings inwardly it usually
affords advantage and opportunity. Desire of proper excellency is a disease
hardly cured in any, and ofttimes works most indefatigably, where it works
most secretly. In many it seems altogether mortified, when it is only stifned
by being cut shorter, or gathers strength by contraction to a smaller room. To
excel others in many points, men of this disposition will not strive; to be
excelled in most, they can suffer with patience. Gods gifts of wit, of
learning, and judgment they will admire and magnify as much as any, in
others, whose industry and opportunities of increasing their talent in sacred
negotiations they cannot but acknowledge greater, then their own: yet will
they not in conclusion be persuaded, that any man not of their own sect or
disposition, knows so much of Gods eternal will and purpose, as they do.
Others general skill in Scriptures, if it be great, is for this reason alone,
suspected to be unsanctified. The stronger the reasons brought against them be,
the forwarder are they to appeal from reason unto Scripture, as if grace did
abolish as well the life or remnant of natures integrity, as her corruptions;
as if Gods law or written word did rather obliterate, than refine and quicken
the imperfect characters or liuelesse lineaments of natures law written in our
hearts. Thus to abandon the help of Arts and natural reason, in this search
they have good reason, if we respect the end, whereat their desires covertly
aim. For Arts and reason being once excluded from examination or trial of
sacred mysteries, their irrational and surd conceits of Scriptures sense in
particulars, which they stand upon, may be as well esteemed, as the most
forcible deductions, that can be drawn from the fundamental Maxims of
Religion, or conclusions exactly and remonstratiuely paralleled to the rule of
faith. If allegations of sacred authority might once by multitude of men's
voices thus affected, be taken by number rather, than by weight; to refute the
Anabaptist, the Separatist, or maintainers of other modern errors, would be a
matter so much the harder, as the refuter is more judicious. For the better his
judgment is, the more accurately will he search, or sift such circumstances,
as at first fight wedde these men's persuasions to their own dreams or
fancies. To avoyde their fallacies, the Reader is to remember that their
modesty in some cases no way acquits them from imputation of extreme pride and
insolency in many points of Christianity. Few there be so transcendently
conceited of themselves, but will yield to known professors of those
faculties, wherein they are not conversant. So on the other side not many there
are, that will not stand upon their skill in those particulars, whereto they
have been wholly addicted, or long employed in. It is no marvel then, if
such, as for expounding greatest mysteries have wholly betaken themselves to
the spirit, or to men's labors whom they presume to be thoroughly sanctified,
do as lightly esteem the opinion of greatest scholars, ancient or modern,
in divine mysteries, as they highly magnify their wit, and judgment in
artificial learning or sacred generalities. For matters of sanctification, of
election and salvation, are as the only trade or faculty, which these men
profess, and of which they deem their own corporation only free; others not
fit to be consulted, or at least their voices not to be taken, until they have
served the like complete apprenticeship to their supposed spirit, or been as
long professors of the pure Word alone, renouncing all commerce with natural
reason. They are more offended with their followers for having recourse to it,
than ordinary tradesmen are with their servants or apprentices for haunting
Alehouses, Tavernes, or worse places.

7. Their first intention, I am verily persuaded, is to magnify Gods grace,
more then others (to their thinking) do. Now it is a Maxim as plausible as
true, that Gods graces can never be magnified too much by any. But it is a
fault common almost to all, to do many things much amiss before we have done
them half enough. The wisest often miscarry in their proiects; these men err in
their very first attempts, their very intentions are mislevelled, in that they
think there is no direct way to grace but by declining helps of art or gifts
of nature. The first and immediate issue of this persuasion, (thus seeking to
nurse a perpetual irreconcilable faction betwixt Scripture and reason, to
magnify grace by nullifying nature and art) is that every action which is not
warranted by some express rule of Scripture, apprehended by grace, is non ex
fide, not of faith, (whose only complete rule is scripture;) and being not of
faith, it must be a sin; so that these two propositions; [1. all actions
warranted by the express word of God must needs be lawfull] 2. all lawful
actions must needs be warranted by the express word of God,] differ no more in
their Logic, then this verse read forward, does from it self read backward,
for Grammatical sense, Odo tenet mulum madidam mappam tenet anna. And after
once (out of a scrupulous fear to sin in any action by following reason
without express warrant of Scripture for the particular) they have for a while
accustomed themselves to level every action or saying, Cap. 48.
and to square each thought by some express suitable rule of Scripture: the
Scripture and their thoughts or apprehensions become so intwined, that in fine
they are persuaded whatsoever they have don, thought, or spoken, in matters
concerning God or Christians duties, is warranted by some express rule or
other of sacred Writ. Whose testimonies for the most part, they use no
otherwise then men in high place and authority, often use the placets or
suffrages of their inferiors, to countenance their peremptory designs by way
of ceremony or formalitie: which if they do not voluntarily, they shall do at
length against their wills. Concerning the true meaning of that Maxim,
Whatsoever is not of faith is sin, we have In the second book upon the
Creed, first Section.
elsewhere delivered our opinion. The Scripture we grant to be the complete and
perfect rule of faith, to be the only rule likewise of planting the root or
habit, whence all good actions or resolutions must grow. It is not the only
rule for rectifying every particular branch in the growth. These must be
rectified by necessary or probable deductions which reason or rules of art
sanctified by the habit of faith frame out of Scriptures of sacred Maxims.

CHAPTER XLVIII.
Of the more particular and immediate causes of all the forementioned errors or
misperswasions.

1. TO give one prime Philosophical cause of all or most moral misperswasions
or transfigurations of sacred Oracles, is perhaps only possible to the cause
of causes. Two Maxims nevertheless there be undoubtedly experienced in
matters natural, from which, as from two principal heads, the maine stream
of errors does most directly spring, though much increased by confluence of
such fallacies, as have been deciphred. The Maxims are; one [ Intus apparens
prohibet alienum] common in Philosophical Schools; the other [ Mota facilius
moventur] as well known, and of as great use amongst the Mathematickes, or
such as write Mathematically of Mechanical instruments. The efficacy of every
agent resultes from the fit disposition of the patient; whence it is, that the
internal distemper or indisposition of the organ will not admit the proper
stamp or impression of any external, though its proper object. Not that any
distemper can so prevent the force or any indisposition so dead the agencie of
the object, as it shall not move and agitate the organor, that it is possible
for the organ being moved or agitated by external objects, to be altogether
barren. For the very motion of it is a kind of conception. But the organ being
prepossessed by abundance of heterogeneall matter mingled with it, the
impression or conception proves like the monstrous brood, of males and females
of diverse kinds. And the more vehemently the organ is agitated, Distemper is
a kind of motion, and the greater the distemper of the organ is, the more apt
it is to be agitated by the object.
the more sensible is the representation or apprehension of the inherent
humors; and in as much as the object is rightly apprehended as the cause of
this actual motion or representation, it is likewised judged (but amiss) to
be such it self, as the motion or representation, which it works. Thus we
sometimes mis-gather those things (the Sun for example) to be hot themselves,
which produce heat in others; those to be cold, which cause sense of cold;
those moist, which leave an impression of moisture where none was or was unfelt
before their operation. Yet is the Moon neither cold nor moist in its self,
although the true cause of coldness or moystning in subjects, aptly disposed
to either quality. Brains stuffed with cold will easily suspect fragrant or
unknown odoriferous perfumes of the loathsome smell, which indeed they cause by
provoking the putrified phlegm to imprint its self upon the organ. As the
Sun shining through a red glass transports the redness upon the eye, and
being the immediate cause of the actual representation now made, is judged to
be of the same hue. So external colors presented to eyes subject to
suffusion, or possessed with real effluxions of other visibles, cause a
representation of those internal humors in the organ, whence colors
external, being the true cause of our present actual sight, we deem them to
be like unto the internal humors, which are seen. Many like irritations of
the flesh are usually caused by the spirit, seeking to imprint the right sense
or Character of Gods word, could the polluted heart or mind infected with
preiudicate opinions, admit the impression. But carnal lusts, or implanted
fantasies, being by this means set on working, conceive a depraved sense, or
a sense quite contrary to the spirits meaning, and yet imagine it to be
suggested by the word of God; only because it concurres to the actual
producing of such humors or fantasies.

2. There is no error, but has its nutriment from truth, in whose root it is
engraffed like a wild plant in a natural stock: no vice, but has similitude
in part with one or other virtue. Now where vice or bad habits do abound, no
character of any moral virtue, or precept divine can leave any true stamp or
complete impression of it self: well may it move, or tickle the predominant
humor, with which it symbolizeth in part. The covetous and niggardly
disposition will solace it self with precepts of frugalitie, and this solace
taken in a conceited conformity to the rule of life, does stiffen him in his
wonted sin. The commendations of ingenuitie or freedom of spirit sympathize
well with brave resolute minds, as they do in part with stubbornness or
self-will, and the applause which the stubborn or selfe-willed take in this
their partial sympathy with the temper of Saints or holy men, works a delight
in them to glory in their shame. So the praise of valor or courage in good
causes is as a watchword to foole-hardinesse, which once started will admit no
curb or restraint from any sacred precept commending wariness or ingenuous
fear. The approbation given by Gods word to excessive zeal or indignation
swelling upon just occasions, oftimes provokes malicious dispositions to vent
their bitterness in a kind of affected imitation of Saints. Now not only all
imitation of counterfeit goodness, but all counterfeit imitation of true
goodness, will in the end bring forth true and real naughtiness. Generally
as the word of life and grace where it fructifies, does translate our natural
dispositions into goodness supernatural: so the opinion or presumption of
having our actions warranted, or our dispositions countenanced from Gods word
or will revealed, does sublimate all corruptions by nature inherent, or
acquired by custom, into a degree of evil more then natural.

3. These gross preposterous misconstructions admit no set bounds or limits of
increase or waning besides the different degrees or qualities of the humor,
whence they spring. As excessive intemperance breeds an hate or loathing of
divine goodness, and disposes to an amity with hell: so in others rightly
persuaded as well of the truth of the Deity, as of the veracitie of his
written word indefinitely conceived, some particular roots of bitterness may
be so venomous and malignant, as will cause them to cast aspersions of
blasphemy upon the salvificall sense of these sacred oracles, and to deifie
contrary misconstructions prompted only by the lusts and corruptions of the
flesh. Choler in some men, though abundant, is forthwith pacified with placid
behavior or gentle language; but in others is so peevish and fretfull, as
makes them interpret all addressements to pacifications to be but mockery.
That, which at other times to them, or at all times to other men, would be
reputed affability, is, in the heat of present distemper, flattery: what
others would take for true submission, or be glad to entertain as a serious
proffer of reconcilement, whiles this humor is stirred, is dissimulation or
subtlety to entrap them. The reason of such uncharitable misconstructions is
the same which was given before. Whatsoever is obvious to thoughts inwardly
perplexed or grieved, is apprehended as evil, because it reviues or
exasperates the cause of grief; and being apprehended as irksome to their
present dispositions, the understanding or fancy must play the Parasites, and
make good such imputations, as the predominate humor lays upon the object.
Others words or gestures always provoke some motion in us, and with the
motion, some humor or other is set on working. Now if the humor be tart or
bitter, the motion of it will be unpleasant to the party, in whom it resides.
For this reason men sickly or choleric prosecute all, that speak to them, or
whatsoever moves the fretting humor, with the same dislike they have of it, or
their internal grievances thus occasioned. All is one whether the speech or
behavior be fair or foul, so the irksome disposition be exasperated, which
sometimes is more offended with the antipathie of affability or proffered
courtesy, than with churlish or boisterous opposition of the like temper in
others. For being boysterously opposed it either relents or finds opportunity
to exonerate it self, and spend its venom by vehemency of provoked motion;
but gathers strength by fretting inwardly at their speech or gestures which
unseasonably endeavor to allay it: as the Spring-sunne by stirring humors being
not able to draw them out or digest them, produces agues. Some tempers of
mind in like sort there be, very apt to be offended with divine truth either
bluntly, obscurely, doubtfully, or unseasonably propounded, and yet as ready to
be friends with it distinctly and placidly represented. Others are so tainted
with the sower leaven of Pharisaisme, that the more evident the truth is made,
or more plausibly delivered unto them, the more bitterly they malign it and
the proposers of it; for the inward grief of a worme-bitten conscience does
more disquiet the soul and spirit, than any choler can do the body or animal
faculty. Thus the high Priest rent his clothes at our Saviors interpretation
of that place in Daniel: [Hereafter shall ye see the Son of man.] as if he
had spoken blasphemy. Albeit his manner of delivering this divine truth,
manifest enough to sober examinours, were most placid, and in terms mitigated
below the tenor of a direct answer to the question proposed. Had he prophesied
to have made them Kings, or upon opportunity of his late triumphant
entertainment, interpreted the Prophets words of himself then coming, as
their General to outbraue the Romans with golden shieldes or glittering
armor, he might have gained that applause, which they afterward gave to Herod;
Non vox hominis, sed Dei.

SECTION VI.
Of qualifications requisite for conceiving aright of the divine Nature and his
Attributes.

CHAPTER. XLIX.
The general qualification or first ground for preventing misconceits of the
Divine Nature or Attributes, is purification of heart.

1. THe Heathens grossly either multiply or mis-figure the divine Nature; we
varnish their unsightly pictures, or conjoyne their distracted representations:
both misproportion or deface him in his Attributes. Now as it is the corruption
of nature, wherein we communicate too deeply with the Heathen, which makes us
partakers of their sins: so shall we prove our selves more inexcusable by much,
then they were, unless their example excite in us religious care and alacrity
to use those means, which many of them by light of nature, (questionless
without the internal light of grace) saw to be necessary for attaining the
true knowledge of the Deity. To the better sort of them it was a clear truth
and a received Maxim; That as the Sun cannot be seen without its own
light, so God could not be known without his illuminations: That by these
illuminations proffered to all the most part were not in any degree enlightened
for want of internal preparation. The preparation or disposition by them
required, was purification of the soul. Of excellent passages to this purpose
Trismegist, Plato with his followers, Plotine specially, and amongst the
Romans, Seneca, are very fertile. Their consonancies to Christian truth are
gathered by many, briefly by Pansa, and some other late Writers, whom I commend
unto the Reader for no other end, but that he may be commended or directed by
them to these authors themselves, worthy to be looked into by the most
eagle-sighted Divines of our times. Admit they cannot communicate to us the
light of saving truth, with whose comfortable rays their souls were never
refreshed, nor their minds enlightened: yet should I take him either for more
then a man, even a celestial Saint on earth, or for a lazy droane, that will
not condemn himself for sloth or dullness in apprehension of God or his
goodness; so he will but impartially compare his own conceits or affections
with these men's, allowing the odds as well of the more excellent means which
he has to find, as of the encouragements incomparably more glorious given him
to search out the hidden Manna, that secret joy of heart or exultation of
spirit, which always resulteth from true contemplation of the first truth, or
from the deaw of this fountain of goodness. And if whiles we seek a rule or
stay to our understandings, lest they slide into error, we desire withal a
spur unto devotion; the usual professors of School divinity come as far
short of these heathen Theologists, and their Christian expositors in this
later service, as they go beyond them in the former.

2. Plotins frequent interspersion of much divine matter throughout most his
Philosophical discourses, often makes me doubt, whether familiarity with
Origin did not draw him to some acquaintance with Christian mysteries;
howsoever he sought to form them in Philosophical mouldes, and set forth
stolen fragments of the food of life with Platonicall sauce. By what means
then may the soul in this man's judgment be elevated to contemplate the
vnprizeable beauty, which has her dwellings in the sacred closetts, and
gaddes not abroad, lest profane eyes might gloate upon her? Not to question how
well he spoke them, or how far he did assent unto them; these, and the like
speeches of his (very pertinent to our present argument) infer a divine truth
out of Philosophical principles. If the eye be either infected with bad
humors, dull or weakened for want of spirits, the brightness of the objects
presented, breeds a dimnesse, and disenables it for seeing, what otherwise
might easily be seen. The spectator must be made like the spectacle; nor could
any eye see the Sun, were it not by natural constitution Sunne-like: No more
can the mind unless purified, behold the fountain of purity: whence he must
be divine or deiformed, that means to see God, or the pattern of beauty.
Plot. lib. 6. Ennead. 1. Whether to his soul morally or Philosophically
purified, thus much was represented by the light of nature; or whether admitted
to look into the fountain of truth or law of liberty, he thus far approved
it while he looked upon it: the sum of his collections was delivered by him,
who alone had seen God, and declared him unto the world Blessed are the pure
in heart; for they shall see God Math. 5. verse. 8.
. In the perfection of this vision consists the fullness of our felicity in
the life to come, of which felicity notwithstanding all in this life may in
some measure be partakers, by seeing him in his word and in his only son: He
that has seen me has seen my father. How then say thou Philip; Show us
the father Ioh. 14. verse. 9.
? But did all see the son, that looked upon him? If they did not, how was he
the true light, that enlighteneth every man that comes into the world? In as
much as the world was made by him, his light was spread throughout it; He
shines still in darkness, though the darkness comprehends him not. Ioh.
1. verse. 5. This darkness in Plotins language is the adventitious filth or
rust, which before purification be wrought, adheres to the humane soul, and
makes it incapable of any illumination from the fountain of light.

CHHPTER L.
What purification of heart may be expected and sought after, before the
liue-image of God be renewed in us. Of the directions given by Heathen
Philosophers for attaining to this purification, or to perfect knowledge by it.
Wherein their directions are defective.

1. But admitting the purified heart has the promise of blessing, as well in
this life, as in the other to come; who shall have interest in the promise? for
who can say; My heart is clean? As justification; so the purification, whereof
we treat, is two-folde; 1. From the reign or dominion of sin. 2. From all
relics or commixture of sin.
Of the latter purification, in this life none can be, of the former all the
faithful must be partakers. But even faith it self, before it can be lively
and sound, must in order of nature (perhaps, of time) be sincere and true: and
unto the mere truth of it, the right knowledge or apprehension of the object
is always precedent. Whence it becomes questionable, what degree or manner of
purification is requisite to the right knowledge of God or his attributes:
these, in the method proposed to us by the authors of this Creed, being the
first articles or objects of our belief.

2. May we in this case, as in the like before, admit of a two-folde cleansing
or purification; one moral, or right only in its kind, but far short of
acceptance in it self, only acceptable, as it is destinated to a second
which is spiritual, and pleasing to God through Jesus Christ, as being the
symbol or participated form, whereby Christ's righteousness becomes actually
ours. The truth of this distinction was supposed by S. James, otherwise he had
set those souls, which he sought to cleanse, in a perpetual backwater. Unto
men as then not justified nor spiritually purified; unto all, (notorious
sinners not excepted) for to them by especial title was that exhortation
directed; Draw near to God, and he will draw near to you. Iam. 4.8. Suppose
the parties, to whom he spoke, should have replied thus; Unless God draw near
to us by his sanctifying grace, how should we draw nearer to him then we are?
Had their reply been pertinent, and just? If just, his exhortations following
had been altogether fruitless and impertinent; Cleanse your hands ye sinners,
and purge your hearts ye wavering minded. Iam. 4 verse. 8. No modern Catechist
knows better then he did; That God alone must spiritually cleanse and purify,
because he alone creates that grace in their hearts, whereby this their
sanctification is wrought. Yet that they might be finally so cleansed, and
purged by his mere grace, they were first morally to be cleansed, by
abstinence from unrighteous actions, by denying of indulgence to internal
lusts. This wavering of mind, though it spring from impuritie of heart or
corrupt affection; (as one observes) is no ill sign in youth, but rather the
working of the soul, seeking to purge it self from corruption; although a
wavering and floating imagination is for the present most incapable of the
impression of Gods image.

3. As corruption of nature does sway us both to conceive, and bring forth
evil of every kind: so our acquired prouenesse to practice it, being
outwardly curbed, or our natural propensions by Gods providence diverted from
such objects, as might entice or enlarge them, the light of nature as yet not
sanctified will manifest the folly of our former ways, and ofttimes cause
notorious malefactors to water their cheeks with tears, in sign they would
(as perhaps for the present in part they do) wash their consciences from
wonted uncleanness, if it should please God to grant them opportunity of
testifying their resolutions by reformation of life prolonged. And what they
thus protest may be either merely pretended, or unfeignedly purposed. So may
purposes, for the time being unfeigned, be either temporary and weak (easy to
be defeated) by future opportunities; or firm, and constant, able to resist
all ordinary or wonted inticements to commit external mischiefs. Such they
may be, and yet never approach the confines of true spiritual renovation.

4. That hearts thus far cleansed and mollified are more apt to admit the
true stamp or character of any moral truth, and may be more easily and
farther poized with any wholesome admonition or reproof* needs no further
proof, than that, which is above all proofs, which can be brought to the
contrary, common experience. And although in the heat of passion, or by
renitency of contrary impulsions, our apprehensions of truths formerly
imprinted or then first represented, be not so clear, or though our judgments
be corrupt and partial; yet such as have laid up these sacred principles in
their hearts, giving them little or no vent, except in practice, will in these
cases suspect their judgment, and appeal from passion to calm and sober
meditations. Many pleasant and grateful fancies, which secretly intrude
themselves by night, are often mistrusted by some, even whiles they dream;
though the like dreams in others, which have less occasion to believe them,
are exempt from all suspicion. The cause of difference, as an exquisite Philip.
Mocenicus.
Philosopher tells us, is this. In the one, the passages betwixt the brain,
and the heart are in some sort open: in the other so stopped, that the head,
which serves as an illiterate messenger or newes-carrier to the heart, can have
no direction or resolution thence, but takes every thing for true, that has
any appearance of truths formerly experienced in waking thoughts. This falls
out so, as if, whiles grand Counselors sleep, Post-boyes should take upon
them to determine of matters of state by vulgar rumors concerning the secrecies
enclosed in their Packets. The vigilant thoughts of men attentive to worldly
business or bent to vice, can be no better in sacred matters, than dreaming
fancies in matters secular. No moral knowledge not implanted in a purified
heart, but upon intercourse of passion or new occurrence, either vanishes or
varieth as strangely and quickly, as nocturnall representations. Nor is it
possible any sacred knowledge should enter into our hearts, until they be in
some measure cleansed of their native rust or adventitious foulness.

5. Not vnconsonant to as much of S. James divinity, as hitherto has been
discussed, is that resolution of Seneca in the beginning of his natural or
theological questions (for God and nature were to him as one) Mustum interest
inter, and bonam valetudinem, etc. There is a great difference between health
and strength: Thou carriest about no counterfeit face, nor framest thy speech
unto another mind: Thy heart is not invailed, thou art free from avarice,
which depriues it self of what it has purloined from others; from luxury,
which repaires the wasted stock more filthily, then it was wasted. Thou art
not subject to ambition, which seldom brings men unto dignity, but by base
and indigne practices? Thou art as yet a non-proficient, and rid of all other
ill guests, not of thy self. The virtue we aim at, is magnificent: not that
it is in it self a happy thing to be without vice, but that want of evil does
free the mind, and prepare it for the knowledge of heavenly matters, and
qualify it for acquaintance with God. Plotin likewise (avouching the consent
of the ancient) makes every virtue a beam or ray of the former purification,
in his opinion requisite for attaining union with the prime light or fountain
of beauty. What is temperance but abstinence from bodily pleasures, as being
neither pure in themselves, nor fit for any affecting purity of life to
follow? Wisdom and Prudence erect the mind to things supernall, and keep it
aloof from this inferior and base part of the world, which pollutes it.
Wherefore it was truly said; That the goodness, and beauty of the humane
soul consists in being like to God. But by what means in his divinity must
our souls put on his likeness? By putting off, whiles they ascend to him, the
vicious habits, which they put on in their descent to worldly spectacles; as
those that enter into the sanctuaries of the Temples, put off their garments,
and approach not the presence of the gods till they be purified. And again,
Our souls must be divorced from all corporal beauty, before we come
acquainted with the prime light or fountain of beauty, of whom all bodily
perfections are but images, on which who so doates, or esteems as objects
worthy of his love, shall be partaker of his folly, that drowned himself by
assaying to embrace fair shadows in the water. For thus enclaspt with love of
bodily decency, that he cannot acquit himself from it, he must needs suffer a
precipitation (not so much of body as of soul) into a pit dark and ghastly to
the mind of man; blinded both amongst the infernal ghosts, and even whiles
they live here, haunted still with ghosts or shadows. That is our Country
whence we came, and there is our settled place of dwelling. But what is the
means or manner of our retire? We need neither ship nor chariot, nor horse,
not so much as the use of our own feet: all these we must forsake, not
vouchsafing once to look back upon them after we be set on in this journey.
Our bodily lights being shutt we must provide us another eye. But what must
this internal eye behold? Upon the first opening or wakening, it cannot
easily fix it self upon excessive brightness. What remedy then? The soul
must be invred by degrees, first to look into honest and ingenuous studies;
afterward to contemplate such actions of famous men, as are fit patterns for
others to follow; lastly to take the true characters of these good actors
minds. But they shall by this means be enabled to take a true draught of their
own form? If thou can not see thine own latent beauty, propose the statuary
for thy imitation, pare of superfluities and exorbitances, rectify
obliquities, and give luster to parts obscure or duskie, and never give over
polishing and trimming thy statue, until virtue display her radiant beams,
until thou see temperance established in her immaculate throne. Thou needst
no Mercury for thy direction, intend thy sight: for such alone, as now thou
art, can truly behold that excellent beauty. Plot. Ennead. 1. lib. 6.

6. Out of this Heathens Philosophy, that Charity, which should be in
Christian Divines, would extract much matter, well symbolizing with the words
of life. Howbeit, lest either young Readers should wrong themselves by doting
too much upon these or like passages, or Divines should deprive him of his due;
let us see a little farther wherein they decline from Christian truth. It was an
heavenly doctrine of Plotine and other Heathens; That gold being severed from
dross or gleibs of earth often intermingled with it, and the soul of man once
purified from vice or external impressions, both recover their native beauty:
that the soul thus recovering her natiue-splendor, becomes a true glass for
right representation of Gods image or his attributes. But the best of the
Heathen wanting this perspectiue glass, whereby things of heavenly nature must
be discovered, could not discern many internal spots or blemishes, which no
less pollute the humane soul, then those running sores, wherewith most others
beside themselves were in their judgment foully infected. Besides these
mentioned, much of their seed we cannot deny to be most precious, as being
either borrowed from the Hebrews, since the law was written, or propagated
from Noah the Preacher of righteousness. Yet even the best, that they did sow,
compared with Paul's or Apolloes labors, proved in the growth but like grass
or green blades upon the house-toppe, withering before they be ripe. And thus
ill it proved, because not sown in contrite hearts, because not rooted in true
humility, never watered with penitent tears, without whose moisture the seed
of Gods word ordinarily receives no just increase. If we may judge of other
Heathens by Plotine, and of Plotine by those instances wherein he sought to be
most wise, their purest doctrine was infected with a double error: the one,
that it was but a kind of hand-labour to put of bad habits, or cleanse our
souls from such filth, as had befallen them, from contagion of externalls; the
other, that perfect splendour, beauty of mind, or fullness of felicity, did
immediately result from these moral abstractions or resecations of
superfluities. Hence were he and his fellow Philosophers often occasioned to
triumph before victory; to boast of liberty, when they had but laid aside
some external badges of slavery; to rejoice when they should have sorrowed.
For of that true purification, which is but as the ground or matter of
spiritual reformation, penitent tears and secret mournings are parts
essential: Suffer afflictions, and sorrow ye, and weep. Let your laughter be
turned into mourning, and your joy into heaviness. Cast down your selves
before the Lord, and he will lift you up James. 5.
.

7. Howbeit as in comparison of our Apostle I must condemn them: so for other
contemplations and good directions I cannot but justify them in respect of
Fingunt illae literae, vegetantque puerile ingenium, atque ad divinarum
scripturaru^ cognitionem mire praeparant, adquas ilico pedibus manibusque
illotis irrumpere, pene sacrilegi genus est. Hieronymus eorum impudentiam
taxat, qui modo a secularibus literis profecti, audent divinas tractare
scripturas. At quanto faciunt impudentius, qui ne gustatis quidem illis, istuc
ipsum audent? Erasmi. Enchirid cap 2.
many professed Divines, which intrude themselves into the holy of holyes, and
pry into Gods secret counsels, without any manifest change of mind or
affection, scarce of raiment, except perhaps to make a color of change unto
the world, by alteration of the hew, oftimes more then wontedly pampering their
wonted green desires, under the shelter of a sable suite or candide robe. And
I have often observed it to my grief; that as none declaime more passionately
against dead heresies, then dissolute and licentious livers: so in questions of
greatest moment, and on their part of fearful consequences, if they should
happen to prove false, none resolve more peremptorily for their own, or more
uncharitably against others opinions, then such as have least sounded the
fundamental principles of true divinity, most unable to judge of
consequences. None, more impatient of contradiction by others, then such, as
being let alone, will in few lines often contradict themselves. To bequeath
titles of ancient heretics to their live brethren: to shoot out their
bitter arrows, at all adventures, against as many of their fellow soldiers,
as do not shoot by their compass, none are more forward then such, as never
sought to know God, but by hearsay; having made a secret covenant with their
sluggish selves to take that to be the true sense and meaning of his word, that
to be the right tenor of his will, which some worthy Divines (more commendable
for general pains, then for exact discussion of these particulars,) but in
whose writings they have been most conversant, shall avouch. If they can put a
new fashion on vulgar, old worn, or home-spunne stuff, nothing foreign,
though of the same thread better woven, and more durable, must be admitted.
What is the reason? Like neat artificers they rate their hand-labours in
materials of others providing too high. Not to utter their old notes or
gatherings of youth, is a loss no less to them, then for Merchants not to
vent such wares as have layne long upon their hands. And whatsoever they have
uttered to the world by word or pen, they deem it no small part of their
credit to warrant (if need require) by solemn oath for good stuff. By this
confidence they gain credit with the multitude, and having this, verily they
have their full reward. But seeing the most exact knowledge, that can be had of
God or of his attributes in this life, must still end in admiration; the first
and surest ground of true knowledge in this subject, must be avoydance of
peremptory and precise determinations in particulars of confessed difficulty.
To hold negatiues, directly contrary to many particular resolutions commonly
received; is always more easy, oftimes more useful, and for the most part
more necessary, then to determine of affirmatiues. Nor is it necessary we
should abate the strength and vigor of our assent to general principles for
want of sure footing in special difficulties; but rather hold it by a hanke or
reyne from violent courses in ruggie or slippery passages. This kind of
suspense, which proceeds from restraint of judgment, not from deadness of
devotion, is the mother of admiration, and admiration the nurse of all true
knowledge concerning God.

8. One of the best means of knowing, what may be known of him in this life,
is by knowing our selves; and the best way to know our selves is to learn the
meaning of that precept of denying our selves. This is a depth never dived into
by any Heathen, nor well sounded by most Christians, though the true and
perfect image of God be no where so conspicuous, as in the bottom of it. The
hidden treasures of his mercy and goodness (attributes most essentially
annexed to the common notion of his nature) were clearliest opened to the world
in the humiliation of our Savior: and that glory of the Godhead, which shined
in him cannot be represented unto us, unless the like mind be in us, which
was in him. But the particular branches of this duty spring more directly out
of the Articles concerning Christ, unto such knowledge (of whom so much as may
bring forth the true similitude of his mind, the true knowledge of the divine
nature, and general attributes, is by way of method necessary, and unto this
knowledge the generalities of the former principle presupposed, and practiced,)
there is yet a more excellent way.

CHAPTER LI.
The best means to rectify and perfect our knowledge of God is to love him
sincerely. Of the mutual aid or furtherance, which the love of God and the
knowledge of God reciprocally and in a manner circularly afford each to other
in their setting and growth.

1. TO make love the mother, and knowledge the daughter will seem an (...) or
mere inversion of natures progress, from whose footesteps the common Maxim,
[ unseen unsought after; or (as the Latins express it,) Ignoti nulla cupido;
unknown undesired;] has been gathered by the investigators of truth. The
very essences of desire and love (especially of things not actually enjoyed)
are so closely enterwrapt and linkt together, that for knowledge, or whatsoever
is no essential part of themselves to interpose or come between them, is
impossible. If then knowledge (according to the former saying) be always
presupposed to desire, how should it be the offspring of love?

2. The former Maxim notwithstanding (if I much mistake not) though within its
limits without controlle, yet rightly examined has no just authority, save
only in such express and actual desires, as are fashioned to determinate
particulars desired. It no way stretches to that mother desire, which all men
naturally have of knowledge indefinitely taken. This always works before we
are aware, and all of us desire to know, before we know what knowledge or
desire means. This native desire of knowledge, no man I think (were he to
speak directly and bona fide to this point) would avouch to be different from
the desire of happiness alike naturally and inseparably rooted in all. One,
and the same inclination of the reasonable nature swayes to happiness, as to
the end or mark, through knowledge, as the entry or passage; but often
miscarries, not so much through faint intention or remiss endeavors, as from
too hasty level, vnsteadie loose, or immature delivery, before it be
furnished with internal weight to balance it self against external
impulsions or attractions. Goodness divine, in whose fruition this happiness
consists, was the port for which the Philosophers in their intricate disputes
were bound: the point, whereon the former desire is by nature directly set; but
from which the alacrious endeavors or vigorous intentions of men most greedy
of knowledge, usually divert as far, as an headless unfeathered flight, shot
out of a strong bow in a mighty wind, does from the mark whereto the Archer
would have sent it. Not the most exquisite knowledge of natures secrecies, of
every creature in the world, can add ought unto our happiness, otherwise than
by rectifying or right levelling that inbredde desire, which impells or swayes
us to this anxious search of knowledge. For knowledge it self we desire only
as it is good, whereas no goodness, save divine, can give satisfaction to this
desire. Unto this point or center of the souls rest and contentment, which
Philosophers sought up and down by as many Arch-lines, as there be spheres or
circles in the several works of nature, the Psalmist directs us by a short
cord or string: Delight thou in the Lord, and he shall give thee thy hearts
desire. Psalm. 37.4. And our hearts desire includes (at least) such a measure of
knowledge and true happiness, as in this life is fittest for us. But as we may
in some sort desire his goodness, may we so truly delight in him, whom we
have not known? Is it true of our hearts, what Jacob said of Genesis 28.
Bethel? Are they indeed the houses of God? is he in them, and we are not
aware of his presence?

3. Of things in their nature sensible, but never apprehended by any particular
sense, there may be an implanted hate or loathing. As whatsoever the mother
near childebirth has been affrighted or misaffected with, will be misliked
by the child brought forth. Hence do these secret enmities, which some
reasonable creatures bear to dumb beasts, which never offended them, usually
grow. The Paroxysmes or fits of this dislike, are never occasioned but by
sight or feeling, or some other sensitive actual apprehensions of matters thus
offensive: howbeit, some grudgings of the same disease may be procured by mere
vicinitie or the unknown presence of the adversary; as I have known some men,
restless after hard labor, and ever and anon to refuse the seat of their
wonted rest, not knowing any reason, why so they did, till search being made,
the sight of their adversary, (that was a Cat) did bring their fit upon them.
And yet I make no question, but either delightful employments, exercise of the
spirit and senses, or the company of lovely creatures, might easily have either
prevented the working of the Antipathie, or deaded all impression of
irkesomnesse or dislike; although their badde neighbor had still been
present. As dislike and hate from antipathie; so love or delight may be raised
from secret contact or vicinitie of sympathizing natures. And whether we hold
our souls to be immediately created of nothing, or to spring as branches from
our parents; both ways they may be capable of impressions from Gods presence,
which (though for the most part vnapprehended) is always intimate and
immediate to them as well in their operations, as productions; and would
undoubtedly fill them with secret joy, did we not either give preposterous
issue to such gladness, as by the sympathy is often unwittingly raised in our
hearts; or stifle the first workings or intimations of it by contrary motions
of unhallowed mirth. Were those secret rays of warmth and comfort, which daily
issue from his brightness, not cast (as they usually are) upon secondary
causes or by-standing creatures, but reflected upon their fountain; the light
of his countenance would more clearly shine upon us, and instampe our minds
with the right portraicture of his perfections imitable. The sum of the
Psalmists late mentioned advise is, to nurse the sympathizing instincts or
seeds of secret joy, but by abandoning all delight, save in those practices,
which preserve the health and peace of conscience. For to delight in the Lord
and in his law, are with him terms synonymall. Unto this point the last
passages of the fourth book, as of laying up Gods word in our hearts, of
giving mature and right vent to internal motions or suggestions, have (as the
Reader will easily perceive) peculiar and immediate reference. The imperfect
light of speculatiue or artificial knowledge may well beget some heat of
love: but the perfection or splendour of knowledge divine cannot spring but from
love thoroughly kindled and bursting out into a flame, which it seldom does, if
those inward touches of unknown joy, find too much, too speedy, or sinister
vent. It is an excellent observation, which some have misquoted out of Plato,
to this purpose. Sacred mysteries can hardly be taught with words: but if a man
long inures himself to divine matters, and fit his life to his meditations,
the light of truth will suddenly burst out, as from a sparling fire. Vide
Pansam. page 9.

4. The doctrine proposed we may maintain without intermedling in that
quarrel between some late Ge^son and Vasques.
Schoolmen and mystical Divines more ancient, concerning the precedence of
love and knowledge, in the unition of our souls with God. In the opinion of
the ancients, the acts of love or affection outstart actual knowledge or
apprehension. We only give this precedence to the indefinite desire or
apprehension of manifest joy from a cause unknown and latent. And perhaps the
reason why some so stiffely deny all possibility, etiam de potentia dei
absoluta, for love to kindle in the rational soul, without some present
elicit act of knowledge or apprehension, may be their averseness from Plato in
holding science to be but a kind of reminiscence. And though upon these terms
we may not second him; yet can we as little brook their opinions, which
either expressly maintain or tacitly suppose the manner, how love or
knowledge rational are first planted or receive increase, to resemble the
compositions of art, rather then the natural growth of vegetables. The first
seeds of both, are not from without, but within us; and the manner how our
knowledge comes to perfection, may (I take it) be best illustrated by the
manner how we our selves become capable of this chief ornament of our nature.
The first and prime substance of all bodies organicall is homogeneall or of one
form. The mould, whence man (far the most excellent in this rank) is by
degrees (scarce sensible) extracted, ought to be reckoned rather amongst the
creatures linelesse and inanimate, than vital. At the best, it is but as the
mean between them, not more like to the one in possibility, then it is to
the other in act; yet duly cherished, it quickens and brancheth it self
into several parts, first exercising only the opperations of life, then of
sense, lastly of reason. For although the rational soul be immediately
created by God; yet the opperations of it, as naturally presuppose the
opperations of sense, as these do opperations vegetable. Parallel hereto, our
natural desire of knowledge or true happiness (considered in its first root
or element) is but (as the Schools speak) Quoddam naturae pondus, A sway or
bent or secret working of nature, seeking to be delivered of this her burden.
Afterward it aims or levells at some particular objects, rather drawn unto
them by sympathy or impeld by instinct, then directed by express rule of
reason or actual choice. And perhaps, the first thing apprehended by it, is
its own attractions or impulsions; the apprehension of them being but as it
were a reflexe or doubling of former inclinations or propensions; and once come
to this perfection, it moves it self, and loves as well the exercise of its
own acts or choice, as the objects, to which it was otherwise drawn or
impeld; now using sense as a servant, which before did lead it as a guide, but
did not give it life or beginning.

5. As food received by the mother does only nourish, not give life to the
fruit conceived in her womb; so the most pregnant suggestions of sense do
only feed, not beget the internal desire of knowledge or happiness. The best
instructions or precepts of Tutors, of Parents, or the experiments we get our
selves, are but as so many offices or rules of Midwifrie, for bringing forth
what was before conceived. Meditation it self, (which is, in common
reputation, the mother of science) or whatsoever intention of mind we can use,
serve no otherwise to the former purpose, then the influence of the Sun or
Stars does to the productions of flowers or plants; or (were the story true)
as the eyes of Ostriches, or the warmth of other birds to the formation of
their young ones. And thus we see natural inclinations or desires always come
to best proof, when they are cherished with assiduous, calm, and quiet
meditations: whereas the nimble motions of unsettled brains usually suffer the
best seeds, which Man was permitted to bring with him out of Paradise, to
perish, as some birds do their young ones, by often running off their nests.
Not that their inventions are not oftimes most pleasant, or delightful to
spectators: for so curious pictures observantly taken from the several
perfections of many liuelesse statues, do far surpass any one
liue-substance in freshness of color or exact proportion; howbeit, the
meanest creature endued with life, and motion, simply considered, is much
better then the most glorious works of Polycletus or Apelles. And herein the
nimble or pleasant wit, and the settled contemplator properly differ: The one
proceeds by addition, or quaint composition of external or borrowed forms;
the other, by multiplication of his own internal capacities; or by a kind of
silent incubation, does as it were hatch his brood, and finds every limb or
branch drawn out of his proper root, before he mark the frame or composture.
And though the conception be sometimes slow, and the proportion long in
setting; yet the fruit of his mind once thoroughly set, overgrowes the other
in height, in strength, and vigor. But unto this facility in bringing forth,
few attain without extraordinary midwifry or much experience. The difficulties
of their first travells make many prostitute their wills to fruitless popular
commercements, never resolving to conceine more deeply of any matters, then may
occasion extemporary pleasure or delight, or procure some anniversarie or
solemn flashes of general applause. But much more painful, then any
contemplation besides, whereof the reasonable soul seeks to be delivered, is
our own new birth, which, in the Apostles language, is but the fashioning of
Christ Jesus or Gods image in us. In this our translation from darkness to
light how often are we enforct to cry out with Ezechiah; The Children are come
unto the birth, and there is no strength to bring forth. Sometimes we seek
with sighs and groans to give vent to the inward working of the implanted
inclination, stirred and quickened by the spirit of God. Otherwhiles, we strive
to strengthen the expulsive force, or to make an eruption by knocking our
breasts; oftimes enforced to rest contented with a stream of tears, strained
out by this struggling agony between the infusions of spiritual life, and the
flesh resisting this our birth, as the Dragon did the bringing forth of the
Woman's child. Howbeit these sorrowful tears serve to this end, as a spring or
summer shower to a joyful harvest. And the greater our pain in the travel, or
the longer our expectation has been masked with carnal blindness; the
greater always is our joy in the delivery; when our minds are enlightened to
see the beauty of that, which heretofore we so fervently expected, only by
secret instinct or sympathy. Then fearing lest these transient gleams might
fade or vanish; either we crave with old Simeon our Nunc dimittis, Lord now
let thou thy servants depart in peace, while our eyes behold thy
salvation, or complain with the Prophet, How long will thou be as a passenger
or as one, that soiourneth but for a night? Return o Lord, return unto thy
resting place, thou, and the Arc of thy strength. And with Peter, We proffer
to build him a lasting tabernacle, to allot him our hearts for a perpetual
habitation.

6. What joy of heart does usually accompany those internal illuminatio^s,
which break forth from such ardent desire of acquaintance with the divine
nature, as has been secretly kindled and nourished by a touch or sympathy of
his former vnapprehended presence; and how incomparably they exceed the most
lively representations which others can frame of his essence or attributes,
whether for solid information of the understanding, for affecting the will, or
for uniting our souls and affections to him, may in part, be gathered from
that excessive delight, which men naturally take in their own labors in
respect of others more exquisitely adorned: partly from the measure of our
exceeding our selves either in the right apprehension or exquisite adorning of
subjects much affected, in comparison of these which we naturally fancy not or
lightly esteem. The fruits of other men's labors, being as it were, gathered
to our hands, we like no farther, then as they fit those moulds of our
speculatiue reflectiue conceits, which have their seat in the superior part
of the soul, and scarce communicate with affection. And our judgments are
always most sincere in respect of those men's works, whose persons or
conversation have given us least occasion of any affectionate sympathy or
antipathie. But in the approbation of our own inventions, affection and that
natural inclination, whence they spring, have swaying voices: and unless
these stubborn suffragants be first squared to the rules of reason taught by
others, they enforce our judgments to bow unto their bent. But albeit too much
affection leads many into folly, yet no man understands or handles any
subject well, which he does not much affect. Hence Poets, as their inventions
are most delicate, so are they usually most in love with them; because the same
bent of affection, which animates and strengthens their fancies to bring forth,
does also enamour them with the beauty of their own brood. Howbeit though
indignation may give the faculty of making verses, where nature has denied
it: yet to make a Poet, nature it self is not able, but by giving an
extraordinary affection of like or Hoc amet, hoc spernet promissi carminis
Auther.
dislike, of such objects as fall within the consideration of the Poetical
faculty. Generally as blunt yrons thoroughly heated pierce further into hard
bodies, then cold edg-tooles; so wits in themselves not the acutest, whilst
accompanied with ardor of affection, conceive most acutely and deeply of
matters much affected, and will got through such difficulties, as would turn
the edges of the best wits living not thus backed or fortified. Nor is it the
nimblenesse of conceit or apprehension, but the unrelenting temper of inbred
desire and incessant sway or working of secret instinct, which brings the seeds
of knowledge to just growth and maturitie; as those plants prosper best, not
which shoot out fastest or flourish soonest, but such as have the soundest
roots, and sappiest stemmes.

7. As reason requires affection to back it so much more does affection need
the eye of reason (domesticke or foreign) to direct and level it; nor is it
only directed, but withal refined and purified by being as it were new cast
in the modells of our rational or reflexe conceits; each act of settled
contemplation diminishes somewhat of its natural sowrnesse, as crabs or wild
apples by often transplanting or engraffing grow more mild and pleasant. As
there is a circular progress of seed from trees, and trees from seed: so is
there a reciprocal production of desire or love by knowledge, and of knowledge
by desire or love in one and the same man. For man's actions of this kind are
immanent, and multiply within himself. And as the seed since the first
creation does still in order of nature go before the tree; so does knowledge
always presuppose instinct or desire. And yet knowledge of things amiable
being come unto maturitie is always laden with love, as with its natural
fruit. Nor should we so much desire to know any subject, unless love to it
known were most natural. So that knowledge properly is but our natural
desire, or implanted blind love restored to sight: and nature does as it were
first grope after that, which at length she comes to see, and having seen
desires to embrace or kiss. The apparent inconstancy of young desires never
satisfied manifests their natural blindness in that they secretly solicit a
guide or instructor: and the original of this inconstancy, (as was intimated
before) is but the working of the soul seeking to vnsheath the implanted
notion or desire of knowledge and of true happiness from those fleshly
invorapments, wherewith it was blind folded as a child in the womb; or to
deduce the original of the error from a principle more properly
Philosophical. As unto knowledge truly speculatiue there is required a
perfect abstraction of the object known, or of the form by which we know it,
from all material conditions, or sensitive adjuncts, which accompany it: so
on the behalf of the intellectiue faculty it self (especially for the right
contemplation of matters moral or practical) a correspondent extraction of
the ingraffed notion or desire of good is as requisite. For as those
speculatiue or general rules, which have been taken from sensitive
experiments not rightly severed or abstracted, though they hold in some, yet
fail in most particulars, when we come to practice: so likewise all love of
goodness whatsoever, is insincere and unconstant, unless the ingraffed desire
of happiness, whence it springs, be first stripped of those sensitive desires or
propensions, which, by the corruption of nature are either linked with it or
enclose it, as the Iv^e does the Oak. And yet the more we enure our selves to
any sensual or external good, the greater advantage those sensual appetites
or propensions gain, as well for strengthening, as for fast linking or
mingling themselves with the intellectual inclination or desire, which by long
custom they either quite blind, or make it willing to admit them for its
leader.

8. This then is the Aphorism, for whose proof thus much has been premised;
The most compendious and safest way to conceive or speak aright of God or his
goodness, is to have our inbred desire of happiness right set in youth, and
continually held as in a baye unto those practices; whereto God has promised
the communication of his gracious presence. So shall the sincere knowledge of
his goodness and other attributes break forth (in a measure fittest for every
man in his vocation) in best season, and bring forth the most lasting,
constant, and pleasant fruits of love. And knowledge again relying upon the
internal desire of happiness, which is the stem or branch, whence these
fruits of love proceed, does season and sweeten the very nature or property
of it, and in a sort transform from a wild plant to a tree of life; as
cunning gardiners by often transplanting and good dressing, much better the
stock, and in process of time, in a manner, alter the very specificall nature
of the fruit. And after our cogitations come once to revolue upon the
forementioned sympathy or settled peace of conscience, (which cannot arise,
but from Gods presence) as upon a firm and constant Center, our souls become
like a Surveyers Table rightly set, for taking the true Model of the in
comprehensible Nature.

FINIS.

