A TREATISE OF THE HOLY CATHOLIC FAITH and CHVRCH.

Divided into three Books.

By THOMAS IACKSON Dr. in Divinity, Chaplain to his Majesty in Ordinary,
and Vicar of Saint Nicolas Church in the Town of Newcastle upon Tyne.

The first Book.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for John Clarke, and are to be sold at his Shop under
St. Peter's Church in Cornehill. 1627.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL and truly worthy Knight Sir RICHARD ANDERSON of
Pendley in Hartfordshire, the blessings of this life, and of that to come, be
multiplied.
RIGHT WORTHY SIR;
YOur unfeigned Love to Learning and true Religion, well known by real
testimonies to all true Lovers of them, which have the happiness (as my self
for long time have had) to be acquainted with you, drew this short Treatise
upon its first return unto me (to whom it has been from its first birth a
stranger) to take you for its Foster-Father. Could it speak for it self, it
would, I am persuaded, complain of wrong, if I should direct it to seek
another Patron, being not acquainted with any Family which bears a more lively
image of a well-ordered Church, than your Family does. Nor is there any other
to whom I more heartily wish all furtherance in good beginnings and
proceedings, then I do to yours, and to that Honorable Family unto which you
are happily united. Of this my desire, and of my best respect unto your self,
and to your Noble Lady, I have no better token for the present, then this
Treatise of the holy Catholic Faith and Church. Thus commending both of you,
with all yours, and it, unto the blessing of him, who is the sole Fountain of
Faith, and Head of the Holy Catholic Church: I take my leave, and rest,

Yours ever in the surest bonds of sincere love and observance, THOMAS IACKSON.
From my Vicarage in Newcastle upon Tine, this first of January, 1626.
Courteous and Christian Reader:
THe sum of this Treatise was delivered in Catechism Lectures for the
benefit of younger Students in Pembrook College in Oxon, at the request of the
Master of that Society, my Reverend and Worthy Friend, and of some other good
friends; to whose religious desires my hope was to have given better
satisfaction, if my continuance in that ancient and sweet Nurserie of Learning
had been longer, or my studies there, less interrupted with other occasions.
But God be praised, that College has been furnished since with one of their
own body, of whose learned and polite Labors, I hope one day to be with
others, a partaker. This Treatise, as now it is, has been for the most part
since in the hands of others, being committed by me to the perusal of that
great light of the Northern parts, my then Reverend and dearest Friend, Doctor
Birkhead, from whose judicious censure, I hoped then, this and other of my
Labors should have received some perfection, and I much comfort from his
company. But it pleased the Lord, (whose good pleasure we must obey, not
question) to call him from us, (no doubt to his greater good, though to the
great loss and sorrow of every true member of the English Church which knew
him) before it was my hap (being then absent from these parts) to hear from
him, or speak with him. Since his death, it has past through many hands, but
all as it seems, good friends, in that it returns unto me entire. And from
it, as it is, (I hope) no orthodoxall Reader shall receive any discontent, nor
any Adversaries of the truth much advantage. Wherein it is for the matter
deficient, or not so fully expressed, I shall have opportunity, whether by the advice of Friends, or exceptions of the Adversary, to amend or enlarge, in
other Treatises of the same Argument, (which by Gods assistance) shall shortly
be communicated to thee. And for this reason in part I have been the more
willing to have it published at this time.

Thine in Christ Jesus, THOMAS IACKSON.

The Contents of the several Chapters handled in this Treatise.
SECTION I. Containing the description, definition, and properties of the Holy
Catholic Church taken in the prime and principal sense, in the six first
Chapters.
Chapters. Folio. 1. That it is easier to oppose, than to answer a Romanist in
this Argument of the Church. The Authors method for meeting with wrangling
Sophismes. 3 2. The definition of the Church in general gathered from the
diverse sorts of union between bodies natural, artificial, or civil. 5 3. Of
the nature and properties of the Church taken in its principal sense. How it
is differenced from other Bodies civil. Of the peculiar unity which it has.
13 4. Of the preeminences which the Church has of other Bodies or
Corporations, in respect of the Governor of it, and the Laws by which it is
governed. Of the two Attributes, Holy and Catholic. 21 5. Containing the
frivolous exceptions of Cardinal Bellarmine, and some other Romanists against
the former or like description of the true Church, or that Church which is
principally meant in the Apostles Creed. 29 6. Containing the special points
to be believed concerning this Article of the One, Holy, Catholic Church. How
every one is so to moderate his assent or belief concerning it, that he
neither incline unto presumption, nor fall into despair. 35
SECTION II. Of the visible Church in general. Of its principal Attributes or
Privileges, unto the sixteenth Chapter.
7. Of the Church Militant and Triumphant. In what sense it is said that the
true Church is invisible. 43 8. What is required to the constitution of a
visible Church. Whence the unity or plurality of visible Churches arises.
What unity may be had or expected between visible Churches independent one of
another for Jurisdiction. The diverse acceptions or degrees of the visible
Church. 52 9. That albeit the true Church be always visible, yet it is a
gross sophisme hence to infer, that the visible Church is always the true
Church; or that one visible Church is more privileged from erring than
another. The strange blasphemy, by which the Author of the Antidote seeks to
support the infallibility of the visible Romish Church. 66 10. In what cases
Arguments of proportion may be drawn from Allegories. A full explication of
the Allegory used by S. Paul, Gal. 4. and of the Argument, or concludent
proof, in the same Allegory contained. 75 11 Of the consonancie between the
promulgation of the old Testament, and the New. Of the opposition between the
Law and the Gospel, or between the old Testament and the New. The explication
of the Apostles argument, Heb. 9. ver. 13, 14. 86 12. The Allegory or Argument
of proportion drawn from Noah's Arc, explicated according to the former rules,
and retorted upon the Romanist. 92 13. How far, and in what cases, that
Maxim used by the Fathers, Extra Ecclesiam non est salus, Out of the Church,
there is no salvation, is true of the visible Church, or Churches visible. 97
14. Declaring by one special instance, the particular manner and
opportunities, by which the Church visible or representative, did first
incroach upon the royal Attributes of the holy, Catholic and Apostolic
Church. For what causes Christians may separate thewselues, or suffer
themselves to be separated from any visible Church, whereof they were sometimes
members. 111 15. That our Forefathers separation from the Romish Church was
most lawful and just, both in respect of Prince and State, and in respect of
every private person which feared God, or sought to retain the holy, Catholic
and Apostolic Faith. 118
SECTION III. The visible Church of England retains the holy Catholic faith,
which the Romish Church has defiled.
16. That our Chvrch was in the Romish Church before Luthers time, and yet in
it, neither as a visible Church altogether distinct from it, nor as any native
member of it. 139 17. That men may be visible members of the holy Catholic and
Apostolic Church, and yet no actual members of any present visible Church.
149 18. In what sense it may be granted, that the visible Romish Church, at
the time of our forefathers separation from it, was a true Church, and yet
withal the Synagogue of Satan, the seat of Antichrist, and common sink of
heresies. 160 19 Whether our Forefathers in separating themselves or suffering
themselves to be separated from the Romish Church, did any otherwise then Gods
Prophets or our Saviors Disciples, had their case and opportunity been the
same, would have done. 170 20. Whether the name [Catholike] can in good earnest
be pleaded or pretended for an inseperable mark of the true visible Church.
21. That the title of [Catholike] is proper and essential unto the faith
professed by the present visible Church of England, but cannot truly be
attributed to the Faith or Creed of the modern visible Romish Church. 180 22.
Of the adinuentions or new Articles added to the Creed by the Romish Church,
by which she has defiled the Holy, Catholic and Apostolic faith. Of the
difference betwixt the Church of Rome, and the Church of England concerning the
rule of faith. What that ecclesiasticke tradition was which Vincentius
Lir^nensis so much commends: to what use it served in the ancient Councels.
185 23. Of the agreement between the Enthusiast or some non-conformitants to
the Church of England, and the Romish Church, concerning the manner how the
Spirit of truth* (as they suppose) does lead men into all truth. That the true
sense of scripture is as determinable by light of reason and rules of art, as
the conclusions of any other sciences or faculties are. A general survey of
the depraved or more then heretical or heathenish infidelity of the modern
Romish Church. 195
Errata.
Page 80* lin. penult. for (...), read (...).

A TREATISE of the Holy Catholic Faith and CHVRCH.
IN the Exposition of the Apostles Creed, a work undertaken by me long ago, I
did sequester four points from the body of that intended work, now almost
finished.

The first was the doctrine of the holy and blessed Trinity, which I reserved
for the last part of my labors to be set down by way of prayer or
Soliloquies, as being an argument, in my judgment, both then and now, more fit
for meditation, then for controversy or Scholasticke discourse.

The second point was, the Article of the holy Catholic Church.

The Third, the Communion of Saints.

The fourth, the Forgiveness of sins.

Points, which I knew not how to handle in that rank and order, as they are
propounded unto us in the Creed, without manifest interruption of my intended
method, which I indeauoured should be continuate, each latter part immediately
issuing out of the former. Nor could I find a commodious entrance into the
Article of Christ's coming to judge as well the dead as the living, before I
had treated of the resurrection of the dead. Nor could I finish what I had to
say, or what was to be said, concerning the last Judgment it self, without
some explication of the sentence to be awarded, and that is life everlasting to
all true believers, and everlasting death to the disobedient and unbelievers.
So then the articles of the holy Catholic Church, of the Communion of Saints,
of the forgiveness of sins, have been out of choice and intended method
left altogether untouched, reserved for peculiar Treatises.

CHAP. I. That it is easier to oppose, than to answer a Romanist in this
Argument of the Church. The Authors method for meeting with wrangling Sophismes.
FIrst then of the Holy Catholic Church. An Argument, fitting for these
times, being specially insisted upon and enlarged by Priests and Jesuits to
our prejudice; they well perceiving, their intricate disputes and sophistical
discourses in this point to be the only net, which Peter's pretended successors
have left them for catching silly and vncatechized souls, or for intangling
men of deep understanding, but of deeper discontent or dislike with their
present Governors or Dispensers of preferment. For unto men, either not misled
by discontented passion, or otherwise not incapable of sound reason, it might
easily appear that there is no heresy at this day maintained in Christendom,
(at least so generally) which does either so highly offend God and his Christ,
or so grieuousty disturb the public peace of Christ's Church, or so desperately
inda^ger the soul of every one that subscribes unto it, as this heresy
concerning the transcendent Authority of the visible Romish Church. Howbeit, I
must confess, it is a great deal easier to discover their blasphemies, and
refute their heresies; to pity the stupiditie of some, or to deride the
petulancy or rashness of others: then to avoid the contrary errors, into
which some reformed Writers of good note have fallen, some through mere
eagerness of opposition, others through weakness and want of Arts. And no
marvel; for there is nothing which sooner or faster leads Artists themselves
into error, than identitie of names or words, including in them diversity of
significations or importances.

signification or importance, is always incroaching upon the attributes or
prerogatives, which most properly appertain to some other more prime and
principal. Now there is no word or term used either in any scientificall,
moral, or popular discourse, which has so many, so much different
significations or importances, as the word [ Church] has, whether we take it
in the Greek, Latin, or English.

Analogatum, that is, of the Church (...), to take a true terriar or survey of
the attributes, prerogatives, or royalties, which belong either solely or
principally unto it: In the second place, to value the other significations or
importances, and rate their several attributes or properties by the neernesse
or remoteness, of their affinity with it, or reference unto it.

Before we come to a perfect view of the nature or properties of that Church,
which is entitled Holy Catholic (...), we must enquire the nature or
definition of a Church in general, or as it is abstracted from true holiness
or universality. For these are the proper and formal differences of the Church
(...), that is, of the principal Analogatum, comprehended under this word or
name, Church, taking it in his universal or amplyest signification.

CHAP. II. The definition of the Church in general gathered from the diverse
sorts of union between bodies natural, artificial, or civil.
COncerning the Name, it shall suffice transitu, or by way of entry or passage
into the matter it self, signified by this Name. The Greek (...) or (...),
and the English word Church do not differ at all in their Grammatical
signification or importance: and from so much of their signification or
importance, as is only pertinent to our present inquisition, the Latin Concio
does no way differ; for all of them signify a certain congregation or company
of men. In the manner, how they come to signify one and the same thing, this
difference perhaps may be observed: The Greek (...) and (...) do in the first
place, or in their radical propriety, signify the persons met together or
assembled: In the secoed or derivatiue signification, they import the place
appointed for their meeting or assembly, which in Latin we properly call
Aedem aut Templum a sacred house or Temple. To this latter signification of
(...) or (...) the Latin Concio, which answers most exactly to their prime and
radical signification, is not flexible. For Concio (as far as I have observed)
is never taken pro loco aut Aede vbi concio celebratur, for the place or house
wherein the assembly is, but usually for any speech or oration made unto the
people assembled, or for the Pro concione, is as much as Pro rostris.
place wherein the Orator or Speaker stands. On the contrary, the English for
this word Church, whether we do according to the most usual and otherwise
most refined Dialect of this Kingdom pronounce it, or as some other Dialects
would have it Kurk, or as the most ancient Dialect sounds it, Kyrke, all derive
their pedigree from the Greek (...) which in the first signification is in
value the same with (...) that is, the Lords house or palace. All the
difference in the diverse pronunciation of it in our English, arises from the
different manner of pronouncing or expressing the Greek K or Y, in the Latin,
English or modern tongues. Some expressing ch by the English K, others by the
Latin C. which in English is usually expressed by Ch as Carolus, in English,
Charles, and Cista a chest: so likewise (...) by li^e corruption of speech,
comes to be Church. Such as express the Greek ch by the English K, and the
Greek Y by the Latin or English V. pronounce it Kurke such as retaining the
true pronunciation of the Greek ch, found the Greek Y like unto the latin or
English Y, have propagated the name of Kyrke.
Church does in the first place signify Aedem or Templum, the place, house or
palace of the assembly; and in the second place it comes to signify or import
as much, as (...) or Concio do, in the first place, that is, the congregation
or Company of men assembled.

Omitting quid nominis: the first inquiry must be quid rei, what is the summum
genus of the Church, indefinitely or generally considered. And this has
presented it self unto us without further search: is an assembly or
Congregation of men.

Omnis ecclesia, omnis concio, est coetus aut multitudo hominum:

Omnis multitudo, omnis coetus hominum, non est Ecclesia, non est Concio.

Every Church is a congregation or assembly of men: Every Congregation or
assembly of men is not a Church. The next Quaere therefore must be, what it is,
that does constitute or formally difference a Church, or concionem legitimam or
an Ecclesiasticke congregation, or at least the genus proximum of the Church
ingenerall, from an assembly taken in general. This cannot be the multitude or
number of persons assembled, for these are oft-times greater at a horserace,
bowling, shooting, bull baiting, or other like concourses of people (which no
man would call concionem legitimam or ecclesiam) then in those meetings which
we properly call conciones, Ecclesias, or Churches. Secondly, that which
formally differenceth a Church generally considered from an ordinary assembly
or congregation, is not iuxta positio, no vicinity or union merely local of
the parties so assembled. For as the multitude, so the throng may be greater at
a stageplay, then at a Sermon or Ecclesiastical congregation. And thickest
crowdes least participate of the nature of a Church or Concio.

Every Church herein exceeds an ordinary assembly and every corporation or
society corporate supposes an union, more then merely local, between the
members; an unity proportionable to the unity of bodies artificial, natural
or vegetable. An assembly or multitude, how great, how close soever, not thus
united or framed into a corporation; or not united by some civil bond, answers
in proportion to the Latin cumulus or aceruus, to an heap or congest of
bodies homogeneall and contiguous, but not informated by one and the same
form, not animated by one and the same soul or spirit. Every natural body is
ens per se, etomne ens, qua ens, est vnum. An heap or congest is neither ens
nor vnam, but by accident, or by extrinsecall denomination from the Identity of
place, with in which the parts or ingredients of it are contained. So that
union merely local, neither is, nor presupposes any form either natural or
artificial whence it flows. Quod non est aliquid formatum, non est aliquid
vere vnum. That which has no set form or fashion, can have no true real
unity: for it is the form of every thing, which gives it a distinct entitie or
unity. That which has no set form, can have no set or proper name, whereby
to be known; it must be described by addition of quantity. For we do not
say, a bread, a earth, a wax, or the like, as we say, a loaf, a candle, or a
close; but a piece of bread, a piece of wax, if it be not made up into some
certain form.

An heap of corn, though every individual part or ship may be said to be
one body, although it consists of indiuidualls or material parts, more
heterogeneall for their substance or quality, and more dislike in outward form
or figure, than rye is from wheat, or oats from barley. The reason is, because
the union between the several parts of a ship is much greater and more
perfect, than the union between the several grains of Corn in the same
heap. All the material or individual parts of the ship, how different soever
in their natural substance, quality or figure, are all wrought into one
artificial form. If one should have an heap of corn bequeathed by legacy,
and particularized by the place wherein it is, and by the measure which it
contains; though the heap were dissolved, so the indiuiduals (though put in
diverse places) remain the same without any alteration or diminution of their
measure or number, the legacy would stand good, and the party unto whom it is
bequeathed, would sustain no loss. But if the indiuidualls should be
successively taken away, and others put in their places to make up the same
measure, and the same heap (for outward fashion and quantity) which the Donor
did bequeath, the legacy were lost; if this were done through his default, to
whom it was bequeathed: for the heap is not the same, unless the individuals
be the same, because it has no form to give it distinct being or union. He
that bequeaths a certain measure of corn, though dispersed, is presumed to
have bequeathed the same corn, though afterward it be made into one heap, or
e contra. He that bequeathes an heap of corn is presumed to bequeath every
individual grain contained in the heap at the time of the bequest, though
they be afterward dispersed or put into several places, before the Donee can
come to challenge them. But it is not so in a house or ship, for if a man
should bequeath a ship by legacy, which afterward were dissolved, albeit no
material part were lost, yet the legacy were lost, because it is not the same
body that was bequeathed, as having lost the form.

So the Lawyers Aliud enim materia est, aliud species. Cui materia legata est,
species ex ea facta non debetur: vt s^lana legata est, deinde vestis fiat, aut
ex tabulis navis, aut armarium. Similiter traditur, si navis legata dissoluta
sit, neque materiam neque navem refectam deberi. Hottoman: Quaest. il. lust.
Quaest. octa^.
say: si navis legata, dissoluta sit, neque materiam, neque navem refectam
deberi. If the ship which is bequeathed by legacy be taken in pieces, neither
the materials nor the ship which is made of them, is due to the legatee. For
the materials were not bequeathed, but as united into one form, and the form
being lost, the individual bequeathed is lost. Though the same materials were
made up again into the like form, yet could it not be reputed the same ship,
but another like unto it. But this is to be understood in case the dissolution
be made, simul and semel, all at once: For if a ship bequeathed should, before
the Donee take possession of it, be successively repaired, as Theseus his ship
was, albeit never a rib, or plank, or other material did remain the same, yet
the form being not dissolved or abolished, the ship should be the same it was.
For the new materials, although numerically or perhaps specifically distinct
from the former, yet being for use the same as the former were, and holding the
same proportion with the whole, whereunto they were fitted, do no way
dissolve, but rather continue the former unity or Identitie of form.

The same case is cleerer in bodies natural, at least him leave to cut it
down, or to let it stand, as long as he pleased; though it should stand
threescore years, before he cut it down; yet could no man except, that it was
not the same tree, which was bequeathed, albeit never a material part could
be thought to remain the same it was, when the tree was given. For albeit
every material part should successively perish, yet in as much as others come
in their places, altogether as capable of animation, of nutriment, of growth,
or augmentation, as these were which have perished, the tree or vegetable is
still the same. And although many vegetables de facto retain some of the same
material parts which they had at their first plantation, yet it is an
undoubted Maxim in true Philosophy, that ad identitatem corporis vegetabilis
non necessario requiritur identitas materiae; unto the identitie of a body
vegetable, identitie of matter is not necessarily required. But of this point,
by Gods assistance, more at large in the Article of the Resurrection.

7 Answerably to these degrees of union between materials or corporal
substances, (of which some are united only in place, others by form
artificial, or truly Physical) there be as many degrees of union between
multitudes, assemblies, or companies of men. Men assembled in a market place,
at some match of sport, or merry meeting, are one multitude, not one body; and
for this reason, being once dissolved, remain no more the same company, as
having no other bond of unity, besides vicinity of place, or union merely
local. As no man would say the same company that met at a horserace, this or
the last year, shall meet the same again the next year. At least such
companies cannot be the same they were, unless the indiuidualls remain the
very same. But Societies, Corporations, or Bodies civil, herein resemble
bodies natural, that albeit every particular or indiuidual person, that met in
their common Hall or place of assembly this day, be dead within 20. years
following, yet the Company or Corporation shall ramaine still the same it was.
In this sense it is said, that although all men are mortal, yet corporations,
consisting of mortal men, are immortal, because their laws and ordinances,
are perpetual. The unity of proportion or subordination to the same Laws, is
sufficient to continue the unity or identitie of the Society or Corporation,
albeit the parties subordinate, do alter, change or perish.

Stationers (for example) after every man has repaired to his own home,
remains the same it was, at their meeting in their common Hall; because the
union or bond of every member to the same Laws and ordinances, still remains
the same, or because there still remains the same power or authority in their
principal Governors to call them together again. And in this point they
resemble those natural bodies, which being resolved into fume or vapor, their
fumes or vapors may be recollected again into the same body without any
less of substance or quantity. As an Alchymist would bate but little or
nothing in selling the fume or vapor of Quicksiluer, for Quicksiluer it self.
So then unity of Laws and ordinances, is the life, the soul, and spirit of
every corporation or body civil. Oath or other obligements to the observation
of the same Laws, or to the maintenance of privileges bestowed upon the
society, are as the nerves or arteries, by which motion is conveyed from the
head or principal members to every inferior or particular member of the same
Society. Thus we have found the genus proximum of a Church considered in
general.

CHAP. III. Of the nature and properties of the Church taken in its principal
sense. How it is differenced from other Bodies civil. Of the peculiar unity
which it has.
EVery Church in what usual sense Et e contra: Yet sometime it may fall out,
by the interposition of civil iuridicall sentence, that a man may be no
member of the Commonweal, and yet remain a member of the Church therein
contained. As a man condemned to dye, is disinabled to do any civil act, yet
not prohibited to receive the Sacraments: Others again cut off from the Church
(as persons excommunicated in some sort are) may be members of the
Commonweal. That which differenceth the Church properly so called from a
society or body merely civil, is the diversity of Laws and ordinances,
and the different manner of union betwixt the members of it. Howbeit a Church,
a Commonweal, or body civil, are not (as the Romanists often dream or
presuppose in their arguments brought for the prerogative of the Romish Church)
two bodies contra-distinct or opposite, but rather one body endowed with
several powers or perfections. When a Kingdom or commonweal becomes a
Church, it loses nothing of what it had, but rather acquires a new perfection
or accomplishment. The growth or progress is but such, as the Philosopher
notes in men, which first live anima plantae, like mere vegetables, then the
life of sense, and lastly the life of reason or understanding. But of this
elsewhere.

To find out the nature and properties of the Church (...), which is the
principal Analogatum, and prime subject of this our discourse, the branches of
method are but two. The former is to find out the qualification or condition
of the parties or members united. The latter is to find out the nature and
manner of their union.

Heb. 12. verse 22.) unto the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem,
and to an innumerable company of Angels. What manner of union is between holy
men and Angels, let it be defined by Angels themselves, or at least by men that
are their consorts in the blissful vision of God and of his Christ. The
subject of our inquiry, was and must be, That Church, which consists only of
men, and of men considered in that estate, which they now have by God, being
made man. Now albeit such men and Angels may be in some respect truly said
one Society; and though both may be comprehended under some general notion
(whether univocal or Analogicall:) yet without all question, they do not
univocally agree in those attributes, by which the Church, in its prime and
principal sense, is usually set forth in Scriptures. We cannot say that the
Angels are of Christ's flesh and of his bones, as every one is, that is a live
member of his true Church. Yea though Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, and the
Prophets, and all such as had perfect union with them in holiness of doctrine,
life, or discipline, were after death, as well as living, live members of the
holy Catholic Church; yet had they not, whilst they lived on earth, no not
always since they lived in bliss, such perfect union, (for the manner at
least) with Christ, as the Sts. have which have lived since Christ's
Incarnation, Passion, and Resurrection, since which time the Patriarchs and
Prophets union with Christ, has been perfected. For it is a point not of
opinion, but of belief, that the Son of God did take our nature upon him,
not only to the end that he might lay it down for our ransom, or suffer for
us in the flesh, but to the end withal, that having suffered for us according
to his humanity, he might by it unite us unto himself as he is God, in a
more peculiar manner, then our humane nature, without such union to his humane
nature, was capable of. As we become righteous by the righteousness, which was
and is in him, as he is man; so must we expect the accomplishment of our future
bliss and glory, by participation of the fullness of that bliss and glory,
whereof his humanity is now possessed.

holy, as it is Catholic. Some there be, who define this Church to be coetus
praedestinatorum, to be the society or company of the predestinate, but this
definition is imperfect, for though it be most true, that every live member of
the one truly holy and Catholic Church, is predestined to this life of
grace, which he now lives, and to the life of glory which he hopes for; yet
every one, which is already predestined to the one, or to the other life, or
rather to both, is not as yet a live member of the one holy and Catholic
Church. Saul was a person predestined from the womb, but yet no civil
member of the militant or visible Church, much less any true member of the one
holy Catholic Church, whilst he remained a persecutor of it, and a zealous
member, or furious instrument of the malignant Sinagogue. Others define it to
be Coetus euocatorum, the society or company of such as God has called out of
the world: but because many are called, and few are chosen, some others define
it to be coetus electorum, the society or company of the elect. Against which
definition or description, this exception may be taken, that the Authors and
Maintainers of it, have entangled this article or point of Belief, necessary
to all that hope to be saved, with intricate and unnecessary questions
concerning Predestination or Election, with which I do not mean to trouble
the Reader in the explication of this Article. It shall suffice us for the
present, to consider, that such as God has predestined or elected before the
foundations of the world, must be wrought and squared by the powerful hand of
God, and the effectual working of his spirit, before they can be fit
materials for that aedifice or structure which we call the Church. There must
be an alteration in every particular member, before it obtain perfect union
with the whole body or aedifice, from which it receives the sweet influence
and nutriment of neuer-fading life. Now what manner of alteration this is, or
wherein this qualification of materials fitting for this aedifice (which we call
the Church) does consist, is a Quaere not so necessary in this place.

4 The second general thing proposed, to wit, the manner or union of the
members or parts of that society (which is the truly holy, and Catholic
Church) will sufficiently determine the former question concerning the
qualification of them.

The questions concerning the union, are in general, whether this union come
nearer to the nature of union betwixt Bodies civil, natural, or artificial.
And to this we answer, that each of these unions in part resemble it, all of
them do not fully express it; because it is more real, more firm and solid,
than any union can be betwixt the parts of bodies, civil, artificial, or
natural. For this Church is a true and real body, consisting of many parts,
all really, (though mystically and spiritually) united unto one head; and by
their real union with one head, all are truly and really united amongst
themselves. The union is wrought between both, by a power supernatural, by a
skill super-artificiall, by a wisdom infinitely surmounting the highest reach
of humane policy. That this Church is a true body, the Apostle (who in his
life time was a live member of it, and (under Christ the head) a chief master
builder for his skill, and yet withal a most painful labourer in fashioning
or squaring the parts or materials of this structure,) has left registered. I
rejoice in my sufferings for you, and fill up that which is behind of the
affliction of Christ in my flesh, for his body sake which is the Church. See
Col. 1.18. and Ephesians. 4. verse. 11.12.15.16.
Colos. 1. v. 24. Every one then is so far a member of Christ's Church, as he
is a member of Christ's body. He that is not in some sort a member of Christ's
body, can be in no sort a member of his Church. He that is a true live member
of the one, is a true live member of the other; He that is but an equivocal,
analogicall, hypocritical or painted member of the one, is but an equivocal,
hypocritical, painted or analogicall member of the other.

5 Now the excellency of the union betwixt Christ and his members, or the
members themselves (and consequently of the members or true parts of the
Church) may best be gathered from the union of those things, whereby the Church
or body of Christ is represented or described unto us in holy writ. The Church
or body of Christ is usually represented unto us, by an aedifice, as indeed
and truth the material Temple, which Solomon built, and which afterward was
restored, was but a type or emblem of that Temple, which Christ was to erect
unto his Father. Christ himself was the true Temple, and therefore spoke no
metaphor, but a mystery unto the Jews, when he said, Destroy this Temple,
and I will build it again in three days. Ioh. 2. verse. 19. As it is the Kings
presence which makes the Court, so it is the extraordinary presence of God,
which makes the true Temple of God. The material Temple of Jerusalem, was
therefore called the house of God, because God did therein manifest his
glorious presence, and as it were, keep peculiar residence in it, in respect
of other places. But in Christ, (says the Apostle) Colos. 2. verse. 9. the
Godhead dwells bodily. As he is the true Temple, because the Godhead dwells
in him; so all they, and only they, in whom he dwells by faith, are true
Temples of God, and live members of the Catholic Church. Now there is no
union betwixt the parts of bodies artificial, or made by hands, so firm and
strong, as the union betwixt the parts or materials of a Temple or stone
building; no union again betwixt the parts of the body natural so perfect, as
the union of life. Hence the Apostle Saint Peter tells us, That by our access
unto Christ by faith, we are made living stones. As newborn babes desire the
sincere milk of the Word, that ye may grow thereby, if so be ye have tasted,
that the Lord is gracious: to whom coming as unto a living stone, dissalowed
indeed of men, but chosen of God, and precious; Ye also as lively stones, are
built up a spiritual house, an holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual
sacrifice, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. 1 Pet. 2.2, 3, 4, 5.

6 Herein this union betwixt the members of the true Church or Temple of God,
is truly resembled by the manner of union betwixt bodies politic, or
societies corporate, in that, local union or vicinitie of place, is not
required to the beginning, to the increase, or accomplishing of this union; for
though Christ's manhood be in heaven, and we on earth, yet are we true members
of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones, as truly and as really, as the
natural parts of our body are said to be our flesh, and our bones. No man,
(says the Apostle to the Ephesians, chap. 5. verse 29.) hates his own flesh,
but nourishes it, and cherishes it, after what manner? as Christ does his
Church. So that every member of the Church, or of Christ's body; is more near
or dear unto him, than our flesh is unto us, and more his own, than our flesh
is ours. Herein again this union betwixt the members of the true Church,
exceedes all other union of bodies civil, artificial, or natural; that every
particular member, once perfectly united unto the whole becomes immortal in it
self. Not the whole body or corporation only, but every individual or
material part, remains everlastingly the same. The whole body is not the same
only by succession or aequivalency As the head, so every member is translated
from death to life: the very selfsame indiuidualls, which are in this life
perfectly united unto Christ by faith, shall be raised up at the last day unto
the life of glory. What it is to be perfectly united unto Christ, or what
perfection of union with him may in this life be attained unto, falls not so
properly within the compass of this present treatise.

CHAP. IIII. Of the preheminences which the Church has of other bodies or
corporations, in respect of the Governor of it, and the Laws by which it is
governed. Of the two Attributes, Holy and Chatholike.
THis Church or Kingdom of Christ, has the pre-eminence of all other bodies
politic, or Commonweals, in every respect, in every point, any way conducent
to their unity, stabilitie or prosperity. First, for the form of government
it is most excellent. It is a Kingdom and has but one head or governor, and
he is truly one, not by succession, but by everlasting continuation of one and
the same individual life. Secondly, the Laws by which this one Kingdom is
governed, are more excellent in themselves, and more unchangeable, then the
Laws of any other Common weal or Kingdom. Again, the Laws of this Kingdom
be not only the dictates of the eternal God (for so were the ceremonial or
judicial Laws of the Jews:) but more then thus, they are the unchangeable
copies or expressions of his immutable and most holy will; by whose due
observance the true members of this kingdom become like unto him. Thirdly, the
obligements or conformity of every Citizen or subject unto these Laws, are
far more strict, than in any other Common weal or Kingdom: for of many
privileges and gracious promises, which the Citizens of this Kingdom enjoy,
it is not the least, that their everlasting Lawgiuer and governor, vouchsafes
to write his Laws, not in tables of stone or pillars of brass, but in the
hearts of them, that are to be governed by them. Now what bond or union
betwixt men can be imagined so great as that, which the fundamental Law of
this Kingdom once written in the hearts of men, does necessarily induce or
effect, to wit, that every one should love his Lord and King above all, and
love his fellow Citizens as himself. And the execution of this Law is the
accomplishment of the felicity and prosperity of this Kingdom: who so has
once attained to this perfection, does joy as much in the good things which his
fellow citizen possesses, as in his own good; so that the joy of each one is
the joy of all, and the joy of all, is the joy of each one.

2 Again, this Church or Kingdom of Christ herein has the pre-eminence for
unity above all bodies natural or artificial, in that it is truly and
indissolubly one, not by unity only of the form, or by the continued identity
of the head, or of some or more of the principal members, but by true unity
and individual identitie of every integrall or material part once perfectly
united to the whole. And albeit these parts before their union were
Heterogeneall and most dislike, yet after their union they become uniform and
most homogeneall to each other. Though some were Scythians, others Israelites,
or Arabians, though some were slaves, and other Lords, yea Kings and Princes,
some Laymen, some Priests, some altogether illiterate, others learned, some
old, some young: yet all of them upon their admission into this Church or Common
weal, become a royal generation, Kings and Priests. The least, the meanest,
or lowest member of this universal Church, or house of God, is himself a
Temple of God. Thus the universality does no way impeach, it does rather set
forth and commend the unity of this Church.

3 That which gives this Church or Kingdom pre-eminence for unity does give
it likewise pre-eminence for holiness before al other Kingdoms or societies
whatsoever, and that is the participation of the spirit of Christ, or (as the
Apostle speaks) the participation of the divine nature, which we have through
the operation of the spirit as agent, but which formally consists in, or
immediately resulteth from that immediate union which we have, through the
spirits agency, with our Lord and King, who is both God and man. As this word
Church so the chief attribute of the Chruch [ holy] is (...) a word of many
significations or importances. To set down all the several importances which
this word holy has in scripture, would be tedious; and in very truth, they are
scarce comprehensible to humane capacity; they may multiply upon new occasions,
and grow diuisible in semper divisibilia. It shall suffice to know in general,
that the diverse significations of this word Holy, are of their number which, as
Aristotle tells us, dicuntur advnum, and may be as many as the references be
unto the principal Analogatum, from whatsoever subject or matter the reference
arise. As for example, Sauitas, or healthfulnes does properly or formally
consist in the right temperature, disposition or habit of man's body: but some
things are said to be sana sound by perfect Analogy or proportion, as we say
pomum aut nux, an apple or a nut, or wood is sound, which are not rotten,
putrified or tainted. We say again that cibus est sanus, meat is healthful,
drink is healthful, that the air wherein we live is healthful, that the
diet, that is, moderatio victus, that exercise, is healthful, and so of every
thing that is conducent to the procuration or preservation of health. And
sometimes the effects or tokens of internal health do participate of its
name, as we say there is, saliva, or vrina sana, sound or healthful spittle:
etc.

4 In like manner, holiness does properly and formally consist in the right
temperature or disposition of the soul, specially toward God. The Idaea or
exemplar of which temperature, is conformity unto Christ our head. Now every
thing in scripture is termed holy, that has any special reference to the
producing of this temperature or quality of the soul, whether as a cause,
means, or circumstance. So we say the word preached is Holy, because it is the
seed or means of begetting this holiness, and withal, as it is indicium
sanctitatis divinae, Cap. 4.
a sign or character of his holiness whose word it is. In the same respect
likewise the Sacraments are Holy, the place wherein the word is preached, or
Sacraments administered, is likewise termed Holy. The day likewise or time,
wherein such assemblies are held, are termed Holy. But the Holiness meant in
this article, is internal holiness, or purity of mind. Now the fountain of
this Holiness is in the head of the church Christ Jesus, from whose fullness
some branch or stream of true and real inherent sanctity of life, is derived
to every true member of this Church. This Church it self is not termed holy, a
maiori part, from the greater part only: Every member of it is inhere^tly
holy. Howbeit this title of Holiness though common to all, does not ex aequo
convenire omnibus, is not equally communicated unto all, but by intrinsecall
analogy or proportion. It is more perfect and more pure, in such as are
already admitted into the Church triumphant; It does rather purify or cleanse
such of Christ's members, as have their habitation in these houses of clay here
on earth, then remain pure and perfect in them. Recipitur ad modum recipientis,
it is received according to the quality of the receiver. The same stream or
water is not for cleerenes or other properties the same whilst it runs in a
muddy channel, as it is in a Conduit of ^ead, or when it runs upon stone or
gravel. Christ, says the Apostle, loved the Church, and gave himself for it,
that he might sanctify and cleanse it (...) of water by the word. That he might
present it ^o himself a glorious Church, not having, spot or wrinkle, or any
such thing, but that it should be holy and without blemish. Ephesians. 5. verse.
25, 26, 27. Though we be washed with the water of Baptism, and with the wine
of the Eucharist in this life, yet cannot we be so washed or cleansed, as to be
left without spot, wrinkle, or blemish, until we have put off this earthly
tabernacle, either by death, or by that change whereunto all are subject that
shall not die. The reason why all must either dye or be changed, is, because
flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of heaven, and the reason of this
is, that flesh and blood is not capable of that purity or consummation of
holiness: which is as the wedding garment, without which none may enter into
those Courts of the Temple, within which the marriage of the Lamb and his
Spouse be solemnized. Or to give the sum of the Apostles reason in his own
words, We must be utterly stripped of the Image of the earthly man, before we
can put on the complete and glorious Image of the heavenly. And as we have
borne the Image of the earthly, we shall also bear the Image of the heavenly.
But when shall that be? When this corruptible shall have put on incorruption,
and this mortal shall have put on immortality; when the saying shall be
brought to pass; Death is swallowed up in victory. 1 Cor. 15. ver. 49, 54.

5 The title of Catholic, to my best remembrance, is not expressed in
Scripture, but often employed in terms aequiualent. The Church of Christ was
first expressly enstyled Catholic by the Apostles themselves o^ (...) compo^ers
of the Apostles Creed, especially in opposition (...) visible Church of the
Jews, or rather to this peoples factious conceit of the prerogatives which God
had bestowed upon their Nation; misweening that the whole family or house of
God, the full amplitude of the Messiah his Kingdom, should be comprised within
the house or family of Abraham, or at least, that none should have any title or
claim to the Kingdom of God, unless he were first admitted to be a member of
that visible society, which did meet at Jerusalem as at their Common Hall,
House, or place of Parliament. That the Church should be thus Catholic, or
universal, or that the Gentiles should be fellow heirs, or joint members of
the same body with Abraham's seed, was a secret, not imparted to many before the
Revelation of the Gospel. For this cause I Paul, the prisoner of Jesus Christ
for you Gentiles, if ye have heard of the dispensation of the grace of God,
which is given me (...): How that by revelation he made known unto me, the
mystery (as I wrote before in few words, whereby when ye read, ye may (...) and
my knowledge in the mystery of Christ) which in other ages was not made known
unto the sons of men, as it is now revealed unto his holy Apostles and
Prophets by the spirit, that the Gentiles should be fellow heirs of the same
body, and partakers of his promise in Christ by the Gospel, Ephesians. 3. ver. 1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Saint Peter himself had not fully apprehended this mystery,
until the Lord awaked him out of this dream, by interpreting the vision which
he saw concerning this point. Act. 10. ver. 15. But seeing the event answerable
to Gods word, or to the voice which he heard in the vision, he burst out into
this confession ver. 34. Of a truth I perceive that God is no accepter of
persons, but in every nation, he that fears him and works righteousness,
is accepted with him: accepted to be a live member of his holy and Catholic
Church, as Cornelius no question either at this time or afterward was. But the
full importance of this term Catholic is set down, Revelat. 5. verse. 8, 9.
And the four and twenty Elders sung a new Song, saying, Thou art worthy to
take the book, and to open the seals thereof, for thou wast slain, and have
redeemed us to God, by thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people,
and nation: And have made us unto our God, Kings and Priests, and we shall
reign on the earth.

The branches of this title Catholic are specially these three. First, Gods
Church is said to be Catholic or universal in respect of all places.
Secondly, in respect of all sorts and condi^^^^^ of men, national or
personal. Thirdly, it is said Universal in respect (...) Some of every
Nation, Condition, or state are admitted unto it. Some likewise are admitted in
every age or generation of men. From the day wherein the Lord did lay the first
foundation or corner stone in Sion, there have been in one place or other
daily additions unto this Church without substraction; continual adgeneration
without corruption, and a continual growth or augmentation without any the
least diminution or decay of any true live particle, which it had before.

CHAP. V. Cap. 5.
Containing the frivolous exceptions of Cardinal Bellarmine, and some other
Romanists against the former or like description of the true Church, or that
Church which is principally meant in the Apostles Creed.
1 THis notification or circumscription of the true Church by the true and
liue-mysticall body of Christ, is not liable to that exception which Bellarmine
and his followers have taken against Caluines invisible Church, as they
conceive it. Or in case the same exceptions be taken against the Church
described or notified in the former chapters, one answer will suffice for both.
Their only exception is this: Primum igitur, quod vera Ecclesia sit visilibis
probatur primo ex Scripturis omnibus, vbicunque inuenitur nomen Ecclesiae. Nam
semper nomine Ecclesiae visibilis congregatio significatur. Nec vnum saltem
locum Caluinus proferre potuit, nec protulit, vbi hoc nomen tribueretur
congregationi inuisibili. Bellar. de Ecclesia militante, lib. 3. cap. 12. That
the true Church is visible, may first be proved out of all those Scriptures, in
which the name of the Church is found. For by this name a visible Congregation
is always signified. Calvin neither did nor could produce so much as one
place, wherein the name Church is bestowed upon any invisible Congregation.

2 If his meaning be, that so much of the true Church, and liue-mysticall body
of Christ, as is now extant on earth, though altogether unvisible to us, be
either excluded, or not principally meant in those places of Scriptures,
Creedes, or Councels, in which the true Church is notified unto us by these or
the like attributes, one, holy, Catholkie, or Apostolic, it is grossly and
apparently false. For all Gods promises to the Church principally belong to the
principal members of it, who are distinctly and indiuidually known to himself
only, not so to us. To whom notwithstanding their persons are visible, the
profession of their faith is likewise visible. The sincerity of their hearts,
or faith is to us invisible, and therefore invisible it is to us, whether they
be liue-members of the holy Catholic Church or no. If his meaning be, that
many Indiuiduals which are no true liue-members of the mystical body of
Christ, be literally comprised under the name and title of the Church; the
allegation, though most true, is very idle and impertinent. For thus the Jew is
able to make proof, as direct and full, as can be required by any ingenuous
and learned Christian, that most of those types and prophesies which we allege
to euince Jesus the son of Mary to be the Christ and promised Messiah, are
literally and historically meant and verified, either of the sacrifice of the
Law, or of Gods people; of David, of Solomon, or of some other, etc. All this
notwithstanding being granted, does no way disprove, but rather ratify our
application of the same prophesies or sacred passages unto Christ, of whom they
are always, in the intention of the holy Spirit, principally meant, and in
whom alone they are exactly fulfilled, not only according to the mystical,
but (for the most part) according to the most exquisite literal sense. Not
that either all or most passages of Scriptures, which are first literally
verified of some other, and after exactly fulfilled in Christ, have (as some
great Divines think) two literal senses (albeit this may sometimes happen,
though very seldom) but that of one and the same litterall sense, there may
be, and usually are, two or more objects; one more principal and proper; the
other, either less principal, or less proper. Thus it always, not only is,
but of necessity must be, wheresoever the terms, wherein it pleases the
Spirit of God to express himself, contain in them a multiplicitie of
significations or importances, whether aequiuocal, analogicall, or ad vnum. Now
of all terms used in Scripture, this word Church, as was observed before,
has the greatest variety of significations or importances. And by
consequence, it must have one principal object, of which all the principal
attributes or titles of the Church, are punctually and accurately verified; and
other objects less principal, to which notwithstanding the same name or
titles, are in some measure often communicated.

3 Hence it may to the obseruant Reader appear, that Bellarmines exception or
argument against Calvin,) which being drawn into form, stands thus; [ The
word [Church] in Scripture, does always import a visible company of men:
Therefore it does not belong to an invisible Congregation] is no better then
this, The holy ointment did bedeaw or besprinkle Aarons garments; Ergo, It was
not powered upon his head, or it did not madifie or supple some other parts of
his body: whereas the truth is, unless the ointment had first been
plentifully poured upon his head, it could not have run down his neck, unto
the skirts, or rather the brimmes of his vesture. Answerable to this
representation, we say that all the glorious prerogatives, titles, or promises,
annexed to the Church in Scriptures, are in th first place, and principally
meant of Christ's liue-mysticall body. But being in abundant measure bestowed on
it, they descend by analogy or participation, unto all and every one, (that
has put on Christ by profession) without respect of person, place, or
dignity. All the difference in the measure of their participation or manner of
their attribution, arises from the diverse degrees of similitudes or
proportion, which they hold with the actual live-members of Christ's mystical
body, in matter of faith or conversation. Such as have the true model or
draught of that Catholic faith, without which no man can be saved, imprinted
in their understandings, albeit not solidly engrossed or transmitted into their
hearts or affections, are to be reputed by us, (who understand their external
profession better then their inward disposition) true Catholics, ttue members
of Christ's body, See chap. 17. parag. 1.
and heirs of promise. Although in very deed, and in his sight that knows
the secrets of men's hearts, many of them be members of Christ's body, only in
such a sense, as foetus conceptus, non animatus, As an humane body shaped or
organized; but yet not quickened with the spirit of life, is termed a man.

4 The conclusion touching this point, which Bellarmine and his followers are
bound to prove, (if any thing they mean to prove to the purpose) is this, That
under the name or titles of that Church, whereunto the assistance of Gods spirit
for its direction or other like prerogatives, are by Gods word assured, the
visible Church taken in that sense, in which they always take it, is either
literally and punctually meant, or necessarily included. The visible Church in
their language is a Society or Body Ecclesiastique notoriously known by the
site or place of its residence, or by their dignity, order and offices, which
are the perpetual governors of it. Ecclesia, says Bellarmine, est tam
visibilis quam est Regnum Galliae, aut Respublica Venetorum. And again, that
Church whereof Christ is King, is as visible in his absence, by the presence of
his Vicar general, as the Kingdom of Naples in the absence of the King, is by
the presence of his Viceroy. Unto the attributes or prerogatives bestowed on
the Church, in the Apostles or Nicene Creed, or unto the promises annexed unto
it in the Scripture, the visible Church, as we say, taken in the Romanists
sense, has no claim or title, save only in reuersion or by reflection: that
is, The true mystical body of Christ, is only instated in the blessings,
prerogatives, or promises made unto the Church: from this Body, or rather from
Christ, which is the head of it, the said blessings immediately and
successively descend in different measure unto the several members of it: or
unto such as are no solid members of Christ in practice or conversation, yet
true Catholics in opinion and love unfeigned unto the Catholic faith. And
from indiuiduals, thus habitually qualified; the Church visible or
representative deriues its right and interest in the promises made unto the
Church generally or indefinitely taken. Wheresoever two or three, thus
qualified, are gathered together in Christ's name; that is, not for any private
ends, or sinister respects, but for mere love of truth; the presence of
Christ's spirit is, by promise, annexed unto them. Though a thousand Bishops,
Prelates, or Clerks, not thus qualified be assembled for their own gain or
dignities, or if their consultations be managed by superior power or faction,
they have no like interest in the former promise. For any Church visible or
representative, whose indiuiduals are not thus far qualified, the greater
part whereof for number, or more principal for authority, may be infideles aut
haereti ci occulti; that is, Heretics, Infidels, or Atheists in hearts. To
usurp an absolute infallibility in judgment of matters sacred, is no better
then blasphemy: for any such Church to expect the extraordinary assistance of
Gods spirit in their consultations, is but the dregs and relics of Simon
Magus his sin. But of the diverse acceptions of this word Church, in what sense
it is said visible or invisible, true or false, we are to speak hereafter,
Sect. 2. chap. 1.

CHAP. VI. Cap. 6.
Containing the special points to be believed concerning this Article of the
One, Holy, Catholic Church. How every one is so to moderate his assent or
belief concerning it, that he neither incline unto presumption, nor fall into
despair.
1 THe special points which we are in this article to believe, are these.
First, that as Christ, whilst he lived on earth was a King, albeit his
Kingdom was not earthly, nor of this world: so he has still a Kingdom, or at
least a great part of his Kingdom here on earth; the members or Citizens of
which Kingdom, whilst living in this world, are not of this world: their
(...) (as our Apostle speaks) is in heaven, that is, the Society or
Corporation, whereof they are actual and liue-members, is translated from
earth to heaven, and their demeanor or conversation here on earth must be
celestial, and such as becomes the sons of God.

The second, that God or Christ in the choice or admission of Citizens into
this celestial Corporation, does not tie himself to any one Kingdom, Nation,
or Province, to any visible Society or Corporation here on earth. But as
heaven it self is alike distant from every part of the earth; so every Nation
or Kingdom of the earth are alike free to stand for, or solicit their
election or admission into this heavenly society, which we term the holy
Catholic Church. Of these two branches of belief this third is a necessary
consequent, that God has not bestowed such privileges upon any visible Church
or Ecclesiastical Society whatsoever upon the face of the whole earth, as
diverse Founders of Colleges in our Universities, have done upon some Grammar
Schools founded likewise by them. Many have been chosen and admitted for
perpetual Fellows of the celestial Academie, which never were trained up in
the doctrine or discipline of the Grecian, English or Romish Church. God is the
sole Founder of the universal Church, and of every particular true Church. As
for particular visible Churches, all are alike free, all their sons alike
capable of admission into the holy Catholic Church; or if any ods there be,
it is in the different measure of their observance of the laws prescribed to
all, especially the Law of loving God above all in Christ, and of loving others
as our selves for Christ's sake.

2 The last point is, that of all such as are effectually called, or
authentiquely admitted into this Society, none ever revolt again to the
Synagogue of Satan or to the world. Their effectual calling and solemn
admission, makes them such pillars in the house of their God, that they cannot
be removed; Him that overcomes, will I make a pillar in the Temple of my
God, and he shall go no more out, and I will write upon him the name of my
God, and the name of the City of my God, which is new Jerusalem, which comes
down out of heaven from my God. And I will write upon him my new Name, Rev.
3.12. So he had said before, verse. 5. He that overcommeth, the same shall be
clothed in white raiment, and I will not blot out his name out of the book of
life, but I will confess his name before my Father, and before his Angels.
Wherein this victory consists, and how in this life it may be obtained, are
points belonging to another Argument, and have been elsewhere discussed at
large. That their names who thus overcome, are whilst they live on earth,
written in the book of life, is evident out of the 20. chapter, ver. 12. the
dead were judged out of those things which were written in the books,
according to their works. The difference between that part of Christ's Church,
which is triumphant, and that which is militant here on earth, may be resembled
by the estate of a visible Society or Corporation, of which the greater part
or principal members live at home in wealth, in peace and quietness, whilst
others of the same society soiourn as Factors, or Apprentices in foreign
lands, yet certain of their admission to the same privileges which the other
enjoy, after they have served out their Apprentiship and performed all duties
and services required by the laws of their Corporations.

3 Two questions, or rather two branches of one and the same question yet
remain, which every one that sincerely minds matter of salvation, will often
make with himself.

First, whether every one that sincerely professes belief of this article of
the Holy Catholic Church, be bound to believe, that he himself is a true
liue-member of the same Church.

The second, whether every one which professes this article, be bound to
believe, that there is a true possibility left him by the founder of this
Church or Kingdom, that he may in good time become a true and liue-member of
it.

Unto the latter question, my answer shall be out of the words of a woman to
her husband distrusting Gods love and favor toward them, whose words became
Canonical Scripture; We shall surely die, says Manoah unto his wife, because
we have seen God. But his wife said unto him, If the Lord were pleased to
kill us, he would not have received a burnt offering, and a meat offering at our
hands, neither would he have showed us all these things, nor would at this
time have showed us such things as these. Judge. 13. verse. 22, 23. All and every
one ought to be assured that if the Lord had any purpose to exclude them from
being liue-members of this Holy and Catholic Church, he would not so often, so
lovingly inuit them by the preaching of the Word, and exhibition of his holy
Sacraments; all which he mightily prophanes, whosoever otherwise receives them,
then as undoubted pledges of Gods love and favor unto him in particular.

4 To the former question, the answer is negative. All are not bound to believe
that they are actual or real members of the Catholic Church. For none can
truly believe thus much of himself, but he that has made his election sure,
and is certain, that his name is written in the book of life. Now though it
be most true, that whosoever is elect, was elected from al eternity; whosoever
is reprobated, was reprobated from all eternity: yet will it not hence follow,
that every man is at all times either in the absolute state of election and
salvation, or in the absolute state of reprobation and damnation. This is too
desperate a division, to put Nouices in faith upon it, a cruel rack for
tender consciences. The best advice which I can in this point give, is that no
man, especially no nouice in faith, how strong a disputant soever he be, seek
to wind himself into this Catholic Church, by strength of syllogism, lest
Satan thence take occasion to wrest his hopes out of his hands, by the same or
like engine. The judicious Reader is to take further notice that many
syllogismes, which go current amongst some good Divines, have many foul,
though secret flawes, as hard to be espied in this subject of reprobation,
election, and the like, as in any other, for these are hardly fashioned into
syllogisticall form. Many propositions are often in vulgar matters, taken for
universal, when they are but indefinite. First, to instance in a subject
wherein the fallacy is more gross and more easy to be discerned: Quicunque
dicit Alexandrum fuisse animal generosum, is verum dicit.
At quicunque dicit Alexandrum fuisse Bucephalum, dicit Alex (...) Ergo,
Quicunque dicit Alexandrum fuisse Bucephalum, is verum dicit.


Whosoever says Alexander the great was a generous creature, says true: but
he that says Alexander was Bucephalus, saih Alexander was a generous creature:
Therefore whosoever says Alexander was Bucephalus, says true.

Others perhaps may answer otherwise; but the only flaw in this Syllogism, if
we examine it by the rules of Art, is that the Major proposition is
indefinite, although it bear in front, a goodly show of an universal note.
But how large soever the note of universality be, unless it do plene afficere
medium terminum, it leaves the proposition as indefinite, as it found it. Now
the medius terminus in the former syllogism is animal generosum. And to make
the former proposition universal, the note of universality should have been
added to animal generosum; as thus: Quicunque dicit Alexandrum fuisse animal
quoduis generosum, is verum dicit. At qui dicit Alexandrum fuisse Bucephalum,
dicit Alexandrum fuisse animal quoddam generosum. Here had been dictum de
omni, quodvis animal de quodam animali: the Syllogism for its form had been
true, but the major proposition had been apparently false; for Alexander was
not every generous creature, or a generous creature of every kind. The fallacy
is the same though not so easily discerned in these two syllogismes following:
Whosoever mortifies the deeds of the body by the spirit is certain of life:
But I mortify the deeds of the body by the spirit.
Therefore I am an actual and liue-member of the holy Catholic Church;
assured of salvation.


The universal note [ whosoeuer] does not plene afficere medium terminum,
which is mortification, which is in it self a term indifinite, and has many
degrees or parts. To make the proposition universal or concludent, we should
say thus: Whosoever does in any sort mortify the deeds of the body, is a live
member of the Catholic Church:
But I do in some sort mortify the deeds of the body:
Ergo, I am a liue-member of the Catholic Church.


The form of this syllogism is true, but now the Major is apparently false,
otherwise he that would admit of this proposition or conclusion in time of
prosperity, or in speculations abstracted from cogitation of sins, past or
present, the same party in consciousnes of actual sin or grievous temptations
would yield to the premises and conclusion following: Whosoever lives after
the flesh shall dye, and is utterly excluded from being a liue-member of the
holy and Catholic Church.
But I have lived and do live after the flesh: Ergo,
I am but dead and lost, I shall never be a liue-member of the holy and
Catholic Church.


These two propositions, Whosoever lines after the flesh shall dye; whosoever
does mortify the deeds of the body by the spirit, shall live; if we resolve
them rightly, are in value thus much:

1 There is a degree or measure of mortification, whereunto whosoever does
attain, is forthwith translated from death to life, and becomes a liue-member
of the holy Catholic Church, a perpetual Citizen of the Jerusalem which is
above without all danger of disinfranchisement.

2 There is a degree or measure of fleshly or carnal living, which who so does
in this life reach unto, does thereby without Gods extraordinary mercy exclude
himself from the Communion of Saints, or society of the holy Church.

So that both propositions are universal in respect of the persons, both
indefinite in respect of the thing it self, to wit, mortification or carnal
living. This degree or measure of mortification may be accomplished in this
life. But who they be, that have attained to this perfect mortification, or
when they attain thereunto; must be left to the judgment of God, and
information of their own consciences. The safest rule for rectification of our
consciences in this point, is that of Saint Peter: Brethren give diligence to
make your calling and election sure. 2 Pet. chap. 1. verse. 10. The means to
make our election sure are there at large prescribed by him. The brief or
abstract of it, is this; to follow those practices, which our conscience
enlightened by the light of Gods Word, shall approve. For a good conscience is
the mouth of the Spirit, and will one time or other speak words of comfort to
every one that has it, and seeks to keep it. And one voluntary testimony
of it grounded upon experience or constancy of good thoughts, good deeds, or
resolutions, is worth a thousand testimonies or confessions rackt from the
speculatiue understanding by force of Syllogism.

SECT. 2. Cap. 7.
Of the visible Church in general. Of its principal Attributes or privileges.
CHAP. VII. Of the Church militant and Triumphant. In what sense it is said
that the true Church is invisible.
SEeing our purpose in the former treatise was only to find out the formal
difference, by which the One, Holy, Catholic and Apostolic Church is
essentially constituted and distinguished from all other Congregations or
Corporations; and there was no difference at all to be observed between the
significations of the Latin Concio, and the Greek (...): whatsoever formal
difference fits the one, does as properly fit the other. If we look upon
them, as they lie in predicamentall line, they have the self same aspect or
situation. Their formal significations are as Synonymall as (...) in Greek,
and Homo in Latin. But being now to search out not the formal differences
whereby the Church (...) or principally so named, is distinguished from all
other Societies, but the secondarie acceptions or several branches of
analogy, contained under the word Church or Ecclesia. We are in the first
place to note, that the Greek (...) has a connotatiue signification or
importance, which the latin concio, or English Church has not. It is as much in
effect as euocata concio, a society selected or called out. This evocation or
selection is of diverse sorts, and each sort admits diverse degrees. The whole
latitude as well of the diverse sorts, as of their degrees, may best be taken
partly by surueying the terminum a quo, and terminum ad quem, that is, the
estate or condition of life whence men are called, and the estate or condition
of life, unto which such men are called as make the Church; and partly from the
nature, quality or degrees of the evocation or motion it self. Some are
called from profession of Paganism, or from Infidelity, unto the profession
of Christianity vocatione mera externa, by external vocation only, as by
preaching of the word, by exhibition of the Sacraments, or other like visible
or sensible invitations, to become members of Christ. And if they admit of the
invitation and profession of Christianity, they become visible members of the
Church indefinitely taken. But proceeding no further; the former calling
through their own default, not in respect of Gods intention or purpose in
calling them, takes no real effect. We may say of them as our Savior says in
the parable, Matthew. 22. verse. 8. The wedding is ready, but they which were
bidden were not worthy. And men thus far called only, are mere grammatical
passiues, and may be paralleld by the high way upon which good seed was
bestowed, though not received.

2 Others are called from Paganism or Infidelity, vocatione interna, by
internal touches or attractions, which in some produces no better effects
then good wishes or desires of amendment of life, or good motions for the
present. And these may be paralleld by the stony ground which received the
seed bestowed upon it, and for a while gave it nourishment and fair
entertainment.

In others, the internal vocation may produce some root, that is, some
temporary resolution for amendment of life or practices conformable to rules
believed; but no settled habit, no constancy in perseverance. And these may be
paralleld by the thorny ground, in which the seed sown, took better root,
then in the stony ground, but was stifled in the growth. This internal
vocation is in others not only effectual for a time, or for some purposes,
but produces an habitual constant resolution of adhering to the truth known,
and a conversation answerable to this vocation. The infallible consequent of
all which is the gift of perseverance: the terminus ad quem of this their
constant motion or progress perfected in victory, is indissoluble union with
Christ.

3 Of men indissolubly united to Christ, that is, of such as are though in a
different measure perfect liue-members of the one, holy and Catholic Church,
some are called not only out of the dregs of their native corruption unto the
life of the Spirit, but out of this world into a better, and these are
triumphant members of that one, holy, Catholic Church, which is the liue-body
of Christ. They are tuti et se curi, free not only from all danger of
Apostasy, but from all possibility of any annoyance or encumbrances, which
the world, the Devil, or the flesh can attempt against them. These are they
which came out of great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made them
white in the blood of the Lamb. Therefore are they before the throne of God,
and serve him day and night in his Temple; and he that sits on the throne,
shall dwell among them. They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more,
neither shall the Sun light on them, nor any heat. Revel. 7. verse 14, 15,
16. Such as are called out of the flesh unto the life of the Spirit, but not as
yet out of the world, are militant members of the holy Catholic Church and
victoriously militant. Tuti sunt, at non securi; They are exempted from
ordinary danger or probable hazard of Apostasy, but not utterly secured from
all danger of temptation, no not from all impairement of their present estate.

4 Such as are called vocatione interna, by an inward calling, sed inefficaci,
not effectual, or men not endued with the gift of perseverance, are militant
members of the Church indefinitely taken, but not victoriously militant: no
perfect members of the One, Holy, Catholic Church, so called, (...), or by
excellency. Such as are called vocatione externa, by external vocation only,
are no true members of the Church militant, much less any militant members of
that true holy and Catholic Church, yet members in their kind of the visible
Church; for so, as Cardinal Bellarmine acknowledges, occultihaeretici, aut
infideles, dissembling Heritikes, or Infidels in heart may be. And this sort of
men may be best resembled by such as have been pressed for Soldiers, and taken
their pay, but without any resolution or purpose to show themselves in the day
of battle, much less to adventure themselves in any difficult service, but
ready upon approach of danger to forsake the field, or revolt unto the enemy.
So that the ordinary and usual division of the Church into triumphant and
militant, comprehends more then the liue-members of the holy and Catholic
Church; to wit, such members of the visible Church or Churches, as oppose
themselves to the holy and Catholic Church, or are not well affected toward
it.

5 The visible Church is a transcendent, and does neither exclude the members
of the Holy Church triumphant or militant, nor does it consist only of them,
or of men internally, though ineffectually called: but of them and of others
called only vocatione mere externa, by vocation merely external. Every
member of the Church triumphant, is visible to other members of the same
Church, though all invisible to the Church militant here on earth; as, perhaps,
the true members of the Church militant, are to them, save only so far as
God has revealed to them the names of such as shall be saved. The Church
militant likewise is visible to God, and to the several members of it: But
what members of this visible and militant Church, be liue-members of the one,
holy and Catholic Church, or who hereafter shall become liue-members of it, is
known only to God, or to men's private consciences, after their effectual
calling. Every man perhaps may feel or perceive his own, but he cannot
discern or see another effectual calling.

6 Though the Church be sometimes by good Writers instiled as well invisible,
as visible; we are not from this opposition of words or terms to conceit an
opposition or distinction of Churches, as if some were visible, others
altogether invisible. Such as most use these terms, mean no more by them,
then we have said, to wit; what persons of the militant and visible Church be
true Denisons of the heavenly Jerusalem or City of God, is to us invisible or
unknown. I cannot say, whether it were ignorance or malice in the Romanists,
to construe these terms of visible and invisible, whilst they found them in
some of our Writers, for diuisiue differences of the Church, as if they had
constituted two contra-distinct or opposite Churches; when as it is plain,
that they are for the most part subordinate and coincident. Ordinarily the
liue-members of the Holy Catholic Church, or of that part of it which is to us
invisible, are members of some visible Church, but not e contra. For neither
all nor most part of any visible Church in latter ages, are true and
liue-members of the Holy and Catholic Church, part of which we believe to be
here on earth, though it be to us invisible. Finally, to be visible or
invisible, are denominations merely accidental, no true differences of the
Church. Between a visible Church, and a Church invisible, there is a mean.
Many there be, or may be in most ages, which are no members of the visible
Church, and yet better members of the true Church, then the members of the
Church visible for the present are. For the true and orthodoxall Church, might
be truly visible in its members so dispersed and scattered, as they cannot
rightly be said to make one true visible Church.

7 The inuisibilitie of the holy Catholic Church here militant on earth, has
not been in all ages the same. The members of this division (if so it please
any man to conceit it) were, in the Apostles time, in a manner, coincident. Few
there were (especially of the Jewish nation) which did associate themselves
unto the then visible Church, which were not even in this life associated to
the holy and Catholic Church militant, and made living stones in the house of
God. That saying of the holy Spirit, ( Act. 2. v. 47.) was more peculiarly
verified of those times, and of that people, then of any other times or people:
The Lord added to the Church daily such as should be saved. This saying
includes thus much, That all, or most of those that professed themselves
members of the then visible Church, became liue-members of the holy Catholic
Church. And no wonder, for the temptations or dangers, which then hindered the
Jews or Gentiles, but especially the Jews from consociating themselves to the
then visible Church, were more and greater, then such as hinder the members of
later visible Churches, from entering into the Kingdom of heaven, or from
resolute profession of that doctrine, without which, no member of any visible
Church this day extant upon earth, can enter or be admitted into that one,
holy, and Catholic Church.

Until Bellarmine, Valentia, Stapleton, and some others, did trouble the
stream or current of Gods Word; as much as we have here said, was clearly
represented to the adversaries of our Church. Witness that Enchiridion of
Christian Institutions, set forth by the provincial Council of Colon, upon
this Article of the Creed. The Author of which Enchiridion (were he one or
more) having divided the Church into triumphant and militant, Ecclesia duplex
est, militans et triumphans, vtramque complectitur hic articulus. Triumphans
est, coetus ille beatarum animarum cum Christo regnantium, qui et de mundo, et
de Diabolo triumphauit, et regnat cum Christosecurus in aeternum, quem
Apocalypsis describit: Hi (inquit) sunt qui ve^erant: de tribulatione magna, et
lauerunt stolas suas, et dealbauerunt cas in sanguine agni, et ideo sunt ante
thronum, et scruiunt ei die ac nocte in Templo eius, et qui sidet in throne,
habitat i^ super illos: non esurient neque sitient amplius, non cadet super
illo sol neque vllus aestus, etc.

Vt ad Ecclesiam militantem veniamus; haec bisariam consideratur: primum
strictius, quat^nus dicimus eos esse in Ecclesia, qui ita sunt in domo Dei, vt
ipsi sint domus Dei, seu Templum Spiritus sancti, qui constituunt vrbem illaus
beatam Jerusalem de coelo descendentem, a Deo paratam, constructam ex viuis
lapidibus, de quibus dixit Apostolus: Multi vnum corpus ^^mus in Christo Jesus:
quos et alibi vocat populum emundatum abomni iniquitate, acceptabilem Deo,
sectatorem bonorum operum. Ecclesia vero elatenus accepta, soli Deo nota est;
Quemadmodum idem Apostolus ait^ cognouit Dominus qui sunt eius. Verum ad eum
modum non oportet accipere Ecclesiae vocabulum, vbi vel Christus de audienda
Ecclesia precipit, vel patres post Apostolos de authoritate Ecclesiae
differunt, E^c^irid. Christian. institut. fol. 65.


ingenuously grants, that the Church militant, taken in its proper and strict
sense, is invisible, save only to God. He grants withal, that some members of
the Church militant, ita sunt in domo Dei, vt ipsi sint Domus Dei, they are so
in the Church of God, as they themselves are the Churches of God; that is, as
we said before, they are homogeneall and liue-members of the one, holy,
Catholic and Apostolic Church, or pillars and living stones, so laid by the
hand of God, that they can never be removed. All he had to say against
Lutherans, was, verum ad eum modum non oportet accipere Ecclesia vocabulum,
etc. That when Christ commands us to hear the Church, or when the Fathers
dispute about the authority of the Church, we are not to take the Church
militant so strictly, as Luther, Calvin, and their followers sometimes do; to
wit, for the liue-members of Christ's mystical body.

All this may be granted; we are not the men which they mistake us for. We
never denied obedience to the visible Church, which consists of good and bad,
which contains in it as well the reprobate as the elect. All the difference
betwixt us is about the bounds or the limits of the obedience which we owe
unto the visible Church. We say first the present Romish visible Church, does
exact greater and more absolute obedience, then either See this point handeled
at large in the third book upon the Creed. Sect. 3. from the 6. chap. to the
15.
Moses, or such as sat in Moses chair, then either Christ or his Apostles did
exact of their followers, whilst he lived here on earth. Secondly, we say,
that we do not owe the same measure of obedience to any visible Church now on
earth, as the primitive professors and believers did to our Savior Christ, and
his Apostles.

Cap. 8.
CHAP. VIII. What is required to the constitution of a visible Church. Whence
the unity or plurality of visible Churches arises. What unity may be had or
expected between visible Churches independent one of another for Jurisdiction.
The diverse acceptions or degrees of the visible Church.
1 TO the constitution of a visible Church, there is required first external
profession of one and and the same faith. Whether the parties making this
profession be many or few, it skils not. Sometimes the father of the family
with his sons and men-seruants, were professors of the Christian faith,
taught by the Apostles, whilst the mothers and the daughters with others of
the same family remained in Paganism and infidelity, et e contra. Now though
the house so divided, were not the Church of God, yet was there a visible
Church of God, or part of such a Church in that house. A visible Church
distinct from others in place of habitation only, not by diversity of faith
or discipline. For, several families of the faithful were called Churches, as
being, parts similares, Homogeneall parts of some more entire or ample visible
Church. Secondly, to the constitution of an entire visible Church, there is
required (besides unity of profession, or the unity of faith professed, or of
moral Laws acknowledged) an unity of Laws or ordinances judicial, or an
unity of discipline, of astipulation or obligement unto a peculiar kind of
power or authority, before unusual in other Societies or Corporations.

2 Before the Pastors or governors of the Church had any commission or coactiue
power derived from Princes, States, or Commonweals, to make Laws for the
Church, or for punishing offenders; every member of the visible Church in what
Realm or Kingdom soever seated, did renounce or abjure all use of such
liberty, as every other member of the same Kingdom or commonweal, which was
no member of the Church, did enjoy. It was not lawful for one member of the
visible Church to implead another in matter of controversy or wrong, before a
foreign Judge. And although this astipulation was not legal (that is, not
authorized by any humane Law or custom) yet did it bind them faster then any
legal or civil bond. Dare any of you (says S. Paul) having a matter against
another, go to Law before the unjust, and not before the Saints? Do ye not
know that the Saints shall judge the world? and if the world shall be judged by
you, are ye unworthy to judge the smallest matters? 1 Cor. cap. 6. verse. 1, 2.
But if some member of this visible church, had opposed this spiritual
authority, or rejected this discipline or astipulation, what remedy had the
Apostles against them? In primitive times, every one that was partaker of the
Word, of the Sacraments, or of spiritual blessings, did thereby subject or
oblige himself unto a peculiar kind of Judicature or tribunal, unto which no
other member of the Common weal or Kingdom, which was no participant of the
Word or Sacraments, was either subject or obliged. And this was the sentence of
Excommunication; an extraordinary and peculiar kind of Judicature, which the
Apostles exercised by authority immediately derived from Christ; not by
commission or warrant from Princes, or Estates, not by the positive Laws or
ordinances of any Body civil or ecclesiasticke. I verily as absent in body,
but present in spirit, have judged already, as though I were present,
concerning him that has so done this deed. In the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, when ye are gathered together, and my spirit, with the power of our
Lord Jesus Christ, To deliver such a one unto Satan for the destruction of the
flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. 1 Cor. cap.
5. v. 3, 4, 5. That this Apostolical Judicature did extend only to the
visible church planted by him; that it did extend to all, and might be
exercised upon every actual member of the same Church, is apparent from the 9,
10, and 11. ver. I wrote unto you in an Epistle, not to company with
Fornicators. The Corinthians had extended this precept too far; so far, as
it was not possible for them exactly to observe it; And upon this occasion it
seems they did (as it usually falls out in like cases) utterly neglect to
practice it within its proper bounds or limits. The Apostle therefore
expresses his meaning not to be, that they should not keep company with the
Fornicators of this world, or with the covetous, or extortioners, or with
Idolaters; for then must ye needs go out of the world. But now I have written
unto you, not to keep company, if any man that is called a brother be a
fornicator, or covetous, or an Idolater, or a railer, or a Drunkard, or an
extortioner: with such a one no not to eat. For what have I to do to judge
them also that are without? do not ye judge them that are within? But them
that are without, God judges.

3 Thus it is true in blessings or privileges ecclesiastical as well as
civil; Omnis commoditas sua fert incommoda secum: Every commodity or
convenie^ce is charged with some or other incommodious conditions. Such of the
Corinthians as were foris, extra matriculam Ecclesiae visibilis, out of the
visible Church in Corinth, were not subject unto this extraordinary
Judicature, or the inconveniences that did accompany it: Unto all which every
visible member of the Chuch there planted was subject. But this subjection was
like the service of God, a great part of their perfect freedom, and a
chastisement, Heb. 12, 11
not sweet for the present but grievous, yet yielding the peaceable fruit of
righteousness to them that were exercised by it. All the Corinthians that were
foris, that is, out of the visible Church there planted, were more then liable,
and more then obnoxious to a more dreadful judgment from God, which one time
or other must ineuitably fall upon every one, that is not found in Christ, or
that is not a liue-member of the holy Catholic Church. The only means, at
least the ordinary means then possible, to be exempted from this fearful
judgment, was by associating themselves unto the present visible Church, and
by submission of their souls to this peculiar Judicature of Gods Apostles,
Christ's Ambassadors. For this power (as the Apostle elsewhere speaks) was not
given them for destruction, but for edification. The members of the Church that
were thus judged by them, were chastened by the Lord, that they should not be
condemned with the world. 1 Cor. 11. verse. 32. Every Apostle of Christ had the
same authority which S. Paul here practiced; namely, full authority to set
down orders for governing the Chruches planted by them, and for
excommunicating all such persons, as either contemptuously violated their
orders, or did otherwise scandalously trespass against the moral Law of God.

4 Was it then lawful for any visible member of the Church planted by Saint
Paul at Corinth in case of controversies, which were to be arbitrated according
to the tenor of his prescript before rehearsed, to appeal from the sentence of
Saint Paul or other domesticke arbitrators, unto S. Peter, or unto any foreign
Church or See planted or governed by him? Or contrariwise, was it lawful for
the Churches planted by Saint Peter, to appeal unto S. Paul? If thus to do it
were not lawful, then questionless, the Churches visible of Saint Paul's
planting, were as truly distinct from the Chruches planted or governed by
Saint Peter, as one free State or Common weal is from another, unto which it
is not in jurisdiction or matter of appeal subordinate. Now it is not the
unity or identitie of laws or customs, that makes a Common weal or Kingdom
to be one and the same, unless the persons which are subject unto the same
Laws, be likewise subject to the same Supreme Tribunal. For albeit, as well
the temporal Laws as the Ecclesiastical constitutions of Sweden or Russia,
were as like to our English Laws Ecclesiastical or temporal, as one apple is
like to another; yet could not Russia, Sweden and England be so properly
termed one Kingdom and Common weal, as England and Scotland are: although the
Laws by which those Kingdoms are governed be much different.

5 In like manner, admitting the Laws and discipline of all the Churches
planted by Saint Peter, by Saint Paul, and other Apostles, had been the self
same: yet could they not in this respect be so truly and properly said one
visible Church, as the particular Churches planted by Saint Paul especially in
one and the same province were one Church; albeit their Laws or ordinances had
been more different. It is probable then, that there were as many several
distinct visible Churches, as there were Apostles, or other Ambassadors of
Christ, immediately endued with this extraordinary judicature which is
immediately derived from Christ, See Fr: Mason of the consecration of Bishops,
etc. l. 1. c. 4. page 24.
and independent upon any earthly power, or any power whatsoever on earth;
whether spiritual or temporal. Their opinion is very probable, who think
that every Apostle had his peculiar circuit allotted him by Christ; and that
they did disperse themselves into twelve several parts of the world. According
to this tradition of the Ancients, a learned Critic of our times in matters
sacred, does point and interpret the 25. v. of the first of the Acts, after
another manner, then any known Interpreter (to my remembrance) does. And they
prayed saying, Thou Lord which know the hearts of all men, show whether of
these two thou have chosen, (...). If ye put a comma, after the word (...), the
sense of this later interpretion will be full.
that he may take the room of this ministration and Apostleship, from which
Judas by transgression fell, that he (to wit, Judas) might go unto his own
place. Forso this place is ordinarily expounded: but the Greek may bear another
sense, to wit, that he that took part of the ministration and Apostleship from
which Judas had fallen, might be sent that circuit, which Judas (had he not
fallen) should have gone.

I It is then profession of the same faith, participation of the Sacraments,
and subjection to the same Laws and Ordinances ecclesiasticke, which makes the
visible Chruch to be one.

II It is the diversity of independent Judicature, or supreme tribunalls
ecclesiasticke, which makes plurality of visible Churches, or distinguishes
one from the other.

III That which makes every visible Church to be more or less, the true Church
of God, is the greater or less efficacy or conformity of its public doctrine
and discipline for enapting or fashioning the visible members of it, that they
may become liue-members of the Holy Catholic Church, or living stones of the
new Jerusalem. Every true visible Church is as an inferior Free-Schoole or
Nurserie for trayning up Scholars, that they may be fit to be admitted into the
celestial Academie.

6 There be two questions yet remaining of very good use, which (if God permit)
shall be more particularly discussed hereafter.

First, Whether there be any Judicature ecclesiasticke for independencie, or
otherwise, altogether the same with that which the Apostles in the first
planting of Churches, had and practiced.

Secondly, Whether independent Iudicatures ecclesiasticke, did or may decrease
or multiply in succeeding ages, or so decrease for number, that there shall be
but one left on earth unto which all ought to be subject so far, that there
shall or can be but one true visible Church.

Concerning the first point, Whether there be any Judicature Ecclesiasticke
altogether the same with that which the Apostles had: I am not of opinion with
Erastus, that great Physician and good Divine, that the exercise of
Excommunication, was then only needful, when no visible Church had any legal
or civil remedy to preserve its unity, or purge it self of gross
offenders. Or that the right or power of Excommunication, which the Apostles
and their immediate successors had, did utterly expire and vanish, after once
whole Cities or Commonweals became Christian, and the Churches which before
had only soiourned amongst them, were incorporated into them as live
principal members; enabled by full authority derived from the supreme
Majesty or sovereignty of States or Kingdoms, to inflict corporal
punishment upon offenders, to enact coerciue or penal Laws or other means
necessary for diffusing the doctrine of life throughout the whole body
politic, without let or encumbrance of any particular part or member. But
though I be not thus far of Erastus his mind, that the power of
Excommunication did at that time specified by him, utterly expire or determine;
yet has experience made it more then probable, that after the Churches and
Commonweals, were so mutually interwrapt and lincked together, that every
member of the Common weal was enforced to become a member of the Church, and
to be so admitted by Church Governors: the edge of the spiritual Vide
Andraeam Laurentium in Libello de Excommunicatione.
sword was much abated, the force of former spiritual ordinances became
stifeled with the multitude of persons against whom they were directed. Whether
the defect be in the power it self, or in such as have it, but do not use
it; certain it is, that this branch of discipline is not in our days so
effectual as sometimes it has been, either for framing visible Churches unto
the rules prescribed by their great Founders or first Planters, or for
conforming the members of the visible Church unto the true, Holy, and Catholic
Church. The mere spiritual power with which alone the Apostles and their
immediate Successors were endued, was of greater efficacy then both the
remainder of the like spiritual power in later Bishops and Pastors, and all
the strength of secular or civil power, wherewith Princes, States or
Kingdoms, since the mutual incorporation of Commonweals and Churches have
(as they were in conscience and de iure divino bound) assisted Prelates and
Church-gouernors.

7 To the second question [ Whether there be one or more independent tribunals]
the later Romanists unanimously answer, that there is but one only Judicature
or supreme tribunal here on earth, the Judge whereof they make the only head
of all the Churches, or (as they would say) of the whole militant Church here
on earth. Nostra sententia est, says Lib. 3. de Ec^les. mil. cap. 2 et in
catechismo in ^ticulo de sancta et Cath. Ecclesia.
Bellarmine, Ecclesiam vnam tantum esse, non duas, et illam vnam et veram esse
coetum bominum eiusdem christianae fidei professione et eorundem sacramentorum
communione, colligatum, sub regimine legitimorum pastorum, ac praecipue vnius
Christi in terris vicarij, Romani Pontificis. Ex qua definitione facile colligi
potest, qui homines ad Ecclesiam pertineant, qui vero ad eam non pertineant.
Tres enim sunt parts huius definitionis. Professio verae fidei, Sacramentorum
communio, et subiectio ad legitimum pastorem Romanum Pontificem. The Church in
our opinion, says Cardinal Bellarmine, is one not two, and this one true
Church is a Company of men linked together by profession of the same christian
Faith, by communion of the same Sacraments, under the government of lawful
Pastors, and chiefly of the Bishop of Rome, Christ's sole Vicegerent here on
earth. Out of this definition (he further adds,) it may easily be gathered
what men pertain unto the Church, who pertain not unto it. For the parts of
this definition are three; Profession of Faith, Sacramental Communion, and
subjection to the lawful Pastor, viz. the Bishop of Rome. The conclusion which
he aims at is this, that whosoever either does not hold the same Faith in all
points which the Romish Church does, or does not communicate with that Church
in the use of Sacraments, or doing both these, does not withal acknowledge the
Bishop of Rome for his supreme Governor ecclesiastike, he no way belongs to
the true Church. Whosoever holds all the three parts of the former definition,
he is the true son of the same Church.

The militant Church, says the Author of the Antidote, is a society or company
of men, linked and combined together in the same profession of the Christian
Faith, and use of Sacraments under lawful Pastors, chiefly under one Head, and
Vicar of Christ the Pope of Rome. the 3. part of the Antidote, cap. 1. p. 17..
5.

8 The Church triumphant is more beholding to, or rather less injured by this
Cardinal and his followers, then it was by some former Popes or Councels,
which as the Raynold in These.
Doctor of famous and blessed memory long since observed, have made the Pope
head of the Church triumphant. Cardinal Bellarmine and his Epitomists, in
making the Pope such an head of the universal Church militant, make him an
essential head of all Christ's actual live and indeficient members here on
earth. And thus to do, is an indignity to Christ, not literally or fully
expressable by any terms which the tongue or pen of men can invent. It may
notwithstanding, be thus typically represented or shadowed. Suppose a man
should put a Gorgon or Saracens head made of straw or clouts, taken out of a
sink, or some other place not fit to be named, upon the Kings statue or image
made by public authority, of pure gold, having first stricken off, or stolen
away the true head, which the Artificer had framed of matter homogeneall and
correspondent for form or proportion to the rest of the body.

9 Contradictorie to Cardinal Bellarmine and the Author of the Antidotes
definition, we may for the present conclude, and the rules as well of nature
and reason, as of laws supernatural and divine, will ratify our conclusion,
viz. First, that since the Churches and Commonweals absolutely distinct each
from other, and independent one of another, have been thus wedded together as
soul and body, as man and wife; there have been as many several visible
Churches independent each on other, for matter of jurisdiction or subjection to
one visible Head, as there be several free States or Christian Kingdoms
independent one of another. Secondly, that the subordination of Church to
Church, is in proportion the same, with the subordination of the several
states, wherein the Churches are planted. The best union that can be expected
between visible Chuches seated in Kingdoms or Commonweals independent one
of another, is the unity of league or friendship. And this may be as strict as
it shall please such Commonweals, or Churches to make it. Thirdly, to make
the Church seated in one absolute State or Kingdom, live in subjection to
another Church seated in another Kingdom, or to any member of another Church
or Kingdom (head or branch) is to erect a Babell, or seat for Antichrist, not
to build up one holy Church to Christ. This practice or usurpation of the
Romish Church, has been the reason why the christian world for these many
years, has been more confused and disordered, then the Synagogue of Mahomet.
Nor is there any possibility that christian States or Kingdoms should ever be
so united in faith and love, as that their joint prayers should be acceptable
unto God against the Turk or other professed enemy of Christ, until they
have cast off this heavy yoke of Satanicall slavery. But of these points
hereafter.

10 Lastly, since the Church has been diffused throughout all and every part
of Kingdoms and Provinces, it is impossible that every member should
personally meet to make laws and orders. And yet all laws are presumed to
be made by universal consent, and in this regard, the Churches have been
enforced to have as well Churches as Bodies politic, representative. And
inasmuch as the practice and custom has been, to admit none but Clergy or
Churchmen, as members of the Body Ecclesiastike or Church representative: the
name of the Church has been in a manner appropriated to the Clergy,
Churchmen, or Spirituality.

The Church or body Ecclesiastike representative, that is, the Church enabled
to make laws or canons Ecclesiastike, (of what members soever, it does, may or
ought to consist, for their qualification, as whether only of Clerks, or
whether it may admit some mixture of the Layetie) is either permanently
existent, or existent only by vicissitude or turns. The Church representative
which is existent, only by vicissitude, or at certain times only, may be
comprehended under the names of Councels or Synods, whether oecumenicall,
general or provincial, or of Conuocations ecclesiastike. The Church
representative permanently existent, amongst the Romanists, is the Consistory
of the Pope and his Cardinals. Albeit in very deed, the Jesuits, the
Canonists, and later Papists of their instruction, have contracted the Church
representative into the Popes breast alone. He, to use their own dialect, is the
vertuall Church, that is, He eminently comprehends all the authority which is
formally and ordinarily seated or inhaerent, whether in the Church
representative, or in the whole militant and visible Church of God, whereof He
claims to be the sole visible head. He has the same reference to the whole
body of the Church visible besides, as Plato his (...) had to (...) that is,
he is (...) the life or quintescence of the visible Church, or in respect of
that Church, all in all. So Cardinal Paleotus, in his book, de sacro
consistorio, would persuade us, that as God Almighty sometimes gouernes the
world by his ordinary power, or by the ministry or coagencie of second
causes, sometimes by his extraordinary immediate or absolute power; so the
Pope sometimes determines controversies in religion and orders the affairs of
the Church, by the consent and assistance of Councels, or at least of his
Consistory; sometimes by himself alone, and by his sole plenarie and illimited
power.

Cap. 9.
CHAP. IX. That albeit the true Church be always visible, yet it is a gross
sophisme hence to infer, that the visible Church is always the true Church;
or that one visible Church is more privileged from erring than another. The
strange blasphemy, by which the Author of the Antidote seeks to support the
infallibility of the visible Romish Church.
1 THe subject of our next inquiry, shall be so to share the titles or
attributes given by the Scriptures, orthodoxall antiquity, or other good
authority, to the Church indefinitely taken, between that one, Holy,
Catholic Church which we believe in this Creed, and the visible Church or
Churches, which we see or know; so as that God and his Holy Church, may have
their full dues, and Gods deputies here on earth, Caesar's or other governors
of his visible Church, may have no wrong. The best and most general rule for
our direction in this search, is that, which will better appear from a
treatise concerning the exposition of prophesies. For, as one and the same
prophecy touching Christ, so one and the same promise made unto the Church,
may be often literally verified, and in different measure successively
fulfilled of diverse parties. Some promises may be literally verified of the
visible Church or Synagogue of the Jews before our Saviors Incarnation, and
of the visible Churches planted by his Apostles; and be in part fulfilled,
throughout every age, of the liue-members of Christ's body to us invisible, but
lastly to be exactly fulfilled of the Church triumphant or Kingdom of glory.

2 Most of the later Romanists arguments, are mere Sophismes a dicto secundum
quid, ad simpliciter; that is, they take all those glorious titles or promises
made to the Church in its most ample or exquisite signification, to be exactly
and entirely fulfilled of the visible Church throughout all ages; when as they
are verified of it in part only, or at some special times, or by way of type
or shadow, and unto which she has at no time any absolute title, but
conditional. In this mist of ignorance, the Author of the blind guide of
faith, in his second chapter, does strangely wander, not only from the truth,
but from the level which he had taken, not much amiss, in the first chapter
of his treatise; and as his custom is, when he has lost his way, like a
balling Hound, not well entered, falls a barking at Doctor Whitaker, whose words
or meaning, how sincerely he quotes or recites, I leave it to the impartial
Readers examination.

In his third chapter having proposed this Thesis, That the true visible Church
is apparently known, and famous to the world, he labors to prove in the
fourth chapter, that the true visible and apparently known Church can never
fail. That the visible Church was in the Apostles time and after, the true
Church of God, we never denied: nor will we contend with him, whether the true
Church of God on earth can ever fail, no not whether ever it cease to be
visible. Where then is the difference? These two propositions, the true Church
of God is always visible, the visible Church is always the true Church of
God, differ as much as a Mill-horse, and a Horse-mill: or, as to stand with a
man, and to withstand a man. The whole visible Church in the days of the
Emperors Constantius and Valens, did Arianize, as the Romanist cannot deny.
The best answer that they can give to this Instance is, that these Emperors
did not reign long, for Valens died within three years after the persecution
by him begun. Howeuer; the Council of Millain, of Sirmium, etc. was the then
visible Church, (...). But I hope, they will not say, that it was the true
Church of God. For though almost all the Bishops and most Christians throughout
the Roman Empire did subscribe unto these Councels, yet was not the true See
the 17. chap. of this book, especially parag. 6.
Church of God during these three years invisible, but more remarkably visible
in some few which did contradict the then visible Church, content to suffer
exile or other martyrdom, in maintenance of the Holy Catholic faith, which is
the life and soul of the Church of God. In few ages after, wherein worse
beasts then Valens was, were chief Governors of the visible Church: that is,
after the succession of Romish Bishops was grown up unto a perfect beast,
according to the measure of Antichrist; the true Church of God was remarkeably
visible in such as that visible Church did condemn for heretics. Instances to
this purpose are plentiful in impartial Writers. And when the doctrine of
Antichrist was come to his full growth, as in the Council of Trent, although
the whole body of Germany besides Chemnitius and some few others; although the
whole visible Church of France besides Calvin, and some such, had subscribed
unto that Council; yet the true Church of God had been visible in France and
Germany in these worthies. Enough there was in their writings against that
Council, to condemn all such as followed it, that is, the visible or
representative Church of Rome, of palpable Antichristian heresy. Yet when we
say, that the true Church of God was visible in these men, and in their
writings, or in John Hus, etc. we do not tie our selves to embrace what
soever they wrote, for truth. We may say of the true visible Church, or of the
truth by which we become visible members of the true Catholic Church, as one
said of Truth philosophical, That it could not be sound entire in the writings
of any one Sect of Philosophers; in the writings of all of them it might. This
advantage we have of all the Philosophers; that we have a surer and more
perfect rule for examining the writings or doctrines of several visible
Churches, than they had any for examining truths philosophical. Absolutely to
assent in each particular to any writers or teachers, since the first
constitution of the Apostolic Church, or accomplishment of the written rule of
faith, were to dissent from them in the maine and fundamental point of
Catholic Faith. For unless there be an unfeigned and hearty desire, a spirit
of watchfulness and of willingness to limit our adherence unto whatsoeeuer
other writings, according to the greater or less evidence of their consonancy
with the written rule; neither Scholar, nor Master, nor Church visible or
representative, can be any other then equivocal or dead members of the true
Church. The Catholic faith it self, could it possibly be planted in any man's
heart, without the spirit or Genius to direct or inform it, would quickly
either putrify or grow crooked.

3 Amongst other glorious titles wherewith the same Author seeks to adorn the
Church of Rome, this, which is the title of his fifth chapter, is one, that the
true Church cannot err. A proposition, I must confess, as hard for us to
disprove, if he take it in sensu composito, as it is for him to prove, in
sensu diuiso. That no Church, as it is true, and whilst it is true, or in
respect of those points with reference to which it is denominated true, can
possibly err, is a truth that cannot be denied. But if by the true Church, he
mean a visible, or the visible Romish Church; there neither is, nor has been
any visible Church, though planted by the Apostles themselves, which since
their times has not either ceased to be a visible Church, or else continued
for a long time as palpably erroneous and false, as truly visible. Whatsoever
this Author deem or write, his Fellows and Masters with one mouth confess,
that every private man in their Church may err; that the Bishops assembled in
Council, without the Popes direction or confirmation of their sentence, may
err; that the Pope himself unless he speak ex cathedra, may err. And by
this confession either the Romish church is no true Church, save only whilst
the Pope speaks e Cathedra, or else the whole body of the true Church (if the
Romish church be the true Church,) may sometimes err. For at all times else,
both head and members of this Church may err. In this inference, I take it as
granted, that the Pope does not always speak ex cathedra. Now if in these
interims of his cathedral silence, any Bishop, Priest or Jesuit shall take upon
them to instruct their Auditors, out of the Pulpit or otherwise, in points of
faith or controversy; their poor flock by this man's collections against us,
cannot be made partakers of that true and infallible faith, without which no
man can be saved; because their Preachers or ministers are not infallible, nor
(to use his words) undoubtedly fenced from all danger of error. His
collections against us are these: Guide of Faith. cap. 5. page 54.
Finally to what end do Protestants strive so much for the Churches erring,
but only to deprive themselves thereby of Church, Faith and Religion? For
whereas neither religion, nor Church can stand without supernatural faith, nor
supernatural faith be attained without infallible certainty of the things
believed; if their Preachers, their Ministers, their Church be not undoubtedly
fenced from all danger of error, the Articles they believe have not that
inerrable warrant, which is necessary to faith. Did this man, may we think,
believe that he himself was undoubtedly fenced from all danger of error? If
he did so believe, the Cardinals of Rome shall do him much wrong, if they
choose him not Pope the next Election, or appoint him not as coadiutor to the
present Pope. If it be replied, that the Romish instructers, be they Bishops
or Priests, cannot err because they neither believe nor teach others to
believe any points of faith, but with absolute submission of their instructions
to what the Pope already has spoken, or shall hereafter speak ex cathedra
concerning the same points; the medicine will be a great deal worse then the
disease. For this persuasion or resolution is altother incompatible with the
first grounds of faith, and is flat Apostacy from Christ, as has been
discussed at large in the second book upon the Creed; and shall be further
manifested, if occasion require, in the second book of this Treatise. To the
former objection, the answer on our part is easy. For true faith receives its
infallibility, not from any infallibility in our immediate and ordinary
teachers, but from the infallibility of the truths themselves, which they
propose unto us out of the rule of truth, and from the infallibility of that
internal and secret Teacher, without whose impressions of truths infallible in
men's hearts, no true faith can be conceived by the Church it self in what
sense soever taken, or by any member of it. But this point likewise has been
fully discussed throughout our second book upon the Creed. Concerning this
glorious title of not erring, wherewith he seeks to invest the visible Church,
the case is easy, and the issue short. If the true Church which can never
err, be the visible Church; then that visible Church, which often has erred,
and does still err, cannot be the true Church, nor such a supreme Judge of
controversies, as he imagines the visible Romish Church to be in his 6.
chapter. Now whether the visible church of Rome has not of later years grossly
erred in many points, and most grievously in this very opinion of their own
absolute infallibility, Cap. 6.
comes to be disputed in the second book. In which likewise it shall (by Gods
assistance) appear, that this vanting Doctor has really danced in that
inextricable maze, which he terms but an Imaginary circle, cap. 7.

4. The special title or attribute, which in this place requires larger
discussion, whether it belong merely to the Holy, Catholic Church, so termed
by Excellency, or in some measure also unto the visible Church; is that Maxim
usual amongst the Fathers, Extra Ecclesiam non est salus, that is, as the
forecited Author proposes it, cap. 8. that out of the true Church there can be
no hope of salvation, in any congregation or sect whatsoever. As an additionall
to this general Testimony, they add that of S. Hierom. tom. 2. Ep. 57. ad
Damas. and tom. 4. l. 4. comment. in cap. 11. Isa. If any one were not in the
Arc, he was drowned in the time of the inundation. If any one he not in the
Church, he perishes in the day of destruction. And again, Gaudentius a little
more ancient then Hierom (as this Author cites him;) It is manifest that all
men of those times perished, excepting only such as deserved to be found
within the Arc, bearing a type or figure of the Church. For so in like manner
they cannot be saved, who are separated from the Apostolic faith, and
Catholic Church. Guide of Faith, cap. 8.

5 Pius Quartus affirms that, that Creed which he has patched up out of the
Nicene creed and council of Trent, is the Faith, extra quam non est salus, out
of which there is no salvation. Unto an empty discourse addressed to this
purpose, the said Author of the Antidote in his ninth chapter of the Guide of
faith, has prefixed this swelling title, Cap. 9.
No Sectarie (so he terms us,) can be saved by believing general heads. The
mark he aims at, is that we are bound under penalty of damnation to believe
whatsoever the visible Church commends unto us as a point of faith; as firmly,
as we believe the general articles of the Apostolic or Nicene Creed. And to
obtrude this conclusion upon us, which would draw us to a general Apostasy,
he has shamelesly transferd that royal prerogative of Gods moral law
avouched by S. James, [Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in
one point, he is guilty of all. c. 2.10.] unto all the mandates of the visible
Church. And lastly, to accumulate impudency, having once transgressed the
bounds of Christian modesty, he further adds [ That it is not enough to
believe all the mandates of the visible Church, See the 19. Chapt. of this
Book.
unless we do communicate with it in practice.] But in what points we may
communicate with the Romish church, in what we may not, shall be in particular
discussed hereafter. For a general answer to his blasphemous allegations, we
can conceive none better, none so good, as that which S. James has framed for
us: He that said, Thou shall not steal, Thou shall do no murder, Thou shall not
commit adultery, nor bear false witness against thy neighbor; said also in
more precise and cautelous terms, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven
Image, nor the similitude of any thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth
beneath. Thou shall not bow down to them nor worship them, etc. Now if we
shall communicate with the present Romish church, in worshipping the Images of
the Almighty Creator, of the persons in Trinity, Cap. 10
and of every living creature in heaven; or in adoring the similitudes of bread
and wine, or rather bread or wine it self, we should daily draw the guilt of
transgressing the whole Law of God upon us. Were not these kind of men further
transported with their blind zeal unto their own Traditions, and malice
toward the Gospel of Christ, then the Jews were; we might refer this point
unto the Romanists, as the Apostles did the like unto the Judgment of the
Jews, Whether it be better, to obey God forbidding, or the visible Church
commanding the adoration of Images, or the consecrated Host, Judge ye.

CHAP. X. In what cases Arguments of proportion may be drawn from Allegories.
A full explication of the Allegory used by S. Paul, Gal. 4. and of the
Argument, or concludent proof, in the same Allegory contained.
1 Unto the argument drawn from Noah's Arc I could use the common exception,
Sensus allegoricus aut Symbolicus, non est sensus argume^tativus; That points
of Doctrine are not to be grounded upon the allegorical or Symbolicall sense
of scriptures. But exceptions are then useful when they are needful, and they
are then only needful, when the Testimonies against us, are not only true but
concludenr. And some good writers to my apprehension, have not in any point
given greater advant^ge to their adversaries, then by denying Orthodoxall or
plausible antecedents, when they should have examined the Argument, or
trauersed the vulgar Judgment, concerning the consequence. We will not
therefore deny, that the argument may be rightly drawn from Noah's Arc unto
Christ his Church which in Thesi, is as much as to say, that sensus allegoricus
seu mysticus est aliquando argumentativus: The allegorical or mystical sense
is sometimes argumentatiue; yea it is always so, when the Allegory is rightly
grounded upon the literal sense, and when the terms are distinct and rightly
suited. For such an allegory, is an argument from proportion, which is the
most usual kind of argument amongst sacred Writers. I will instance in two
arguments of S. Paul; in the one of which I must be somewhat longer, because it
is more difficult. Yet to recompense this inconvenience, the matter of it
rightly explicated, is very Homogeneall or suitable to the matter now in hand,
and may serve as a leading case to others which we are hereafter to handle.
Galat. cap. 4. ver. 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26. Tell me, ye that desire to be under
the Law, do ye not hear the Law? For it is written, that Abraham had two
sons, the one by a bo^dmaid, the other by a free woman; but he who was of the
bondwoman, was borne after the flesh, but he of the freewoman was by promise:
which things are an allegory. As every Analogy or proportion, so every
Allegory (especially in matters sacred) if it be explicit and complete,
consists of four distinct terms. In this present Allegory of the Apostle,
as in the like used by sacred Writers, the two first terms have a literal,
proper or historical sense: the other two have a borrowed, metaphorical or
symbolicall sense. Or to speak more significantly, (perhaps to some men) the
two first terms, besides their historical or native signification, have a
symbolicall or emblematicall importance; that is, the realities or matters
historically related or literally expressed, are as types and shadows of some
more principal events, to ensue; though not literally expressed or foretold,
but by way of hieroglyficall emblem. And in this Allegory, the historical
and proper terms, are Hagar the Handmaid, and Sarah her Mistress. The
Allegorical terms, by these foreshadowed, are the two testaments, the one
from Mount Sinai, whereof Hagar the Handmaid is the type, the other from
heaven, established by our Saviors blood, whereof Sarah the Mistress and the
Freewoman, is the type. Thus much is clear from the Apostle himself.

The difficulty which has puzzled many good interpreters in the exposition of
this Text, herein consists: namely how, and in what manner the other terms,
which are here interserted, as Mount-Sinai, or Hagar in Arabia, the Jerusalem
that now is, and the Jerusalem which is above, are reducible to the four
former terms wherein the Allegory properly consists. To prove that Hagar,
Sarahs Handmaid, was the type of the Testament given upon Mount Sinai, the
Apostle thus inferres, or rather interprets, (...), For this Agar is mount
Sinai in Arabia. Gal. 4.25.
This inference to a mere Artist, may well seem strange: for it is merely
equivocal. And whatsoever sensus mysticus, parabolicus or allegoricus be,
certainly, sensus aequiuocus non est sensus argumentativus, the equivocal
sense can bring forth no sound Argument.

2 To this we answer, that many things which are aequiuoca casu, in respect of
men, are aequiuoca a consilio, in respect of Gods providence: And diverse
prophesies which have been conceived and expressed in terms equivocal, have
been remarkeably fulfilled according to the different or contrary
significations of one and the same prophetical word; as on the contrary, one
and the same Evangelical word or attribute of Christ, may (according to its
different or equivocal significations) comprise the literal significations of
two or more prophesies conceived in distinct terms, no way equivocal or
coincident in the original. Instance was In a Sermon upon the 31. of Ier. verse
22.
elsewhere given, in the Latin Nazarenus, or Nazareus, truly verified of
Christ, both as he was the rod of Iesse, and as he was the Idaea of legal
Nazarites. To these the instance of our Apostle in this place is parallel. That
the same mountain, which the Hebrews call Sinai, should by the Arabians be
called Agar, and bear the same name which Agar, Sarahs Handmaid did, was
merely accidental or casual, in respect of men. But that God should promulge
his law, and enter a covenant with his people upon this Mount, did, by the
disposition of his All-seeing providence enigmatically portend what the
Apostle, (by an Analogy of interpreting Scriptures well known in his time,)
inferres; to wit, that such as did adhere unto the law, or first covenant, as
to their mother, scorning or loathing the sincere milk of the Gospel or new
Testament, should by so doing, become rather children of Abraham, by Agar the
Bondwoman, then by Sarah the Freewoman, as anon shall be declared. But
besides this equivocation of the word Agar, and the doubtful signification of
the Greek (...), there is an Amphibologie in their reference or conjunction,
which many good Interpreters not well observing, have left the stream or
current of the Apostles words much troubled in translations, though in a manner
clear in the Fountain.

3 Most of the Ancient, with some modern, make the Mount Agar, the entire
subject of this proposition: as if he had said in English; This mount Agar
bordereth upon Jerusalem: whereas the Apostles meaning is, that Agar, Sarahs
Handmaid did border upon, or answer unto the then Jerusalem. The vulgar Latin
speaking of this Mount, says, continuatus est; Erasmus, confinis est
Jerusalem, which I wonder at, if we have his last corrections, seeing a
Sepulveda in his Epistle to Erasmus.
learned man did admonish him to amend it. Aquinas, to justify the sense of
the vulgar translation, gives this reason, why Mount Agar might be said to be
continuatus Jerusalem, because the journey or pilgrimage from this mountain
was continual. But Sepul veda very well replies, that there was never any
journey less continuate, then the Israelites journey from mount Agar to
Jerusalem. For it was a continual wandering up and down, neither was the
Jerusalem, whereof the Apostle speaks, but the whole land of Promise the term
or period of the Israelites wandering pilgrimage. Some others whom Luther
follows, have taken some pains in Geographie, to show, that the mountains
in Arabia, are continuate unto that part of Iudaea, wherein Jerusalem stands,
but how true soever this may be in Geographie, it cannot be more true, then
impertinent to our Apostles meaning. For Agar or Sinai is not such a general
name of the whole mountaine-country in Arabia, as Would or chilterne is in
English. It is the proper name of that one famous Mount, on which the Law was
given, betwixt which and Jerusalem, there be so many other hills and mountains,
that it cannot be said, in any Geographicall sense, to border upon Jerusalem.
True it is, that the Greek (...) does sometime signify as much as to border
or trench upon, yet this is but a secondarie or deriuatiue signification. The
reason of this deriuatiue or borrowed speech is, because such as are properly
termed (...), that is, such as march together in battle array, are vicini, or
near one to the other. Our two later English translations render it better,
answers to Jerusalem, or as Beza, ex aduerso respondet: But neither, as I
think, refer this word answering, to Geographicall situation. In which sense
the Latin respondet is (at least by Poets) sometimes used. So Creete is said
to answer to Athens: Contra elata mari respondet Cnosia tellus.

4 But our later English by this word answering, means it to be in the same
rank with Jerusalem* Howbeit to speak in the proper terms of Art military,
such as are in the same rank, are called (...), they are (...) which are next
in the same file, that is, in eadem serie, incipiendo a front ad ^ergum, in
the same line or row from Front to Reere. As when Soldiers march ten in
breast, and thirty deep, they are said to be thirty ranks, and ten Files,
and yet thirty in File, and but ten in Rank. The first and second in the
same File, are (...) the first and second in the next File to these are (...)
with these, or (...) unto them. Or as in a teeme or draught of Oxen, such as
are of the one side, are (...) and with reference to them such as are on the
other side are (...), such as are in the same yoke are (...). Howeuer, because
Soldiers (...), that is, when they march in order, hold just distance and
proportion one with another; hence it is, that in Aristotle and other good
writers, the several terms of any just proportion, are called (...), as two,
four, eight, sixteen.

5 The termini (...) in this Allegory, are not mount Agar, but Agar Sarahs
Handmaid and her offspring, and the Jerusalem which was in our Apostles time. On
the other side, the termini (...) to these, or (...), betwixt themselves, were
Sarah, Abraham's wife and her offspring, and the Jerusalem which was above. As
for Mount Agar or Sinai, it is no formal part of the Allegory, no term at
all in this proportion, but only collaterally, or by way of metonymie
interserted: inasmuch as the old Testament, which is one of the formal and
primitive terms in this Allegory, was given upon this Mount, the old
Testament or Covenant it self, and Jerusalem which then was, cannot be
properly termed (...), as making but one term, and diffring only, as homo
and rationale. So the new Testament, and the Jerusalem which is above, make but
one term, whereof the one is as the soul and quidditie, the other as the body
or compositum, unto which Sarah, Abraham's wife is the terminus (...). Unto this
or like kinds of arguments drawn from proportion, there is always some
Common Notion or prolepsis presupposed as a ground to support them.

The presupposed ground of this argument is, that Abraham's family was a type,
yea more then a type of the militant Church; the very root of that celestial
Vine which God, having brought out of Egypt, did plant in Iewry. This
presupposed; our Apostles argument may be thus drawn; The same proportion
which Agar the Handmaid had to Sarah her Mistress in Abraham's house, the same
proportion has the old Testament to the New, in the house of God; the same
proportion which Agars offspring had to Sarahs, the same proportion had the
Children of the Law, that is, the Jerusalem which then was, unto the Jerusalem
which is above, that is, to the children of the Gospel or sons of promise.
Now Hagar was sometime a visible and principal member of Abraham's family, a
kind of second wife to Abraham, and Ismael her son was for a while Abraham's
presumed heir: yet after Agar did begin to despise and contest with her
Mistress Sarah, and Ismael to flout or persecute Isaac, Abraham's heir
apparent and Son of promise; both Mother and Son were cast out of Abraham's
house, and deprived of all hope of inheritance in the land of promise. Sarah
bearing the type of the true visible Church then on earth, did pronounce that
sentence of excommunication against them; Cast out the Bondwoman and her Son.
Genesis 21.10. and God ratifying in heaven what she had bound on earth, inioynes
Abraham to put her sentence in execution. Genesis 21. verse 12. The Covenant
likewise which God made with this people upon Hagar, or mount Sinai, was as the
betrothing of Israel unto himself. The Law of Moses, whilst it was lawfully
used, was the only Catechism or Introduction, without which there was no
entrance into the Church of God. The children of this Covenant, did by virtue
of it become haeredes praesumpti, the presumed heirs or children of God.

6 But when this deputed or nursing-mother came once to contest with the true
Spouse of Christ, with the new Testament or Gospel: and after her children,
the Jerusalem which then was, began to persecute the children of the Jerusalem,
which is above; the mother with her children, that is, the Law, with such as
sought to be under it, were cast out of the true visible Church of God, by the
Apostles, unto whom our Savior had committed the keys of the Kingdom of
heaven. There is a special Emphasis in that speech of the Apostle, (...) This
is not all one, as if he had said, the earthly Jerusalem which had continued
from David's time till Christ; but not the same for condition in our Saviors
time, as it was in David's: For it now stood in such opposition to the Gospel,
as Hagar did to her Mistress Sarah, at the time when she and her Son
committed those misdemeanors, for which both of them were cast out of Abraham's
house. The Jerusalem which was on earth, was sometimes, or in some part rather
a consort than an opposite or adversary to the Jerusalem which was above. So
was the old Testament or the Law, and all such as lawfully used it, rather
subordinate allies, then foes or adversaries to the new Testament, or heirs of
promise.

The occasion which Agar took to despise her Mistress, was her barrenness,
but the Lord took occasion from Agars contempt and scorn, to visit Sarah, as
afterward he did Hannah with mercy in the midst of grief, and gave her
strength to conceive seed, and she was delivered of a child, when she was
past age, because she judged him faithful who had promised. Therefore sprang
there even of one, and him as good as dead, so many as the stars of the sky
in multitude: and as the sand, which is by the Sea shore innumerable. Heb. 11.
verse. 11, 12. Nor was Abraham only (...) as good as dead, in respect of
procreation, but Isaac in whom his seed was to be called, was by him destined
to death, and in figure or token of the resurrection, received to life again,
before he became the Father of the glorious offspring, which God had promised
to Abraham.

7 In like manner the present Jerusalem or Synagogue, did deride the new
Jerusalem when it first came down from heaven to abide with men on earth, and
flouted the promised seed, (even whilst they persecuted him to death) more
bitterly then Ismael had done Isaac: He saved others, himself he cannot save.
Thus they did, and thus they said, not remembering, that what had been said to
Abraham, and done to Isaac, was to be fulfilled in Christ: therefore he was not
only to be as good as dead, or destinated to death, as Isaac was; but to taste
of death before his glorious seed came to be multiplied as the stars of
heaven. Thus much besides the body or emblem exhibited in Isaac, was expressly
foretold by the Evangelicall Prophet, Esa. 53.10.
When thou shall make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed, he
shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his
hand. He shall see of the travel of his soul, and shall be satisfied.

But that which serves best for setting out the parallel betwixt the Apostle
and the Prophet, is this. After the Evangelical Prophet had written the
history of Christ's passion in the 53. chapter, he presently sets down that
invitation of the new Jerusalem (pre-figured by Sarah and her barrenness) to
take up old Hannah prayed and said; My heart rejoices in the Lord, mine horn
is exalted in the Lord, my mouth is enlarged over mine enemies, because J
rejoice in thy salvation. They that were full, have hired out themselves for
bread, and they that were hungry, ceased: so that the barren has born seven,
and she that has many children is waxen feeble. The Lord kills, and makes
alive, he brings down to the grave, and brings up. 1 Samuel cap 2, ver. 1,
5, 6.
Hannahs Song; Rejoice o barren, thou that did not bear, break forth into
singing and cry aloud thou that did not travel with child: for more are the
children of the desolate, then the children of the married wife, says the Lord.
Enlarge the place of thy tent, and let the^ stretch forth the curtains of thine
habitatio^s: spare not, lengthe^ thy coards, and strengthen thy stakes. For
thou shall break forth on the right hand, and on the left* and thy seed shall
inherit the Gentiles, and make the desolate cities to be inhabited. Isa. 54. v.
1, 2, 3. The Apostle immediately after his explication of the former Allegory,
Gal. 4.27. takes up the first part of the Prophets song by way of testimony or
confirmation of his doctrine. But Jerusalem which is above is free, which is
the mother of us all. For it is written, Rejoice thou Barren that bear not,
etc.

Cap. 11
CHAP. XI. Of the consonancie between the promulgation of the old Testament,
and the New. Of the opposition between the Law and the Gospel, or between the
old Testament and the new. The explication of the Apostles argument, Heb. 9.
ver. 13, 14.
1 But when did the Church or spouse of Christ (or children of the new
Testament) first take up this joyful song, whereunto the Prophet did invite
her? Immediately upon our Saviors death and resurrection? No: these were the
days of the Churches widowhood, wherein she sat (for a while) destitute and
comfortless, and wherein her womb was shut up from bearing children. The
Apostles themselves had as little strength as Abraham had, to beget, or Sarah
had to bring forth children unto God, until they were endued with power from
above. The new Jerusalem did not descend like a glorious bride from Heaven,
until the bridegroom her Lord, had ascended from earth to heaven in glory.
But within ten days after, the Holy Ghost came down upon the Apostles and
disciples in visible shape, in token that Christ's Church was now betrothed unto
him: this was as the solemnization of the Marriage. And whereas, for fifty days
after our Saviors resurrection, we do not read of one soul more then their
own, begotten to God by the Apostles and Disciples: there were added upon the
fiftieth day, three thousand souls unto the new Jerusalem or visible Church;
and every day after such as should be saved. And these being dispersed
throughout every Nation under heaven, did propagate the seed, increasing and
multiplying much faster then the Israelites did in Egypt.

The songs of joy foretold by Esaias the Prophet, were taken up by these sons
of the new Jerusalem, whilst they were filled with the Holy Ghost, and began
to speak with other tongues as the spirit gave them utterance. Acts, 2. ver.
4. God gave his Law upon Mount Agar or Sinai fifty days after the Israelites
were delivered out of Egypt: and fifty days after the deliverance of his
people from the bondage of sin and Satan, the same Lord proclaims his Gospel
or new Covenant upon Mount Sion in Jerusalem the Metropolis or royal seat of
Abraham or David's seed. The visible Jerusalem from David's time till Christ's, is
as the middle term of proportion, between the Law and the Gospel; that is,
the same proportion which the Law, as opposed unto the Gospel, or which Agar
with her children, had unto Abraham's offspring by Sarah, in respect of civil
freedom, or of emblematicall or typical preheminences; the like proportion
had Abraham's offspring by Sarah, (or the visible Jerusalem in her greatest
glory) unto the new Jerusalem after the Holy Ghost had descended upon the
Apostles, and such as were in their times converted unto Christ. And as the Law
being given upon Mount Agar did emblematically import a kind of civil
servitude unto such as did adhere unto it, whilst it stood in opposition to
the Gospel: so the Gospel being promulged in the visible Jerusalem, did
betoken the spiritual freedom of all such as abandoning the Law, did embrace
it.

2 Of the difference or agreements betwixt the Law and the Gospel, or (which
is all one) betwixt the old Testament and the new, I shall have occasion to
treat elsewhere. For this time it shall suffice in a word to advertise, that
the old Testament and the new, are sometimes compared and considered by sacred
Writers, tanquam includens and inclusum, as the Husk and the Grain. The
Gospel before Christ's time, was in the Law as the corn new set in the ear.
And the Law and the Gospel, or the two Testaments, thus considered, are rather
one the^ two, at least there is an unity of subordination betwixt them. Unto
such as used the old Testament as they ought, only as an Introduction to the
new, there was indeed but one Testament. For, as the Schools speak, vbi vnum
propter aliud, ibi vnum tantum. The same Testaments may be sometimes considered
as abstracted or severed each from other. Thus the Gospel or new Testament
since our Saviors death and resurrection, is become as pure corn, threshed
and winnowed. The old Testament or the Law (thus severed from it) remains
only as the chafe or husk. If we thus consider the Law or old Testament, as
the Jews embrace it, that is, altogether severed from the new, to which alone
we Christians adhere by faith; they are not only two, but two opposites or
contraries. The Jews appetitus caninus, or womanish longing after the Law, and
our constant adherence to the Gospel (thus opposed unto the Law, as pure corn
unto the putrified chafe or husk) breeds a kind of Antipathie between us.
For such as is our several food and nourishment, such our several
dispositions are. We feed upon the pure corn, or rather upon the bread of
life it self cleansed from all branne; the Jew only upon the chafe or husk;
and his religion is as loathsome to us, as swines flesh is to him. See Philip.
3. verse. 7, 8, 9.

3 This opposition or subordination between the legal or Evangelical
Testament will further appear from our second instance which was in the same
Apostle, Heb. 9. ver. 13, 14. If the blood of Bulls and of goats, and the ashes
of an Heifer sprinkling the unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of the
flesh: How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal
Spirit, offered himself without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead
works to serve the living God. The terms of proportion likewise in this
inference are four. The first, not fully expressed but employed, and it is a
sin or trespass merely committed against the Law of ceremonies. The second,
which is (...) to this, is a legal or proper sacrifice for such a sin, to
wit, the blood of Bulls and of goats, and the sprinkling of the ashes of an
Heifer. The third term typified by the Ceremonial sin, is man's natural
corruption, sins original or actual, or sin of what kind soever committed
against the moral Law of God. The fourth term is the sacrifice by God
appointed, to purify and cleanse us from such sins, and that was the bloody
sacrifice of our Lord and Savior Christ, whereof the legal sacrifices were
types or shadows. So that the legal sacrifices had two uses or references,
the one expiatory, (for their offering did expiate sins merely ceremonial:) the
other sacramental or prefiguratiue, for they did picture out or represent the
eternal sacrifice, whereby our redemption was fully wrought, as the Apostle
proves at large in the 10. chapter to the Hebrews. His argument in this place
is in effect thus; The same efficacy which sacrifices merely legal offered by
the Priest had in cleansing men from sins merely ceremonial [ as from
touching of the dead, or some creeping thing etc.] the same, but much greater
efficacy, has the blood of Christ being offered by the eternal Spirit (that
is, by the Godhead personally dwelling in him) to cleanse us from all sins
against the moral Law of God, and to purify us from such dead works, as, not
expiated by his blood, would bring forth everlasting death. Now the Apostle
takes it as granted, that the legal sacrifices did not only sufficiently
cleanse men from such sins, but withal did legally sanctify them: and so in
like manner Christ's blood was not only the full price of our redemption, but
is withal the fountain of our sanctification, by which we are qualified for
admission into the heavenly Sanctuary.

4 The first original of the Jews hypocrifie and malice, was their ignorance
in the law of Moses, for they thought, these legal sacrifices were sufficient
to cleanse them from all sins whatsoever. And if such sacrifices could have
freed from sin, the Jew had been most free from sin, of any people living.
Most of those that presecured our Savior Christ, might be, as S. Paul was,
whilst he was a persecutor, (...) without stain or blot in respect of the
righteousness which is of the Law. Phil. 3.6. In presumption of this their
integrity, with reference to the Law of Ceremonies, and of their being Abraham's
sons, not by Agar but by Sarah; the better sort of the worser Jews scorned to
hear of being set free by the truth it self, which they in part believed: If
ye continue in my word, then are you my disciples indeed; And ye shall know the
truth, and the truth shall make you free. They answered him, We be Abraham's
seed, and were never in bondage to any man: how say thou, Ye shall be made
free? But our Savior tells them, In as much, as they committed sin, they
were the servants of sin, (and being servants, they were in the same case with
Agar and her son) for the servant abides not in the house for ever. If the son
therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed. John 8. verse. 31, 32,
33, 34, 35, 36.

Thus you see, that the Apostle Gal. 4. v. 18. etc. did teach no other thing,
tha^ our Savior here does. These Jews by relying upon the prerogatives of the
Law, became as sons of the bondwoman, remaining still slaves to sin. Others by
adhering to the new Testament, which the Son of God ratified by his blood,
became sons of the freewoma^, or as this Evangelist Ioh 1.12.
elsewhere speaks, the sons of God. How exactly the present visible Romish
Church does parallel Agar and the Jerusalem which the^ was when our Savior and
S. Paul thus wrote and spoke, shall by Gods assistance, be declared hereafter.
Let us now see how ill that Church does parallel Noah's Arc.

Cap. 12
CHAP. XII. The Allegory or Argument of proportion drawn from Noah's Arc,
explicated according to the former rules, and retorted upon the Romanist.
1 FRom these and the like Arguments drawn from the types to their antitypes,
we are for conclusion to frame the Argument drawn from Noah's Arc after another
fashion, and to a better end then the Romanist does. The terms of proportion
in this argument are conspicuous: First, Noah, secondly, his Arc; thirdly, the
means of safety from the flood by his Arc. Terms to these (...), are first
Christ, 2. his Church, and 3. the salvation of such as enter into his Church.
First, to parallel Noah and Christ in some few points. The Lord said unto Noah,
Genesis 7. ver. 1. Thee have I found righteous before me in this generation, that
is, (as the Apostle says of Abraham) he had whereof to boast with men, but
not with God. He was righteous not only coram hominibus, but prae hominibus
coram Deo, more righteous than any other man living, even in the sight and
judgment of God, yet not perfectly righteous in the sight of God. This was
Christ's peculiar, in who^ that which was in some measure or co^paratiuely
verified in Noah, was exactly fulfilled: for he only amongst all the
Generations of men, was altogether pure and righteous before God. Again Noah
was a Preacher of righteousness, and extraordinarily qualified for this
function by the spirit of Christ. So much that place of S. Peter proves in his
1. Epistle, 3. chapter, verse 18, 19, 20. For Christ also has once suffered
for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God, being put
to death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit. By which also he went, and
preached unto the spirits in prison, which sometime were disobedient, when once
the long-suffring of God waited in the days of Noah, while the Arc was a
preparing. Yet Noah had but his portion, though a large one of the Spirit: sed
Christo Deus non admetitur spiritum, God gives not the Spirit by measure to
Christ, Ioh. 3. verse 34. He spoke but the word, and great was the number of
Preachers, and from his inexhaustible fullness, we all received grace for
grace.

2 Again, Noah built an Arc by Gods appointment, for the safety of all such
as were obedient to his preaching, into which, whosoever would not enter, was
destroyed by the Flood, for disobedience to his preaching. All this was
fulfilled of the Church, which Christ builded: for whosoever does not enter
into it, shall be devoured by the everlasting flames, for disobedience to this
authentic Preacher of righteousness. The issue then between us and the
Romanists is, unto what Church Noah's Arc answers as a figure? to the visible
Romish Church, or only to the Church before defined, which is one, Holy, and
Catholic Church (...) We say of this later only, not of any visible Church,
save only so far as it is an introduction to this Church. Our reason is
this: Although it be true that none of the sons of men, besides such as
entered into Noah's Arc, were saved from the deluge; yet is not this negative
more unquestionably true, then the affirmative; That whosoever entered into the
Arc, were saved from the deluge. This is so expressly and determinately set
down in the Scripture, that no Atheist can question the meaning or extent of
the propositions, wherein it is set down. In the self same day, (says the
Scripture, Genesis 7. verse 11.) entered Noah and Sem, and Ham, and Iapheth, the
sons of Noah, and Noah's wife, and the three wives of his sons with them,
into the Arc. And in the 8. chap. and the 18. verse. Noah went forth, and his
sons, and his wife, and his sons wives with him. So that eight souls came
into the Arc, and eight went forth.

3 So then for conclusion, Noah's Arc was a type of that Church, into which
whosoever enters, shall be saved; but such a Church is not the visible Romish
Church in what sense soever it be taken. First, it is not true of the
universal Church consisting of the Layetie and Clergy, nor of the Church
representative; to wit, their general or provincial Councels. For none will
affirm, that all and every one of their Bishops, or such as give suffrage in
their Councels, shall have the suffrage of Christ, or their names written in
the book of life. They will not astipulate, that whosoever is graced with a
red hat in Rome, shall be sure to wear a Saints or Martyrs crown in heaven.
Even the Pope himself, whom they make their vertuall Church, may be a
notorious vicious man, and dye the death of the wicked: and therefore neither
living was the head, nor at his death any member of that Church, which was
prefigured by Noah's Arc; because he can neither save himself, nor such as
have committed their souls to be wafted over to the new Jerusalem, by this
presumed Pilot of Peter's pretended ship. So that either Peter's ship was not
such a type of Christ's Church, as Noah's Arc was, or else the Pope is no Pilot
of it.

4 Do we speak this as men? does not the Scripture say the same? do we
make these collections as sectaries, or has not S. Peter made them unto our
hands? For, speaking of the Arc, wherein few, that is, eight souls were saved
by water; he says, The like figure whereunto, even baptism, does also now
save us, (not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a
good conscience toward God) by the resurrection of Jesus Christ. 1 Pet. 3.
cap. verse 20, 21. His meaning is, that as Noah's Arc was the type of that
Church extra quam nulla salus, intra quam salus certissima, out of which there
is no salvation, in which salvation abounds: so the waters by which the Arc
was consecrated or hallowed to be the receptacle of safety to mankind, was a
type or figure of that sacred Lauer by which the Church is consecrated or
hallowed to be as the womb or breast of salvation to the faithful. Baptism
it self answers in proportion to the door or window of Noah's Arc. But of
what baptism was the water, by which such as entered into the Arc were saved,
a type? A type of external Baptism? No, external Baptism, and the waters of
Noah, were types of the same rank, both were types or shadows of that
internal Baptism, which is wrought by the Holy Ghost, by which we are
incorporated into the body of Christ, and become more undoubtedly safe from the
everlasting fire, then such as entered into Noah's Arc, were from the deluge of
water.

5 The Apostles argument, Heb. 9. holds as truly of Christ's Church, as of his
Sacrifice. If the Arc which Noah built, did save all such from the deluge, as
entered into it; how much more shall that holy and Catholic Church, which
Christ has built, and sanctified by his most precious blood, give life
eternal to all such as in this world become liue-members of it? Such members
they are made, not by external Baptism, or by becoming members of the
visible Church, but by internal grace or sanctification. But never did the Jew
dote half so much on external circumcision and legal sacrifices, or the
Aaronicall Priesthood, as the modern Romanist does on the Sacraments of the
Gospel, and on his imaginary Priesthood after the order of Melchisedeck, or
other like notes or sensible cognizances of the visible Church. Now it were
more then wonder, if the excess of this his blind zeal unto these externals,
did not draw him to much greater, more direct diametrall opposition unto
Christ, unto an higher pitch of inueterate malice against the members of his
Holy Catholic Church, or Kingdom spiritual, then the high Priest or Elders
exercised against his person, whilst he was present in the flesh. Thus much
for this time of the allegory or argument of proportion drawn from Noah's Arc.

As for the general Maxim, extra Ecclesiam non est salus, [There is no
salvation out of the Church,] although it be absolutely and punctually true,
Cap. 13
only of that one, Holy, Catholic Church, which was exactly typified by Noah's
Arc; yet the same Maxim is literally applyable unto, and in certain cases,
undoubtedly true of some visible Church or other. All true visible Churches
have some right or interest in it.

CHAP. XIII. How far, and in what cases, that Maxim used by the Fathers,
Extra Ecclesiam non est salus, Out of the Church, there is no salvation, is
true of the visible Church, or Churches visible.
1 THe persons that are extra Ecclesiam, are of two sorts. First, such as never
were members of any visible Church, as all Infidels, modern Jews, and
Mahumetans, etc. Secondly, such as have been members of some visible Church,
but have been either cut off from it by Ecclesiastical censure, or have
separated themselves from the visible Church or Churches wherein they lived.

In respect of the first sort, that is, of all such as never were members of
any visible Church, the Maxim extra Ecclesiam non est salus, there is no
salvation out of the Church; is not universally true: yea, taken universally,
it is universally false in respect of time; that is, it could never be verified
of all and every one that was extra Ecclesiam visibilem, out of the visible
Church in any age.

There was a time, wherein Gods visible Church was confined to one people or
nation, to the offspring of Abraham. Now it were an heresy to say, that no
sons of men, besides the sons of Abraham, or such as did associate
themselves unto the visible Church then resident only in Abraham's family, were
saved: during the time of the Law, or before the Law was given, righteous Job
was no son of Jacob, yet the son of God. And it were uncharitableness,
though no heresy to say, that Iethro, Rechah, or Ionadab, were all sons of
perdition, or were sons (as our Savior said of the Jews) of their father
the Devil; because they were not the sons of Abraham, or had not the visible
Church of Israel for their mother.

In respect of this present time, to say, We know no means, by which any
Inhabitant of China, or of Terra incognita can be saved, is a great deal more
safe, then to think God has no means unknown unto us, by which he may and
does save some, even in those countries wherein there is no visible Church or
Christian Congregation; or whose Inhabitants have no commerce with any
Christians. We see by experience, that God teaches such as are borne deaf
and dumb, many things by the eye or other external suggestion, which such as
have the use and benefit of ears and tongue, could not learn either by sight
or other external sense. Now albeit the Apostles rule, faith comes by
bearing, be most undoubtedly true; and true likewise, that without faith, it is
impossible to please God: yet were it an hard censure, hence to conclude, that
none such as are born deaf and dumb can be saved. The Apostles saying then,
that faith comes by hearing, must be limited by its proper subject; that is,
men to whom God has given the gift of hearing. So must the Maxim now in
question, extra Ecclesiam non est salus, out of the Church there is no
salvation, be limited or restrained to its proper subject. Howbeit, the exact
limitation of it might best be made or taken by such as have occasion to
dispute with the Jews or Heathens. It is only or especially true, in respect
of such Jews, Turks, or heathens, and their several progenies, as have
commerce with Christians. The former Maxim, with reference to such men, is
universally true; if we take the visible Church universally or indefinitely,
unless such men associate themselves to some visible Church or other, they
cannot be saved. And in some cases it may be undoubtedly true, in respect of
some particular visible Church; but so, true only, ex accidenti, or hypothesi,
by accident or upon supposition. As if a Jew or Mahumetan by profession and
birth, should live in this kingdom, having no possible means of associating
himself to any other congregation of Christians, than such as conform
themselves to the doctrine and discipline of the Church of England: it were
both safe and orthodoxe to lay the former Law or Gospel as hard unto him, as
the Papists do unto us; to tell him in plain and peremptory terms, that
there were no means for him to escape the horrors of hell, and miseries of the
world to come; unless he would become a member of Christ's Church, planted
here amongst us. Or in case he and other more, such as he is, were to leave us,
and to reside in some other State or Kingdom; we were bound in conscience to
apply the like medicine unto him or them, and to tell them, there were no hope
for them to escape the wrath of God, but by becoming the sons of God: no
hope to become the sons of God, but by becoming the children of some visible
Church endued with power and authority to baptize them into Christ's death, and
resurrection. Of heathens then or infidels, or of whosoever not as yet
professing Christianity, yet having commerce with Christians, and living
within the call of the visible Church, that of Cyprian is universally true; He
that has not the Church for his Mother, cannot have God for his Father. Albeit
by the Church in this saying, we mean a visible Church.

2 Of such as have been actual members of some visible Church, but have
either separated themselves from it, or have been cast out of it by
Ecclesiastike censure or coactiue power: neither of the former Maxims, [ extra
Ecclesiam non est salus: Et qui non habet Ecclesiam Matrem, non habet Deum
Patrem,] out of the Church there is no salvation: And he that has not the
Church for his Mother, has not God for his Father;] is universally true, if we
speak of the Church visible, whether particular, indefinite, or universal.
Both must be limited by the reasons or occasions, which did move the parties to
forsake the Church wherein they were baptized, or by the causes for which they
were excluded, or cast out of it. It is here supposed, that if the causes, why
they are excluded from one visible Church, be just and good, and the exclusion
it self legal and formal; the parties thus justly excluded from one, cannot
lawfully be admitted into another visible Church.

3 Swarez in his treatise (to my remembrance) de causa formali, and in that
question, An dentur plures formae in vno composito, whether there be more
forms than one in one body, mentions a Synod, which anathematizeth all such as
dogmatically do hold, tres animas in vno viuente, three souls in one living
body. And had the spiritual sword been put into Lactantius his hands, it is
very likely, he would have put all such Philosophers, Geographers, or
Astronomers, as had held the Antipodes, to have sought out a visible Church in
that region. At the least, if his arm had been so long, as the Jesuits make
the Popes, he would have cut them off from all Communion with any visible
Church or congregation of Christians, within the Hemisphere wherein he lived.
And no question, but every visible Church has such power and authority, that
it may (so it will tyrannically abuse the power, which God has given it) cut
off every inferior member de facto. But being cut off, though from the
universal Church visible, upon no greater occasions or iuster causes, then
these late mentioned; they do not thereby cease to be members of the Church,
which is to us invisible; that is, of the Church which is Holy, and Catholic
(...), no, not to be visible members of the Holy, Catholic Church taken in a
secondary sense, that is, of the Catholic Church which is visible to us. Of
which, and of the ground of this distinction between an actual member of the
present visible Church, and a visible member of the Holy, Catholic Church, we
shall speak hereafter.

But to hold, tres animas in vno viuente, three souls in one living body, is
not so great an error in Divinity, or so meritorious of excommunication; as
either to affirm, that there be two persons, or to deny, that there be two
natures in our Savior Christ. He that should dogmatically hold the affirmative
or negative specified, deserves to be utterly cut off from every visible
Church. And one and the same stroke of the spiritual sword which cuts him off
from being a member of the visible Church, does incontinently cut him off from
being a member of the Holy, Catholic Church in what sense soever taken: or to
speak more properly, he does deprive himself ipso facto, of all communion
with Christ, or his body the Church, by denying the unity of his person, or by
confounding his natures. And having thus apparently excommunicated himself
from that holy Church, which is only known unto God, to us invisible: the
visible Church stands bound in duty of conscience, and allegiance to Christ,
to deprive him of all communion with her or any member of hers, either in the
hearing of the word of Christ, or in the administration of the Sacraments:
bound she is, to withdraw from him all benefits or comfort of Christ's death and
passion, which are committed to her dispensation, until he repent and be
reconciled again unto Christ.

4 From this truth, some excellent writers against the usurped power of the
Romish Church in the use or exercise of Peter's keys; some I say, as well before
Luthers time as since, have gathered this general doctrine; That the visible
Church has only power to declare, who are separated or excommunicated ipso
facto from the holy Catholic Church; she has no power so to separate or
excommunicate any excommunicatione majori, by the greater excommunication,
unless they have first excommunicated themselves, or voided their hopes or
interests in the holy Catholic Church, by heretical positions, or opinions,
or by lewd and scandalous misdemeanors.

Of this opinion was that famous Weselius, which was entitled lux mundi before
Luther arose, or the light of the Gospel which we now enjoy, did break forth.
But though the doctrine be true, yet he and such as follow him* extend the
truth of it a little too far, and beyond its proper subject. There is a mean
between this opinion, and the contrary extreme of the Romanist, which cannot
be found out, without some division of such errors, or other causes, as either
justly deserve, or at least may be pretended to deserve excommunication, or
utter separation from the visible Church.

Some errors in Divinity as we say, are heresies ex specie; of so deadly a
nature, that they induce a separation from the Holy, Catholic Faith, even in
their very first degree. Of this rank are all such errors in Religion, as are
directly opposite or contrary to those fundamental points, whose positive
belief is necessary to salvation; which he that believes not, is infidelis
secundum infidelitatem purae negationis, that is, such an Infidel as they are,
which cannot say the Lords Prayer, the Creed, or ten Commandments by heart, or
know not the general conte^ts of them: and which peremptorily to deny, or
contradict, does argue infidelitatem prauae dispositionis, an infidelity of
contradiction. We say in Logic, Every contrariety if it be direct and full,
does necessarily include a contradiction, as he that says nix est alba, Snow
is white; does as fully contradict him that says, nix est nigra, Snow is
black, as he that should say, nix non est nigra, Snow is not black. For
album esse, to be white, is somewhat more then non esse nigrum, not to be
black. The rule is applyable in Divinity, and of good use in this present
argument. If not to believe there is one God, if not to believe that this one
God is the Author of goodness, and the rewarder of such as seek him, be
infidelitas purae negationis, a privative infidelity, and argue an absolute
privation of life spiritual: then to believe there be more Gods then one, or
that God is not the Author of goodness, but it is all one whether we serve him
or serve him not; is an error ex specie, in its kind heretical and deadly. If
it be infidelitas purae negationis, an infidelity privative, not to believe
the incarnation of Christ (as certainly it is; for all such as do not believe
it, are Infidells:) then to be but positiuely persuaded, that Christ is not
truly man, is an error ex specie, heretical, a deadly heresy, infidelitas
prauae dispositionis, an infidelity of co^tradiction or contrariety. Again, if
not to believe, the Son of God is truly God, or if not to believe, that this
true Son of God was incarnate for us, necessarily argue a privation of life
spiritual, and be, (as we say) infidelitas purae negationis, a privative
infidelity, then if any man which acknowledges Christ, be of opinion, that he
is not as truly God as he is man, this man by entertaining such an opinion,
does undoubtedly separate and disunite himself from the holy bond of Catholic
faith, and by consequence stands excommunicated ipso facto, from the Holy,
Catholic Church, and deprived of the communion of Saints; whether the visible
Church does her duty or no, in depriving him of all communion with her self,
or with her members: yea, though the Pastors or Governors of the visible Church
could by bribery, or other sinister respects be mis-swayed, if not to abett or
maintain him in it, yet to use conniuence toward him.

Now of all such errors as are ex specie heretical, and necessarily induce a
separation or disunion from the holy, Catholic Faith or Church; the former
assertion of Weselius is true, to wit, That the visible Church does not by her
authority cut them off from being members of the holy, catholic Church, but
only declare them to be no members of that Church. And of all persons
excommunicated by the visible Church, or that separate themselves from the
visible Church for fear of being censured upon these causes or occasions; the
former Maxims are universally true. There is no hope of salvation for them
until they return again into the bosom of the visible Church by unfeigned
sorrow, and by true submission and repentance. Yet suppose they never return
again to the visible Church; they are not therefore deprived of salvation
because they are extra Ecclesiam visibilem, out of the visible Church; but
because they were cast or went out of it, upon such causes or occasions, as did
first make them to be extra Ecclesiam sanctam and catholicam, out of the Holy,
and Catholic Church. Or, in case by repentance they return again into the
visible Church, whence they were cast out, and obtain salvation: yet are they
not therefore saved, because they are in the visible Church, save only as it
is the mean, or an instrument of reuniting them unto the Holy, Catholic
Church, or of ingraffing them into Christ.

Other opinions or errors in religion there be, that be ex specie very
dangerous, yet not deadly, unless they be in a high degree; or perhaps in the
highest degree not deadly in themselves, unless they be mingled with some
spice of some other pertinacie or disobedient humor, more then arises merely
from the strength or habit of the error, or from the nature of the object,
about which the error is. To be persuaded that the blessed Virgin did not
continue so pure a virgin (all her life time) after our Saviors birth, as she
was before, is certainly an error ex specie, very dangerous; yet nothing so
deadly as the error of Eutyches, which held that our Savior Christ did not,
after his resurrection and glorification, continue as truly man, as he was
before.

So long as a man holds errors of this second rank only to himself, being
not sufficiently enlightened by the messengers of truth, to discern their
danger, nor admonished by pastoral authority to abandon them: as it cannot be
denied that he is soule-sicke; so it is not safe to affirm that he is sick
of them unto death, no not after the second or third monition, unless his
monitions be seasoned or tempered with a large measure of fatherly and loving
instructions, grounded upon perspicuitie of truth. Frequent contempt or neglect
of such admonitions, though it be in matters not altogether deadly, may induce
a separation from the holy, Catholic faith, unto which nothing is more
opposite then disobedience in cases wherein obedience by the Law of God is due.

5 Every one that is not rooted in faith, and not truly ingraffed in Christ,
although for speculatiue opinions, he be an Orthodoxe, yet is he in respect of
salvation but as an Embryon, or as the seed or homogeneall Element, from which
vegetables or living bodies spring. Now among such seeds or modells of
vegetables or sensitive bodies, as are not yet organized, or being organized,
are not truly informed, or quickened; some may be so inwardly or deeply
tainted, that no benignity of native soil, no comfort of Sun, no refreshing
of wholesome winds, or dew of Heaven, can quicken or give them specificall
perfection: Other seeds there are of the same kind, which though tainted, yet
they are not so deeply tainted, but that they might be organized or quickened
by such comforts or cherishments, as could not revive the former: albeit, even
the latter also are certain shortly to perish, if they be transplanted from a
good soil to a bad, or be exposed to noisome winds or other uncomfortable
occurrences or contagious adherents. Now every error (as was intimated before)
in matters of Religion, is a tainting, or an infection or sickness of the
soul, and of errors some are so deadly, that neither the bosom of the Church,
nor all the benefits of Christ's death committed to her custodies, (though
imparted in as ample manner, as she can distribute,) can revive or quicken the
parties tainted with them. Other errors again there be not so dangerous in
their kind, or not so full grown, but that the parties tainted with them, may
retain or recover life; so they may continue in the visible Church, and enjoy
the communion of Saints, and participate with them in the word of life, in
devout prayers, and in the ordinary use of Sacraments. Howbeit, even these
errors also become deadly, if the parties in whom they settle, be with Hagar
and Ismael cast out of Abraham's family into the wilderness, or be constrained
to dwell in Mesech, or to have their habitation amongst the Tents of Kedar.

Now in respect of such as are cast out of the visible Church, because they
will not abandon or cast out such naughty, though not deadly opinions, out of
their souls; the former rule of Weselius concerning excommunication fails, if
it be extended as far as some have done it. For some have taught or by their
speeches given others just occasion to conceive their meaning to be, That the
visible Church has only a declaratiue sentence in all excommunications:
whereas this rule is to be restrained unto excommunications only of the former
rank, that is, such as are directed against manifest heresies, ex specie
heretical and deadly. To kill a man already dead in heresy, the Church
cannot, but only declare him to be dead. The visible Church notwithstanding
has power simply and absolutely to excommunicate some of her members, albeit
it does not fully appear unto her, whether the opinions wherewith their souls
are tainted, do either necessarily induce or argue a schism or separation
from the holy Catholic faith. Yea though this point be doubtful, or though it
be more probable, that the opinions as held by them, do not induce a
separation from the holy Catholic Church or Faith: yet may the visible Church
use her authority of binding them, before they have bound themselves, and
deprive them of all communion with the sound and orthodoxe members of the
Church; lest happily they might by their vicinitie infect others. It would
argue more folly then pity, or at least more pity then discretion or
wholesome discipline, if the Church should be indulgent to such as are over
indulgent to their naughty opinions or lewd affections; especially if they hurt
others either by misperswasion, or ill example.

6 Now of all and every party that is cast out of the Church upon these
occasions, the former Maxim, extra Ecclesiam non est salus, out of the Church
is no salvation, is most true. The most wholesome and most effectual medicine
that can be applied unto souls sick of this sickness, is to be instant in
denouncing unto them, that albeit they be not as yet spiritually dead, yet
there is small hope of life, unless they seek readmission with sighs and
tears into the bosom of the visible Church. And though it be true, that such
as do not in time seek their readmission by repentance, do therefore
perish, because rhey are separated from the visible Church; yet do they not
perish, quatenus separantur a visibili Ecclesia, sed quatenus separantur ab
Ecclesia sancta Catholica, that is, their separation from the visible Church,
is a praeuiall disposition to the spiritual death, or such a cause of it, as
the Pilots absence is to the passengers, whose company he has for their
misdemeanors abandoned: yet does not their spiritual death properly consist
in this separation, nor immediately and instantly result from it, but it
consists in, or immediately results from their separation from the Holy
Catholic Faith and Church: unto both which the visible Church wherein they
lived, so they had still remained in the bosom of it, might have united or
wedded their souls, or yet may reunite them, so they will with submissiue or
hearty repentance return unto it.

CHAP. XIV. Cap. 14
Declaring by one special instance, the particular manner and opportunities,
by which the Church visible or representative, did first incroach upon the
royal Attributes of the holy, Catholic and Apostolic Church. For what causes
Christians may separate themselves, or suffer themselves to be separated from
any visible Church, whereof they were sometimes members.
1 FRom this distinction of errors in Religion, which either deserve, or may
be pretended to deserve the sentence of excommunication, we may discover the
manner how the great monster with seven heads and ten horns, the grand
mystery of iniquity, was brought forth out of the womb of the visible, and
as the Romanists call it, the Catholic Church.

The manner was thus: seeing the ancient and orthodoxe Fathers had in the name
and power of the holy, Catholic, and Apostolic Church (as they were in duty
bound) excommunicated the Encratists, Eutychians, Arians, Nestorians, etc.
which had manifestly excommunicated or divorced themselves from the holy
Catholic Faith by adherence to their wicked opinions; the Successors of these
holy Bishops in place of authority, but not in holiness and understanding in
matters spiritual, took upon them to pronounce the like censure upon every
opinion which they disliked, and expected the whole visible Church should hold
the persons of men whom they excommunicated, though (God wot) upon most dislike
occasions, in as great execration, as those whom the ancient Fathers
excommunicated.

2 A notable instance to justify this assertion, we have in the seventh Synod
or second Nicene Council. The point in debate was, whether such Prelates and
other Ministers as had favored the Eiconaclastae, and withstood the
worshipping of Images, were to be received again into the Church, and to be
restored to their dignity, upon their submission. The books being produced,
by which it did appear that Athanasius, Cyrill, and other ancient Pillars of
the orthodoxall Church, had received notorious heretics into their favor and
communion again; a Bishop of the Province of Sicilia learnedly puts in this
exception or caveat.

Qui hactenus lecti beatorum patrum Canones, de Nouatianis, Encratistis, et
Arianis dati sunt: huius autem haeresis magistros quo loco habebimus?
The Canons of the blessed Fathers which hitherto have been produced, were
enacted against the Nouatians, the Encratists and Arians: But as for the
Masters of this present heresy, in what rank shall we place them?

Upon which a Deacon of the same Church and Province, propounds this question:

Minor^^^st quae nunc nouata est haeresis, an mayor illis qua hactenus fuere?
Tharasius sanctissimus Patriarchas dixit; Malum perpetuo idem est et aequale.
Whether is this new sprung heresy greater or less then those heresies which
have been before it.

To all which, the great Herod of Constantinople, Tharasius, being reconciled
quoad haec to the Roman Pilate, Pope Adrian, makes this learned answer; Evil
is always the same, always equal. This is true says Epiphanius venerabilis
Diaconus sanctissima ^atanes Ec^lesiae, et Vicarius beatissimi Thoma
Archiepiscopi Sardinia, inquit; Maxim autem in rebus Ecclesiasticis, in quarum
decretis cum paruis tum magnis errare idem est, si quidem in vtriusque lex
diuina vio^atur.
Epiphanius, (the venerable Deacon of the most holy Church of Catanes, Vicar or
Deputy for the most blessed Thomas, Archbishop of Sardinia:) but especially
true in causes ecclesiastical or matters concerning the Church, from whose
decrees to swerve in matters great or small, is all one, seeing the divine Law
is violated in both cases. And after him, one John a venerable Monk,
(Vicegerent for the oriental thrones) as if his part had been to act the
Parasite in the Comedy, and to turn magnas into ingentes, gave this verdict:
Ioannes venerabilis Monachus locum tenens thronorumorientalium dixit: Haeresis
ista omnibus haeresibus ^eior est, malorum omnium pessima vtpote quae
Oeconomiam seruatoris nostri subuertat. Synod. 7. Act. 1.
This heresy is worse then all other heresies, and of all evils the very
worst, etc. But was this great Patriarch Tharasius, so stoically senseless, as
not to be offended with this illiterate rough-shod Ass, that thus would claw
him like a Spannell? For if this heresy were worse then all other heresies, or
the worst of evils: the most excellently illiterate Patriarch, and the
venerable Deacon, were grossly ouerseene in their sentence, That all errors or
heresies in matters ecclesiastike, were equal. Or will any Christian be so
senselesly partial, as to think that this illiterate factious Council, could
be Prophets or Doctors infallible in their conclusions, when they bewray
themselves to be gross heretics, or more then heathenish Stoics in the
premises, that Malum semper est idem and aequale, that evil is always the
same, always equal. Thus by the self same stroke of Authority, by which this
Council did de facto thrust all other out of the visible Church, that would
not worship Images, they have declared themselves to be excommunicated de iure,
from the holy Catholic Church.

3 In this assertion, the ancient Fathers unanimously accord, that defection or
swaruing from the Catholic Faith, does exclude men from the Catholic Church,
and by consequence from salvation, but about the extent or precise limits of
holy Catholic faith, or about the exact list of Articles to be believed, their
concord is not so general. What particular opinions did induce or argue a
defection from Catholic faith, or divorce from the Catholic Church, was never
consented upon by the ancient Fathers, nor could their joint authority in this
case be so great, as in the former. The latter ages of such, as in respect of
us are ancient, are in this point various and superstitious. But of the use and
effects or just causes of excommunication, we shall have occasion to speak more
particularly hereafter. The rules most pertine^t to our present business, and
which serve as an entry to the main controversy betwixt us and the Romanists,
are two.

4 The former immediately concerns Prelates or Church Governors. They are
always to remember, that this power is given them, not for destruction, or to
show their own greatness, but for the edification of others; and therefore
never to be used but upon special and weighty occasions. He that strikes
fiercely, with his spiritual sword, at feathers, does always either wound
himself, or wrest his arm: neither is it safe to measure the justice of
Prelates proceedings, by the event; or to collect, that God does approve their
sentence, because the party sentenced by them, may often come to a woeful or
fearful end. They may dye in their sins, and Gods justice may be manifest in
the manner of their death, and yet for all this their blood may be required at
their hands, which did thus rule them with a rod of iron, or feed them, as the
Apostle says, with the sword, when they should have nourished them with the
milk of the Gospel, or at least have used salutari seueritate, wholesome
severity toward them. The second caveat concerns private men; and it is,
that they be more unwilling to separate themselves from the visible Church,
then to be cut off from the commonwealth wherein they live. The occasions of
voluntary separation ought to be more weighty and heinous, in respect of the
parties from whom they voluntarily separate themselves; then are the causes of
excommunication, for which inferiors are violently, yet justly separated from
the Church by their Governors. Cato, as one says, could not have committed so
heinous a murder by killing another man, as by killing himself: for I think
it had scarce been possible for him to have killed any Roman that had less
deserved death than himself did: yet not in this respect only, but simply and
absolutely, it was a greater sin in him, and is more unlawful for any man to
kill himself, then to kill another. The rule is as true in this point of
spiritual murder; that is, of unlawful separation (active or passive) from
the visible Church. Though it be a grievous sin in Governors to deprive
their inferiors of all communion with the visible Church upon light and
unnecessary occasions; yet it is a greater sin in inferiors to deprive
themselves of the same communion upon the same or like occasions, especially if
they be not certain elsewhere to enjoy the like or equivalent communion
without disturbance. Such as intend a separation, must always respect, as well
terminum ad quem, as terminum a quo, whom they go to, as from whom they
depart. It is a motto better befitting Christians in violent persecutions, by
heathens, then in voluntary separation from Christian Churches: Quos fugiam
habeo, quo fugiam non habeo: I know from whom I fly, but whither to fly, I
know not. To forsake the Church wherein we have been baptized, for the foul
abuses that we know by experience to be committed in it; before we be
certain in what other Church we may be admitted, in which there is not in some
kind or other, the like or worse abuses, or more insufferable grieuances: were
as desperate a madness, as for a passenger to leap into the Sea, because he
knew the ship wherein he sailed, and the company with whom he must necessarily
converse, were deeply infected with a deadly pestilence. And thus to do, were
a desperate pranke, unless the party aduenturing, had very great skill in
swimming, and were withal within ken of some comfortable shore or harbor.

All this may seem to make for our Adversaries, or at least against our
forefathers, which were sometimes members of the visible Romish Church, but did
either voluntarily separate themselves from it, or suffer themselves to be
thrust out of it; when as they might have retained communion with it, so they
would have embraced their doctrine. Besides the danger of separation from it,
both they and we have felt the seuerest strokes of the spiritual sword of
excommunication, which the Governors of the Romish Church could reach us.

5 The branches of the maine controversy betwixt that Church and ours, are
two. The first, [whether the reasons which moved our forefathers to depart from
that Church, or not to embrace her doctrines, were just and necessary.]

The second, [Whether our forefathers, being howsoever separated from it, had
commission, full power and just authority from God to unite themselves into a
true visible Church; whether they did rightly pursue such warrant or commission
as they had, and whether they and we have been and are a true visible Church.]
The just and necessary reasons, for which men (whether few or many) may and
ought to separate themselves from any visible Church, are in general two. The
first, because they are urged or constrained to profess or believe some points
of doctrine, or to adventure upon some practices, which are contrary to the
rule of faith, or Law of God; and are either ex specie, or ex gradu and cumulo,
either for their specificall quality, or for their burden or number, so
heretical and deadly, that they necessarily induce a separation from the holy
and Catholic faith, without which the Church can neither be holy nor Catholic.

The second, in case they are utterly deprived of freedom of conscience in
professing what they inwardly believe, or be bereft of some other means
either altogether necessary or most expedient to salvation, both which may be
had in some other visible Church. In this later case, that rule of our Apostle
given unto servants, is true; Let every man abide in the same calling, Cap. 15
wherein he was called. Art thou called being a servant? Care not for it: but
if thou may be made free, use it rather. For he that is called in the Lord
being a servant, is the Lords freeman. Likewise also he that is called being
free, is Christ's servant. Ye are bought with a price, be not ye the servants
of men. 1 Cor. 7.20, 21, 22, 23. Although we were persuaded that we could
communicate with such a Church without evident danger of damnation: yet in as
much as we cannot so communicate with it, upon any better terms then legal
servants, or bondslaues do with their Masters; we are bound in conscience and
religious discretion, when lawful occasions and opportunities are offered, to
use our liberty, and to seek our freedom, rather then to live in bondage.

CHAP. XV. That our Forefathers separation from the Romish Church was most
lawful and just, both in respect of Prince and State, and in respect of every
private person which feared God, or sought to retain the holy, Catholic and
Apostolic Faith.
1 WHen we debate the lawfulness of our Forefathers separation from the Romish
Church; we mean the then Romish Church as visible.

Now unto the constitution of an entire and complete visible Church, there is
required, First, an unity of faith and doctrine: Secondly, an unity of
discipline or coactiue Laws, but especially an unity of subordination to one
independent Judicature.

Unity in points of faith and doctrine, is more essential to the Church as it
is holy and Catholic, that is, as it is Orthodoxall.

Unity of Laws or discipline, or of independent Judicature is more essential,
and more necessary to the Church, as visible. Hence as we said before, there
be as many distinct visible Churches, as there be independent Iudicatures, or
supreme Tribunalls Ecclesiasticke. Unto a Catholic Church or unto a Church
visibly Catholic, such as the Romanists believe their Church to be, both kinds
of unity are necessary.

Whether this unity of discipline, full power of Jurisdiction, or independent
Judicature, be seated in one person or more, that is, whether the form of
ecclesiastical government be Aristocraticall or Monarchical, is in our
Divinity all one. The unity or conformity may be as complete and perfect the
one way, as the other. But the Romanists, the English Priests, and Jesuits, do
not only hold this unity of independent Judicature to be necessary to the
constitution of the visible, Catholic Church; but that it must of necessity be
radically in one person, to wit, in the Pope, on whom as upon the head and
fountain, the unity of the Holy, Catholic visible Church, does depend: and
for this reason they put his Holiness in the definition of the Holy Catholic
Church, as you heard before out of Cardinal Bellarmine, and the Author of the
Antidote. So that the Popes supremacy has the same place in the whole visible
Church, as every summum genus in his proper predicament. As nothing can be
truly said to be in the predicament, unless it participate the nature or
definition of the summum genus: so none by this doctrine, can be a true member
of the holy Church, unless he be subordinate to the Pope: Or, as no man can
come to the Father, but by the Son; so none can come unto the son, but by
this Holy Father, the Pope. Every one must be visibly united unto him and to
his Laws, before he can be mystically or spiritually united unto Christ.

Howbeit by putting the Pope in the definition of the Holy, Catholic Church,
with intention thereby to exclude us from it, who deny his authority; they
entangle and fetter themselves in another point of great consequence betwixt us
and them: of which advantage we shall make some better use hereafter. The sum
of our present dispute is this.

As professing of unity with the Romish Church in all points of faith which
that Church teaches, does necessarily induce a disunion or separation from the
holy Catholic Faith and Church: so the acknowledgment of such subordination as
is required unto the head of it, in matters of discipline or jurisdiction,
induces flat rebellion or high treason, against all free States or Kingdoms
Christian.

2 The reasons which moved our forefathers to forsake the visible Romish
church, or to suffer themselves to be forsaken by it, and withhold us from
returning to i^, were and are in two respects most necessary and just. Just
they were, and are necessary; First on the behalf of every private man that
had or has a care of conscience and Religion. Secondly, on behalf of Prince
and State, in respect of Christian and religious policy. And first of the
reasons in behalf of King and State: Their positions which induce rebellion
against free States and Kingdoms, and which, were they jointly admitted, would
leave supereminent or royal Majesty only a naked title, without any realtie
of sovereignty or jurisdiction, are two.

First, That the spiritual power is above all secular or civil power. And
this assertion, were it rightly limited, is in it self orthodoxall. But the
more orthodoxall it is in it self, the more deadly it makes the second
position, unto which they seek to wed it.

The second position is, That this supreme and spiritual power is totally
seated in the Clergy, as in a body distinct from the body politic: Yea the
most of them hold the plenitude of this power, to be in the Pope, from whom
all spiritual power of jurisdiction is derived to the rest of the Clergy,
after the same manner, as jurisdiction in causes temporal is derived to
inferior Magistrates from the Monarch or supreme Majesty in every Kingdom.

The Regiment of the Church, as they say, is Regimen monarchicum, a visible
Monarchy, of which the Pope is the visible Monarch. As the spiritual power,
which the Church of Rome or Pope usurps is intensiuely most absolute and
independent: so is the object of it for extension most transcendent and
illimited. Pope Innocent the third by virtue of this supposed plenary power did
challenge to be supreme Judge in censuring or punishing mortal sins:
Intendimus decernere de peccato, cuius ad nos pertinet sine dubitatione
censura, and (or vt) nullus qui sit sanae mentis ignorant quin ad officium
nostrum spectet de quocunque peccato mortali corripere quemlibet Christianu^.
cap. nouit. de Iudicijs. We intend (faith he) to determine concerning Sin,
the censure whereof so unquestionably appertains to us, that no man well in
his wits can be ignorant, that it is a part of our power or office to chastise
or correct every Christian man for any mortal sin of what kind soever.

But if in this Cathedral constitution he did not err; the Christian world
might have as infallible a perpetual rule for guiding Millers hands and Tailors
sheeres, and for preventing or punishing all cozenage in Trades or Crafts, as
it has for ending controversies in matters of faith or divinity.

3 It is an idle and frivolous distinction which some Canonists have framed to
solue the truth of this Popes sentence. Aliud est de re, action aut contractu
iudicare, and aliud iudicare de peccato: It is one thing to determine of the
action or contract, another to determine or judge of the sin committed. For as
Father See this point excellently handled by father Paul, whose Apology for
the state of Venice, (as I now perceive) is translated into the English tongue.
Paul excellently observes, quod inseparabile est distinguunt: they put a
diversity without a difference. For if the pope may judge of every matter or
contract as it is a sin, I hope he would prohibit it, if it were a sin, and
compel men to observe his Edicts or prohibitions. And doing thus, what
remains to be done by any temporal power, whether supreme or subordinate,
but only to look on, or to be as Sheriffs to see his Decrees put in
execution, or to be his hangman or executioner. No Magistrate does punish but
upon supposall of some fault or sin committed. Lex non est just is posita,
says the Apostle, sed iniustis. The Law punitiue is not given against the
just, but against the unjust. And if the Pope might be supreme Judge of every
mortal sin, every malefactor might have the benefit of appeal unto him in
all matters criminal. He might punish Princes for making unjust Laws, or for
not executing such Laws, as they themselves have made or have found made unto
their hands by their Predecessors, or as he shall make or appoint them to make.

4 Again, all of them agree in this, that the Pope has a supreme independent
power to make coactiue Ecclesiasticke Laws for the welfare of the Church; and
in as much as all temporal power is subordinate to the power spiritual, which,
as his subjects say, is originally and plenarie in himself; he may by virtue
of this supreme spiritual power, disanull all such Laws as any temporal
State or Kingdom shall make, if these to his Holiness unerring spirit, shall
seem contrary to the Laws of God, or to the Laws Ecclesiasticke, made by
himself, or by his predecessors. Now in case any Temporal Princes or States,
shall, after some monitions, refuse to repeal such Laws as they have enacted,
but he dislikes; they stand obnoxious ipso facto to the sentence of
excommunication.

The exercise of this terrible power has been within these 400. years,
frequent in many Kingdoms, and famous of late against the Venetians. That
ancient and renowned State for wisdom and gravity, and of all States
professing Romish faith, always most venerable for devotion, had made such a
Law, as the Law of Mortmaine here in England, for repressing the excess of
Leuies portion, which was become like a huge deformed wen in a fair and comely
body: and being admonished by the Pope to repeal this Law, and another edict
necessary for the preservation of peace; whereby the unruly Clergy within
their territories were subjected to the censure of the State; because the
Venetians would not obey his monitions, and betray their ancient liberties, the
Duke and Senate were excommunicated by his Holiness. I do not well remember,
whether that State had made a decree, that no provision should be carried out
of their territories to Ancona: but put the case, they had made such a Law, in
as much as Ancona is a City which belongs to Peter's patrimony, a segniorie or
Lordship of the Church of Rome, this Law must be controleable by the Pope,
because it is prejudicial to the Church. And the temporal Sovereignty of
Venice, must submit themselves unto the spiritual Jurisdiction of the Romish
Church, or feel the stroke of Peter's sword.

5 The like dreadful consequences, of these dangerous principles, about the
supremacy, or Jurisdiction spiritual, did cause diverse Kings of this land,
before Henry the eight, to separate themselves and their people from the
visible Romish Church in matters of Jurisdiction, though not of doctrine. For
an English man to have received any title of Jurisdiction from the Pope, or any
foreign Prelate subject unto him, was by the ancient Laws of this land, a
praemunire. I will only touch so much of the Romish Churches practice in this
State, See Sir Edward Cokes Reports in Lailors case.
as foreign Writers have taken notice of, which was enough to give our Kings
just occasion to make such Laws of praemunire, as the forecited Author
produces.

Pope Innocent the third (presuming upon his former rule, that it belonged unto
him, de quocunque peccato mortali corripere quemlibet christianum,) to censure
or punish every man, for any mortal sin;) charged John, King of England, and
the French King, to keep the Churches peace, under pain of his curse. And in
the process, excommunicates the French King, for taking arms against King
John. After, the same Innocent the third, (upon what displeasure I know not)
excommunicates King John, arms the French King with the spiritual sword, to
make war, authorizing King John's own natural subjects to rebel against
him; until the poor King was brought so low, that he was content to become
the Popes Farmer of his own Kingdom: but being once admitted his Tenant, and
become Farmer to the Church of Rome, his privilege was greater, and his person
more sacred, than it had been by being Gods Vicegerent. For the Council of
Lateran excommunicated all such as did or should molest or vex him; so long as
he remained the Churches Rent-gatherer. This strange ods, has the holiness
of that Church, of other things, which by Gods Law were counted holy; that
whatsoever does but touch it, nay whatsoever has but vicinitie with it, and
relation or reference to it, straight way becomes Holy, and capable of
greater privileges, then Princes or the Lords anointed are.

6 From this superexcellent Holiness of their Church, they now pretend that
every Clergy or Church man is exempt from all Jurisdiction temporal; as if
their persons, on whom the Pope or his Bishops lay their holy hands, become
more holy and sacred, then royal power it self, which as the Apostle says,
is from God: so sacred and holy, that no temporal sword may touch them, lest
their calling should be polluted. Some professed reformers of their School
Divinity, since the light of the Gospel brake forth, have not been afraid or
ashamed to plead that this exemption of the Clergy from secular Jurisdiction,
is de iure diuino, by divine Law, and ratified by that Text, 2 Cor. 2. cap.
verse. 15
Spiritualis homo diiudicat omnia, ipse autem a nemine iudicatur, He that is
spiritual, judges all things, yet he himself is judged of no man. But were
the allegation true or pertinent, either there should be no spiritual men
besides the Pope, and so the subject of the proposition, should be homo
singularis, one man only; or, if there be more spiritual men, they should all
of them be Popes to judge all others, and be judged of none, no not of the
Pope of Rome himself, unless he be no body. For these are conuertible; Qui
omnes dicit, neminem excipit, Qui neminem dicit, omnes excipit. He that says
all, excepteth none; and he that says none, excepteth all.

But howeuer, if all Clergy men may by the Pope be exempted from all
Jurisdiction temporal, and he may make as many Clergy men as he list, or
list to be made by him, and make such Laws for them as it pleases him: who
sees not how easily he may bereave Princes of their natural subjects. The case
betwixt them is on the Popes side, like a game at draughts or Chests, wherein
the one party has gotten the start or advantage to make as many Kings as he
list, and the other having lost his opportunity of taking the like advantage,
must be sure to loose the game, if the play hold.

7 Again, seeing they make the Pope to be the supreme head in all causes
Ecclesiasticke or spiritual, and over all Ecclesiasticke persons: I see no
reason but that every Priest and Jesuit of the English, Scottish, and Irish
Nation, should be indicted for mocking his sacred Majesty, as often as they
instile him their Sovereign Lord. For every one that in good earnest calls the
King his Lord, is presumed to acknowledge himself to be the Kings Subject. Now
every Subject, is a Subject in respect of Jurisdiction. To be the Kings
Subject, and not to be subject to the Kings Jurisdiction, implies a
contradiction. So that in final conclusion, for English Priests to call the
King their Lord, and yet to profess and believe, that their persons belong not
properly to his Jurisdiction, but to the Popes; is all one, as if they should
say: Noah indeed was Iaphets Father, and Iaphet did well so to call him; but
Iaphet was not Noah's son, nor did he owe him any filial obedience: as
certainly he did not, if he had been exempted from Noah's paternall
Jurisdiction, after the same manner, as the Romish Priests are from
Jurisdiction temporal. But to submit the whole temporal power and laws made
by it, to the spiritual power, as it resideth in the Pope; is to make all
Princes and Monarchs more subject unto him, then inferior or secular
Magistrates are to them: not so much as mean Lords in fee, but mere Tenants
at will.

Yet is this subjection of all temporal power unto the Popes spiritual power,
not the opinion only of the Romish Clergy or flattering Canonists: even
their Ciuilians are infected with this heretical and traiterous doctrine.
Witness that otherwise learned and ingenuous Ciuilian, Balthazar Ayala,
sometimes chief Justice of the Spanish Army, under the Prince of Parma, Lib.
1. de iure et officijs belli, cap. 2. sect; 27.

8 If we put both these positions together, to wit, That the Pope has power
to exempt all Ecclesiasticke persons from Jurisdiction temporal, and to
subject all temporal laws to spiritual laws of his making; we may repeal
or antiquate an ancient and usual distinction of the sword spiritual and
temporal. For by these devices, they have put such a spiritual handle upon
the temporal sword, and given the Pope so fast hold of it, that if he and
Christian Kings should at any time fall at variance, his Holiness (so long as
this doctrine stands authentic) may be sure to have the drawing of it, and
poor Christian Princes, to whom the sword by right (more ancient then the
Popedom is) properly belongs, must be contend to defend themselves with the
scabbard.

For these and many like reasons, our forefathers departure from the visible
Romish Church, was most just and necessary on the behalf of Prince and State,
and in respect of lawful and Christian policy.

9 The reasons on the behalf of every private man, were in two respects,
again most necessary. First, because that Church did and does utterly deny,
even to her own children, the free use of means, either altogether necessary,
or most expedient to salvation. These she will not give unto her own children;
no, nor sell them at any lower rate, then the Devil sets upon his wares; that
is, they must fall down and worship her.

Secondly and principally, because the Church did and does rigidly and
peremptorily exact our belief and profession of many doctrinall points, and
upon such belief inioyne many practices; of both which some are ex specie, for
quality so heretical and diabolical; others ex gradu et cumulo, for degree
or multitude, so deadly, as they manifestly induce a separation from the Holy
Catholic Church, or nenessarily argue a contradiction to the Holy, Apostolic
and primitive faith. So that besides the excessive price which the Romish
Church sets upon her own childrens necessary food, they may not eat it after
they have bought it, unless it be mingled with deadly poison.

The doctrine of the Popes supremacy, of the Churches, or the Popes absolute
infallibility, in matters of faith and manners, is an error in it self, ex
specie, heretical and more deadly then heathenisme: and includes
infidelitatem prauae dispositionis, infidelity of contradiction, as malignant
as the infidelity of the Jews; and the consequent of it, is an entire
Apostasy from the Apostolic faith. This I have In the third book upon the
Creed, Section the last.
elsewhere endeavored to show at large; the sum of which work, shall by
Gods assistance, be recollected in this Treatise. I now meddle only with this
transcendent heresy, as it is diffused through other errors. The very
participation of it, is as the Pharisaic^ll leaven, by which all other
erroneous opinions or conjectures, which that Church has su^ked, either from
Heretics of old, or from some mistakings or misreadings of ancient Fathers,
are malignified and made much worse then they were in their first Authors. Our
first instance shall be in the manifold and daily transgressions of that rule
of faith, given by our Apostle, Romans 14. verse 5. into all which
transgressions, this doctrine does lead and draw them blindfold, as the
Philistines did Sampson, after they had put out his eyes. The Apostles rule is,
Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind. And this full persuasion or
assurance of faith, is, in the cases there mentioned necessary; because
whatsoever is not of faith, is sin, verse 23. This last Maxim is most
undoubtedly true, and the former precept most exactly to be observed, in such
cases, as the Apostle there speaks of: that is, where the positive practice
(unless our warrant be authentic in it self, and evident to us,) is very
dangerous or deadly; whereas on the contrary, the forbearance of such practice
is either safe, or not prejudicial to our souls, but to our bodies only, or
estate temporal. But in what cases does the authority of the Romish Church,
where it bears sway, draw men to transgress the former rules of faith or
conscience? In many.

10 To rob God of his honor, or do him prejudice in his glorious titles of
mercy, bounty, and the like, is unquestionably a grievous sin: and being
such, no doctrine or practice ought to be admitted or imposed upon us, which
with probability may induce or infer it; especially, if the end or benefit
for whose attainement the suspected doctrine or practice is imagined
behoofefull or useful, may as certainly be obtained by some other more safe
and no less effectual or convenient means. If from these grounds we should
enter friendly conference with an ingenuous Papist, and tell him, as the truth
is, that we Protestants do teach, That good works are most necessary to
salvation; and that the more such works we do, the greater certainly shall
be our reward, so we do them in sincerity, and acknowledgement of our
bounden duty toward God, humbly confessing our selves (after we have done
all, even our very best) to be unprofitable servants. It from these
allegations we shall thus infer, that glory, honor, immortality, and
eternal happiness in the life to come, being all that he seeks after by
well-doing; seeing we seek for the very self same things, by a safer and
less suspicious way, why should he not be content to abandon all conceit of
merit, and to renounce the term as an offensive and suspicious title, for a
poor suppliant to use before the Almighty Majesty of God. To this and like
Quaeries, all the answer you shall get, is this: and this you shall have from
the more judicious and ingenuous secular Papists; that for their own parts,
they could be well content to relinquish the opinion or term of Merit, so they
were left unto themselves; but they must use the one, and maintain the other
in obedience to the Church. So strong a hand has the Church his mother over
his faith and conscience, that he had rather adventure to stand upon real
terms of meum and tuum, or come to iuridicall contestation with God his
Creator and Redeemer, than disobey or dissent from her in the use of words, or
in matters of conceit or opinion only.

11 Again, no Christian denies that our Savior is able to hear our prayers at
all times and in all places; that he is more favorable and compassionate unto
us, then any Saint in Heaven or earth can be; that his Father always hears
him. It is likewise a fundamental article of our belief, that we ought at
all times to pray unto him, that he would pray unto his Father for us; that it
is our duty to offer up our prayers and the best sacrifice of our souls and
spirits in honor of his great and glorious name; that to come unto the Father
by his mediation, is to worship him in truth and spirit. All these positions
are ex fide and de fide, points of necessity to be believed. And if we were
always employed in some of these practices, happy were we, although we did
nothing else. No Saint, we may be sure, would be offended with us for praying
continually unto Christ, unto whom they contiuall pray or give thanks. But
whether in praying unto Saints as the Romanists do, we do not offend both
Christ and them, is not so clear and unquestionable.

12 To request the Saints deceased to pray for us without express warrant or
assurance that they can hear our prayers, is superstitious; to offer up our
prayers unto them by way of Honor or tribute, without assurance of faith, is
flat Idolatry. Yet admitting it were lawful not only to pray, but to offer
our prayers unto their Images; yet to fall down before them and worship them,
is certainly a practice so quite contrary to the rule of faith, and Gods holy
commandments, that he which fears God, (who has expressed himself in this
point above others to be a jealous God) would in ordinary discretion and
reason, before he durst adventure upon so dangerous a practice, demand as
express a dispensation or countermand to the former precept, as Abraham had to
assure him, he should not commit murder by sacrificing his only son.

Lastly, admitting the invocation of true and unquestionable Saints, (as for
example, the Apostles) and the adoration of their Images, to be no sacrilege or
wrong to God; yet to honor every one who^ the Pope shall canonize for a Saint,
with all the former points of honor, which they exhibit to S. Peter, S. Paul,
etc is a great wrong unto those glorious Saints, an heresy, or rather an
Idolatry ex specie deadly. And yet for aduenturing upon all these dangerous
practices, they have no other assurance of faith or warrant of scripture,
besides their unwarrantable and blind belief of the Chruch and Popes
infallibility. Nor can the ingenuous Papists give us any other answer to such
reasonable demands, as were now proposed in this point of Invocation of Saints,
or adoration of Images, then was given before, That He does all this in
obedience to his mother the Church.

I should proceed to the like faithless and desperate practices in the Mass,
for which they can have no true assurance or warrant from God or his Laws; but
only rely upon the supposed infallibility of this Church, which
notwithstanding may be manifestly convinced of gross and stupid heresy, in
the doctrine of ^ransubstantiation. But because the doctrine is ex specie
heretical, and the practice deadly, I shall reserve the refutation of both,
and the explication of the ancient and orthodoxall opinions concerning the
manner of Christ's presence in the Sacrament, or communication of his body and
blood, unto a peculiar Treatise.

13 Generally, the more dangerous or deadly any practice does seem to be,
whilst we compare it with the ordinary and common rule of man's actions; the
more evidently it ought to appear unto him that undertakes it, by what
special rule or warrant it is exempted from the common rule or general
prohibition of other facts and practices in nature and appearance like it. If a
Judge should charge the Sheriff or other inferior officer to see execution
done upon some malefactor; it were no wisdom for the inferior Officer to
adventure upon the Judges command, unless he knew that the Judge had special
commission and warrant from the King to sentence him to death, and that he had
legally so sentenced him. Yet would it be a point of ill manners and
indiscretion for an inferior Justice or officer, to require the like special
warrant or express rule of Law for whipping a vagrant person, or putting some
idle fellow in the stocks. The Judges word or command might in this case be a
suff^cient warrant, especially to one not skillful in the Laws, nor too
scrupulous in yielding obedience to such as are skillful in them. It is
nicitie, ill manners, and indiscretion to exact an express rule of scripture
or faith for standing at the Creed, for kneeling at the Lords board, for using
the Cap and Surplice. In these cases consent of the Church or tradition will
suffice; so there be not any express Law or commandment to the contrary. He
that exacts in these points as express rules of faith, or warrant of scripture
for his obedience to ecclesiastical authority, as he would, or as every man
ought to do for aduenturing upon worshipping of Images, invocation of Saints,
or the like; has made his brain or fancy the chief seat or mansion of his
Religion, which should be seated in the heart. To run thus far in seeming
opposition to the Romanist, is not truly to oppose him, but to meet with him in
the point of disobedience to Gods Laws. The one, by disobeying the Church in
these cases wherein it has authority to command obedience; disobeyes those
Laws or mandates of God, which give the Church authority to make Laws in
things indifferent, neither expressly forbidden nor commanded by the Law of God.
The other, by vowing absolute blind obedience to the Church, disobey Gods
particular and express Laws, even the most fundamental Laws of p^ety and
religion, the laws of nature and of Nations.

14 To kill a private man without warrant of authority, is a heinous and
fearful sin, but far more heinous to kill a Prince, or to raise tumults
in a State, or incense the multitude to take arms against their sovereign
Lord: yet upon these and worse practices will any well catechized Romanist
adventure, without any further warrant then the Churches command or
approbation, which he believes to be infallible. But that the Church has
absolute infallibility, and full power to command his conscience, or authorize
his action in these cases, what special warrant has he from God or his
Laws? Mat. 16.18.
The best they bring, is this; Tu es Petrus, and super hanc petra^ aedificabo
Ecclesiam meam, Thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my Church. But
does this place either prove Peter to be the Rock on which the church is
built, or the Popes to be Peter's perpetual successors in that confession, which
Peter then uttered, which was the rock indeed on which Christ's Church is
built, and which did make Peter to be such a rock or living stone as he was
in the house of God? I could be content to try this issue with any Jesuit,
whether he could, by better probability from this Text infer, that the Pope
is Peter's successor in the infallibility of holy doctrine; then I shall infer
from another Text following in the same Chapter, that the Pope is the first
borne of Satan, perpetually obnoxious to the check which our Savior gave unto
Peter: Get thee behind me Satan, thou art an offense unto me, for thou
sauourest not the things that be of God, but those that be of men. Matt.
16.23.

This was but a friendly check of Peter; but will prove the judicial censure
of the Pope and his Disciples, unless they recant this wicked doctrine. Our
Savior bestowed the name of (...) or Rock upon the son of Iona (as the
Jesuits will have it) in the former place, whilst he uttered that worthy
confession; Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God. By faithful
adherence to this confession he became a living stone, a part of the
foundation of Christ's Church, the first in order of twelve. But nominis omen
habuit, he did best brook this name after our Saviors resurrection. A little
after the uttering of the former confession, when out of his kind nature (as
we would term it) but certainly our of a carnal imagination (as the Spirit
would censure it,) he sought to dissuade his master from suffering death, and
so to hinder him from dissoluing the works of Satan, and overthrowing his
Kingdom, our Savior calls him Satan, as if he had said, Peter, thou
counsellest me to that very thing, whereunto Satan himself, so I would give
him audience, would persuade me with more Rhetoric then thou have. What if I
should say, That all the Popes are Peter's successors, and that so much may be
proved out of this 16 chapter of S. Matthew, will it therefore follow that none
of them are Antichrists or Sons of Satan? No, distingue tempora, and
concordabunt scripturae, distinction of times, is the reconciliation of
scriptures. The first and ancient Popes were Peter's successors in the former
confession, all or most of them living stones in the house of God. The later
Popes are Peter's successors in counselling Christ's Church to undertake those
practices in Christ's name, whereunto the Devil does always counsel men by
internal suggestions of the flesh. Peter's temporary infirmity, is become their
hereditary heresy. Certainly their succession in Peter's chair does no more
argue the^ to be his successors in the stability of faith; than succession in
Moses chair proves the Scribes and Pharisees to have been Moses true
Disciples, or the^ the Jews lineall descent from Abraham, proves then to be
Abraham's children. The Analogy of faith will warrant this doctrine for
conclusion: That these later Popes and their followers are of their father the
Devil: for they go about to murder Kings and Princes, which take upon them
to defend the truth. This did not Peter, this would not any Bishop of Rome have
done within five hundred years after Christ.

SECT. 3. Cap. 16
That the present visible Church of England retains the Holy, Catholic Faith,
which the Romish Church has defiled; and by defiling it, has lost that true
union with the primitive and Apostolic Church, which the visible Church
retains.
CHAP. XVI. That our Church was in the Romish Church before Luthers time, and
yet in it, neither as a visible Church altogether distinct from it, nor as any
native member of it.
1 IT is in the first place objected, that we had no Church at all before
Luthers time.

Secondly, that neither Luther, nor Christian Princes which embraced his
doctrine, had any authority to erect or found a new Church.

If we say, as we must say and believe, that we had a true Church before Luther
of a Monk became a Reformer, it will be demanded where our Church was, and of
what persons it did consist.

To the former part of this importunate demand, [ Where was your Church before
Luthers time?] the Reverend and learned Doctor Field pithily answers: Our
Church was in the same place then, wherein now it is. His explication will
justify his meaning against all gainesayers. Howbeit, I must frame my answer
according to my former principles, and fit it to some captious questions or
objections made by some of our Adversaries since this Worthy died.

2 If our Church before Luthers time were in the same place wherein now it is;
it will further be demanded, Whether it were a Church distinct from the then
Romish Church, or a member of it.

That we had a visible Church before Luthers time in this Kingdom, altogether
distinct from the Romish visible Church planted in this Kingdom before Luther
was borne, or so distinct as respublica Venetorum is a Regno Gallia, as the
State of Venice is from the kingdom of France, seems very improbable to the
Romanists, and somewhat hard for us to prove; unless we will derive our
pedigree from the Albigenses, the Picardi, or the poor men of Lions: which to
do I know not how safe it is, or how well pleasing it would be to the present
visible English Church, unless we had better records of their tenets, then I
have seen, or then the visible Romish Church, that de facto condemns them for
heretics, was willing to propagate to posterity. On the other side; if our
Church before Luthers time, was a member of the then Romish Church, we shall
be further questioned, what authority our King and State had, either to
dismember their Church, or to make a new entire distinct Church of an old
dismembered part of their Church. In these and like objections, they always
suppose two things as unquestionable, which we utterly deny.

The first, that the whole multitude of Christians throughout these Western
parts, as England, France, Germany, Italy, and Spain, etc. excepting such as
were by their Church disclaymed for heretics or schismatikes, were all members
of the then visible Romish Church: and that there was such an union betwixt all
and every one of this multitude, as suffices to make all indiuiduals within
these States or Kingdoms, true members of one visible, or of the then visible
Romish Church.

The second, They suppose that our union with some present visible Church, is a
native degree or part of our union with the Holy, Catholic Church: or that our
union with some present visible Church, is necessary or essential, not
accidental to our being, or not being members of the Holy, Catholic Church.

For our more orderly and safe proceeding, we are in the first place to shake,
and hereafter (by Gods help) to raze these two rotten foundations, whereon all
their arguments, either for annoying ours, or for supporting their Church, are
grounded.

3 Our first Counterfort shall be this. All the particular Congregations
recounted by reformed Writers, which before Luthers time, had either separated
themselves from the visible Romish Church of their times, or had been
disclaimed by it for schismatiques or heretics, being sequestered from this
dispute: our Church might be, and was in the visible Romish Church (as
Bellarmine and other professed sons of that Church define it,) and yet be in
it, neither so as to make one entire visible Church, distinct from it, nor as
any integrall part, or natural member of it.

If we take all, which the Romish Church does challenge for her sons before
Luthers time; there was in that multitude rather a Church truly visible, than
one true visible Church, if we measure the truth of the visible Church
according to our former principles, and as we ought to measure it, by the
conformity which it has with the one, truly holy and Apostolic Church. Our
meaning is, the whole multitude of Christians in these Western parts before
Luthers time, (all those being excluded, which the Romish Church representative
did condemn for heretics or schismatiques) had no such unity, as truly
answers to the unity of a body natural, but an unity only answerable to the
unity of an heap or congest of Heterogeneals. Some had the number only, others
the very character of the Beast.

The heap or congest which we suppose as an Emblem of the visible Romish
Church (taking that Church in that amplitude which they challenge, before
Luther by Gods appointment, attempted reformation) shall be an heap or congest,
of several metals, al or most part vnpurified. In this one heap or congest, a
great part of heterogeneals, though not all, shall be supposed to have had the
union of continuation or concretion: that is, some pieces of vnpurified gold,
by the negligence or unskillfulness of the artificer, were made up or suffered to
make up themselves, in some clod or cake, with an huge quantity of copper,
lead, brass, iron, or other baser metals, all vnpurified from their dross,
the other part of the same heap or congest consisting of several or lesser
pieces of richer metal, all homogeneall in themselves, though many vnpurified,
and wanting the union of contiguitie or concretion.

4 The parts of a good Mineralist or Refiner in this case, were first to
dissolve the cake or clod, and to sever the richer metal from the baser.
Secondly, to purify homogeneals, so severed, from their own dross. Thirdly,
to make them up so severed or purified, into plate, wedges, or Bullion; or to
put some other accidental or artificial form upon them. All this being done,
we cannot say, there was a true generation of any new body or substance, or
that the Refiner did make gold where there was none before, (as some Alchymists
profess, that they can turn iron or other metals specifically distinct, into
gold) here was only a refining of metal praeexistent, and an addition only of
an accidental form.

To parallel the Refiners work, by the reformation wrought by Luther, and the
Christian Princes, that harkened to him: First, it cannot be denied, but that
the visible Romish Church, or if you will the faction of the Romish Court, did
bear a great sway throughout most Realms in Christendom, before Luthers
time. Besides the Body of the Clergy, or Church representative, many
Potentates, some through ignorance, others for hope of gain or advantage
against their adversaries, did adhere unto it. This faction or combination,
does in proportion answer to the clod or concrescence of Heterogeneals in the
emblematicall congest before mentioned. For, there was no true union betwixt
them in matters of faith. On the other side again, it cannot be denied, but
that many in every Kingdom before Luther, did utterly detest the tyranny of
the Court of Rome: many as well of their Clergy, as of their Layetie, did in
heart and affection wish a reformation as well of the Ecclesiastical
Government, as of the doctrine professed and practiced in their Church. The
States, Princes, or private men thus affected, answer in proportion to the
several pieces of homogeneall and richer metal in the former heap or
congest. All that Luther, all that the Christian Princes which followed him,
did intend or undertake, was; first, to dissolve the clod, or break the
faction of the Romish Church or Court, spread through their Kingdoms:
Secondly, to refine and purify themselves and their adherents from the dross
and soil which they had taken by their adherence unto, or vicinitie with the
Romish Church: Lastly, to unite themselves thus refined and purified in matters
of faith and doctrine, into a new form of government Ecclesiastike,
independent on the tribunal or Court of Rome.

5 So then it is false, which our Adversaries object, that Luther did take upon
him to make a new Church. For this supposes a plantation of new faith or
doctrine never planted before, in which the life and soul of the true Church
consists. Whereas they say we had no Church before his time, it is true only,
secundum quid. Their meaning can be no other, but this, We had no visible
Church altogether severed and distinct from theirs: and this again is true,
only in respect of those times, wherein the Kings of England, or Emperors of
Germany, did submit themselves and their Subjects unto the Jurisdiction of the
Court of Rome. Albeit this submission, (being wrought for the most part through
violence or deuillish policy) does not argue our fore-Elders to have been
parts or members of the Church of Rome, from which they were severed in heart
and affection, and severed in form of government, de iure, though not de
facto. In the times of diverse Kings, the Church of England was severed de iure,
et de facto, from the visible Romish Church. So likewise were diverse Churches
in Germany. But for Chronology or matter of history, I must refer them to
another place. The question is much what the same, as if they should ask us,
Where was King Henry the seuenths Kingdom, where were his Subjects, where was
your Commonweal; whilst Richard the third did call Parliaments, and sway the
Scepter of this Kingdom? The Kingdom of Henry the seventh, and of his
Successors, or the English Commonweal, was in the same place then, as now it
is. The deposition of the Tyrant, the dissolution of the tyranny, and the
reducing of English Subjects to their true allegiance, did work no essential
alteration in the Commonweal or Kingdom, but only a reformation of the
government and reducement of it to the fundamental laws of this Land. No more
did the reiection of the Romish Churches usurped authority in matters
spiritual, induce any substantial alteration in the English Church, but a
reformation or reduction of it unto the fundamental constitutions of the
Primitive Church. But to return to our former illustration: This argument, You
had no visible Church before Luthers time, ergo, you had no true Church, is no
better than this; There was no Plate or Bullion in the forementioned heap or
congest before the Refiner did his part; ergo, there was no true gold or
silver. For as every part of gold, is gold, and every part of silver is silver,
but every part of a wedge or plate, is not a wedge or plate: so every member of
the true Church of God, is himself a true Church and Temple of God: yet is not
every part or member of the true visible or Catholic Church, a true visible or
Catholic Church. Or, as 8. or 10. pieces of gold, into which an Angel may be
broken, though they remain for weight, for value, and for substance the same
they were; yet can they not be said to be the same Angel, because they want the
unity of that artificial form, into which they were made: so likewise, although
there were ten thousand in this Kingdom before Luthers time, all true members
of Gods Holy and Catholic Church; yet could they not be properly said, one
visible Church, so long as they wanted that unity of discipline or independent
government, which we have, for the most part, since inioyed.

6 Now as any kind of metal made up into a wedge or other artificial form,
is less subject to putrefaction, soil, or canker, then it was whilst it lay
scattered in several fragments or pieces: so the union of Christian Professors
into one visible Church, is a good means for preserving every particular
member, specially nouices in faith, from such errors, heresies, or other
temptations, as if they had been left alone or scattered, would endanger their
faith. And yet again, as the perfection or purity of gold above other metals,
is best proved, in that it does not so easily take soil or rust, though it lie
scattered in little pieces amongst other baser metals, or other bodies apt to
taint or putrify: so the true members of Christ's Church or Body, are best
discerned, best approved by living upright in points of faith, in the midst of
a perverse or crooked generation, or by continuing undefiled in the bosom of a
polluted visible Church; out of which they may not, they cannot, at their
pleasure depart, but are to exspect the call or summons of Gods special
providence.

7 So then whether we had for these six hundred years a visible Church,
distinct from the visible Romish Church or no, is not pertinent to the maine
point in question; for they fasly assume, we justly deny, that men are saved
by being actual or professed members of the visible Church, or that our union
with the present visible Church is a native degree or part of our union with
the Holy, Catholic Church, whereof Noah's Arc was the type. We say, the former
union is available to the latter, only ex accidente; in as much as the
present visible Church does by doctrine and discipline, draw us to a
conformity, in points of faith and other means necessary unto salvation, with
the ancient Catholic and Primitive Church. This did not the visible Romish
Church, for diverse hundred years before Luthers time: but on the contrary, she
did discompose or misfashion them from all true conformity with the ancient
Catholic Church. Howbeit, even in the midnight of superstition and palpable
darkness, which had ouerspread the visible Romish Church, there were within
it, though not of it, many visible members of the Holy, Catholic Church: men
by so much more true and lively members of the Holy Catholic Church or Body of
Christ, by how much they were less true and actual members of the visible
Romish Church; that is, by how much their adherence unto the Romish Church
representative, or to the authority of the Court of Rome, was less firm or
none: as in a general plague, when every city and town throughout the whole
Kingdom, is infected; they are most safe which have solitary dwellings in the
country, and have least commerce with port towns or markets. Such adherence to
the visible or representative Church of Rome, as the Jesuits and others now
challenge, does (as we have often said) induce a separation from the Holy,
Catholic Church, and is more deadly to the soul, then to be bedfellow to one
sick of the pestilence, is to the body.

CHAP. XVII. Cap. 17
That men may be visible members of the holy Catholic and Apostolic Church,
and yet no actual members of any present visible Church.
1 THe two principal points, whereon we pitch, may be comprised in these two
propositions: the first, A man may be a true liue-member of the holy Catholic
Church, albeit he has no union or commerce with any member of the Churches
visible. And this proposition is clear from that point formerly discussed, how
far it was true of the visible Church, extra ecclesiam non est salus, Out of
the Church there is no salvation.

The second, A man may be a true and visible member of the Holy, Catholic
Church, and yet be no actual member of any visible Church. The truth of this
later proposition, may be proved by many instances of most ages, since the
Church (whether under the Law or Gospel) became visible. For this present it
shall suffice to explicate the meaning of it according to my former promise,
and to confirm the truth of it so explicated by one or two pregnant instances.
Albeit most of the terms in this proposition or distinction contained, have
been explicated before in two inquiries; the one, what was required to the
constitution of the Holy Catholic Church. The other, what was required to the
constitution of a visible Church. To what was then said, I will add only thus
much: That the Church may be termed Catholic, either in the prime sense (or
as we then said (...),) or in a secondary analogicall sense.

The Catholic Church in the prime sense consists only of such men, as are
actual and indissoluble members of Christ's mystical body, or of such as have
the Catholic Faith, not only sown in their brains or understanding, but
thoroughly rooted in their hearts.

In a secondary Analogicall sense; Every present visible Church, which holds
the Holy, Catholic faith, without which no man can be saved, pure (and
undefiled with the traditions or inventions of men;) may be termed an Holy,
Catholic Church. When we say, a man may be a visible member of the holy
Catholic Church, and yet no actual member of any present visible Church, we
take the catholic Church in the later or secondary sense, that is, for a
Church wherein no point of faith or doctrine is maintained or allowed, which is
not consonant and homogeneall to the Catholic and primitive faith delivered by
Christ and his Apostles. Who are indissoluble members of Christ's body, is
only visible or known to him: Many thousands are and have been true members of
it, which are and have been altogether invisible to us. But who they be, which
profess the unity of that faith, which the Apostles taught, and without which
no man can be saved, is visible and known to all such as either hear them
profess it viua voce, or can read and understand their profession of it given
in writing.

2 The truth of the second proposition may easily be manifested hence, in as
much as the union between the members of any Church as visible, consists in
the unity of discipline or jurisdiction, or of laws judicial or ceremonial;
whereas the union of the Church as holy and Catholic, formally consists in the
unity of faith or doctrine, or of Laws and Mysteries internally spiritual
and moral. It is clear, that the former union may be dissolved without the
dissolution of the latter, as the latter likewise in some cases may be
dissolved without dissolution of the former. As for example, a man may be cut
off by excommunication or exile from all commerce with the present visible
Church, wherein he was bred and borne; and yet not thereby cut off from the
Holy, Catholic, orthodoxall Church. Again, a man by heresy or impious
opinions, (whether voluntarily and secretly embraced by him, or thrust upon him
by the visible Church which has authority of Jurisdiction over him) may
separate himself from the Holy, Catholic Church; and yet still remain an
actual member, a dear son of the visible Church, in whose bosom he is
willing to live.

Every visible Church whose Laws are ratified by Sovereign Authority, and
whose Governors are armed with power coactiue, may cut off any particular
member; besides the head, from which all power coactiue is derived. Suppose one
or two, or more be actually cut off by excommunication, exile, or the like
censure, not only from public communion in the Church, but from all civil
commerce with his neighbors: yet if I know, that he was so cut off either
upon misinformation, or mistake of his Judges, as if he had held some grievous
heresies, which as appears to me he did not; or that the Church Governors
out of ignorance, spleen, or faction, or other sinister respects, which I may
not in particular examine, did condemn these opinions held by him for
heretical or schismatic, which are in themselves, and to my knowledge,
orthodoxall and truly Catholic: he is to me and to others which know his
meaning, a visible member of the Holy, Catholic Church, though no more a
member of the visible Church wherein he did, and we yet remain. And albeit I
have no power to rescind the visible Churches decree, or authoritatiuely to
pronounce him a Catholic, whom they, to whom the cognizance of such causes
belongs, have condemned for an heretic; and albeit, I may not admit him to
public prayers, or to communion at the Sacraments, as being interdicted by
authority: yet I may and ought still to retain that communion with him which
in this Creed we believe to be betwixt all true members of Christ's body, or
professors of the Holy, Catholic faith, that is, the Communion of Saints: such
a Communion as is betwixt the members of the Church triumphant, and the living
members of Christ's body militant; or rather such as is between the orthodoxall
professors of the English, or other reformed Churches. I am bound to pray for
him, and he for me, that we may continue steadfast in the faith which we have
received from the Holy, Catholic Church of former times, from which the
Governors of the present visible Church, have swearued in this particular. Of
this case thus propounded in Thesi, Athanasius his case was the Hypothesis. The
then Church representative or visible (...), had condemned him in one or two
general Counsels for an heretic, and being so condemned he was utterly
excluded, and perpetually cut off from all communion in things sacred, with the
visible Church or its members, so long as he maintained that doctrine which it
condemned. Which doctrine it is certain, he neither did nor would recant,
whatsoever the then visible Church did or might determine to the contrary.

3 If either the name Catholic, or the thing signified by it, be to be valued
for the time present, by the multitude of suffragants, or number of suffrages
given ex cathedra; Athanasius and his followers were no more Catholics, then
Wickliffe, and Hus with their followers in their times, were; For one Bishop
that did maintain or favor Athanasius doctrine, there were more then forty
did oppugn it. And yet he boldly pronounces that the faith professed by him,
was the only true, Catholic faith, without which no man could be saved, which
whosoever did not keep holy and undefiled, was to perish everlastingly.
Suppose not ten in all the Christian world besides, had resolutely embraced the
same faith which Athanasius did so much magnify: or suppose all (were they
more or few) which did embrace or profess it, had been with him condemned for
heretics, and utterly cut off from all communion with the visible Church, all
either banished into several Hands, or shut up into several prisons: all this
notwithstanding, they had still remained the only true visible members of the
Holy, catholic Church, which these times afforded. And for this reason were
they to be accounted the only true visible members of the Holy, Catholic
Church, because they only were contented, rather to be cut off from the
present visible church, then to communicate with it in such doctrines or
opinions, as either contradict or defile the chatholike primitive faith.

4 That which some Romanists in this point reply, to wit, that Julius then
Bishop of Rome, did not consent to Athanasius his condemnation, but entertained
him in his exile; may for ought I know, or at this present have to say against
it, be as true in part, as it is impertinent. Sure I am, that the Bishop of
Rome did not so resolutely and manfully oppose the Arian faction, or the then
erring visible Church, as Athanasius did. That confession of the catholic
faith, which the Church of Rome her self retains in her Lyturgy, as a
Trophie of the victory, which the catholic faith in the issue obtained over
the potent Arian heresy, was neither conceived, published, nor commended to
the Christian world, by the Bishop of Rome, but by the exiled Athanasius. This
worthy Bishop saw almost all the Prelates in the world besides, for the
present, to be set against him. How these, or their successors, or such as
lived after him, would be affected, he knew not; in respect of the truth of his
doctrine, he cared not, as being confident, that his doctrine was truly
catholic and authenticke, without the ratification or proposal of the then
Bishop of Rome or his successors, or of any visible church succeeding: he knew
Christ's Apostles and their immediate successors had embraced it. For such as
lived with him, or were to come after him, at their perils be it, if they
embrace it not. Though not ten of that age, or any age after him, were to be
saved; yet of these few, not one, as he protests, could otherwise be saved,
then by believing, as he did, and as former Saints of God had done.

If the then Bishop of Rome, did receive Athanasius in the name of an Orthodox
or Catholic, and bid God speed unto his labors; all that can hence be
inferred, is this, That Athanasius was to the Bishop of Rome a visible member
of the holy, catholic Church, and the Bishop of Rome a visible member of the
same church to Athanasius. But neither of them, not both of them, the then
visible church, nor any members of it.

As many as after this time became true members of the holy, catholic Church,
became not such by holding union with the then visible Church, but by adherence
to that catholic faith, which Athanasius and other visible members of the
holy, catholic Church then taught. The holy catholic militant Church, has
continued one and the same since its Foundation, not by continuation of one and
the same visible Church, but by continuation of one and the same catholic and
Apostolic faith throughout al ages, which faith has been sometimes maintained
but often oppugned by churches visible or represe^tatiue.

5 It is one thing to say, the Holy, catholic Church has been in all ages
visible, another thing to say, the visible Church has been in all ages
catholic: We may and ought to grant; that in every age since the Apostles
time, there have been many not only true but visible members of the one,
holy, catholic Church, that is, such as were able out of Scriptures to make
demonstration unto the observant; that their doctrine was orthodoxall and
consonant to the orthodoxall faith and doctrine of the primitive Church,
howsoever contradicted and ecclipsed by the present visible churches wherein
they lived, till Luther and Christian Princes by Gods appointment united the
visible members of the Holy, catholic Church into visible Churches. A Hic tum
Epictetus Episcopus: no^ fidei (inquit) causa, Jmperator, hodie, neque
Iudiciorum Ecclesiasticorum, faciendoru^ studio adductus Liberius hunc
instituit sermonem, sed quo possit apud Senatores Romanos gloriari, se
rationibus Imperatorem superasse. Constan: Tanta^e orbis terrae pars, Liberi,
in ^e residet, vt tu solus homini impio subsidio venire and pacem orbis ac
mundi totius derimere audeas? Liberius. Esto quod ego solus sim: non tamen
propteria causa fidei fit inferior. Nam olim tres solum erant reperti, qui
Regis mandato resisterent Tunc Eusebius Eunuchus: Tu (inquit) Imperatorem sacis
alterum Nebuchodonosor? Liberius: Minime sane: sed non minus temere tu hominem
condemnas, de quo nullum factum sit indicium, quam ille olim. Tom. primo
Council: page 478.
pregnant instance of the former distinction we have gathered to our hands in
that famous Dialogue between Constantius the Emperor and Liberius then Bishop
of Rome. The Emperor having (as the Romanists since have done) mispictured the
regiment of Christ's body or Church, by the regiment of commonweals, wherein
Laws are made by the whole consent or by the consent of the greater part of
the body politic, presses Liberius with this argument. Does so great a part
of the world reside in thee Liberius, that thou alone dare undertake the
defense of this impious man (Athanasius) to the disturbance of the peace of the
Empire and of the world? Hereto Liberius answers. Be it so as you say, that I
alone defend Athanasius, yet the cause of faith shall hereby suffer no
detriment, for the times heretofore have been, wherein three only were found
that durst resist the Kings command. To this reply Eusebius the Eunuch
reioynes, Do you, Liberius make the Emperor another Nebucodonozer? I do not so,
but thou Eusebius deals no less unjustly than Nebucodonozer did, in thus
condemning a man who has not had a judicial trial.

6 So long as Liberius stood to this confession, he was a visible member of the
Catholic Church. But when he sought to purchase the Emperors savor by
subscription to Athanasius his condemnation, Liberius Romanus Pontifex,
Athanasio, Hilario et Hier: testantibus, per vim et minas sollicitatus, huic
primae fidei formulae subscripsit, Athanasium condemnauit, et cum Arianis
communicauit: idque per literas ad Valentem a liosue scriptas significans, ab
exilio liberari sedique suae restitui petijt. Itaque contra fidei confessionem
ac iustitiae legem peccans, adeoque turpissi mam sibi morum et vitae maculam
inurens, Arianorum communione pollutus, quanquam infidelis et haereticus non
esset, a communione Catholicorum, et sede Pontificia excidit. Binnius in notis
ad Sermiens Council habit. Anno 357. And again, Liberius Arianorum communione
pollutus, ab vnitate Ecclesiae Catholicae merito exciderit Ibid.
and communion with the Arians; although he might by this dealing, regaine his
former dignities, and become a principal member of the then visible Church;
yet did he thereby cease to be a visible member of the Holy, Catholic
Church. For albeit Bellarmine would in part excuse him, as if that which he
did, did not continere in se manifestum haeresin, contain any manifest
heresy: yet Baronius and others, and amongst the rest, Binnius confess, that
for yielding to the Emperor, the Catholics did eschew communion with him. Now
these Catholics that did eschew communion with Pope Liberius for communicating
with the Arian faction, were neither the Catholic Church, nor the visible
Church, but at the best, visible members of the Holy catholic Church. And the
Church as catholic, includes as well universality of succession and of time,
as extension of place, or multitude of persons professing the catholic faith.

After this defection of the Romish church in the Bishop Liberius, the whole
Roman Empire was ouerspread with Arianisme. If there were any visible Church
of note, which in those days remained catholic, it was in the East, without
the precinct of the Roman Empire, or in this our Island. The chief pillar or
ground of truth which the Roman Empire in those times had, was Gregory of
Nazianzene, as may appear out of that ancient Author that writes his life.
Though Constantinople had been held the chief watchtower of the oecumenicall
church visible: yet when Nazianzen was sent for thither to support the
catholic cause against the Arians; so much of the catholic church as was
extant in that great city, was contracted within the narrow walls of the
Exceptus autem a qui busdam, et generis, et pietatis cognatione cum eo
coniunctis, Ecclesiam offendit, quasi malu^ in mente, aut quasi signum in colle
vt Prophetae verbis vtar, hoc est, numero per exiguam atque obscuram (quod vide
licet pijs viris libertas omnis ab eo, qui imperium tenebat, erepta esset)
sacras etiam omnes domes spoliatas, ac servim occupatas vni sictae Anastatiae
templum orthodoxis patebat, forcasse etiam quia propter ambitus et
circumscriptionis angustiam, contemptui habebatur: quemadmodum norunt, qui
vetus hoc Templum perspexerunt. Vita Nazianzeni a Greg. praesbit. Conscripta.
Temple of Anastasia, for that church only was permitted them to meet in, (as
is thought) in contempt, that the littleness of it might vpbraid them with
their paucitie, it being a fit receptacle rather for a private conuenticle,
then for a just and lawful congregation. Nazianzen then was the Luther of
ancient times to reform the visible church, being ouerspred with Arianisme.
Luther was the Nazianzen of later times, to dispell the mists of Popery and
Romish Idolatry, by the light of the Gospel, and to reduce the visible church
unto conformity with the ancient church.

7 As many as in our Saviors time here on earth, at the instigation of the
high Priest, of the Scribes and Pharisees, (or of the then visible church
representative,) or otherwise out of their private choice, did persecute him
and his Apostles as deceivers or authors of new sects or heresies; did thereby
dissociate themselves from the ancient and Primitive Church of God established
in Iewrie, and yet remained true and obedient members of the then visible or
representative church. On the contrary, such as, before our Saviors death or
passion, did acknowledge him for their Messiah, although for so doing they were
excommunicated and cast out of their Synagogues, that is, utterly cut off from
being any longer members of the then visible church, did by this their known
sufferings or martyrdom, become illustrious and visible members of the true
Primitive and catholic Church, whereof Abraham, David, Samuel, with all the
rest of the holy Patriarchs and Prophets, were principal parts. The Jews had
agreed, (says S. John, chap. 9. verse 22.) that if any man did confess that
he was Christ, he should be put out of the Synagogue. For fear of this heavy
censure, the Parents of that blind man, which our Savior had restored to
sight, put off the Pharisees with this dilatorie answer; Ioh. 9.20.21.
We know that this is our Son, and that he was borne blind; but by what
means he now sees, we know not, or who has opened his eyes, we know not:
he is of age, ask him, he shall speak for himself: The Son being asked,
boldly replies, If this man were not of God, he could do nothing. And for this
answer, he is cast out of the Synagogue or visible church, and yet remains a
more conspicuous and visible member of that holy church which Moses had planted
in Israel, then his Parents were, which continued, as they had been, actual
or vnseparated members of the present Synagogue or visible church.

Cap. 18
CHAP. XVIII. In what sense it may be granted, that the visible Romish Church,
at the time of our forefathers separation from it, was a true Church, and yet
withal the Synagogue of Satan, the seat of Antichrist, and common sink of
heresies.
1 But here it will be demanded, whether these visible members of the holy,
catholic church, which were as living stones or fit materials for erecting
reformed visible churches, (as having not their consciences indelibly branded
with the character of the Beast) were, before Luther began his reformation,
(...), or no, that is, whether they were the immediate sons of God, begotten
only by his Spirit, without the ministry or travail of any visible church?
To affirm they were such sons of God, we may not: and if we say they were
the sons and daughters of God, and yet withal the sons and daughters of
the visible church, which was before Luthers time; that visible church (which
by our positions can be no other then the church of Rome,) was certainly a
true church, in that it brought forth sons and daughters unto God. All this
may be granted, that the Romish church before Luthers time, was, and at this
day is, a true church, quoad hoc; that it did and may bring forth sons and
daughters unto God, that is, there are these means of regeneration in it,
which are not in the Mahumetan or Jewish Synagogue. In opposition to both
which, it may be said a true church; though in respect of the Primitive
catholic church, or of reformed visible churches, it may truly be termed
the Synagogue of Satan, or seat of Antichrist, in many respects, as much
worse, as it is in some respects better, then the Jewish or Mahumetan
Synagogue. The Thesis was as discreetly proposed, as learnedly prosecuted by
Doctor Rainolds Romana Ecclesia nec est catholica Ecclesia, nec sanum membrum
Catholicae Ecclesiae; The Roman Church neither is the Catholic Church, nor any
sound member of the Catholic Church: In saying this, he did not deny it in
some respects to be a true Church; which is in express terms affirmed by
Iunius in his book entitled Liber singularis de Ecclesia; by Doctor Couell in
his Apology for Master Hooker, and by Master Forbes, upon the 14. of the
Revelation, whose testimony is so much the more to be esteemed, because he
expressly maintains the papacy or representative Romish church to be the
Kingdom of the great Antichrist. So that in the judgment of these three which
have handled this point very discreetly, as also in the judgment of learned
Doctor Rainolds; the visible church of Rome might fitly be compared unto a
Mother, which brings forth sound and healthy children, but when they come to
suck her milk, she infects them with such loathsome diseases, as accompany
lewd and naughty Strumpets: or if they chance to escape infection by the milk
which they suck from her in their infancy; yet when she comes to feed them
with stronger meats, if they be content to be fed by her, and seek not their
food from the ancient, Primitive, and catholic Church, like an abominable
nastie slut, she poisons all the food which is of her own dressing. Some
there may be in this Church, (or as yet under her government) which are more
cleanly Cooks, and do not so pollute the food of life, but that such as are
continually fed by them, as by ordinary Pastors, may escape the danger of
their mothers infection, and die members of the Holy catholic Church, though
not actually separated from the present visible Romish church, nor externally
united to any visible reformed Church.

2 All this I take to be a true branch of the forecited Authors meaning: but in
what sense the visible Church of Rome before Luthers time, might be said, a
true Church, and yet withal, the Synagogue of Satan: or in what manner their
Cardinals, Bishops, and Priests, may be said to exercise the ministry and
service of Christ, and yet they themselves be bondslaues of Satan, Priests of
Baal, and native members of Antichrist; may in my judgment, be most
punctually expressed by that excellent distinction of the civil Law, Aliud est
Magistratum esse, aliud est in Magistratu esse, It is one thing to be a true
Magistrate, another thing to be in the Magistracy, or to execute a
Magistrates office. From this distinction was gathered this general ruled
case, or sentence; That the Acts of him that was a false and unlawful
Magistrate, might be lawful and just.

This resolution or ruled case, did grow upon this occasion. One Vide Hottoman
illust. quast. quast. 17. An quae a falso Magistratu per Magistratus nomen
gesta sunt, raia esse debeant*
Barbarius was by a common error, chosen Praetor, and continued in the place,
whereof he was altogether incapable, as being a bondman. Some there were, which
did not only consent to remove him after the truth was known, as he was
indeed by law removed, because he was never lawful Praetor; but withal did
question, whether the Acts that he had done, whilst he unjustly usurped that
office, were of any validity, or rather void in Law. It was determined
according to the tenor of the former distinction, that though he was falsus
Praetor, a false Praetor; yet he was in verapraetura, in a true Praetorship;
and the Acts which he did, did receive their validity from the Praetorship,
not from the Praetor.

One part of the Praetors office was to set men free, which were bondslaues;
and in this respect it was requisite that none should be Praetor, but he which
was a Freeman, and that no bond-slaue, though chosen Praetor by a common
error, should ever prescribe by long continuance in the place, but was
instantly to be amoued, so soon as the truth was known and declared. So that
in respect of his person, or of right unto his place, that Maxim of Law was
still in force, Quod non valuit ab initio, non potest tempore valescere; that
which was of no value from its first beginning, cannot acquire any validity, by
continuance of time: yet in respect of the persons which were made free
Denisons by him, that other Maxim (much often times mistaken or misapplyed by
some modern Lawyers) was true; Communis error, facit ius, A common error,
makes a Law. In as much as he was chosen Praetor by a common and full consent
of lawful suffragants, though so chosen by a common error; yet the Acts done
by him, till the error was known and declared, were just and lawful: such as
had been set at liberty by him, were as true Freemen, as those that had been
set free by true and lawful Praetors. For their manumissions or
enfranchisements took validity not from the condition or person of the
Officer, but from the virtue of his office into which he was an intruder.

In like manner, though Richard the third were a Tyran, no true King; yet the
Laws made by him were true and good Laws, and the Earls or Barons created by
him, were true Earls, and true Barons: for though he were not legitimus Rex, a
lawful King, yet he was in legitimo regno constitutus, he did manage a lawful
Kingdom: Nor were they Traitors that did yield obedience to the Laws made by
him, or submit themselves unto the Magistrates of his appointment: save only in
cases, wherein the Laws made by him might prejudice the fundamental laws of
this Kingdom, or cut off the right of Succession to the Crown. But in case
the Magistrates, Earls, or Barons created by him, should have commanded their
inferiors to take Arms against the known and lawful heir to the Crown; to
have yielded obedience unto them in this case, had been treason: as Richard
himself during all the time of his Reign was no better then a Traitor.

3 Either from the Analogy of the former ruled case in matters civil, or from
the general or fundamental rule of equity, whereof that was a branch, did the
Church ordain, that Baptism administered by heretics should not be
reiterated. For though no heretic be a true member of the Church, and
therefore no true Priest; yet so long as he is in sacerdotio in the Priests
place, the acts of his ministry or Priesthood be good. Now though the Pope or
Bishop of Rome be more then an heretic, even the Antichrist or man of sin,
the supreme head though not of all Christ's enemies (for Jews and Turks are
such,) yet of all Rebels or usurpers of his throne on earth; 2 These. 24.
nevertheless seeing (as the Apostle says) He sits in the Temple of God, even
the acts of his ministration or Priesthood are good: nor are the Bishops
consecrated by him, so polluted by communion with him in their consecration,
but that their Episcopal Acts, as the ordination of Ministers, the
administration of Sacraments and the like, be lawful and good, so long as they
observe the form of ordination or administration of sacraments prescribed by
Christ and his Apostles. The word preached by them likewise, has the force and
efficacy of begetting faith in their Hearers hearts: and so long as they teach
nothing but what Christ has taught, the people or laity owe the like obedience
unto them, that the people of the Jews, in our Saviors time, owed to the
Scribes and Pharisees. For though perhaps they have in many points degenerated
much further from S. Peter's doctrine and manner of life, then the Scribes and
Pharisees had done from Moses; yet so long as they sit in Peter's or other
catholic Bishops chaires, that precept of our Savior, Mat. 23.3
[ Illos audite, hear ye them,] binds them as much as it did the Jews. How
far it bound the Jews, I leave it to the Expositors of the 23. of S. Matthew,
and amongst the rest to Maldonat.

4 It is certain, the people were not by virtue of this precept bound to do
all that their high Priest with his confederates would ex cathedra command them
to do, though intended by them, in ordine ad Deum and salutem Ecclesiae, with
reference to God, and to the welfare of his Church. For Caiaphas had delivered
this sentence ex cathedra, It is expedient for us that one man die for the
people, and that the whole nation perish not. John 11. ver. 49. And upon his
authority or warrant, they adventured to put the Lord of glory to death. Had
not this false Apostaticall Priest, been in vero sacerdotio, a chief officer
in the house of God; neither could so clear a truth as he uttered, have been
inuerted to such a pernicious end, as it was spoken by him, and apprehended by
others; nor could he have conceived or uttered so clear a truth of himself,
as S. John instructs us he did. This he spoke not of himself: but being high
Priest that same year, he prophesied that Jesus should die for the Nation. Ioh.
11.51. Other Acts of his priesthood took their validity from his office, not
from his person: this speculatiue truth took its poisonous operation from his
person, not from his office; although he could not have borne so bitter enmity
unto Christ, unless he had been in that office.

Now albeit we grant that Caiaphas did prophecy by virtue of his place or
Priestly office, yet no Romanists (as I hope) will deny, that Caiaphas in the
preposterous application of his prophetical sentence, might well brook the
name of Antichrist; at the least that he was a type or shadow of the
Antichrist to come; who was to sit as Caiaphas did in the Temple of God, or if
so they will have it, in S. Peter's chair, that he may wrest divine truths
authoritatiuely to as wicked ends, as Caiaphas did.

5 But may it not hence be inferred, that as the Sanedrin was the only
visible Church, which God had here on earth; so the Romish Church from which
Luther did separate himself, was the only true visible Church of Christ, at
the time of his separation? This may be granted de facto, but not de iure. For
there was an express Law of God, that there should be no more visible
Churches, then one, before our Saviors death and resurrection; after which
there were to be as many visible Churches de iure, as there were several
independent Soueraignties. I have heard indeed of some French Catholics (as
they would be accounted) which use this as an argument, whether intended by
them, ad homines, to delude the obiecter only, or ad rem, to the matter it
self, I know not: But this argument they use, to prove that their Church (as
opposed to Reformed Churches) is the true Church, because the Pope is
Antichrist, and Antichrist (as the Apostle teaches) is to sit in the Temple of
God, and the Temple of God, no question, is the true Church; whence seeing he
sits in their Church, they infer that theirs is the true Church, not ours.
But as in most other arguments concerning the Church, so in this they cozen
themselves with the fallacy, a dicto secundum quid, ad dictum simpliciter.
First both letter of Scripture and analogy of faith, do teach, that
Antichrist is to sit as Caiaphas did, in a true Church, yea to be a chief
Officer of some Church: otherwise he could not be a principal Rebel or
notorious Traitor against Christ. But in that he was to be such a rebel and
such a Traitor, it is not conceiuable, that the Church which wholly submits
herself to him, as to her head, should be the true Church, much less the
only Church of Christ. The former argument will hold thus far, The Pope is
Antichrist; ergo, the Church of Rome is a true Church secundum quid, that is in
opposition to the Synagogue of Jews, of Turks, or other professed Infidels:
But if we speak absolutely, or compare it with Churches truly Christian, it is
no true Church of Christ, but the Synagogue of Satan. Or, as he said of his
sordid Hosts entertainment, that there was so much fire, as a man could not
have truly said in strict propriety of logic phrase, there was no fire; that
is, there was so much, as if he had been bound by covenant of Lease, never to
have suffered the fire to go out, he might have saved his lease from
forfeiture: and yet there was no fire but a mocke-fire to the entertaining of a
stranger; so much, as was a greater eyesore to him that had sought comfort or
refreshing from it, then if there had been none at all. In like manner there is
so much of the true Church in the present Romish visible Church, as a man
cannot say, it is no Church at all; so much true doctrine in it, as suffices
to support the title of Antichrist, and to make it the very seat of all
abominations or impieties more then natural. For as the mingling of the
Traditions of men with Moses doctrine, did make the leven of Pharisees to be so
malignant and distasteful to God and all good men; so is it the mixture or
making up of the doctrine of Christ and of Devils, in one and the same
Liturgy, which makes Antichristianisme in grain. And as In the third book upon
the Creed, Sect. 3. and 4 in diverse Chapters.
elsewhere is observed, the Idolatry of the Romish Church, is so much worse then
the Idolatry of the Heathens, by how much that Churches general belief of one
God, of the glorious Trinity, and of the redemption of mankind, is better then
the Heathens belief or knowledge of the same points.

6 But when it is said that Antichrist is to sit in the Temple of God, it is
not meant only that he should sit in the present visible Church, but that he
should be an usurper of that chair which sometimes had been the seat of Gods
Saints, and be an intruder into that Church, which had been Holy and
Catholic before his intrusion, and which still retains the roots and stemmes
of Catholic faith, into which it shall be his and his followers continual
care, to ingraffe the doctrine of Devils, and to exercise their spiritual
whoredoms in the Oratories of God.

Cap. 19
CHAP. XIX. Whether our Forefathers in separating themselves or suffering
themselves to be separated from the Romish Church, did any otherwise then Gods
Prophets or our Saviors Disciples, had their case and opportunity been the
same, would have done.
1 But here again, the Author of the Antidote, or the blind Guide of faith,
will object, That neither the Prophets of old, nor our Saviors Disciples
before his death, did separate themselves from the present visible Church. If
not to believe as the Church visible and representative for the time present
did; if not to communicate with her in matters of fact or practice, were to be
separated from the present visible Church (as this Authors words cap. 9. parag.
5. of this book, his words are set down.
elsewhere imply) the Prophets out of all question, did either separate
themselves, or suffer themselves to be separated from the visible Church
wherein they lived. Ezekiel and Daniel would never have consented to the
Priests and Rulers in their persecutions of Jeremy as a false Prophet or
Traitor. Our Saviors Disciples before his death stood excommunicated by the
visible Church of the Jews, they were as far from communicating with the
chief Priests and Elders in matters of faith and practice, as we are from
communicating with the Romish Church or members of the Trent Council. But if
this man's meaning be, that neither the Prophets, nor our Saviors Disciples
before his death, did take upon them to erect a new visible Church altogether
distinct from the erring Synagogue, the objection is true, but no way
prejudicial to us. For they lived in that Church or common weal as our
forefathers before Luthers time, which feared God, did in the Romish Church, or
common weal which had not by public consent abandoned the Romish Religion;
that is, neither as absolute members of the Synagogue, nor yet a visible Church
distinct from it, but as visible members of that primitive Church from which
the Synagogue had degenerated.

As for the Prophets and other godly men which lived before our Saviors death,
they wanted rather power than willing minds to reform the corruptions of the
visible Church, in which they lived. And the true reason why that Church
continued so corrupt from Josias his death, until the destruction of the
Temple, and grew so wicked again in the age before our Saviors time; was,
because, during these times, there were either naughty Kings, or no Kings at
all in Israel. Had Iehosophat, Ezekiah, Josiah, or any like unto them of David's
line, been Kings of Judah in Herod's stead: there is no question, but they
would have brought the Scribes and Pharisees to better order, or have deposed
them; either have reduced the then visible Church to its primitive purity, or
have erected a new visible Church, according to the pattern prescribed by
Moses. That the Priests and Prophets did so ouerbeare the true Prophets of God,
Jeremiah, Ezekiel, etc. to the ruin of the City and Kingdom, was the fault of
Iehoiakim, and Zedekiah. As at this day again, it is the fault and folly of
Christian Kings, that the Church of Rome is not either reduced to better
conformity with the holy, Catholic and Apostolic Church, or else demolished
as the Jewish Synagogue was.

But what should move this man, I mean the Author of the blind Guide of Faith,
to make the former objection against us, I cannot conceive; unless it were to
give us and the Christian world to understand, That the visible Romish Church
his mother, could be very well content to continue, till Christ's second
coming, as erroneous and antichristian as the Jewish Synagogue was before his
first coming in the flesh; upon condition she may retain her wonted power and
authority to tyrannize over us and other Saints of God, as the visible Jewish
Church or Synagogue did oft-times over the true Prophets and Christ's disciples.

2 For conclusion of this point; In as much as Christian Princes and free
States did second Luther in his intended reformation of so much of the visible
Romish-Church, as was seated in their Soueraignties or Dominions; this warrants
our separation to have been just and lawful, and free from all suspicion of
rebellion or schism; whereunto the like attempts in Jury, though undertaken by
Gods Prophets, had been obnoxious, unless the Princes or chief Magistrates
had given them countenance and authority. Howbeit neither Prince nor people
jointly or severally, either now have, or at any time had power to make a new
church altogether distinct from the Catholic Church militant on earth, which
has been one by continuation of the same faith, since the Apostles time. But
in case any part of the Church militant or visible, be infected with heresy,
or ouerswaid by faction, to approve such impious and ungodly practices as are
incompatible with the Holy, Catholic faith, which has been professed in pure
and vncorrupt times: every free Prince or State, have in this case power and
authority sufficient, to dislinke themselves from the factious combination of
the visible Church or Churches seated in foreign States or Kingdoms, and to
unite themselves into renewed forms of visible Churches, distinct from others.
Yet thus to do, so they do no more, is not to make a new Church never heard
of before, but rather to recollect the scattered members of the Holy, Catholic
Church, in whom the life and substance of the true Church of God consists, and
to put a new accidental form upon them.

3 The case is altogether the same, as if an Army consisting of threescore
thousand English, French, and Italians, appointed by joint consent of these
Nations, to invade the Turk, should be misled by the Italian General, to
revenge his private quarrels upon the Christians. If the English, upon
discovery of their Generals treachery, should abandon him, and adioyne
themselves unto the Hungarians or other Christians oppressed by the Turk; they
could not justly be blamed, either for defection or revolt, or for leuying an
Army, or undertaking a war altogether new, without any warrant or
commission. Well might they presume their Prince would approve their
proceedings, specially if their service had success answerable to the godly
intentions of their first Commission.

4 As many of our forefathers as did submit themselves unto the Jurisdiction of
the church of Rome, and undertook such services as the Pope or Roman Prelacie
did appoint them unto; they did thus only upon presumption, that the Pope did
faithfully execute his Commission as the Apostles successor, or that he did
command in chief for Christ. But when the contrary was notoriously known unto
this people, that he did but counterfeit the visage of the Lamb, that he
might the more plausibly effect the designs of the Dragon: Our Prince and
people, in abandoning his yoke, and breaking off their confederacy with the
church of Rome, did well. And this being done, they remain the same church
they were for life and substance, but the same Church better purified and
purged from rebellious Antichristian humors, the same Church so much more
homogeneall to the ancient Primitive catholic Church, by how much they
remained the freer from servitude to Romish tyranny, whose usurped authority
over other Churches, is but Antichristianisme or Apostasy from Christ.

CHAP. XX. Cap. 20
Whether the name [Catholike] can in good earnest be pleaded or pretended for
an inseperable mark of the true visible Church.
1 But in all these Illustrations it will be excepted, that we take something
for granted, which the Romish Church will utterly disclaim. This for one, That
our forefathers at the time of their departure from the Romish Church, were
true Catholics, or, in the interim between the abandoning of the Prelacie of
Rome, and the establishing a Prelacie or form of Government of their own more
refined, were visible members of the holy, Catholic Church. For so destitute
is the Roman Church of all true and solid properties of the true Church of
God, that she is feign to plead the name and title of Catholic, to be her
proper note or Ensign, which no other Church may more presume to challenge,
then a Seruingman may presume to wear his Masters coat or cognizance, after
he be discharged of his service. In this waking dream, the Author of the
Guide of says, was brought to rave, as follows: Now I come (says he) to the
great Character of our glory, and renowned title of our profession, the name
[Catholike] a name famous in the Primitive Church, famous in the Apostles
days, and inserted by them among the Articles of our Creed: famous after in
all succeeding ages, and used commonly by the Fathers; not so much to make a
difference, (which some think) betwixt the Jewish Synagogue, and the Christian
Church, as to sever and distinguish the false named Christians themselves, from
the true and unfeigned believers. And, Reason teaches, and D. Whitaker often
confesses, the marks and properties of the Church, to be inseperable from the
Church, whose marks they are. Therefore that which once was, must still
continue a mark of the Church, because the true Church, although it admit some
accidental change, yet it is always in nature, unvariable; in essence,
unchangeable: so that the properties which flow from the essence thereof, as
the name [Catholike] does, can no more be altered, changed, or cease, then the
power of laughing, a property which proceeds from the nature of man, can
ever cease to appertain to man. c. 18. sect. 1. and 4. p. 155. and 138 Auditum
admissi risum teneatis amici?

2 If the power of laughing proceed from the nature of man, and the nature of
man consist in reason: it will be very hard for any man to refrain laughing,
that has but so much reason as to consider the vanity of this assertion, that
a name should be an inseperable property proceeding from the nature of any
realitie. God gave names to the first Man, and to the first Woman, and the
first man gave names befitting other creatures: but the names proceeded not
from the nature of the creatures named, but from the Imposers; otherwise their
names should have been the same in all nations and languages. And if the name
[Catholike] were an unchangeable mark or natural property of any real
Church, it should be of the Greek Church or nation, unto which the name or
title of Catholic is prime and natural. If the real property answering to
this name had belonged to the Romish Church, the holy Ghost would have expressed
it by a Roman name, and have called the Roman Church, the universal Church,
at least the Romanists should have called themselves universals, not
Catholics. But let us listen again unto this Rauer. We only enjoy the
lively badge, and are invested with the Liuerie of the true professors of
Christ. Neither can Mr. Abbot, or Mr. Whitaker dismantle us of that royalty,
by saying, Names may be falsely imposed to things, or unjustly usurped. For this
name is not imposed by man, nor usurped by abuse, but imparted by God, inspired
by the Holy Ghost, (as I have proved above) who cannot apparel us with any
feigned attire, nor can the Devil take from Gods people their cognizance, or
nobilitate his vassailes with the colors of Christ.

3 Was the name of Catholic more immediately inspired by the Holy Ghost, then
the name of Angels or Apostles was? or was this title more appropriated to the
Church, than the other two titles of Holy and Apostolic. Now S. Paul tells us,
[2 Cor. cap. 11. verse 14, 15.] that Satan himself is transformed into an
Angel of light, and it is no marvel if his Ministers transform themselves
into the Apostles of Christ. Is it then impossible for the ministers of Satan
to usurp the name of Christ's Apostles or Catholics, though both names were
imposed by God, and inspired by the Holy Ghost? Certainly seeing this
transformation is not in substance, but only in color or show, it must needs
include the color or usurpation of the name, whether of Apostles, or of
Catholics.

But he further adds, [ That no heretic could ever obtain to be called
Catholics by true Christians.] For this very reason, we Protestants of
reformed Churches, who are, if not the only true Christians on earth, yet the
truest Christians, and the most conspicuous members of the Holy, Catholic
Church, as militant here on earth, dare not vouchsafe to bestow the name of
Catholic upon any Papist, but with such an addition or item, as we give the
name of Angels to infernal fiends, which we term Satan's Angels, or collapsed
Angels. Now the same analogy which Gods Angels or a holy Angel has to
Satan's Angel, or to a collapsed Angel, a true and holy Catholic has to a
modern Roman Catholic. For by this term we mean such a one, as being a
servant of Satan, does seek to transform himself into a true and holy
Catholic. The point which this blinde-guide was to prove, was this, That no
heretics could usurp the name or title of Catholic. We say it is the
property of the modern Romish Church to counterfeit the fairest titles given
to the Church, by orthodoxall Antiquity, more plausibly then the ancient
hereti^es could. And by this property, we discern her to be that mother of
Harlots, which can imitate the Lambs voice, whilst she acts the Wolfes part.
He further objects, that the Jews and Mahumetans, when they hear a man named
a Catholic, thereby conceive some member of the present modern Roman Church,
not any of Luthers or Caluines followers. So we likewise, when we hear a
people brag and instile themselves a holy nation, we presently conceive the
parties that thus instile themselves, to be Jews. Yet do we not for all this,
believe that the Jewish Nation is the Holiest of Nations, or the only chosen
people of God now on earth. As for both Jews and Turks, it is likely they
could be well content to suffer the Romanist to enjoy the name Catholic, as a
pre-eminence above Christians. For, they might well hope to prove their own
Religion to be better then the best professed amongst Christians, if once it
were granted that the Roman Catholic Religion, is the best. But to give the
Christian Reader some real solace after his pleasant recreation at this
ridiculous Discoursers folly; in that he and his fellows can thus seriously
plead for the name Catholic, which they seek by faction to ingrosse unto
themselves: this is an argument to us, that the floods already approach the
sandy foundations whereon this spiritual Babylon is built, and that her
downfall is at hand. For unless her professed Champions and Pilots were
likely to be drowned, they would not so earnestly catch at such shadows, or
floating bul-rushes, as this Guide of Faith has done. But leaving the shadow,
let us in the next place see whether have better interest in the body or
substance, whether we or they do better deserve the real titles of
Catholics.

Cap. 21
CHAP. XXI. That the title of [Catholike] is proper and essential unto the
faith professed by the present visible Church of England, but cannot truly be
attributed to the Faith or Creed of the modern visible Romish Church.
1 WHether the name Catholic were first bestowed upon the Church, or upon that
faith which is the life and soul of the Holy, Apostolic Church, shall be no
part of our inquiry. It suffices that the name Catholic it self is
univocal in respect both of Church and faith. True faith is therefore
Catholic faith, because it is the only door or way unto salvation, alike
common unto all without national or topicall respect. Whosoever of any Nation
have been saved, have been saved by this one and the same faith, and
whosoever will be saved, (as Athanasius speaks) must hold this Catholic
faith, and he must hold it pure and undefiled. The maine question then is, who
they be that hold this Catholic faith, and whether they hold it undefiled or
no.

Were Vincentius his rules as artificial, as they are orthodoxall and honest,
the issue betwixt us and the Romanist would be very easy and triable. But let
us take them as they are. Id catholicum est quod ab omnibus vbique et semper,
etc. That is Catholic, which is held by all in all places, and at all times.

The three special notes of the catholic faith or Church, by him required,
are universality, antiquity and consent. Whether these three members be
different or subordinate, and ofttimes coincident, I leave it to be scanned by
Logicians. According to the Authors limitation, all three marks agree to us,
not to the Romanist.

2 First concerning universality, the question is not, Whether at this present
hour, or in any former age for these thousand years past, there are or have
been more, which profess the present Romish Religion established in the Church
of Rome; then the Religion established in the reformed Churches since the
separation was made. If we should come to calculate voices after this manner,
Whether will you be a Roman Catholic, or a protestant: They might perhaps
have three for one amongst such as profess themselves Christians, ready to
cry, I am not for the protestants; but for the Roman Catholics will I be. But
it was far from Vincentius his meaning, that universality should be measured
after this fashion; for he very well knew that the Arian faction had prevailed
especially by this tumultuary kind of canvase or calculation. The multitude of
voices thus taken for them, may prove their faction to be stronger and greater
than our Church; it cannot prove their faith to be so universal as our faith
is. The fallacy by which the Romanists deceive poor simple people, is in
making them believe, that our Religion and their Religion, our faith and their
faith are duo prima diuersa, or so totally distinct, that part of the one could
not be included in the other. But for the universality of our faith we have
every member of the Romish Church a suffragant or witness for us. First,
nothing is held as a point of faith in our Church, but the present Romish
Church does hold the same, and confess the same to have been held by all
orthodoxall Antiquity. So that for the form of faith established in our
Church, we have the consent of the Primitive Church, of the four first
general Councels, of all succeding ages unto this present day, the consent
likewise of the present Romish Church, and of our selves. Now as France is a
great deal bigger than Normandy, if we compare them as distinct and opposite;
and yet France, and Normandy is bigger then France without Normandy: so
likewise though the present visible Romish Church be much greater then the
Church of England, yet seeing the Romish Church, how great soever, does hold
all the points of faith which our Church does, for Catholic and orthodoxall;
our consent, and their consent, our confession and their confession, is more
universal then their consent without ours. But if their consent unto the
points of faith believed by us, prove our faith to be universal, and our
Church by consequence to be Catholic; why should not our consent unto the
points of faith believed by them, prove their faith to be universal, or their
Church to be Catholic? Because it is not enough, to hold all points of
Catholic faith, unless the same points be kept holy and undefiled. The
Romish Church, we grant, does hold all points of Catholic faith, and so far
as she holds these points, we dissent not from her: yet dissent from her we
do in that she has defiled and polluted the catholic faith, with new and
poisonous doctrines; for which she neither has the consent of Antiquity, nor
of reformed Churches. And in respect of these doctrines, she stands convicted
of schism and heresy, by Vencentius his rules. For it is with him a
fundamental rule, That no present visible Church, has any authority to
commend any thing as a point of faith to posterity, which has not been
commended to the said Church by Antiquity derived from the Apostles times. A
proficiency or growth in faith, he allows and grants, modo sit in eodem
genere, so it be in the same kind, or proceed from the same root: but for
additions or new inventions, he takes them for the marks of schism and
heresy.

3 So then we hold the Catholic faith, and they hold the Catholic faith. And
seeing they hold the Catholic faith in the same measure that we do, is it not
reason they should be termed Catholics as well as we, though not so good
Chatholikes as we? No reason they should be termed Catholics at all. Where is
the difference? In this. We hold it pure and undefiled, they have defiled and
polluted it for many generations, and do still defile it with many loathsome
additions and inventions. Now in this case the denomination follows the
worser part, that is, they are not so much to be reputed Catholics for that
they hold the Catholic faith, as to be adjudged Heretics and Schismatiks,
because they have defiled and polluted it with many new inventions, and being
admonished hereof and reproved, will not purify their faith, will not reform
their religion according to the rule of faith and the practice of Antiquity.
Their faith not purified from the additions of the second Nicene and Trent
Council, can be no Catholic faith. Their Religion not reformed, can be no
true Religion, save only in reference to Paganism, Iudaisme or Mahumetisme.
For as Dionysius says, Bonum non est nisi ex integra causa, malum ex quolibet
defectu, Nothing is good which is not entire and sound, evil arises from
every defect. Every new addition or invention in matters of faith or doctrine,
is enough to make that church schismatic, which before was Catholic and
orthodoxall. Catholic and orthodoxall no Church can be, unless it hold all
points of faith without admixture of humane inventions or of new articles. The
admixture of a great deal of man's meat with a little swines meat, makes the
whole dish to be no man's meat, but swines meat. Our Church according to,
Vincentius his rule admits a growth or proficiencie in faith, in that it holds
not only those propositions which are expressly contained in Scripture, but such
as may by necessary consequence be deduced out of them, for points of faith,
and this growth is still in eodem genere, from the same root. Other points of
faith besides these, our Church admits none, but ties even her Prelates and
Governors to obtrude no other doctrines as points of faith, upon their
Auditors, than such as are either expressly contained in Scriptures, or may
infallibly be deduced from them. And this is the fundamental and radical
difference between our Church and the Romish Church, which admits such an
illimited increase or growth of faith as is in heaps or congests of
Heterogenealls.

CHAP. 22. Cap. 22
Of the adinuentions or new Articles added to the Creed by the Romish Church,
by which she has defiled the Holy, Catholic and Apostolic faith. Of the
difference betwixt the Church of Rome and the Church of England concerning the
rule of faith. What that ecclesiasticke tradition was which Vincentius
Li^inensis so much commends: to what use it served in the ancient Councels.
1 THe paine-worthiest enquiry in this argument, were first to make search what
additions or adinuentions unto the ancient or primitive Canon of Catholic
faith have been made, received or authorized by the Romish Church, since the
Council of Ephesus which was some 3. years before Vincentius Lirinensis wrote
his admonitions concerning this point; and in what age and upon what occasions,
such additions have been made or received. Secondly, to make proof or
demonstration, how far and in what manner such additions do corrupt or
contaminate the Holy, Catholic faith; and how far each or all of them
jointly or severally, do undermine or overthrow the holy Catholic faith.

The first addition or adinuention of moment, Con^il^or Iesum Christum
crucifixum pro nobis ^arne sepultum and resurgentem in coelosque reuersum,
venturum iudicare viuos and mortues praeter haec mortuorum resurrectionem
expecto, and secundum vnius cuiusque actionem aeternam retributionem ^onorum
simul and malorum, obsecrans intercessionem sanctissimae intemeratae Dominae
nostrae deiparae and semper virginis Mariae, sanctorumque Angelorum, and
sanctoru^ gloriosorum Apostoloru^, Prophetaru^, Martyrum, Co^fessorum and
Doctoru sept. Synod. act. 1. and 3.
which comes into my memory, is the Invocation of Saints and veneration of
Images. Both which points were added as articles of faith or parts of the
creed, which all were bound to believe and profess by Tharasius Patriarch of
Constantinople, and President of that illiterate parasiticall and factious
Assembly, which has bin commonly enstyled the seventh general or second
Nicene Council. In these and the like abominable decrees the then Bishop of
Rome was Tharasius his complice, his instigator and abettor, as may appear
from the speeches of his Legates in that Council, and by his own Epistles,
although part of the Epistle may be justly suspected to have been framed
since. But by what spirit this Council was managed, or in whose name they met
together, I refer the Reader unto that learned Treatise in the book of
Homilies (whereunto we have all subscribed) concerning the peril of Idolatry,
especially the third part. What ingenuous minds of this Kingdom thought of
that Council, before either the Author of these Homilies or Luther was borne,
may in part be gathered from an Hoveden anno 79^.
ancient English Historiographer, who says the Church of God did hold this
decree in execration.

2 The self same points with a great many more of like or worse nature, all
whatsoever any Council which the Romish Church accounts general or
oecumenicall; or any Canons which the same Church accounts Catholic, even
all the decrees whereto the Trent Council has affixt their Anathemaes, have
been annexed by Pius Quartus to the Nicene Creed, and are inserted as
principal points of that oath which every Roman Bishop at his consecration is
to take; one part of which oath or solemn vow it likewise is, that every
Bishop shall exact the like confession of his inferiors to be ratified by oath
or solemn vow. Caetera omnia a sacris and oecumenicis concilijs, ac praecipue
a sacrosancta Tridentina Synodo tradita, definita, and declarata indubitanter
recipio atque profiteor; fimulque contraria omnia atque haereses quascunque ab
ecclesia damnatas, and rejectas, and anathematizatas ego pariter damno, reijcio
and anathematizo. Hanc veram catholicam fidem, extra quam nemo salvus esse
potest, quam in praesenti sponte profiteor, and veraciter teneo, eandem
integram and inviolatam vsque ad extremum vitae spiritum constantissime (Deo
adiuvante) retinere and confiteri, atque a meis subditis, vel illis, quorum
cura ad me in munere meo spectabit, teneri, doceri, and praedicari, quantum in
me erit, curaturum, Ego idem N. spondeo, voveo, ac iuro, sic me Deus adiuuet,
and haec sancta Dei Evangelia. Onup. de vita pont. page 472.

The particular decree concerning Invocation of Saints and adoration of Images,
is much enlarged by the Trent Council, and by Pius Quartus. But of the
equivalency of Idolatry in Rome Heathen, and Rome Christian, In the fifth book
upon the Creed, or a ^^eatise containin^ the original of unbelief, etc. sect.
4.
elsewhere at large. In this one point, to omit others, the present Romish
Church far exceeds the Eastern Church, in the time of the second Nicene
Council; in that it ratifies the worshipping of all such Saints as are
canonized by the Pope.

3 The second addition made by the Roman Church unto the ancient canon of
faith, is, a transcendent one, and illimited; and that is, the making of
Ecclesiastical Tradition to be an integrall part of the canon of faith. This
does not only pollute, but undermine the whole fabric of the holy, primitive
and Catholic faith. That there is a certain rule or authentic canon of
faith, is a principle, wherein the ancient primitive Church, the modern Roman,
and all reformed Churches agree. The first point of difference betwixt us, is
about the extent of the written canon, specially of the old Testament. The
maine points of difference are these. First, we affirm with antiquity, and in
particular with Vincentius Lirinensis, that the canon of Scripture is a rule of
faith, perfect for quantity, and sufficient for quality: that is, it contains
all things in it, that are necessary to salvation, or requisite to be contained
in any rule; and so contains them as they may be believed and understood,
wthout relying on any other rule or authority equivalent to them in certainty,
or more authentic in respect of us, then the Scriptures are. The modern
Romish Church denies the canon of Scripture to be perfect and complete in
respect of its quantity, or sufficient for its quality or efficacy. To supply
the defect of its quantity, they add Tradition, as another part of the same
rule, homogeneall and equivalent to it for quality. To supply the insufficiency
as well of canonical Scriptures as of Tradition in respect of their quality or
efficacy toward us, they add the infallible authority of the present visible
Church. The former addition of unwritten Traditions, as part of the infallible
rule does undermine: this latter addition of the Churches infallible and
absolute authority as well in determining the extent, as in declaring the true
sense and meaning of the whole rule, utterly pulls down the structure of faith:
yet when we reject Ecclesiastical Tradition from being any part of the rule of
faith, we do not altogether deny the authority or use of it. Howbeit that
Ecclesiastical Tradition, whereof there was such excellent use in the Primitive
Church, was not unwritten tradition, or customs commended or ratified by the
supposed infallibility of any visible Church. That Ecclesiastical Tradition
which Vincentius Lirinensis so much commends, did especially consist in the
Confessions or registers of particular Churches. Now the unanimous consent of
so many several Churches, as exhibited their Confessions to the Nicene
Council, being not dependent one of another, not ouerswayed by authority, nor
misled by faction to frame the Confessions of their faith by imitation, or
according to some pattern set them, but voluntarily and freely exhibiting such
Confessions as had been framed and taught before these controversies arose;
was a pregnant argument to any impartial understanding man, that this faith
wherein they all agreed, had been delivered unto them by the Apostles and
their followers, by the first planters of the Churches thus agreeing; a
pregnant argument likewise, that these first planters had been inspired and
taught by one and the same Spirit. Each particular Church was a competent or
authentike witness of every other Churches integrity and fidelity in seruando
depositum, in careful preserving the truth committed to their special trust.
On the contrary, in that Arius, Eutyches, Nestorius, and other heretics, did
obtrude such constructions of scriptures upon their Auditors, as had no where
been heard of before, but sprung up with themselves, or from the places
wherein they lived: this was an argument more then probable, that if the
Apostles had delivered the whole form of wholesome doctrine unto posterity (a
point questioned by no Church in those times) these men, or the particular
Churches which abetted them, had not kept the doctrine delivered unto them by
our Savior and his Apostles; but had corrupted or defiled it with the idle
fancies of their own brains, or with the muddy conceit of their discontented
passions.

To speak more briefly, though perhaps more fully: The unanimous consent of so
many distinct visible Churches, as exhibited their several Confessions,
Catechismes, or Testimonies of their own and their forefathers faith, unto the
four first oecumenicall Councels, was an argument of the same force and
efficacy, against Arius and other heretics, for whose conviction these
Councels were called, as the general consent and practice of all Nations in
worshipping some Divine power or other, has been, in all ages, against the
Atheists. Nothing, besides the ingraffed notion of a Deity or divine power,
could have inclined so many several Nations, so much different in natural
disposition, in civil discipline and education, to affect or practice the
duty of adoration. Nothing, besides the evidence of truth delivered unto the
Christian world by Christ and his Apostles, could have kept so many several
Churches, as communicated their Confessions unto the Council of Nice and
Ephesus, etc. in the unity of the same faith.

4 Howbeit this unanimous Tradition Ecclesiasticke, was not in these times held
for any proper part of the Rule of faith, but alleged only as an inducement
to incline the hearts of such as before acknowledged the written word for the
only Rule of faith, to believe that the interpretations or decisions of those
Councels, did contain the true sense and meaning of the Rule acknowledged by
all. So that the written Tradition which Vincentius so much commends, was not
by the Nicene Council used to any such purpose as the Romanist now use
unwritten Traditions. The only use of it was to direct the present Church in
her examination of the Catholic truth, or points of faith. The chief
authority which the visible Church then challenged, did consist in the
unanimous consent of Ecclesiasticke Tradition, and that (as was said before)
but an inducement to embrace the interpretations of the present Church, and
reject the interpretations of vpstart heretics.

5 But was it a received truth in these Primitive times, or a truth
acknowledged by Vicentius, (the pretended patron of Roman Catholic Tradition)
that the joint consent of so many Bishops, as were assembled in the first
Council of Nice, or the joint Confessions of so many several Diocesses as
were then delivered to that Council, should unto the worlds end, continue an
argument or inducement of like force or validity, as it then was, either for
establishment of the Canons which succeeding Councels should make, or for
condemning such opinions as with the consent of as many (or more) Bishops, as
were there assembled, should be condemned for heresies? No: the same Vincentius
has given posterity a Caveat as full of wisdom, as of religion; in some
cases not to admit of his former admonition, concerning the trial of Catholic
faith, either for refelling heresies, or for establishing of the truth. The
limitation of his former admonition, is, in his own words, thus. Sed neque
semper, neque omnes haereses hoc modo impugnandae sunt, sed nouitiae
recentesque tantummodo. cum primum scilicet exoriuntur, antequam infalsarint
vetus^ae fidei regulas, ipsius temporis vecentur angustijs, ac priusquam,
manante latius veneno, maiorum volumina vitiare conentur. Caeterum dilatatae et
inueterata haereses nequaquam hac via adgredienda s^nt, eo quod prolixo
tempurum tractu longa ijs furandae veritatis patue^it o^casio. Alque ideo
quascunque illas antiquiores, vel schismatum vel haerescon prophanitates nullo
modo nos oportet, nisi aut sola, si opus est, Scripturarum authorita^e
conuincere, aut certe iam antiquitus vniuersalibus Sacerdotum Catholicorum
Concilijs, conuictas damnatasque vitare, etc. Vinc. Lirinens. Commonit. c. 39.
As for ancient and inueterate heresies, they are not in any wise to be
refuted by the former method, because continuance of time (after heresies be
once set on foot) may afford Heretics many opportunities of stealing Truth out
of the writings of the Ancient, or for exchanging orthodoxall antiquity with
profane novelties.

Now what opportunities of falsification did these 800. years last past
afford, which the Roman church was not always ready to take? The
opportunities afforded by dissolution of the Roman Empire and variance of
christian Kings, first made the Roman Clergy such sacrilegious Thieues, as
Vincentius supposes any opportunity may make heretics to be. And the Roman
church, being flesht with the spoil of Christ's flock and christian churches
through the West, have not been wanting unto themselves in devising new
opportunities in coining a new art of falsifying Antiquity, of stealing the
consent and suffrages of the christian world, from orthodoxall and primitive
truth. So that if this controversy may be examined and discussed by Vincentius
his rules, since the first acknowledgment of the Popes supremacy, since the
making of Edicts for the acknowledging of it, since the exemption of Clerks
from royal or civil jurisdiction; all the written testimonies, or unwritten
traditions, which the children of the Romish church do or can rake together,
are void in law, and void in conscience: there is not so much as one legal
single Testimony, but all are as a multitude of false and illegal witnesses,
of parties or conspirators in their own cause.

6 But although heresies of long standing and continuance cannot be refuted,
nor may not be assaulted in Vincentius his judgment, by the former method;
that is, by multitude of suffragants, or joint consent of several Provinces:
is there therefore no other means left to convince them, no way left to eschew
them? yes, we may eschew them, (says he) as already condemned by ancient and
orthodoxall Councels; or we may convince them, so it be needful or expedient,
by the sole authority of Scriptures. Now if the Scriptures be sufficient to
convince heresies of long continuance or long standing, and to confute such
heretics, as want neither wit, will, nor opportunity to falsify ancient
records, and imprint traditions of their own coining, with inscriptions of
Antiquity; I hope the same Scripture was (in Vincentius his judgment) a Rule
of faith neither vncompleate for its quantity, nor insufficient for its
quality: a Rule every way competent for ending controversies in religion,
without the assumption either of Tradition or decrees of Council, as any
associates or homogeneall parts of the same rule.

7 Unto what use then did Ecclesiastical tradition, or general Councels serve
for quelling heresies? Ecclesiastical traditions or unanimous consent of
particular Churches throughout several Kingdoms or Provinces in points of
faith, was in ancient times, and yet may be an excellent means, by which the
Spirit of God leads general Councels into the truth. And the Councels whose
care and office it was to compare and examine Traditions exhibited, were the
sovereign and principal means under the guidance of Gods Spirit, by which as
many as embraced the love of truth, were led into all those truths, which are
at all times necessary to salvation, but were much questioned and obscured by
the iuglings and falsifications of former Heretics. Into the same truths which
these Councels were then, we now are led, not by relying upon the sole
authority of the Councels which the Spirit did lead, but by tracing their
footsteps, and viewing the way by which the Spirit did lead them. And this was,
by necessary deductions or consequences, which reason enlightened by the
Spirit, and directed by the sweet disposion of divine providence, did teach
them to make, and does enable us to judge that they were truly made by them.

CHAP. XXIII. Cap. 23
Of the agreement between the Enthusiast or some non-conformitants to the
Church of England, and the Romish Church, concerning the manner how the Spirit
of truth, (as they suppose) does lead men into all truth. That the true sense
of scriptures is as determinable by light of reason and rules of art, as the
conclusions of any other sciences or faculties are. A general survey of the
depraved or more then heretical or heathenish infidelity of the modern Romish
Church.
1 IGnorance or vnaduertence of the manner how the Spirit leads us into the
truth or true sense of the rule of faith, has been the mother of two
monstrous twins in latter ages; of Enthusiasme, and of Romish implicit or
magical faith. The Enthusiast presumes he has the Spirit for his guide, and
knows he has it, merely by his breathing or affl^tion. The Romanist
observing the Enthusi^st to run into gross errors, by relying upon the
immediate voice, the breathing or suggestion of his private Spirit; think^s it
safest to believe none but public Spirits, and that the public spirit speaks
nothing, or judges nothing for authentike, save only in public Assemblies,
as in general Councels, or in such public place, as is the Consistory of the
Pope and his Cardinals. Neither of them consider, as the truth is, that either
the connection between principles of faith, and the conclusions or inferences
which follow upon the admission of such principles as true, or the
non-coherence of inferences pretended from sacred principles expressly contained
in the Scriptures, may be as clearly demonstrated to reason, though
unsanctified; as the connection or non-coherence between the principles and
conclusions of any art or science whatsoever. Between sciences properly so
called, and the faculty of divinity, this is the only difference: The
principles or Maxims of sciences, properly so called, may be rightly
conceived, and fully assented unto, by mere light of nature, without such
assistance or illumination of the Spirit, as Christ has promised to his
Church, and without which no principles of faith, though expressly contained in
Scripture, can be rightly conceived, much less firmly believed. So that the
conclusions of arts and sciences, may by light of nature be absolutely known;
whereas even those conclusions of faith, whose connection with the principles of
faith (expressly contained in Scripture) is as clear and demonstratiuely
evident to reason, not enlightened by the Spirit, as any connection is between
scientificall conclusions, and their principles, cannot be absolutely known
or firmly believed, without the assistance of the Spirit; because the
principles whence they are deduced, cannot by reason unsanctified, or not
enlightened, be absolutely known or assented unto. And unless the princples
be absolutely known or believed: the best knowledge or belief of the
Conclusions, can be but conditional. Every Artist knows, that the connection
or non-coherence between a postulatum or hypothesis, (that is, a proposition
not fully known, but taken as granted,) and the conclusion thence rightly
deduced or pretended, may be as clear and evident as the connection between
an undoubted principle, and the conclusion demonstratiuely deduced from it, or
pretended to be so deduced. He that is no competent Judge of a problem
absolutey considered, may give absolute and infallible judgment of the same
problem upon the mutual acknowledgement or agreement of the controuersors. As
if two Nouices in Arithmetike, should move this question; Whether fifty were a
square number, whether sixty four were a cubicke, and refer the decision of
both ore tenus, to an exquisite Mathematician, that did not well understand
English; it were impossible for him to resolve the problem before he perfectly
understood the terms. But upon their mutual acknowledgement, that fifty in
English was as much as Quinquaginta in Latin, and a square the same that
Quadratum in Latin; he could absolutely resolve them that fifty could be no
square, that the next number below it, was a square, although he knew not how
to express it in English. Upon the acknowledgement of both parties likewise,
that sixty four in English was as much as sexaginta quatuor in Latin, he
could absolutely resolve them, that it was both a square and a cubicke number.

2 To propose the like case in Divinity, which shall be this; Whether Polygamie
be lawful, or rather a true branch of adultery: suppose this controversy
were to be handled before some Heathen Ciuilian, between two Christians, the
one of which had married the others daughter, and intended to marry a second
wife in a foreign Country, where the party grieved had no Christian
Magistrate to do him right. An heathen Judge, that could understand the
literal meaning of the Scripture, though he did not in any sort believe them,
and made no conscience of Polygamie himself, might in this case give as
upright judgment, as the Pope and his Cardinals could, and that according to
the rule of faith; so the parties would both submit themselves to have the
controversy decided by that rule, that is, by the Scriptures of the old and
new Testament. The party peccant might plead custom and tradition, The
practice of the Patriarckes and holy men of God for his warrant, and that with
greater probability than the Romanist can plead for worshipping Images, or then
they excuse themselves from spiritual Adultery. If the party grieved should
against custom and tradition, plead or oppose that law, Let every man have his
wife, and every wife her husband, or other like Texts, which some great Divines
have alleged for decision of this case; they would not conclude the cause,
specially before a Judge not acquainted with the mystery of the Creation. For
he that has a wife and a wife, has a wife, and she that has a husband, and
a husband, has a husband. But if that precept of our Mat. 19.9.
Savior, [ Whosoever puts away his wife unless it be for adultery, and
marieth another, commits adultery: and he that marieth her being so put
away, commits adultery:] were once produced; any Heathen Ciuilian might give
this absolute and infallible sentence, [ If ye Christians will admit this Law
for true and just, or for a rule of conscience; then Polygamy certainly is a
natural part of Adultery, and he that has a wife and marieth another, is to
be punished as an Adulterer.] For what is the reason why he that puts away
his wife, though by legal divorce, and marieth another, commits adultery with
the second? or why he that marieth the first being so put away, is likewise an
Adulterer? Is not the reason because the bond of matrimony betwixt the husband
and the first wife, according to this your Christian law is not dissolved by a
legal sentence of divorce, extra casum adulterij, unless in case of adultery?
Yet as a sentence of divorce gotten upon suspicion of adultery or subornation,
or upon other causes which humane Laws, and Gods Law unto the Jew did permit;
cannot by the Evangelicall Law altogether dissolve the bond of matrimony: so
out of all question, it does rather loosen or weaken it, than corroborate or
knit it faster. Wherefore if he that having gotten a sentence of divorce, by
formal course of Law, against his wife, become guilty of Adultery in the Court
of conscience, and by the Evangelical Law, if he marry another: then much
more shall he be an Adulterer, who having a wife whose chastity was never
called in question, against whom no sentence of Law has been obtained, if he
shall presume to marry another. Thus far an Heathen, by light of natural
reason, without the assistance of Gods Spirit, may go in this and many other
controversies amongst Christians.

3 Were not most Recusants throughout this Kingdom worse affected, I will not
say toward us and our Religion, but toward truth it self, even toward the
light of the Gospel, than any civil Heathen either are or can be; they might
as clearly discern the usurped authority of the Romish Church, over their
faith, and over Scriptures the rule of faith, to be as true a branch of
Apostasy from Christ, as Polygamy is of Adultery; and that it does more
evidently dissolve the bonds of matrimony betwixt Christ and his Spouse the
Church, than Polygamy or adultery does the bond of matrimony, betwixt man and
wife. First, they make the Scriptures, as was said before, not only an
imperfect rule in respect of its quantity, but this defect being in their
opinion supplied by associating unwritten Traditions unto it; in the second
place they make both Scriptures and unwritten Traditions to be an insufficient
rule in respect of their quality. For it is their doctrine, that we cannot know
which be Canonical Scriptures, which are not, which be authenticke traditions,
which not, but by relying upon the authority of the visible Church. Again,
admitting the Church could determine, which were Authenticke Traditions, which
were not, and that no Traditions should hereafter be received besides those
which she had determined: yet if any controversy should arise concerning the
meaning of those Scriptures, which she has determined to be Canonical, or
concerning the meaning, limitation or use of these Traditions which she has
acknowledged to be authentike; no private man may take upon him absolutely to
believe this or that to be the meaning of either, but with submission of his
judgment to the Churches sentence. And this, as I have In the third book upon
the Creed, section the fourth. See section the second, ca. 2.3.4.
elsewhere showed at large, is not only to make the authority of the Church to
be above the authority of the Scriptures, but utterly to nullify the
authority of the Scriptures, save only so far as they may serve as a stale
or footstool to support or hold up the authority of the Church or Pope. So
that the last resolution of the Romanists belief, as out of their own
comparisons of the Scriptures to colors, and the authority of the Church unto
the light by which colors become visible to us (as In the book fore cited,
sect. 4. cap. 5. par. 12.
is elsewhere demonstrated) must be this; That he absolutely believes only the
infallible authority of the Church concerning the truth of Scriptures and their
true meaning: their truth or meaning he neither absolutely nor infallibly
believes. So that, if he believe any divine truth, it is only ex accidenti,
that is, in as much as the Church does not err in that point of faith, which
she proposes unto him: howbeit to believe that which is true, upon no better
motive or condition then this, is much worse then the ignorance of truth, or
mere unbelief of the same truth. How many several divine truths or articles
of faith soever he thus believes; he can be no true Catholic, because he
believes no divine truth, but as it is mixed with hellish antichristian
falsehood. If we shall prove that this supposed infallibility of the Romish
Church does in diverse points induce not only heresy but infidelity, and that
infidelity of a worse sort, then can be incident to any Heathen; I hope our
intended conclusion will be sufficiently euicted, that whosoever holds this
absolute infallibility of the present visible Romish Church, whatsoever he
holds besides, can be no Catholic. To give you an instance for proof of this.

4 If one being a Christian shall steal, he does commit a grievous sin, yet
a sin of one kind or species, that is theft: he does not thereby cease to be
a Christian, he does not thereby become an Infidel or Antichristian. The like
we may say of fornication, adultery, murder, incest, or the like, all which
are grievous sins, and without repentance exclude men from the Kingdom of
Heaven. Yet can we not say, that they make a man an Infidel, though worthy to
be cast out of the Church, until he give full proof of his humble submission
and hearty repentance for his fact. But if any man that has been baptized and
made a partaker of the word, which in many points he believes, shall by
covetousness, malice, intemperancie, or the like, have so far corrupted the
feeds of Christianity, or Law of God written in his heart; as he shall think,
that which indeed and truth is theft, fornication, adultery, murder, or incest,
to be no sin, he is by the general verdict of the Schools, not only an
heretic, but an Infidel. Now Infidelity is of two sorts, either infidelitas
purae negationis, privative infidelity, such as is in the Heathen, which have
not known God or his Laws, as having no commerce with his people; or
infidelitas prauae dispositionis, depraved infidelity, of which there be more
degrees; as first it may be in the Heathen to whom the truth of the Law or
Gospel has been imparted; but they have impugned both, or had them in
derision: or it may be in the Jew, which acknowledges the truth of Mosaicall
and Prophetical writings, and yet oppugnes the truth of the Gospel, which is
contained in them, with greater spite and violence, then the Heathen which
acknowledge neither. Briefly, as the contrariety is greatest, which is betwixt
opposite qualities of nearest alliance in predicamentall line; such as have the
same immediate or proximum genus: so is their infidelity or enmity unto the
Catholic faith most deadly, which communicate with true Catholics in most
principles, and yet swerve grossly from them, and from the truth, in some
particular principles or practices thereon grounded. As, for an Heathen to hold
murder, or incest, to be no sin, is not a crime so heinous, as the like in a
Jew: For a Jew to license or authorize incestuous marriages, to allow or reward
the murder of Christians, for whom Christ shed his blood, includes not so
great an enmity unto Christ and his Laws; it argues not so high a degree of
infidelity, as the like practice or opinions do in him, that professes
himself to be a Christian, to be a successor of Christ's Apostles, to be
Christ's Vicar here on earth.

5 To prove our intended conclusion by full induction; first, let inquiry be
made what pillage and spoils of ecclesiastical Benefices the Pope, or (which
is all one) the Church of Rome has made by Bulls of provision throughout this
and other Kingdoms; whereby many Christians have been induced to account
sacrilege no sin. Secondly, what oaths, whether of allegiance from Subjects
to their Sovereigns, or of solemn leagues betwixt Prince and Prince or free
Soueraignties, or of solemn contracts betwixt man and wife, have been
dispensed withal, and utterly nullified by the Pope; by which means a great
part of the Christian world have been seduced to esteem breach of lawful
vows or perjury joined with disloyalty, to be no sin. Thirdly, what
marriages the Pope has licenced between parties forbidden to marry, not only
by the Law of God, but by the civil Law of the Ancient Romans, and other
Nations, by which means many great Families, and whole Christian Kingdoms have
been induced to account such incest or fornication, as was loathsome to the
Gentiles, to be no sin. Fourthly, what massacres or cruel butcheries of men
never convicted or condemned by course of Law, have been either licenced
before hand, or commanded, or else allowed, approved, and commended after the
fact done, by the Pope; whereby many Christians have been seduced to account
cruel murder no sin, but a meritorious act, yea an act of mercy and pity
toward Christ's Church. If all such particulars as belong to every branch here
specified, and have been related by impartial Historians, were duly
collected and examined with the circumstances; we might refer it to any
Heathen Ciuilian, to any whom God has not given over to a reprobate sense to
believe lies, whether the supposed infallibility of the Romish Church, or the
prerogative given to the Pope by his followers, be not, according to the
Evangelical Law and their own tenants, worse then heresy, and worse then any
branch of Infidelity, whereof any Jew or Heathen is capable; yea the very
(...) or period of Antichristianisme.

Why should we look for a greater Antichrist in Rome or elsewhere, then has
been already revealed, when as the Pope has herein manifested himself to be
the first borne of Satan, in that he takes authority upon him to execute the
prerogative wherein Satan and his Angels most delight; that is, of turning
Gods affirmative precepts into negatiues, and Gods negative precepts into
affirmatiues.

6 Amongst other explicit Articles of the Roman Creed, which every Bishop at
his consecration is bound by oath to maintain, this is one; that in the Mass
there is, sacrificium verum proprium et propitiatorium pro viuis et defunctis,
A propitiatory sacrifice as well for the dead as for the living. How far
this heresy does contaminate or overthrow the Canon of Catholic faith, into
which it is inserted by Pius Quartus, as it were a toade or spider put into the
Chalice or wine of the sacred Eucharist, I am not now to meddle. My only
purpose for this present is, to give the Reader to understand, that failing in
other points about consecration of Bishops in England, their principal
exceptions against our Church and Ministry is, that our Priests in their
ordination do not receive the power of sacrificing Christ's body and blood in
the Sacrament. But their inserting this clause into the form of ordination,
does prove their Priesthood to be antichristian. And as many as received
ordination in this form, had the number, though not the character of the
Beast. And although this clause did not nullify their Priesthood which had
been thus ordained before the doctrine of the present Mass was fully
discovered to be a part of Antichrists Liturgy; yet does it now make all
communion with them either in ordination, or in the Romish Sacrament of the
Eucharist to be a desperate heresy: and for this cause the controversy about
the Mass must be reserved to the second Book of this TREATISE.

FINIS.

