DIVERSE SERMONS, WITH A SHORT TREATISE BEFITTING THESE PRESENT TIMES, Now
first published BY THOMAS IACKSON, Dr in Divinity, Chaplain in ordinary to his
Majesty, and President of Corpus Christi College in Oxford.

For the contents with the several places of Scriptures expounded, or
illustrated in them, see page following the Epistle.

OXFORD. Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD An. Dom. 1637.

TO THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCE CHARLES PRINCE OF WALES, DVKE OF CORNWALL, etc.
All the blessings of this life and of the life to come.
WOuld your Excellence vouchsafe if not at your best conveniences to read, yet
for the present to accept these Treatises following, with the like favorable
patience as your royal Father, and my most gracious Sovereign Lord and master
did hear the most of them, I should think my pains in publishing, and
offering this mite, as well bestowed, and as well recompensed, as any other
part of my labors in the ministry: That you may long exhibit to this present
and future ages, a live expression of your most royal Fathers Princely
virtues, especially of his devotion in Gods service, and his zeal to his house
the Church; that by continuance in thus doing, you may continue in like favor
with the King of kings, and Lord of lords, as Iehosephat, Ezekiah, and other
best Princes of Judah were, is and shall be the daily prayer of

Your highness most humbly devoted Servant THOMAS IACKSON.

TWO Sermons upon 2. Chron. Cap. 6. verse. 39. 40. Containing a Paraphrase on
Solomon's petition unto God, at the Consecration of the first Temple, with the
grant and success of it.

ERRATA.
Page 9. line 21. her read his p. 10. l. 2. him r. them and l. 3. of r. or p.
16. l. vlt. that r. then that p. 40. l. 1. certain r. certainty.

THREE Sermons upon IER. 26. verse. 29. MICAH 3. v. 10. 11. 12.

Errata.
Page 26. l. 11. dele their p. 30. l. 24. time r. our times p. 31. l. 30 labor
r. labourer p. 30. l. 11. af. r. after p. 32. l. 8. dele that p. 41. l. 8. or r
and p. 70. l. 13. his r. its.

A Treatise concerning the signs of the times, containing a Paraphrase or
exposition upon LVKE 13. verse. 1. to the 11. and from verse. 23. to 27.

Errata.
Page 18. l. 1. tradii. r. tradidi p. 37. l. 3. now r. nor p. 53. l. 8. for
then r. or that.

A Sermon upon the second Sunday in Advent, containing a Paraphrase or Comment
upon LVKE 21. verse. 1. to the 28. MATT. 24. verse. 1. to 32. MARK 13. verse. 1.
to 27.

2. CHRON. 6. 39. 40. 39. Then hear thou from Heavens, even from thy dwelling
place, their prayer, and their supplications, and maintain their cause, and
forgive thy people which have sinned against thee.

40. Now my God, let (I beseech thee) thine eyes be open, and let thine ears
be attent unto the prayer that is made in this place.


1 IT was the saying of a Roman Senator, who thought himself well seen in
matters of State, Parvi sunt arma foris, nisi sit consilium domi; Arms are of
little avail abroad, without a wise Council at home, to give them
instructions: but the wise King, part of whose words these of my text are, saw
a great way farther and lays his foundation much deeper, parvi sunt arma
foris, parvi consilium domi, nisi sint preces in Templo; Council of State or
Council of war, arms at home, or armies sent abroad by their directions,
with their best instructions, add little to the security and safety of State
and Kingdom, without prayers in the Church, or house of God. And for this
reason although he had now erected a goodly Temple, with as Princely and
cheerful a heart as his Father David had built an Altar, unto the name and
honor of the God of Israel, yet he thought it no Sacrilege, no robbery at all
to intend a public and perpetual benifite to the State and Kingdom, from
this glorious work. So compatible are Royal intentions of Gods honor, with
desires of Gods blessings temporal upon the people committed to their charge,
that this wise King (even whilst he dedicates this great house unto his God,
for a peculiar habitation wherein he would be pleased to place his name) yet
consecrated withal as a Sanctuary, for every afflicted soul, to be more then
an Arsenall for war as a Magazine of medicines and remedies for all manner of
wounds, or diseases incident to the body public.

2 God had given this young King a large talent of Princely wisdom, and the
spirit of government in an extraordinary manner; and of this extraordinary
wisdom and spirit one special part it was to know that it was not in the
power of man, not within the compass of any wisdom (though participated from
above) to direct his own ways, much less the ways of others aright, least
of all to give success to their best directions. As the skill of Pylots is
best known in a storm, or dangerous passage: so is the wisdom of Rulers best
tried in perplexity, or distress. The best proof or trial which Solomon
could give of his wisdom in this case, was the knowledge to frame his
petitions aright to the God of wisdom and Lord of Hosts. This whole Chapter is
no other then an Anatomy Lecture of the diseases and wounds of Kingdoms and
Commonweals, publicly read by Solomon for the instruction of Princes and
Rulers that should come after him. It is the glory of a King, as this King
elsewhere observes, to find out a secret, and to punish iniquity when it is
found out, (though committed in secret:) and to render to every man according
to the equity of his cause, being made known, is the duty of a Judge: but in
as much as many controversies of right and wrong, must be determined by oath,
if men will be so destitute of the fear of God, as to swear falsely; or to
contrive their own gain and others harms by perjury, what Judge can help?
what Prince can remedy men by this means distressed? Yet Solomon begins at
this inward sore, or secret corruption, the remedy he seeks from the searcher
of men's thoughts and hearts. So he prays 2. Chron. 6. 22. 23. If a man Sin
against his Neighbor, and an oath be laid upon him to make him swear, and
the oath come before thine Altar in this house. Then hear thou from Heaven,
and do and Judge thy servants by requiting the wicked, by recompensing his way
upon his own head and by justifying the righteous, by giving him according to
his righteousness. To recompense the ways of this wicked man upon his own head
is one of the mercies which in conclusion he beseeches the Lord to show unto
his people, for crudele est hic misericordem esse. Though mercy be always
good, yet the better it is, the worse it is placed upon such pestilent members.
As great a cruelty to show pity upon the perjured, as to pamper or cherish any
joint or member of the body, wherein the Gangrene or other deadly spreading
sore has got possession or root. From this internal imbred corruption he
proceeds unto more public and grievous wounds, or diseases usually made by
causes external, as when Israel shall be overthrown before their enemies. v.
25. When the heavens shall be shut up, and the earth be without rain. v. 26.
When there shall be Famine, Pestilence, mildew, Grasshoppers or Caterpillars. When
the enemy shall besiege thee in the Cities. When they shall be afflicted by any
Plague or sickness. v. 28. The sovereign remedy for all and every one of
these and the like is the very same, and it is this v. 20. 21. Then hear thou
from heaven, from thy dwelling place their prayer and their supplications and
maintain their cause, and forgive thy people which have sinned against thee.
v. 29. But what if this people should be led captive into a foraigne land not
permitted to repair unto this house where the Lord had placed his name? This
Solomon foresaw as a matter not impossible, how ample soever his promises unto
his father David and his seed might in ordinary construction seem to be: is
there any possible salve for this possible fore? or can this house (which he
had consecrated to be an house of prayer) afford them in this case any remedy,
when they could not come to pray in it? yes, the remedy is prescribed, v. 38.
39. If they return to thee with all their heart and with all their soul, in
the land of their captivity, whither they have carried them captives, and pray
toward their land which thou gave unto their fathers, and toward the city,
which thou have chosen, and toward the house, which I have built for thy name:
Then hear thou from heaven etc. So then both Prince and people were to pray
in this house, whilst they possessed this land and city wherein it stood; to pray
toward it when they soiourned in foreign Coasts, or were detained in the
land of their captivity; to pray toward the place wherein it had stood, in
case it should be demolished. So did Daniel, after this house, which Solomon
built, was burnt to the ground.

3* The prerogatives which he petitions might be bestowed upon this house of
prayer, were, you see, exceeding great. Was it then any part of his intention
in the suite, or of Gods purpose in the grant, to have this house endowed with
such ample privileges, for the use or benefit of Israel only, or of Abraham's
seed according to the flesh? surely Solomon did conceive his prayers out of a
perfect and special faith, yet the specialty of his faith in Gods promises
made unto Israel, or to Abraham's seed, did no way extinguish his charity, or
abate his good affection toward others, for he expressly consecrates his
house to be an house of prayer, for the use and benefit of all the nations
under heaven, though in the first place for Israel. Moreover as touching the
stranger which is not of thy people Israel, but is come from a far country,
for thy great names sake, and thy mighty hand and thy streched out arm, if
they come and pray in this house, then hear thou from heaven, even from thy
dwelling place and do according to all that the stranger calls to thee for,
that all people of the earth may know thy name and fear thee, as does thy
people Israel, and may know that this house which I have built is called by
thy name. 32. 33. He knew the gracious goodness of his God to be in it self
so great, so truly infinite, that it could not be a whit lessoned toward
Israel how far soever it were extended toward others, as it is extended to
all men without exception, insensu divise, though not in sensu composito, it is
thus far extended unto all, to the end that they might come to the knowledge of
the truth, but not extended, not communicated to such as love darkness better
then light, and falsehood then truth. It was then well with Israel, when their
charity toward others was like their heavenly fathers love, without factious
partiality or respect of persons. It was their seeking to ingrosse Gods
promised blessings unto mankind which twice brought that grievous curse upon
them, under which at this day they sigh and groan. Now if all the nations on
earth had this interest in Solomon's Temple, shall we deny any one of what
Nation soever the like interest in Abraham's seed, concerning whom the Lord had
sworn that in him should all the nations of the earth be blessed? Thus much of
the general scope or view of this Chap: to retire my self unto my text, which
is as the center or fittest Angle, for taking the exact survey of this long and
fruitful field.

4 To give you then a brief comprehension of the principallest and most
fundamental truths, either directly incident into, or natural emergent out of
it,

First it is taken as granted, by Solomon and it is to us a point of faith,
that as well the Calamities as the Prosperities of states and kingdoms are
from the Lord; It is he that gives life as well to bodies politic as to
natural. It is he that wounds, and it is he that makes whole.

Secondly, no Calamity or wounds of state are in their nature incurable, if
this remedy be sought in time; they grow incurable only by neglect of the
medicines in Gods word prescribed.

Thirdly, the only Sovereign remedy for restoring states and kingdoms
diseased and wounded by the hand of God unto their perfect health, is prayer
and Supplications to the King of Kings.

The last must be the conditions of the prayers, or qualification of the
Supplicants, by whom such prayers as may prevail with God must be made. Upon
this point Solomon often touches in several passages of this Chapter.

Such of the heathens as were always ready to sacrifice unto their own right
arms for victory inbattle, and unto their own wit in policy, for the sweet
fruits of peace, did often observe certain surplusses of success, good, or
bad, which they could not account to be the natural issue, either of their
industry, or contrivance; and whatsoever fell without the mould of their hopes
or fears, was attributed to fates, if it were disastrous: to fortune, or
chance, if it were good; now whatsoever the heathens did ascribe to fortune, to
chance or fate, or to any other supposed guide of nature or intermedling power
in humane affairs all these the wise king ascribes wholly unto his God, he is
the God of peace, and yet the God that makes war, the Lord of hosts, the
God of plenty, and yet the God that sends scarcity. The God of our health,
and life, and yet it is he which punishes with plague and sicknesses. Nor are
we bound only to derive all extraordinary success, (which the heathen gave to
fortune and fate) but ever even the usual success of ordinary endeavors, (be
it good or bad) from his providence. That the heathens did ascribe ordinary
success, (if it were good) unto themselves, (if it were ill) unto their
adversaries or opposites, this was their Atheism or irreligion. That they
ascribed extraordinary calamity, unto fate or chance was their superstition.
Unto both these extremes true religion is alike opposite, and for this reason
must ascribe all success ordinary or extraordinary, good or bad, unto him, who
is a God as well of wisdom as of power, as well of peace as of war. The
Egyptian Magitians were enforced to say of some miracles wrought by Moses, Hic
digitus Dei est, the finger of God is in this. But if we look on Gods works,
or our own with the eyes of faith, the point of his hand is more conspicuous,
or more full in matters of ordinary pass or in the usual course of nature,
then in some rare miracles. If the sun should now stand still in its sphere,
as in the days of Iosuah it did, the world would be ready to say this is the
hand of God, yet it is more impossible that it should move without Gods power
then stand still without it, whilst it stood still it was partaker only of his
power sustentatiue, but deprived of his power motive or cooperatiue, move it
cannot without the cooperation of his motive power, nor could it continue
moveable, though without motion, for a moment of time, without continuance of
his creatiue, and preserving power; and thus in the continuance of ordinary
success or blessings upon man's endeavors, there is oftimes a greater
concurrence of divine communicatiue power, then is required unto success
extraordinary. For the mere substraction of his usual cooperation or
efficiency from us, or from such as oppose us, makes the success of the one,
or other to be extraordinary, and yet so blind and stupid are we for the most
part, that we take small notice of his ordinary presence by his wisdom, power,
and providence, without some interpositions of extraordinary success,
unexpected occurrences, or interruption of the ordinary course of time, and
nature,

Did the body of the sun always move beyond her Horizon, in such difference
from it, as to leave no evident distinction between light and darkness, we
should hardly know, how much our eyes are beholding to it for the use of its
light: many happly will be persuaded, that the light to their eyes were
sufficient to see withal: God who is the light and life of the world, by whose
participation the best faculties of men perform their proper functions, (as
the eye does its function by the bodily light of he Sun) is in his nature
invisible; and hence it is, that few conceive what entire dependence they have
on him in all their actions, and consultations, unless it please him sometimes
to withdraw his guidance or assistance from him; nor need we to deny, or
question the proper efficacy of any visible or second causes, albeit we ascribe
all success, as well ordinary as extraordinary, good or bad, unto the same
God. The matter of most sovereign bodily medicines is oftimes gathered from
the patients gardens: the Physician infuseth no new quality, or hidden virtue
into the simples, or ingredients, yet, inasmuch as he tempers and compounds
them, and appoints in what measure and season his receipt shoud be taken, the
recovery of health (though wrought by the efficacy of the medicine) is wholly
ascribed to the Physicians skill, not shared betwixt it, and the natural
qualities of the medicine. Admit of a thousand fighting men, no one man's
strength or courage were abated before the day of battle, yet if every one then
might be permitted to fight (as we say) on his own head, to come on, and off,
at his own likeing, the multiplication of their several strength, without a
guiding or directing power, might harm themselves, more then their enemies, so
that we might truly say, that albeit our army consists of common soldiers, as
well as of Commanders, yet the strength of an Army consists not in the strength
of limbs, but in the skill and moderation of their Commanders, and in the
observance of good orders and discipline. Now beside the especial dependence
which every particular creature has on the Creators power, in all his motions,
attempts or actions, which is such, as no ingredient in any medicine has on
the Physician; such as no soldier has on his Commander; the whole host of
creatures, whether sublunary or Celestial, whether reasonable or reasonlesse,
whether animate or without life, is more subordinate to the direction and
guidance of the Divine wisdom and providence, then any inferior can be, to
his lawful, most powerful, and most esteemed superior. Though God does not
always work alone, but every creature works in him, and by him in its kind,
yet he alone apoints the time, the place, and opportunity of their workings, he
alone apoints the issue, which they finally bring forth, he alone does limit
the number of coworking causes or of agents conspiring for the effecting of the
end designed by his providence, whence, though in the greatest achievements
jointly undertaken by man, every man might know his own and every others
strength, his own and every others projects, which are confederats or
coworkers with him, though every one could know all the preparation, which they
severally, or jointly make, what the determinate force, or efficacy of every
isntrumental cause, whose help they use; yet is it never possible, for them to
know what other causes or agents the wisdom of God may design either to
hinder them, or to further their enemies in their counterplots. So that all
prosperity or calamity of any nation, visibily inflicted by secondary
instruments, or agents, is justly ascribed unto the wisdom, justice and
providence of God. Can a bird fall in a snare (says the Prophet Amos cap. 3.
v. 5.) upon the earth where no ginne is for him? or shall there be evil in
the city, and the Lord has not done it? Men he supposes are as unwilling to
be overtaken with the evil here meant, with malum poenae, with calamity or
disaster, as birds are to be caught in a snare. Calamity then is the snare
whereinto men by Gods appointment fall, and their own proiects and devices are
the strings which draw this net upon them, when these are contrary to the
Council of the Lord, and if there be no evil of calamity, or disaster in any
city, which is not the Lords doing, then certainly, the good which is contrary
to this evil, all the safty, welfaire, and prosperity of any nation, is from
the Lord, is the work of his hand.

Ignorance, or want of belief of this point, was one special cause of the
miseries which befell the Christian Nations, by the inundation of the Goths
and Vandalls, and other barbarous people, so a sweet and learned writer of
those times complains, Si quando enim nobis prosperi aliquid praeter spem
nostra^ and meritum, Deus tribuit, alius ascribit hoc fortunae, alius eventui,
alius ordinationi ducum, alius consilio alius magistro, alius patrocinio,
nullus Deo; and miramur si nobis coelestis manus non praestet, cui quicquid
praestiterit derogamus. If God at any time give prosperous success to our
proceedings beyond our hope and merit, on ascribes this to fortune, another to
good hope or chance, none to God. We may conclude this point with the Psalmists
testimony, Except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build it.
Except the Lord keep the City the watchman waketh but in vain, Psalm. 127. 1.
We shall no way pervert his words, if we thus invert or extend their sense.
Except the Lord be purposed to ruinate the house, they labor in vain that
seek to ruinate it, except the Lord delivers up the city into their hands,
they that beseige it, beseige it in vain, and if all endeavors without his
ratification of them be vain, then it is he that does all in all; it is he,
not the air, elements, or host of heaven, that brings scarcity, famine, or
pestilence upon the land, it is he, not the enemy, which wounds, or weakens any
state or kingdom.

But if all calamity be inflicted by his hand, who can take off what he has
laid on, who can heal where the great Physician himself has wounded? But the
question is not, what man can do when any calamity befalls him, but rather what
he which can do all things, will have man to do for himself. Now it is not
his will that we should in this case sit down and do nothing. The ascribing
of all the success of our labors unto him, does teach us only to abandon all
reliance upon our own endeavors or consultations, not the consultations or
endeavors themselves; It should be the first and last of all our endeavors,
carefully to consecrate all our consultations and enterprises unto him who
alone is able to give a blessing unto them. It is most true, all our strength
is but weakness in respect of him, yet true with this exception, unless we
rely upon his strength; It is true, man's wisdom is but folly, and yet true
again, that our wisdom becomes more then man's wisdom by relying upon his
wisdom, with the strength of our hearts and affections; Now for the
strengthening of our reliance upon his wisdom, strength, and providence, and
for consecrating our endeavors aright, two things are required; 1. the right
information of our understanding in point of Doctrine, 2. sincerity of
practice, answerable to the right information of our understanding. The first
and general part of Doctrine is the second point proposed, that noe calamity
or wound in state, though inflicted by the immediate hand of God, is altogether
incurable, if the remedy be sought in time. This point of Doctrine is grounded
upon another special principle of faith, to wit, that our gracious God in his
severest punishments is a most just judge, he does not immediately delight in
the exercises of punitive justice, as he does in the exercises of justice,
mercies, and loving kindnesses. He bestows his blessings of prosperity freely,
and for his own names sake, not for our sakes or deservings. He never plagueth
any nation merely for his own names sake, or of his own accord, but as
provoked by their ill deservings. Deus non priui est ultor quam homo peccator.
God never proceeds to revenge, before man has done him manifest wrong. Poena
semper sequitur culpam. Punishment never has precedence of offenses, but
always follows them, and for the most part in great distance. This truth or
principle of faith is expressly supposed by the wise King in this Chap. v. 24.
and if thy people Israel be put to the worse before their enemy, because they
have sinned against thee. This inferres that they should not be punished with
so much as loss of victory; or defeat unless they had first sinned against
their God, and again v. 26. when the heaven is shut up, and there is no rain,
because they have sinned against thee. This teaches us the truth of that which
an ancient father has, nos mutamus naturam rerum, we exchange the nature of
the creature, and divert the sweet influence of heaven from our selves by
changing from better to worse, and by our turning from God. Quid ergo? de
poenarum acerbitate quaerimur, unusquisque nostrum ipse se punit. Lib. 4. number.
107.
They are the expostulation of Salvian, with the Christians of his time, which
had been often overcome, and long pressed by barbarous and heretical nations.
But why do we complain that our punishment is bitter and grievous, seeing
every one of us does punish himself? But here happly some will make that
objection against the former point, which Salvian makes against himself by way
of prevention, if all punishment or calamity be from God, how are we said to
punish our selves? His answer is very satisfactory, Vtrumque verum est, a deo
quippe punimur, sed ipsi facimus ut puniamur Lib. 8. Number. 264. Both are true,
we are punished by God, but it is our own doing, that we are punished. The
manner and order by which mankind fall into extremity of punishment, whether
temporal or everlasting, that he collects out of that saying of the Prophet
Esaias. Chap. 50. v. 11.

This good father albeit he lived in the miserable times, wherein the visible
feature of Christ's Church and of Christendom was much defaced by the wounds
and scars which had been given by barbarous hands, yet was herein happy, that
he might freely avouch the unspeakable mercies of God, and extend his unfeigned
love to all, (even to those which perished in their sins) without censure of
heresy or persecution, by men of his own profession; It was no scruple to his
tender conscience to aver, nor was the often averring it any imputation unto
him for many generations, that God did punish us, invitus, against his will,
but he was willing to heal the wounds which he had made, that men did
constrain him to continue, or increase his plagues, when he was otherwise
ready to take off his punishing hand.

But some in latter years question (and would to God they did but question)
whether punitive justice be as direct an effect of Gods primary will, or as
primarily intended by him in respect of some men, as the exercise of bounty and
mercy toward others. But if this Doctrine were positively determined, the
calamities which befall most states and kingdoms would be more incurable, and
all endeavors of reformation less available, then is behoofefull for them to
believe they are. Howbeit some passages of sacred writ therebe, which either
naturally run, or have been drawn this way, as if punitive justice were the
mark or aim of means offered by God, for so that place and the Apostle Romans
1. 20. The invisible things of him from the creation of the world are clearly
seen, to the intent that they should be without excuse. But this expression of
the original is worthily corrected by the latter English. God did manifest
himself in his works so fair, that they are without excuse. And though the
speech be for its form indifferent, or aequipendent, yet the matter does
necessarily sway it from the former to this latter sense. For if God had
manifested himself unto them them to no other intent that they might be
without excuse, they had a better excuse in readiness then any of the
reprobate or damned shall find, at the day of Judgment. None of them shall be
then able to deny either the receipt of a talent, or the receipt of it to some
better intent or end, then to leave them without excuse. They are therefore
without excuse because they have hid their talents, and do not employ them to
the use or end intended by their master. But more particularly the calamities
or plagues which befell the Jewish nation may seem incurable from the words of
our Savior Mat. 23. 34. 35. Behold I send unto you Prophets and wise men and
scribes, and some of them ye shall kill and crucify, and some of them ye shall
scourgein the Synagogues, and persecute from City to City. That upon you may
come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth, from the blood of righteous
Abell, unto the blood of Zacharias son of Barachias, whom ye slew between
the Temple and the Altar. Did the wisdom of God then send Prophets and wisemen
unto their forefathers, or did he come to this generation in person himself,
to this intent, or end, that all the righteous blood which had been shed upon
the earth, might be required of them? For thus interpreting this place the
original phrase affords a pretense, somewhat fayrer then can be brought for
the former Interpretation of S. Paul, Vt super vos veniat: yet every novice in
Grammar knows that the preposition ut, or Greek (...) does not always denote
the Final cause, it ofttimes imports the Course or issue, not the end or
intent (...) not (...) so says our Savior Ioh. 17. 3. This is life eternal
that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have
sent, Vt te cognoscant, this is no more then if he had said te cognoscere, to
know thee to be the only God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, is life
eternal. Give these words of our Savior in the 7th of S. John leave to
interpret his forecited words Mat. 23. and their meaning will be in plain
English thus much and no more, some of them you will crucify, and some of them
you will scourge, and persecute so long, until the blood of all the righteous,
shed upon the earth will come upon you. The true reason why the blood of Gods
Prophets was to be required of this generation was because God had continually
sent them unto them from time to time, out of his mercy and compassion, that
they might be healed: So says the Scripture, 2. Chron. 36. 15. And the Lord
God of their fathers sent to them by his messengers rising up betimes and
sending, because he had compassion on his people and on his dwelling place. But
they mocked the messengers of God, and despised his word, and misused his
Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord rose against his people, until there
was no remedy. That which made their calamities remediles, or as the original
has it incurable, was their continual mocking or despising the messengers of
their peace, which God from time to time had sent to heal them: So that all
the calamity which ensued was not the end intended by God in sending his
messengers unto them, but the issue of their mocking and despising both
Physicians and Medicines. They are the cause of their incurable wounds, yet was
it God that did inflict them; for so it follows v. 17. 18. Therefore he
brought upon them the King of the Caldeans, who slew their young men in the
house of their Sanctuary, and had no compassion upon young man, maiden, or old
man, or him that stooped for age. He gave them all into his hand; and all the
vessels of the house of God, great and small, and the treasures of the house of
the Lord and the treasures of the King and his Princes. All these he brought to
Babylon, and they burnt the house of the Lord and brake down the walls of
Jerusalem, and burnt all the palaces thereof with fire, and destroyed all the
goodly vessels thereof.

All this mass of misery fell upon the people of God, for whose prosperity
Solomon here prays; all the desolation here mentioned light on this house
which he now consecrates to be the house of prayer. All this and more became
inevitable in the issue, but so it was not from the time that Jeremy began to
prophecy, to foretell, and forethreaten it by express revelation from the Lord
of heaven. One special means by which this misery became inevitable, was that
erroneous opinion or conceit wherewith most of this people were possessed, to
wit that their calamity or prosperity was fatal; that all things were so
predeterminated by God; that nothing could fall out otherwise then it did; that
every thing was absolutely necessary, in respect of Gods decree. This was the
symptom of their incurable disease, for whose cure Jeremy was sent to the
potters house there to receive that instruction from the Lord, of which we read
Chap. 18. The exact point of time wherein their disease (whether in whole or
part) became incurable, we leave with all reverence unto him who has reserved
the knowledge of times and seasons (as a special prerogative of his power)
unto himself. Act. 1. 7. Yet thus much he has revealed unto us, that every
part of this calamity did not become inevitable at one and the same time: the
state of prince and people became more dangerous then it had been, (as it were
a disease recovering strength from a relapse) by their shuffling with God,
after they had made a covenant with him, for freeing their servants according
to the tenor of his law in that case provided. This breach of covenant Jeremy
foretells in thundering terms, would prove the cause of greater calamity then
he before had threatened, And ye were now turned and had done right in my sight
in proclaming liberty every one to his neighbor. But ye turned and polluted
my name, and caused every man his servant, and his handmaid whom ye had set at
liberty at their pleasures to return, and brought them into subjection to be
unto them for servants and handmaids. Therefore (says the Lord) because ye
have not hearkened unto me in proclaiming liberty every one to his brother and
to neighbor, behold I proclaim a liberty to you, says the Lord to the sword,
pestilence and famine, and I will make you to be removed unto all the kingdoms
of the earth. Ierem. 34. v. 15. 16. 17. and v. 21. 22. And Zedechiah King of
Judah and his princes will I give into the hand of their enemies, and into the
hand of them that seek their life; and into the hand of the King of Babilons
army, which are gone up from you. Behold I will command (says the Lord) and
cause them to return to this city, and they shall fight against it and take it
and burn it with fire, and I will make the city of Judah a desolation without
an inhabitant. Yet was not this sentence, though thus uttered with indignation,
as yet altogether unchangeable, much less was this peoples safety peremptorily
decreed by God, as their false Prophets misperswaded them. This error
concerning the tenor of Gods decree or covenant being planted in them, the
Egiptians expedition against the Caldean army for Ierusalems succor might
with fair applause be pretended, as a mean ordained by God for effecting
their safety. To quell this their vain confidence in the strength of Egypt the
Prophet reavoucheth his former message with some additions, Ier. 37. 7. 8. 9.
This says the Lord God of Israel, thus shall ye say to the King of Judah that
sent you unto me to enquire of me. Behold Pharaohs army which is come forth to
help you, shall return to Egypt into their own land, and the Caldeans shall
come again and fight against the city, and take it and burn it with fire;
thus says the Lord, deceive not your selves saying the Caldeans shall surely
depart from us, for they shall not depart. For though ye had smitten the whole
army of Caldeans that fight against you, and there remained but wounded men
among them, yet should they rise up every man in his tent and burn this city
with fire.

Yet was not the event here foretold at this time altogether inevitable, but
inevitable only upon their refusal to obey the Prophets counsel, for after
this time the same Prophet shows King Zedechiah a way or mean ordained by God,
which if he had followed a great part of this calamity so peremptorily
denounced might have been avoided Ierem. 38. 17. Then said Jeremiah unto
Zedechiah, thus says the Lord God of Israel, if thou will assurely go forth
unto the King of Babylon, then thy soul shall live, and this city shall not be
burnt with fire, and thou shall live and thine house. But if thou will not go
forth to the King of Babilons Princes, then shall this city be given into the
hands of the Caldeans and they shall burn it with fire, and thou shall not
escape out of their hands. This was the last warning which he was to expect
from God, by his Prophet, for his peace. But not harkening unto his voice,
whilst it was called to day, but seeking to escape the Judgments denounced by
flight, he inevitably brought them upon himself, upon his Princes, upon the
temple, in a greater measure, especially as they concerned himself and his
house, then they had been threatened. When the Caldean Princes entered the city,
Zedechiah and the men of war fled out of the city by night, but the Caldeans
host pursued after them, and overtooke Zedechiah in the desert of Jericho and
brought him to Nebuchadnezar King of Babell, unto Riblah where he slew the sons
of Zedechiah before his eyes, and all the nobles of Judah, (a lamentable
farewell to the sense of sight and liberty) for immediately after he put out
Zedechiahs eyes, and put him in chains, to carry him to Babylon. v. 7. Thus
have you heard how Jerusalem and Judah came to a lamentable and tragical end
by diseases in their nature not incurable, but made such by their own
wilfulness, in not harkening to the voice of Gods Prophets. Did then the
wisdo^e of God who out of compassion sent his Prophets unto them, whilst the
first temple stood come in person himself to increase the misery of that
generation, with whom he converst here on earth, or to destroy the second
temple with a more fearful destruction then had befallen the first? That this
generation became a prey in the issue to the Roman vultures, was not from want
of good will in him to gather them, but from their unwillingnesse to be
gathered under his wings; witness himself Mat. 23. 37. Jerusalem, Jerusalem
etc. But did he speak this as God or as man? a captious question. What if I
should say that it was vox humana and yet vox Dei, the voice of God uttered by
man, the very personal voice of the son of God, as S. Luke testifies, He
spoke as never man spoke, and was so affected toward Jerusalem as never man
was affected. The Prophet Jeremy after he had seen that tragedy really acted
which he had represented in words, did wish his head had been a fountain of
tears that he might weep day and night, for the slain of his people. The
wisdom and son of God became a more sorrowful spectatour of a second
tragedy of Jerusalem, not as yet within forty years probability to be acted:
when he came near says S. Luke 19. 41. he beheld the city and wept for it,
saying, Oh if thou had even known at the least in this day those things
which belong unto thy peace, but now are they hid from thine eyes. These his
tears though he wept as man, were a visible expression of his divine
inexpressible love toward Jerusalem and her inhabitants, after they had
deserved this ill at his hands stiffly bent to deserve much worse. As yet it was
called to day, but this was a critical day, and full of danger, howbeit
Ierusalems sin was not sealed up until the sign of the Prophet Jonas was
expired. After his Resurection from the dead Jerusalem had yet forty days for
repentance, as Nineveh had (for so long our Savior remained here on earth) but
Ierusalems Children not repenting within that time, as Nineveh did, their
estate became as desperate as their murmuring Forefathers had been in the
wilderness, they were to wander forty years in the wilderness before any of
them could enter into the land of promise; and as many as were above twenty
years being cut off by oaths from all hopes or possibilities of entering in at
all. This generation, whom our Savior here forwarnes, were to continue in it
forty years, which being expired, they and their Children have been
exterminated and banished from it for almost forty times forty years. During
the forty years wherein they were permitted to remain in it their estate was
no less miserable then their Forefathers had been in the wilderness. There
dyed in the wilderness almost six hundred thousand men; of this latter
generation well nigh twice as many within the same compass of time did die
more miserably, Jerusalem being first made their prison, afterward their
grave, first an heap of carcasses, and then a heap of stones. Now seeing, as
our Apostle, says these Jews did not stumble to the end that they should
fall, but rather that by their fall salvation might come unto the Gentiles, let
us beseech our gracious God, that from Ierusalems ruin we may in time and
whilst it is called to day, seek the edification of his Church and Kingdom,
Root out, good Lord we beseech thee, all Jewish affections and Jewish opinions
out of the hearts of thy people, that so our prayers and supplications for the
prosperity of thine inheritance and thine Anointed, may be ever acceptable in
thy sight, O Lord our strength, and our Redeemer. AMEN.

THE SECOND SERMON UPON 2. CHRON. 6. 39. 40.
COncerning the second general proposed, two points there be which require
discussion or declaration; The first, whether this petition which Solomon here
prefers to the King of Kings, were granted according to his desires.

The second, how far the grant made to him, or how far the practices or
experiments answerable to his petition, during the time that this temple stood,
may concern us, or the times wherein we live. That Solomon's petition was fully
granted, first the equity of the matter contained in it may persuade us; for
he requests nothing at Gods hands which is for substance altogether new;
nothing but that, which out of his free mercy and bounty he had granted unto
his people before, though not supplicated unto in such a solemn manner, as
Solomon now uses and prescribes as a pattern for others to use. When Israel
was in his infancy, not able to speak the language of Canaan, much less to
frame his petitions according to the style and form of the Sanctuary, the God
of his father did understand his cry, and was always ready to give him a
better answer then he could desire. The cry of the children of Israel (says
God) is come unto me, and I have also seen the oppression wherewith the
Egyptians oppress them. Exodus 3. 9. Might they have spoken for themselves, the
utmost of their request had been only for some ease or mitigation of their
present servitude and grievance; but God (so gracious is he) sends them full
deliverance, and of slaves makes them a free state, a royal nation. Upon the
sight of Pharaohs host pursuing them, after they had been set free, the
extremity of fear makes them desirous rather to return unto their wonted
thraldom, then to hazard their lives for attaining that liberty, whereunto God
by Moses had called them. Whilst thus affected, they cry unto the Lord, and he
hears their cry, although it were mingled with murmurings against Moses. Exodus
14. v. 10. 11. True it is that Moses prayed, whilst they murmured; but God was
more ready to hear, then Moses to pray: and therefore he says v. 15.
wherefore cryest thou unto me; speak unto the children of Israel that they go
forward. But for a master to redeem his own servants from foraigne oppression
is not so strange, or out of course. Did God then at the prayer or instance of
his servants, heal his people whom he himself had wounded? When the people
complained, it displeased the Lord, and the Lord heard it, and his anger was
kindled and the fire of the Lord burnt amongst them, and consumed them that
were in the utmost parts of the camp. Numb. 11. 1. The disease was acute and
made quick dispatch, the medicine was as swift and speedy; Then the people
cried unto Moses, and when Moses prayed unto the Lord, the fire was quenched.
v. 2. One branch of Solomon's petition is, that when Israel should go forth to
battle against their enemies by the way which he should send them, that he
would then hear their prayers and supplications, and judge their cause. A
lively pledge of Gods favor answerable to this branch of the petition, and of
the immediate dependence which success in battle has on faithful prayers,
we have in that story Exodus 17. v. 9. 10. when Iosuah was sent by Moses
appointment to fight with Amalek, It came to pass when Moses held up his hand,
that Israel prevailed, and when he let down his hand Amalek prevailed. Another
branch of Solomon's petition in this place, is v. 24. That when Israel should be
put to the worst before their enemies, that God would be merciful unto their
sin, when they should turn again and confess his name and pray. This was
Isreal's case in the siege of Ai, Iosuah 17. v. 7. 8. Iosuah upon the sight of
this wound flies for succor to that medicine which Solomon happly from his
practice prescribes; For he rent his clothes, and fell on his face to the earth
before the Ark of the Lord, and cried, alas! O Lord what shall I say when
Israel turns their back before their enemies! God hears his prayer, before
he was willing to make an end of praying, Get thee up, wherefore lie thou
thus upon thy face? and instructs him for restoring Israel to his wonted estate
and condition, by recompencing the way of the wicked upon his own head. First
he makes Achan confess his sin, and give glory unto God, and so removes the
sin from Israel by execution of justice, which in like case is equivalent to
prayer, at least a necessary condition of successful prayers for the public
weal and safety of kingdoms.

2 If after Iosuahs death we were to give a general title to the sacred
history of ensuing times, for almost four hundred years, or make an Epitome
of the book of Judges, it could not be more brief then this, Israel sins
and is given up into the hands of the oppressor; Israel cries unto the Lord,
and he sends him a Judge and a deliverer: And yet, as the sacred penman of that
story observes, Isreal's repentance always died with the Judge which God did
send them, and could not be revived again but by renewing of affliction. One
and the same affliction was commonly the effect of Isreal's sin, and the
means of Isreal's repentance; his sin was the efficient and repentance the
final cause of their oppression. And so gracious was God toward them, so
ready always to hear their prayers, that he seemed not to punish them so much
for sins past, as to continue his punishment until they repented. Among other
calamities of estate whose cure or remedy Solomon here seeks, the plague of
pestilence is one, v. 28. with this the land was grievously smitten, even from
Dan to Beersheba, in his Father David's days, by the immediate hand of God, and
in particular for his Fathers sin in numbering the people. Yet when David
confessed his sin, and thus prayed, Behold I have sinned, yea I have done
wickedly, but these sheep what have they done? Let thine hand I pray thee be
against me and against my Fathers house, v. 17. the Lord was appeased toward
the land, and the Plague ceased from Israel. So ready was God always to hear
the prayers of this people, when they turned unto him, before this Temple was
built.

The sum^ ^hen of Solomon's petition is, that the Lord would be pleased to give
his people some particular or new assurance, for continuing his wonted mercies
or blessings unto them; and that this house which he had built, might be as a
public Court of audience, a place wherein it might be free for every man, and
for all Israel, to exhibit the petitions of his heart to his God, and to
receive answer from him. And so we may observe, that from this time forward
the consecration of this house, and the solemnity which Solomon here used, did
come into the style and form of this peoples prayers, made as it were an
additionall to the Covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. But what express
proof have we, that Solomon's own prayers at this time, for these prerogatives
of this house were heard? This fully appears from the subsequent miracle,
wherewith this petition was signed as with the immediate hand of God, 2. Chapter 7.
1. 2. Now when Solomon had made an end of praying, the fire came down from
heaven, and consumed the burnt offering, and the sacrifices, and the glory of
the Lord filled the house: and the priests could not enter into the house of
the Lord, because the glory of the Lord had filled the house. This kind of
answer by fire was always most satisfactory to the business or proceedings that
were or might be in question; by this answer God did determine the
controversies between Elias and Baals Priests; by the like effect of fire from
heaven (consuming the fat of the sacrifice) the calling of Aaron to the
Priesthood, by Gods immediate appointment, not by man, was put out of question.
And so was the consecration of the Son of God to his everlasting Priesthood,
confirmed by the visible apparition of the Holy Ghost in tongues of fire, which
was the accomplishment of both the former miraculous apparitions from heaven,
the one at the consecration of Aaron, the other at the consecration of this
material Temple.

3 But admitting every branch of Solomon's petition was on Gods part fully
granted; yet will it be demanded, whether the practice did pursue the grant, or
what remarkable success or issue the practice found? To both parts of this
demand, two or three instances, which are upon sacred record, will suffice. The
first from the practice of good Iehosaphat, in that strange exige^ce or
extremity of danger, whereunto the Kingdom of Judah was brought in his days,
by the malicious confederacy of Moab, Ammo^, and Mount Seir. As was the
danger, so was this good Kings fear exceeding great; and the greater it was,
the better motive he had to pray more heartily, according to that pattern
which Solomon prescribes 2. Chron. 20. 5. etc. And Iehosaphat stood in the
Congregation of Judah and Jerusalem, in the house of the Lord, before the new
Court, and said, O Lord God of our Fathers, art not thou God in heaven, and
rulest not thou over all the Kingdoms of the heathen? And in thine hand is
there not power and might, so that none is able to withstand thee? Art not thou
our God who did drive out the inhabitants of this land before thy people
Israel, and gave it the seed of Abraham thy friend for ever? And they dwelt
therein, and have built thee a Sanctuary therein for thy name, saying, if when
evil comes upon us, as the sword, judgment, or pestilence, or famine, we
stand before this house and in thy presence, (for thy name is in this house)
and cry unto thee in our affliction, that thou will hear and help etc. As the
form of his prayer was peculiar, such as was not used before this house was
built, so the success was extraordinary, and such as this people had never
tasted before, unles it were in the destruction of Pharaoh, and his mighty
army. The victory which Gedeon had over the Midianites was miraculous, in
respect of their multitude which was vanquished, and of their paucity which
vanquished them: yet in that miraculous deliverance, there was the sword of the
Lord and the sword of Gedeon. They fought for victory, but in this mighty
discomfiture of 3 nations more potent then Midian, which had combined for the
overthrow of Judah* here was only the arm of the Lord; the use of man's sword,
or arm of flesh, is utterly prohibited by the Prophet Iahaziel v. 17. Ye shall
not need to fight in this battle, set your selves, stand ye still and see the
salvation of the Lord with you. All that Iehosophats royal presence or person
did undertake or perform, for the accomplishment of this victory promised,
was, to exhort his people, not to be valiant in fight, but to put their
confidence in the Lord of Hosts. v. 20. They rose early in the morning, and
went forth into the wilderness of Tekoah: And as they went forth, Iehosaphat
stood and said, Hear me O Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, believe
the Lord your God, so shall you be established, believe his Prophets, so shall
ye prosper. And so they did. For this victory was more complete and more
beneficial to the King, and people, then any victory which David had gotten
over the enemies of God, though purchased with his peoples blood. For as it is
v. 25. When Iehosaphat and his people came to take away the spoil of them,
they found amongst them in abundance, both riches with the dead bodies, and
precious jewels (which they stripped off for themselves) more then they could
carry away, and they were three days in gathering of the spoil, it was so
much. For the Lord mighty in battle had turned the strength and weapons of
death and war, which these confederates had prepared against Judah, upon
themselves. The most remarkable circumstance, in this sacred story, was that
the coals and fire of that fatal diffention which brought universal
destruction upon these three armies, did then begin to kindle, when the men of
Judah, and Jerusalem began to praise the Lord with sweet harmony, as well of
heart and spirit, as of voice v. 23. When they began to sing, and praise, the
Lord set ambushments against the children of Ammon, and Moab, and Mount Seir,
which were come against Judah, and they were smitten. For the children of
Ammon, and Moab stood up against the inhabitants of mount Seir, utterly to
destroy, and slay them, and when they had made an end of the inhabitants of
Mount Seir, every one helped to destroy another. Such power there is in the
songs of the Sanctuary, when they are rightly set by the Priest, and taken up
by unanimous consent of prince, and people, united in heart, with the fear of
God, and with loving affection one toward another, and toward Gods Church.
Here was more then an accomplishment of that branch of Solomon's petition in
this Chapter. v. 34. They went out indeed unto their enemies, and by the way
which God had appointed them, but the way which he had now appointed them was
not to fight with them, but to believe in him, who can save us, as well with a
few, as with many; and can maintain the cause of his people, as well without
the industry or endeavors of man, as with them. And for this cause Iehosaphat,
and his people did praise him with like confidence, for the assurance which he
had given them by his Prophet of future victory, as if it had been already
gotten.

A victory, or defeat of the enemy without the active endeavors of men, fully
parallel to this we have in the 2. of Kings c. 19. v. 15. to wit, the great
discomfiture of Senacheribs army, which had for a long time besieged
Jerusalem. Such was the success of Hezekiahs prayers, which were conceived in
that form which Solomon here prescribes, and uttered in this house, which he
now consecrates. And Hezekiah prayed before the Lord, and said, O Lord God of
Israel, which dwell between the Cherubins, thou art the God, even thou
alone, of all the kingdoms of the earth, thou have made heaven and earth, Lord
bow down thine ear, and hear. Open Lord thine eyes, and see, and hear the
words of Senacherib, which has sent him to reproach the living God. v. 15. 16
To this petition he receives this answer v. 32. Thus says the Lord,
concerning the King of Assyria, he shall not come into this city, nor shoot an
Arrow there, nor come before it with shield, nor cast a bank against it. By
the way that he came, the same shall he return, and shall not come into this
city, says the Lord. For I will defend this city, to save it, for mine own
sake, and for my servant David's sake. The like joyful deliverance was obtained
by the prayers of Elisha in that straight siege of Samaria, and the famine,
wherewith the city was so grievously pinched, was suddenly turned into such
plenty, that whereas an Asses head had been fold one day for 40 pieces of
silver, the morrow after, two measures of Barley, and a measure of wheat
flower, was sold for a shekell. 2. Kings 6. 25. and 7. 18. Heaven, we read was
shut up for three years in Elisas's time, the earth was chapped, and the land
of Israel wounded with famine, for want of rain. Heaven is opened again by
Elias his prayer, and the land refreshed, 1. Kings 17. 1. 18. 45. So that there
is not one branch of Solomon's petition, which the Lord did not really
accomplish, when this people prayed unto him, as Solomon prescribes them.

Through want of such prayers as Solomon here makes, or, at least, for want of
that faith, by which the prayers of Iehosaphat, Hezekias and the Prophets were
conceived, Iehoiakim, Zedekiah etc. found no such success; or deliverance in
their distress, as these two godly Princes had done.

But some men, the better they believe these sacred stories, concerning the
infallible success of the Kings of Judah's godly prayers; The more prone they
will be to question in what cases, how far, or whether at all, the undoubted
grant of Solomon's petition may any way concern us, or the times wherein we
live.

The question may seem more pertinent, or rather, the second general point
proposed by us, may seem more questionable, or, (more then questionable)
altogether impertinent; because, most of these victories, or deliverances,
which Judah, or Israel obtained by prayers, were miraculous; such as far
exceed the force of natural causes, or means ordinary, and which are without
the reach, or contrivance of policy. And what assurance then can we have, that
our prayers shall be answered with like success, unless we may believe, or
hope, that even our prayers or supplications may procure true miracles: but
miracles have altogether, or for the most part, ceased for these later times;
in which, for this reason, that song of the Psalmist might be more fitly taken
up, than the practice of Solomon, or the Kings of Judah; We have heard with our
ears, and our fathers have declared unto us the noble works, which thou did
in their days, and in the old time before the^.

Thus to complain of the times wherein we live, in respect of former, all of
us are by nature too prone; and this pronenesse is one special means, by
which the fervency of better spirits devotion is so much dampened: yet Solomon
has told us, that we are but foolish inquisitors; And if but foolish
inquisitors, then certainly no competent judges in this case.

To say, that these times are not more corrupt then former, were to flatter
them; enough to convince us of being time-servers; yet to complain of them, or
to lament them, as men do which have no hope, or assurance in Gods promises,
were to accuse God; a spice of infidelity. Certainly, there is no fault in the
times, or in the places, wherein we live, but such as we our selves
respectively infuse into them, some by wickedness of life, others by impious
or ungodly opinions.

Let us then so use our freedom in speaking the truth of the times wherein we
live, that we do not slander the eternal dispenser of times, and seasons;
that we cast no aspersions upon his fatherly care and providence. God has not
forgotten to be as good, and gracious unto our times, as he has been unto
former ages; but we have forgotten to be thankful unto him; we either are
distrustful of our selves, or, for the most part, teach others to distrust the
extent of his goodness, whose certain belief must be the root of prayers
as well for blessings spiritual, as temporal.

There is no speedier way, or shorter cut unto Gods curse, or vengeance, then
by distrusting his goodness toward our selves, or by denying the fruits of
it unto others.

But to the Quaere proposed, How far the grant of Solomon's petition may
concern our selves, or the times wherein we live, the answer is ready; Our
present interest in that grant, our assurance in Gods promises for blessings
temporal to that people may be as great, our deliverance from dangers
imminent, and unavoidable to the apprehension of man, may be as certain and
infallible as theirs was; albeit God does not in particular promise succor, or
work our safety by the same, and like means as he did theirs.

Admit then it were an Article of our Creed (as it is not) that miracles in
these later times have ceased, may not upon any exigence be expected, that to
seek after such signs, and wonders, as were given then, were a tempting of
God, as intruth it is no better; yet all this ought not to weaken our
assurance, that the issue of our prayers (so they be as faithful as theirs
were) shall be as joyful to our selves, as beneficial to the state and
kingdom, as Iehosaphats and Hezekiahs prayers were. Gods goodness toward us,
his providence over us is still the same, and our belief of this his
goodness, if in us it be true, and sound, it is the same it was in them; so
will the issue be the same, either in kind, or by equivalency. Whether the
like issue or success be wrought by means ordinary, or extraordinary, is
merely accidental to the certain of it; Not to embrace the works of his
wisdom with as thankful hearts, as Israel did the works of his power, would
be childish and pettish.

Hopes of success, whether by means ordinary or miraculous, must in all ages
be grounded upon the same article of faith, but not at all times upon the same
branch of the same article. It is he that made us, which only can preserve us,
and whiles we profess that it is he that made us and not we our selves, that
he is the maker of all things visible, and invisible, we include as much as the
Apostle says, and somewhat more then he expresses in these words, In him we
move, live, and have our being, which contain the three special branches of
Gods power.

Miracles, properly so called, consist in some extraordinary manifestation of
Gods power, either adding somewhat unto, or subtracting somewhat from the
ordinary efficacy of isntrumental causes, or observable course of nature. All
miracles may be reduced to such manifestation either of Gods creative, or his
conservative, or cooperative power.

Sampsons strength, or archievements were truly miraculous, and did suppose an
addition of force supernatural to his native activity, or extraordinary
measure of Gods coworking power.

The victory, which Iosuah got over the Amorites, was after this manner
miraculous. There was a power more than natural, as well in the motion as in
the making of those great stones, wherewith the Amorites were beaten down. The
three Children again were preserved untoucht, in the midst of the flaming
furnace, by true miracle, or extraordinary manifestation of Gods power; But
this consisted not in the addition of any supernatural forces unto it, but in
the mere subtraction of Gods coworking power, without subtraction of his
creative, or conserving power; for so it had ceased not only to burn, but to
be fire. The sudden withering of Ieroboams hand was a true miracle, but did
consist in the subtraction of Gods preserving power, that is, that branch of
his power, in which, as the Apostle speaks, all things live that are endowed
with life.

That God has thus wrought the safety of his servants, and yet is able to
work by these, or the like more miraculous means, we do believe, in that we
believe he is the Almighty maker of heaven, and earth. But besides that
absolute dependence which every particular creature has on these branches of
his power, by which their several efficacies may be extraordinarily increased,
or diminished, there is an essential subordination of all the several ranks
of his creatures, with whatsoever strength or efficacy they be endowed, unto
his providence; as in wisdom he made them all, so in wisdom he marshalleth,
and orders them all.

Now the contrivance of means, or agents, for their nature, or kind but
ordinary, may be more admirable, than miracles properly so called, that is,
than his particular works of wonder.

Miracles are in their nature more apt to affect the sense, but the sweet
contrivances of Gods wisdom, and providence do more affect the understanding:
The one works astonishment, the other admiration. For this reason were
miracles more frequent in the infancy of the Church, as an awful kind of
discipline to enforce unbeleevers to give audience unto the word of life, and
to take Gods promises (which would otherwise be slighted) into serious
consideration.

But the ways of Gods wisdom, or sweet disposition of his providence, are
more apt to cherish the seed of life being sown in men's hearts. Miracles by
continual frequency would cease to be miracles, would not be wondered at;
whereas the unsearchable ways of Gods wisdom, or his indissoluble
contrivances of extraordinary success by means ordinary will uncessantly
breed in us matter of admiration. His ways and contrivances are still in one
kind or other most admirable, but we want eyes, or will, to contemplate, or
observe them. Yet let us see whether the greatest deliverances, which God
wrought for his children of Israel, besides that one in bringing them out of
the land of Egypt, were not wrought by means ordinary and usual, if we
respect their particular or several agencies, and admirable and extraordinary
only for their combination, and contrivance. When the Lord turned again the
captivity of Sion, we were like them that dream. Then was our mouth filled
with laughter, and our tongues with singing. Then said they among the heathen,
the Lord has done great things for them: yea the Lord has done great things
for us already, whereof we rejoice. Psalm. 120. v. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. This was
indeed a great deliverance, and so to be acknowledged by all posterity. For so
the Prophet had foretold, Ier. 23. 7. Behold the day is come, says the Lord,
that they shall no more sya, the Lord lives, which brought forth the children
of Israel out of the land of Egypt; But, the Lord lives, which brought up and
which led the seed of the house of Israel out of the North country, and from
all countries, whether I had driven them, and they shall dwell in their own
land.

Not to make comparison betwixt the mighty works of God, or not to question
whether according to the literal meaning of this Prophecy, the fame or fresh
memory of this second deliverance out of Chaldey, should eclipse the fame of
the former out of Egypt; This is certain and unquestionable, that this latter
deliverance was a most exact parallel to the former. And yet, if we could
exactly calculate all the particular means, which did concur to the
surprisall of Babylon by Cyrus, or to Cyrus his setting this people free, we
should not find one miraculous effect among them; And yet if we would but
seriously compare all the circumstances and concurrences of second causes,
which Herodotus and Xenophon relate, with the sacred predictions concerning
Cyrus his good success against Babylon, the entire contrivance of them is most
admirable; and such as would, give us a more pleasant view, or model of Gods
infinite wisdom, then miracles can do of his infinite power.

Again, in that deliverance of the Jews from Hamans conspiracy, there is no
extraordinary manifestation of Gods power, no particular cause, or agent was in
it is working advanced above the ordinary pitch of nature; and yet the
contrivance, or suiting of these ordinary agents appointed by God, is more
admirable, then if the same end had been effected by means truly miraculous.
For a King not to take kindly rest by night, though in a bed of ease, is not
unusual. For a King, again, to seek to solace his waking thoughts, by
hearing the Annalls of his kingdom, or the journalls of his own reign read
unto him, is more commendable, then rare; But that King Assuerus should lie
awake at that time specially, when Haman did watch and plot the destruction of
the Jews, that causing the Chronicles of his Kingdom to be read, the reader
should light on the place wherein Mordecai his unrewarded good service, in
discovering the treason intended against the Kings person, was recorded; this
was from the keeper of Israel who neither slumbereth nor sleeps, and who was
marveilous in his peoples sight.

It was his doing likewise, that Hester, though by Mordecai's advice, should
conceal her nation and parentage, until she came in such high favor with the
King. That Queen Vashti should be displaced, and she preferred, about the same
time wherein Haman was advanced, and by his advancement enabled to do a
remediless mischief to the Jewish nation had not the Lord (as the wise man
speaks) made one thing against another.

If we would rightly survey that rare deliverance of Iehosaphat and his people
before mentioned, the particular means, by which it was wrought, were but
ordinary, not miraculous: but the coincidence, or concurrence of such means
was more then miraculous. Seeing the spirit of Godhath concealed the particular
occasions of that unexpected hostility, between the children of Ammon, and
Moab, and the Edomites; we have no reason to suspect them to have been any
other, then such as the Lord heretofore has wrought, and yet may work
between the confederate enemies of this kingdoms peace, for our good, if we
shall be thankful; or between our friends, or confederates for the advantage
of the enemy, if we shall continue enemies unto our God. In a word, in that
rare and admirable deliverance, there was no particular rare, or unusual in
respect of those times, unless it were Iehosaphats, and his Nobles firm
reliance, not to the arm of flesh, or probable appearance of means ordinary,
but upon the mercy, and loving kindness of the Lord; in whose wisdom they
knew was treasured up variety of means ordinary, unknown to them, as all
sufficient to save, as if the whole armory of his power, by working miracles,
had been used for their defense.

If Christian states would thoroughly parallel Iehosaphat and Judah in this;
God in this age would parallel the success by the like extraordinary
disposition of means ordinary. As his mercy endures for ever, so the treasure
of his wisdom, for effecting their good which love him, is inexhaustible. It
is not necessary that he should interpose his creative power, or work miracles
for bringing forth success extraordinary, and miraculous; For of means
ordinary, whereof he has infinite store already created; a small number, by
his all-seeing disposition, may suffice for any purpose. He can without
miracles save with a few, as well as with many.

The letters, or elements of all speech, or language are not many; few more in
number than the years of our youth, or nonage; yet the possible compositions
of these few are so various, and copious, as to afford several words,
sufficient not only to signify the diversity of things that are by name, but to
express their natures, and properties; enough to decipher all the actions or
undertakings of men throughout all ages.

How unsearchable then are his ways? how incomprehensible the secret courses,
by which he brings calamity or prosperity upon any nation; who can with greater
facility compose the several ranks of his creature, even all things that are,
then the Printer can do his few letters.

And albeit all the visible means which may be thought to conspire for our
woe, or for our weal, may be, to man's apprehension, apparently the same which
have been manifested in former times, yet his wisdom, by secret addition, or
subtraction of some petty occurrences, may quite alter the success, which from
some former models we fear, or hope, with less ado, than a critique,
permitted to correct a press, can do the sense and meaning of the exactest
writer, by the dispunction or inversion of points or letters. How many devices
soever there be in man's heart, yet as Prove. 19. 21. Solomon says, there is a
counsel of the Lord and that must stand.

It was a grave Christian-like advice, which the heathen Cambyses, from some
broken apprehensions of the great wisdom of his Gods or divine powers, did
give unto Cyrus his son, when he first undertook that quarrel with the
Armenians, which gave occasion to that great war, which by the counsel of
the Lord he happily accomplished against Babylon. The sum of his advise was
this, That he should run no hazard either of his own person, or of his
charge, without sacrificing to the Gods, and receiving directions from them.
For men (says he) in the choice of their actions, or undertakings, do but
rove by guess, not acquainted with the fountains, whence true goodness must
be derived, or the secret issues by which it runs.

Many instances he there brings of men which had wit, or power to compass the
particulars which they most affected, which yet have strangely miscarried in
the maine chance, and as it were ran counter from that end, or mark at which
all men by nature make aim.

The resultance of his many instances, or his experiments to this purpose, is,
That humane wisdom (at the best) has no more skill to choose what is best for
it self, then as if a man should come to a lottery, where he must be content
with the lot which he draws; he has a freedom of will, or power to choose
this before that, but none to make the prize of what he chooses; that was set
before. But as for the immortal Gods they know all things as well past as to
come, and will direct their friends, being consulted, to choose that which is
good, and decline evil. But as for such as are not their friends, there is no
necessity that they should take the like care for them.

We may add, though all men by nature be enemies unto the true and only God;
yet is there is no necessity laid upon any so to continue. All the nations of
the earth have better means of reconciliation unto God then the Temple of
Jerusalem, or the service of it was unto the nation of the Jews, wherein it
stood: God, says the Apostle, was in Christ reconciling (not this or that man)
but the world unto himself. All the nations of the earth, as you heard before,
had their interest in the Temple built by Solomon: The demolishing of it, or
the 2d Temple built by Zerubbabel, reedified and adorned by Herod, can be no
prejudice to any particular nation of the earth, much less to any christian
nation, least of all to this most orthodoxall nation.

But what? Is that way, or means of reconciliation unto God, which we now
have, more excellent then the Jewish nation had whilst Solomon's Temple stood?
Certainly the Son of God did use no Sophisme or aequivocation; He spoke more
then Metaphors, even sacred mysteries, when he said unto the Jews, Destroy
this Temple, and in three days I will raise it up. John 2. 19. For albeit his
words, as the Evangelist instructs us, were literally meant of the Temple of
his body; and though the Jews did pernitiously err in not construing them so;
yet the same words had a farther emblematicall, mystical, or spiritual sense,
importing thus much, that the Jews, by destroying the Temple of his body,
should destroy that very Temple wherein they trusted, and that within three
days it should be raised with him to a more excellent state, or manner of
being than it had.

The material Temple was signed, or marked unto destruction, by the rending of
the veil at the hour of his death: and though the visible building, or so
much of it as was the work of man's hands did stand for forty years after; yet
it stood but as a Carcass, the soul and spirit of it was translated unto the
Temple of his body. For as he said, Veios habitante Camillo Illic Romafuit.
Rome was at Veii whilst Camillus, in whom the life and spirit of the Ancient
Romans did then wholly reside, had his residence in that town. Or as we say,
the Kings royal presence makes the Court: So was it always the immediate or
peculiar presence of God by way of inhabitation, which made that goodly
edifice, which Solomon now erected, to be the Temple or Sanctuary, the house of
prayer.

Now from the time of our Saviors death, God withdrew his extraordinary
presence from the Temple made with hands; all the privileges, wherewith it was
endowed, and the secret influence of his grace, are now wholly treasured up in
the sun of righteousness, or in the body of Christ, in whom, as the Apostle
speaks, the Godhead dwells bodily. God is not so present in any other body
or place, as he was in the Temple of Jerusalem, not present any where by way of
inhabitation, save only in the body of Christ, and in the members of it, that
is, his Church.

But in as much as God is by such special manner present in Christ's manhood,
our access unto him, in all our troubles and distress, is more immediate than
Solomon, or his people had any. They were to pray in the material Temple, or
toward it; their prayers had no other access to heaven, than as it were by
way of Echo from the earthly Temple, and though by this way they found a true
access unto heaven; yet had they not altogether the same acceptance there, as
ours now have, or might have.

Solomon indeed beseeched God, here in my text, that his eyes might be open,
and his ears attent unto the prayers, which were made in this place, to wit,
in the house which he had built. But this he spoke, (...), after the manner
of men. For God had not then the eyes of men to look upon men, nor the ears
of man, as now he has, to entertain the prayers of men.

This is one special comfort, that the Son of God, that very Lord unto whom
Solomon directs his prayer, is become our high Priest, not such an high Priest
as cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but was in all points
tempted like as we are, yet without sin. He has his Temple, or Sanctuary at
the right hand of his Father, Act. 3. 26. where he sits to pray for us, as
Solomon did for his people in his name.

Yea, but he is placed there, as the Apostle speaks, to bless us with all
spiritual blessings, and what are these to blessings of states and kingdoms,
for which Solomon here prays? Much every way; or rather, all in all. For if
blessings spiritual include godliness in them, they have blessings temporal
annexed unto them, as appurtenances, Godliness, says the Apostle, is
profitable unto all things, having the promise of the life that now is, and of
that which is to come. 1. Tim. 4. 8.

THREE SERMONS PREACHED BEFORE THE KING, Upon Ier. 26. 19.

By THOMAS IACKSON Dr in Divinity, and Chaplain in ordinary to his MAJESTY.

OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD An. Dom. 1637.

JEREMIAH 26. V. 19. Did he not fear the Lord, and besought the Lord; and the
Lord repented him of the evil which he had pronounced against them?
THe Text is part of an Apology for the Prophet Jeremiah, against whom the
Priests, and Prophets, and all the people had pronounced this peremptory
sentence, v. 28. Thou shall surely dye; why have thou prophesied in the name of
the Lord, saying, this house shall be like Shilo, and this city shall be
desolate without an Inhabitant. But this sentence you shall find reversed or
contradicted by the Princes and all the people, v. 16. Then said the Princes
and all the people unto the Priests and Prophets, this man is not worthy to
dye, for he has spoken unto us in the name of the Lord our God. The scales of
Justice being thus far turned the right way, the Elders and Sages of the land
sought to keep them at the point whereto they were drawn, (more through
vehemence of present motion, then by permanent weight of reason) by alleging a
former rule beyond exception. All that the Priests and Prophets could pretend,
why Jerusalem having made her self equal to Shiloh in sin, might not be
made equal to her in punishment, was this; That albeit Shiloh had been the
place of Gods rest, the Town or City where the Arc of his Covenant did
reside, yet it never had the title or privilege of the place which God had
chosen to place his name in. This was Ierusalem's prerogative amongst all the
Cities of Israel. But what prerogative soever Jerusalem did from this title
enjoy, these had been the same in the days of Hezekiah, which now they were.
And if in the Judgment of Hezekiah, and the state of Judah, it were lawful
for Micah to threaten, that Sion should be plowed as a field that Jerusalem
should become heaps, and the mountain of the house like the high places of
the forest; It could be no capital crime in Jeremiah to say, that the Lord
would make the Temple like Shiloh, and Jerusalem a curse to all the Nations of
the earth. Now Hezekiah and the state of Judah (as these Elders allege) were
so far from putting Micah to death, that Hezekiah for his part, did fear the
Lord and besought the Lord. And when it is said, he feared the Lord, it is
included that he did not only patiently hear the Prophet, but truly believe
him. For the fear of the Lord in this place is neither to be extended further,
nor contracted narrower than thus; He feared least the Lord should put the
Judgments denounced by Micah in speedy execution, and as is probable, by
Sennacherib King of Assyria. By what means soever the likelihood was that this
Judgment should be put in execution; the only means which Hezekiah resolves
upon for avoiding or preventing it, was hearty and unfeigned praiets. Did he not
fear the Lord, and besought the Lord? etc. In this his resolution and
success, these four particulars present themselves to your considerations;

First, his wisdom in making choice of prayer before and above all other
means, which the opportunity of those times might suggest.

Secondly, what advantageous success did accrue from fear unto the efficacy
of his prayers? or, how fear of God's Judgments does prepare men's hearts to
pray?

Thirdly, of the just occasion of his and his peoples fear; or of others fear
in like case.

Fourthly, in what sense God is said to repent.

If I should say that Hezekiah in thus doing did show himself a godly and
religious King, none would deny it; but to say, he was in this a wise and
politic King, this will not be granted. For what policy was therein fearing
and praying? Every coward is capable of the former; and he is a very fool
that, when other means fail, cannot practice the later. Must we then decline
all trial of his wisdom by the received rule of humane policy? This we might
do, but this we need not do. For the depth of his wisdom and policy will
appear if we measure it by that rule, or scale of that policy which the
wisemen of this world hold in greatest admiration. For so a great master of the
art of policy tells us, that when any state or kingdom is either weakened by
means internal, as by the sloth, the negligence or carelessness of the
Governors (as diseases grow in men's bodies by degrees insensible, for want of
exercise or good diet) or whether they be wounded by causes external; the only
method for recovering their former strength and dignity is, ut omnia ad sua
principia revocentur, by giving life unto the fundamental laws and ancient
customs. As for new inventions, what depth or subtilities soever they carry,
unless they suite well with the fundamental laws or customs of the state
wherein they practice, they prove in the issue but like empiricall Physic,
which agrees not with the natural disposition or customary diet of the party
to whom it is ministered. Of the former aphorism you have many probatum's in
the ancient Roman state; So have ye of the later in the state of Italy, about
the time wherein Machiavel wrote (if we may believe him) in his own
profession. Admit then the rule or method were (as, for ought I have to say, it
is) without exception, yet the success of the practice (how conformable soever
to the rule) must still depend on that measure of goodness which is contained
in the fundamental laws or primevall customs of every Nation. If these be
but comparatively good, the success of the practice cannot be absolute: If
they be but seemingly good, or mixed with evil; the great Philosopher treating
of this subject has foretold the success, (...), whatsoever is either falsely
or but seemingly good, will in revolution of time bring forth effects truly and
really evil. If the fundamenmentall laws of any state be not firm or sound,
whatsoever else is laid upon them, there lies a necessity of finking with their
own weight. Where the basis is but narrow, the fastigium or roof cannot be
high. Or where the foundation is both firm and spacious, yet if the structure
be set awry, with every degree of height it gets, there grows a parallel
degree of inclination to its sudden downfall. Now if Hezekiah in making choice
of prayer before any other means of policy, did practice according to the
former rule, that is, as the ancient laws of that kingdom, and rules of
government prescribed by his Ancestors did direct him, he was more politickly,
wise than any Prince of other Nations in these times could be: than any at this
day can be, besides such as have the like fundamental laws, or take his
practice in like exigence for their pattern. For the fundamental laws of his
kingdom were absolutely good, as being immediately given by God himself. The
best laws of other Nations were but the inventions of men. Hence says the
Psalmist Psalm. 147. v. 19. He shows his word unto Jacob, his statutes and
ordinances unto Israel. Yet Moses presumed that other Nations, which had no
knowledge of their laws in particular, should from the happy success which
was to attend their due observance, acknowledge in general that their laws
were more righteous, and able to make this people wiser than other Nations
could be. For so Moses had said Deuteronomy. 4. 5. Behold I have taught you statutes,
and Judgments, even as the Lord my God commanded me, keep therefore and do
them: For this is your wisdom and understanding in the sight of the Nations,
which shall hear all these statutes, and say, surely this great Nation is a
wise and understanding people: And what Nation is there so great that has
statutes and Judgments so righteous, as all this law which I set before you
this day.

Amongst other Nations some had laws (in their kind) good for war, others
for peace, few or none, good laws for both; none, absolutely good for either.
No such laws as their strict observance might secure them from their enemies.
They could not be so wise in projecting their own future prosperity, but their
enemies might be as subtle in contriving their adversity. They could not be
so strong in battle, but their enemies and their Allies might be as strong as
they. They could not be so industrious or vigilant for recovering the strength
or dignity of their weakened estate, but their enemies might be as vigilant to
defeat their intentions. Or albeit one Nation had so far overtopped another,
as well in council of peace, as strength of war, as to be able to keep them
perpetually under: yet no laws, no inventions of men could ever secure the
most potent Nation on earth from such dangers as accrue from the host of
inanimate or reasonlesse creatures, albeit all Neighbor: Nations were at peace
with them or sworn confederates for advancing their state and dignity. Against
the hosts or armies of men, some preparations may always be made, because they
come not without notice or preparation; but the several hosts of the
reasonlesse creatures come upon men, for the most part, without observation or
foresight. And one of them can execute another office or charge, or every one
accomplish that work which the Armies of men did intend, but could not execute.

That scarcity of bread, or other calamity, which sometime suddenly arises in
some limb or corner of a kingdom, by want of trade, or by shutting up too
great a multitude of ships for a long time in one harbor, whilst the enemy or
Pirates annoy the coasts; how easily might it be much increased, if he that
keeps the winds as in a treasure house, should shut up a greater multitude of
ships for a long time in the same harbor by a contrary wind, albeit their
enemies in the mean while become their friends: albeit they were provided of
an invincible navy at an hours warning. Or in case they did know whence the
wind comes or whither it is going, or could so covenant that it should blow
where and when they listed; yet if the Lord of hosts be so pleased, he can
bring a greater dearth and scarcity upon the most fertile provinces of the
land, then either the enemy, or contrary winds can occasion; either by
withdrawing the sweet influence of the heavens, or by corrupting the seed
lately sown, or corn ready to be reaped with abundant moisture. Or, admit any
people or Nation by miracle or divine dispensation might have authority, not
over the winds only but over the clouds, the rain, and dew: or such a power
of shutting and opening heaven, as husbandmen have of letting in brooks upon
their meadows, and taking them off again at their pleasures; so as they might
have seed time, and harvest as seasonable, their fields as fruitful, the Sea
as open as their hearts could desire; yet the very freedom of commerce and
traffic (whether with foraine Nations, or with other members of the same
Nation) may bring in a greater inconvenience (which no plenty can hold out)
then the enemy, then unseasonable wind or weather could threaten. Want of
trade and want of victuals are plagues or punishments sent by God; but the
plague of pestilence, which is often times the companion of peace and plenty, the
usual effect of free trading or traffic, is more terrible then either of the
former wants. And thus may every part of the reasonlesse host accomplish what
another had omitted. Now with turbulent spirits, or unruly men, good laws
duly executed may take some order; but against unseasonable weather, against
unruly or incommodious winds, no law of man, no act of Parliament can provide.
Against the plague or pestilence, no council of state or war, no host or
army can secure themselves, much less others. Though they that besiege and are
besieged do keep watch and sentinel day and night, yet the arrows of this
dreadful messenger fly more certainly to the mark, whereto they are
directed, though at midnight, then their bullets do at midday.

As there is no counsel against the Lord, so there is no policy that can
prevent, the execution of Gods judgments upon mightiest kingdoms by the
meanest of his creatures besides that policy which his laws given to Israel
did prescribe. One special branch of that wisdom which Moses ascribes unto
these laws was, they taught their observers not to trust in bow or shield, not
to put any part of their confidence in the strength or wit of man, no not in
their own observation of these very laws, or reformation wrought by their
rules (as it was theirs) but only in the Lord of hosts. He was their wisdom,
and he was their strength, whenever any danger did approach whether from men,
or from other creatures, their laws did teach them that he was absolute Lord
over all, that the hearts of Kings and Governors were under his governance,
that he could dispose and turn them as it seemed best to his heavenly wisdom.
And that always seems best to him, which is for the good of such as repose
their whole trust and confidence in him. When Isreal's enemies displeased him,
more then Israel did, he made them stronger then their enemies; and when their
ways did please him, he made their enemies (as Solomon speaks) to be at peace
with them. Whilst they faithfully served this Lord of hosts, they knew he
could command the whole host of the reasonlesse or livelesse creatures to do
them service.

From this knowledge of God and his laws did Solomon gather these unerring
rules of sacred policy, whose observation at this time did, and might for ever
have preserved this kingdom. There is no inconvenience of peace, no mischeife
of war, no kind of calamity which can befall any state or kingdom, against
which the fundamental laws of this Nation and the rules of policy gathered
from them by Solomon did not sufficiently provide. The sovereign remedies for
every particular disease or kind of calamity, are set down at large. 2. Chron.
6. v. 22. to the 40. The remedy against the calamity of war v. 24. 25. against
the calamity that may come by drought v. 26. 27. against famine, pestilence,
and blasting of corn, or other inconvenience from the host of reasonlesse
creatures, you have the remedy v. 29. 30. against captivity in a foraigne land
v. 37. 38. The sovereign remedy against all these and other like
inconveniences and calamities is for substance one and the same with that which
good King Hezekiah here used, to fear the Lord, and pray unto the Lord, either
in the Temple when they had opportunity to resort unto it, or toward the
Temple or the place wherein it stood, when they soiourned (...) were detained
Captives in a foraigne land. And who so would diligently peruse the sacred
story, from Solomon's time until this peoples return from captivity, and the
building up of the second Temple, shall find a probatum of this Catholic and
sovereign medicine, in respect of every branch of calamity mentioned by
Solomon at the consecration of the first Temple. I must hold to the instance of
my Text. Another branch of that which was contained in the fundamental laws
of this kingdom, and which goes a great deal deeper than the fundamental
rules of any other policy, was this; that of all calamities which did or could
befall them, their sins and transgressions were the prime causes; and
whatsoever afflictions were laid upon them for their sins, could not be
taken off without the humble supplication of the sinners. Unto a lower ebb
then King Ahaz did leave it at, the kingdom of Judah had not been brought by
any of his Predecessors, or by any other in their days. Now of all the
miseries which at any time befell it by the famine, by the enemies sword, or by
the pestilence, the only cause which the rule of faith assigns, was their
forsaking of the Lord their God, and the transgressing of his laws. But to
prevent the perpetuity and continuance of such calamities as king Ahaz and his
Adherents had by their foul transgressions involved this kingdom in, no
attempt or practice of Prince or people, whether jointly or severally, did ever
find success, until they put Solomon's rules of sacred policy in practice, as
good king Hezekiah did; Did he not fear the Lord, and prayed before the Lord
etc.? The fruits of his prayer, and the reformation of those corrupt times, by
giving life unto their fundamental laws, were two. First his prayers procured
an healing of the wounds which by negligence of his Predecessors had been
given to the State. Secondly, he prevented the execution of those terrible
Judgments which in his own days did hang over this land and people, specially
over their Heads and Rulers. The kingdom of David had sometimes exceeded the
most flourishing neighbor kingdoms, as far as the Cedars of Libanus did the
ordinary trees of the forest; but was now brought low. That height, which was
left her, but as a decayed tree marked to the fall; Hezekiah by zealous prayers
removes the axe from the root, after it had made such deep incision that it
was scarce able to bear its stem, though dispoiled of his top or principal
branches: it nearely concerned every one which hoped for shelter under its
shade, to pray for gentle winds and comfortable weather, that she might
recover root and branch again. But so Hezekiah's and his peoples Successors
did not. Manasses his son found a people not untoward, as being in some
tolerable sort reformed by Hezekiah; but he himself a most untoward King, able
(by his authority and bad example) to undo what his good father had well done:
to spoil and mar a greater people than he was Lord of, though better
reformed in Josiah grandchild to this Manasses, as good a King as could be
wished for: a man that needed no reformation: a fit pattern for reforming
others. But this heavenly star was placed in an earthly sphere; he had to
deal with such a lewd court and naughty people, as choked the influence of
his goodness. And albeit his personal performances in his attempted
reformation, were no way inferior to Hezekiah's practice in this place; yet
neither his performances nor prayers found the like success. He could not
plant the fear of the Lord either in his people or in his own childrens
hearts. And if we sequester Josiah his attempt of reformation from Hezekiah his
time unto the destruction of the City and Temple; there was sometimes on the
Princes part, sometimes on the peoples part, usually on all parts, Prince and
people, if not a continual increase of sin, yet a continuance in usual and
wonted sins. And where Gods Judgments have once seized upon a land or
people, there is no removal of them without public repentance: no true
repentance without prayer, no prayers effectual without fear of the Lord. Did
he not fear the Lord, and befought the Lord etc. His prayers were earnest and
effectual because his fear was hearty, and unfeigned, not affected. But how
fear should perform the office either of mother or midwife for the bringing
forth of succesfull prayers is a Quaere not to be omitted, and was the second
general proposed.

Pray we may, but our prayers cannot be successful, unless they be
conceived in faith; And faith (as our Apostle tells us Heb. 11. 1.) is the
ground or substance of things hoped for. And what affinity is there, what
agreement can there be, between fear, and hope or confidence, which is if not
the nature, yet, the native issue of faith. From these words of the Apostle
[faith is the ground of things hoped for] happily it was that some late writers
have put fiducia or confidence in the very definition of faith. But we are to
consider that the former words of our Apostle, contain rather a character,
then a just description or definition of faith. Otherwise his words following
had been superfluous [faith is the evidence of things not seene] And under
this more general character, things feared may be as directly contained as
things hoped for. But have we any Scripture to warrant us, that faith in some
cases may be as truly the ground of things feared, as of things hoped for?
Yes. By faith (says the Apotle Heb. 11. 7.) Noah being warned of God of things
not seen as yet, moved with fear, prepared an Arc for the saving of his
house. Or if we consider faith not in it is universality, as it equally respects
the whole word of God, but as it has a peculiar reference unto his covenant
with this people, that (we know) was not a covenant of life only, but a
covenant of life and death. And all the writings of the Prophets which were to
them, and are to us, the truest leaders and guides unto faith, are as full of
threatenings as of promises: their sweetest hymns are composed as well of
judgment as of mercy. So that faith if it be not lame or defective, has two
hands; as well a left hand to apprehend the truth of Gods judgments threatened,
whilst we swarve from the ways of life; as a right hand, to lay hold on the
truth of his promises, whilst we are not conscious of such deviation. Fear
then, which is no other then an expectation or apprehension of evil, is the
left hand of faith; and hope which is the expectation or apprehension of good,
is the right. And they who place the nature of faith in fiducia, or co^fine it
unto confidence do utterly maime it on the left side; and being maimed or dead
on the left side, it cannot be sound or lively on the right. That which they
term fiducia or confidence in Gods promises, if it be not supported with an
implanted fear of his judgments threatened, is in true language but
presumption; It cannot bring forth the prayers of faith. For prayers made in
faith presuppose and include a sincere renouncing or relinquishing of those
desires or practices which by nature, or course of Gods Justice, are either
incompatible with the blessings which we pray or hope for; or are the causes of
the evils threatened or inflicted. He that will offer the sacrifice of prayer
unto God for his health, must abandon all excess and riot; otherwise he does
but mock God. And he that supplicates for the forgivenes of his sins, must
be prepared in heart to forgive such as have sinned or trespassed against him.
It Is our Saviors own comment upon the prayer which he has taught us. And
hence the heathen Cynick did justly deride such supplicants and sacrificers as
continued in riot whilst they tendered their prayers and sacrifices to entreat
Gods favor toward themselves for health. Whilst we retain malicious or
revengefull purposes toward our neighbors, it is to put in a caveat against
our own suits or petitions in the court of heaven.

Now unto this qualification or preparative unto prayer, which consists in the
abandoning of those practices or resolutions which stand as a bar or caveat
against our petitions and supplications; there is no means so effectual, no
method so compendious, as hearty and unfeined fear of Gods judgments. It is
the very arm or hand of faith, for remooving all such obstacles. For fear (as
we said before) is the expectation of evil approaching. And the apprehension
of any remediless mischief, of any greater inconvenience or inestimable
evil, will oversway the hope or expectation of any inferior good, be it
matter of pleasure or commodity by which two matters only we are withdrawn
from goodness it self. And if any man be altogether wedded unto temporary
delights or contentments, it is for want of fear. In the beginning of a storm
the Merchant or passenger will be unwilling to cast any part, especially of his
most precious commodities, over board; but in case, storms increase, to his
sight or observation, if then the Pilot or Mariner can persuade him, that the
ship wherein he sails, unless it be speedily disburthened, will shortly
sink; the certain fear of loosing all will moove him to part with one half,
or instant dread of loosing his own life, will make him willing (if need so
require) to part with all. The griping Usurer will be ready to release the
unconscionable interest covenanted for, if the Lawyer in whom he trusts can
persuade him, that by rigorous exaction of the use he may come to loose the
principal, or to incur a censure from which both use and principal will not
free him. The case of Judah in this extremity was the very same, if we compare
the judgments threatened by Micah with the nature and quality of the sins
that had provoked them) as you may find in the Prophet Micah 3. 9. They build
up Sion with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity. The heads thereof judge for
reward, and the Priests therereof teach for hire, and the Prophets thereof
divine for money. Now until these greedy hopes of unlawful gain were
abandoned, they could not pray in faith. The ministration of public Justice
for private reward, the Priests teaching for hire, and the Prophets divination
for money, would (respectively) turn their very prayers into sin. Now what
means could be more effectual for abandoning these and the like sins then
the judgment which the Prophet there threatened from the Lord? Therefore shall
Sion for your sake be plowed as a field, and Jerusalem shall become heaps, and
the mountain of the house as the high places of the forest, Micah 3. 12.

If the heads of the house of Judah, and Princes of the house of Israel, to
whom this message is directed, did sincerely and truly believe him that sent
it, they could not but fear, least without their speedy repentance the Lord
would quickly accomplish whatsoever the Prophet in his name had threatened. Now
hearty and unfeigned fear that Sion should be plowed as a field, that Jerusalem
should become a heap, would move all such as had not their habitation only but
the very root of their livelihood in them, to lay a better foundation of their
own, and of their posterities welfare, than blood and violence. It would
incline the hearts of their Rulers and Magistrates to break off their iniquity
by sincere administration of Justice: by almsdeeds and works of mercy. Fear
again least the mountain of the house, that is, the Temple (or whose
flourishing estate the livelihood and welfare of Priests and Prophets did so
depend, as the Passengers life does on the safety of the ship wherein he
sails) would work their hearts to an observance of the properties or
qualifications, to the performance of all the conditions which are required to
faithful and effectual prayers. But of the conditions of successful
prayers, and of the qualification of good Suppliants, fitter occasion will
offer it self hereafter. Thus much toward this purpose we have gotten from
these generals, that the hearts of men which have been long accustomed or
hardened in perverse courses of grosser sins, will hardly be new molded or
refashioned according or wrought unto the temper and model of Hezekiah's
heart, until they be made to melt with fear of such Judgments as Micah here
theatened against Judah, Jerusalem, and Sion. For producing this melting or
mollifying fear the considerations are specially three. First, the
consciousnesse or apprehensions of such sins as specially provoke Gods anger,
or solicit his Judgments. Secondly, a faithful recounting of divine
forewarnings or monitions past, especially if they have been grossly neglected
or usually slighted. Thirdly, the Inspection of the isntrumental causes, or
means in probability appointed for the execution of Judgments threatened; or a
diligent observance of the signs of the time.

As these be the special means for begetting unfeigned fear: so the best
method for nurturing up such fear begotten, that it neither grow slavish nor
wild, that it end not in desperation, is to know in what sense, the Lord is
said to repent. For the sins which specially provoke Gods fearful judgment
against any land or people, we cannot have a more distinct view of them in
breife, than from the Prophet Micah in the forecited place. Bribery and
corruption in the seats of Justice: oppressions and cruelty in the mighty and
wealthy, mercenary temporizings in the sons of Levi; every one of these
diseases is dangerous, though alone: but when they all meet in any state or
kingdom, they grow deadly. Or if Micah may be no further allowed of, than of a
single witness, we may add unto him the like testimonies of the Prophet
Isaiah, who lived in the same time with him. Corruption in the seat of
Justice, did in his time taint the service of the Temple, turned the prayers of
the Rulers into sin, and made their sacrifices become abominable. Esaias 1. 14.
The very averseness or unwillingnesse of such Rulers and oppressors as these
were, to have the law laid unto them by the Prophets, was a prognostic of
sudden Judgments approaching, Isaiah 30. 13. Therefore this iniquity shall
be to you as a breach ready to fall, swelling out in a high wall, whose
breaking comes at an instant. Now if the Priests and Prophets, whose office it
is to discover and repair such breaches, do but dawbe them with untempered
mortar, and so hide and cover them from their sight, whom it concerns to
beware of them; by this doing, they draw the multitude within the reach of that
ruin and destruction, which like a trap or snare was ready to fall upon them.
Or least any should suspect that these prognostics did serve only for
Jerusalem and Judah, the same Prophet instructs us, Isaiah 47. that it was
oppression and cruelty toward such as she had conquered, which did draw Gods
Judgments upon Babel. But that which made them to fall so suddenly and
unexpectedly upon them, was the popular and man-pleasing humors of her
Soothsayers and Diviners.

Jerusalem and Judah were at this time sick of all those three diseases, and
therefore had just cause to fear the judgments threatened;

Quid, quod and hos morbos gravius symptoma sequatur?

There is a symptom mentioned by the Prophet Micah, which was worse then the
diseases themselves; yet will they lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not the
Lord among us? None ill can come upon us. v. 11. Elsewhere we read this people
taxed by Gods Prophets for trusting sometimes in lies; sometimes in oppression
or violence; often times for putting confidence in their own strength, or in the
strength of their confederates. But of any branch of this fault they were not
at this time guilty; yet taxed no less, as being no less taxe-worthy, shall I
say, for trusting the Lord, or rather (as the Prophet says) for leaning on the
Lord? That is, for presuming on his favor in the consciousnesse of such sins
as they now stood charged with. That to presume on Gods wonted favors or
ordinary protection in the consciousnesse of extraordinary sins is a most
grievous sin against God, (best proportioned by his sin against Gods
Deputy, who being infected with some dangerous disease should presume to rest
himself upon the royal chair,) is a truth unquestionable. But why this
people, being thus dangerously infected, should at this time specially lean
upon the Lord, and avouch his warrant upon their protection, may well be
questioned, and not unfitting to be inquired after. The reason (I take it) is
this; These peoples fore-elders, or these very men themselves, in Ahaz time had
usually been indicted of Idolatry, and found guilty, specially of worshipping
in high places, and serving groves and Idols. But Hezekiah in the very
beginning of his reign, remooved the high places, brake the Images, cut down
the groves, brake in pieces the brazen Serpent that Moses had made. 2. Kings
18. v. 14. Nor was he more zealous in repressing all worships of false Gods or
Idolatry, then in restoring the service and worship of the true God. Albeit he
had found the Temple so strangely profaned in the first month of the year
and of his reign, as might seem to require many months labor for it is
preparation and cleansing; yet in the second month by his zealous care, the
feast of unleavened bread with the Passover and other parts of Gods service
were celebrated with such public joy and solemnity, as the like had not been
seen in Jerusalem from the days of Solomon the son of David, who
consecrated the Temple, as we read 2. Chron. 30. v. 26. In all this reformation
the Heads and Rulers, the Priests and Levites, with other parties principally
taxed by the Prophet Micah, had gone along with their good King, and no doubt
had entered the same Covenant with the Lord their God, which he resolved to do
2. Chron. 29. v. 10. and having thus returned unto the God of their Fathers,
they presumed that he was now turned to them, and would be their Guardian and
Protector against their enemies. Albeit they had seen their Brethren, the ten
Tribes of Israel, about this time lead into captivity by the Affyrian, yet this
sad accident, through the deceitfulness of hypocrisy, would in all likely hood
add more to their presumption than to their fear. They were at all times
prone to judge others rashly and therefore at this time would in all likelihood
suspect, that this Judgment had befalne Israel because they had this plausible
pretense or motive, that Israel for the most part would not join with Hezekiah
in this reformation of religion, or restoration of Gods service, but scoffed
at his messengers, when they were solemnly invited thereunto. But this
reformation, alas, was on Judah's part (the King excepted) but a lame or
defective reformation. For whilst they pulled down idols in the high places,
suffering the idols of covetousness, oppression, and cruelty to be enshrined
in their hearts: whilst they cleanse the Temple from material filth or
profanation, and in the mean time harbored profaneness and uncleanesse in
their own breasts; they did not turn to the Lord with their whole hearts, as
the Lord in the Law required, and Solomon in the consecration of the Temple did
on their part capitulate and covenant.

However an half reformation was better then none. Less evil it was to have
no Idols or Images in the high places, no profaneness in the Temple: then to
have Idols both in their breasts, and in the woods, then to have the Temple of
God and their hearts alike profaned. This is true; yet whilst they rest
persuaded, that the Lord will graciously accept of their lame sacrifice, that
is, of this superficial, or half reformation, or that he was tied by promise
to perform the mercies, which he promised to David and Solomon upon true
repentance, unto them, as they were now affected, Laude^ cum crimine pensant,
this confidence or presumption was worse then the abuses which they had
reformed. To rely or lean upon the Lord in the consciousnesse of those
outcrying sins, was perfect hypocrisy; And that is, if not worse far,
altogether as bad, as downright open Idolatry. And the Prophet Micah would
give posterity to understand, that these delinquents presumption upon Gods
favor, before they repented of their gross sins or delinquences, did provoke
Gods fierce wrath against them, more then the sins themselves did. They
presumed God would be extraordinarily favorable unto them for Jerusalem and
Sion's sake; at least for the Temples sake, seeing the Lord had chosen that
place to put his name there. But the righteous Lord by his Prophet declares
himself to be so far from this partiality or respect of persons, that
Jerusalem for their sakes should become an heap; that Sion for their sakes
should be plowed as a field; that the Temple, in which they trusted, should
for their sakes be made like the high places of the forest.

The sum or resultancy of all that has been said, is this; That as in every
Nation he that fears God and works righteousness is accepted of him: So in
whatsoever place or Nation bribery and oppression in the laiety, mercenary
temporizing in the clergy, and hypocrisy in most sorts abound, Gods fearful
judgments still do gather as they increase; and without repentant prayers and
supplications, are suddenly powered out like a thundershowre.

But this thesis or Mayor proposition will have the faithful assent of all
good Christians. All the difficulty will be in framing a Minor or assumption,
which shall run parallel with this Mayor; That is to persuade the
Magistracy, the Gentry, and Clergy of any state or kingdom, that they are
respectively as faulty, as deeply guilty of these sins, as men of their rank
and place were in the state of Judah in Hezekiah's days. All that I have to
say in this point, for the present, is to beseech Almighty God, that every man
amongst us whom it concerns (and it more or less concerns all) may enter into
his own heart, and may unpartially examine and judge himself, that this land
and people be never so judged of the Lord, as Micah had threatened Jerusalem and
Judah should be, in the days of good Hezekiah.

THE SECOND SERMON UPON IER. 26. 19.
AN hard task it would be to persuade the Magistracy, the Gentry and Clergy
of any state or kingdom throughout Christendom, that they are as deeply
guilty of these sins, as men of their place and rank in Judah were, against
whom Micah denounced that terrible judgment.

Against all that we can allege to this purpose, there is one general
exception, alike common to all our hearers whom it concerns. They must believe
that the state of Judah was deeply tainted with bribery, corruption, and
oppression, because the Prophet Micah has said it. But modern preachers are
no Prophets, nor is all which they say to be accounted any part either of Gods
law or Gospel. The exception indeed is thus far pertinent, that the same
spirit of God, which taught the Prophets to foresee evils to come or
judgments approaching, did likewise notify unto them many matters of fact
present or past, which did provoke Gods judgments. But of the like matters of
their fact with their qualities, such as are no Prophets can have no just
notice, can have no better knowledge of them then by here-say. Now faith
comes not by here-say, nor may the messenger of God so far believe, all
that he hears, though from many mouths, as to make it matter for the pulpit.
Yet one of these two we must believe, we may be certain of; either that the
Magistrates, Nobles and Clergy of this Realm are as faulty, as men of their
rank and place in Judah were in Micahs time: or that the people of this
kingdom are more malicious and slanderous, at least more quarelous then the
people of Judah were. If Vox populi were always Vox Dei, we might proceed
with warrant of Gods word to make the same conclusion that Micah did, to
thunder out present judgment against the Court, against the chief cities of
his kingdom, and against the Church established in this kingdom.

2 But whether are more faulty, Magistrates and Superiors in giving just
occasion to be thus thought of, or inferiors in taking occasion where none is
given, or greater then is justly given, this I leave to the searcher of all
hearts, who has reserved the judgments of times and seasons and of men's
demerits in them unto himself alone by peculiar right of prerogative. The most
useful point that I can pitch upon, will be to discover the errors or
fallacies by which we usually deceive our selves, even whilst we endeavor to
examine or judge our selves.

3 Now as into cities strongly fortified, well stored with men and victuals,
the enemy often times finds entrance, either by the negligence of the watch, or
at some secret places for the time ill manned: So into Churches or commonweals well grounded in points of faith and Orthodoxall doctrine, and abounding
with all spiritual food, destruction and ruin (such judgment as Micah here
threatened) find easy passage by a twofold negligence or incogitancy, rather
then gross error. The first incogitancy common to most is, that we hold it
sufficient to repent us of our own sins or of the sins of our own times.
The second, that even such as are willing to take an accurate view as well of
their forefathers or predecessors sins, as as of their own sins, or of
the sins of the time and place where they live, do often use a false or
imperfect scale. For preventing the first incogitance, we are to consider, that
albeit God do never punish the children for their fathers sins, yet he
usually visits the sins of the father upon the children, at least with
temporal plagues or punishments, as well public as private. And this
visitation is sometimes drawn upon posterity, not so much by a pronenes to
imitate their fore-elders in those actual sins by which they did first
provoke Gods wrath, as by a promptness to maintain the Arts of their
fore-elders (without addition unto them) especially if they have been
warranted by any kind of legality. For children not to confess the sins of
their forefathers, not to repent of them, not to make satisfaction for them,
(so far as, they have been injurious to men) is by the rule of divine
Justice sufficient to charge the inheritance, which descends unto posterity,
with the punishments due to their actual transgressions from whom it descends.
Not to visit the sins immediately upon the first transgressions or
transgressors, but to give them and their successors a larger time for
repentance, is a branch of Gods long suffering and mercy. But to visit the sins,
not duly repented of by the first and second, upon the third and fourth
generation, is a branch of Justice, declared and avouched by God himself in
the second commandment. But this point will meet us again in the reformation
attempted by the good Josias. The second incogitance is more pertinent to this
place, and in it self more dangerous. And it is this. Many which carefully
endeavor to frame their lives and actions by the prophetical rule, are not so
careful and provident to measure their transgressions by the prophetical
scale, or by the balance of the Sanctuary, but according to the rate of
modern corrupt language. Thus when we hear the Prophets compare the
oppressors or corrupt Magistrates of their times to ravenous wolves, to
brambles or thorny hedges most men instantly conceive that the parties whom
Gods Prophets (which were no slanderers) did thus deeply censure, had taken
away their neighbors lives or goods by strong hand, by some notorious
disturbance of public peace, by such palpable facts, as with us are said to
be contrary to the crown and dignity of the Prince. And by this gross
calculation many Potentates, and Magistrates, many that take upon them to be
reformers of others, run further upon the score of Gods wrath then the Jewish
Rulers in Mica's time did, before they bethink themselves of any danger. Many
again of tender consciences in respect of diverse duties whereof others make no
scruple, when they hear or read the woes denounced against hypocrites will
with the Poet detest such lying lips, even as the gates of Hell, which speak
well, and mean ill; which have God in their mouths, and the Devil in their
hearts. But he that measures this sin of Hypocrisy by this Heathenish scale,
may come to make up the full measure of it, before he has charged it upon his
accounts, or bethink himself to be in such arrerrages for this sin, as
deserves to be called for.

4 By the same oversight many people which firmly believe the prophetical
rules to be most infallibly true, make up the measure of their iniquity, before
they have made up their intended accounts, or suspect themselves to be in any
such arrerrages as may deserve the Prophets censure, or to be called upon by
threatening Gods Judgments. The error it self is much what the same, as if a
factor which stands charged with a thousand pounds sterling according to the
old hanse or esterling pay should make up his private reckonings according to
the rate of pounds or coin this day current throughout this kingdom; he which
thus accounts for any great sum, must needs fall into the error of the Church
of the Laodiceans Rev. 3. to think himself rich or well before hand when he
is poor and wretched and liable to a debt, unsatisfiable by himself,
unsupportable by his friends, yet our accounts unto God we make up for the most
part afthis manner.

5. To make these different calculations agree, or to reform or rectify our
corrupt language by the rule of the Sanctuary, that which we usually call
warrines in dealing, or wit to use the benefit of the Law, or the advantage of
times in making bargains; This in the prophetical language is hunting our
brother with a net, and whereas the Prophet says of the Judges and Magistrates
of his times, that even the best of them was but a bramble and the most upright
amongst them as a thorny hedge. This is the very Scantlings of the fairest
course of legal proceedings which poor men in time shall find. The least
protection which the customary course of law affords unto them, is but like the
shelter which silly sheep in a storm, find under a hedge of thorn, or bush
of brambles. However the law may protect them from the violence which other
intend against them, yet shall they be sure to leave their fleece for this
protection. It is a thing much to be wished that either the courts of temporal
law were not so open, or the doors of the Sanctuary might be closer shut than
they are, specially against such as are upon petty occasions, far more ready
to spend a hundred pounds in legal vexation of his neighbor, or Christian
brother, than to give an hundred pence for Christ's sake, or his Church, be the
cause never so urgent, or just. That which in the language of great landlords
is no more then to make the most or best of their own, is in the Prophets
dialect neither better, nor worse, then to play the ravenous wolves to eat the
flesh, and gnaw the bones of their poor brethren.

It Micah or Jeremy or Zephany were now alive, and should see many poor
hunger-starved wretches whose friends and parents had been undone by racking
of rents, or hard bargains, or by suites of law, they would take the boldness
upon them to pluck our bravest gallants, our wealthiest Citizens our greatest
landlords, our gravest lawyers by the sleeves in the open street and tell them
to their faces, the limbs and bones of these poor wretches are in the beams
and rafters of your stately houses, their flesh and blood is in your dainty
dishes you suck their very marrow in your pleasant cups. The bread of the
poor, says the son of Sirach, is the life of the needy, he that deprives him
of it is a man of blood, he that takes away his neighbors living slays him,
and he that defraudeth the labor of his heir is a bloud-shedder. Ecclus. 34.
21. 22. This Character goes deeper then a murderer with us. So does the
Prophet Zephany censure of the corrupt Rulers in his time, exceed the Notion
which we have of Canibals, the Princes of the oppressing City are roaring
Lions, her Judges, are evening wolves, they gnaw not the bones until tomorrow.
Zephan. 3. 3. But are not the sons of Levi in our times as liable to these
Prophets censure concerning the Priests and Prophets of Judah in their days?
Has the Clergy no portion in the measure of this lands iniquity? Surely if
the sins of this land that at any time within these forty years past had
been divided into ten parts, the transgressions of the pulpit and
Print-houses would have largely made up a tenth part. And they have not in any
point more offended, then either in giving this people a false, or in not
giving them a true Scale of that hypocrisy which the spirit of God so much
condemns. A kind of hypocrisy there is which consists in pretending one
thing and meaning another: but this is so gross that the very heathens detest
it. The greatest cunning or proficiency that practitioners in this kind
attain unto, is to deceive others not themselves. To applaude their own wits,
men of this guise may have some occasion, but no temptation to applaud
themselves for extraordinary honesty or sanctity of life, whereas to deceive
themselves, more then any others? To think themselves more righteous and
religious then their neighbors, is the inseparable Symptom of hypocrisy
truly pharisaicall, this is a disease of the soul which cannot be directly
intended or caused? It has it is being only by resultance, and it always
results from an extraordinary measure of zeal, but of zeal obstructed or not
uniformely dispensed throughout the whole body of Christian religious duties.
Now, wheresoever zeal is not uniforme or free from obstructions, the greater
zeal men bear unto some particular duties, as to hearing of the word; or that
which they conceive to be the form of wholesome doctrine; or to observance of
rules, for avoiding superstition or profaneness; the more censorious they
become of others, and more uncharitable toward all that will not comply with
them in their rigid zeal or curiosity of reformation. It was not a pretended
nicety, but an interanall zeal of straining of gnats which did so blind and
embolden the Pharisees to swallow Camels. They knew themselves to be as free
from gross Idolatry, and were as zealous reformers of it and breach of Sabbath
as any living men could be, yet these were the two special sins for which
their forefathers were punished, and out of that deep notice which they had in
reforming these gross abuses they said, as they were persuaded, if we had
lived in the days of our forefathers we would not have been partakers with
them in the blood of the Prophets, and yet by thus judging their forefathers
they did condemn themselves, and were even then making up the measure of their
iniquity, as our Savior foretells them. Mat. 23. v. 32. their mere overprising
this reformation did bring forth worse effects in them than worshipping of
Idols, or breach of Saboth. Their fathers had killed the Prophets for diswading
them from these two delightful sins. These later Jews put the Prince of
Prophets to death because he would not comply with them in the rigid
reformation of these two sins. This was the very root of their extreme
hatred against him. Were there any Evangelicall Prophets or men of Apostolical
spirits amongst us, they might and would make application of our Saviors
speeches in particular to many which take the name of professor or of reformed
religion as their own peculiar, woe unto you hypocrites, which say if we had
lived in the days of the Scribes and Pharisees we would not have been
partakers with them in the blood of the Son of God. There is scarce a
Christian which is not apt to think thus charitably of himself, and your
ordinary minister cannot in particular disprove them, only thus much we know
and forewarne in general, Corruption optimi semper pessima, that kind of
hypocrisy spleen or envy which arises from obstructed zeal or partial
observance of Evangelicall duties, is worse then that hypocrisy which sprung
from partial observance of the law. For men professing Christianity and great
zeal unto truth, to make up the measure of Jewish enmity against Christ, to
condemn themselves by judging the Scribes and Pharisees as greater hypocrites
then themselves, is a matter as easy (God grant not as usual) as it was for
the Jews to make up the measure of their forefathers sins, and to condemn
themselves by judging their Ancestors as more bloody persecutors then they
would have been in like case.

And if unto this branch of iniquity divination for money and teaching for
hire, naturally afford nutriment, our sins have been in these particulars
more faulty then the times wherein Micah lived in any likelihood could be. The
covetous Priests and Prophets of Judah were not mere hirelings; Judah I take
it, had not many, few or none, whose maintenance did wholly depend upon the
voluntary benevolence of them they were to teach.

2 Whereas amongst us the greater number of such as take upon them to teach
Gods people are mere stipendiaries, and yet contend for the pulpit in
opposition to such as have their livelihood from the altar by course of law
established, as eagerly as the Jesuits, and Dominicans have done of late about
the chair in the Universities of Spain. Upon these occasions the meanest
corporation amongst us, though consisting for the most part of apronmen, have
found opportunities to have their fancies humoured, and their ears tickled by
their hireling shepherds, after a more delicate manner then any heathen
Emperor, or Christian King could ever procure from their parasites; and the
sheapheards reflattered by their flocks into an higher conceit of themselves,
then any Pope pretends unto. For though the Roman consistory usurp the
Monopoly of the Holy Spirit, and of his gifts; yet neither does the Pope take
upon him to secure the Cardinals, nor the Cardinals to secure him, that
whenever either of them dye, they shall infalliby be saved, and be as
glorious Saints as Saint Peter to morrow, if they chance to dye this day. But
why does the Prophet Micah, when he assigns the causes of Gods judgments
threatened, mention only the sins of the rulers, Magistrates, and Clergy? Was
not the people at that time infected with the popular diseases of all times, as
with adultery, murder, luxury of all kinds and profaneness. No doubt they
were: and do not these sins deserve vengeance? They do. Yet the judgments
due unto them are usually charged upon the transgressors themselves, not upon
the land or state wherein they live; unless the principal transgressors
escape unpunished, by the connivence or corruption of rulers; in this case the
sins of private men become the sins of the land, and solicit public
visitations. So does oppression, specially when it is practiced by men of
authority upon the poor and helples men. Of others wrongs, or of wrong done
unto others, that which Eli said unto his Sons 1. Sam. 2. 25. is most ture.
If one man sin against another, the judge shall judge him; but if a man sin
against the Lord, who shall entreat for him? Now when judges and Magistrates
suffer the poor and helpless to suffer wrong, they sin against the Lord:
for though he be Lord of all, and the avenger of all wrongs, yet is he in
special manner the protector of the fatherless, widow, and the helpelesse;
and what can be more just, then that they which oppress their helpless
brethren, should be oppressed by foraine enemies? And how ever men esteem of us
the Sons of Levi, we are by Gods ordinance and appointment, as fathers to our
flock committed to our charge; and though we have not that coercive authority
over them, which Eli had over his sons, yet we shall partake of his
punishment, if we prove not more faithful remembrancers of their negligences
and transgressions, then Eli was to the Sons of his body. Finally, as the
other sins which Micah taxed, were their sins which did commit them, so
their leaning upon the Lord in the consciousnesse of such sins were the
sins of the Priests and Prophets, which should have forewarned them of the
wrath to come, and have put them in mind of their strange neglect of warnings
past. That the neglect of Gods forewarnings or summons to repentance, whether
these be mere monitions, or mixed with punishments, is a fearful Symptom of
a dangerous disease, and, without repentance, a presage of death, is a point so
common and known, as it needs no proof. The diverse kinds of such
fore-warnings, sometimes given by the host of reasonlesse creatures, sometimes
by the reasonable, and the danger increasing by their neglect, are pathetically
recounted by the Prophet Amos. Chap. 4. with this item or caveat still repeated
at the neglect of every message, yet have ye not returned unto me, says the
Lord; And I also have given you cleanness of teeth in all your cities, and
want of bread in all your places; yet have ye not returned unto me; says the
Lord. And also I have withholden the rain from you, when there were yet three
months to the harvest etc. v. 6. 7. I have smitten you with blasting and
mildew: when your gardens and your vineyards, and your fig trees, and your
olive trees increased, the palmer-worme devoured them, yet have ye not returned
unto me, says the Lord. I have sent among you the pestilence after the manner
of Egypt, your young men have I slain with the sword, and have taken away your
horses, and I have made the stioke of your camps to come up unto your nostrils,
yet have ye not returned unto me, says the Lord. v. 10. The same burden is
twice repeated in the verses following, for not returning unto the Lord after
two calamities inflicted upon them, distinct from the former, as well for time
as quality. The space or distance of time between the first and last of these
fore-warnings was so long, that many of them which had known the first, or
could take notice of it, were dead before the last approached; and most of
them, whom the last message did specially concern, were unborne, when the
first warning was given. And yet the neglect of it is laid to their charge; and
of all these fore-warnings or chastisements (beside the desolation of some
cities) there is scarce one which has not been paralleld by the like given to
this kingdom long ago.

9 To begin with that which most resembles this fore-warning given by the
Prophet Micah unto this people, Sion for your sakes shall be plowed as a field.
This was to them a mere monition, for God repented of the plague denounced
against them; such was the powder plot unto us. It was a gentle monition of a
fearful judgment. For however such as foretold it were lying Prophets,
Sons of Belial, whom no son or child of God was bound to believe, when they
threatened judgment, yet the warning which God in mercy gave us by them was
truly real. The sepulchers of our Kings were nearer the point to have been
more pitifully plowed, then Sennacherib intended to plow Sion, or the city of
David, when in the days of Hezekiah he did besiege it; Gods mercy toward us
was that time no less, then at any time it had been unto Sion; our
deliverance, though not so miraculous, was yet no less wonderful for
valuation, then Ierusalems deliverance from Sennacheribs army, shortly after
this fore-warning by Micah. But did either warning or deliverance take the same
effect with us, as the like had done with Hezekiah and his people? Herein we
truly imitate Hezekiah, not so much in the use, which he made of this
forewarning, as in his demeanor after his recovery from his sickness, that we
do not render according to the reward bestowed upon us. An anniversary
thanksgiving was upon our delivery by public authority presently enjoined,
and has since by all sorts of men professing true religion (to the eyes of
men) been duly observed. Unto this day young and old, whilst they bless God
for his mercies, accurse the malice of such as did project that fearful
plague against us: and his curse be upon him that shall think either their
practice, or principles whence they inferred or sought to warrant it, can be
detested too much. Yet for all this we may detest their practice and religion,
yea we may magnify Gods mercies toward us, though never too much, yet much
amiss. If our acknowledgement of his mercies had been, or were yet sincere and
entire; our fear of his judgments ever since that time, would hve held full
equipoize with our hatred or detestation of our adversaries mischievous
imaginations against us. For the unerring eye of his all-seeing providence, and
omnipotently steadfast hand, by which he wields the scales of justice, would not
have suffered his consuming wrath to come any nearer to us, then we were come
unto the full measure of our iniquity.

10 The first thing which then was, or now is to be enquired after, is what
were the extraordinary, and special sins, which drew Gods judgments so
near upon us. These were not the cruelty of laws enacted against professors
of that religion which these traitors professed, as they as foolishy as
impiously allege; nor was the negligence or connivence of such as were put in
trust with the execution of these laws the cause of the judgment then
threatened, as some others out of misguided zeal suspect. Of such negligence or
omission or of whatsoever else may give any advantage to the adversaries of our
peace and religion, there were some positive causes in our selves, God only
knows how many; but of these we cannot but take notice which the Prophet Micah
expresses, or some like unto them, as sacrilege, oppression, and bribery in
the layty; Simony and time-serving in the Clergy; luxury, profaneness, and
hypocrisy in both. Now when the professors of true religion shall give
undoubted proof of their constant and impartial zeal against these foul
enormities, or for enquiring after the most enormous delinquents in all these
kinds; there will be good hope that the laws already enacted or projected
against idolatry, against superstition and false religion, shall have their
wished success. But suppose that upon the occasion or opportunity, which these
idolatrous miscreants had in a manner thrust into the hands of our lawmakers,
the suppression of idolatry and superstition throughout this land had been more
exact and more complete, then that which Hezekiah, in the beginning of his
reign, had wrought in Judah: Was there any probability that those other
diseases, which Micah mentions, would have been one jot abated? any
likelihood that the most amongst us would not have learned that song or ditty
by heart, is not the Lord now amongst us; or the Antiphony unto it, would have
been, no evil can come upon us. Other gross exorbitancies usually come within
the stroke of the civil sword, and lie open to the execution of wholesome
laws: but for snipping this secret hypocrisy, or presumptuous leaning upon
the Lord, though in the professors of true religion, the severest execution of
wholesome laws, or exercise of the civil sword, has no force or dint, the
cure of this disease properly belongs unto the Divine, and the method to cure
it, is contrary to the ordinary course of law or physic; we must break a
general custom of this people, and teach them not to rare their affections
unto truth by their opposition unto false-hood, not to measure their zeal and
love to true religion by their hatred of false religion. These be the very
roots of that hypocrisy or presumption, which Micah so deeply taxes in the
state of Judah, the chief ingredient in the leaven of the Pharisees.

But lest more of this people should slide into an error too common unto many,
as if such a reformation of religion, as they affect, would acquit or secure
the state and kingdom from all danger of Gods threatened judgments; let us
here behold the severity and mercy of our gracious God. Mercy, I say, toward
us, and severity toward our brethren professors of reformed religion in
neighbor nations, whom he has of late subjected to the enemies sword, and
other calamities of war; for what transgression in particular, he only
knows; but surely not for those transgressions, which some out of discontented
zeal conceive to be the only cause of his displeasure against this nation,
whenever any cross or calamity befalls themselves; for no man can suspect
those foraine Churches, which he has visited of late, were deeply guilty
either of connivance to superstition, or to much favoring Arminianisme.
However, the righteous Lord by chastising them does fore-warne us to examine
and judge our selves, and if we find no other causes or probable occasions to
fear the approach of the like Judgments upon our selves; yet even this alone
will in the day of visitation make a great addition to our general account,
that we did not humble our selves with fear and trembling whilst the Lord did
humble and correct them, whilst his hand was heavy upon such of our nation as
were sent abroad for their succor. Our consciences will one day accuse us
(when we shall have occasion to seek the Lord) that we have not for the
years late past besought his goodness with greater fear and devotion, to
remoove the rod of his wrath from them.

But did the Lord in this interim direct no messengers of his wrath unto us
within our own coasts? Did mortality and famine only follow the camp abroad,
or towns besieged in other nations? The famine, (Gods name be praised for it)
has not for many years been either universally spread throughout this land,
or extraordinary grievous upon any greater portion of it, and yet has left so
deep impression in some native members of this great body, as may evidently
convince the rest of great stupidity in not sympathizing more deeply with
them. And stupidity or dullness in any member, whilst other suffer, is an
infallible Symptom of a dangerous disease, oft-times a certain prognosticke
of death; and he were but an indocile Christian, that could not by those
known calamities, which much people of this land have suffered from this
messenger, instruct himself, how easy it is for the righteous Judge to bring
such calamity upon this kingdom by this messenger alone, as would move even
the most malicious and cruel enemies that we have had, to bemoane our case,
although we were fully assured of a constant peace with all other
neighbour-nations, that have any power or ability to annoy us by the sword, or
any practice of hostility. Rome in her growth, in her height of greatness, and
in her declining days had received many grievous wounds, was subject in all
estates to fearful calamities and disasters; yet never in such a lamentable
and ruefull plight as the famine had brought her to, if we may judge of her
inward grief either by her bitter outcries, Vid. plura apud Claudianum initio
belli Gildonici.
or by the dejected and ghastly dress, in which one of her sons then living
has set her forth.

Si mea mansuris meruerunt moenia nasci
Jupiter auguriis, si stant immota Sibillae
Carmina, Tarpeias si nec dum despicis arces,
Advenio supplex, non ut proculcet Oaxen
Consul ovans, nostraeve premant pharetrata secures
Susa: nec ut rubris aquilas figamus arenis:
Haec nobis, haec ante dabas; nunc pabula tantum
Poscimus: ignoscas miserae, pater optime, genti;
Extremam defend famem, satiavimus iram
Siqua fuit; lugenda Getis, and flenda Suevis
Hausimus, ipsa meos horreret Parthia casus.
After a solemn resignation of all claim, title, or interest to all former
victories or wonted triumphs, she takes upon her the beggars garb, and
becomes an humble suppliant for bread; and for that not in just competency, but
in such a measure as might assuage or prevent extremity of hunger; of which
she had suffered so much, as she thought would have given full satisfaction
either to her ancient and inveterate foes, or to the most malignant of her
modern enemies: enough as she thought to have drawn sighs from the
barbarous Getes, or to have wrung tears from the merciless Swab, or to have
cast Parthia her self into a swoon, so she might have been a spectatour of
her ruefull and tragical plight: yet all this evil came upon her not by
observation; it was not preventible by any forecast or policy besides that
which Ezekiah here uses; this would have sufficed so it had been practiced in
time.

But it is not the representation of that which has befallen others long
since, or may hereafter befall our selves which will so much affect us, as the
recognition of that which we our selves have formerly suffered. It will not
then, I hope, be unseasonable to put you in mind, how in these later times
whilst neighbor nations address their Ambassadors to to this court, either to
condole the death of our Sovereigns, or to congratulate our joy for the happy
continuance of royal succession, there still has come one unwelcome or
unexpected Ambassador either with them, or before them, to this people. And
however he seem to plead for the grave, yet his message is from heaven, and
for our peace; though he find audience for the most part with needy, sick, or
dying men, yet his instructions are principally directed to the living and
potent amongst us, and the tenure of them is in effect thus, think you that
those whom the Lord has wounded with his poisonous arrows were greater
sinners then your selves, or that they have suffered more then they have
deserved? I tell you nay, but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish;
unless you prepare your hearts to meet the Lord while he is on the way, a
greater plague then the plague of pestilence, is coming against you. Yet has
that plague been twice in our memory more fearful, then in the days of our
forefathers. To omit that great mortality, which was almost universal
throughout this land about twenty seven years ago; The calamities which
followed upon the 2d arrival, or return of this Ambassador about 5 years
ago did leave a live print or character of that fear, by which the Prophet
Amos describes the day of the Lord. Amos. 5. v. 18. 19. The day of the Lord,
says he, is darkness, and not light, as if a man did fly from a Lion, and a
Bear met him, and went into the house, and lean his hand on the wall, and a
Serpent bit him. Many fled from the great city, as a man would fly from a
Lion, and thought themselves safe, if they could get into a ship for some other
port, but sped no better then if they had met with a Bear, death being as
ready, as they were, to imbarque it self as a passenger for every port,
authorized to execute his commission, as well by sea, as by land; others
coming to the shore were more harbourlesse in the wished for haven, then if
they had committed themselves to the merciless waves of the sea, which way
soever they took, their case was like unto a stricken dear, haeret lateri
letalis arundo. They could not shift aside from Gods arrow, which still took
up some vital part for his mark? Some after their arrival in their native
soil wandered without companions to support them in their weakness, and lastly
dyed in the fresh and open air, without that comfort which the infected
places, from which they fled, might have afforded them: without consorts in
their sighs and groans, without such mutual expressions of grief as Sympathy
of nature brings forth in the beasts of the field.

But amongst the woeful spectacles, which the calamity of those times
presented, none me thinks more apt to imprint the terror of Gods judgments
deeper, then to have seen men, otherwise of undaunted spirits, men whom no
enemies looks or braggs could afright, afraid to hold parley with their native
contrymen that came unto them with words of love and peace, more aghast to
embrace their dearest friends or nearest kinsfolks, then to graspe an adder, or
a snake. The plague of pestilence is above all other diseases catching, and
such as have been most observant of it is course, tell us, men of covetous
minds or unseasonably greedy of gain are usually soonest caught by it, though
exposed to no greater, or more apparent visible danger, then others are. The
course which this messenger of death observes (if these men's observation of it
be true) may lead our conjecture to one special cause why it was sent amongst
us with such large commission, surely if in the days of health and peace it
had not been usual for one neighbor to prey upon another, and to verify the
saying homo homini lupus; the neighborhood and presence of men of the same
nation and profession would not have become more terrible unto others, then if
their habitations had been amongst Wolves, or Lions, or other ravenous
creatures. But to what end soever this fearful messenger was sent amongst us,
the tenor of his message either was not well understood, or is not perfectly
remembered. And for this reason his commission has been renewed of late in the
times of our hopes and joy for the continuance of royal succession in a
straight line. But Gods name be ever blessed, who has hitherto so tempered his
judgments with mercy, that we have more just cause of joy and thanksgiving for
the birth of one, then of sorrow for the death of many. Yet let not this, I
beseech you, abate our fear of future judgments, or occasion us to think
that the Lord either has repented, or will repent of the evil which he has
so often threatened, whereof he has given this land and people so many
warnings, until we bring forth better fruits of our repentance, then
hitherto we have done. That thus we may do, let us pray continually to the
Lord, that he would teach us to fear, as Hezekias did, that he would teach us
to pray, as Hezekias did. As for him, he is the same Lord still, the same
loving Father to us, that he was to Judah, and cannot forget to repent
whenever we shall truly turn unto him. Convert us, O Lord, and we shall be
converted.

IER. 26. 19. And the Lord repented him of the evil which he had pronounced
against them. Thus might we procure great evil against our souls.
THIS is the resolution of a controversy, debated from the beginning of this
chapter, unto this place, between the Priests, and the Prophets, and the
people, and the Princes of the land; whether the Prophet Jeremy were to be put
to death, for saying the Lord would make his temple like Shiloh, and the city
of Jerusalem a curse to all the earth.

The Priests and Prophets contend, that he was to be put to death, and the
people at the first concur with them in this bloody sentence, but afterward
comply with the Princes, whose verdict was, that he was not worthy to die,
because he had spoken to them in the name of the Lord their God. And upon this
verdict, the elders of the land give judgment from a ruled case in the Prophet
Micah, who had spoken more terrible words against both city and temple in more
peremptory manner, then Jeremy now had done, and yet not therefore put to
death, but reverenced by Hezekiah, as you have it in the beginning of this 19.
verse. Did Hezekiah king of Judah, and all Judah put Micah at all to death? Did
he not fear the Lord, and besought the Lord?

Now if the solemn practice of so good a King as Hezekiah was could not move
them, yet the happy success of his practice should in reason allure them, to
deal more mildly with Jeremy, then was intended by them. For upon Hezekia's
prayers, and repentance, the Lord repented him of the evil which he had
pronounced against Jerusalem, and Sion: and when they further add, thus might
we procure great evil against our souls, they imply thus much, that if this
present assembly do not repent of their ill intentions against Jeremy, the
Lord would not repent of the evil, which by his mouth he had pronounced
against them.

The points which offer themselves to be discussed are but two. The first, in
what sense God is said to repent. The second, in what case it is said, that God
will not repent, or that he is not as man, or the son of man, that he should
repent.

Deus tunc poenitere dicitur, quando non facit aut quod minatur, aut quod
permittit. God as some give out, who take upon them to resolve this point, is
then said to repent when he does not effect the evil which he threatens, or
the good which he promises.

All this is true; yet no true definition, no just expression of repentance;
either as it is applyable in Scripture to God or man. Most true it is, that
whenever God is said to repent, it must be conceived, that he did not effect
either the evil which he threatened, or the good which he promised: But it is
not reciprocally true, that whenever God does not bring that evil of
punishment to pass, which he threatens, it is rightly said or conceived that
he did repent.

A loving father may sometimes threaten to chastise, sometimes promise to
reward the son whom he loves best; and yet not be truly thought to repent,
albeit he neither chastise, nor reward him: For he may thus mingle threatenings
with encouragements, with purpose only to try his present disposition.

Thus we read that God, who is a most loving father to mankind; did command
Abraham to sacrifice his only son Isaac, whom he loved. This was a threatening
command, at least in respect of Isaac. Now albeit the Lord did withhold
Abraham's hand from executing this command: yet do we not read, nor is it to
be conceived, that God did repent of that which he gave Abraham in charge. The
reason is because he charged Abraham thus to do, not with purpose to have
Isaac then presently sacrificed, but only to try the sincerity and strength of
Abrahams' faith, and obedience; and by this trial to gain his assent unto the
offering up of the seed promised from the beginning of the world, which was from
this time irreversibly ordained to be the seed of Abraham. For seeing God from
the beginning had determined to give his only son for the redemption of man,
it was his good pleasure to confirm this promise by oath unto a man, that was
ready to offer up his only son in sacrifice unto God, and Abraham from this
very intended work as S. James tells us, was called the friend of God: the
promise made to our first parents was now accomplished by way of contract, or
covenant betwixt God and Abraham that the son of God and seed of Abraham
should be offered up in sacrifice for a blessing unto all the nations of the
earth. This being the end or purpose of God in commanding Abraham to sacrifice
his only son Isaac in whom his seed was called, there is no semblance of
repentance in God, although he did withhold Abraham's hand from doing that
which he had commanded him to do.

They therefore come nearer unto the meaning of the Holy Ghost in this
particular expression, who tell us that Deus tunc poenitere dicitur, quando non
facit quod facturus erat. God is then said to repent when he does not that
which he was about to do, or that which he intended or purposed to have done.
For without a revocation or reversing of somewhat seriously purposed or
intended, there can be no true notion of repentance whether in God, in man, or
Angels.

And this notion, or expression of repentance as it is attributed unto God in
scripture, we have expressly delivered by the Prophet Jeremy. Chap, 18. from
v. 7. to the 11. At what instant I shall speak concerning a nation, and
concerning a Kingdom to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy it; If
that nation, against whom I have pronounced, turn from their evil, I will
repent of the evil that I thought to do unto them. And at what instant I
shall speak concerning a nation, and concerning a kingdom, to build and to
plant it: if it do evil in my sight that it obey not my voice, then I will
repent of the good wherewith I said I would benefit them.

This general to my observation was first drawn into a rule or doctrinall
form by the Prophet Jeremiah; yet the truth of the former part of it was
experienced long before in the men of Nineveh, though contrary to the mind and
expectation of the Prophet Jonas, not out of a nescience of this rule, or Gods
usual dealing with men, but out of a particular dislike, or discontent, that
the sentence, which God had commanded him to pronounce, should not be put in
execution.

The sentence was, yet 40 days and Nineveh shall be destroyed Jonas 3. v. 4.

This solemn proclamation the Lord did dictate unto him as it is. v. 2. Did
the Lord thus speak to try the Ninevites disposition only, had he no intention
or thought, as the Prophet Jeremy speaks, to overthrow, or destroy the city?
Certainly the Ninevites did think he had; and yet this their thought or
opinion is commended unto us by the Holy Ghost under the style, or title of
belief, for so it is said v. 5. The people of Nineveh believed God.

Wherein did they believe in him, or what did they believe of him?

Surely they believed, in the first place, that he meant as he spoke, that he
had a purpose or intention to destroy them. They knew their sins had deserved
no less, and they believed that God was a just God, to inflict upon them what
they deserved; but they believed withal, that he was a God of mercy, and
forgiveness; and out of this fear thus tempered with hope, they address
themselves to become as capable of his mercy, as they had been of his justice.
For so it follows, that the people of Nineveh believed God, and proclaimed a
fast, and put on sackcloath from the greatest of them even unto the least of
them; and thus they did both by the Kings royal command, and example: an
admirable resolution in a heathen King, a practice more Orthodoxall then was
the doctrine of the Priests or Prophets, which questioned Jeremiah, for saying
the Lord would make his Temple like Shilo, unless they did speedily repent.
But what was the issue of the Ninevites repentance? God, says the text, saw
their works, that they turned from their evil way, and God repented of the
evil that he had said that he would do unto them, and he did it not. v. 10.

Did he then but say that he would do this evil unto them, without any
thought or purpose to do it? if he had but only said it, and not meant it,
he could not be truly said to repent him of it; his saying supposes his
intent or thought, for he said it solemnly, and publicly, not tentatively,
or by way of trial only.

But if God had a serious will or purpose to destroy Nineveh at this time, and
destroyed it not, how is it true which the Psalmist says, that he does
whatsoever he will in heaven and in earth? So that if it be true what we have
before delivered, we shall be thought by some, to admit either some defect in
his power, or some alteration in his will. Thus little children, by turning long
round, imagine that the Globe of heaven and earth runs round with them,
until their brains be settled: And men of riper years (unless their
understandings correct their fancy) conceit that towers and steeples, with the
shoares, whereon these or other edifices stand, do move from us, whilst we
swiftly pass by them, or from them.

But to think there should be any change in Gods will, because many things
which he seriously wills are not effected, is an error a great deal more
gross, then either of the former: For all the change is in the object of his
will, that is, in the things willed or nilled by him.

The answer to this objection, or discovery of this fallacies original, was
most acutely made, and punctually delivered by the schoolmen long ago, aliud
est mutare voluntatem, aliud est velle mutationem; It is not all one for God to
change his will, and to will a change in things created by him.

God never changes his will, it always is as his nature is, absolutely
immutable, or, as our Apostle speaks, without shadow of change: yet by one and
the same unchangeable will, he may, and does will variety of changes,
diversity of alterations, in the things willed by him, or in the sentences
denounced by his Prophets in his name. He works all things by the council of
his will, and as Saint Gregory says, nunquam mutat consilium, his counsel
does never change or alter; saepius tamen mutat sententiam, his unchangeable
unalterable counsel may work a change in all things besides it self.

It was his just will seriously at this time to destroy the Ninevites, and this
his will or purpose we will conceive to be more unchangeable, more immovable
then a rock of Adamant: and Nineveh, whilst she continued her wonted course in
sin, was like a ship before a full wind, which had outsailed her watch,
whilst the Mariners slept; and by this error ready to dash against the
immovable rock of Divine justice; had not her Pilots, and governors (awaked
out of their sleep upon the Prophet Jonas summons) tackt about, and directed
their course another way.

If whilst we acknowledge Gods will to be most unchangeable, we consider it
withal to be a most complete and most constant rule of equity and goodness,
qua talis; it will most necessarily follow, that even in this respect it is a
rule most complete, and most unchangeable, it must have one award for Nineveh
raging with cruelty and oppression, another for Nineveh turning from the
violence that was in their hands; one doom for Nineveh wallowing in
drunkenness, riotousnesse, and uncleanenesse, another for Nineveh watching,
washing her self with tears, fasting, and sitting in ashes covered with
sackcloth. One sentence for Nineveh polluting her self with pride of heart,
with perjury and blasphemy; another for Nineveh humbling her self under the
mighty hand of God with fasting, devoutly calling upon his name with tears and
supplications.

For albeit God knows all things, as well things to come as present, and does
nothing otherwise than from eternity it was determined to be done; yet even
this we know was determined from eternity, that every man in every nation
should be rewarded, not according to the identity of their persons or place,
but according to the diversity of their ways, to the variety of their works.

Though Rocks in the sea be immovable, yet we easily conceive how the
distance, or aspect betwixt them and ships, which sail to and fro, does vary
every moment, whilst the ships are in motion. Conceive then Christ Jesus to
be, as he truly is, the immovable Rock of our salvation, but withal a
living Rock, and an allseing rule, and it will be easier to conceive how the
doom or sentence from eternity awarded to every man's actions does hourly
change either for quality or degree, as men do change their course of life,
whether from good to evil, or from evil to good, from good to better, or from
evil to worse.

So then Repentance in these Ninevites did import not only a will of change,
but a true change in their wills and affections. They turned their delight in
sin, into sorrow for sins past, and good resolutions not to transgress so
again.

Repentance in God imports only a will of change, nor is it the will of every
change, but a change of the doom or sentence denounced, which the Scripture
calls repentance in God. And here I should have set a period to the first point
proposed, did not some men question, whether that belief wherewith the
Ninevites are said to have believed God, were a true belief, or an act of
saving faith? however, such it was, as did save them from present destruction,
but so it might be in some men's judgments and yet be but a temporary
historical faith. For how could they pray in faith according to the Apostles
rule, seeing they doubted whether God would show mercy upon them, or not; For
so much seems to be included in the resolution. v. 9. Who can tell if God will
return and repent, and turn away from his fierce anger, and we perish not.

Now thus to doubt, may seem to argue that their prayers were not of true
faith.

But these two sacred maxims (whatsoever is not of faith is sin) (whatsoever
is done with doubt or scruple is not of faith) are oftener wrested, sometimes to
abette presumption in respect of God, sometimes disobedience toward his
vicegerents, than any other maxims in sacred writ besides. For this present,
the limitation of them is briefly this.

Whenever the doubt, or controversy stands betwixt a man's belly, or purse,
and his soul, or conscience, the Apostles rule (whatsoever is not of faith is
sin) is universally true, whosoever does any thing for his belly, or purse,
or matters of such temporal consequence, which he probably doubts, may wound
his soul or conscience, his action or choice is not of faith, is truly
sinful; In other cases he that intends to do much good, must resolve to do
many things whereof he cannot but doubt, whereof he cannot be resolved but
by the event or success, yet not sin.

Thus these Ninevites were uncertain or doubtful, whether the Lord would
repent or no, of the evil threatened against them, and yet notwithstanding this
doubt, they did well, exceeding well, to fast and pray that he might repent;
and in thus doubting and thus doing, they declare not their works only but
their divinity to have been much better than theirs who condemn the like
actions of heathen men for sinful, because their persons were not sanctified
by saving faith. As for these Ninevites they had a true notion of that truth
which the scripture teaches, to wit, that as God is often said to repent, so
some special cases there be in which he does not, in which he will not upon
any terms repent, and of which the Prophets saying is most true, He is not as
man, or the son of man, that he should repent.

And such, for instance, was the case of Saul, the first King of Israel, in the
issue, though not from the beginning of his reign, or from that point of time
wherein God revealed that branch of his will to Samuel 1. Sam. 15. It repents
me that I have set Saul up to be King, for he is turned backward from following
me, and has not performed my commandments. And he that turns his back from
Gods commandments, shall be sure to meet his judgments in the face.

But this heavy sentence against Saul (as it there follows) grieved Samuel,
and he cried unto the Lord all night, but his cries were not heard, for so it
follows v. 35. that Samuel came no more to see Saul until the day of his
death, nevertheless he mourned for Saul, and in the 1. v. of the 19. chap.
Samuel is expressly forbidden to mourn for Saul: and if he might not mourn
for him, he might not pray for him.

A lamentable case that so great a Prophet, so good a man as Samuel was, might
not pray, might not mourn for his sovereign Lord, whom by Gods special
command, he had anointed, but the cause is intimated v. 28. 29. For when Saul
by seeking to hold the Prophet from departing from him, had rent his coat, he
returns this heavy message unto him, The Lord has rent the kingdom of Israel
from thee this day, and has given it to a neighbor of thine, that is better
then thou: and also the strength of Israel will not repent for he is not as man
that he should repent. And Samuel had no reason to mourn for him, or to pray
to God for reversing this sentence, after he knew the Lord would not be
entreated to recall it.

But here the Aliens from the common weal of Israel, or men of Iultans
disposition would object, is the God of Israel no otherwise affected toward
his people, toward Kings of his own making, then the Gods of the heathen (whom
ye despise) were toward kingdoms or Monarchies which served them? Does he
give his people just cause to complain of him as the heathen Poet did of his
Gods, when he saw Rome so rent and torn with civil wars, that it could not
long stand. Heu faciles dare summa Deos, eademque tueri -- Difficiles! Will the
strength of Israel advance a man to a kingdom which never sought it, but had
it put upon him whilst he was seeking his fathers Asses? And will he not be
entreated to keep him in it after long possession, after many adventures of
his body, and effusion of his blood for supporting it? Will he repent of the
good which he had purposed to do for Saul, and will he not repent of the evil
which he had denounced against him? Thus uncatechised flesh and blood, or men
not instructed in the ways of God would repine. Now it were an easy answer to
say, that God did thus peremptorily deal with Saul because it was his absolute
will to depose him and to choose David in his place. But this or the like
answer would make a foolish heathen stark mad, and move a man that hovered
betwixt heathenisme and Christianity to fall quite from us: whereas we are
bound by the Apostles rule to give no offense not only to the Church of God,
but neither to the Jew nor to the Gentile; whereas this answer gives just
occasion of offense to them all. For sure the scripture is plain, and I think
no Christian will (in the general) deny, that Saul did at this time much
better deserve to be deposed, than either he or David did to be elected King;
his sins were the meritorious cause of his rejection, but what sins in
particular is not so apparent.

Saul, as some ancient interpreters observe, was once little in his own eyes,
and then he was a great man in Gods sight, but he grew great, exceeding great
in his own eyes, and the greater he thus grew, the more he waned in Gods
favor, whose eternal will, and pleasure is to give grace unto the meek and
humble, and to resist and bring down the proud.

All this is true, but too general to give satisfaction to the doubt proposed:
For God does never so peremptorily reject any lawful Prince as he did Saul
without hope of repentance, or reversing the sentence denounced against him,
unless it be for some excessive multitude or full measure of sin, or for
some ominous, or prodigious sins.

We read only of two remarkable sins committed by Saul before his rejection,
the one was for offering a burnt offering, and for his intendment to offer a
peace offering before Samuel came unto him. 1 Samuel 13. 19. and 20. And for this
transgression Samuel says unto him v. 30. Thou have done foolishly, thou have
not kept the commandment of the Lord thy God which he commanded thee: For now
would the Lord have established the kingdom upon Israel for ever. Saul then
had Gods promise before for the continuance of his kingdom. But of this good
truly intended to him the Lord from this time repents, as it follows verse
14. But now the kingdom shall not continue. Yet upon this fact it is not said,
that the Lord would not repent of the sentence denounced against him.

But what was Saul's folly in all this; or was it any? for as it is said v. 8.
he tarryed there seven days, according to the set time that Samuel had
appointed. It was not so great a folly for Saul being a king to stay no longer,
as disrespect in Samuel not to come within the time appointed: was it not more
fit that the Prophet should stay for the King, then the King for the Prophet?
The text is plain that Saul staid seven days according to the set time that
Samuel had appointed, but it is not so plain out of the text, nor is it any
way probable, that these seven days were observed by Saul in that season, or
to that end which Samuel had appointed.

Two good interpreters, Rupertus and Angelomus
and ancient in respect of our times, have observed an amphibology in Samuels
words, and it was Readiness folly to make choice of the sinister or wrong sense.

The words you have now written, yet not written but spoken then by Samuel
chap. 10. v. 8. And however the Hebrew text, as it is now pointed, but
especially the Latin and the English, do cast the sense of Samuels words that
way which the objection supposes, yet the matter it self, and other
circumstances sway the other way, in excuse of Samuel, and aggravation of Saul's
folly. Thou shall go down before me to Gilgal, and behold I will come down
unto thee to offer burnt offerings, to sacrifice sacrifices of peace offerings.
And here they make a pause or full sense, and begin another at these words,
seven days shall thon tarry till I come to thee.

But the original will bear another sense, retaining the self same words,
only altering the pause or point, as thus, Thou shall go down before me to
Gilgal, and behold I will come unto thee to offer burnt offerings, and to
sacrifice the sacrifice of peace offerings for seven days: and then begin the
second clause thus, thou shall tarry till I come to thee, as if he had said,
see in any case thou tarry till I come to thee, and show thee what thou shall
do. Samuel it seems went in the mean time to ask counsel of the Lord as
being not himself fully instructed in this great business which he was
toward.

If Saul did usurp the Priests office in offering sacrifices upon pretense of
Samuels stay, this was prodigious. If he took upon him only to appoint the
time for the sacrifice or supplication, designing some Priests for exercising
the sacred function, this was a great deal too much, more then mere folly;
for all this was by God himself reserved for Samuel who was the interpreter or
spokes-man betwixt God and Saul. The sacrifice, no question, was a public and
solemn sacrifice, such as Solomon made at the consecration of the Temple,
whose solemnity lasted full seven days: and it is probable that this present
solemnity which Samuel had appointed, was the consecration of Saul, or
establishing him in his kingdom, had he not foolishly wronged himself by
trenching upon the Priests, or the Prophets function, or upon both.

But whether these mentioned, or some others, or these with others were the
principal branches of Saul's folly, certain it is, that neither any of these,
nor all of these did make his doom to be inevitable, or his deposition
irreversible. For though Samuel upon notice of this his folly did foretell that
God would give his kingdom unto another, yet he did not expressly add that
the Lord would not repent him of this evil denounced against him: and this
addition being not made, the sentence was liable to the ordinary rule of
interpreting Gods threatenings Ier. 18.

Saul by repenting of this folly might have been capable of that pardon,
whereof he made himself altogether incapable, by his second more gross and
more stupid transgression of Gods commandment. What was that? His indulgence
toward Agag and his people. Is it then an unpardonable sin in Christian
Princes to show pity unto heathenish or idolatrous Princes, whom God has given
into their hands by victory and battle? No. To gather such general doctrines
or uses, from particular instances in scripture, as some have done from
Ezekiah's demolishing the brazen Serpent, or from Ahabs suffering Benhadad to
escape with life, is but the Symptom of distempered zeal, misled by
ignorance. Nor will it follow, because Ahab was more remarkably and more
severely punished for suffering Benhadad to escape with life, than he was for
putting poor Naboth to death; that therefore this slaughter was a less sin
in it self than the other. For we read that Ahab repented him of his unjust
and cruel dealing with Naboth: but so he did not of his other folly in
suffering Benhadad to escape with life: and for this reason God repented him of
the sentence denounced against Ahab by Elias: So did he not repent of that
other sentence denounced by another Prophet, because thou have etc.

However, this was not all wherein Saul was faulty; though foulely faulty in
all this, more faulty in sparing Agag, than Ahab was in sparing Benhadad; For
God had expressly commanded him utterly to destroy Amalek not sparing man or
beast. But so the the same God commanded the Israelites to destroy the
Cananites, yet their sin in entering league with the Gibeonites was not
equivalent to Saul's transgression; for the condition of Amalek and the Kings
was much worse then the condition of other heathens, more incapable of pity
from the Israelites, then the Amorites or the Hittites were. For God had
denounced hostility against this people by solemn oath Exodus 17. v. 15. 16.
And Moses built an altar and called the name of it Jehovah Nissi, for he said,
because the Lord has sworn that the Lord will have war with Amalek from
generation to generation. Now the Amalekites being thus solemnly declared to be
Gods enemies in so high a degree, the Israelites were bound to wreake his
foe-hood against that Nation. Nunc, olim, quocunque darent se tempore vires.

When Saul was made king of Israel, to fight the battles of the Lord, and at
this time expressly enjoined to destroy Amalek, his sin in sparing Agag and
the cattle, was a sin of like nature, as if a Judge or sworn magistrate,
being put in trust to do justice in a particular, unto which his sovereign
Lord had peremptorily and determinately sworn, should upon bribe or other
sinister respects neglect his duty, and make his master (as much as in him lay)
for-sworne. And for any inferior judge thus to do, deserves more bodily
deaths then one. It would be disloyalty for his dearest friend to sue for his
pardon. It is a most Catholic rule in Divinity, of which the Heathens had an
ingrafted notion, the ancient Jews an undoubted tradition, and the use and
doctrine of it unanimously received by primitive Christians, that wheresoever
we find either matter of blessing or matter of cursing denounced by oath; there
the sentence is irreversible, God will not repent. We see the rule first
experienced in those murmuring Israelites to whom God had sworn, that they
should not enter into his rest. For though they repented of their folly, and
besought God with tears that he would revoke his sentence, offering their
service (which before they had neglected) for conquering the land of promise,
yet the Lord would not hear them, and, which is more remarkable, he would not
hear Moses in this particular for himself, because he was involved as an
accessory in that sentence, for he spoke unadvisedly on their behalf. So Moses
himself does testify Deuteronomy. 3. v. 23. etc. And I besought the Lord at that
time saying, O Lord God thou have begun to show thy servant thy greatness, I
pray thee let me go over and see this good land which is beyond Jordan and
that goodly mountain Lebanon. But the Lord was wroth with me for your sakes,
and would not hear me; and the Lord said unto me, let it suffice thee, speak
no more unto me of this matter, get thee unto the top of Pisgah and behold it
with thine eyes: for over this Jordan thou shall not go.

So then God repented him that he had made Saul King over Israel, because he
had the Kingdom only by mere promise, not by promise confirmed by oath. But
God would not repent of his deposition, nor reverse his sentence, because Saul
by his preposterous indulgence unto Amalek (Gods sworn enemy) did by this fact
incur the sentence of deposition by oath; and more deeply participate with
the Amalekites, than Moses had done with the Israelites, whom God had cut off
by oath from entering into the land of Canaan.

I hope I shall not be thought to flatter men, whilst I bless the name of our
glorious Lord, for setting a King over us, as far from Readiness or Ahab's
disposition as they were from the disposition of king Hezekiah, and for giving
him a people nothing so untoward, either toward God, or him as the murmuring
Israelites were toward God and his servant Moses.

But whatsoever has been said, or is written concerning the Kings of Israel or
Judah, were written for our instruction, whether Prince, or people.

The most immediate use of the point last discust concerns great Princes, and
their followers: their followers thus far, that they never solicit or
importune their sovereign Lords, or in case they do, it deeply concerns
Princes, not to suffer themselves to be wrought by any solicitation, or
importunity, to favor any cause which stands accursed by Gods eternal law,
not to take the persons of any men into their protection whom the supreme
Judge has exempted from his; not to patronage any, whom the law of God and
man, have designed unto utter destruction. For by doing such bodily good to
prodigious malefactors, they shall procure, as my Prophet speaks, great evil
unto their own souls. Evils at least temporal unto themselves and to their
people, of which the Lord will not repent. For where such favor is shown unto
men, or rather where favor and pity is showed unto such men as God is thus
highly displeased with, there can be no true fear of the Lord. In whomsoever
that fear is, it is praedominant and will command all other affections,
whether of hope or fear, whether of hatred, love, or favor to men. Unless
such fear of the Lord be first planted in their hearts, no Prince, nor
Potentates, no state or Kingdom can justly pretend to this blessing which
Hezekia's prayers obtained. For he first feared, and then besought the Lord
before the Lord repented of the evil which he had pronounced against him, and
his people.

Now it is our hope and assurance that God will repent of the evil denounced,
which makes our fear of him or of his judgments, to be a filial, not a
slavish fear. For no man can fear God with a true filial fear, but he that
apprehends him as a loving father, and one as is sorry for our aflictions, one
that delights not in the punishment of his sons or servants but in their
repentance, that they may become capable of his fatherly mercy, or loving
kindness.

With thee there is mercy, (says the Psalmist) therefore shall thou be feared.
Why? does any man fear Gods mercies more than his justice? No. This was no
part of the Psalmists meaning: We fear his judgments in and for themselves
and as they bring evil upon us. We fear God himself for his mercy, we are
afraid to offend him if we be his children because he is merciful, and
because the greatest evil which any man can procure unto his own soul, is to
deprive himself of his mercy, who is goodness it self, the sole fountain of
all the good which can be derived unto us. Or it may be a further part of the
Psalmists meaning, that it was our apprehension or belief of his mercy, which
keepseth our fear, whether of him or of his judgments, within his proper
sphere, or limits, as if he had said, with thee o Lord there is mercy,
therefore shall thou be feared, hated thou can not be by such as apprehend
or believe thy mercies; whereas fear of judgments or perpetual punishments,
unless it be tempered with hope of mercy, runs out of his wits, and running
beyond its bounds always ends in hatred.

It is not possible either for that man not to love God, which truly believes
that he has mercy in store for all; or for that man not to hate him, or at
least not to occasion others to hate him, which is persuaded that he has
reserved judgment without mercy to some men, as they are men; or that he has
destinated them to inevitable destruction before he gave them life or
preservation.

To be thus persuaded argues an uncharitable disposition, as well toward God,
as toward men: and from both root and branch of this error, from all such
heresies, hatred, malice, and uncharitableness good Lord deliver us, that are
thine heritage, thy whole Church, especially this land and people.

A TREATISE CONCERNING THE SIGNS OF THE TIME, OR GODS FOREWARNINGS.

CONTAINING The sum of some few Sermons delivered partly before the Kings
Majesty partly in the Town of New Castle upon Tine.

OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, An. Dom. 1637.

LVK. 13. 5. I tell you nay; but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise
perish.
THe words contain an emphaticall negative, (...), and the emphasis of the
negative does infer a vehement affirmative, though conditional, or
exceptive; but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Besides the
grammatical emphasis, or vehemence, the same words are twice repeated by him
who used no tautologies, by him whose nay was nay, and whose yea was yea and
Amen. The ingemination of the same sentence was from two several occasions:
The one given to our Savior; the other taken by him. The occasion given ye
have v. the 1. There were present some that told him of the Galilaeans whose
blood Pilate had mingled with their sacrifices. Who these Galilaeans were, and
what was their crime, is no where (to my observation) registered in particular;
probable it is, that they were the relics of Judas of Galilee his Sect, of
whom we read Act. 5. 37. This man, as Gamaliel in that place relates, rose up
(that is in our language, did rebel) in the days of the tax enjoined about
the time of our Saviors birth, and drew much people after him; and though he
perished, and all, even as many as obeyed him, were dispersed: yet, his sect,
or opinions died not with him: for as Josephus that great Jewish Antiquary tells
us, he left two sons which maintained his doctrine after his death, and
these Galileans here mentioned were, it seems, their disciples; and their
crime, mutiny, or attempt of rebellion.

With what intentions the relaters of these news did interrupt our Savior in
his serious discourse unto his auditors, he best knew. However, res ipsa
includebat dolum. With what intention soever they came unto him, the relation
it self, before such a multitude, was captious: Such as would have put a man
but ordinarily wise either to silence, or upon an exigence. If he should have
held his peace, this had been a disparagement to the opinion which the people
had of his wisdom; and if he were disposed to reply, there seems a necessity
laid upon him either of censuring these Galileans for notorious transgressors,
or of taxing Pilat of extraordinary cruelty, to condemn these miserable men
after such dreadful execution, especially before their countrymen (for such
were most of his Auditors, Galileans, many of them perhaps their kinsemen) had
been odious. To have taxed Pilates person of cruelty, or this his present fact
of injustice, had been dangerous; for it was an act of state. And whatsoever
private edge, or spleen this Roman deputy had against these Galileans, that
was sure to be backed by public supreme Authority. As for Pilates person,
place, or fact, that our Savior (such was his wisdom) meddles not with; he
neither approves, nor disallowes it. That these Galileans were grievous
transgressors, did justly deserve what they suffered, he denies not. But that
they were more heinous sinners than any other Galileans which had not suffered
the like punishment, that he firmly denies, in the 2. v. Jesus answering said
unto them, suppose ye that these Galileans were sinners above all the
Galileans, because they suffered such things? I tell you nay, but except ye
repent (...), ye shall all likewise perish.

This speech is directed to his ordinary Auditors, who for the most part were
Galileans, and our Savior at the time when this news was brought him, was not
in Judea, nor in Pilates jurisdiction, but in Galilee or Peria which both
belonged to Herod's Soveraigntie.

But these newes-mongers were not Galileans, but inhabitants of Jerusalem, and
for this reason he takes occasion to put them in mind of as fearful an
accident which had fallen out though not so lately, yet within their memory, in
Jerusalem, admonishing the inhabitants thereof to make better use of it than
hitherto they had done v. 4. or those eighteen, upon whom the tower in Siloe
fell, and slew them, think ye that they were sinners above all men that dwelt
in Jerusalem? I tell you nay, but except ye repent (...) ye shall all
likewise perish.

This ingeminate verdict of our Savior first against the Galileans, secondly
against the inhabitants of Jerusalem, as most other of his solemn sentences
(if we had the grace, wit, or will to weigh them aright) admit a double sense
or importance, and require a twofold consideration. The one as they are
prophetical and of more special use. The other as they are moral and of
general use. We are in the first place to consider these words now read unto
you as they are prophetical. For unless we have a true scale of them as they
lie under this observation we shall take their moral meaning either too wide
or too straight, and shall continually wander from the meaning of the Holy
Ghost in the particular application of them.

But some happily will demand what matter of prophecy or of prophecy befitting
the Prince of Prophets thus emphatically to utter (...) it is in no case, as
you think of these Galileans, or inhabitants of Jerusalem, but unless one and
other of you repent, ye shall all likewise perish.

Every ordinary minister of Gods word may, and ought to preach this doctrine
daily to his Auditors, unless they be much better than in most places they
are. For such (for the most part) both Priest and people are, that unless they
do repent, they shall dye not the death of the body only, but of the soul.
Yea, but many thus dye which do not perish, and many may perish, and yet not
perish (...), or (...) after the same manner that those Galileans, whose blood
Pilat mingled with their sacrifices, or those eighteen of Jerusalem, upon whom
the tower of Siloe fell, and slew them. Now our Saviors meaning is, that as
the end of these few particular men was exemplary and disastrous, so should the
end of the Galilean nation, and of the inhabitants of Jerusalem without
repentance be; a spectacle and astonishment to all the nations of the earth,
which should see, hear, and read of it. And to foretell this national
disaster so long before was matter of prophecy well befitting the Prince of
Prophets. A true document that he had the spirit of prophecy, not by measures,
or minute portions, but most full and entire, that he was not only vates
futurorum, or praeteritorum, but certus interpres praesentium. For unto all
these points the spirit of Divine prophecy does respectively reach. Moses did
declare himself to be as true a Prophet in setting down the history of the
creation, and the lives of the Patriarks, as in foretelling what should befall
their posterity. So did Daniel in retriving Nebuchadnezar's dream, which had
out flowne his own memory, as in giving the undoubted interpretation of it.
Our Savior in this place declares himself to be vates praeteritorum, in his
most infallible recounting that sad accident in Jerusalem without a
remembrancer, or any record of it then extant. For however the thing it self
was well known to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, yet he did not preach upon
carantoes. The ground of this his heavenly discourse was not vox populi, but
his own infallible knowledge of both these disasters. And both of them were
extraordinary signs, or forewarnings unto the Jewish nation, and in particular
to the inhabitants of the Province of Galilee, and city of Jerusalem. Yet
signs or forewarnings, whose interpretations none besides the Prince of
Prophets could then have given. And his interpretation of them is in brief
this, that Galilee should be the prime seat of that bloody war, and
Jerusalem the center of all those unparalled calamities, whereat the general
signs of the time, and these two particular disasters mentioned in my text
directly point, and would strike home without speedy repentance.

That both these sad accidents were such as the Latins call portenta, or
prodigia, that is in sacred language, peculiar signs of the time, or
forewarnings of greater calamities to follow, we gather from the first words of
the Chap. (...), there were some present (...), in illo ipso articulo temporis,
in that very season, or nick of time, who told him of the Galileans, whose
blood Pilat had mingled with their sacrifices: What season was that? That point
of time, wherein he said unto the people 12. Chap. 4. v. When ye see a cloud
rise out of the West, streightway ye say, there comes a shower, and so it
is. And when ye see the South wind blow, ye say there will be heat, and it
comes to pass. Ye Hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky, and of
the earth, but how is it that ye do not discern this time? Yea, and why even
of your selves judge ye not what is right? And when the Pharisees, with the
Sadduces came tempting, and desiring him that he would show them a sign from
heaven, as it is Math. 16. v. 1. 2. etc. He answered, and said unto them, when
it is evening ye say it will be fair weather, for the sky is red. And in the
morning it will be foule-weather to day, for the sky is red and lowering: O ye
Hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky, but can ye not discern the
signs of the times? And albeit his recited speeches Luke 12. v. 54. were
directed unto the people, or promiscuous multitude then present: yet in that
multitude there were (no question) some Scribes, which had the prerogative, and
portion of the first borne in the title of Hypocrites.

Now our Sauiour's discourse immediately before my text being of the signs of
the time, and a tax of his Auditors dullness, in not discerning them: This
unexpected intersertion of those Galileans whose blood Pilat had mingled with
their sacrifices whatsoever the newes-mongers intended, was indeed no
interruption, but rather an illustration of his doctrine; It comes in 'its
right cue: and the relators of this sad accident serve his turn as fitly, as
the Surgeon does the Physician, by making a visible dissection of that part,
on which the other makes an Anatomy lecture. The implication, or importance of
the news, thus suited by divine providence unto the point then handled by our
Savior, is in effect, as much as if he himself had said unto his Auditors;
If you want other signs of the time to meditate upon, take these two for your
theme, the unusual masacre of these Galileans, and the disaster of those
eighteen inhabitants of Jerusalem, upon whom the tower in Siloe fell and slew
them. These are the first drops of Gods displeasure against the Nation; but
these drops without repentance will grow into a current, and the current into a
river, and the river swell into a flood, and the flood into an ocean of
public woe, and tragique miseries.

The Prophet Jeremy long before had taxed their forefathers as more dull and
stupid, then the reasonlesse Creatures, as the birds of the air, for not
discerning, or not observing those signs of the time, which did foreshew Gods
judgments upon them, with the causes which did provoke them, Ier. 8. 6. 7. I
hearkened and heard, but they speak not aright; no man repented him of his
wickedness, saying what have I done, every one turned to his course, as the
horse rusheth into the battle; yea the Storke in the heaven knows her
appointed times; and the Turtle, and the Crane, and the Swallow, observe the
time of their coming, but my people know not the Judgment of the Lord.

This stupidity or senslesnesse in man, whether Jew or Gentile, whether
Christian or Heathen, in thus slighting or neglecting the signs of the time,
that is such portendments or prognostiques of Gods judgments or calamities, as
the very book of nature, or of the visible creatures affords, argues the
nature, at least the disposition of men, in whom this stupiditie is found, to
be farther out of frame then the nature of the birds of the air, or beasts of
the field. For they commonly foresee vnseaonable weather or storm coming,
and seek in time for some refuge or shelter, but so do not men for the most
part return to God, who is their only refuge, under the shadow of whose wings,
there is only hope of safety; albeit he daily gives them more pregnant
prognostics of wrath ensuing, then the disposition of the air does unto birds
or fowls.

From these circumstances of the season, wherein these news were brought unto
our Savior, the ensuing discourse must take its rise by these degrees, first,
of the peculiar signs of times portending unusual calamities, and of their
general use. Secondly, of the manner how this prophesy was fulfilled upon the
whole Jewish Nation, according to the scale, or model of these two signs upon
these few Galileans, and inhabitants of Jerusalem. Thirdly, of the moral use,
or application of both these signs and predictions.

That the preserver of mankind does always in one kind or other gently, yet
seriously forwarn every city, or nation of such extraordinary calamities, as
hang over their heads, and without repentance inevitably fall upon them; there
can be no better proof than by induction, that is, by the general agreement
of Historians whether sacred, Christian, or heathen, in all ages. Of
Historians, whose works are entirely extant, or unsuspected to be the Authors
whose names they bear, Herodotus is the most ancient, and he has made up the
induction to out hands until his own times, Quoties ingentes sunt eventurae
calamitates vel civitati vel nationi, solent signis praenunciari. Extraordinary
calamities, whether such as befall cities or peculiar Segniories are always
foreshewne by some sign or other. This author lived before Alexander the
great, but after Cyrus had taken the city of Babylon; and is quoted by
Aristotle, who was Alexanders instructor. I refer his instances or ensamples
confirming his former induction of general observation to a fitter
opportunity, diverse of them being more paralleld to the signs of the times in
my text, then any I have read in any heathen Author. In the age next ensuing,
the Author of the second book of Maccabees (A man of authentic credit for
matter of fact, though not of Canonical authority for his doctrine, or
judgment upon matter of fact related by him) has recorded the like
forewarnings, though in another kind, foresignifying the wars that befell the
Jewish nation by Antiochus, Chap. 5. 2. 3. To parallel these with the like in
every age since that time, would be less painful to an ordinary Preacher,
then troublesome to his auditors. Matchiavel, a man as free from superstition,
or vain credulity, as any other writer that has bin borne and bred amongst
Christians, out of his own reading, and experience has made the same
induction which Herodotus did, but somewhat more full.

Vt causam facile confitebor me ignorare: it a rem ipsam cum ex antiquis, tum
novis exemplis agnoscere oportet, and confiteri omnes magnos motus, quicunque
aut vrbi, aut regioni evenerunt, vel a coniectoribus vel a revelatione aliqua
prodigijs aut coelestibus signis praedici ac praenunciari solere. Matchiav.
disput. lib. 1. cap. 56.

But besides the induction made by Herodotus (whose works I doubt, but know not
whether Matchiavel had red) many other instances he brings out of his own
observations and experience.

But some will ask, what credit is to be given to Matchiavel or men of his
temper? Little or none (I must confess) in point of censure or opinion
concerning matter of religion or sacred use; But as the testimony of the Jew in
matter of fact is the most pregnant proof that we Christians can use against
the Jews themselves, or for confirmation of our religion; so Matchiavels
testimony in matter of fact of this nature whereof we treat is most authentic
against the Atheists or men of no religion. For this great Politician was so
far from being too superstitious or credulous in this kind, that by his
writings many have suspected him to have been rather irreligious, more
inclining to Atheism then either to the Christian or Jewish nation. And
whatsoever in this kind he has observed, as he himself confesses, was in a
manner evicted or extorted from him by the evidence of truth. The true cause of
such prodigious signs or forewarnings he professes he did not know, and we
have reason to believe him in this, because he was ignorant of the right end or
use of them. But this, says he, all we of Florence know, that the coming of
Charles the eigth French King with a puisant army was foretold long before by
Jerome Savanorola, and likewise foreshewed by many other signs rife in his
times, throughout the Dukedom of Tuscany. Now this divination of Savanorola
was not gathered from any politic observation* for Charles his attempt was in
all politic esteem so incredible and rash that the grave Senators of Venice
would give no credence unto the first news of his entering into Italy, until
one of their ancients better acquainted (it seems) with that French Kings
disposition then the rest, told them that he could more easily believe this
rash attempt of that French King then of any of his predecessors. But besides
the testimony of Matchiavel for this particular we have the undoubted
testimony of Philip de Comtnes that grave and religious Historian, who was then
agent for the French King in Italy, and relates this prediction from Savanorola
his own mouth, with more particulars then Matchiavel mentions; for he expressly
foretold him of that unexpected success which Charles at his first coming did
find: but this he foretold with this proviso or caution, that unless the
King his master did faithfully execute the work whereunto the Lord of Lords
and King of Kings had designed him, he would quickly call in his commission and
bring the French armies back again into their own land with disgrace and
loss. The event did prove both these parts of this prediction to be most true.

This great alteration of state and wars in Italy, as Matchiavel confidently
affirms, was likewise portended or foresignified by such apparitions in the
air as the Author of the second book of Maccabees in his 5. chap. mentions,
that is, by apparitions of great armies of men joining battle over Aretium a
Town in Tuscany. The words of the Author of the second of Maccabees before
cited are these, And then it happened that through all the city for the space
almost of 40 days there were seen horsemen running in the air in cloth of
gold, and armed with lances, like a band of soldiers and troops of horsemen
in array encountering and running one against another, with shaking of shields,
and multitude of pikes, and drawing of swords, and casting of darts, and
glitterings of golden ornaments and harness of all sorts; wherefore every man
prayed that that apparition might turn to good*

He instances in another sign or prodigy well known to all in Florence, which
did portend or fore-signifie the death of Lorenzo de Medices, who laid the
first foundation of the present Dukedom of Tuscany in his family, being a man
who by his wisdom had preserved all Italy a long time in peace. For a little
before his death the roof of their chief Church or Temple took fire from
heaven, which much defaced it. The banishment of Petrus Soderinus a great peer
and pillar of the state of Florence in his time, and the calamities which
ensued thereupon, were likewise fore-signified or portended by the burning of
their Guild Hall or Senate House by lightning or fire from heaven. These
examples he brings from his own knowledge, another he brings out of Livy, of
one Aeditius an honest countryman, who was warned and commanded by a voice in
the dead of night more clear and shrill then the voice of man, to tell their
Magistrates that the Gauls their enemies were coming to be revenged upon the
Romans. So he concludes his discourse as he did begin it, that whatsoever
might be thought of such conjectures or forewarnings, this is most certain by
experience that some great alterations always follow upon such signs or
forewarnings. As for Herodotus I like his verdict in this kind the better,
because he referred this observation of prodigies or signs of the time unto
the Egyptian nation, which was the most ancient and most remarkable Kingdom
amongst the Heathens. And what reason the Egyptians had to observe these
prodigies and signs of the time more than others, both Jews and Christians
canno: but know or may remember, seeing God had showed such signs and wonders
in the land of Egypt as had not been shown in any nation before, such as can
scarce be paralleld in any nation since, besides in the destruction of
Jerusalem, until the day of judgment, or the signs which shall be given
before it come.

Unto matters related by the Author of the second book of Maccabees if not for
his own esteem, yet for S. Paul's or whoever were the Author of the epistle to
the Hebrews, we owe such an historical belief as may ground matters of sacred
or canonical use or application, because that sacred Author has given him
credit or countenance in his relations of the persecutions of Gods people long
before his own time, which are not registered by any ancient Author now extant,
besides this Author of the second book of Maccabees. 2. Maccab. 7. 7. Heb. 11.
35.

They extend an undoubted truth too far, which make canonical scriptures to
be the only rule of our belief, as well for matters of fact, as for matter of
Doctrine or use. For some matters of fact, though not related in canonical
scriptures, we may, and do belief, or know, as certainly, as those matters
which are related by sacred historians. We (all of us) as steadfastly believe,
and know, that God has often visited this land with the plague of pestilence
in later years, as we do that he visited the land of Judah in David's time.
Many of us believe or know, that we have been sick, grievously sick; and
this we believe and know as firmly, as we believe that Hezekias was sick even
unto death and recovered, albeit his sickness, and the plague wherewith Judah
was visited in David's time are both recorded in scriptures, so are not any
visitations wherewith the Lord has visited either our selves in particular, or
this land and people in general.

But though these or the like matters of fact be not expressed in scriptures
which are the rule of our faith: yet are the canonical scriptures the only
rule of faith, how we ought to demean our selves, when we are either visited
in particular as Hezekias was, or when Gods visitation is more general and
public, as it was upon Judah in the reign of David.

But however we may know matters of fact which are present, or which fall out in
our times as undoubtedly as we do matters of fact related in scriptures: yet it
will be objected, that we may not give the same credit or belief unto any
matters of fact done in former times related by Heathen or Christian, by ancient
or modern Authors, which we do unto all matters of fact, which have been
registered by canonical writers.

All this is true, yet unto writers as well Heathens as Christians we may and
ought to give, though no sacred esteem or credit, yet an historical or moral
belief, as many by profession Christians do not distinctly give unto matters
of fact related by sacred writers, or at least unto their censures of them.

If all, or most of us could but attain unto such a distinct historical
belief of sacred writers as many have of stories related, as well by ancient
Heathens as by modern Christians, we would be more religious, or less
irreligious than for the most part we are.

Briefly, though to believe as much concerning the signs of the times as the
Heathens did, though to make as good or better use of them than they did, be
not sufficient to acquit us from ruin and destruction foresignified; yet not
to believe as much as they did, not to make so good use as they did, not to be
so much affected with them as they were, is enough and more than enough to
condemn us, enough to bring that ruin or calamity, which they portend or
foresignify inevitably and in full measure upon us.

Unto these observations of Herodotus and Matchiavel I only add this one, that
the greater the alterations or calamities be which are thus foresignified, or
portended, the greater commonly, and more strange the prodigies be which
foresignify them. The more sudden the blow, or the fewer the forewarnings be,
the more express, and punctual they are. Two instances for this present shall
suffice, exhibited a little before, or in the time wherein Matchiavel wrote.
Both forewarnings were given Viva voce, by the voice of men, but of men which
no man present knew, either whence they were, or whither they went, after the
delivery of their message.

The one unto James the fourth, then Lord and King of our now sister nation.
The apparition and message was so strange that the learned Historian from whom
I have it professes, he should hardly have believed it, unless he had heard
it from a man far from lying and coining of news, as from Sr David Lindsey
that famous King at arms, and Knight of the Mount.

Hac belli denuntiatione in Scotiam prolata dum ad excercitum proficiscens rex
Limnuchi vespertinas in Aede sacracantiones (ut tum moris erat) audit; senex
quidam ingressus, capill^ in rufum flavescente, ac in humeros promisso, front
in calviciem glabre capite nudo, vest longiuscula cyanei coloris amictus, ac
linteo cinctus, caetero asp ectu venerabilis, is regem quaerens per turbam
obstantium penetrat; u^i ad eum accessit rustica quadam simplicitate, super
solium, in quo rex sedebat innixus, Rex, inquit, ego ad te sum messus ut te
admoneam ne quo instituisti progrediaris, quam admonitionem si neglexeris, non
erit e retuanec eorum qui te camit abuntur: praeterea praem^nere sum iussus, ne
mulierum familiaritate, consuetudine, ac consili^ ut aris, secus vero si facies
and damno and ignomini^ tibi res erit. Haec locutus turbae sese immiscuit: nec
eum, precibus finitis, rex eum requireret, usquam comparuit: quod eo magis
mirum est visum, quod eorum qui propius astiterant atque eum observabant, avidi
ex eo multa sciscitandi, nemo eius discessum senserat. In iis fuit David
Lindesius, Montanus; homo spectatae fidei and probitatis, nec a literarum
studiis alienus, and euius totus vitae tenor longissime a mentiendo aberat, a
quo ni^i ego haec, uti tradii, accepissem, ut vulgatam vanis rumoribus fabulam,
omissurus eram.

And it is no wonder if this forewarning were so unusual and strange, seeing
the calamity which through the neglect of it, was so great, as this famous
Herald in his writings complains it could not be paralleld in any nation
besides the Egyptian, for the loss of the Prince, and so many Nobles in one
day: But though the blow was for the present terrible, yet, God be praised, the
wound was not incurable; Forsan and has venturus amor praemiserat iras. The
wound, or breach was at that time the wider, that the cure, or close of it
might be the sweeter; and let him perish that seeks any other use of the
ancient foehoods, betwixs these two neighboring nations, then the settling of
such love, and peace betwixt them, as becomes dearest sisters. Let no other
emulation possess Nobility, Gentry, or Commonalty of either Kingdom, besides
true zeal in Gods service, and loyal obedience to his Vicegerent, their joint
Lord, and sovereign.

If the former relation of that famous Knight, and Herald might seem strange
to any for the present, Amongst other writers of those times see that noble
French Historian, Martin Fumee Lord of Genille.
their diffidence, or incredulity might have bin sufficiently convinced by an
apparition, and forewarning far more strange, exhibited within twelve or
thirteen years after, unto the State, or Court of Hungary.

The King being at dinner, Histor. Hungar. lib. 1. page 32.
the gates of his Castle being shut (as the custom was) a certain ghost, in
form, and shape of a man, evil favored, with crooked legs, came halting,
and knocks at the gate, and with a loud shrill voice desired to speak with the
King, to acquaint him with things which nearely concerned both the good of
himself, and of the Kingdom. His speeches at first being not heard by the
guard, who were at the gate (as it is the use in Princes courts) he cried
louder, and with a horrible voice demanded again, whether they gave the King
notice thereof. In the end, certain of the company being moved by the
importunity of this deformed Ghost; they demanded of him what he would have,
but he replying said, he would not reveal his secrets to any but to the King.
This message was presently carried to the King, who understanding thereof; sent
unto him one of his servants, in the best and richest apparel, and one who was
next himself, feigning that he was the King, commanding him to enquire what
this fellow would say. This messenger coming before the Ghost, and asking him
in private, what secret he would impart unto him, the other denying that he
was King (but came disguised to abuse him) with a high, and loud voice he
said, that since the King would not hear him, he should shortly perish. And so
shortly he did with the loss of a great part of the Kingdom of Hungary not
recovered by Christians to this day.

But it is time to come to the use, which the Hearthens did, and the Christians
ought to make of the special signs, or forewarnings, of what kind soever they
be. Of the Heathens, some in most ages did utterly contemn, or scorn all
presage from the signs of the time, some not so ill disposed, did slight them,
others took them into serious consideration, but for the most part made no
right use of them, did grossly err either in practice, or opinion. The
ancient Romans had an accustomed presage of success in battle, by the eating
of birds, kept for that purpose. This kind of presage was so far contemned by
Clandius Pulcher general for the Romans in the first Punick^ war, that when
the sooth sayers had diswaded him from giving battle to the Carthaginians
that day, because the birds would not eat, he commanded them to be cast into
the sea, to see if they would drink or no: But the ill success, which was
conceived to follow upon this contempt, did cause the Senate to call in his
commission, and choose another general in his place. Howbeit this kind of
presage, I take it, was no sign of the time, or forewarning exhibited by the
true God, but rather effected by superstitious men.

However; the contempt, or scorn of superstition, or blind devotion, unless
it spring from a sincere, and well rooted love to true religion, is much worse
than superstitious, than idolatrous practices. Many instances are extant in
unsuspected Authors, that the irreligious contemners, or scorners of false Gods
have been remarkeably plagued, not by those supposed Gods, whose service they
neglected, but by the true and only God, who is the just revenger, as well of
Atheism, and irreligion, as of superstition, and idolatry.

But the Emperor Vespatian, though an Heathen, was in his way devoutly
religious, and though no contemner, yet a slighter of the prodigies, and signs
of the time. For when amongst other presages remarkable of his death, notice
was given him of a comet which then appeared; he bid the relaters deliver this
message to the King of Parthia, Ille comatus est, ego autem calvus; seeing the
King of Parthia did wear long hair, it was most likely, that this blazing
star, or ^rinita stella, as the Romans call it, should portend his death
rather than the Emperor Vespatians, who was bald. But the course of destiny as
the Heathens upon this observed could not be diverted by jerkes of wit, for
Vespatian died before the extinction of this comet, and the King of Parthia
outlived both: Vespatian perhaps might have lived the longer, if upon these
summons, or forewarnings, he had betaken himself to his prayers, as Hezekiah
in like case did, or said in his heart unto the divine power, which gave him
those summons, as David in like case did, Behold here am I, do with me as it
seems good in thy eyes.

But error in opinion concerning the use of the these forewarnings was usual
to the more ingenious, and devoutest sort of heathens, which did carefully
regard them. Thus far they are to be commended, in that they thought these
forewarnings to be sent by the Gods, or Divine powers as tokens or pledges of
their good will toward men, some of them expressly say they were sent from
the God, not from the Gods, from coelest^ ^umen, not from c^^lesta numina, from
the power of heaven, not from heavenly powers; wherein did these men fail, or
err? In this specially, that albeit they did not suspect the Divine power
either of hatred, or want of good will toward men, yet they thought rate, and
destiny were stronger then this Divine power; that the miserable calamity, and
success which did commonly ensue upon such forewarnings could by no means
possible be either prevented, or averted, hence was that or the like
exclamation, Heu vani monitus, Silus
frustraque morantia parcas
Prodigia; Italicus.
heu superi fatis certasse minores.


But this was the speech of a Poet, and Poets take liberty to be passionate in
expressing the dispositions, or opinions of men in their times. Yet a most
sober, most ingenuous Roman writer is more express to this purpose in prose.
C^: etiam Pompeium Jupiter omnipotens abunde monuerat, Valerius Maximus.
nec cum C. Caesare ultimam belli fortunam experiri contenderet.

He speaks not of the Gods in general, but of one God, whom he characters
under the style of omnipotency, who did forewarn Pompey the great, not
sufficiently only, but abundantly, not to hazard his fortunes upon a battle
to be determined on one day. The forewarnings which he there relates were
extraordinary, and prodigious; some of them portending Pompey's overthrow,
others Caesar's victory. His verdict, or censure upon them is briefly this, they
were such a quibus appareret coeleste numen and Caesaris gloriae favisse, and
Pompeii errorem inhibere voluisse.

But if this heavenly power were willing to inhibit Pompey's error, how came it
to pass that it was not inhibited? This is all the reason he could give,
^nvictae leges necessitatis, pectus alioqui ab amentia remotum, prodigia ista
iusta aestimatione perpendere passae non sunt. The irresistible laws of
necessity would not suffer this great and otherwise most prudent General to
weigh these forewarnings aright.

But if this Jupiter, or heavenly power were; as he instiles him, omnipotent,
and willing withal, a^ he confesses, to inhibit Pompey's error at this very
time, what law, what necessity, or what laws of necessity could resist, or
prohibit the execution of his will? These immutable laws of necessity if any
such there were might be more truly styled omnipotent, then Jupiter or that
great God, who gives laws to man, and Angels* but it was the want of true
Logic which did occasion this error, or ill expression in this heathen
writer, as it had done and does the like in the Stoics. The transposing only
of one word, or placing of one point aright, without alteration of any
fillable, or it is signification, would make this heathen's opinion, and
expression of himself exactly paralleld to the rule of faith.

When he says, Invictaeleges necessitat is etc. would not suffer Pompey to
lay these forewarnings to heart* he contradicts himself, and the truth of
Divine, omnipotent power. Whereas if he had said, the invincible laws of
necessity did suffer Pompey, not to lay these forewarnings to heart, he had
spoken like a Christian. For there can be no other invincible law of necessity
besides the irresistible will of the one omnipotent God, and that is a law
absolutely invincible, and most irresistible; and yet a law which admits a
liberty of choice in the parties subject to it, or a law for the most part
disiunctive. It was the irresistible will of God that Pompey should have
sufficient, or as this Author speaks, abundant warning to correct his error,
or to abate his high spirit or pride of heart, and yet it was one and the same
irresistible will of one and the same God, that these forewarnings* how
prodigious soever, should not necessitate his will or enforce relentance upon
his present resolution.

No matter of fact, or signs of the time can be more infallible prognostickes
of calamities foresignified by them, then these signs of the time which it
pleased our Savior to interpret. No prophecy or prediction, though uttered by
an Angel from heaven, can induce a greater necessity, or argue a more
inevitable futurition of things so foretold then the express prediction, or
prophecy of the Son of God himself.

Though here, or elsewhere he often foretold the destruction of Galilee, and
Ierasalem; yet was not the destruction of either of them from the date of this
prophefie absolutely necessary, or inevitable, but necessary only upon
supposition, or conditionally necessary, unless ye repent ye shall all
likewise perish. Yea but this proposition might be true, if they did repent
they should not perish. But this does not argue their repentance to have been
possible: For Hypothetica propositio (as they say) nihil Ponit in esse; this
proposition would be true, though in a beggars mouth. If I had ten thousand
pound I should be a rich man, yet the truth of this proposition puts no money
in his purse.

But he that would apply this Logic rule unto our Saviors speech in my text,
does either jeere our Savior, or make him to be a jeerer of the sons of
affliction, which later of two evils is the worse; for wheresoever the contract
or covenant is serious, or where the bond or grant is real, and legal the
condition must be facible.

The Prince, or Judge, that would grant, or promise a malefactor, suppose a
manslayer, his life upon condition, or provise, that he should restore the
party whom he had slain to life again, would be thought rather to mock him
than show mercy to him, and to do himself, and his authority more wrong than
the other good.

Solomon did not mock Shimei when he gave him life upon this condition that
he should keep himself within the confines of Jerusalem. This condition,
though not performed by Shimei, was facible, and the breach of it did bring
death upon Shimei.

Every condition or promise, if it be serious, praesupponit aliquid in esse,
presupposes some estate in being. As when our Savior says, except ye
repent, ye shall all likewise perish, This exception, or condition
presupposes an estate in sin, yet an estate mutable. It presupposes these
men were truly liable to destruction threatened, but it presupposes withal
that the door of life, and salvation, though now but narrow, was not utterly
shut against them; that as yet it was called to day with them; yea that after
this time there was a season wherein this son of God did call them to
repentance, when he beheld the city, and wept over it; Oh that thou had
known this thy day etc. After they had cast him off from being King over them,
and exempted themselves from his wonted special protection; yet he cease
not to pray for them, Father forgive them for they know not what they do.

But here some, who think it part of their office to send off Gods intended
mercies from such as they have marked for reprobates, will tell you, that our
Savior did then pray not for the Jews, but for the Roman Soldiers: yet Roman
Soldiers they were not, but Jews of the worst condition, which stoned the
blessed Martyr Steven to death; and yet he prayed, Lord lay not this sin unto
their charge. And it will be no sin in us to think that the dying disciple
did learn this extraordinary charity from his dying (...).

Now if either master, or disciple had known the destruction, which hanged
over this peoples head, to have been at that time altogether inevitable,
neither of them would, or might have prayed for them, or against the plague
which in the issue fell upon them; for it was never lawful for the Prophets,
nor is it for any man living this day, to pray for any people, or person in
case they infallibly know that they are utterly cast off by God, or left in a
state impennible.

As for the destruction here threatened against Galilee and Jerusalem, though at
this time truly evitable, yet it became Iesse evitable every day than other for
almost forcy years* by their continual perseverance (...) special sins;
and their progression in sin without relentance was occasioned by the neglect
of the signs of the time, or the forewarnings which God had given them for
their good.

No public plagues or calamities whether foresignified by such signs, as
these in my text, or punctually foretold by Gods Prophets, or by his Son the
Prince of Prophets, become inevitable, unless it be by contempt, or neglect
of forewarnings given, or by deeming all events to be inevitable, because they
are foresignified, or foretold by God himself, or by his ambassadors.

It is true sometimes, that the very inevitability of ensueing calamities is
either expressly foretold or foresignified: but such presignifications, or
predictions can be no forewarnings, but rather peremptory denunciations of
some irreversible sentence, or doom after warnings given, be they more, or
fewer.

To scorn, or neglect forewarnings given, is a Symptom of hardness of heart,
and contempt of Gods word. To think all calamities are inevitable, which are
foretold, or foresignified, or of which God himself has given forewarnings,
is a branch of false Doctrine, or an heresy, sometimes adludged by the
lawmakers of this land so capital, that they did exempt the maintainers of it
(which were then the sect of the Anabaptists) from all benefit of the Kings
royal pardon, as is apparent from the general pardon of the thirty 2 year of
King Henry the eight: but by what co^stitutions of the visible Church of
England which then was the error of such men as thought nothing could fall out
otherwise then it does, was condemned for an heresy, or by what parliamentary
law it was adjudged to be a capital heresy incapable of pardon, or whether
such Ecclesiastical constitutions or municipall laws as were then in force
have been since by like authority repeald, or antiquated by disuse or
discontinuance of practice, are points without the limits of my profession, and
besides my intention either to determine or farther enquire after in this
place. Therefore leaving these points with all submission to the learned
professors or interpreters of laws Ecclesiastical or municipall, the next
enquiry must be of the manner how this prophecy of our Savior, and the signs
of the time which he did prophetically interpret, were accomplished.

Of the several sorts of Divine forewarnings.
THe manner of Gods forewarning by matter of fact, or other visible signs, is
so various, that it cannot be comprehended by art, or observation. Sometimes
he forewarnes by signs in the Sun, and Moon, sometimes by apparitions in
the air, sometimes by monstrous births; sometimes he makes the murren of
cattle, or mortality of beasts of the field, or birds of the air to be
forerunners of plagues or pestilence unto men. Sometimes he forewarnes men (as
we say) in kind, and gives them a touch of public ruin, or desolation
ensuing, without repentance, by the sudden disasters of some few men, or
children in the same nation. So Herodotus tells us, that before the desolation
of the people of Chios, these strange signs did happen. Sed videlicet quoties
etc. ut supra. Etenim Chiis ante hanc cladem ingentia signa contigerant: Vnum,
quod ex choro centum juvenum, quos miserant Delphos, duo omnino rediere,
nonaginta octo pestilentia absumptis: Alterum, quod sub idem tempus, paulo ante
navalem pugnam, tectum suprapueros litteras discentes corruit, ita ut ex centum
viginti pueris unus omnino evaserit. Haec eis signa Deus praemonstravit; post
haec excepit pugna navalis, quae civitatem in genua deiecit. Accessit ad cladem
navalis pugnae Histiaeus cum Lesbiis, qui Chios iam exhaustos facile ad
excidium deduxit. Herodotus lib. 6. The signs were two, One, that of a hundred
young men, whom they had sent to Delphos, two only returned, the rest being
consumed by pestilence: another, but a little after the same time, before the
loss of their Navy and Mariners by sea, the roof of the Schoole-house did
fall so suddenly, that of an hundred, and twenty children, but one escaped
with life. And these signs (as he conceives) God did give them of that great
disaster, which they had by sea, which brought the city first upon her knees,
and after to that utter ruin, and desolation, which the Lesbians in their
weakness did bring upon both city, and people.

These forewarnings, as before was intimated, run parallel with these two in
my former text, the fulfilling of which, as also of the parable uttered by our
Savior in the words immediately following, come now to be discust.

LVK. 13. verses 6. 7. 8. 9. 6 He spoke also this parable; A certain man had a
fig tree planted in his vineyard, and he came and sought fruit thereon and he
found none.

7 Then said he unto the dresser of his vineyard, behold these three years I
come seeking fruit on this fig tree, and find none; cut it down, why cumbreth
it the ground?

8 And he answering said unto him, Lord let it alone this year also, till I
shall dig about it, and dung it.

9 And if it bear fruit, well; and if not, then after that thou shall cut it
down.


THese words are as an appendix of our Saviors precedent discourse concerning
such signs of the time, as did portend, or foresignifie the utter ruin of the
Jewish nation, and of the visible Church planted in it. How peremptory soever
the forewarnings were, how infallible soever he was in his predictions of their
ruin, yet both were subject to this exception, or condition, unless ye
repent, ye shall all likewise perish. The use, or importance of the parable was
to admonish them, that these forewarnings or signs of the time, which God did
give them, whether by the express words of this great Prophet, which was then
amongst them, or by strange matters of fact legible in the books of the
visible creatures, were not to continue in infinitum; They had their period set
before all times; from eternity. And however it is elsewhere said, That at what
time soever a sinner does repent him from the bottom of his heart, I will put
all his wickedness out of my remembrance. Yet is it no where said, that
sinners may repent them at what time they will, or find the just fruits of such
repentance as they perform. But as there is an indefinite or long time, within
which it is possible for sinners to repent, and a promise universal, that at
what time soever, within this limited time, sinners do repent, their prayers,
and supplications shall be heard: So there is a peremptory day set to all
nations respectively, after which there is no access by true repentance, no
entrance by such repentance, as they tender unto temporal safety. Today (says
the Psalmist) If you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts as in the day
of temptation in the wilderness, when your fathers tempted me, proved and saw my
works forty years: Wherefore I was grieved with that generation, and said,
they do always err in their hearts, and have not known my ways; So I swear
in my wrath, that they should not enter into my rest. Heb. 3. v. 7. 8. 9. 10.
Psalm. 95. 7.

The meaning of the Psalmist in that place; is more fully and plainly expressed
by our Savior verses 24. and 25. of this Chapter, in his answer to that
question, Lord are there few that shall be saved? And he said unto them,
strive to enter in at the strait gate: for many, I say unto you, will seek to
enter in, and shall not be able. But to what end should they strive to enter
in at that gate at which they are not able to enter? Shall we say, that albeit
they that strive to enter be not able of themselves, yet it is possible for
them to enter in by Gods assistance? Or that albeit they are not able to do
any thing possible, that may merit their entrance; yet they may do somewhat,
which being done, God will make the entrance possible to them, and enable them
to enter in? This answer in some other cases is most true, yet not in this; it
can no way satisfy the question proposed unto our Savior, it is no way
pertinent to the meaning of his parable concerning entering in at the straight
gate, or this parable of the unfruifull figtree. It is at some times, at many
times, possible for all that hear the word, to become obedient to the word
heard, and by this obedience to enter in at the strait gate. But it is not
possible for any to enter in at it, after they have sometimes contemptuously,
or often times carelessely omitted the opportunity which God had offered them
for their easy entrance into it, or passage through it. The gate is not so
strait, but that all men, which have heard of it, may enter in at it, whilst
it is open, so they seek to enter in at it in order, not tumultuously. But
after this gate is shut, none can enter, though many seek to enter. So our
Savior instructs us in the twenty fifth verse of this Chapter, When once the
master of the house is risen up, and has shut to the door, and ye begin to
stand without, and to knock at the door, saying, Lord, Lord, open unto us, and
he shall answer, and say unto you, I know you not whence you are. This is the
general end and scope of the parable in my text, and of the parable of the
foolish Virgins. For the more clear explication of this parable's particular
contents, ye are in the first place to know the meaning of the single terms,
as first, who is in special meant by the certain man which has planted a
figtree in his vineyard. Secondly, who is in special meant by the dresser of
this vineyard. Thirdly, what is meant by the figtree planted in it. Lastly,
what is meant by the three years, wherein fruit was by the owner expected, and
the fourth year wherein the dresser of the vineyard did petition for the
sparing of it upon further trial.

The owner of the vineyard, and of the figtree planted in it, as best
interpreters agree, does represent God the Father, or first person in Trinity.
He it is that exacts satisfaction for all sins committed against the Deity,
or divine nature: and he it is which demands fruit of whatsoever the divine
nature has planted; that is thankfulness of man in special, for his
benefits bestowed upon him; but specially of his Church wheresoever planted. By
the dresser of the vineyard ye are to understand the Son of God, or second
person in Trinity. For he it is which took our nature upon him to till, and
dress it for his fathers service, and that portion of our nature, which he
took upon him, is as the root, or stem to all the residue which shall be
freed from cursing: So our Savior tells us, I am the true vine, and my father
is the husbandman, or the owner of the vine. It is again the Son of God, or
second person in Trinity, which does mediate betwixt God and man, and by his
mediation and intercession our first parents, the whole nature of man was
reprieved from death. By his mediation, and intercession the execution of Gods
dreadful, and exemplary judgments upon the seed of Jacob, or people of
Israel, was for many ages deferred, though in some part executed upon them in
every age, but never fully executed upon the nation, until their contemptuous
neglect of these forewarnings. By the figtree planted in the vineyard, you are
to understand the Kingdom of Judah, or the Church of the Jews, as they stood
affected for this present. For in respect of Gods chosen people then living on
earth, or of that one holy catholic Church, which was then in planting, and
was afterward to be propagated throughout the world, the Jewish Church or
Synagogue then flourishing, was but as a figtree planted in a vineyard, but as
one figtree for quantity, and a most unfruitful one for quality in respect of
the charges, care, and pains which had been bestowed upon it, and of the
special care which the dresser of the vineyard had taken of it.

By the three years wherein fruit was expected from the figtree, but not
yielded, we are in the historical, literal, or punctual sense to understand
the three years of our Saviors prophetical function here on earth, which
were before this time complete and ended. By the fourth year, wherein the
figtree was permitted to grow upon further trial, we are to understand the
year current wherein this parable was uttered, in the midst of which year our
Savior was consecrated here on earth to his sacerdotall, or priestly function.
And forty days after his consecration admitted to exercise this function in
his heavenly sanctuary.

But here it may be demanded, why this figttee, that is the Jewish Church, was
permitted to stand after this fourth year was ended, since it continued this
year more unfruitful than the former; for it is imported in the parable, that
unless it did bear fruit within this fourth year, it was to be cut down.
To this demand we answer, that the meaning of the parable is not, that this
figtree instantly was to be cut down at the fourth years end, but that the
dresser of the vineyard would not entreat the owner any longer for it, in such
manner as he had done before, but would leave it wholly to his wisdom, how it
should be disposed of; or in what time, or by what degrees it was to be cut
down. True it is, that it was not utterly cut down at this fourth years end,
for the Church and the common weal of the Jews represented the figtree did
continue almost forty years after this fourth year ended, but stood like a
tree, or stem of a tree, marked to be felled. There did not pass one year
of forty wherein it did not receive some chops, or deep incision in the root
or stem, not one year wherein it was not despoiled of some principal
branches. And during this time the Son of God, here represented by the
dresser of the vineyard, stood as a spectatour, made no intercession for it.
For after this people had rejected him from being their King and and protector,
Gods fearful judgments often threatened and denounced against it, took their
ordinary process without any prohibition.

This Church or people were not to expect any extraordinary favor or more
favorable signs than other Nations had: yet signs they had many of their
miserable ruin and desolation of their country: which they might have
observed, which if they had observed but in such measure and manner as many
heathens did the like, they might have been acquitted a tanto, though not a
toto; their ruin and destruction after it became in a manner necessary, was
not necessarily decreed to be so inevitable, as by their own stubbornenesse
they made it in the issue. Thus much in general of the sense and meaning of
the owner of the vineyard and the dresser of it, of the figtree, and of the
three years wherein it continued fruitless, and of the fourth year wherein
it was to be cut down.

But as for the figtree and the years wherein it was permitted to stand,
besides the former punctual or historical sense, they have an exemplary or
indefinite sense. That which is fore-prophecied of this particular figtree or
Church of the Jews, holds true, in proportion, of every particular visible
Church on earth. Every one of them have their several forewarnings or
appointed times for bringing forth fruit, within which time, if they do not
repent, they are exempted from our Saviors special protection, and left open
to the ordinary process of Gods judgments, as this particular figtree was.
This is the only difference, that the forewarnings of other Churches and
Nations are not in respect of the time so express, so determinate and
punctual as this figtree had. Now are they marked to the fall by the self
same degrees, that this figtree was; the time of their fall and ruin after
such forewarnings is not so determinate in respect of us, as the time of
Ierusalem's and Judah's ruin after our Saviors death, and resurrection were.
For the time of their ruin was both foretold by the Prophets, and prefigured
by matter of fact; as by their fore-elders wandering forty years in the
wilderness, and by the forty days, which after our Saviors resurrection were
given them to bethink themselves better, and to make their peace with God, as
the Ninevites did upon forewarning given them by Jonas. But leaving these
punctual, or special forewarnings, we are to follow the forewarnings here
mentioned in the 3. and 4. verses of this Chapter, with the like general
signs of times ensuing.

The province of Galilee had its forewarning in the massacre of these Galileans
whose blood Pilate mingled with the sacrifices. The inhabitants of Jerusalem
had their particular forewaring likewise in the lamentable disaster of those
eighteen, upon whom the tower in Siloe fell.

These Galileans (were they many or few) did perish in Jerusalem, and their
disaster for this reason was more public, such as the whole nation of the
Jews could not but take notice of; so that both signs put together with the
circumstances of the time, and place wherein they happened, did portend that the
utter ruin of the whole nation should be in Jerusalem.

It might be true in part, which the chief Priests and Pharisees had observed.
Ioh. 7. 52. Search and look, for out of Galilee arises no Prophet. Nor was our
Savior, to whom they apply this observation in particular, a Galilean by
birth, but a neighbour-born unto Jerusalem; for he was borne in Bethlehem the
city of David. But at the time of this great Prophets birth, who was to
falsify their observation in respect of future times (for he made Peter, John,
and James, and other Galileans more then Prophets) there arose a seditious sect
in Galilee, which did first oppose the payment of tribute unto Caesar. And all
the opposition which this rebellious people made against the Roman empire took
its original from Judas the Gaulonite, and his sons. And as Galilee was the
beginning of woe unto Jerusalem and the Jewish Nation, so it was the first in
the plagues and woes here denounced. For Vespasian being sent to quell this
rebellion, made his first invasion upon Galilee, and took in all the cities
and principal towns within that province, before he made any assault upon
Jerusalem or other cities of Judas.

The number of Galileans, which perished in that war, was so great, that I
should hardly believe Josephus his relations or them, unless our Savior had
foretold this calamity was to be national, and universal for all were to
perish, besides such as did in time repent, which (God wot) were but a few.

But had those Galileans no signs of the times, besides these forewarnings in
my text, to dissuade them from that desperate war? yes, signs they had many
and most pregnant which did verify the literal meaning of our Saviors
prophecy, signs abundant to instruct them, that the Lord had appointed the
Romans to rule over them; and these signs they had partly before, partly after
Vespaians coming to manage the war on the Romans part against them.

King Agrippa of whom we read Acts 26. in that excellent oration set down by
Josephus in his second book and sixteenth Chapter, did forewarne them more
like a Prophet, than a politician; but these forewarnings concerned the whole
Nation as much as they did Galilee. After the invasion made upon Galiles by
Vespasian, Josephus himself, who wrote the history of those wars in which he
had been a principal agent, took warning by the visible signs of the time,
to yield himself to the Romans upon the taking of Iotopata. But a more fear.
full forewarning they had in the second taking of Ioppa, whither the Galileans
had fled in great abundance, hoping at least to have escaped the Romans forces
by ships, if they were not able to defend themselves by land; but they found
the wind, and weather to fight more bitterly against them, than the Romans had
done. The tempest did drive them from the Sea, and the Romans from the city.
Some were swallowed by the waves, some killed themselves for fear of being
drowned, many were dashed against the rocks, so that the sea was bloody, and
all the shore was covered with dead bodies. Such as escaped the Sea, were
killed by the Romans, four thousand two hundred dead bodies were cast upon the
shore. lib. 3. Chap. 15. Did the rest of the Galileans take warning by these
men's disaster, or by the destruction of this and other cities, and the general
desolation of their country? They did in part, but to no purpose. They saw it
was in vain to defend the cities of Galilee, but even the desperate estate
hereof they took as a sign of the time, or as a watchword to fortify
Jerusalem, the chief city, and Metropolis of their Nation. This was the city
which the Lord had chosen amongst all the cities of Israel to place his name
there; and God, they thought; was bound in honor to defend his chosen city.
Out of this persuasion all the men of war that were left in Galilee, and in
other places overrunne by Vespasian, did repair unto Jerusalem, and in the
issue of this resolution they fulfilled that which our Savior had foretold,
that not only the Galileans, but the inhabitants of Jerusalem should perish.

Had those Galileans, after despair of defending their own cities, or strong
holds or after they saw Vespsiaan's army bent against Jerusalem, fled as our
Savior admonished his followers into the mountains, or dispersed themselves
amongst other Nations, they might have escaped that butchery, which the Romans
practiced upon them, and they upon others of their own Nation. And unless
they and others of their own Nation contrary to our Savior's admonition had
floc'kd unto Jerusalem (after they had seen it begirt with the Roman forces)
the Burgesses, or inhabitants of that famous city had submitted themselves unto
the Romans, who were ready to give them better quarter, than now one Christian
Nation will upon like occasion give another. But the inhabitants of that city
being overcrowded with the multitude, which daily flocked unto them, and which
they admitted to be partakers with them of the legal sacrifices, they became
partakers of that vengeance, which still pursued the seditious, what place
soever they made choice of for their refuge. Thus by neglecting or contemning
the signs of the time which our Savior had given them, the greater part of
that Nation, more then five to one, of such as were then ready to bear arms,
were first shut upon Jerusalem, as in a prison, or as so many fatted beasts in
a market; The Temple afterward becoming as the slaughterhouse or shambles.
To recount all the miseries which they suffered in the city and in the Temple
by the famine, and by the sword, and by the infection of dead corpse, which had
no other grave besides the open streets, the Temple, and their houses, would
be a labor infinite, and superfluous for this place, seeing they are so fully
and so pathetically related by Josephus, whom God had appointed as the fittest
man to keep the register of them; and you may at your best leisure without any
fee peruse his records; now more common in our English language then the
records or Chronicles of our own nation. And so no doubt it was Gods will to
have them, that our Nation might take example, or instructions by them, whom
they more concern then they do any Nation since they were first written by
him. My present aim or level directs me only to observe the fulfilling of our
Saviors words in my text, and the accomplishment of those signs of the time,
which the owner of this vineyard did give unto this people, after that the
dresser of it (that was our Savior) had given over his special protection of
them, and left them to the ordinary course of his fathers justice.

The blood of those Galileans, whom Pilate slew, did but make a mixture with
the blood of the sacrifices which they offered; and in this mixture we do not
read that the blood of these seditious men was praedominant, or that it was a
mixture of the blood of men and beasts ad pondus, or in equal measure. But
after Jerusalem was besieged by the Roman army, Josephus, who relates only the
matter of fact, without any reference to the prediction of our Savior in this
place, does tell us that the Altar did swim with the blood of men, the blood
of Galileans, as well as of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, in greater abundance,
then at any time it had done with the blood of beasts. The blood of beasts, or
of legal sacrifices, whilst they were legally offered, that is, whilst the law
was in force, was an infallible sign unto this people, that God would spare
their persons, and accept of their commutation, that is of the blood of beasts
in liew of the blood of men, which he might at all times have justly exacted.
But when the blood of men about the Altar or Courts of the Temple was shed in
greater abundance, and that by men of Jewish progeny, then the blood of beasts
had been; this was a sign and a fearful one, that the righteous Lord would
no longer accept of legal sacrifices, but did require the blood of those men
who had abused the legal sacrifices, not as a means to pacify his wrath or
to defer their deserved punishment, as the blood of beasts in former time had
done, but rather as an infallible sign, that this was the time appointed for
taking full vengeance of all the righteous blood, which they, or their
forefathers had shed in this holy city. Or to use our Saviors words, Luke 11.
50. 51. That the blood of all the Prophets which was shed from the foundation
of the world might be required of this generation from the blood of Able, unto
the blood of Zacharias, which perished between the Altar and the Temple,
verily I say unto you it shall be required of this generation.

But had this people no other forewarnings to desist from this desperate war
after Jerusalem was besieged by Vespasian, besides these prophetical
forewarnings of our Savior? yes, though the book of the Law and Prophets were
now sealed up that they could not read or understand the meaning of it; though
our Saviors forewarnings were quite forgotten, or not observed by them; yet
the book of the visible creatures was still legible; they wanted not
prodigies, or other remarkable signs of the time, which testified Gods
special providence in directing all occurrences for the good of the Romans,
and for their destruction. And these signs were observed even by the Heathens,
and others which had no true knowledge of Christ, or of his prophecies. A
remarkable one was pressed upon them by Josephus, in his oration unto them; The
fountains which before gave you no water, yield it to Titus in great
abundance. You know that before his coming the fountains without the city and
Siloe were so dried up that water was sold by measure, yet now they flow so
plentifully, that they do not only serve all the armies, and their cattle
also, but besides that, do water all the gardens about lib. 6. c. 11.

It is a short, but a remarkable observation which the same Author there makes:
Vespasian (says he) so gained by warring against us, that he has hereby got
the whole empire. This was a pregnant sign of the time; for indeed the manner
how the Roman empire did within the space of sixteen months devolve from Nero
upon Galba, from Galba upon Otho, from Otho upon Vitellius, rather to crush
them than to advance them; and the manner again how the same empire, after
this long tumble, did quietly settle under Vespasian, and his sons, did
abundantly testify even unto the natural moral man, that this resolution was
wrought by the special hand of God. Every sober or civil man which had any
notion of the divine providence, might have clearly gathered, that albeit Nero
had appointed Vespasian general against the Jewish Nation; yet it was the Lord
of Lords, and King of Kings which had directed, and appointed Nero thus to make
this choice, and did confirm it. He again in those times which had perused
the prophecies might have collected, that the same Lord of Lords which gave
Egypt to Nebuchadnezzar for his diligent service against the proud city of
Tire, had now reserved the Roman empire for Vespasian, as his pay or stipend
for the faithful service, which he had done him in his wars against Galilee
and Judea.

The character which the Roman historians have put upon Galba was brief, but
pithy; dignus imperio nisi imperasset, that he was in all men's judgments
worthy the empire if he had not taken it upon him. And Vespasian himself, who
afterward enjoyed the empire, did esteem Galba worthy of it. Now that Galba
enjoyed it, or his life after he was chosen emperor, so short a while as he
did, that was not above seven months and seven days, this we may say, was by
the special appointment of the Lord, to the end that Titus, being far on his
way toward Rome to present his fathers service, and his own unto Galba, might
upon the unexpected news of Galba's death turn back again into Judea, to
manage the battles of the Lord against Jerusalem, and other cities of the
province, in his fathers absence, who in the interim was chosen emperor; And
this war Titus managed with as great valor and alacrity as could be expected
of any Roman then living, and yet with greater wisdom and clemency. A man he
was of such a temper and disposition that we may think he was either chosen,
or fitted by the maker of all men, for this purpose, specially that the
obstinate Jews, and all the world besides, might have a visible model, or
character of his own forme^ dealing with this stubborn people.

When we read the sacred story, 2. Chron. 26. or the lamentations of Jeremy
concerning the miserable massacre of both Priests, and people, of young and
old, and the utter destruction of both city and temple by Nebuchadnezzar, we
cannot much wonder at such cruelty as was then practiced by a barbarous and
cruel tyrant, always willing to do his worst against all that did oppose
him. But that these historical expressions of Ierusalem's misery under
Nebuchadnezzar, a pattern of tyrants, should become true prophecies, that the
miseries of this people at that time should be but as prodigious signs, or
portendment of far greater miseries under the Roman Titus, the flower of
curtesy, and mirror of affability amongst Princes; this points at somewhat
extraordinary, at somewhat worthy of admiration. This visible type or shadow
has a body answerable unto it. Titus is the type, or shadow, than whom no man
that day living could have been more unwilling either to practice cruelty upon
any private man, or to bring ruin upon any city or Nation: And yet the Jewish
Nation, and Jerusalem the Queen of cities, did suffer far greater misery
under him, than any city, or Nation of the world besides did ever suffer under
the most bloody tyrant into whose hands the Lord had given them. But how
unwilling soever he was to practice cruelty, or suffer it to be practiced by
others under him, yet he was bound to practice the discipline of war, not to
stain either his own worth, or the majesty of the Roman empire by
prostituting his native clemency unto desperate stubborn rebels.

That of the Prophet Hosea was never more truly verified, never more exactly
fulfilled in any generation of this people, than it was in this last. Perditio
tua ex te o Israel, salus ex me. That this city and Temple was spared so long,
that this people had so large a time for repentance, this was altogether from
God, who wills not the death of him that dies; and to testify this amor
benevolentiae, this good will of his unto them as they were men, even unto the
last end, and after they had broken off amorem amicitiae, the love of
friendship, he sends for a general against them not a Vitellius but a Titus, a
man quoad haec, or in this particular after his own heart, a man as it were
composed of princely valor, and clemency; That in the issue, the city, the
Temple, and people perished after such a tragical and unparalled a manner,
as they did, this was their own doing, their own seeking. They themselves did
give fire first unto the Temple, and afterward by their desperate stubbornness
provoked the Roman soldiers to accomplish the combustion so contrary unto
Titus his will, and command, that nothing besides necessity would have excused
them: but thus they and their forefathers provoked God himself to punish and
plague them so often as they were plagued; he being always of his own
nature, and goodness more compassionate toward them, than any father can be
toward his son, than any mother toward the fruits of her womb.

To conclude this point; the blood of these few Galileans which Pilate mingled
with the blood of their sacrifices, and that disaster which befell those
eighteen by the fall of the Tower in Siloe, being compared with the national
disaster of Jerusalem and Galilee, bear but the same proportion, which the
cloud that Elias servants saw arising out of the sea, like a man's hand, did
unto that great inundation which immediately followed upon it.

Now as none but a Prophet could have prognosticated such abundance of moisture
from so little an appearance: so none but the Prince of Prophets could have
discovered that unparalled destruction of Galilee, Judea, and the Jewish
Nation from such petty, and private disasters, as these two mentioned in my
text, forty years before their accomplishment.

THE MORAL PART OF THIS TREATISE.
THE most useful consideration which these words discussed, compared with the
former chapter, afford us, are for the general two.

First, they teach us to beware of rash judgment, or censuring others as
extraordinary sinners, or more grievous sinners then our selves, though Gods
visible judgments upon them (which are always most just) be extraordinary.

Secondly, they instruct us to lay Gods extraordinary judgments upon others,
or other unusual signs of the times unto our own hearts. For these are the
usual means whereby the spirit of God does work sinners to true repentance.
Wherein true repentance (which is the duties whereunto our Savior by these
signs exhorts the people) does consist, is the subject of other meditations
consonant to these present.

To the first point [that rash judgment, or unadvised censuring of others, is a
foul fault even in best men] all men, good and bad, do agree. But not to
censure, or esteem of others on whom God has showed notorious judgments; as
more notorious sinners then those which escape his judgments, this may seem
for diverse reasons questionable. First, as all sober-minded men agree, it
cannot stand with the goodness of God to plague, or punish any* but for some
sin or other. And if thus to deal with men be a branch of his goodness, it
must be a branch of his justice to recompense extraordinary and grievous
sinners with extraordinary and grievous punishments. What fault is it then to
judge of the cause by the effect? why may we not censure them for notorious
sinners, or more grievous sinners than our selves, whom the righteous Lord has
remarkably judged, or grievously punished? If to reward every man according to
all his ways be the irresistible rule of eternal, and unchangeable justice,
what reason have we to deny all those to be most grievous sinners, which he
that cannot err in judgment has punished most severely?

Every part of these Quere's would sway much with any reasonable Christian, if
there were no punishment reserved by Gods eternal justice for the life to
come. All of them would be unanswerable, if the truth of that maxim, or
general rule, God rewards every man according to all his ways or works, did
determine, or expire with our last mortal breaths. But seeing we all expect,
or at least profess our expectation, that Christ Jesus shall come to judge as
well all those which are dead, as those which he shall find alive at his second
coming, we cannot by rule of faith or reason expect that every man should be
rewarded according to all his ways, before that last and final judgment. We
may not presume that any man, the least sinner that dies in his sins, should
be punished according to all his deserts, before that last and general assize.
After that day, or after the eternal and most righteous judge has given
final sentence, we may safely say and pronounce, that this man has been a
more grievous sinner than that, than we our selves were, because we see him
more grievously punished, or sentenced to a more grievous punishment, than we
or others are; but before this day it is not Christian-like, it is not safe to
say or think, that this man is a more grievous sinner than we our selves are,
for than this man deserves to be more grievously plagued, than we our selves,
or others whom we think well of, so long as either they or we have one
hours space left for repentance. To judge of the measure of any man's sins by
the manner of his punishments here on earth, or to determine of his future
estate by his present death or disaster, is to usurp or trench upon Christ
Jesus his royal prerogative, which to prejudice by word, or sentence
interlocutory, which to preoccupate by any peremptory or censorious thought, is
more than a praemunire, a branch of high treason, or rebellion against him.

Besides this exception, which clearly infringes the former allegations for
judging of the cause by the effect, or measuring men's sins by the manner of
their visible punishments, many positive reasons there be, which might persuade
us, that our most good, and gracious God, without impeachment unto his
unchangeable mercy and justice, may, and often does in this life show
extraordinary mercy to extraordinary sinners, and recompense ordinary sinners,
men not so sinful as the best of us account our selves to be, with
extraordinary punishments in this life.

Both parts of this allegation may be proved by instance, and by rule, by
examples of Scripture, and by reason grounded on Scripture.

First, because such as have been extraordinary sinners have obtained
extraordinary mercy. There was not an honest matron, or unmarried woman in in
the land of Judea or Galilee, but would have taken it for a defamation to have
been compared to Mary Magdalen. She was a notorious sinner in that notorious
sin of wantonness and uncleanenesse, and yet obtained greater mercy than any
woman of her time, besides the blessed Virgin Mary, for she was endowed with
an extraordinary measure of that excellent gift of love and charity. Our
Savior gives her this testimony, that she loved much. And the reason, why
she loved much, was because many sins, and those of the worst kind of
sins, were forgiven her. Here was mercy two ways extraordinary. First, in
that she had many such sins foregiven her. Secondly, in that she loved
much. For this extraordinary measure of love, through the same goodness of
God, by which it was given her, was to have an extraordinary reward. Again,
what disciple, or Apostle of our Savior was there, which might not have
upbraided Peter with extraordinary ingratitude (which is the height of sin)
for denying his Lord and master three several times expressly, and in a
manner judicially. And yet for all this Gods mercy, and gracious favor toward
him was extraordinary, even in respect of other disciples and Apostles, the
disciple whom Jesus loved only excepted. Paul for a long time was a blaspheamer
of the evangelicall truth, a more furious persecutor of such as followed the
ways of life, then the Prince of his tribe, King Saul, had been of righteous
David. And yet this man from a notorious sinner, from a persecuting Saul, was
changed into a zealous Paul, became a valiant champion for the faith, more
zealous in maintaining it, than he had been furious in persecuting such as
professed it. And this sudden, and extraordinary change was wrought by the
extraordinary mercy of God.

But do not these and the like instances, or examples of Gods extraordinary
mercy, favor and bounty toward extraordinary and notorious sinners, no way
prejudice or impeach the unchangeable mercy of God, or his impartial dealing
with men? No, for the extraordinary mercy which he showed, did not extend to
them only, but to all extraordinary sinners in the like kind unto the worlds
end. His extraordinary mercy, and favor unto Mary Magdalen was as a pledge of
his mercy, and favor to all like sinners of her sex, so they would by true
repentance accept, and embrace his mercy and favor manifested unto her. If any
which hear, or read of his mercy exhibited to her, do finally perish, their
perdition is from themselves. If any truly repent, their salvation and
repentance (by which they become immediately capable of salvation) is from the
Lord. Gods extraordinary mercy unro Peter, who had in a manner made shipwreck
of his faith, was as secunda tabula post naufragium, as a planck, or mast cast
out after shipwreck, not only for his succor, but for the succor of all the
Jewish nation which had denied the Lord that bought them. As many of this
nation as after Peter's conversion were converted and saved, their conversion,
and salvation was merely from the Lord; as many of them as perished, did
therefore perish, because they did not repent as Peter did; and they did
therefore not repent, because they did not lay Gods mercies toward him, and to
their countrymen converted by him, to their hearts. That extraordinary mercy
again, which God exhibited unto Paul, yields the assurance of faith, a sure
anchor of hope, to all persecutors of the Church whether Heathens, Turks, or
Infidels, that there is plenteous redemption with God in Christ, mercy
plenteous to work repentance in them, and (by repentance) complete redemption
of body and soul. As many of Turks or other infidels as do not repent, and
by their not repentance perish, their perdition or not repentance is from
themselves. Not the salvation only, but the repentance of such as do repent is
merely from God: and this God our Lord, who is rich in mercy toward all, did
work repentance in Mary Magdalene, in Saint Peter, and Saint Paul by means
and motives extraordinary, that all such sinners as they were might believe and
know, that no sinners are excluded from possibility of repentance in this
life, but that the mercy which he showed to them by means extraordinary, is
daily exhibited by means ordinary, that is, by the administration of the word,
and sacraments, unto all that do not wilfully exclude themselves.

The second point proposed was, that God does award extraordinary visible
punishments unto ordinary sinners, without impeachment to his unchangeable
justice, or to that ingraffed notion, which all Christians have of his
unpartiall dealing with the sons of men.

It was an extraordinary visitation wherewith he visited the inhabitants of
Bethshemesh, and their territories. 1. Sam. 6. 19. for he smote of the people
fifty thousand threescore and ten men, because they had looked into the Ark of the Lord. It was likewise an extraordinary punishment upon Vzzah, who being
but a Leuite, did touch the Ark of the Lord. 2. Sam. 6. 6. For he was smitten
with sudden death, from which kind of punishment all of us do pray, or
ought to pray, that the Lord would deliver us.

But may we therefore conclude that these men of Bethshemesh were sinners
above all the men of Judah, or that Vzzah was a more grievous sinner than any
Levite of his age on whom the Lord did not show like punishments? God forbid,
yea our Savior, who is both our Lord and God, has in my text forbidden us to
pass the like censure either upon them, or upon any in after ages, on whom the
like judgments have been visibly executed. That the men of Bethshemesh did
grievously sin in looking into the ark of God, no Christian can, no Jew does
deny: But that they were more grievous sinners in this, than a great part of
men (Christians by profession) are in this our age none but an Hypocrite will
affirm. Leaving their persons to be judged by God, this their particular sin
is more than doubled by all such, as having neither lawful calling, nor
abilities to discern sacred mysteries, will take upon them not only to look
into the ark of God, but to determine of his covenant of life and death, that
is of election, and reprobation, the very grammatical notion of which terms
they understand not.

As for the sin of Vzzah, it was for nature, and quality the very same, as if
a parish clearke in our days should intrude himself into a Deacons office, as
if a Deacon should usurp the function of a Presbyter, or a Presbyter the
office of a Bishop. Now the delinquents in both these kinds are at this day
more than ten to one in comparison of the men of Bethshemesh to all the men
of Judah, or in comparison of Vzzah to all the Levites of his time, which were
not guilty of like sins in particular.

The judgments which God did show upon the men of Bethshemesh and upon Vzzah,
though extraordinary, were yet judgments tempered with mercy. For God in thus
punishing them did forewarne all posterity not to trespass in the like kind as
they did, lest a more grievous punishment either in this life, or in the life
to come do befall them. For as our Apostle. 1. Cor. 10. 6. in the like case
says, all these were our examples.

But many in this last age, and more than in any age since our Savior dyed,
and more in this kingdom than in any one Kingdom under heaven, have palpably
transgressed after the manner of Vzzah and the men of Bethshemesh.

May we hence therefore conclude that these men are more grievous sinners than
any others of this age, or Nation, which have not transgressed in particular
after these men's example? No, the Lord has forbidden us to pass this censure,
or judgment upon them: Such as are most free from these presumptuos sins
must ever remember that they have often grievously transgressed the Law of God
in some one kind or other. All of us must lay that saying of our Savior to
heart; unless we repent we shall all likewise perish.

But though this place prohibites rash censure and judgment upon particular
sinners, may not we which are Gods ambassadors pronounce the like universal
sentence, which our Savior here does against all the inhabitants of Galilee
and Jerusalem with the same limitation against this, or any other Christian
Nation, except ye repent ye shall all perish after the same disastrous manner
that the Jewish Nation did? I tell you nay; this is beyond our commission,
beyond our instructions, whom God has appointed for his ambassadors. Our
Savior himself has put in a caveat against all such presumptuous
conjectures, or pretended divinations. The calamities, and distresses of
Galilee and Jerusalem, of the whole Jewish Nation were so general, and so
tragical, as no Nation since the beginning of the world had suffered the like,
no other shall suffer the like unto the worlds end. But then all Nations
unless they repent shall perish after a more fearful and visibly disastrous
manner, than Galilee and Jerusalem did. But may we not in the mean time say,
that these Galileans, and inhabitants of Jerusalem, in whom this prophecy in my
text was literally fulfilled, were sinners above all other Nations or
generations in the world, because they suffered such things as no other Nation,
or generation had either suffered, or shall suffer unto the worlds end? I tell
you nay.

But this present generation of the Jews did put our Savior, the son of
God, the God of their forefathers, to an ignominious death: And this was the
most grievous sin quoad speciem, for its specificall quality that could be
committed; A sin that could not be committed again, for he was to dye but
once, death has no more dominion over him. But though the son of God could
dye but once, yet many this day living may be as guilty of his death, as
Judas, or Pilat, as the most malicious amongst the chief Priests, the Scribes
and Pharisees were. Or admit that those Jews were more deeply guilty of our
Saviors blood than any generation since; yet he that would hence infer his
death to have been the chief or only cause of all the calamities, which be
fell that present generation of the Jews. wherein he dyed, should only prove
himself to be more skillful in laying the charge then in making the just
exoneration, he should shew-himselfe to be but half an accoumptant; but of
this elsewhere.

But in what sense soever the putting our Savior to death, was the cause of
Ierusalem's destruction; yet this particular sin in putting our Savior to
death was not the sin, or any part of the sins of which they are forewarned
by our Savior to repent, for this sin was not as yet committed, nor so much
as thought upon by those Galileans, whose blood Pilat mingled with their
sacrifices, or by those eighteen upon whom the tower in Siloe fell. And no
question but these men did perish for such sins as the Nation was for the
most part guilty of, and were forewarned of by exemplary punishments, inflicted
upon these Galileans.

The persecution of our Savior was but a Symptom of those other sins of
whose deadly issue, without repentance, they were forewarned by these, and the
like signs of the time. The reason why they hated the light of the world,
after he had done so much good unto them, was, because their deeds were evil
Joh. 3. v. 19. And this is the condemnation, that light is come into the world,
and men loved darkness rather then light, because their deeds were evil. What
then were those capital sins whereof they were warned in particular? such in
the first place was their present rebellious disposition, for which sin in
particular these Galileans did thus perish. But was this all? No, it is one
thing to be rebellious, another to be unrelentingly rebellious. This
unrelentance presupposes some other fouler sin then rebellion. As what?
Hypocrisy specially, and when our Savior upbraids them with this title of
Hypocrisy, as when he says Luke 12. v. 54. Mat. 16. Ye Hypocrites ye can
discern the face of the sky, and of the earth, how is it that ye cannot
discern the signs of the time, His speech implies that their hypocrisy was
the chief cause, why they did not discern the signs of the time; Why they
were so unrelentingly rebellious against God and man, that they would take no
warning either from the son of God, or by the calamities of their brethren.

Now if any amongst us be as great hypocrites as they were, they be as
grievous sinners, as guilty of Christ's bloody death, and liable to as grievous
punishments, either in this life, or in the life to come, as they were.

A Pharisaicall hypocrite none can be, unless his soul be so wedded to some
branches, as he conceives them of holy doctrine, or zeal to Gods word, that
he would rather suffer his soul, and body to be dissolved, then be divorced
from his opinions: That will not be ready as opportunity serves to persecute
all such even unto death, as will not comply with him, or maintain his
faction. And this kind of hypocrisy always presupposes some other sins
which breed it, always include some other sins, or errors which feed and
strengthen it. That error which breeds hypocrisy is a zealous desire to be
extremely contrary in all or most points unto them, whom they undoubtedly know
to contradict the truth as well in some opinions as practices.

Satan may instill other erroneous opinions into his scholars, and yet must be
enforced to play the sophister before he can draw them to admit of his
intended conclusions, that is lewd, or wicked practices, but if he can once
insinuate immature persuasions, or strong presumptions of their irreversible
estate in Gods favor, he needs no help of Sophistry to infer his intended
conclusions. This antecedent being swallowed, he can enforce the conclusion by
good Logic, by rules of reason, more clear then any Syllogism can make it,
then any philosophical, or mathematical demonstration. For it is an
unquestionable rule of reason presupposed to all rules of Syllogisme^ or
argumentations, that an universal negative may be simply converted, as [if no
man can be a stone, then no stone can be a man] the rule is as firm in
divinity that if no hypocrite, no envious, or uncharitable man can enter into
the Kingdom of heaven, then no man that must enter into the Kingdom of
heaven, that is irreversibly ordained to eternal life, can be an hypocrite,
can be an envious, or uncharitable man. Whence again it will clearly follow,
that if the former opinions concerning men's personal, or national
irreversible estate in Gods favor have possessed men's souls and brains
before its due time; albeit they do the self same things that rebels do,
that hypocrites, that envious or uncharitable men do: yet so long as this
opinion stands unshaken they can never suspect themselves to be rebellious, to
be hypocrites or uncharitable: That which indeed, and in the language of the
holy ghost is rebellion, will be favorably interpreted to be the liberty of
concience in defense of Gods laws; envy hatred, and uncharitableness toward
men will go current for zeal toward God, and true religion.

To illustrate, or confirm these observations touching the original, and
Symptoms of pharisaicall hypocrisy by the example and practice of these Jews
according to the order in which they have been now proposed. The first
original was in the overprising of the rigid reformation of their forefathers
profaneness.

Their fathers worshipped stocks, and stones, the images or statues of heathen
Gods, these latter sought to be so extremely contrary to the heathen, or to
the practices of (...) forefathers in this particular, that they would (...)
any civil use of pictures, and their unrelenting zeal to maintain this rigid
reformation was the original of that rebellion, wherein they perished after
they had continued it seventy years more or less. For Herod the great having
erected a golden eagle upon the walls of the Temple, not with purpose to have it
adored, but in testimony of his gratitude, and allegiance to the Roman
Emperor, some of their Rabbis, or great masters did teach their scholars to
deface it though they dyed for it: and death in this holy quarrel was
accounted Martyrdom. Afterward they were pressed to admit a statue of the
Roman emperor in their Temple, but not urged, as I take it to adore it. And
this did blow the coals of former dissension, and was the original of that
final rebellion under Nero. Now if they had not apprehended this rebellion as
an holy war; or had not affected to become Martyrs in defense of true
religion, they might easily have deprecated this eyesore, or grievance at the
Roman deputies hands, as the wiser sort of them sometimes had done.

But howsoever these latter Jews, almost from the time of their return from
Babylon, did increase the measure of their forefathers grosser sins by too
nice and rigid reformation of them, and added pharisaicall hypocrisy unto
them, as a new disease of the soul scarce heard of before; yet this hypocrisy,
though epidemicall to this Nation, had not the strength to bring forth that
monster of uncharitableness, which did portend the ruin of this mighty
people, until they were invaded by the Romans. For from the time that this
Nation was brought into subjection by Pompey the great, their Church Governors
did allow and appoint daily sacrifices to be offered for the peace, and
tranquillity of the Roman empire, and security of the emperors. But a little
before the fulfilling of this prophecy in my text there arose a sect which did
condemn this custom, after an hundred years continuance, as unlawful, as
contrary to the Law of God, as a pollution of the Temple. And it is a point
observable by such as read the history of Josephus, that of all the
iregularities, or prodigious villainies committed in the Temple during the time
of the siege, as the tumultuous deposition of their high Priests, and murder
of them, and others of better place, the faction surnamed (by themselves) the
Zealous were the chief Authors, and a betters. The fruit of this their blind
and misguided zeal was to misinterpret the murder of their brethren, which
would not comply with them in their furious projects to be the best service
the only sacrifice then left to offer unto God; for the daily sacrifice of
beasts did cease for want of provision, they having plenty, or sufficiency of
nothing but of famine.

Now, to parallel the sins of our Nation, of this present generation
specially, with the sins of the latter Jews: As for sins against the
second table, no man of unpartiall understanding, or experience can deny that
we far exceed them, unless it be for murder only; disobedience to
parents, to magistrates, adultery, fornication, theft, false witnesse-bearing,
and coveting their neighbors goods are far more rife amongst us then they
were, or could be amongst them, at least in the practice. The keen edge of
some few give us occasion to conjecture what the bloody issue of misguided
zeal would be, could it once get as strong a back as it had in these Jews,
when there was no King in Israel, or in that Anarchy wherein every one did that
which was pleasing in his own eyes. Again no man not surprised with a Jewish
slumber, but may clearly see how many amongst us, place a great part of
religion in being as extremely contrary to the Romish Church, as these latter
Jews were to the idolatry, or superstition of the heathen, or of their
forefathers. Now if this zeal of contrariety to Romish superstition be but
equal to the like zeal in the Jews, the hypocrisy, which is the resultance
of such misguided zeal must needs be more malignant. And easy it were, if
place and time did permit, to demonstrate how these men condemn themselves by
judging the Romish doctrine and discipline, in her grossest errors, and
practices. An^articks they are, and think they can never be far enough from
the North Pole until they run from it unto the South-pole, and pitch their
habitation in terra incongnita in a world and Church unknown to the ancients,
and I fear unto themselves.

But to let this error pass; if it were a grievous sin in this last
generation of the Jews to prohibit the offering of legal sacrifices for the
peace and security, for the weal and prosperity of the Roman emperors whilst
the partition wall betwixt the Jew and the Gentile was yet for the most part
standing; it cannot be a less sin in such Christians as forebid us to offer
up the calfes or fruits of our lips, to wit, the sacrifice of prayer for all
men, for all people in the world, since this partition wall was taken away. If
thus to pray for all men were indeed an error; yet it were, alas, but error
amoris, a charitable error; an error which deserved pity, rather then
contempt, and hatred of those who think themselves wiser in Gods ways than
their fathers in Christ; yet pity it they do not, but rather scorn and
contemn it, or persecute such as practice it so far as they are able; that
is, with bitter and slanderous words. And why do they so? Not out of hatred
unto men's persons, if we may believe them, but out of zeal unto Gods word,
which forbids the practice of it, and must be obeyed before any injunctions of
the Church, which in their construction are but Laws of men. But where does
Gods word so expressly forbid it? Our Saviors practice, as they allege,
which ought to be to us a rule more Saveraigne then any rubrickes in our
Church book, does in their opinion by consequence condemn it, as John Chap.
17. v. 9. I pray for them, I pray not for the world; but for them which thou
have given me, for they are thine. This, for ought I know, is the only place
that can be pretended against the practice of our Church. But the question is
not whether our Savior in this place, or at this time did pray for his
Apostles alone, or for such as should believe through their report, but what it
was which he prayed for them only? If our Savior in this very place did pray
his father not only to bestow some extraordinary gifts upon his Apostles, and
such as they taught viva voce; but withal for some visible manifestation of
these extraordinary gifts bestowed upon them, The extraordinary blessings which
our Savior prayed for, were the visible endowments of the Holy Ghost, and that
admirable union of soul and mind, and community of goods, and possessions etc.
mentioned Act. 2. 3. 4. etc.
this will no way exclude the world, as it then stood in opposition to true
believers, in sensu diviso, from being partaker of his prayers for gifts
ordinary. Now that our Savior did thus pray for his Apostles, and the first
converts to this end and purpose, that these extraordinary gifts bestowed on
them alone, might be an inducement to bring the world, and all future
generations to be partakers of ordinary gifts, is evident from the 20. and 21.
v. Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me
through their word: that they may all be one, as thou father art in me, and I
in thee* that they also may be one in us: that the world may believe that thou
have sent me. All which gifts were peculiar to these primitive times.
Our Savior in this prayer for the world prays not only that it might be
partaker of the outward means, but of the internal means of salvation, yea
of salvation its self, for so he had premised. v. 3. This is life eternal,
that they may know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.

So far then is our Church, or the ancient Church, whom she follows, from
contradicting our Saviors meaning in this place, that they took his prayer
and practice for their pattern. For as we are taught in our Liturgy to pray
for all men without exception we are taught withal nor to pray for all things
for all men promiscuosly, but respectively; for such things for every man as
his estate and condition is immediately capable of. All men of what Nation or
condition soever, as well Singula generum as genera singulorum, are either in
the way of truth, or out of it: This division admits no medium or third member.
Now we are taught to pray for all men, for every man, that are comprehended in
this division; but not to pray for the same blessings for all. In the first
place we are taught to pray that God would bring all those into the ways of
truth as have erred and are deceived; we do not pray to God to confirm them
in the way of truth, until they be in it; of such as are in the way of truth
(which is the second member of the universal division) some do stand, that is
walk in it without stumbling, others fall, others walk in it, yet but weakly
and droopingly: and according to their several estates and conditions, we
pray first, that God would strengthen such as do stand; Secondly, that he
would raise up such as do fall; Thirdly that he would help and comfort the
weake-hearted or fainting travelers in the ways of truth, and finally (not at
our first conversion) to tread down Satan under our feet; Iam. 4. v. 7.
For we must resist, we must encounter him before he will flee from us, and
after his flight we must pursue the victory, or advantage gotten before we can
hope to trample upon him. But what success has our Church found by continuing
this form of prayer more than other Churches which contemn, or deride it? The
success we leave to God: yet this comfort we have, that albeit many, or most
of them, for whom we thus daily pray, may dye in their sins, their blood
shall not be required at our hands. As for such as malign, or mock us for
thus praying, let us continue our prayers for them also, Father forgive us, and
forgive them all our sins negligences and ignorances, and endue us with the
grace of thy holy spirit, to amend our lives according to thy holy word.

A SERMON OR POSTILL PREACHED IN NEWE-CASTLE UPON TINE The second Sunday in
Advent 1630.

OXFORD.

Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD An. Dom. 1637.

LVK. 21. V. 25. And there shall be signs in the sun, and in the moon, and
in the stars, and upon the earth distress of Nations, with perplexity, the
sea, and the waves roaring;
THIS day being the second Sunday in Advent draws me, as ye see, unto a new
text, being part of the Gospel for this solemnity. But my text does not draw
me to a new argument. My former argument, as ye may remember, was concerning
the signs of the time. And here ye may behold signs of the time in the
frontispice of my text; There shall be signs in the sun, and in the moon
etc. Upon the earth and in the waters, that is, in every part of this great,
and visible book of the creature. But of what, or of what times were these
signs here foretold? To the former part of this question our Evangelist has
made a full answer. v. 27, These were signs of the son of man's coming to
judgment with power, and great glory. By the son of man, ye know, is meant
our Lord and Savior Christ, and his coming was expected by this people, one,
and other. John Baptist knew this to be the title of the Messiah, and out of
this Notion or description of his person, and office he being in prison sent
two of his disciples unto him with this Embassage, Luk, 7. v. 19. Art thou he
that should come, or are we to look for another; And from this Embassage of
John the next Dominicall, or Lords day takes its denomination, or right to be
enrolled amongst the Dominicalls consecrated to the memory of his coming. The
Pharisees likewise knew this title of him that was to come to belong unto
Christ, or unto the great Prophet, which God had promised to raise up unto them
like to Moses. And out of this notion they propound this interrogatory unto
John, John 1. 21. Art thou Elias, art thou that Prophet, and again, v. 25. Why
baptizest thou then if thou be not that Christ, nor Elias neither that Prophet.
And from John's answer to these interrogatories v. 26. 27. I baptize with
water, but there stands one among you, whom ye know not, he it is who
coming after me is preferred before me, The fourth, and last Dominicall takes
its denomination, or right to be enrolled amongst the days consecrated to the
memory of his coming. The Dominicall, or Lords day last past takes its
denomination from the Gospel appointed for that day. Behold o Sion thy King
comes. etc. So does this present day, or second sunday in Advent take this
title from that clause of the Gospel, v. 27. And then they shall see the son
of man coming in a cloud.

Now the coming of Christ, the son of man, and the son of God, admits in
the general two degrees. The first, his coming in humility to visit and
redeem the world. The second, his coming in power, and glory, to judge the
world. The Gospells appointed by the Church for the three other Dominicalls, or
Lords days in Advent refer to the first manner of his coming, to wit, in
humility to visit and redeem his people. The Gospel appointed for this
present day points at his coming in power, and glory to judge the world. The
question then is, whether this prophecy has been in any sort already
fulfilled, or in what sort it shall be hereafter fulfilled, or accomplished? or
if this prophecy were twice to be fulfilled, the question is, whether these
signs here mentioned in my text, do concern as well the last fulfilling of
it as the first? That this prophecy has been already literally fulfilled is
clear from the 21. and 32. verses of this Chapter. Verily I say unto you this
generation shall not pass till all be fulfilled. All what? All that he had said
concerning the signs of the time, so S. Matthew expresses our Savior's
meaning more fully then S. Luke does Math. 24. v. 34. Verily I say unto you
this generation shall not pass till all these things be fulfilled, that is,
till the terrors of those times whereof he speaks, until the signs of these
times in the sun, in the moon, and in the stars, should be exhibited. For
by this generation he comprehends that present age, or compass of an hundred
years taking their beginning either from the time wherein he uttered this
prophecy, or from the birth of these his Auditors, the greater part whereof
were betwixt twenty and fifty years, and but a few of them to live above fifty
years after this forewarning; so that this age or generation whereof he
speaks was to determine with the life's of these Auditors: though many of them
did not, yet some of them did, and more might have outlived these signs here
foretold. For these signs were to be exhibited unto the Nations not long
after the desolation of Jerusalem as S. Mark tells us, Chap. 15. v. 24. But in
those days after that tribulation the sun shall be darkened and the moon
shall not give her light, and the stars of heaven shall fall, and the powers
that are in heaven shall be shaken. Or least any man should except that the sun
might be darkened after the days of Ierusalem's tribulation, and sorrow, and
yet not be so darkened till the last day, S. Matthew has put in a caveat
against this exception, Mat. 24. 29. Immediately after the tribulation of those
days shall the sun be darkened, and the moon shall not give her light. So
that if we can point out the time, wherein all that our Savior said concerning
the tribulation of Jerusalem, and Jury were fulfilled, we may easily find out
the appointed time, wherein the signs in my text were to be exhibited.

That which must direct us in the right search of the tribulations precedent to
his coming here literally meant, is our Savior's censure upon his Disciples
admiration at the goodly buildings of the Temple. As he went out, says S.
Matthew 24. 1. and departed from the Temple, his Disciples came to him to show
him the buildings of the Temple, S. Mark tells us Chap. 13. 1. that one of his
Disciples says unto him, master see what manner of stones, and what buildings
are here. And because this one Disciple is not named S. Matthew indefinitely
says, his Disciples came unto him. A strange humor in them (were they one or
more) for how could they imagine that he had not observed the goodlinesse of
these buildings before. But upon what occasion soever (they or he, one or more
of them) did move him to view the buildings, his reply unto this motion was
unexpected, For he says unto them, see you not all these things? Verily I say
unto you there shall not be left here one stone upon another, that shall not
be thrown down. Mat. 24. 2. Mark. 13. 2. Luke 21. 6. And thus much he had
told them with weeping eyes before, Luke 19. 44. But it seems they were at
better leisure to hearken unto this second prediction of the Temples
destruction, than they were before when their ears were filled with the
joyful shouts of Hosanna, blessed be he that comes in the name of the Lord.
And hence as he sat upon the mount of Olives, over against the Temple, Peter,
and James, and John, and Andrew, asked him privately, tell us when shall these
things be? and what shall be the signs, when these things shall be
fulfilled? Mark 13. v. 34. All of his Disciples at least all of them which
moved this question did agree in this prenotion, that all these things should
be fulfilled at his coming and that at his coming to judgment the world
should have an end. Hence S. Mat. 24. 3. relates the question thus. Tell us
when shall these things be, and what shall be the sign of thy coming, and
of the end of the world? But this question, though not so intended by them, was
fallacia ad plures interrogationes, a question consisting of two parts, one so
different from the other that one and the same answer could not befit both; and
therefore he makes answer distinguendo, or respectively to both parts.
Concerning the signs of his first coming to declare himself to be the judge
of the world, or the signs precedent to the destruction of the Temple, he
gives them a plain peremptory answer. Mat. 24. from v. 4. to the 36. And so
again Mark. 13. from v. the 5. to v. 32. And in this Chapter from v. 10. to v.
32. But concerning the other part of the question when the world should end, or
the signs that should preceede, that he conceales, or rather exhorts them not
to enquire after it; But of that day and hour, that is, the day of final
judgment, or the end of the world, knows no man, no not the Angels of
heaven, but my father only. Mat. 24. 36. And Mark. 13. 32. But of that day and
hour knows no man, no not the Angels which are in heaven, neither the Son,
but the Father.

That this answer concerns only the second part of the former question, to
wit, the time wherein the world shall end, is hence evident for that the
Angels, yea and such as understood the Prophets, at least our Savior Christ,
as man, did know the time appointed, for the destruction of the Temple, and the
desolation of the holy City and land, for thus much was punctually and
literally foretold by Daniel Chap. 9. 24. Seaventy weeks are determined upon
thy people, and upon thy holy city, to finish the transgression, and to make an
end of sins, and to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in
everlasting righteousness, etc. No question but Daniel himself, and the Angel
which instructed him, did know the precise point of time when these seaventy
weeks did commence; although Chronologers at this day vary a little upon this
point, and he that knew the time when they begun, might easily collect at what
time they were to end. For these seaventy weeks, or seaventy seavens of
years, make up the just sum of four hundred and ninety years, and so long
did Jerusalem continue after it was restored again by Cyrus, and his
successors in the Persian Empire. And albeit our Saviors Desciples did not at
that time, perhaps clearly understand the Prophecy of Daniel; yet they might
clearly forsee the time of Ierusalem's destruction by the signs which our
Savior gives them in this Chap. and in the 24. of S. Matthew. The signs were
specially three, first earthquaks and strange commotion of wars in several
nations, as specially between the Jews, and other Nations subject to the
Roman empire: Secondly, the general hatred wherewith all Nations did persecute
Christ's Disciples, which were then no Nation, but the fewest of any sect or
profession: For unto the time between our Saviors death, and the death of the
Emperor Nero, that saying of our Savior, ye shall be hated of all men for
my name's sake, has special reference. And it was most remarkably fulfilled
whilst the Jewish Nation did flourish, or was in strength. For that Nation did
bear more deadly hatred to such as professed themselves to be Christ's
Disciples, then they did unto the Heathen. And the Heathens again, specially
the Romans did hate and persecute the Christians as the worst sort amongst the
Jews, of whom they took Christ's little flock to be a stem, or branch,
because the governors of it, Christ's Apostles, were Jews by progeny. So that
the Laws which were ennacted in Rome against the Jews were most severely
executed upon the Christians, besides many lawless and barbarous cruelties,
which were practiced upon many of them in the time of Nero without any check,
or impeachment. This was a second sign precedent to the desolation of
Jerusalem. The third was the abomination of desolation foretold by Daniel, and
expounded by our Savior. Mat. 24. 15. For the overspreading of abominations,
says Daniel. Chap. 9. v. 27. He shall make it desolate, even unto the
consummation, and that determined shall be powered upon the desolate. It is
termed by our Savior the abomination of desolation because it was an
abomination which did portend the utter desolation of the city, and of the
Temple, wherein this abomination was practiced by the seditious, or that
faction which was called the zealous. And this abomination became most
remarkable from that time that the seditious begun, first to depose the high
Priests, and afterward to murher them in the Temple. For then they turned the
house of God, not into a den of thieves, but into a den of murderers, even a
slaughter house. The fulfilling of this part of our Saviors prophecy, you may
read at your leisure in Josephus in his sixth book of the Jewish war. Chap.
1. O miserable city, says he, what did thou suffer at the Romans hands, to
be compared unto this, although they entered with fire to purge thee from thy
iniquity? For now thou wast no longer the house of God, neither could thou
endure being made a Sepulcher of thine inhabitants, and having by thy civil
wars made the Temple a grave of dead bodies.

It was the abomination which this desperate, and gracelessely Jewish people
did commit in the holy place; (that is in the Temple and in the courts of it)
which brought that miserable desolation upon the Temple, upon the city and
Nation. The Romans were but executioners of Gods wrath and vengeance against
them. And those interpreters of the Gospel who by the abomination of
desolation understand the Roman forces though many theybe, yet the more they
be, or shall be, the more they multiply a strange error, or gross
incogitancy. But after the practice of such abominations, as Josephus relates,
in the holy place, the doom pronounced by our Savior against the Temple,
against the city, and Nation, became so inevitable, and was to be executed
with so much speed, as every one that in those times feared God might see the
just occasion, and necessity of our Saviors admonition, Mat. 24. 16. etc. Then
let them which are in Judea flee unto the mountains, let him which is on the
house top not come down to take any thing out of his house, neither let him
which is in the field return back to fetch his clothes etc. Then shall be
great tribulation, such as was not from the beginning of the world to this
time, nor ever shall be. The same admonitions of our Savior are related
totidem them verbis Mark, 13. v. 14. to the 20. and by S. Luke 21. 21. to the
26. with some additions. Then let them which are in Judea fly unto the
mountains, and let them which are in the midst of it depart out, and let not
them which are in the country enter thereinto. For these be the days of
vengeance, that all things which are written may be fulfilled, and they shall
fall by the edge of the sword, and shall be led away captive into all Nations.
And Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles, until the times of the
Gentiles be fulfilled. After Gods wrath had once seyzed upon them, the
execution of it was so nimble and quick, that if it had continued but some few
weeks, or many days, as it had begun, all Isaacks seed according to the flesh
had utterly perished. But for the elect's sake, or such as God had chosen out
of that Nation to propagate the Kingdom of his son, these days of
tribulation were shortened; And however the persecution of both Jews and
Christians, did not determine with the destruction of Jerusalem: yet the number
of Christians did multiply faster then the seed of Abraham according to the
flesh had done in Egypt. Now all these signs, which our Savior had given of
Ierusalem's destruction, were fulfilled within forty years after his
resurrection, and ascension; and the dissolution of the Temple and of the city
which these signs, or abominations did portend, was accomplished in the
Autumn following.

Now after the exhibition of these signs, and the tribulation of those days,
the fearful signs here mentioned in my text were immediately to follow. But
how immediately? without any delay, or inter position of time, of days, of
months, or years? this we may not say, this we cannot safely collect from
our Savior's words. These signs were to follow immediately, non immediatione
te^poris, sed immediatione signorum; that is, they were to follow immediately
not with reference to the next times ensuing, but with reference to the next
remarkable signs of the times, of which the world (as well the Christians then
increased as the relics of the Jewish Nation as the Gentiles (who were the
greatest part of the world) after the destruction of Jerusalem were to take
warning. In this sense we say that one King is another's immediate successor,
if there be no King between them, albeit their be an interregnum either of
weeks, or months betwixt them. The vacancy of an Episcopal see for one or
two years, or more does not make the next succeeding Bishop not to be the
others immediate successor, albeit there be an intermediat time betwixt the
ones death, or removal, and the others election, or consecration. Thus albeit
the signs in my text did immediately succeed the former signs of Ierusalem's
destruction; yet the world, as well the Jews, and Christians, as the Romans
had a convenient time allotted to pause, or meditate upon the strange
desolation of Jerusalem, and Judea, before the second rank of signs here in
my text, were to be exhibited, for they were not exhibited until the second
year of Titus his reign. For seeing the Nations would take no notice of
Christ's Kingdom, or of Gods judgments by the prodigious destruction of
Jerusalem, it was, shall I say his will, yea an act of his mercy to give them a
second, a more solemn public warning of that great and terrible day, wherein
that Jesus whom the Jews had crucified, whom the Romans had strangely
slighted, and grievously persecuted in his members, will come with glory and
power to execute judgment upon all ungodly men, upon all unbelievers, or
rebels against his Kingdom.

But before I come to show you the particular manner how this phophecy was
fulfilled within that age current, wherein it was uttered, it will be expedient
to acquaint you with the strange manner how the Jews first, and the Romans
after them did misconstrue, or pervert the signs of the time, which God had
given them for their good. The Heathen writers themselves acknowledge there was
a constant fame, or received opinion throughout the East, that the land of Jury
in this age should bring forth one who was to be Lord, and King over the whole
world. This general fame and opinion took its original from the prophecies
of the old testament concerning our Savior's birth and resurrection. And unto
these prophetical predictions all the signs of the time did fully accord; yet
seeing our Savior's Kingdom was not of this world, though more universal,
seeing the authority which he excercised was merely spiritual not temporal,
seeing he would not take upon him to imprison, to put to death, or to divide
inheritances, or to manage wars against the enemies of this people, they
sleited him then as most part of the world have done his true Ambassadors
since. For who is there almost that fears the edge of the spiritual sword,
unless it be backed with the temporal. But did the Jewish Nation then take
notice of the former constant fame throughout the East, concerning the great
Lord of Lords which was then to arise out of Jury? or had they no apprehension
of the signs of the time which did confirm, or seal the truth of the
prophecies, which occasioned this fame? Yes, the signs of those times did
work very strange, though very bad effects, even in the very worst of this
people. Their hearts were so overgrowne with pride, vainglory, and hypocrisy,
that the abundance of these and the like bad humors did turn good Physic,
even the food of life it self into deadly poison.

For out of this undoubted prenotion, that this was the very time wherein the
Lord had promised to deliver this people from the hands of their enemies, they
became so prone (as the event proves they were) to take arms, and rebel
against the Romans, partly about the time of our Savior's birth, but
especially after his resurrection, when his Kingdom began to be propagated
through the world. There was no man of greater might, or potency amongst them
which did not take upon him to promise this peoples deliverance from the Roman
yoke, with which the more they strugled, the sorer it crushed them; and the
multitude were as prone to believe every one that would take upon him the name
or title of a Savior, or deliverer. The foresight of this pronenesse in great
ones to promise salvation to this people, and the peoples promptness to
believe them, did occasion our Savior to give these admonitions to his
Disciples, Beware of false Christ's, Mat. 24. v. 4. Mark. 13. v. 6. Luke 21. v.
6. which would arise in Jury before the destruction of Jerusalem, with such
fair inticeing promises, and pretenses of deliverance, that if it had been
possible the very elect should have been deceived by them, And no question but
many of our Savior's Disciples had followed these false Christ's, unless their
master the true Christ had expressly forewarned them to beware of them; or
unless he had instructed them that the victory which God had promised to give
his people at this time over their enemies was not to be purchased by strength
of sword, but by patient possessing of their own souls in time of wars and
persecutions. And of these times wherein false Prophets, or false Christ's did
so prevail with this people was that saying of our Savior John 5. 43.
remarkably fulfilled. I am come in my fathers name, and ye receive me not, If
another shall come in his own name, him you will receive.

The wisest amongst the Romans, and amongst the rest Tacitus, that great
statesman, or politician, observing the Jews to have failed so foully in their
hopes of becoming Lords over the Nations by their expected King, or Messiah
turned greater fools than the Jews had been; for having acknowledged the
truth of the former prophecy which was so famous and so constantly received
throughout the East, He would have it fufilled in Vespatian, in that he was
called out of Judea unto the empire of Rome, that is (as they interpretit) to
be Lord of the whole world. And which is most strange, Josephus himself, a Jew
by birth and education, and therefore acquainted with the prophecies, or
prenotions concerning their Messiah, was either the Author of this foolish
interpretation, or the first Author now extant that did publish it. Tacitus
adds some credit to Josephus his report of the constant fame throughout the
East, that Judea should at that time bring forth the Lord of the whole world,
but he makes no addition to Josephus his folly in misapplying that which the
Prophets had said, and the esterne Nation had received concerning the King that
was to arise out of Judea unto Vespatian, making him and his sons of true and
lawful Emperors, false Christ's. Now to aawake the Romans out of this proud
fantastique dream; the true Christ, the Lord of heaven and earth, and judge of
quick and dead, did exhibit these signs here mentioned in my text before the
Romans had fully digested their triumphant feast, and joy for the victory which
they had gotten over the Jewish Nation, Italy and Rome it self became the
stage whereon these fearful spectacles were acted, and the whole Roman Empire
were more then spectators, if no Actors, yet patients in this doleful tragedy.
Besides the destruction of the old world by water and of Sodom, and other
four cities by fire and brimstone, no history of the world does mention any
such strange calamities as issued from the burning of the mount Vesuevius in
Campania which first hapened in the first, or second year of Titus although it
has oftentimes since procured great annoyance to neighbor provinces. But that
it begun first to burn in the days of Titus is clear from the untimely death
of Plyny the elder that great Naturalist, Who out of curiosity going to search
the cause of it, was choked to death with the smoke.

I have often put you in mind heretofore that many historians which either
never read the sacred prophecies, or did not mind them when they wrotte their
histories are usually the best interpreters as well of the prophecies in the
old as new testament. Nor is the fulfilling of any prophecy in the old
testament more literally, or more punctually related either in the old, or new
testament, then the fulfilling of this prophecy in my text is by Dio Cassius, a
most judicious, and ingenious heathen writer, in the reign of Titus. The
sudden earthquakes were so grievous that all that valley was sultring hot,
and the tops of the mountains sunk down, under the grouud were noyses like
thunder, answered with like bellowings above; the searoared, and the heavens
resounded like noise; huge and great crashings were heard, as if the mountains
had fallen together; great stones leaped out of their places, as high as tops
of hills, and after them issued abundance of fire and smoke, in so much that it
darkened the air, and obscured the sun, as if it had been ecclipsed; so that
night was turned into day, and day into night; many were persuaded that the
Giants had raised some civil broils amongst themselves, because they did see
their shapes in smoke, and heard a noise of trumpets; others thought the world
should be resolved into old Caos, or consumed with fire; some ran out of
their houses into the streets, others from the streets, or highways into
their houses; otherer from sea to land some again from the land to the sea,
Dio Cassius inhistoria Titi.

Besides the large extent of this calamity through Egypt, Syria, and Greece,
and great part of Africa related by this Author and touched upon in the first
book of Comments upon the Creed. page 49. etc. The latin reader may find
many other circumstances in other good writers, as in Procopius, Zonaras etc.
faithfully collected by Maiolus tractatu de montibus. page 520. and 521.

Though Cedrenus were a Christian, yet I think when he wrote the history of
Phocas he had as little mind, or thought of the fulfilling of S. John's
prophecy Revelation the 8. Chap. v. 8. etc. As Dio Cassius had of the
accomplishment of our Savior in my text; (...)
And the second Angel sounded, and as it were a great mountain burning with
fire, was cast into the sea, and the third part of the sea became blood. And
the third part of the creatures which were in the sea, and had life, died, and
the third part of the ships were destroyed. Cednenus, after a breife character
of Phocas his ill favored body and conditions, in which latter his consort did
too well agree with him, tells us that in his time there was an inundation of
all manner of mischiefs upon mankind, an infinite number of men, and beasts
died, and the earth denying her increase, the famine and grievous pestilences
arose, and the winters were so sharp and cruel that the sea freez'd, and the
fishes in it perished. These were strange signs of the time, and did portend
the greatest alteration that ever befell Christian Churches by the erection of
the two grand antichristian tyrannies, Lib. 1. comment. in Symbolum Apostolicum.
the one in the East, the other in the west. Cedrenus in compendio historiae
page 332.

All that I have for this present to add unto my former observations,
concerning the burning of Vesuvius is the admirable disposition of Gods
providence in that he would not have the fulfilling of this prophecy in my text
to be recorded by any Evangelist, or other sacred writers, but by this heathen
historian; A bright ray, or beam of divine providence you may observe in so
disposing the testimonies of these times, as that the Evangelist, S. John, who
usually relates our Savior's speeches more distinctly, and more at large then
the other three Evangelists does not so much as mention our Savior's
prophecies, either concerning the signs preceding the destruction of
Jerusalem, or these signs in my text, which were signs of his coming to
judge the Nations. The reason I take it was, because S. John of all the four
Evangelists did outlive both sorts of the signs, for he was alive in the
days of Trajan the emperor, betwixt whose reign and the reign of Titus, in
whose days these signs in my text were exhibited, Domitian, and Cocceius
Nerva did successively reign over the Romans. And it may be S. John did
purposely omit the Relation of our Saviors prophecies concerning these signs,
or prognostics, whether of Ierusalem's destruction, or of Christ's coming to
judge the Nations, because he knew, when he wrote his Gospel, he was to
outlive them, and for this reason his relation of them would have been more
liable to suspicion, or to the exceptions of the Jews or heathen, than the
relations of S. Matthew, Mark, or Luke were, seeing they all dyed before the
destruction of Jerusalem. But did S. John know, or what presumptions have we to
think he did know, that he was to continue his pilgrimage here on earth
until this prophecy of my text were fulfilled, that is, until Christ's
coming to give all the Nations of the world, as well as Jerusalem, a solemn
warning of of his power, and purpose to judge the world? This S. John might
know, or this he could not but know, from our Savior's speeches to him and S.
Peter, related by him John. 21. v. 18. to the 23. Our Savior had signified, or
intimated to S. Peter, by what manner of death he should glorify God, and bid
him follow him; the meaning is that he should be crucified, as our Savior had
been. But Peter not content to know the manner of his own death, turned about,
and seeing S. John, says to Jesus Lord, what shall this man do? And Jesus
said unto him, if I will that he tarry till I come, what is that unto thee? The
rest of the brethren, that is, of Christ's disciples made a false descant upon
this sure ground; for they hence collected, that S. John should not dye at all;
but this misconstruction of our Savior's words S. John himself v. 23. of that
Chap. plainly refuses. Jesus said not unto him, he shall not dye, but if I will
that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? Yet this his annotation, or
comment upon our Savior's words did better refute errors past, then prevent
the errors, or misconstructions of times ensuing. For surely they err which
interpret our Saviors words as a mere put-off to Peter's curious question, or
as if they contained no such prediction, or prophecy concerning John, as the
former did concerning Peter. And there is a medium between the construction
which the Disciples then made of our Saviors words, and that construction
which others have made since. The Disciples hence collected that John should
not dye at all, others collect that our Saviors speech was merely
hypotheticall, or conditional; yet being proposed by way of interrogation, it
is equivalent to this assertory, or affirmative, It is my will that he should
tarry till I come, do not thou grudge at this but follow me: Now, as you have
heard before, there is a two fold coming of Christ, the one typical, or
representative, which is the coming here mentioned in my text, and meant by
our Savior in his answer to Peter, John 21 v. 22. the other real, or
consummative, to wit, his last coming to Judgment. The Disciples did err
only in this, that they understood our Saviors words unto S. Peter of his last
coming to judgment. And if John had been to tarry on earth till that time,
the consequence had been true, he should not have dyed but as S. Paul
speaks, he should have been changed. But our Savior speaks of his coming
here mentioned in my text, of which coming S. John, and others then living,
were to be witnesses, and spectators; And of this coming the destruction of
Jerusalem was a sign, by which his Disciples then alive might prognosticate,
or expect it before they dyed. But of his last coming to judgment, at least
of the time of the worlds end, our Savior in my text gave no sign, but rather
inhibited his Disciples to enquire after it, seeing it was then reserved to his
father only. And if any be disposed to seek after the signs of that day,
these he must learn of S. John in his revelation, who saw his first coming to
judgment in such a sense and manner, as he had seen the Kingdom of heaven
come with power, and glory, at his transfiguration upon the mount.

But though the time of Christ's coming to judgment be uncertain, though we
may not expect that he should come unto us in such visible manner, as he did
to this generation; yet he daily comes to us in a more real manner, if we
will prepare our hearts to entertain him. For so he comes to us in his word,
and in the sacraments, and this his coming shall be unto judgment, unless
we examine and judge our selves. But if we will judge our selves, we shall
not be judged of the Lord; yea he comes unto us in mercy and loving
kindness. One way or other he comes to all. Behold (says he) I stand at the
door and knock, if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in
to him, and will sup with him, and he with me. Revel. 3. 20. Yet he which thus
knocks, that we may open, has commanded us to knock that it may be opened
to us. And indeed the only way by which we can open the door to him is by
continual knocking at the gate of mercy, that he would open that unto us, that
he would come unto us by his grace, by the sweet influence of his own
everlasting sacrifice, Lord hear us when we call upon thee, and open unto us,
and so come unto us, yea so come quickly.

A brief appendix to the former treatise of the signs of the time, or divine
forewarnings.
OF omnious presagements, or abodings good or bad whether given, taken, or
affected; and of prodigies, or portendments which are, for the most part,
public signs of the times wherein they are exhibited, I had in my younger
and better days written a large treatise which hitherto I have not had the
opportunity, or leisure to publish, out of which I have borrowed two, or three
instances in the former treatise. But amongst all the forewarning signs given
to this land, as so many summons to repentance, none which have been given
within my memory did make so durable impression upon my heart and thoughts, as
that late mighty wind, which having begun his terrible visitation from the
utmost point of the South-west, did continue it in one night unto the
North-east corner of this Southern province. This was more then a sign of the
time; Tempus ipsum admonebat, the very time it self wherein it hapened, being
the vigils of that great anniversary November. 5. was a sign, to my
apprehension, most significant, and does interpret the meaning of this terrible
messengers inarticulate voice, much better then any linguist living this day,
as well as the Prophets (were any such now alive) could do. Both the
messenger, and the time wherein he delivered his message, do teach us that
truth, which has been often mentioned in these former meditations, more
punctually, and more pithily than I could then, or can yet express it. Thus
much of his meaning, the serious reader may understand, that albeit we of this
Kingdom were in firm league with all Nations of the earth with whom we have
had any time commerce; although our greatest enemies should become our greatest
friends; yet it is still in the Lord almighty his power, and as we may fear
in his purpose, to plague this Kingdom more grievously by his own immediate
hand, or by this invisible, but most audible messenger; or by other like
storms, and tempests, then at any time he has done by the famine, by the
sword, or by the plague of pestilence; to bury more living souls as well of
superior as of inferior rank in the ruins of their stately houses, or meaner
cottages, then the powder-plotters did intend to do, or the powder plot it
self, had it taken effect, could have done.

God grant every member of this Church and Kingdom grace to look into his
own heart and purposes: and to all in authority, whether superior or inferior,
from the highest to the lowest, to look not only unto their own, but unto
others ways of whom they have the care, or oversight, that these may run
parallel with the ways of God: which if we shall continue to cross, or fall
foul upon them, or his most sacred laws; it is not any parliamentary law, not
any act of state, or decrees of Courts of Justice, that can break the stroke
of his outstretched punishing arm and hand or fend off his dreadful Judgments
threatened from falling more heavy upon us, then at any time hitherto (his name
be praised) they have done. Finally although our public fasts, or solemn
deprecations for averting his judgments from this land (...) or the time being
ceased by the same authority by which they were begun: yet no authority, no act
of state does prohibit any private man to fast upon the days appointed by the
Church; whose Canons injoyne though not whole families, yet of every family
some one, or other, to resort unto the house of the Lord to offer up prayers,
and supplications appointed by our Church upon two other special days in the
week besides the Lords day. Nor are any prohibited upon these days to offer
up, besides their supplications for averting his judgementt the sacrifice of
praise, and thankesgiving for our many deliverances past, unto him, to whom all
praise, power, dominion, and thanksgiving are due.

FINIS.

