IVSTIFYING FAITH, OR The Faith by which the Just do live.

A Treatise, Containing a description of the Nature, Properties and conditions
of CHRISTIAN FAITH.

With a discovery of misperswasions, breeding presumption or hypocrisy, and
means how faith may be planted in Unbelievers.

By THOMAS IACKSON B. of Divinity and Fellow of Corpus Christi College in
OXFORD.

Galat. 3. 7. Know ye therefore that they which are of faith, the same are the
children of Abraham. John 8. 39. If ye were Abraham's children ye would do
the works of Abraham. coat of arms or blazon

At London, Printed by JOHN BEALE, dwelling in Aldersgate street 1615.

To the right Honorable SIR ROBERT SPENCER KNIGHT, Baron Spencer of
Wormleighton; the blessings of this life, and of that other to come be
multiplied.
Right Honorable
THe imputations, which from experience of more learned writers late mishaps, I
see now ready to befall me, will be especially two: The one, my presuming to
augment the superaboundant number of books written in this age: The other, my
not writing more exactly. I must request your Lordship to stand betwixt me and
the later, that I may deal the better with the former; whose force, if it come
but single, I can easily put off, thus: Did I not see such men as hold all
additions to the number of books formerly extant altogether needless and
superfluous, continually ouerlading themselves with heaps of superfluities
harmefull to themselves and others; I should gladly entertain this their
dislike of these, or former labors, as a good opportunity to ease my self of
future pains, and to advise my fellow Ministers hereafter to spare their pens.
But whiles these censurers, after the example of most now living, daily
manifest their incredulity to our saviors approbation of Mary, by solicitous
imitation of Martha: a necessity is laid upon us that be his messengers, and a
woe will befall us, if we do not, as well by writing as speaking, by all
means possible, dissuade this erroneous and sinister choice. I may, in this
regard, safely affirm, that the argument or drift of this present Treatise,
cannot (justly) seem either idle or impertinent; because it teaches (as the
Reader in the issue will perceive) the extirpation of those impertinencies, or
superfluities, wherewith most in our days wilfully entangle themselves, to be
altogether necessary to the sure rooting, right taking, or just growth of that
faith which only brings forth the fruits of life. And this advantage these
present Comments, otherwise weak, have of more accurate labors directed to the
same end they are: These, as they discover the danger of many encumbrances
which usually beset the way of life, to be much greater then it is ordinarily
thought; so they give intimations withal of means more immediate and
effectual for their auoidance; in as much as they derive, as well our
alacrity in all good performances, as all preservatives against wicked
practices, more directly and more necessarily then commonly a man shall find
their deriuance, from the essence or internal constitution of such faith as
they describe. That I handle not these points so accurately, as I my self
could wish, much less so exactly as a judicious Reader would require: The best
Apology I can make must be borrowed from that I have already made for the
vnripenes of my first fruits, published, upon the same occasion these are,
before their time. Others, besides my self, have taken notice of your
Honorable favors, and kindness toward me: and secret consciousnesse how
slow I am in private testifications of my duty, either by my pen, or presence,
hastened the conception of this more public and durable pledge. Which
notwithstanding (as if haste had maimed speed by ouerrunning it in the
starting) has been now twice as long in bringing forth, or rather in coming
to public light, as it was in coming to the birth. So long it has been out
of my sight, that the blindness of such affection as Parents usually bear to
their own brood newely brought forth, is quite abated. To say it were ill
favored, or misshapen, is more then any Parent will conceive of his own
offspring. Of such defects, or blemishes, as the accurate spectator will
discrie in it very many, diverse, I must confess, it naturally takes from
the Father; but many withal from ill hap not to have a Midwife nearer to set
it sooner, or at such time as he that gave it such shape and form as it first
had, might have looked on. But these are faults which I must seek to amend
when God shall bless it with more brethren. This, as it is, I must humbly
entreat your Lordship to accept, as an undoubted pledge of my endeavors to
make my self, and others, such indeed, as we are in Name, altogether
Christians; of my sincere and hearty desire to show my self thankful to
your good Lordship as to an Honorable favorer, and chief furtherer of my
studies. Being now to leave it, I would only impart this language to it,
always to pray for a Prophets reward unto your acceptance of it in the name of
a Prophets child.

From my study in Corpus Christi College in Oxford. April 20. 1615. Your
Lordships in all duty and service, THOMAS IACKSON.

A Preface containing the sum, the Use, and end of the Treatise following.
Beloved Reader,
OF that long work I undertook some years ago, (whether well or ill) so
much is after my fashion done, as were it well done, might justly be accounted
more then half In these present Meditations, conceived in the sweetest calm
of mind, and purest vacation from any cross or molestation my God for many
years had given me, I have endeavored so to set forth the nature, properties,
and use of Christian faith, as if thou follow my method in thy practice thou
shall never I trust have just cause to fear lest thy faith ripen too fast, or
prove unsound at the root. Now the auoidance of these inconveniences, as in the
preface to my first labors is specified, was amongst others, one principal
occasion of my writing after so many learned writers of this age. What then I
purposed concerning this Argument, and some what more is at large exhibited in
the Treatise following. For thy better direction to trace my foote-steps
throughout the principal passages thereof, otherwise not so much beaten as
many of the like Argument are, may it please thee first to view my progress in
this short map or draught.

As Well of our own as foreign writers, ancient and modern, I found the most
more forward to urge a certainety of belief, as altogether necessary unto
salvation, then clearly to teach how this certainety could possibly fasten upon
objects not evident to the believer: such, notwithstanding the object of
Christian says are held by them that hold it morl certain, then the principles
of any humane science. In the discussion of this difficulty (Section 1.
Chapter 34. 5,) I do not much differ from that graund light of the English
Church, whose opinion (had I been aware of it, before this Treatise was
conceived) might happily hane fashioned my conceit unto the form of words
wherein he expresses his, from which my phrase or dialect does somewhat differ.
In the maine point we well agree, that Faith is an assent as well unto the
goodness as unto the truth of matters divine. That which he with some
ancient School men terms certainty of adherence, is in my dialect,
stability o^ firmness of belief; which. I derive not so much from the
evidence or certainty of things beleened, as from their worth and goodness.
All of us by nature adhere more firmly to things of great and known worth,
then we could do unto the very same, if their worth, either were in it self,
or by us esteemed, less, albei^ their certainty were equal. The next lesson
which reason will hence learn is, That unto some truths our adherence may be
more firm then unto others of greater evidence and certainty, in case the
former excel the later more in goodness then they are exexceeded by them in
evidence and certainty.

But seeing with the Romanist we admit the nature of faith to consist in
Assent, we might perhaps be thought to confine it wholly (as he does) to the
understanding; an error justly abandoned by most in reformed Churches, who, in
this respect (for the most part) either define it not by Assent, or else to
make up one entire and complete definition, match Assent with other terms
not so well consorting with it as the rules of art in my occasions require. To
this purpose rather in defense of mine own, then any way to prejudice other
men's methods, which must be measured by the end at which they aim, the first
and second Chapters are premised. But some perhaps would reply, that Assent
being terminated unto truth, can have no greater alliance with goodness, then
with those differences assigned unto it by other writers, rejected by us, not
as false, but as not formal. And the objection (to speak the truth) could not
be put off as impertinent, did we follow the Romanist in another erroneous
principle, not discovered, much less disclaimed by such as most oppugn them;
from which principle notwithstanding the worst inconveniences can in this
argument be objected to their doctrine directly follow, and are not so clearly
or fully avoided by those that contradict them, as by us that assent unto them
in defining Christian faith by Assent. Not with the modern pontifician only,
but generally amongst the schoolmen, faith and works are so dissociated, as if
they were of linages altogether distinct, and had small or no affinity. Most
protestant writers acknowledge them to be of entire blood, yet somewhat farther
removed then in my opinion they are. The principal reason whereof as I
conjecture is, that they esteem more of schoole-philosophy then
schoole-diuinity, and with the schoolmen, specially Aquinas and his
followers, imagine the will and understanding, from which faith and good works
in their ^erauldry severally descend, to be faculties really distinct, like
brother and sister, being indeed but two names, or titles of one and the same
intellectual nature; as truth and goodness (their supposed really different
objects) in matters moral differ only in degrees of apprehension; as one and
the same person known a far off under the common notion of a man, is often
times clearly discerned by his approach to be an honest man and our loving
friend. Sutably to this true Philosophy, learned out of the best professors of
that faculty, and to omit other Schoolmen out of the wise and learned
Gerson, I place faith neither in the will nor understanding, but in the
intellectual nature, as subject to both these titles or appellations. The
inference hence taken is, that faith, although it be formally an Assent, may be
as imediately terminated unto the goodness, as unto the truth of revelations
divine. And these being of all the matters that can be revealed or known, both
in themselves, and in respect of us, far the best: I make that faith which
primarily distinguisheth^ true Christian from an hypocrite, or fruitless
professor of orthodoxall religion, to be an assent or adherence unto
revelations divine, as much better then any contrary good the world, the
devil, or flesh can present to pervert our choice of what they prescribe for
our saving health, or habitually to interrapt or hinder the prosecution of
their designs. By these deductions drawn forth at large in the sixth Chapter,
the Reader may easily perceive the link between faith and works, to be most
immediate and essential.

This maine conclusion whereon the most of the Treatise following depends, is
further confirmed (Chap. 7.) by instances of sacred writers, ascribing all the
victories of Gods Saints over the world, Devil, or flesh, unto faith, or
apprehension of divine promises, better then ought could come in competition
with them; all backsliding into evil, or backwardness in good courses, unto
want of faith, or apprehension of Gods judgments, or threatenings, as more
terrible then any tortures which man can devise against his fellow creatures.
Briefly the whole drift or scope of the Apostle from the later part of the
tenth Chapter to the Hebrews, unto the end of that Epistle, iumps fully with
the former conclusion. Whereunto likewise the usual dialect of the holy
spirit, when he speaks absolutely, not with reference to the solecismes of
hipocrites, or such as have divorced truth from honesty, or set words and works
at variance, is exactly consonant. It is generally observed by all interpreters
of sacred writ, that the terms which it uses to express the proper asts or
exercises of sense and understanding, still include those affections or
practique faculties, which are most homogeneall to them. The true reason
whereof is not because he who sees the heart, and inspires it with faith,
speaks more vulgarly or grossly, but rather more metaphysically then many
Divines or Philosophers do; as supposing the truth before specified,
concerning the identity of the will and understanding, with the essential
combination of truth and goodness in matters practical. The consequences
hence inferred and exemplified at large in the eight and ninth Chapters are in
brief unto this purpose. As the apprehension of divine infalibility breeds an
infallibility of persuasion, or sure reliance upon his promises: so assent unto
his goodness or imitable attributes assimulates our souls to them. Every object
rightly apprehended or understood imprints it similitude upon the apprehensiue
faculty. The divine nature therefore must leave an impression or stamp in our
souls as well of his goodness, as of his veracity: otherwise we apprehend
him who is essentially as good as true without any lively apprehension of his
goodness. This stamp or character of goodness divine, is as a touch to draw
the soul, as the Adamant does the iron after it self: and in this adherence
of the intellectiue nature (once touched with grace) unto the celestial
promises the definition of saving faith is accomplished (Chap. 9.): whose
general or chief properties are set forth (Chap. 10.). For conclusion of the
first Section (Chap. 11.). I notefie the principal errors of the Ramish
Church, partly because method so required, partly for more commodious solution
of some difficulties objected by them in the point of instification, but
principally for expugning their doctrine of merits by works, which as it is
absolutely false, so it is more abominable in them then in us it could be,
because their works can be but dead being ^eparated from the life of faith by
which ours, so we practice as ^^^ teach, are truly quickened. The controversy
itself I must refer to the article of CHRIST'S coming unto judgment.

The second part of this Treatise advises for the directing of faith aright
unto it proper end, and that we suppose to be firm adherence unto Gods
mercies in CHRIST, or inseparable union with this our head. Of this end many
that seek salvation by CHRIST usually fail by these means especially; First,
by defective or misgrounded persuasions of faiths inherence before they have
it, or of great love and loyalty to their Redeemer, when as they remain in the
same gall of bitterness that the heathens did, which persecuted all true
professors of his Gospel, or the Jews which put him to death. The first roots
or general originals of these dangerous misperswasious are handled (Chap. 1.).
The poisonous sap or i^^ce of Gentilisme and Iudaisme thence propagated to most
Protestants, Papists, or others professing the name of CHRIST, and boasting
themselves to be the only branches of the true and natural olive, is
discovered in the second and third Chapters. The conclusion arising from these
instances or inductions is, that faith in CHRIST, connot be truly notified but
by sincere love, nor such love to him otherwise known then by doing his
fathers will, or observing his commandments: and in observing some or many of
these, we may be so zealous as to lay down our lives, and undo our selves
and our posterity, rather then leave them undone, or transgress them, and yet
prove but Pseud^* Martires. Ignorance Omnium Vna (...) eade^ lententia, cos qui
sie in ac^e procumbebant, vitam mereri perpetuam* et in pa^^e sortis sanctorum,
praedestinato collocari in lumine. Willerm. Tyres. Archiepis. Hist. Lib. 3.
Cap. ^. vide et 6.
of this Elench has been the Mother of much blind devotion (to omit the
instances specified in the body of our discourse) in such gallants as went to
recover the holy Land, it being received as an undoubted maxim in the divinity
of those times, that whosoever was slain by the Turk or Saracen, should
assuredly wear a Martyrs Crown in Heaven: which all that died in that war
I am persuaded did not; howbe it I do no way disparage the just occasions of
that war, only I wish the like whenever they fall out agaiue, may be
prosecuted with more discreet religious zeal. The issue of the fourth Chap.
wherein the qualification required to Martyrdom with other like points are
handled at large, is that the sincerity of our faith and love must be tried by
an impartial and uniform observation of all Gods commandments, as is proved in
the Chap. following; first by the anthorities of Siracides, a man well
ac^^ainted with the sacred dialect, one from whose writings we may best gather
the force and extent of belief, in Saint Paul's disputes, within whose limits
is included that uniformity of works, which Saint James requires unto
justification or salvation; by whose Apostolical authority the former
conclusion is refortified. In perusing of this first Chapter recall to mind,
or have recourse unto the points set down (Chap. 8. Sect. 1.) and unto those
passages of the eleauenth, wherein the different value or diverse acceptions of
faith in Saint Paul and Saint James are discussed.

Others again fail of the former end of faith. i. (union with CHRIST, or
reconciliation with God by his mediation) either by inuerting the use of faith,
or by mistaking the measure of sanctifying graces necessary to salvation. The
former error is peculiar to the Romanist, who labors to misperswade himself
and others, that faith is given him as a bare foundation of other graces, or as
a talent for frewill to traffic with, until he obtain such a full measure
of inherent righteousness, as shall immediately acquit him of all reckonings
between his Creator and him, by expelling all relics or slain of sin as
utterly out of his soul as the water does the air out of the vessel which it
fills up to the very brimme. The dangerous consequences of this error are
handled at large ( Chap. 6. and 7.) And unto the use and measure of faith and
other graces inherent I reduce the controversy of justification, here
inserted, contrary to my first intent; least otherwise I might have ministered
some offense unto the Church wherein I live, or left some scruple in the
Readers mind, how faith should justify without works; the link or bond
between them being so strict and essential as I make it, almost identicall.
The same doubt naturally offered it self from the discussion of Saint James
his meaning, partly in the Chapter precedent, partly in the last Chapter of the
the first Section. Out of sundry other passages of this discourse it likewise
apeares, that the works required to justification by Saint James are virtually
included in the faith whereto Saint Paul ascribes justification: whence, it
may seem to imply a contradiction in the very terms, to say we are justified
by faith alone without works, if in justifying faith works necessarily he
included.

As the Trent Councels doctrine which upon penalty of damnation exacts a
measure of inherent righteousness, whereof mortality is not capable, nurseth
final doubting or despair, so others in opposition to it, minister occasion
of carelessness or presumption either by not urging such a measure of
perfection as Gods word requires, or by deeming that sufficient enough to
salvation, although it be subsequent to justification. Whereas he that can
once fully persuade himself he is actually justified, will not easily be
brought to doubt whether he want ought necessary to salvation. All of us that
have forsaken the Romish Church rightly acknowledge the end and use of faith to
consist in calling upon the name of the Lord in the day of evil and
temptation, and that all such as call upon him faithfully shall be saved. But
many of us are either much mistaken by our hearers, or else deceive our selves
in imagining faithful invocation of Gods name through Christ to be one of the
easiest points or operations of faith, being indeed the most difficult,
because the final service, whereunto all other obedience to his Laws, and
daily wrestlings with flesh and blood do but inure us, as soldiers in the
time of peace and truce are trained against the day of battle. All
persecutions or exercise of our patience are in respect of this last conflict
with hell and death, wherein victory is obtained, only through faith in
Christ, but as playing at foiles in a fence school to better skill and courage
in trial of masteries at sharp. These and like points are handled in the two
last Chapters of this second section not so fully as these times require but
large enough for hints to popular sermons.

The third and last Section shows the necessity and use of humane industry for
attaining unto the faith, whose nature and properties are set forth in the
first; notwithstanding that such faith is the sole gift of God, not wrought in
part by us but wholly created by him. The points whereto our endeauours must be
addressed, thou shall easily perceive by the titles of the Chapters; only let
me request thee to bear in mind Chap. 6. of Section 1. whi est thou read
the fowrth of this third: as also to compare Chap. ^. of Section 1. with the ^.
of this.

Order of doctrine did require that I should set down the nature and properties
of that faith by which the just does live, before I admonish for auoidance of
misper swasions concerning the present cossession, right use, or regiment of
it, and these again were to be prevented, before I direct for the right
planting of it. Notwithstanding, he that desires to be a doe^ not a hearer
only of the truth, must begin where I end, and first practice the rules
given in the last Section, and so proceed to the first and second. Thus he
shall find every Section suited to the three branches of his vow made in
Baptism, as they are set down in the Catechism authorized by our Church. The
first; To for sake the Devil and all his works, the pompes and vanities of
this wicked world, and all the sinful lusts of the flesh. [The third Section
expounds the meaning of this resolution, showing withal that serious
endeauours to perform it are ordinarily precedent to the infusion of faith.]

The second To believe all the articles of the Christian faith] The nature and
properties of this belief, are set down in the first Section. The third to
keep Gods holy will and commandments, and to walk in the same all the days
of this life. How belief of the Creed does enable us to this observance, is
partly showed in the first but more fully in the second Section; wherein
likewise is handled at large, how far we are bound to observe Gods
commandments. How necessary prayers are, either for attaining to this
perfection, or for absolution from all our sins after faith is infused; (which
is an other principal part of that Catechism,) the Reader may be informed by
the later part of the same Section: what it shall please any well-affected to
advise me of, as either defective or amiss in this Treatise, shall by Gods
assistance be amended in my exposition of that Catechism, a work upon
special occasions, lately begun for the benefit of the unlearned.

Besides these generals, every part of this Treatise has a peculiar use for
more commodious explication of the articles following. The last Section has
special reference to the Article of everlasting life. The second to the
articles of CHRIST'S death his passion, and coming unto judgment; and
contains withal an Elench of those vulgar fallacies, which must be avoided
before we come to search what certainety of justification or salvation may be
had in this life, or of whom it may be expected. The handling of these
fallacies in my first intention was referred in the Articles concerning Christ
and remission Vide prefat. ad librum 1. page 6
of sins. The first Section has a transcendent use throughout all the
Articles following, what peculiar reference the several passages of it have to
particular Articles will better apeare in their sever a explications; whereunto
my next labors are now consecrated. God of his infinite mercy assist meinwardly
with his grace, and bless me outwardly with that measure of health, of vacancy
from other business, and whatsoever means, he knows fittest for his service.

To the Author.
SIr, according to your request I have perused your book: I would my occasions
had been such, that I might have ouerseene the Press also. I would have
thought no pains too much for this purpose; partly for the love I bear to the
Author, but specially for the liking I have of the work. You know my nature,
far from flattery; and I know yours, as free from ambition. Yet if I should
speak what mine heart thinks, and as the truth would give me leave, perhaps it
might be subject to misconstruction. I will only say thus much; I have profited
by reading of your book, and so I think will he say, whosoever shall read
it with deliberation and understanding. And so I leave you and your labors to
Gods blessing.

Your ever loving friend HENRY MASON.

A Table containing the principal arguments of the several Sections and
Chapters contained in this Book.
SECTION 1. Of the Nature, Essence and properties of that Faith by which the
Just does live. Page 1.
CHAP. 1 Rules of method* for the right differencing of that Assent, wherein
Christian faith consists. page 1. CHAP. 2 The usual division of Faith, or
Assent, into historical and saluificall, not so form all as rightly to fit the
method proposed. p. 5 CHAP. 3 What Assent is; whence the certainty,
firmness, and stabilitie of it properly arise. p 8 CHAP. 4 What
correspondencie evidence and certainty hold in Assents or persuasions: what
measure of either, in respect of what objects is necessarily required to the
constitution of that Assent wherein Christian faith consists. p, 11 CHAP. 5 The
several kinds of evidences whereof some are appliable unto faith in respect
of certain Articles, others in respect of other: That the certainty of faith
in respect of divine truths not evident is grounded upon an evident certainty
of others; the property naturally arising from this difference of Assent, as
it is of objects partly known and partly unknown. p 19 CHAP. 6 The mutual
affinity betwixt truth and goodness: the real identity of the will and
understanding: that the Assent of faith cannot be so appropriated to the one as
to be excluded from the other: that admitting such a difference betwixt them as
true Philosophic may approve; faith in respect of some objects must be
attributed to the will, in respect of others to the understanding: the
original of difficulties in assenting to moral objects, or of the natural
man's back wardnesse to believe truths divine: what dependence other Christian
virtues have on faith: that to adhere unto divine revelations as good (not
simply considered only but comparatively, or with opposition to any other
good) is altogether as essential to faith rightly Christian; as to believe or
acknowledge them for true. p, 32 CHAP. 7 Illustrating and confirming the
conclusion last inferred by practies properly ascribed to faith in Scripture,
as well Canonical as Apocryphal: of hypocrisy and the contrary progress
observed by it and Christian faith. p 54 CHAP. 8 That knowledge of moral
objects, in sacred dialect, includes the affections concomitant: The exact
conformity, or correspondencie betwixt the Assent or adherence (resulting from
such knowledge) and the proper object whereto it is applied. p 80 CHAP. 9 What
manner of knowledge it is whence the last and proper difference of that Assent
wherein Christian faith consists, does result: the complete definition of such
faith. p, 92 CHAP. 10 Of the general consequences or properties of true Faith,
Love, Fidelity and Confidence, with the manner of their resultance from it. p,
100. CHAP. 11 Of the diverse acceptions of faith in Scriptures or Fathers: of
the Romanist pernicious error concerning the nature of it, and charity, whereby
his in aginarie works of merit necessarily become either dead, apish, or
polluted. p 110
SECTION. 2. Of immature persuasions concerning men's present estate in grace
with the means to rectify or prevent them: of the right use of faith and
other spiritual graces. Page 135.
CHAP. 10 The general heads or springs of hypocritical persuasions, with
brief rules for their prevention. p 136 CHAP. 2 That our Assent unto the first
principles of Christianity, by profession of which, the says of ancient
Christians was usually tried, may be, to our own apprehension, exceeding
strong; and yet our belief in Christ no better then the Heathens that oppugned
them: that it is a matter of more difficulty to be a true Christian now, then
in the Primitive Church; did we rightly examine the strength ^p^r faith not by
such points as theirs was tried, but by resisting pop^^ar customs or
resolutions of our times, actully opposite to the most essential and utmost,
as Idolatry is to the remote or general differences of Christian faith. p 143
CHAP. 3 That we modern Christians may hate Christ as much as we do the memory
of such Jews as crucified him, albeit ready, if we were called to formal
trial, rather to die, then openly to deny him or his Gospel: what means are
surest for just trial, whether we be better affected toward him then these
Jews were. p 163 CHAP. 4 That the fruits of righteousness, if but of one or
few kinds, argue the stock whence they spring to be either imperfect or
unsound: of the danger that may come by partiality in the practice of precepts
alike divine, or from difformitie of zeal: that our Assent to generalities
oftimes appears greater to our selves then indeed it is, from our pronenesse
or eager desires to transgress in some particulars. p 174. CHAP. 5 That true
faith is the soul of good works: that it equally respects all the
Commandments of God, and can admit no dispensation for nonperformance of
necessary duties. p 192 CHAP. 6 Of difficulties arising from the former
discourses, in the Protestants doctrine of justification by faith without
works: That faith is as immediately a^t to do good works of every kind as to
justify: Of the diverse accep^ions of Justification: That the justification by
works, mentioned by S. James, is proposed as subordinate to S Paul's
justification by faith without works: The true reconcilement of these two
Apostles speeches contrary only in appearance, from the contrariety of their
several ends or intentions. p 206 CHAP. 7 Of the differences betwixt us and
the Romish Church concerning Justification, or the right use or measure of
grace or righteousness inherent. p 229 CHAP. 8 How far the Law must be
fulfilled in this life: of the regiment of grace, of the permanencie of
Justification. what interruptions it may admit; how these must be repaired, or
in what sense it may be said to be reiterated: That every sin is against
Gods Law, though every sin not incompatible with the state of grace. p 253
CHAP. 9 That firmly to believe Gods mercies in Christ is the hardest point of
service in Christian warfare: That our confidence in them can b^ no greater
then our fidelity in the practice of his commandments: That meditation upon
Christ's last appearance is the surest method for grounding true confidence in
him. p 272
SECTION. 3. Of the right plantation of Faith. page 278.
CHAP. ^ That Christian Faith, although immediately infused by God, without any
cooperation of man, does not exclude, but rather more necessarily require
precedent humane endeauours, for the attaining of it. p 279 CHAP. 2 That
circumspect following the rules of Scripture is more available for attaining
true faith, then the practice of moral precepts for producing moral habits:
That there may be natural persuasions of spiritual truths, and moral desires
of spiritual good, both right in their kind, though nothing worth in
themselves, but only capable of better, because not hypocritical. p 283 CHAP.
3 Of the fundamental rule of Christianity to forsake all and deny our selves:
That the sincere practice thereof is a method more admirable and compendious
for the attainment of faith, then any Artist could prescribe, the principles of
Christianity being supposed: That the want, partly of instruction in the duties
contained in it, partly of solemn and public personal protestation for
their performance, is the principal cause of hypocrisy and infidelity. p 282
CHAP. 4 That the observance of the former rule is most easy unto men of meaner
gifts, unto whom in this respect Gods mercy is greater then if their guiftes
were better, and yet his mercy justly to be esteemed greatest toward such as
have most excellent gifts by nature p 299 CHAP. 5 Our Saviors Parables
especially those (Mat 13. Mark 4. Luk 8) most sovereign rules for the
plantation and growth of faith: of unfruitful hearers resembled by the
highway side and stony ground, with brief caueats for altering their
disposition. p 306 CHAP. 6 Of that temper which in proportion answers to
thornie ground: of the deceitfulness of riches: how difficult a matter it is
to have them and not to trust in them. The reason why most rich men of our
times never mistrust themselves of putting this trust in Mammon p 310 CHAP. 7
Of the antipathy between true faith, and ambition or selfe-exaltation: That
the one resembles our Saviors, the other Satan's disposition: Brief
admonitions for avoiding such dangers as grow from other branches of
voluptuous life. p. 317. CHAP. 8 Of the goodness or honesty of heart required
by our Savior in fruitful hearers: of the ordinary progress from faith
natural to spiritual, and the different esteem of divine truths or precepts
in the regenerate man, and him that is not, but sincerely desires to be such:
vacancy to attend all intimations of the spirit to be sought after by all
means possible: That alienation of our chief desires from their corrupt
objects is much available for purchase of the inestimable pearl p. 331. CHAP.
9 That faith cannot exercise it sovereignty our affections or desires until
^t be seated in the heart, with brief admonitions for bringing it into his
throne. p. 346.
Places of Scripture expounded or illustrated by Observation in the Treatise
following. ()
Out of the Old Testament.
GENESIS.
Cha. 22 Verse 2 TAke now thine only son Isaac whom thou love etc. Section
1. chap. 7. parag. 5. Verse 12 and Sect. 1. chap. 8. par. 9.
EXODUS.
Cha. 10 Verse 8, 9, 10 Go and serve the Lord your God, but who are they that
shall go etc. Sect. 2. c. 8. par. 5. Verse 26 Therefore our cattle also shall
go with us etc. neither do we know how we shall serve the Lord until we come
thither ibid. Cha. 20 Verse 8 Remember thou keep holy the Sabbath day. 1. c
8. par. 3.
DEVTERONOMY.
Cha. 10 Verse 16 Circumcise therefore the fore skin of your hearts etc. Sect.
2. chap. 5. par. 3.
2. KINGS.
Cha. 5 Verse 12 My Father, if the Prophet had bid thee do some great thing
would thou not have done it etc. 3. c 2. par. 2.
NEHEMIAH.
Cha. 6 Verse 14 My God remember thou Tobiah and Sanballat, etc. Sect. 1. chap.
8. par, 3. Cha. 13 Verse 14 Remember me, O my God, concerning this, etc. ibid.
Verse 29 Remember them o God that defile the Priesthood, etc. ibidem.
PSALMS.
Cha. 1 Verse 6 The Lord knows the way of the righteous, etc. Sect. 1 chap 8.
par. 7. Cha. 15 Verse 1, 2. etc. Lord who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle, etc. 2.
chap. 6. par. 6. Cha. 19 Verse 12 Who can understand his faults? Lord cleanse
me from my secret sins. 2. c 8. par. 7. Verse 14 Let the words of my mouth
and the meditations of my heart be acceptable in thy sight, O Lord my strength
and my Redeemer: ibidem. Cha. 30 Verse 5 Heaviness may lodge with us for a
night, but joy comes in the morning. Sect 1. c 5. par. 9. Cha. 32 Verse 1. 2
Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered,
etc. in whose spirit is no guile. 2. c, 6 p, 6. Cha. 62 Verse 10 Trust not in
oppression nor in robbery, if riches increase set not thy heart upon them, 1.
chap. 10. par. 4, 5. and 3. chap. 6. par. 2. Cha. 66 Verse 18 If I regard
iniquity in my heart the Lord will not hear me. 2. c. 8 p. 7. Cha. 78 Verse 8
Their spirit was not faithful unto God. 1. 6. 8. p, 7. Verse 36 They flattered
him with their mouth, and they lied unto him with their tongue, 1. c, 7. p, 14.
Cha. 95 Verse 10 It is a people that do err in their hearts for they have not
known my ways, Sect. 1. c, 8. p, 7. Cha. 137 Verse 4 If I forget thee O
Jerusalem then let my right hand forget her cunning. Sect 1. c, 8. p. 3. Cha.
146 Verse 3 Put not thy trust in Princes, etc. Sect. 1, c. 10. p. 4, 5. Verse 8
The Lord raises up them that are bowed down, etc. ibidem.
PROVERBS.
Cha. 2 Verse 3, 4 If thou criest after knowledge and liftest up thy voice for
understanding, etc. 3. c, 8. p, 5. Cha. 20 Verse 9 Who can say I have made my
heart clean, I am eleane from my sins. etc. 2. c, 6. p, 3. Cha. 25 Verse 28
He that has no rule over his own spirit is like a City broken down, etc. 3.
c, 3. p, 5.
ECCLESIASTES.
Cha. 2 Verse 2 Of laughter thou art mad, and of joy and pleasance, what is
this thou do. 1. c, 6. p, 10. Cha. 4 Verse 17 Take heed to thy foot when
thou go into the house of God, etc ^ c, 5 p, 1. Cha. 12 Verse 1, 2 Remember
now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, 1. c, 8. p, 3.
ISAIAH.
Cha. 32 Verse 17 The work of righteousness shall be peace, etc. 1. c, 11. p,
2.
JEREMIAH.
Cha. 5 Verse 2, 3 Though they swear the Lord lives yet they swear falsely,
1. c, 8 p, 8. Verse 23 This people had an unfaithful and rebellious heart,
etc. ibidem. Cha. 17 Verse 5 7, 8 Cursed be that man that trusts in man* and
makes flesh his arm, and withdraws his heart from the Lord, etc 1. chap. 10
p, 3. Cha. 42 Verse 1. 2 Then all the Captains of the host and Iahonan the
solue of Kareah, and Ieshaniah the son of Hoshaiah and all the people etc*
unto the 15. verse of the 44 chap. 1. c, 7. p, 15.
EZECHIELL.
Cha. 18 Verse 24 If the righteous turn away from his righteousness and
commit iniquity in his transgression that he has committed, and in his sin
that he has sinned he shall die. 2. c. 6 p. 3.
WISDOM.
Cha. 6 Verse 12, 13 Wisdom is glorious and never fades away: yet she is
easily seen of them that love her, and found of such as seeeke her. 3. c, 8 p.
3. Cha. 7 Verse 8, 9 I preferred her before Scepters and Thrones, etc. ibidem,
par. 4* Verse 11 All good things together came to me with her, etc. 3. ^. 8.
p, 6.
ECCLESIASTICVS.
Cha. 2 Verse 12 VVoe be to fearful hearts and faint hands, and the sinner
that goes two ways, etc. 1. c, 7. p, 14. Verse 14 They that fear the Lord
will not disobey his word, etc. ibidem. Cha. 19 Verse 19 The knowledge of the
Commandment of the Lord is the doctrine of life, etc. 1. c, 8 p, 7. Verse 21
If a servant say unto his Master, I will not do as it pleases thee, though
afterward he do it, etc. 2. c. 5. p 4. Cha. 30 Verse 24 To believe the Lord
is to keep his Commandments, 1. c. 8. p. 7. Cha. 32 Verse 23 In every good
work be of a faithful heart, etc. 2. c 5. p. 2.
1. MACCABEES.
Cha. 2 Verse 61 This consider ye in all ages that none that put their trust
in the Lord shall be overcome. 1. c. 7. p. 12.
2. MACCABEES.
Cha. 7 Verse 2 We are ready to die rather then to transgress the laws of
our Fathers, etc. unto the end of the chapter, 1. c, 7 p. 11.
Out of the New Testament.
MATTHEW.
Cha. 5 Verse 17 THink not that I am come to destroy the law or the Prophets
etc. 2 c, 6. p, 1. Verse 20 Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of
the scribes and Pharisees, etc. ibidem. Verse 44 Love your enemies, bless them
that curse you, etc. 1. c. 8. p, 9. Verse 48 Be ye perfect as your heavenly
Father is perfect. ibidem p. 1. Cha. 6 Verse 23 First seek the kingdom of God
and the righteousness thereof, etc. 3. c, 8. p, 6. Verse 31, 32 Take no thought
saying what shall we eat or what shall we drink, etc. 1. c, 8. p, 9. Cha.
70 Verse 21 Not every one that says unto me Lord, Lord, etc. 2. c, 7. p, 3.
Cha. 2 Verse 24 The Disciple is not above his Master, nor the servant above his
Lord, etc. 3. c, 3. p, 4. Verse 37 Whosoever loves father or mother, brother or
sister more then me is not worthy of me, 2. c, 4. p, 4. Verse 39 Whosoever will
save his life shall loose it, and he that will loose it shall save it, 3. c, 7,
p, 6. Cha. 12 Verse 33 Either make the tree good and the fruit good, or else
make the tree evil and the fruit evil. 2, c, 2, p, 10. Cha. 13 Verse 12
Whosoever has to him shall be given, etc. 3, c, 5. p, 1. Verse 19 When one
hears the word of the Kingdom, and understands it not, etc. ibidem. Cha.
18 Verse 15 If thy brother trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault
between thee and him etc. 2. c, 2. p, 9. Cha. 23 Verse 23 Woe be unto you
Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, for ye tith the mint and the rue and all
manner of herbs, etc. 1. c, 10* p, 5. Cha. 25 Verse 44 Lord when saw we thee
naked, or an hungered, etc. 2. c, 3 p, 5.
MARK.
Cha. 8 Verse 3 What does it advantage a man to win the whole world, and to
loose his own soul. 3. c, 7. p, 3. Cha. 10 Verse 17 Master what shall I do
that I may possess eternal life. 3. c, 6, p, 3. Verse 23 How hardly do they
which have riches enter into the kingdom of Heaven, ibidem. Verse 29 Verily I
say unto you there is no man that has left house or brethren for my Names
sake, etc. 3. c, 8. p. 5. Cha. 12 Verse 33 Thou art not far from the Kingdom
of God 2. c, 6. p, 3. Cha. 13 Verse 13 Ye shall be hated of all men for my
Names sake. 3, c, 3. p, 4. Cha. 16 Verse 17 These signs shall follow them that
believe, In my name shall they cast out devils, they shall speak with new
tongues, etc. 1* c, 11. p, 5
LVKE.
Cha. 5 Verse 39 No man that drinks old wine straightway desires new, etc.
1. c, ^. p, 2. Cha. 6 Verse 22 Blessed are ye when men hate you and separate
you etc. 3. c, 7 p. 5. Cha. 8 Verse 15 That which fell in good ground are they
which with an honest and good heart; etc. 3. c, 8. par. Cha. 12 Verse 33
Provide your selves bags which wax not old, etc. 3. c, 8 p, 6. Verse 48 To
whom much is given of him much shall be required. 3. c, 4 p. 3. Cha. 14 Verse
8, 9 When thou art bidden of any man to a wedding, etc. 3. c, 7, p, 1. Verse
12, 13 When thou make a dinner or a supper* etc. 2. c, 2. p, 8 Verse 33
Whosoever denies not himself and for saketh all he cannot be my Disciple, ^.
c, 3. p, 5. Cha. 18. Verse 14 Every one that exalts himself shall be
brought low, 1* c, 10. p, ^, and 3. c, 7. p, 1 Cha. 21 Verse 36 Watch therefore
and pray always, etc. 2, c, 9. p, 4.
JOHN.
Cha. 2 Verse 24 Many when they saw his miracles believed in him, etc. 1. c.
11. p 1. Cha. 3 Verse 15 Whosoever believes in him shall not perish but have
everlasting life, 1. c, 8. p, 7. Cha. 4. Verse 34 It is my meat and drink to
do my fathers will and finish his work 1. c, 10. p, 1. Cha. 5 Verse 44 How
can ye believe which receive honor one of another, etc. 1. c, 11. p, 1. Verse
46 Had you believed Moses you would have believed me, etc. 2. c, 3. p, 2. Cha.
6 Verse 14 Of a truth this is that Prophet which should come, etc. 2. c, 1, p.
5. Cha. 7 Verse 38 He that belieueth in me, as the Scripture has said out of
his belly, etc. 1. c, 11. p, ^ Cha. 8 Verse 34 Whosoever commits sin is
the servant of sin, etc. 2. ^, 8* p, ^ Verse 39, 40 If ye were Abraham's
children ye would do the works of Abraham 2. c, 6. p, 2. Verse 44 You are of
your father the devil and the lusts of your father you will fulfill 2. c, 3.
p, 2, and 2. c. 8* p, 6. Cha. 11 Verse 25, 26 I am the resurrection and the
life, he that believes in me, etc. Sect. 1. c. 7 p 4. Cha. 12 Verse 32 Even
amongst the Rulers many believed in him, Sect. 1. cha. 11. par 1. Cha. 14 Verse
21 He that has Christ's commandments and keeps them, etc. Sect. 1. c, 8.
p, 7. Cha. 17 Verse 3 This is life eternal that they may know thee the only
true God etc. ibid.
ACTS.
Cha. 7 Verse 5 God gave Abraham none inheritance, etc. Sect. 1 c. 7. p. 4.
Verse 51 Ye stiffenecked and of uncircumcised hearts, etc. Sect. 2. c, 3. par,
2. Cha. 20 Verse 35 It is more blessed to give then to receive. Sect. 2, c. 4.
p, 2. Cha. 24 Verse 25 When Paul preached of righteousness Felix trembled, etc.
Sect. 1. c, 6, p. 12.
ROMANS.
Cha. 1 Verse 16 The Gospel of Christ is the power of God unto salvation to
every one that believes Sect. 1, c. 11. p, 9. Cha. 2 Verse 13 The hearers of
the law are not righteous before God, etc. Sect. 2, c. ^. p 3. Verse 28 He is
not a Jew which is one outwardly, etc. Sect. 1. chap, 11* par. 9. Cha. 3 Verse
3 The faith of God cannot be without effect, Sect. 1, c, 10. p. 3. Verse 23
There is no difference, all have sinned etc. Sect 2. c, 6. p, 5. Verse 28
Therefore we conclude that a man is justified by faith, etc. ibidem. Cha. 4
Verse 3 Abraham believed God and it was counted unto him for righteousness*
ibidem p. 4 Verse 5, 6 To him that works not, but believes in him, etc.
ibidem par. 6. Cha. 5 Verse 1 Being justified by faith we have peace with God,
etc, Sect. 1. c. 1^ par. 2. Cha. 6 Verse 2, 3 How shall we that are dead to
sin live yet therein, etc. Sect. ^ c. 6. p. 2 Cha. 7 Verse 18 To will is
present with me* but I find no means to perform that which is good, Sect. 1.
c, 6. p, 5. Cha. 8 Verse 30 Whom he predestined them also he called, and whom
he called*them also he justified, Sect. 2* c, 6 p, 3 Cha. 9 Verse 6 All are
not Israel that are called Israel, Sect; 1 c, 11* p, 12. Cha. 10 Verse 10
With the heart man believes unto righteousness, Sect. 2. chap. 5 par. 1. Cha.
13 Verse 10 Owe nothing unto any man but love, Sect, 2 c, 4. p, 2.
1. CORINTHIANS.
Cha. 9 Verse 9 God is faithful by whom we are called unto the fellowship of
his son Christ Jesus, etc. Sect. 1. c, 10. p, 3 Cha. 12 Verse 31 Covet ye
earnestly the gifts, etc. Sect. 1, c, 11. p. 6. Cha. 13 Verse 1, 2 Though I
speak with the tongues of men and Angels, etc. ibid. p, 4. 17.
2. CORINTHIANS.
Cha. 5 Verse 21 He has made him to be sin for us which knew no sin, etc.
Sect. 2. c. 7. p. 6.
GALATHIANS.
Cha. 3 Verse 7 Such as do the works of Abraham they are the children of
Abraham, Sect. 1. c, 11. p, 12. and Sect. 2. c. 6. p. 2
EPHESIANS.
Cha. 5 Verse 18 Be not drunk with wine wherein is excess, etc. Sect. 3. c,
8. p, 5.
PHILIPPIANS.
Cha. 3 Verse 8, 9 Doubtless I think all things but loss for the excellent
knowledge sake of Christ, etc. Sect. 1. c, 5. p, 13.
1. THESSALONIANS.
Cha. 2 Verse 16 The wrath of God is come upon them to the utmost, Sect. 2. c,
3, par. 2.
HEBREWS.
Cha. 4 Verse 2 The word that they heard profited them not, because it was not
mixed with faith, Sect. 1. c. 8. p. 7 Cha. 10 Verse 35 Cast not away your
confidence which has recompense of reward. Sect. 1. c. 10 p. 6. and Sect. 2. c
6* p. 4. Cha. 36 Verse 36 Ye have need of patience, etc. Sect 1. c. 7. p. 1.
Cha. 11 Verse 1 Faith is the substance of things hoped for the evidence of
things not seen, Sect 1. c 5. p. 5. and 6. Verse 2 By faith the Elders
obtained a good report, Sect. 1. c. 7. p. 2. Verse 6 Without faith impossible
it is to please God, ibid. Verse 7 By faith Noah being warned by God of things
not seen, etc. unto verse 11. Sect. 1 c, 7. p. 3. Verse 18 He considered that
God was able to raise him up, etc. ibid. p, 5. and Sect. 2. c. 6 p. ^. Verse 24
When Moses came to age, etc. Sect. 1. c 7, p. 8. Verse 20 By faith Isaac
blessed Jacob and Esa^ concerning things to come, etc. unto verse 36, Sect. 1*
c, 7 p. 10. Cha. 12 Verse 2 Yet for the joy that was set before him, he
despised the shame etc. ibid. p. 9. Verse 11 No chastening for the present
seems to be ^oious, etc ibid p. 2. and Sect. 2. c, 6. p, 8 Cha. 13 Verse 3
Remember such as are in bonds, Sect. 1. c. 8. p. 3.
JAMES.
Cha. 1 Verse 5 If any of you lack wisdom let him ask of God. etc* Sect.
2. cap. 7. par. 13. Cha. 2 Verse 10 Whosoever shall keep the whole law and
offend in one point is guilty of all Sect 2. c 8. p 6. and Sect. 2. c 5. p 4.
Verse 14 What avails it my brethren though a man say he has faith and have
no works etc. 2. c 6. p 4. Verse 19 The devils believe that there is a God and
tremble. Section 1 cap. 8. par. 8 Verse 21 Was not Abraham our Father justified
through works, etc, Sect: 1. c 11. par. 9 Verse 24 Ye see then how a man of
works is justified etc. Sect. 2. c 6. par 3. 4. Verse 25 Likewise also was not
Rahab the harlot justified by works etc. Sect. c. 11. par. 10
1. JOHN.
Cha. 1 Verse 10. If we say that we have no sin we deceive our selves, etc.
2. c 7. p 8. etc 8. p 6. Cha. 2 Verse 1 If any man sin we have an Advocate
with the Father etc. 2* c 8. par 4. Cha. 3 Verse 2 Beloved now we are the
sons of God, etc. Sect, 1. c, 8. p, 7. Verse 6 Whosoever abides in him
sins not. ib. p. 5, Verse 7 He that does righteousness is righteous. 2. c, 6
p, 1. Verse 8 He that commits sin is of the Devil etc, 2. c, 8. p, 6.
Verse 9 He that is borne of God sins not ibid p 5. Verse 14 We know that we
have passed from death to life etc. 2, c, 4, p. 5* Cha. 5 Verse 5 Who is he
that overcomes the word? etc, 1, c, 8* p, 7.
REVELATIONS.
Cha. 22 Verse 2 He that is righteous let him be righteous still. 2. c, 6 p. 3.
CHristian Reader, For casualtie ( whether in the text, or margin of this
Treatise) always read causalitie; for casually, causally. If the letter S
(either as an affixe or note of the plural number) sometimes want sometimes
redound; (as if thou find Abraham for Abraham's, their for theirs; formalitie,
for formalities; performs, for perform;) do me or the Printer the favor
either to correct, or not impute these, or like petty escapes, which way as
easily beamended as committed. Such faults, as alter, inuert, or obscure the
sense, are here corrected to thy hand.

Errata.
PAge 36 line 35 for will read nill. p. 39. l. ^^, as, p. 41 l. 14. three, p.
^3. l. 34, other p. 44. l. ^. affection, or p. 51. ^^. directory, ^5. nurture,
p. 54. l. 30. which, bind, p. 67. ^6. for joy r^glory* p. 63. l. 3^ cut down,
p. 8 ^. l. 30. Patriot, l. 6. an ^ p. 90 l. 2. consonantly* p. 96 l. 34.
faculty, p. 114. l. 23. us. p.117. l. 2^, Isoerates p. 126 l. 10, least, l. 21.
for and r. of, p. 129. l. 34, nursed, p. 133. l. 22, dele not, p 139, l. 15
vnseaso^^bly, p. 146. l. 29, to love p. 162. l. 14 use. p. 165, l. 1, had, p.
172. l. 1, n^s^^able, p. 173 l. 30. for it^. we, p. 174, l 1, by ou^, p. 178,
l. 3, were p. 184 l, 29 euacuacion, p. 185, l. 7. is in devils, p. 186, l 23
from such, p. 187* l. 14. ever, p. 188, l. 13, propose, p. 189; l. 2, her
internal, p. 199, l. 12, i^^^u, p. 199. l. 18, they, p. 206, l. 12, Paul
commends, p. 109 l. 2. seems even, l. 35 of his, p. 213* l. 25. the, p. 214,
l. 15, not doubt. p. 216. l, 29, us, or p, 217 l. ^5* it imports p. 222, l. 1^
the like p. ^^4 l. 32 the l. 30. only let, p, 231 l. 28 Sun, p, 235. l. 32,
paedanticall, p. 242, l. 5. own, p. 243 l. 8 recover, l. 30, ever, p. 245 l.
14, whereby, l. 3^. permitted, p. 248 l. 17. these. p. 249, l. 27, this life,
p. 251. l. 9, for all must r* most p. 254, l. 1^. inherence, l. 36. their, p.
259, l. 1, the. p. 278 l. 26. r. weomen, p. 290. l 12 destiny, p. 294. l. 28.
material. p 295 l. 17, dele so p. 312 l. 30. matches, p. 314, l. 37,
Hippocrates p. 315, l. 3, in, p. 320, l, 29, inuitation p, 323, l, 3, lover, p,
327, l, 32 unconscionable, p, 328 l, ^0, fests, p. 333, l. 26, had that, p,
332, l, 31, alike, p. 342, l, 29. dependence, l, 33, deepelier:

Page 44 li^^ 17, Read with some others, or knowledge of the same (...) in
different, Page 243 l, 35. for as heathen* ^^ad, which had surprised the
Heathen as heathen,

SAVING FAITH, OR The Faith whereby the Just do live.
SECT. 1. Of the nature, essence, and properties of that Faith by which the
Just do live.
CHAP. 1. Rules of Method for the right differencing of that Assent wherein
Christian faith consists,
THat Christian faith includes an assent to supernatural objects, or truths
revealed by God; especially concerning Christ, the means of man's salvation, and
matters of the life to come, has been declared before: Nor is there, or can be
any dissent among professors of Christianity about the quality of this
assertion; seeing the acknowledgment of fuch reuclations does primarily
distinguish christians from Jews or Infidels. About the extent or quantity of
the object assented unto, or revelations thus acknowledged, difference there is
betwixt us and the Romanist; some doubt there may be amongst our selves. The
Romanist will have the object of Christian faith as directly to comprehend
unwritten, as written revelations divine: we take the actual and ordinary
limits of it from the plot drawn by the pens of Prophets, Apostles and
Evangelists. Two enti^e moities we make of it, and no more; the old Testament
delivered unto us by the Jew; and the new acknowledged by the Roman Church.
The principal doubt amongst our selves (the discussion whereof will naturally
fall in the Article of remission of sins) is, whether our personal election,
predestination, salvation or possessory right in state of grace be directly
contained under the formal object of Christian faith, as any proper integrall
or homogeneall part thereof, whereunto the former Assent may be immediately
terminated. Examination of the difference betwixt us and the Romish Churches
comes not at all within the compass of this present survey.

2. It is agreed on by all sides again, that every assent unto supernatural
trueths revealed, of what rank soever, suffiseth not to the attaining of
supernatural and eternal bliss, which is the only end and mark, by
approach whereto or declination from which, the sufficiency or insufficiency of
faith, as christian must be measured. Yea some there be so far from thinking
every assent should fit the former purpose, that they seem scarce to vouchsafe
assent any room, or place in the definition of such belief, or faith as we now
treat of: but rather suspect it as a term, though of it self indifferent,
yet abused by Popery. Least I should mistake them, or their followers me, the
point questioned I would thus propose. Whether they dislike assent should be
acknowledged as the supreme kind or stock whence al particular branches of
faith should lineally descend, as diverse persons of the same kindred do from
one and the same first progenitor; or whether they would admit some other
compeere with it, from which true christian faith should more immediately be
derived, as from a joint, but a better or more proper original: or lastly,
whether they hold it an indignity for such faith to derive its pedigree at all
from assent, as from any part of its first Original. If they be for this last
opinion, they are too nice to admit any Logical dispute: If for the second, I
request them to permit me my method as charitably, as I allow them theirs.
Albeit perhaps I could guess the original of their disliking my terms to be
only hence, that they observing fewer differences betwixt Assents then happily
may be found, think when we define Christian faith by Assent, we mean only a
bare Assent.

3. He that would define Man to be a substance, or bodily living creature,
should come far short of the truth; which notwithstanding he shall never be
able to hit, but by following the same line. For man is but the complement or
perfection of bodily living creatures, as these are of material substances.
All the differences of either he has not in him; albeit nothing essentially in
him, which is not either a true and formal difference of Substance generally
taken, or some kind of soul endued with life. And the only right way to
find out the entire nature or complete essence of Man, were to seek out as
they lie in order all the proper differences, whereby substances from the
highest to the lowest are essentially and formally divided. In diuisiue
progresses, specially if they be long, often shall he be enforced to cut or
interfere that will follow his method, which of living creatures made some to
have feet, others none; and of such as had feet, some to have feathers, some
none, justly taxed by the great Perlege Aristotelis librosde partibus animalium.
Philosopher: for what affinity have feet with feathers? kindred betwixt them
there can be none, direct and lineall. He had framed his next steps aright, had
he thus proceedeed: Of living footed creatures some have two feet, some four,
some more, some fewer; of both sorts, some are solid footed, some cloven; of
cloven footed creatures, some have toes, some claws, others talants; and of
all these some more, some fewer.

4 But as few take notice of more discents in meaner families then fall out
within their own memory: so most Writers omit this direct prosecution of
genealogies in matters moral, or not distinguishable by ordinary sense without
accurate or laborious inspection. How beit I have ever been of opinion that
the continual adoption of foreign differences for want of proper, (a fault
most common to curious Dichotomists, never allotting more then two branches to
one stock, whence scarce either naturally grows,) does breed as many
needless intricate difficulties in the search of truth, as frequent alienation
of lands from Name to Name, by often matching with uncouth families, for want
of succession in heir-males, does in trial of titles of Honor or inheritance.
Even in the order or rank of material and sensible bodies, which in a sort
marshall themselves unto our view, we usually suffer the intermediate linkes of
the chain, by which we should proceed, to lie double and unfolded, coupling
things close together which nature had set far asunder. As what a cross
double is it we use before we make that long leap, or vast stride rather as it
were with one leg shakled and another loose; when proceeding from Vegetables
to Creatures endued with sense, we say, of them, some are rational, some
irrational. Thus indeed we might cast about to entangle one that would deny
a manifest truth, or to be sure to encompasse a truth undiscovered: no fit
method it can be for orderly suting our conceits to the real natures, whose
knowledge we seek; but rather a trick to cast off such as would artificially
hunt out Natures footsteps in her progress, as not loving to range at random
in hope to stumble upon their game. First, neither is irrationality any further
degree of sense, nor does sense express that general notion, whereto reason
is a directly subordinate as mere sense. Secondly, betwixt reason and that
general notio^ of knowledge, or perception; by some branch or other, whereof,
every sensitive creature exceeds Vegetables, the intermediate degrees of sense
are many; yet every one almost as directly shooting out of other, as that part
of the Vine branch which grows this year, does out of such as grew the
former. Vegetables have life, but perceive not the defect or competency of that
nutriment by which they live, altogether incapable either of pain or pleasure.
The first rank of such as we call sensitive creatures are pained by defect,
and pleased by competency of necessary nutriment, but perhaps with nothing else;
capable only of contraction and dilatation for lessening grief, and enlarging
content; otherwise immooueable. Others evidently enjoy the sense of touching,
which is the only root of taste, always furnished with motion requisite for
satisfying appetite, or generally for attaining such pleasures, or avoiding
such grieuances as accompany either of these 2. senses. From these more
imperfect senses spring smelling, hearing, seeing; and these again are
perfected by other internal more noble sensitive faculties, as memory, fancy,
and the like: all subordinate unto reason, wherein Man exceedes all other
sensitive creatures, as being last framed according to the image of his Creator.

5. Now as he that desires the exact knowledge of man should first know the
intermediate parts, differences and iunctures of this chain, which reaches
from the first perception of pain or pleasure unto reason: so he that hopes to
find out the true nature of supernatural belief or assent, should first seek
the superior differences or degrees of Assent in general. And here we suppose
that the Assent of Christian faith though supernatural, is contained as
formally under the most common notion of Assent, as reason, though springing
from an immortal root, is under that general knowledge or perception which is
alike communicable to creatures mortal. Supernatural faith we likewise
suppose to be more necessary to the right discernment of matters spiritual
then an immortal soul for the apprehension of things eternal, although true
it be, that the conceit of eternity cannot enter into mere mortality.

CHAP. II. The usual division of Faith or Assent into Historical and
saluificall, not so formal as rightly to fit the method proposed.
1. A *Distinction there ^s of Historical, temporary, and saving Faith, often
used by learned Divines very fitly to their occasions, howbeit expressly
rejected by some, and (for ought I have read) avouched by none for an
artificial or for^^all division; in which regard as in many cases I must
approve it, so in this business I may not follow it, intending the search of
such differences as formally divide Assent, and are essential unto Christian
^aith. Of which rank to be saluificall, doubtless is not. For to save, take
it in what sense we list, actually or potentially, is either an operation, or
a property in order of nature following true and lively faith; whereas the
essential differences must go before it. Besides, two points there be very
questionable, but in this place not determinable. First, whether in men never
attaining unto salvation, there may not be faith, for essence, quality, and
degrees one and the same with that which saves others, only different in want
of radication or durability: as many men are not so long lived, as others of
the same complexion or constitution of body.

The second, whether any faith, though supposed to continue unto the last end
of life, be sufficiently qualified for justifying by the bare essential nature
or quality, or rather a competent measure or quantity be necessarily required
with these unto so weighty a business. Omitting these questions for the
present, it shall suffice to search the true nature and properties of that
faith which does justify, or which primarily distinguishes a true Christian
from an Hypocrite.

2. Such faith questionless is not opposite, but subordinate, or rather
coincident to historical assent: whose latitude, or degrees of intensiue
perfection is commensurable to the different esteem of authority in
historians. He should much disparage Tacitus, Liuit, Dion, or Halicarnassensis,
that made no better reckoning of their histories then of Dictys Cretensis, or
Ctesias: so should he much wrong the memory of Sir Thomas Moore, that gave no
more credit to his history of Richard the third, then to diverse passages in
Hector, Boethius, or in some other writers of English or Scottish affairs. But
much greater indignity should he offer Moses, or rather the blessed Spirit,
that would not believe the book of Genesis much better then the former, or
any domestique story. Finally, seeing historical belief is but an assent to
historical narrations, whose strength increases according to our better
esteem of the Historian: I should suspect my heart of prophanenes, if I did not
believe the sacred story by that sacred faith, by which I hope to find
salvation. Yet besides this different esteem of Historians, whose latitude, as
it comprehends as well divine as profane, is as great as the altitude of the
heavens above the earth: Many other grounds or motives there be, whereby our
assent to diverse narrations in the same author may be much strengthened, and yet
the title it had, not thereby abrogated it may continue historical still. As if
an unknown writer of times, and countries otherwise sufficiently known, should
now come to light; a judicious critic, or well experienced Antiquary, upon
serious comparison of all circumstances or matters related, or due
consideration of his manner in relating them, would apprehend far more sure
grounds of assent to diverse passages, then a nouice that had never gone further
then Stadius upon Florus, Sleidans four Monarchies. or Bodins methods.

3. Or, not to speak of Critical skill in this kind, such I profess is my
simplicity, that albeit no other Writers but ancient Poets had ever intimated
the general deluge; yet the light of such stones, as the exquisite and
ingenuous Ca^nden in his description of Richmond shire.
Antiquary assures me have been found in places far from all approach of
any inundation, that has happened within the times mentioned by any Historian
except sacred, as much resembling the Cockle, as others do the Oyster, from
whose shell it is apparent they Quod in montium autem summitatibus, vt etiam
alibi lapides nonnunqua^ fuerint reperti cocle^^ marinas, et alia aquatilia
referentes: si no^ sint naturae miracula, refusi in omnem terram sub Noe,
del^vycerta esse indicia, cum Orosio Christiano historico iuaicabo Refuso (
inquit ille) sub N^e in omnem terram mari, immissoque d^luvio, cum toto otbe
contecto, vnum s^acium coeli esset ac Pe. laci. d^letum suisse vniuersum genus
humanum paueis in A^ca fidei suae merito ad substituenda^ origin ^ reser.
uatis euidentissime veracissimi scriptores docet. Fuisse tamen illi contestati
sunt, qui praeterita quide^ tempora, ipsamque auctolem temporum nescientes,
tamen ex iudicio and coniectura lapidum quos in remotis montibus conchis and
ostreis scabros, etiam saepe cauatos aquis Visere solemus, conijciendo
didicerunt.
have been newly hatched, would have moved me to suspect there had been a
time, Omne cum Proteus pecus egit altos visere montes. Scarce can I imagine any
could be so wayward, or incredulous, as not to give Caesar what belongs to
Caesar, firm credence to his Commentaries, at the least as far as they only in
general relate his conquest of this Island, or first planting of Romans here;
if digging his ground he should (as others have done of late) find by chance
some ancient Roman coin, with Caesar's image and superscription upon it, or
other monuments in every point answerable to Historical relations of customs
practiced by the Romans, while they inhabited this land.

4. Were most men's assent unto sundry passages in sacred story grounded but
upon like sensible and unquestionable inducements, it would draw them nearer
to salvation then often they come. And my pains (I hope) shall not prove
unprofitable, in searching out plenty of undoubted experiments, more exactly
answerable to the exact relation of Prophets and Evangelists. For my self I
rest assured, that, if we will not lay the blame where it is least deserved,
our faith is not to be reputed unsound or non saluificall, because historical;
but rather oft-times therefore insufficient to save, because not so fully
historical as it might be, or in that our apprehension of diverse matters
related in sacred stories, is not so great, so lively and sound, as to equalize
the utmost limits of some belief, which may yet be fully comprehended under
assent historical. For no assent can exceed the measure of that belief or
credence, which is due unto sacred Writers. If that on our parts be but such,
as it should be to Gods general promises, it will more forcibly, more truly
and naturally apply them to us in particular, then we our selves possibly can
do, by beginning our faith at this particular application where it must end.
The next thing then to be sought out is, the nature of Assent in general, and
what manner of Assent this is, which we require as due to sacred Historians, or
matters related by them.

CHAP. III. What Assent is, whence the certainety, firmness, and stability of
it properly arise.
1. CReatures of every kind have several propensions, or inclinations to such
others as suite best unto their natures, and hardly admit of any rest, until
they get some manner of union, or conjunction with them. That which in
substances liuelesse, or merely natural, we call propension; descending to
such as are endued with knowledge or apprehension, is differenced by the title
of desire. The propension most native to the intellectiue faculty is desire of
truth; unto which found out, the adherence must needs be correspondent; and
this This importance of Assent, Tullie gives us in that speech: Vberius ista
quaeso: haec enim spinosiora, ori^^ ut confitear, me cogunt, quam vt assentiar.
^. lib. Tuscul. et initio.
adherence we properly call Assent: which notwithstanding by a great Vid
Vasquez. in j^^ secundae disputat. 79. cap 3. number. 12. vide eundem disput. 62.
cap. 3. number. 9
Artist is defined, to be a knowledge or apprehension of conuenience betwixt
things compared in any enuntiation. But this definition he chiefly intended,
in oposition to such as restrain Assent only unto the reflexiue, or
examinatiue acts of the understanding. Neither I think would have denied this
adherence, (wherein Assent more properly consists then in knowledge, which it
necessarily supposes) to be an inseparable concomitant to all acts of
knowledge, whether reflexiue or direct; especially if their objects be worth
the contemplation. For unless that proportion, which breeds a mutual liking
betwixt the objects apprehended, and the apprehensiue faculty vary:
continuance of union is always as much desired after it is gotten, as the
union it self was before. Wherefore, as desire of truth brings forth motion,
by impelling our souls unto the search of it: so the apprehension of it
necessarily infers a settling, or fastening of them to it found. For as test
terminates the natural motions, or actual propensions of liuelesse bodies: so
the desires of the sensitive or intellectiue nature, attaining their proper
objects, are always crowned with joy, pleasance, and complacency in their
purchase.

2. That such is the nature of Assent, as we have said, may appear from its
contrary, dissent: which, over and above knowledge or apprehension, includes an
auersion in the intellectiue faculty, or a bearing off from what it apprehends
as false. Whence he that bears testimony to an untruth, may as truly be said
to assent unto it; as his action may be accounted voluatarie, that casts his
goods ouerboord in a storm: which kind of action the Vide Aristot, Ethic. 3
Cap.*
Philosopher makes to be mixed, though more inclining unto voluntary, because it
takes the denomination, especially from the present resolution. So likewise in
the former testimony there is a mixture of Assent; because albeit the party
simply knew it for untrue, and therefore dissonant to his intellectiue nature,
(which can no better brook the apprehension of apparent disconuenience betwixt
things compared in enunciations, then the sense of touch can the impression of
heat and cold together: yet, for the time present, he is not auerse from it,
but rather adheres unto it, as it lies in his way to honor, gain, promotion,
or other sinister ends, upon which his mind is mole strongly set, then upon
truth.

3. Doubt likewise, which is the means betwixt Assent and dissent, if it
proceed from want of examination, is but a suspense or inhibition of the soul
from any determinate inclnation one way or other: if from apprehension of
reasons diverse or contrary, drawing near to an equality in strength, it is
but a tremulous motion of the understanding* not finding where to settle or
fix its approbation.

4. Certainty is but an immunity from change or mutabilite; and according to
this general notion, univocally agrees, as well to the object, known, as unto
assent or adherence to their knowledge. Those obicts are in themselves most
certain whose nature is least obnoxious to alteration. Assent most certain we
likewise account all, of whose mutability or change there is no danger, as
admitting no possibility or prejudice by oppositions of contrary oppinions:
whence we must of necessity distinguish between the Certainety, the Stability,
the Strength or vigor of assent or adherence unto known truths. Certainty
arises from cleernes of apprehensio^: Stability from the immutability or
setlednes of the exact proportion betwixt the apprehensiue faculty and the
object on which the cleerenesse of apprehension is grounded. The Strength or
vigor of every Assent springs from the worth, or right valuation of the
object. For unto all truths alike clearly apprehended, our adherence is not
equal, but greater to such as are apprehended of greatest use or worth; albeit
the danger or possibility of dislike, or disproportion between the object and
the apprehensiue faculty be more, then is between it and other objects, the
clear apprehension of whose certain truth may much less affect the soul.

5. That the certainety of Assent does accrewe, partly from the certainety of
the object, but more immediately from our apprehension of it, is set down at
large in the first section of our first book: that the strength of our Assent,
or adherence unto supernatural objects, does naturally spring from a right
apprehension or estimate of their worth, was intimated in the second Section of
that Book, and will manifest its truth throughout this whole discourse: what
temper or disposition of the apprehensiue faculty is fittest for grounding the
stability of certain adherence unto divine truths, shall be generally showed
in the last section of this Book, more particularly in the several Articles,
wherinthe danger of dissent or dislike is greatest. Now seeing certainety is
the only sure ground of all stability, or strength in persuasions, without
which supposed to their beginnings, the greater they are the worse they prove
in their endings: the subject of the next inquiry is, what measure of
certainety or eui dence is required to the nature of that assent wherein
Christian faith consists.

CHAP. IIII. What correspondencie, evidence, and certainty hold in Assent or
persuasions: what measure of either, in respect of what objects, is necessarily
required to the constitution of that Assent wherein Christian faith consists.
1. ASsents (as all agree) are most properly differenced by the diverse measures
of their credibility, certainty, or perspicuity, whose growth in matters
secular is always equal. That the objects of our belief are all in
themselves most certain, were damnable to doubt. But whether unto the nature
of that Assent, whose differences or properties we seek, such exact certainty
be so necessarily required, that without it we cannot truly be said to have
Christian belief, is somewhat doutfull. Or if such certainty be so necessary,
the doubt is greater, whether the evidence must, or if it must, how possibly in
this life it can be thereto commensurable. But by apprehension or
representation there can be no belief or knowledge of any truth. And if we
seek all the differences or properties of apprehension or representation: what
any of them besides such clearenes or perspicuity, as satiates the passive
capacity of the apprehensiue faculty, should confer unto the certainty of
knowledge, or assent thence resulting, is inexplicable. Even the most Ad
probationemcum assumitur quod n^llus tenetur ^^^mius adhaerere conclusioni,
quam sit certitude no ti^ae propter qeam ill^^dherere^^ista posset concedi cum
aliqua condition, sci^. si ill^ teneatur adhaerere conclusioni praecise
propter certitudinem no^^^iae: vbi autem non subest dicta conditio, propositio
est simpliciter neganda: in proposito autem non subest quoniam non praecise
propter certitudinem aliquam notitiae (proprie loquendo) si^e conclusionis,
sieve princi^iorum, teneatur Catholicus adhaerere ^alibus Quini^^o quic quid
Chi^roponatur per Scripturam vel Ecclesiam, fore credendam, nulla alia notitia
habita credere tene^ur. Ad c^^^imat^on^m, cum dititur nullus credidit nisiquia
illud sibi constat; si loquatur de constantia notitiae ^^ls^m est^ si de
constantia adhaesionis, tunr etiam potest negari: quia aequiualet isti; Nullus
credit aliquod nisi quia credit illud: quae in sua proprietate non est vera.
Greg. Arim. in 1. Sent. did. 1. quaest 1. Act c. 4. The like imperfect
solution ^alentian has where he dispureth this question against the same
author Fran. de Mat. and Petir Abaylard or P^ripat: which held faith to be
assensus euidens.
acute amongst the Schoolmen, whiles they seek to clear this doubt, do but
faulter or tautologize; or finally confound the strength of adhaerence, which
arises from the worth or amiablenesse of the object, with the certainty of
persuasion or credence, which is the proper consequent of cleerenesse in
apprehension or representation.

2. If it be replied, that the certainty of our belief depends upon the
authorities of the teacher, the doubt still prosecutes the solution. For,
either must our apprehension of his skill and fidelity be clear and evident,
or else our persuasion of it remains uncertain, and our belief at the best
but conditionally certain: Notwithstanding it has been generally held in the
schools, that faith is no evident assent, because of objects not evident or
apparent, unto which tenent we did thus far in the beginning of this work
subscribe, that it was not directly evident: which opinion, whether it be true
of all, or of some principal objects of our faith, or how far of any, we are
now further to discuss.

3. The Romanist exacts a certainty of Assent in the belieuer more exact then
demonstratiue sciences afford, and yet makes divine revelations not only not
evident, but ineuident and obscure, the method of faith even a So Valentian
terms it whose words are cited in the appendix to the third book
labyrinth of obscurities. And for ought I can perceive, this obscurity in
respect of every Article is a like to all: even whiles the Assent becomes most
certain and infallible. Yet questionless, whether the immediate ground of our
Assent be evidence of truth in the object or some inferior degree of distinct
apprehension approaching thereto: the growth of certainety in the persuasion is
always turbulent and preposterous, unless the apprehension of truth in the
object grow more and more perspicuous, and so come nearer and nearer to the
nature of evidence properly so called. Every degree of certainty we get in
belief not thus grounded, is but a step to sorcery. For what is the Sorcerers
fault, but that he belieues those things most firmly, of whose truth he can
have no distinct apprehensions, but some pretenses of warrant from the
authority of scriptures, or practices of holy men therein recorded? This gross
error in compounding faith of obscurity, and exact certainty, is one especial
root of popery in grain, as else where I am to show. And this certainty of
persuasion which they thus enforce upon themselves, without proportional
increase of evidence or perspicuity apprehended in the object, has the same
proportion to lively faith, that stubborn foolehardinesse unto true valor.
Few of Jesuitical instruction but are as aduenturous, as most of Gods Saints
have been, were the causes they manage as good, their motives to undertake
them as evidently warrantable, or their intensions as sincerely sound. But the
Jesuit or his Catechist, nursing a conceit of obscurity in the object of
belief to ground a title unto merit, ( To this purpose they abuse a saying of
Gregory^ Fides non habet (...), cu^ humana r^^^ praebet experimentum: Which
notwithstanding he men^ of the incomprehensibility, no^ of the persp^cuity of
objects believed. ^is words at full are these. Diuina operatio si ratione
aprehendatut non est admirabil^^net ^ides habet mer^^^ etc. Greg. hem, 16. in
Euang. But of his opinion in this point we shall have fitter occasion when we
come to speak of merits.
for what reward were it worth to believe an evident truth?) out of the
stubbornenesse of his forced persuasions, or violent certainty meeting with
this veil of darkness, wherewith he purposely hoodwinks himself, runs
upon any mischief his Superiors shall design him unto, as stoutly and boldly
as blind Bayard rusheth into the battle: which way he should go he sees not,
he cares not, save only as his Rider spurs him, or rather as the devil drives
him; destitute of clear aim by the word of God, he desperately flies like an
instrument of battery, whither his living rule of faith shall level him,
though it be to ruinate the state wherein he was borne, or overthrow that
Church which gave him Christendom.

4. But a great deal more easy it is to discern the grossenes of error come
to full growth, then to discover the first root whence it springs, or assign
the original breach betwixt it and truth, commonly united in the same trunk,
like the two opposite branches of Pithagoras letter. As much as in reason can
be required of us will be to guess or give aim (as our custom is) grosso
modo, leaving the exact designation of that Mathematical point, or angle,
wherein truth and error in this present business are first divided, unto more
accurate eye-sights. Seeing Evidence, besides cleerenes or perspicuity
(directly and formally included in it prime and native signification)
collaterally draws with it a conceit of such plenary comprehension of the
object known, as fully satiates our desire of its knowledge: (for evident we
hardly account that knowledge which leaves the apprehensiue faculty capable of
further or better information then it already has from the particulars which
we desire to know) In the first place it may be questioned, whether that
apprehension we have in this life of objects supernatural, though never
coming to such full growth as may deserve the title of evidence, may not
ground a greater certainty the^ that we have of things les certain or credible
in themselves, yet evidently apprehended, or rather exactly comprehended,
according to the full measure of that certainty or credibility they have. For,
if certainty of Assent amount proportionably to the degrees of credibilitie
inherent in the object, distinctly apprehended by us; that Assent, whose
evidence is defective or imperfect in respect of its proper object (containing
as is supposed almost innumerable degrees of Veracity, Certainty, or
Credibilitie) may be more certa ne, then the most exact and evident knowledge
that can be had of other matters, the full measure of whose internal
certainty, or veracity, contains fewer degrees then we did apprehend in the
former. Of this assertion there could be no doubt, were the apprehension of
several degrees in both, a like clear and distinct: whence, of such as hold
the evidence of our Assent unto revelations divine, to be less then that we
give to humane sciences, many perhaps mean no more then this, that the
apprehension we have of them in this life is for evidence very imperfect, in
respect of that which may be had of them in the life to come: whereas the
evidence of some scientificall principles or conclusions (mathematical
especially) is already as great as it possibly can be. ^ Thus some opinions
seeming contrary, may perchance be reconciled with this distinction: our
assent to the truth of revelations divine is less, then that we give to
conclusions in humane sciences, if we compare either evidence, as it is found
in us, with the capacity of its proper object; yet altogether as great, if we
compare the several qualities, or degrees of evidences only betwixt
themselves. As 8 while it is compared with 7 is a greater number, because
consisting of more unities; and yet the Octonary number applied to nine, is
less then the Septenary applied to seven material numerables. Or, to
illustrate our purpose by a comparison more familiar and proper; If a man
should see the sun at mid day in a cloud, and the moon in her strength, or the
beams of the one in at his chamber window, and the body of the other directly
in its sphere: his sight of the Sun would be as evident as of the Moon;
although the Moon he could not possibly apprehend more evidently or more
directly, while his apprehension of the Sun, in respect of what it might be,
is both ways very imperfect. But thus, if we make an equal comparison, the
certainty likewise of our Assent unto supernatural objects, should in a
correspondent sense be said less or greater then the certainty we have of
humane sciences, because the objects of the one cannot possibly be better
known then they are, when as the knowledge of the other is not half so great
in this life, as it shall be, for the Apostle (who knew many divine mysteries,
more evidently then we do ought) says of himself as well as others, we know
but in part. Yet notwithstanding, this half knowledge of the one, may be more
great and certain then the whole knowledge of the other; if we compare them
only betwixt themselves, not with the internal capacity of their proper
objects, considered as credible or intelligible. Or if our apprehension of as
much as we know in the one, be not so clear as it is in the other, it may
further be questioned, whether the excessive multitude of parts apprehended in
it, though not so clearly, or the variety of motives procuring our assent,
though not so evident; may not, all taken together, be as forcible to support
as great certainty as arises from evidence in humane sciences fully
apprehended, more intensiue in it self, vet extensiuely not so great, as not
being grounded upon so many motiu^^ or degrees of internal certainty or
veracity in the object. Thus many pillars, though all somewhat declining, may
bear as great weight, as fewer exactly perpendicular; or many lights severally
taken, not splendent in the highest degree, may better illuminate a large
room, then one or two intensiuely much brighter.

5. Lastly, it were worth a sacred Critiques pains to observe, whether this
error that gives certainty the start so far of evidence, did not spring from
a confusion of that certainty which is in the object, with the certainty that
may be in the subject. It is true indeed, our Assent must be conformable to
the object; and therefore as is the one, so should the other be most exactly
certain: but, whether such exact certainty as may be had in humane sciences,
be not only necessary by way of duty or precept, or as the mark whereat all
must aim though few in this life can hit, but even unto the being of a
Christian; or whether an earnest desire of increasing our knowledge in matters
divine, joined with an unfeigned uniform practice of such duties* as faith
prescribes, be not sufficient at least to Aquinas and his followers g^^n^^ at
ve^^^a^es ^id^i sunt e^^den^er ^r^dib^^es. It y ^redio^^^y they mean ^o (...)
then probability as it is opposed to certain^^, their doctrine is dangerous:
for ^o they make articles o^ faith to be evidently uncertain. But if they take
credi^^^^ty, as it is common or indiff^^^n^ ^^ proba^^^^ty and ^ertai^^* ^*
^ropositions of faith may be (as we maintain) evidently certain unto some,
th^ugh but evidently probable unto others in their particularities.
many, albeit the certainty of their belief be not in it self so great as
their knowledge in some other matters, may in charity, and for the comfort of
weak consciences be doubted. Most certainly persuaded even the weakest
always must be, upon the highest terms of absolute nesessity, not to
relinquish the profession of Christianity, not to despair of good success,
not to be daunted in religious courses, for all the arguments the devil, the
world and flesh can oppose against them. But hereto we stand in our own
consciences most strictly bound, albeit the certainty of our assent unto divine
matters be less then demonstratiue or scientificall; seeing as well the danger
that may accrue by renouncing, as the hopes we conceive by continuing our
profession are infinitely greater, then any we can possibly imagine, should
arise from embracing contrary suggestions. It may well seem so far
sufficient as not to argue any nullity of Christian faith, if our Assent, upon
examination or trial, prove more certain then any conclusions can be brought
against it, which can never be demonstratiue, nor if well sifted, probable; and
yet retayning* firm adherence to the truths contained in the Apostles Creed,
and an undaunted resolution, to follow the prescripts of Gods word,
(notwithstanding all the blasts of temptations, or storms of persecutions the
wicked spirits or their agents can raise against us) we may be truly said to
hold fast the Faith, albeit our apprehension of the particular truths it
teaches, be not so evident, nor the grounds of our adherence to them, (to
speak properly) so certain as they are unto some Mathematical conclusions. For
what necessity is there faith should be more certain then such sciences, as
are more pressed to do her the best service they can, then any way to oppugn
her?

6. Or if from the excess of certainty, or fertility of consequences evidently
flowing from undoubted principles; these hand maids should plead for equal
interest with their mistress in our souls: to quell their insolences enough it
were, that besides the infinite reward, which we have reasons many and great
(though none absolutely evident or demo^stratiuely certain) to expect in the
life to comithe joy and comfort every Christian, in this life, may sensibly
reap from the constant embracements of trueths taught, or practice of duties
enjoined by the rule of faith, is much greater then all the delight we can
imagine should elsewhere grow. Nor does less certainety, or evidence of divine
truths in particular, any way prejudice, but rather advantage our firm Assent
or adherence to them, as long as their contemplation or practice evidently
affoords joy and comfort, more sincere and sweet then the most exact, most
certain, and evident knowledge that can be had of other subjects; especially
if this comfort they yield receive daily increase, as every Christian by
steadfast continuance in religious exercises may undoubtedly perceive. For, as I
said before, the strength of our adherence, or Assent, arises more properly
from the excessive worth of the object apprehended, then from the evidence of
apprehension. Thus by the divine providence it comes about, that every
Christian may ^itly take up the Apostles speech, but in another sense then he
meant it, When I am weak [in faith] then I am ^ 2. Cor. 12. v. 1.
strong. For though his Assent unto the articles of this Creed severally
considered, be much less evident and certain, then unto many other matters;
yet if the fruits of it be evidently greater for the quantity, and
incomparably more pleasant for the quality, the greater interest will their
love and admiration hereby gain in his soul. And who knows, whether he that
made the heart of man, best knowing how prone it is to be pu^t up with pride,
and ready upon sudden change of it wonted diet, (the beggarly rudiments of
this world) to surfeit with fullness of knowledge, though of heavenly mysteries,
does not, with purpose to alay their sweetness, only season the stream or
current of our desires, whilst weak and sickely, with some light tincture of
his graces; seldom infuling the water of the well of life into the fountain of
our corrupt affections, otherwise then by drops, whose soft instillations,
(during the time of our infancy in CHRIST,) bring forth such transient
apprehensions, or imperfect tastes, as rather breed a longing after the like
again, then any ways enable us to discern aright the nature and quality of
what is past; that so the love of these everlasting truths, never
comprehensible in this life, thus secretly kindling by degrees insensible in
our souls, might at length break forth into a flame, much more ardent and
durable, then if our apprehension at first acquaintance with them, had been as
evident, and certain, as our first Parents had of them in Paradise, or Lucifer
before his fall.

7. Thus granting evidence and certainty to live and die together like
Hippocrates twins, o^ rather the latter to follow the former as closely as
Jacob did Esau out of the womb; we may conclude, that as well the evidence, as
certainty of that Assent wherein Christian faith consists, is in some respects
less, in others This I take it is ^^o more then what the learned Hook^r, in a
Sermon upon the Prophet H^bak^^^ doubtful c^^tation (pa 3) has expres^d:
only we make that which he ca^s certainty of adheren^^ to have ^^^dence for
i^s ground, not of particulars, but of the general choice here mentioned H^
e^^ we ag^^^, that this certainty of ^dherence unto particulars arri^eth from
their worth o^ consequence?
as great as can be found in any science. Both, in many (at least) rightly
enjoying the name of Christians, are directly much less, whiles we compare
particulars with particulars; as belief of seu^rall Articles with Assent to
demonstratiue conclusions. The certainty notwithstanding, of this general
resolution [That all divine truths proposed in Scriptures, are most undoubtedly
to be embraced, though with opposition to all other professions,] is as great
as can be found in any scientificall conclusion, because manifestly grounded
upon evidence, as great as can be required in the undoubted maxims, or common
principles of exact sciences. For unto breasts inspired with such inward
comfort in this life, as may nurse hope of ^oies unspeakable in the life to
come; or unto consciences so wounded with the sting of sin, as thence to
conceive fearful expectation of horrible torments after death: the wisdom of
this choice [most firmly and constantly to adhere unto all divine truths
whatsoever, speculatiue or practique, particular or general, (though
apprehended directly in themselves neither as evident nor certain, but in some
high degree of probability) rather then to endanger the hopes of life, or
increase fears of death e^erlasting, either by open renouncing their
profession, or unconstant wavering between the practices they prescribe, and
the contrary which the world follows,] is most cl^^re and evident. In the
judgment of such as will not be partial for sensuality, against the evident
testimony of mere natural reason, the reiection of the former choice upon
such experience of uncouth ioies and terrors, includes more degrees of
extreme folly and desperate madness, then can be imagined of certainty in any
science, or of prudence in any other moral consultation. No heathen
Philosopher, though unwilling, because wanting all such experience, to renounce
his profession, but would have condemned him as more brutish then any beast,
that having such, would doubt to continue the former resolution. Now this
firmness or constancy of adherence unto divine truths in particular, thus
grounded upon an evident and certain appehension of true wisdom in the former
general choice, may serve as the first difference of that Assent, which is
necessary to the being, or constitution of a true Christian, which primarily
distinguishes him from an Hypocrite or worldling Whether more be not required
to full assurance of our actual state in grace, and favor of the sons of
God, is hereafter to be discussed.

CHAP. V. The sever all kinds of evidences whereof some are appliable unto
Faith in respect of certain Articles, others in respect of other: That the
certainty of Faith in respect of divine truths not evident, is grounded upon an
evident certainty of others: the properly naturally arising from this
difference of Assent, as it is of objects partly known and partly unknown.
1. THe Conclusion last inferred as I maintain not either against any lawful
authority that shall command, or learned divine that will instruct me to the
contrary; so, left herein to my Christian liberry, I would advise men of mine
own profession not to content themselves with such general evidence or
certainty; albeit perhaps sufficient to some of their flock honestly minded,
but dull in apprehension of particular divine truths. Wherefore, as well to
encourage such as are come thus far to go further, as to occasion the
learned to look more narrowly into these points; it will not be amiss to set
down the several kinds of evidence, and which of them may in this life be
had of points believed.

2. Evidence, according to the Etimologie of the Latin word, includes a
clear, distinct and full apprehension of objects present, and is most properly
applied to the objects of sight. Amongst them, such are most evident, as are
most visible, or apt to enforce their apprehension upon the eye: whence the
Sun of all visibles is held most evident: because such as cannot see it can
see nothing, and hardly canany sight be so distempered, as to be mistaken in
the apprehension of it.

Hence is this appellation translated to objects of the speculatiue
understanding, because that faculty has most affinity with sight. And with
reference to it, those things are said to be most evident that are of easiest
apprehension, or most apt to imprint their truth upon it. Such for the most
part are mathematical principles, common notions, or maxims, general to all
sciences. For scarcely can any distemper of body, or mind, phrenzy excepted,
work any distrust, whether the whole be not bigger then it part, whether all
right angles are equal, or whether ademption of equal portions from things
equal, leave not such equality betwixt them as it found. And in this sense it
will be impossible to assign any object of christian faith so universally
evident as these maxims are: for unto the mere natural man, most divine
t^uthes are distastefull, none so evident as to enforce their apprehension upon
his heart, until he be cured of his natural distemper.

3. But as light to the eye, so to every other sense the proper object within
just distance is most evident, albeit distemperance in them may more easily
breed either a dullness in the apprehension, or an error in the composition: as
cold in the head either obstructs or corrupts oursmel, albeit odoriferous
objects be present: bad humors either dead the taste, or by imprinting an
apprehension of themselves, make meats sweet and pleasant, seem bitter,
sower, or loathsome, according to the several, ungrateful noisome qualities,
which they communicate to the organ. Unto this last kind of evidence all
Assent to matters moral is more properly resembled; and upon this, such as
write of mystical Theology, for the most part ground their discourses.

4. Besides these sorts of evidences, arising from exact proportion betwixt the
passive capacities of particular senses, and the active force of the objects to
imprint their shapes upon them, an evidence there is of bodily impulsion or
motion; whereunto in the mind is answerable an evidence of instinct, or
working, always manifest in the effect, though the cause ofttimes be hidden or
doubtful. An evidence likewise there is of bodily strength, either passive to
sustain contrary force or violence, or active to repel it by opposing the
like. Proportional hereunto there is an evidence of conscience, upon just
examination always witnessing, either our strength, or weakness to resist
temptations; or our vigor, alacrity or dullness in doing of good. But this
kind of evidence belongs rather unto the trial of faith inherent, or our
persuasions of it after we have it, then unto the objects or grounds whence it
arises.

5. The Jesuit having defaced the image of his Creator, (as essentially good
as true) in his heart, and out of the relics of it erecting an Idol in his
brain to represent the visible Church or Pope; (both which he adores as gods
for their veracity, though not for sanctity) imagines no evidence possible in
matters divine, but merely speculatiue: and hence argues Faith to be an Assent
ineuident or obscure, because not evident: after the same manner Mathematical
theorems, or common natural notions are to the speculatiue understanding, or
the Sun, Moon, or Stars of the first magnitude to ordinary sights. As if
an Englishman, Dane or German, should conclude Italians, Frenchmen,
Spaniards, or generally all forreiners to be Blacke-moores, because not of the
same complexion they themselves are. The like looseness we find in some more
ancient Schoolemens collections, that the objects of faith are neither evident,
nor properly intelligible, but only credible, because neither of such
propositions, as every one that hears will approve, nor of evident deductions
from such. But the question is not of the universality or extent, but of the
intensiue perfection of evidence: and no man I think will deny, that many
Truths altogether unknown to most, may be as intensiuely evident to some
particular dispositions, as general maxims are to all. Otherwise S. Paul
should have had no exact evidence of special revelations made to him, no
Prophets of their cleerest visions, not CHRIST JESUS himself of his fathers
will, in whose bosom he was; seeing he did not make that enident to the Jews.
Every man's thoughts are as manifest to himself, as the principles of any
science, though he cannot so certainly manifest the one as the other to his
auditors. None of reformed Churches, I think did ever avouch, that he could
make the Articles of faith evident to all endued with natural reason: but that
the spirit of God, which first revealed and caused them to be written in
Characters visible unto all, cannot as evidently imprint them upon the hearts
of all his children, what reason have we to deny? Because faith is the argument
of things not seen?

6. A work it were worth his pains that is not fit for very great, nor
necessarily engaged to other good emploiments, to observe how many opinions,
which could never have been conceived but from a misconceit of Scriptures, have
been fastened to the Temple door, as more certain then Prophetical oracles.
First, by continual hammering of Schoolmen; afterward by instruction given
from the great Pastor to the Masters of Romish assemblies, which for the most
part do but riuet the nails the other had driven, or drive such faster as they
had entered, not without disturbance of their opposites. What a number of such
opinions, as the Trent Council ties our faith unto, as Articles necessary to
salvation, were in ages last past mere school points held pro, and con, by
the followers of diverse factio^s in that profession? And though these Trent
Fathers do not expressly teach us, that belief is an Assent ineuident and
obscure: yet does it bind us to believe it to be such as none ever would have
conceived, but from a mistaking of the Apostles words lately cited, which
notwithstanding he uttered not any ways to disparage the evidence, but rather
to set forth the excellency of that heavenly virtue. He supposed, as shall
hereafter be deduced, (nor does that learned Riber^.
Jesuit, which long ago had robbed the whole society of ingenuity, and buried
it with him in his grave, in his Commentaries upon that place dissent from us)
that faith is an assurance, or instrument, by which the sons of God attain
unto a kind of sight, or glimmering, but evident view of divine mysteries,
altogether as invisible, but more incredible to the natural man, then
Galilaeus supposed late discoueries to mere country men, utterly destitute of
all other helps, or means for discovering such appearances, besides the eyes
nature has given them. He that said faith is the argument of things unseen,
did never deny it to include an evident knowledge, or apprehension of some
things present, which the world sees not: yet such as he there describes, it is
to the regenerate only, or unto them whom God has given this heavenly treasure
as a pledge of his future favors. But regeneration, renewing of the inner man,
or fruits of the spirit are terms as unusual for the most part in their
schools, as their schoole-termes in common talk of the illiterate among us;
and yet before our regeneration, or participation of Gods spirit, we dispute
of the evidence or obscurity of faith, but as blind men may of the differences
betwixt day and night, not able to frame any distinct or proper conceit, truly
representing the face of either, though daily hearing lively discriptions of
both, or learned discourses about their natures or essential properties. But
when God begins to open our hearts, that we may see our natural misery; it is
with us as it was with such as being born blind were restored to sight by our
Savior, (as for illustrations sake we may suppose) in the beginning of some
dismal night some hours before the moons a^isall. At the first opening of
their eyes they might perceive an evident distinction betwixt the greatest
darkness inci-dent to night, by tempests, storms, or ouer-casting, and their
wonted blindness; an evident difference again between such darkness, and
light shortly after ensuing upon the remooual of clouds or apparition of
stars. And albeit they did hereafter expect a cleerer distinction betwixt
this time, and that which they had often heard others call the day; yet easy
it had been to have persuaded them the Moons appearance had brought the
morning with it, until the dawning had cleared the doubt: during which, as the
Sun did nearer and nearer approach, the distinction betwixt day and night
grew cleerer and cleerer. Evident it was now unto them that the Sun should in
time appear, although it self were yet unseen, whose actual apparition
could only terminate the former expectation, and leave no place for further
errot, the brightness of it being able so fully to satiate the capacity of the
visiue faculty, and so all sufficient for presenting other visibles as
distinctly and clearly as their hearts could desire to their view.

7. Though not of our outward senses, yet of the more excellent internal
faculties of our souls, all of us have a natural blindness from our birth:
which he alone cantake away, that gave bodily sight to such as had been shut up
in darkness from the womb. The first thing we apprehend directly and
evidently upon this change, is the difference betwixt the state of the sons
of darkness and the sons of light, and this appears greater and greater as
we become more conversant in the works of light; whence springs an eager
longing after that marvelous glory, which in the life to come shall be
revealed, whose apprehension, though in this present life distinct and evident
it cannot possibly be, yet from a clear and certain apprehension, first of
the prophets light, then of the day star shining in our hearts, it is evident
unto us that in due time revealed it shall be, as fully as our souls could
wish. Beloved (says Saint John. 3. 2.
John) now we are the sons of God; and yet it does not appear what we
shall be: but we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we
shall see him as he is.

8. Even unto this great Apostle, John. 1. 14.
that had seen the glory of Christ, as of the only begotten Son of God, the
joys which he certainly believed to be prepared for the godly, and of which
he steadfastly hoped to be partaker, were as yet unseen. But was either his
belief, or hope, for this reason, less evident then certain? Not unless we
make an unequal comparison or measure them partially, referring evidence to
one part or quality of the object believed or hoped, and certainety to another.
As well the manner, or the specificall quality, as the distinct measure of
those joys he believed, were uncertain, because not evident or
apprehensible. But that God had prepared such joys for his Saints, as no eye
had seen; such, as their conceit could not enter into the heart of man,
whilst inuail^d with this corruptible flesh, was most certain to him, because
most evident from their present pledge, that peace of conscience, which passes
al understanding, yet kept his heart and mind in knowledge and love of Christ
Jesus, being an infallible evidence of those joys which were not evident, the
sure ground of all his incomprehensible hopes. This clear apprehension of our
present estate we may call an evidence of spiritual welfare or internal
sense, directly answering to that natural evidence or certain knowledge men
have of their health, or hearty cheerfulness, when their spirits are lively
and their bodies strong, not disturbed with bad humors, their minds not
cumbred or disquieted with anxious carking thoughts. Of errors incident to the
intermediate state beetweene the sons of darkness, and the sons of light,
(if any such there be,) or to our first apprehensions of this change, and of
the means to avoid them, the Reader shall find somewhat in the two next
Sections of this Book, but more particularly in the Treatise Of the trial of
Faith, or Certainety of inherent grace. In this place we only suppose, as
there is no living creature endued with those animal spirits that quicken the
organs of bodily sense, but evidently feels pain or pleasure: so is there
none truly partaker of the Spirit of God, but has or may have an evident
feeling of this joy and grief of conscience; which is to other objects of
knowledge truly spiritual, as is the touch to the rest of our senses: yet may
we not think this feeling to be alike evident in all. For one living creature
excels another in apprehension of proper sensitive objects, all alike
evident in themselves, but so are not the senses, or apprehensiue faculties of
several creatures, alike nimble quick or strong.

9. But for mine own part, the opinion generally received amongst the school
men and other learned Clerks, that faith in respect of speculation or
discourse should be an Assent vneuident, has made me often to suspect my
dull capacity in matters of secular knowledge, Aristotle's Philosophy I had read
over, and yet could I hardly call any conclusion in it to mind, that might
with greater evidence be resolved into clear unquestionable principles, then
most effects or experiments, revolution of times afford, may be into the
disposition of a providence truly divine. And considering with my self how
grossly he should often fail, that would undertake to set forth a comment of
my inward thoughts, by observation of my outward actions, when as no alteration
of times, of persons, or places, ever swarued from the rules of Scripture: I
rest persuaded, that the same divine providence which guides the world, and
disposes all the actions of men, did set forth these everlasting comments
(which never change) of his own consultations or decrees concerning them.
Again acknowledging this eternal divine power, alike able to effect his will
and purpose by ordering the unruly wills of this presentage, though their
policies be of a contrary mould, to such as heretofore we have heard he has
defeated: the former inference as it seemed more religious, so more evident
then our adversaries make; when, from a supposition only of some infallible
authority in some present Church, they presently assume, it must reside in the
visible Romish Church representative: yet this collection they hold evident by
the habit of Theology, albeit they admit no discourse in Assent of Faith,
which is their second fundamental error in the doctrine of life, another
maine root of Romish witchery. For thus far at least all the Sons of God
make faith to be discursiue, that fom evident experience of Gods favors past,
or present, they always infer a certainetie of the like to ensue. To the
most of them in their distress it was evident deliverance should be sent them;
although the deliverance it self were not so, although they distinctly
apprehended not by what means, or in what manner it should be wrought. The
immutability of Gods decree concerning the salvation of his people, whether
general or particular, being as well known, as the stability of his covenant
for vicissitude of day and night, or other seasons: the godly even while they
were themselves beset with sorrow, and every where environed with calamity, or
saw the Church almost overwhelmed with universal deluges of affliction, might
resolve for the general, (that all in the end should turn unto their good,
that continued in faith and love to the Redeemer) as undoubtedly, as men at
midnight may gather that the Sun shall arise, though they know not in what
manner, whether under a cloud in a mist, beeset with vapors, or appearing in
his natural brightness. Thus (says the Psalmist) Psalm. 30 v. ^.
Heaviness may lodge with us for a night, but joy comes in the morning. Yea,
Ier. 31. v 35. 36
thus says the Lord, which gives the sun for a light to the day, and the
courses of the moon, and of the stars a light to the night, which breaks
the Sea when the waves thereof roar, his name is the Lord of Hoasts. If these
Ordinances depart out of my sight, then shall the seed of Israel cease from
being a nation before me for ever. Doubts again in other points, apprehended
and assented unto, though but conditionally, or imperfectly, yet by the habit
of Christian faith, are finally resolved into the article of the divine
providence, which is to most others, as undoubted principles to scientificall
conclusions; whence faith admits such discourse, or resolution as has been
mentioned in the former books.

10. A speculatiue evidence likewise there is, intensiuely as perfect as can be
expected in most demonstratiue sciences, (but infinitely more pleasant, though
we respect only the transient delight of actual contemplation) and extensiuely
no less, though not for facility of its apprehension, or number of persons to
whom it so appears; yet for the multitude of necessary inferences upon one and
the same subject, all which might appear most evident to all were not many of
us wilfully blind, slothful or careless, and yet discoursiue too, because
analitical; the resolution I mean of Evangelical testimonies into
Prophetical predictions, legal types or historical figures of the Messiah, as
in due place (by Gods assistance) shall be manifested. If any object, that
this resolution can be evident only upon supposition, (if the Scriptures of
the old Testament were from God) I must answer him, as the John ^
Parents of that blind man did the captious Jews, search them. For their
Characters, rightly taken, evidently signify their undoubted antiquity to be
greater, then any record he can bring of this distinct vicissitude betwixt day
and night, summer and winter, seed time and harvest, or other seasons; the
possibility of whose interruption in times past, may from some extraordinary
changes within our memory, be argued with greater probability, then any can
possibly be brought, why the books of holy scripture should be suspected for
new and counterfeit. And the antiquity of the old Testament being evident, the
admirable consonancie of it with the new, and multitude of manifest experiments
every kind, fully answerable to their rules, better ascertaines the truth of
Gods promises contained in them, then any induction natural reason can frame to
prove, either the vicissitude of times or seasons, or revolution of the
heavens, to have been since the beginning perpetual. The truth of which
conclusion, as of many others in Philosophy, for which great Artists think
they have demonstratiue reasons, I profess I much better believe, and more
evidently know from Gods covenant, to this purpose recorded in sacred writ,
then from all the writings of Philosophers, or any reason they or I can bring,
or our successors shall be able to find, although after us they study this
point till the foundations of the earth be shaken, the elements melt with heat,
and the heavens be gathered like a scrole. Yea further, to me it seems an
evident demonstration from the effect, that there is such a subtle Politician
as we call the Devil, which cunningly bewitcheth or blinds the eyes of men's
souls, or else with golden balls auerts them from looking unto those heavenly
mysteries, in that they seem either incredulous, or improbable unto such, as
can discern the truth of curious and abstruse conclusions in secular arts.

11. Lastly, of those Articles, which seem to flesh and blood (as is their
distinct apprehension even to Gods children in this life) most impossible, the
possibility is directly evident: That they shall actually be accomplished
depends upon resolution of promises made to us in Scripture, into his fidelity
that has promised; whereof we have evident and full assurance. The one rank
of especial marks, whereat these present meditations aim, shall be, to set
forth these several evidences in the articles whereto they properly belong; as
the evidence of possibility in the Articles of creation, and the resurrection
of our mortal bodies, the evidence of speculation in the Articles of the
Godhead, divine providence of Christ's incarnation, life, death, passion and
resurrection; the evidence likewise of internal sense, answering to touch or
taste, in the doctrine of Original sin and life everlasting. Not that Assent,
in respect of this object, can be evident to mortality, but that there may be a
clear distinct apprehension of such a disposition as has been mentioned, of
body and mind more then natural, inclining our souls with patience to expect
the accomplishment of those promises, concerning joys unspeakable in the world
to come; which though never formally represented, may notwithstanding, be fully
assented unto in this life as certainly future, from sure experiments of his
fidelity and ability that exhibited this present pledge or assurance: whether
the certainty of future matters, yet unseen or vndistinctly apprehended, can
possibly in this life be as great, as the evident certainty of their present
assurances; or whether delay or long expectation necessarily weaken faith, as
excess in length makes bodies of equal strength more easy to be broken then
if they were shorter; has a more fit place to be disputed in. The evidence of
Faith answerable to the evidence of bodily motion or impulsion, must be
reserved (as Artists do difficult problems) as an appendix to this work
finished: he that is desirous of information in this kind, may find rules not
altogether impertinent to this effect, in such as write of the trial of
spirits, or mystical Theology.

12. Here some happily will demand, whether this Assent we treat of, being of
things past, present and to come, or of things partly seen, and partly
unseen, be properly termed faith in respect of all, or some of these only?
For ought I have observed in Scripture, or from the common use of speech, the
name of faith is given to it especially in respect of things past or to come,
which are unseen: but this I dispute not. It suffices that the habit of
inherent grace, whereby we formally assent unto all the objects of Christian
faith, (whether they include a relation unto times present, past, or to come)
is one and the same, and may in part be defined, an Assent unto supernatural
truths revealed in Scriptures, firm in respect of all, directly evident only
in respect of some. Or if any will exclude evidence from the definition,
because not incident to those objects, with reference to which this habit
originally takes his name, let him say it is a firm infallible Assent unto
supernatural truths already past or hereafter to he manifested, grounded upon
an experimental evidence of others present, or upon a true knowledge of
scriptures divine truth, or such points as they teach, indefinitely considered,
without peculiar reference to this or that time.

13. From these discussions about the imperfect evidence or certainety of some,
the inexhaustible capacity of all, and the incomprehensiblenesse of the two
final ob^ects of Christian faith, life and death everlasting, the one
distinctly apprehended in its pledge or assurance, the other in its
presignifications; it may appear, the most native property of this Assent thus
far differenced, is admiration and horror. Admiration is properly of things
rare and excellent, known in part, but not comprehended, so as the more we
know, the more we desire to know of them. This affection it was which first
brought forth philosophy, according to the dunsticall proverb, propter
admiraricaeperunt homines philosophari: and as an excellent Philosopher tells
us, minds naturally disposed to admire things strange, secret o^ uncouth, are
the fittest for this study. Belike, want of this disposition in modern wits
has been the cause we have added so little to the invention of the ancient in
this noble science. Nor should I much deplore this defect in us, that have
given our names unto divinity, if the less we minded such problems as nature
propounds, the more earnestly we set our affections upon heavenly things, or
more faithfully employed our best faculties in discovering these celestial
objects, in themselves much more worthy of contemplation, as distinctly
apprehended in part; albeit the latitude, length and profundity of their
internal credibility, be infinitely more incomprehensible. In all which
respects they are more apt, as to begin, so to continue a longing after that
which is behind. But I know not how, the Philosophers fields look like
gardens, and the Paradise which we are set to dress, like an heath or
wilderness. The theoricall part of Theology becomes loathsome unto many,
being for the most part wholly attired in slouenly terms of triuiall Arts,
whiles the beauty of the practique is thought chiefly to consist in the
flourish of Scripture phrases, or embellishment of popular discourses, with
divine sentences, most admirable (I must confess) in themselves, but like
Scanderbegs sword in a weakelings arm, usually loosing their edge and
strength, whilst not managed by that affection or disposition from which they
sprung. Nor is it possible the Prophets flowers should retain their native
odor of life in our lips, without such influence from our hearts as they had
from theirs: Nor can our hearts be fitly qualified for this purpose, without a
deep and penetrant apprehension of what they have discovered, or new
discoueries of our own: without assiduous and accurate observation of that
heavenly order, exact proportion, and sweet aspect, which the several rows of
these plants of life, growing in this great nurserie of wonderment and
admiration, have each with other. He that thinks as much has been, as can be
said, concerning these divine mysteries, has doubtless forgotten who is their
author, and says in his heart, God is grown old, or the spirit weary of
teaching his children* Let us therefore as many as be or would be perfect, be
so minded as the Apostle was. Phil. 3 ver. 8 10. 11. etc.
Doubtless (says he) I think all things but loss for the excellent
knowledge sake of Christ Jesus my Lord: for whom I have counted all things
loss, and do judge them to be dung, that I might win Christ. That I may know
him and the virtue of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his afflictions,
and be made conformable unto his death. If by any means I might attain unto
the resurrection of the dead: not as though I had already attained unto it, or
were already perfect: but I follow if that I may comprehend that for whose sake
also I am comprehended of Christ Jesus. Brethren I count not my self to have
apprehended: but this one thing I do, forgetting those things which are
behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are before, I press toward
the mark for the price of the high calling of God in CHRIST JESUS. This
observation in this place I rather touch, because who list to examine shall
upon sure trial find, that admiration springing from calm and quiet
contemplation of harmony amongst these heavenly mysteries, will be as an armor
of proof to his most firm and best Assent, better enabling it to resist all
the fiery darts of Satan, especially to neglect the wanton allurements of the
flesh, or fairest proferres the world can make, then the strongest persuasions
he can enforce upon himself, by perpetual gazing upon that point whereat we
all hope to arrive; but from whose direct aspect it would argue no error
sometimes a little to deflect our course, to have our sails filled with these
sweet and gentle blasts, which may well stretch our hearts with joy, but never
puff them up with pride.

14. As for the contrary affection of horror and astonishment, arising from the
sting of conscience, imperfectly representing the unknown terrors of that
dreadful day, and casting our souls as it were into a spice or grudging of
that deadly scorching fever, wherewith the wicked and impenitent shall
everlastingly be tormented: the best course were to stop the progress of it by
subcracting the fuel. Yet seeing these our mortal bodies can never be free
from matter too much of this disease, it will not be much amiss for the best
of us to allot selected hours for the attentive hearing of such complaints, as
our own consciences upon just occasions will present unto us; or otherwise,
when none are offered to address our contemplations to take a perfect view of
that infernal region where no goodness grows, nor misery ever fad^s. No danger
can accrue from either practice, but rather great advantage to sinful souls,
if not possessed with prejudicial co^ceits of utter exclusion from that
eternal league of grace and peace, or of ab^olute damnation to that lake from
which is no redemption. But to what use the contemplation of hell torments may
serve Gods children, at the full (by Gods assistance) in the last Article of
this Creed.

CHAP. VI. The mutual affinity betwixt truth and goodness: the real
Identitie of the will and understanding: that the Assent of Faith cannot be so
appropriated to the one as to be excluded from the other: that admitting such a
difference betwixt them as true Philosophy may approve; faith in respect of
some objects must be atributed to the will, in respect of others to the
understanding: the original of difficulties in assenting to moral objects, or
of the natural man's backwardness to believe truths divine: what dependence
other Christian virtues have on faith: that to adhere unto divine revelations
as good, not simply considered only, but comparatively, or with opposition to
any other good, is altogether as essential to Faith righly Christian, as to
believe or acknowledge them for true.
Unto some not ill affected toward the truth we seek, perhaps the manner of
the search may seem injurious unto Christian faith, in that restraining it to
Assent, we may be thought to confine it wholly to the understanding, the
greatest glory of whose prerogative consists in reformation of the will; and
this a cure in some men's judgments, not dischargeable, but as it were by
personal residence in that part or faculty of the soul. And unto some great
Divines it seems improbable, if not impossible, that faith being no aggregated
accident, but one pure, immixt, simple quality, should have it seat in two
diverse subjects or mansions: for such they account the will and understanding;
because, as they suppose, two several parts or faculties of the reasonable
soul, really distinguished one from another. But in the Philosophy we have
learned, out of the best professors of that science hitherto it has been our
hap to light upon, the objected difficulty can have no place: rather this
erroneous imagination of such a distinction betwixt these faculties, has
plunged the maintainers of it in such foul inextricable errors, and driven
them to such miserable endless shifts in matters moral, and theological of
greatest consequence, as every intelligent man would abhor; nor need any be
put unto the like, that has more Philosophy then only to serve, as we say
from hand to mouth, or can bespeede themselves of as much as they have use for
elsewhere, and not take all upon trust from Aquinas or his followers.

2. Yet for the defendants of such a real distinction betwixt the w^ll and
understanding, it may be alleged that the one has Truth, the other Goodness
for its proper object, and diverse objects argue diversity of faculties: not
unless the objects be really distinct, rather opposite then subordinate, or
mutually included one within the other: Seeing as well colors as sounds,
smelles as tastes, are sensible; and yet it cannot be truly said that colors
are audible, sounds visible, tastes odoriferous, or odours tastable, we hence
rightly gather, that these four sensibles are apprehended by so many several
senses. But it is quite otherwise in Truth and Goodness: for if we grant, as
colors are of sight, or sounds of hearing, so truth to be the proper object of
the understanding; needs must that faculty be delighted therewith: and seeing
delight, (as all grant) is an essential branch of goodness, impossible it
were the understanding should delight in truth, save only in as much as truth
is good and pleasant.

3. Again, seeing entity and transcendent goodness are always of equal
growth, and not the meanest amongst creatures altogether inanimate, or mere
natural, but has a peculiar inclination to its proper good, whereof it has
no sense or apprehension: needs must the intellectiue and most noble faculty
of man be inclined to truth, in whose contemplation it so much joys, Sicut in
rebus inanimalis appetitus est incl^natio natuo^ in aliquid, and dicitur
appetitus naturalis, ita in natura intellectuali appetitus est est
inclinationaturae intellectual^s in quantum intellect u^ est, prop^erea omn^
actus vol^ntatis est inclinatio actualis ipsius naturae intellectualis: and
dare inclinationem a^^^alem tali naturae and inclinare voluntatem, p^^ eodem
accipiuntur Ferrain cap. 88. lib. 3. Aquin. contragentes.
Now what in natures inanimate we call a propension, or inclination in
creatures endued with knowledge is properly called an appetite, or desire. For
(as was observed before) it is al one, whether we say a sensitive creature has
an inclination* or appetite unto good: whence, if the understanding either
formally be, or include an inclination to truth, it must needs either formally
be it self, or necessarily include an appetite of the same: and this appetite
or desire either sensitive or rational, if but mere sensitue it is brutish,
if rational, it is essentially and formally a will. For even such as admit the
former distinction, cannot better define the will then by a rational appetite,
or inclination of the intellectiue nature. Thus it appears that goodness is
essentially contained in truth, and the will intrinsecally included in the
understanding. But more apparent is the like mutual enclosure of the
understanding in the will. For on what good soever that nature entitie or
faculty, we would have signified by the name of will, is or can be bent; needs
must it know it, or else move unto it as earth and stones do unto their proper
place: and all knowledge is, either an act of sense or understanding, if by the
mere sense the will know the good to which it tendes, it is but brutish, if by
understanding, to will either formally is, or essentially includes such an act
as we call Intellection.

4. The issue of these perspicuous and demonstratiue collections is, that this
Assent, whose differences we seek, cannot without evident contradiction be
appropriated to the understanding, and excluded from the will, or so attributed
to the will as to be excluded from the understanding. He that grants it to be
in the one, and denies it to be in the other, must affirm it to be in both,
and (...)y it to be in either: for the acts of both are so essentially linked
and combined, that we cannot express so much as any true conceit or notion of
the one, but by the other. Every choice essentially includes a will, every
approbation a choice, and every Assent an approbation. Yet what it is to
understand cannot better be notified, then by some of these acts, acknowledged
by all as essential to the will; as by an Assent or approbation of what we
apprehend as true, or more probable then the contrary. All truths we
understand are either simply necessary, or comparatively more probable then
such as may stand in competition with them. In our Assent to truths apprehended
as simply necessary, there is as formal a reiection of all incompatible
opinions whatsoever, as there is of a known evil in respect of an absolute
good. In every Assent again to truths more probable then others of the same
quality, there is as formal a choice of the one part, and as voluntary a
refusal of the other, as there is of greater good before a less of the same
kind: so, that every act men would seem to appropriate most to the
understanding, is properly, essentially, and formally, a volition or willing.
That such acts again as they appropriate to the will, and call volitions, are
essentially and formally intellections, is most evident. For if a man should
ask what it is to will, the answer could not be more formal and proper, then
to say it is to understand a thing as good, at the least as good unto the party
understanding* Ex hoc en^m quod Deus est int^lli^e^s, sequit^r quod si^ vo^ens*
C^^ enim bon^m intellectum sit propr^m ob^e(...)m ol^ntatis, oportet quod bonu^
intellectum, in quantu^ huiusmodi, sit volitum ^intellectum autem di citur ad
intel^igentem, necesse est igitur quod intelig^ns bonum, in qua^tum huiusmodi,
sit volens. Aquin. contra Gentes. lib. 1. cap. 72.
This is Aquinas own collection; Deus est intelligens bonum, ergo est volens:
God must be said to wilin that he understands good. The reason of this mutual
combination betwixt these acts is as clear, as the combination it self. For
there is no truth so merely intellectiue or contemplative, but essentially
ends in goodness, because it delights the contemplator. And even of
Mathematical Theoremes, wherein seems least appearance of any good; the more
certain, more useful, or fertile of evident, though mere speculatiue
consequences is held the better, and more delights the author or inuentor. Nor
is there any moral goodness so essentially practical, or opposite to
speculation, but essentially begins in truth: for to appear^ good only and
not to be truly such, is evil and not good. Briefly, Goodness is the
essential crown of truth, and Truth the essential ground of Goodness:
whence, if we will use accurate and scholastique terms, and ground our speech
upon the internal nature of the subject we speak of, not upon such
extrinsecall references it has to several objects, or denominations given
from them to it: every act of the intellectiue nature must of necessity be,
formerly and properly both a volition and intellection. Upon just reasons
therefore do we make belief an Assent, or inclination of the intellectiue
nature, not appropriating it either to the will or understanding: albeit such as
acknowledge a real distinction between them or their actts, should in reason
place it rather in the will, because the objects of it are rather moral then
merely speculatiue, nor can we ever understand them a right, but we must
understand them as good to us. But though so to understand any object be the
cleerest and best ^^ration, or definition, the most acute follower Aquinas
has, can give of will or volition: yet unto many not much addicted unto
either, it will, I doubt, seem a doctrine new and strange, that we should will
whatsoever we understand to be good to us.

5. But Truth (I hope) shall not be worse entertained by the ingenious and
courteous Reader, because a stranger. Rather then it should, it shall learn
the common language after some brief aduertisements for avoiding the errors
thence occasioned, or for discovering the original of the former unnecessary
distinction; which doubtless was for want of another, more needful betwixt
our intellection, or approbation of good, whilst simply considered in it
self; and whilst compared, either with some other more familiar good we must
forgo, or some evil which would befall us, if we should continue or
accomplish our former choice or approbation. For as a candle, though as truly
bright as visible, remains only visible, and rather obscure then bright, while
actually compared with the midday Sun: so our unwillingness to purchase the
good which we late approved, appearing most clear and evident from actual
refusal of it, and free choice of the contrary, when we come to examine the
terms or conditions upon which it is proffered, does quite ouershadow and
drown all former acts of our will, or desire to have it as simply considered,
and leaves only a conceit of it, as true, in the brain. Yet that both are
properly acts of the will or desires, is most apparent in matters of secular
use or commodity. For every man knows it is one thing to desire a commodity
simply, another to accept it at such a rate. A man's unwillingness to give five
hundred pound for a Farm, does not argue his unwillingness to have it gratis;
or if he perfectly knew another purchase to be as well worth a thousand, his
willingness would be the same to have it for five hundred, as to have the
former gratis. Thus many divine truths are in our first apprehensions assented
unto as good, and therefore truly willed whilst simply considered: which yet
we evidently refuse, or will, when we come to question about their price. And
this later act obliterating all impression of the former, we usually
appropriate that unto the understanding, though as much belonging unto the will.
For I never knew any so idle or dissolute but would diverse times wish he were
like some godly men, whom he will not imitate, and yet his wish to be like them
is as proper an act of the will, as his unwillingness to imitate them: this
later notwithstanding we usually appropriate to the will, though equally
appertaining to the understanding; would we make an equal comparison. In the
former we cannot but will divine truths simply, because simply considered we
understand them as good: in the later we do not therefore truly will them,
because we do not at the instant of choice apprehend or understand them as
good, being compared either with some entising sensual good, or much seared
evil, their prosecution would deprive us of* or procure us. For, as in the
Article of everlasting life, by Gods assistance shall be showed, it is
impossible the intellectiue nature should will, or choose a less good before a
greater, unless there be a defect in such acts as are confined unto the
understanding, even by such as distinguish it from the will: as, either the
representation of the good, in gross acknowledged for greater, is not formal,
distinct or clear; or because the approhension is dull, or the impression
weak. Here it contents me, that in this resolution I follow our Apostles form
of speech: Romans ^. ver: 18
To will (says he) is present with me, but I find no means to perform that
which is good. Thus he attributes the first act of the intellectiue nature,
whereby he assented unto divine truths contained in the law of God, as good
whilst simply considered unto the will: that afterward he effected not the
purchase of what he so willed or approved, he ascribes not to any peculiar
defect in the will, but to want of ability, arising partly from the strength
of sinful affection, partly from weakness or insufficiency of Assent, or
inclination of the mind, as it comprehends both the will and understanding.

6. But is there no difference between Truth and Goodness? no use of any
distinction betwixt the will and the understanding? Yes, we deny not all, but
had rather seek a true difference between the one couple, and a commodious
distinction between the other. Truth precisely considered includes a right
apprehension, or representation of the object, whether actual or possible. As
the representation of a winged horse, or Hippocentaure, or Chymera is false,
but of a winged Eagle true; because the Eagle actually is, the horse possibly
cannot be such. Although it were all one in respect of our ends, or purposes,
whether the Eagle had four feet without feathers, or the horse wings without
feet. Goodness, as in common use of speech it is made the peculiar object of
the will, besides the true representation of the object, or conformity of our
imagination to it, as having actual or possible being, includes a conueniencie
in respect of us, or oppertunity of furthering our desires. That properly is
good which is agreeable; that bad which is contrary, that indifferent which is
alike far from contrariety, or agreement to such affection as we have or
should have.

7. Notwithstanding this distinction, whilst we consider the whole latitude of
objects good and true: Truth and Goodness in moral matters fully apprehended,
are in a sort coinsident, altogether as inseperable as sound and melody are in
a pleasant consort to attentive ears within just distance. And as of sounds
perceived by one and the same ^are, some are dissonant, some consonant, some
neither one nor other to the internal harmony or constitution of our souls: so
of truths assented unto by one and the same intellectiue faculty, some are
pleasant, some distasteful, some indifferent in respect of our desires, or
moral purposes. Such as are either indifferent in their nature or essence, or
unto some certain point or degree of apprehension, we are said to apprehend or
conceive, as merely true. And this apprehension or conceit, we usually
appropriate to the understanding; not that it absolutely excludes every degree,
or branch of goodness, but all besides that immanent delight which flows
from the bare representation, or is comprised within the impression made upon
the apprehensiue faculty, never diffusing it self into any other part of the
soul, save only that which first entertaines and embraces the object, unapt
either by internal nature or imperfect apprehension to make any further
entrance. As the bare quality of light, though not accompanied with any other
visible ornaments, after long darkness pleases the eye: so does the mere
dispelling of ignorance (which is as blindness to the mind) or clear
manifestation of truths, how abstract and simple soever, if before obscure and
unknown, (...) the understanding, and therefore contain as many (...) of
goodness, as they quench of our natural thirst after knowledge. ^^ true it is
what was intimated before, that the most slender truth we can imagine is a
surface (not merely Mathematical, but Physical) of goodness: the greatest
good we can desire but a solidity of tru^^* Whence as truth and goodness are
one in that incomprehensible fountain from which they flow: so shall our
apprehensions of them, when we come to a distinct view thereof, be coincident.
For it includes a contradiction that we should apprehend the truth of that
object, in whose actual contemplation or apprehension consists the greatest
felicity out humane nature is capable of, otherwise then as the greatest good
conceiueable. Such is the glory of the Godhead, bodily dwelling, and
personally shining in the Man CHRIST JESUS. This is a truth so clear, so sweet
and solid, as will in the first moment of its distinct apprehension thoroughly
quench our extreme thirst after knowledge, and at once more fully satiate all
our desires, whether of truth or goodness, then the light of the Sun in his
strength does the appetite of sight. So strict is the clear union of his truth
and goodness, both infinite in him, and will fill every corner and angle of
our apprehensiue faculties, even whiles the sight thereof enlarges our
capacities to comprehend ten thousand times more then before they could. So
forcible again is the attractiue influence, thence diffused throughout our
souls, as will perfectly unite our most distracted appetites or inclinations
into one maine flame of desire to continue holy, as he is holy: we shall not
then say, This is profitable, That is pleasant, but yonder other truly good and
honest. For this sanctity, whereby we are made conformable to that Holy one,
and capable of his glorious presence, shall become all in all, as it were a
perfect unity of the former Trinity.

8. But in this life, from imperfection partly of the objects apprehended,
partly of our apprehension, we frame unto our selves distinct conceits, as of
profit, pleasure and honesty: so likewise of truth and goodness. That truly is
a moral good, and absolutely honest, which qualifies our souls for better
attaining that blessed sight of our Redeemer. To our nature taken in this life,
as it is, all that generally is good, and the complete object of man's
corrupted will; which, besides the delight directly arising from the
representation of its nature or possession of its right shape or resemblance,
inflames other parts of the soul with a desire of further union with it, or
more real fruition of it; and emploies our motive; or practique faculties for
bringing the match about. Rightly to apprehend or find out the true conceit,
or notion of Temperance, or that harmony of affections which is required to
this, or other moral virtues, does as much delight the soul, as contemplation
of those Mathematical proportions betwixt sounds, whence melody resultes. But
so to apprehend this virtue, as to take denominatio^ from its acquaintance,
includes further such a love and liking of this Idea, or image in the brain as
causes us submit all our affections to it, to addict our best abilities to the
service of it, and direct our actions to attain familiarity with so beautiful
and chaste a mistress as it represents. All moral knowledge, if it be perfect,
includes as great a delight in the exercise, or practice of duties subordinate,
or the internal sense of that consort or concordance the sensitive affections
have one with another and all with reason, as men usually take in the hearing
of melodious sounds. For practice or right composall of affections, being the
end (as the Philosopher teaches) of all moral discipline, knowledge in that
subject is imperfect, unless it bring forth good actions with joy. Whence a
mere contemplator of moralities, and a moralist differ, as if a Musician,
besides his skill to set a grave or pleasant lesson, should further out of the
honesty of his mind desire to hear it perpetually sung, or to have his
spirits always so composed as they are whilst external harmony works upon
them. But as a man either by dullness of hearing far distance or
intentiuenesse on other objects, may perceive the sound indistinctly, and yet
be nothing at all affected with the melody: so may he likewise, as most have an
imperfect or confused notion of moral doctrines as true, without delight in
their practice, never moved with that internal harmony of affections, which
is most sweet and pleasant to all such as have their wits at home, and their
minds attentive to such music.

9. That this sufferance of our imaginations to wander abroad, or fixing our
desires on foreign objects, does either altogether hinder the forcible
impressions of moral truths upon our souls, or work such disturbance in our
conceits, as great noises do in men intentive unto contemplations, needs no
further confirmation then every man's own experience. The reason is as plain
as the thing it self is true; for even our most abstract speculations or
apprehensions suppose an inclination of the soul, though this in some be
scarce sensible, because but weak, as the object is but slender, in others
much weakened, either for want of positive attention, or renitency of some
contrary inclination. The ground of this assertion we take as granted by all;
because, for ought we know, never denied by any: that whether the vegetative,
sensitive, and intellectiue faculties have their distinct souls or substances
for their several originals, or all spring from one; the inclinations of all
three are so united in one common center, that the intention of one does
always hinder the execution of what another intends, and diminish the native
force of the soul in all by dissipation or distraction* Thus intention of
mind (as hard students know) much weakens the digestive faculty, by this
means coming even with the belly, whose service most binders all true
devotion or contemplation. But more offensive are the contrary inclinations of
one and the same faculty, when they come to band directly one against another.
From this division of inclinations within us it is, that Mathematical truths
are easily assented unto by youth; which as the Arist. (...)* lib. 6. cap. ^
(...) enim tempus experie^^^^ facit, nam and hoc a^^quis (...) cur Mathematic^^
(...) at; lap^^Spand^^ si(...) non (...). A^ quod illa (...) eo (...), (...)
au^^Spand^^ experien^^^ (...).
Philosopher observes rather recite moral duties by rote then believe them,
because these in his phrase of speech are not known but by experience. And
seeing experience, as he elsewhere notes, arises from many memories of the
same object, all presupposing distinct apprehensions of its truth: Impossible
it is youth should either have experience, or true knowledge of moralities
until affection or passion be assuaged. Nor do these whilst unnurtured,
disenable young men only for action, or practice of what is good (as the same
Philosopher, or some for him may seem to say: Rather even this backwardness to
practice, they especially effect, by disenabling their apprehensions* For
knowledge, or perfect apprehension applied to these subjects we speak of;
besides, a representation of their logical truth, or correspondencie, includes
an impression of their esteem, upon that part wherein the affection is seated.
The want of disposition to receive such impression, or rather the temper most
opposite to it, is that, which in Scripture is called hardness of heart.

10. From these grounds of true Philosophy we may reduce the reasons, why the
natural man so hardly assents to matters of his own salvation, unto these two
heads. The one, because they are so directy opposite to the chief object of his
corrupt desires; the other, because these are so strong and deeply diffused
throughout the substance of our souls. For all affections set on matters
contrary to these we should affect, according to the degrees of their strength
more or less, either mussle or sheath the edge of our wits, that they cannot
pierce into truth or goodness, or weaken that intention of mind which should
(whether actiuely or passiuely) work the mutual penetration betwixt truths
proposed, and the apprehensiue faculty. Thus we see by experience, that men
prove most expert in those arts or sciences, whereto they are most inclined by
nature; and are, though otherways dull oft-times, very witty in that subject
whereon their desires are chiefly set, their conceits in others being usually
but foreign and borrowed from their delightful apprehensions of matters most
familiar. Our readiness again to believe whatsoever is pleasant to our nature,
or lies in the way to our especial purposes, plainly argues the backwardness
of our belief in divine mysteries, to be usually if not wholly, from natural
propensions to sensuality or secular contentment. And that the former unaptness
in youth, especially to perceive truths moral or theological, does not spring
from any inherent dullness in the Intellectiue faculty, were the motions of it
toward such points proposed free, and vnfettered, is evident, in that their
wits are in that age, for the most part sharpest, and able with ease to
perceive the truth of such Mathematical conclusions, as will hardly enter into
riper judgments: much less does this inconvenience spring from any faintness
in their endeavors, for their spirits are most lively; therefore only from the
abundance of affection or heat of passion, which secretly dissuade their
understandings from all acquaintance with such objects as are repugnant to
themselves. Eccles. 2 ver. 2
Of laughter (says the wise King) thou art mad, and of joy and pleasance
what is this thou do? Now these being the chief marks whereunto young men
stretch their wits, seldom have we seen any of that rank without
extraordinary education, to recover their right mind in matters pertaining to
God, until he bind them on their beds of sorrow, and scourge them with the
rods of affliction. But then they become more docile auditors of sacred lore
then men of mature age are; (unless formerly accustomed to penitency, or long
trained in the scholle of Christ) because the affections of youth, though more
violent in their motion, are not so stiff or stubborn in the habit, and young
men's hearts even because unconstant or less settled, are more apt to repent
then old men's are, oft-times hardened by affliction, through too much constancy
in their wonted courses. No man I think has either so much or little
acquaintance with sudden passions as to be ignorant, that their violence for
the time being, quite blinds the soul, in such matters, as at other times it
sees most clearly, and draws it oft-times to a liking of what it otherwise
has condemned. From which experience reason free from partiality will collect
that strength of habitual affection makes us incapable of divine knowledge,
partly by hindering the native cleerenesse of the apprehension, partly by
weakening the Assent or adherence to what we apprehend, partly by breeding an
obstruction in the soul, or by resisting the impression of such truths as
contradict and countersway them. For sudden or violent passions differ from
strong habitual affections or desires, but as actual motions do from
inclinations or propensions.

11 From these considerations we may gather, that the usual distinction
between the speculatiue and practique understanding and the will, ariserh not
from any diversity in the faculty, but only in the objects willed or
understood: For of them some have affinity or repugnancy to affections, or
propensions to their objects; and with referrence to these the intellectiue
nature is denominated practique, and is said to will or nill: These terms in
usual speech including always a competition betwixt several goodnesses
proposed. Others have neither affinity or repngnancy, at least directly with
any sensitive affection, a natural inclination, save only that contemplation
of the truth causes such a transcendent delight in the intellectiue nature, as
every convenient object does in its proper faculty: and in respect of these,
the understanding is denominated speculatiue. A scholar might make show of
curious skill in metaphisicall contemplations, as many years together, as
Scotus is said to have studied the natural motion of bodies, before any
practical wit or politician, did either envy or contradict him, unless it
were to make himself sport: whereas should he but defend some paradoxes of the
like subject in the Schools, or seem to know more of such matters then others
of his profession do, he should quickly perceive that he had stird a wasps
nest. Now as in the ciuell conversation abroad, or in public societies, a
man may profess skill, or insight in diverse matters without emulation or
corriualshippe, but shall be instantly crossed and thwarted, if he seem but
desirous of acquaintance of some others, or knowledge of the same truths in
different companies: so may our intellectiue faculty within this little world,
or domestic commonweal every one of us carries about with him, affect some
objects without check of any contrary desire or inclination; but others he
cannot so much as seriously think upon without ielousies, discontents,
reluctations, or distractions. The objects whose contemplations exasperate no
opposite propensio^s, either to obscure their apprehensions, retradate their
assent, or dull their impression, are matters most abstract from use of moral,
or religious life, especially the mathematiques, whereunto many Gentlemen are
happily therefore most addicted, because the most courteous studies they could
converse with. Their truth is certain, and their delight resulting from the
apprehension of it sincere, because not prejudiced by opposition of other
desires. Knowledge of general Theorems breeds a longing after more particular
corrolaries, or conclusions; which from the highest to the lowest, as little
control any ambitious thought or wanton purpose, as the most universal
principles in that faculty: So is it not in moral discipline, no not in the
most useful Poets or Historians: in which many things will often apply
themselves: and such as delight in the general, will be loath to diue too far
into particulars, least they find the pictures of their own passions or
resolutions truly taken, or such characters of their manners, as seem
ill-fauoured whiles they behold others, stigmatized or branded with them, All
truth notwithstanding is in it self delightful, even pabulum animae, the
souls food, as the heathen observed: and the knowledge of particulars rightly
detiued from the generals in every faculty, in it self most pleasant. But unto
distempered souls the apprehensions of such slender abstract truths, as
exasperate no internal humors, relish best: as does small drink or water to
sick, or aguish bodies; although the chief pleasure or profit either bring,
is only mitigation of present pain: But whiles we descend to particular
applications in moralities; obsequium amicos, adulation (which is but a branch
of falsehood) finds best entertainment: because corrupt affection would
apprehend its own praises true, and all true imputation false: veritas odium
parit, Truth is excluded as an unwelcome guest; because distasteful unto
sensual inbred humors or desires, which like wanton Strumpets having gotten
possession of the marriage bed, bring our souls out of love with such objects,
as they have been affianced unto by yielding full Assent unto the generalities,
whence they naturally and lineally descend. For even in matters practical, or
essentially moral, the vniuersalls may be ranked amongst the objects
speculatiue, and be referred to the understanding, though their particulars
belong more properly to the will.

12. Hence if it be demanded whether this Assent of faith do especially belong
to the speculatiue or practique understanding, or unto the will (supposing the
use of this distinction late specified:) the demand, if general, is captious.
For in respect of some objects it may be referred to the will, in respect of
others to the understanding, or in respect of the generals to the one, in
respect of the particulars to the other. As our Assent unto the Article of
creation and resurrection scarce admits any positive repugnancie of affection,
or inbred desire; the only cause of men's distrust to them is a mere natural
imperfection of the understanding, or a speculatiue error springing from broken
and impertinent inductions, as shall hereafter be declared. But our Assent unto
the Articles of the last judgment and eternal life, with the particulars
concerning Christ's death and passion, is usually assaulted by opposite
affections. So when S. Paul reasoned of righteousness, temperance, and
judgment to come; Felix trembled and answered; Acts 24, ver, 25
Go thy way for this time, when I have a convenient season I will call for
thee: the reason of this resolution is plain: For if the root of this former
distinction be properly in the object only, not in the faculty; we cannot
absolutely ascribe faith so to the speculatiue as to exclude it from the
practique understanding, or so to the understanding at al, as to bereave the
will of its presence; seeing all these make but one faculty: But well may one
and the same habit, or it acts though all seated in one and the same
individual or indivisible faculty receive diverse denominations from references
unto objects of different nature. This imagination of plurality in causes or
faculties, occasioned only from extrinsecall denominations, given unto them
from diversities proper only to their objects or effects (as we often mistake
in thinking bodies to be in the place of their appearance,) is such a
transcendent perpetual error, as he that will take warning of it in his younger
days, may in contemplations moral, natural, or theological, have immediate
and free access to truth, into whose presence others seldom are admitted, but
after long windings and turnings by unnecessary distinctions or divisions, and
yet after all scarce ever see her but masked in terms of art.

13. But even in matters either by nature so abstract, or otherwise so
general, that our apprehension of them, or Assent unto them cannot be directly
hindered by any contrary natural inclinations, we may often find great
encumbrances from indirect or accidental oppositions. Thus desire of glory, or
hope of victory in scholastique encounters, moves men often to disclaim the
truth which others have found out, or well illustrated; whereunto
notwithstanding they would quickly yield their firm Assent, might the glory
of the invention be reputed theirs, or were it no prejudice to their high
esteem of their own wits to learn of others. For this reason I have known
of good scholars, some out of iealousies least their discoueries should be
published in another name, some out of charity refrain discourse, amongst
such as too much delight or glory in that faculty, for the most part so willing
to contradict others observations, that a man can hardly put forth a truth
before them without danger of thrusting them into the opposite error. Surely
neither was it desire of gain nor love of pleasure, nor any other carnal
affection besides this foolish hope of vainglory or delight arising from
curiosity of speculation, that of late has tempted some to misbelief in the
Article of the blessed Trinity. The admirable unity of perpetual Assent, to
which great mystery, amongst such bitter dissentions as are this day maintained
by diverse Churches in most other points of Christian says: I have ever more
ascribed to want of direct oppositions, unto any carnal affection or resolution
much beneficial to the chief managers of affairs through Christendom; then
unto positive devotion or true fear and reverence of that great majesty, which
all have so long professed to be one in Three. For, did this unanimous consent
in that graund mystery amongst parties otherwise discordant, spring from these
lively roots of true religion; all sorts would be afraid so grievously to
dishonor his name by other heresies, and such unchristian resolutions, as to
maintain with profession of allegiance unto Christ is worse, then once for all
to renounce him. Could the abridgement of honor, due either to the Son or
holy Ghost, have brought as great revenues to the Papacy, as toleration of
stews, or filthy practice of Indulgences: the acknowledgement of either person
as God, had been held long since a sin more grievous then fornication,
adultery, oridolatrie. Even we of reformed Churches, as many as sincerely adore
that glorious Unity in the power of Majesty, have just cause to sing daily
praises to Him; that the profession of three persons in one Deity was not so
grievous an e^esore to some great Statesmen, or Politicians, as three Abbeys
or Deaneries in one shire: otherwise the heavenly doctrine of the blessed
Trinity had been at this day as offensive, as that Tithes are due unto the
sons of Leui, iure Diuino, or by right more sovereign then to be counter
checked by any decree or law sinful man can devise. But unto me (as to our
Apostle) it ever has bin and ever shall be matter of joy and consolation, that
the doctrine of Christ and of his Gospel, whether of pretense, or sincerely is
every way maintained, though by the poverty and affliction of his true
disciples. For unless hope of worldly gain, or other respects had moved
Christian Princes, and their Statesmen, to shake off the yoke of Romish civil
tyranny: never had her blasphemous positions been publicly held in such
detestation, as now they are. Whence, hardly could any doctrine of devils have
been distasteful to our distempered souls, which had unaware sucked deadly
poison with our first nurses milk. If Princes again or Potentates, had not
held the doctrine of the Trinity as an ancient religious custom, no way
prejudicial, but rather aduantagious to their states, and therefore
religiously to be observed: either discontented Prelates crossed in their
ambitious hopes of honor, or such curious contemplators as hold civil honor
in contempt, out of vainglorious affectation of fame amongst posterity, by new
inventions had wrought the mayor part of Christendom to their faction, so as
Arrianisme or some worse heresy, had long ere this been established by
national constitutions.

14 The necessity of these collections depends upon the unquestionable truth
of this maxim, which in the sequel will manifest it self: that carnal
desires, or resolutions of equal strength are always a like forcible to
weaken, alter or inuert our Assent to any one point of belief, as to another,
if the opposition be a like direct; and our belief is of it self soonest
misled, or infeebled in matters most remote from light of nature, as is the
Article of the Trinity. This observation of diverse conjunctions, or
oppositions betwixt men's carnal affections and several points of belief, is
the chief part of Satan's astrology; whereby he forecasts the fall of most in
sundry ages, by means in show most contrary, in issue the same. Read Sect. 2
chap. 2. 3. 4
By this skill he brings his matters so about, that the greater part of mankind
in latter days, in their own conceit lovingly embrace Christianity upon the
same grounds or motives, that disposed the heathen so bitterly to oppugn it:
eleuating the one as high in hypocrisy or Pharisaicall persuasions of their
misgrounded faith, as he depressed the other in infidelity or malignancie to
the Gospel. It is a rule again as clear and indeficient, that either
habitual neglect of particular duties enioined, or indulgent practice of evil
forbidden by Gods word, do as evidently euince want of true faith in professed
Christians; as oppugnation of the whole frame of Christianity does in infidels,
or of some principal parts in Arch*heretiques. Difference there is betwixt
them, none in the internal constitution of the mind, only the doctrine of
faith by alteration of times, public constitutions, or references to some
private ends, gets a conjunction with the ones predominant carnal affections,
retaining opposition with the others.. The reason of both assertions is
perspicuous to the intelligent: for seeing supernatural objects compared with
others, exceed them further in worth then in certainty or credibility; we must
if rightly, both certainly and firmly Assent unto them, not only as truer then
any arguments can be brought against them, but as much better then any profit,
pleasure, or other good, the world, flesh or devil can profer unto us. Both
parts of this certain and firm Assent must be universal in respect of the
object, and perpetual in respect of time: for as he is not to be held an
orthodoxal professor that acknowledges the speculatiue, or general divine
truth of all the Articles in his Creed, or matters proposed by the word of God,
whiles none gaine-sayes, but doubts or recants while the adversary oppugnes
them: so is he not to be reputed a sincere faithful christian, but rather
tainted with hypocrisy that assents unto the goodness of divine precepts whiles
temptations are far off; but disesteems them in the choice, whiles they come in
competition with sensual pleasure, worldly goods, civil honor, estimation or
the like. And if we could persuade our selves to a liking of scripture phrase,
which doubtless has a more fresh and lively form of wholesome doctrine then
Aquinas sums, or his followers disputes: this Assent unto divine matters,
(especially such as peculiarly concern man's saiuation), as perpetually good,
is a more essential part of Christian faith, then the acknowledgement of their
truth, which is a difference proper to an orthodoxall professor of
Christianity, but remote to a faithful man or true Christian as he is
distinct, not only from Infidels or Heretics, but from Libertines or
Hippocrites. Thus defect in practice is censured by the spirit of God for
unfaithfulness, albeit every omission of good, or commission of evil does not
convince the delinquent of absolute infidelity; nor is every intemperate, or
incontinent act, a just imputation of incontinencie, or intemperancy. But as
every partial defect is a degree, or portion of unfaithfulness: so if the
delinquencie be habitual without remorse, or joined with indulgence, it truly
denominates the delinquent an Infidel in his sight that knows his heart. So
the Psalmist usually styles the wicked and obstinate Israelites, by the name of
Heathens; albeit they renounced not the profession of the true God.

15. Our usual appropriating this delinquency (whether habitual, or by
intermission actual,) unto a peruersity or untowardness of the will; as if it
did not necessarily argue a correspondent defect, or weakness of that Assent
which we call faith, and most suppose to be placed in the understanding only:
may hence appear to be a soleeisme of the Romish language, in that to the
redress of this enormity, no peculiar reformation of the will, or other
intellectiue faculty we can imagine distinct from the understanding is
required, sole fortification of the former Assent, in what part of the soul
soever it be seated, or abatement of the contrary desire or inclination,
inherent for the most part in the sensitive faculty will suffice. Yet it may
be, such as first used this dialect, now much abused by the Papacy, did take
the will in such a general or catachresticall sense as Saint Interest autem
qualis sit voluntas bominis, quia si peruersa est, peruersos habebit hos motus:
si autem recta est non solum inculpabiles, veru^ etiam laudabiles erunt.
Voluntas est, quippe in omnilus: uno omnes nihil aliud quam voluntates sunt.
Nam quid est cupiditas and laetitia, nisi voluntas in eorum consensionem* qu^
volumus? Et quid est metus atque tristitia, nisi voluntas in dissentionem ab
his quae nolumus. Aug. de ciuitate Dei cap. 6. lib. 14
Augustine does; where under this name he comprehends not only the
inclination rational or intellectual unto good, but every appetite, desire or
motion of the inferior or sensitive part, whose reformation is in part
presupposed as necessary, but principally consequent to true Christian faith,
whose first office, ere it self be perfect is to subdue affections, or keep
them under from doing evil, afterward to use them as instruments in doing any
good the word of God shall commend unto us. Whence it may be questioned,
whether this Assent should not belong unto the sensitive faculty; in which the
Philosopher (for the reason late alleged) has placed moral virtue, not
altogether incongruously to his speculatiue positions. For, if the efficacy of
agents, or term of their actions be in the Patient: moral virtue, consisting
especially in the modulation of sensitive desires, or affections unto reason,
may well be referred unto that part of the soul, wherein affections are
placed, which in respect of the intellectiue faculty is patient. Or perhaps to
speak more properly, and reconcile Aristotle with his master Plato: moral
virtue may consist partly of a directly or commanding power in the
understanding, partly of a submissiue obedience, or right mixture of our
sensitive desires or affections. Or lastly, seeing in true Philosophy the
faculties sensitive, and intellectiue are but branches of one and the same
soul; or at the most, but two parts of that complete form, which
distinguishes a Man from creatures inanimate, and takes from him life, sense
and reason all at once by it departure: this Assent of faith being such as we
have said, may most commodiously be placed in the common center, wherein
sensitive and intellectiue inclinations concur, See 3. chap. 5
whence it may easiliest command the motions of both, and diffuse it force and
virtue throughout the whole substance, and every faculty of the humane soul.

16. If the Reader be desirous to have the definition of faith, or that part of
it which naturally arises from this discourse, comprehended as the school
fashion is in two words; he shall not much mistake if he term it a spiritual
prudence; which includes as much as an Assent of the inteliectiue faculty, able
to ouersway and moderate the sensitive, or generally all humane affections or
inclinations. The Romanists conceit that Christian charity should inform true
lively faith, is as preposterous, as if we should say, the affection does
inform the understanding, or virtues moral the intellectual; or if we speak
of the love we bear to God, the analogy of speech is no better, then if we
should say the grateful memory of pleasant objects informs See cha. 10 1 and
chap. 11 7
the faculty that perceiues them. In what part of the soul soever this Queen
of virtues lodge, it has the same command over our affections, or practique
powers that sense or appetite has over the progressiue faculty, which nature
has given to sensitive creatures for accomplishme^t of their necessary
desires. That our Christian virtue should physically inform another, is a
conceit altogether dunsticall, and now disclaimed in the explication of the old
school maxim, wherein without Jesuitical comments, no man but would think it
were literally and necessarily included. That Faith morally informs, directs
and commands charity as a guide appointed to it by him that is the author of
both; neither of them consulted by him that has them, will deny. Albeit, if
lawful it be to enstamp matters sacred with the exact form of scholastique
speech, it is (perhaps) but one and the same spiritual grace which animates
and enables the soul, as to discern the truth, so to embrace the goodness of
revelations divine, and constantly to practice all kinds of Christian duties;
bearing diverse titles from execution of several offices, whiles it inspires
diverse faculties of the same soul, as one and the same breath has different
sounds in the several pipes of the same organes, or other wind instrument. As
it illuminates the mind, or sovereign part of the rational soul, it is
termed faith, as it moderates every particular affection or desire, it takes
the name of the virtue peculiarly appointed to that This grace notwithstanding
is first in the intellectiue faculty^ and thence diffused into others,
(ordinarily by the operation of faith) nor can the inferior faculties be
brought in subjection to the spirit, until they touched by the same grace
which illuminates the mind. Fides lampas est quia sicut lampas illuminat domum
i(...)des animum, C^^^so^t super Math. 25.
charge, making it of merely moral truly Christian. Unto Parents, kinsfolk,
acquaintance, benefactors, or such as well deserve of them, most men naturally
are well affected, unto all as men we owe humanity, and this affection being
made conformable, and subordinate to the directions of lively faith, becomes
christian charity. But ere it become such the same grace, which as it
illuminates the mind to see, and strengthens it to embrace divine truths
proposed, is termed faith, does alter the quality of this affection, by
purging it from carnal respect of persons, or private purposes, is termed
faith, does alter the quality of this affection, by purging it from carnal
respect of persons, or private purposes, by enapting it to be ruled by faith,
which fixes it only upon such objects as Gods word commends, and in that
degree it prescribes. Though before we did affect others upon such motives as
flesh and blood suggested; yet afterward we must know no man so, but all our
love is in the Lord. And though faith teach us to enlarge our benignity, or
good mind toward all, as well foes as friends; yet it fixes it especially on
such as we deem nearest allied unto our Redeemer, albeit their personal
deserts, or references toward us be not so great. In like sort does one and
the same grace perhaps (for the manner) physically, but faith morally inform,
and moderates every affection, disposition or inclination, that can be matter
or rudiment of virtue. It perfects our notions of equity and justice; it ripens
and sublimates our seeds of temperance of valor, of liberality. For all these
or other virtues, are in a higher degree in minds endued with faith, then in
such as are destitute of it, and principally set upon such objects, as the
natural man could not affect. But because love thus informed by grace, and
directed or touched by faith, of all christian virtues most resembles the
disposition of our Lord and Savior; and if in this life it could be perfect,
would fulfill, at least the second part of the law, if we compare it and
faith, as they are parts of our imperfect righteousness, charity within its
own proper sphere is intensiuely the greater, or higher in this edifice, as
being supported and held vpby faith: but because our righteousness is in it
self imperfect, and our charity toward others unable to withstand Satan's
malice against us, without external muniments, procured not by the merits of
it, but by faithful prayers and supplications: therefore, as Christ is Alpha
and Omega, so is faith the first of al christian virtues in plantation and the
last we must in this life rely upon, for retaining vnio^ with this author and
finisher of faith CHRIST JESUS. Briefly, as he is to all the faithful, so is
faith to all other virtues in this life, a transcendent foundation and
complement. It remains we show, first the truth of our maine conclusion by
instances of sacred writ, or such practices as it ascribes to faith: Secondly
the philosophical premises, whence we infer it to be most consonant to the
phrase of Gods spirit, which often teaches us more true philosophy in one
word, then Philosophers do in large volums. The conclusion is, [we are then
said rightly to believe matters of our own salvation, when we Assent unto them
as good, as necessary and worthy to be embraced, not only whilst considered in
themselves, or in general, or without such encumbrances or occurrents, as do
often interpose or hinder their practice: but even whilst actually compared
with present loss of any sensual good, or infliction of any transitory evil,
the world, devil or flesh can oppose to raise their price.]

17. Such must this Assent be in the habit, or constant resolution, though
often defective in the act upon disaduantages espied by Satan. But every such
defect we must account a dangerous sin (especially if we have any distinct
notice of actual competition between carnal and spiritual good): for this
preposterous choice is properly not of faith, but rather directly against the
very nature of it, as it is now defined to be an Assent unto the means of man's
salvation, as much better th^n any temporal good

CHAP. VII. Illustrating and confirming the conclusion last inferred by
practices, properly ascribed to faith in Scripture, as well Canonical as
Apochriphall: of hypocrisy and the contrary progress observed by it and
Christian faith.
1. YE have need of patience (says the Apostle) that Heb. 10. 36, 37
after ye have done the will of God ye might receive the promise. For yet a
little while and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry. Now the
Just shall live by faith: but if any man drawebacke, my soul shall have no
pleasure in him. The manner how we live by Faith, wherein that great
controversy betwixt and the Romanists consists; Saint Paul in this place
handles not, as elsewhere he does, and we from his principles hereafter must,
according to the measure of abilities bestowed upon us. Here it shall suffice
to trace out his footsteps in unfolding that faith, by which the just does
live; and whereby, he that rightly hopes to live, must in some measure be made
just. That this withdrawing, whose distaste unto our God is here intimated, is
a defect in faith none (I* presume) upon better examination will deny. Not that
it argues a total apostacy from christianity, or hostile revolt unto the
adversary; but only a disesteeme, or vnderualuation of those gracious promises,
whose accomplishment must with patience be expected, whiles their future
goodness comes in actual competition with such grievous bodily afflictions,
which every Christian did then expose, and as it were bend himself unto by
profession of the truth. Such were the conditions of those times, that if their
hopes had been confined to this life, Christians of all the sons of men had
been most miserable. And conceit of extreme misery, without sure hope of
redress, can have no fellowship with patience: it admits no consolation*
Whiles they looked only on things which were seen, they might descrie an army
of enemies, as many creatures almost as are visible planted against them; and
must have cried out with the Prophets servant unto this great Teacher of the
Gentiles: 2. Kings 6, 15
Alas Master what shall we do? by his own practice he instructs them, not to
look on things which are seen; for they are temporal: but on the things that
are not seen, for they are eternal. 2. Cor. 4, 1^
Faith (as he adds) is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of
things not seen. This lower hemisphere, or visible part of the world is but as
the devils chesse-board; wherein hardly can our souls move back, or forth,
but he sets out one creature or other to attach them; nor have we any other
means to avoid his subtilty, but by looking unto the hills when^e comes our
help; or into that part of this great sphere which is altogether hid from the
worlds eyes, 2. Kings 6. 15
where we may behold more for us, then those that be against us. And seeing we
come in danger of Satan's check, either by fear, causing our souls to draw
back, or love of some worldly creatures alluring them beyond the lists they
are to combat in: if we view that host of heavenly soldiers which are for
us, we may always have one of the same rank more potent to remove all fear,
or diminish the love of any visible creature, or other encumbrance which Satan
can propose unto us, and which unless we be negligent in our affairs may, as
we say give our Antagonist the check-ma^e. If he tempt us unto wantonness, by
presenting entising looks of amiable, but earthly countenances to our sight:
we have sure hopes of being as the Angels of God, and consorts of the glorious
unspotted Lamb, to encourage us unto chastity. If with pleasantness or
commodiousnesse of our present habitations, he seek to detain us from the
place of our appointed residence, or discharge of necessary duties: we have the
beauty of the new Jerusalem, to ravish our thoughts with a longing after it, to
cause us choose the readiest way that leads unto it, rather then take up our
rest in Princely palaces. If with honor he go about to entrappe us, or
terrefie us with worldly disgrace: we may contemn^^he one by looking upon that
shame, and confusion of face, wherewith the wicked, though in this life most
honorable, shall be covered in the day of vengeance, and loath the other, by
fixing the eyes of our faith, upon that glorious promise made to all the
faithful, Math. 5. 34
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you. If
syrants by his instigation threaten us with fear of death, which is the utmost
of their despite: Faith sets another before our eyes, whom we must fear more
then such as can only kill the body; If with sickness and languishment, we
may by Faith feel the inward man daily grow as the outward man decaies.
Finally, let him assault us what way he can, the affliction can be but light
and for a moment, in comparison of that excellent and eternal weight of glory,
which we hope shall be revealed; of which hope Faith is the only substance.
These are the roots of reformation in life or manners, whose several branches
will spread themselves more at large in the Article of everlasting life. Here
it more concerns to confirm, and illustrate our former inferences, by sacred
rules and instances subordinate to the late description of Faith.

2. That Faith is appointed as Guide, and General to all Christian virtues,
ordering and marshalling every affection as is fittest for Gods service, is
implied in these speeches of the Apostle; Heb. 11. 2
By it the Elders obtained a good report, Verse 6.
without it, impossible it is to please God. As the success of resolute
soldiers valor, is the generals praise; so is the effect of every other
work, or commendable quality here ascribed to Faith as their director or
chief commander. Had it been possible unto them (or were it so yet to us)
without faith to make, or prosecute a choice of true good, or settle our
desires aright; no doubt our works, though imperfectly, yet truly conformable
unto Christ's, should for his sake be acceptable unto his Father, who is so well
pleased in him, that for him he cannot but be pleased with all that are, in
what degree soever truly like him. The fundamental act, or radical
qualification of Faith for the formal general service, is the steadfast
acknowledgements of Gods Being and Bounty. For he that comes to God must
believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek
him. This is a transcendent maxim, wherein truth and goodness are so
apparently coincident, that to Assent unto it as true, and not as good to the
party assenting, implies an evident contradiction. For if the rule of strict
justice be observed, the hire must be as worthy the labor, as the labourer
the hire. But where reward is properly an act of bounty, or liberality, it must
exceed the worth of any pains undertaken for obtaining it. And being such,
once proposed it instantly allures the mind to motion, or resolution to
attempt the means, that may procure it: if it be apprehended as sure, and
easy to be achieved as it is great: Will, or desire in this case commonly
out-starts the understanding as men in thirst swallow their drink, before they
perfectly discern the taste. Now as we say there is no service to the service
of a King, so is there no reward to the reward of the Almighty: and therefore
no works so faithfully to be performed, as his. For, as shall hereafter
better appear, even that Faith by which we live, must be concurrent by an
uniform force, or strength in every work that is truly good; for such it is
not if not faithfully done. Nor can the truth, force, or virtue of Faith be
better discerned or tried without less danger of error, than by an uniform or
constant practice of what it teaches to be good. In our Assent unto the truth
of the former maxim, That God is a rewarder of then that diligently seek him;
this second is necessarily included: It is better to obey God than Man: Not in
this or that particular only, or upon some special days or seasons,
peculiarly set apart for his service; but at all times, in all places, in every
thing that he commands. For seeing we are taught by the Article of creation,
that his dominion over every creature is perpetually most absolute; that of all
their Being, Existence, Effects or Operations, it is most true which Job says
of Riches: The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away at his pleasure; that as
he caused light to shine out of darkness, so can he turn matter of sorrow and
mourning into joy, and mirth and laughter into woe and lamentations: The
conclusions essentially answering to these premises are; Nothing can be against
us if he be for us, nothing for us if he be against us: no harm can happen us
from any loss or pain, if He be pleased: no good from any joy or mirth we
reap from any creature, if He take displeasure at us. Not that the condition
of the faithful in this life is always so sweet and pleasant, as they could
not be contented to exchange it with others for the present; but that the worst
which can befall them, whilst sustained with hope of ioifull deliverance,
grounded on Gods promises, or allayed with internal sense of his savors and
extraordinary supportance, is much better then the greatest joys or pleasures
of the wicked, whose issue is death. This is our Apostles doctrine: Heb. 12, 11
For no chastening for the present seems to be joyous but grievous:
nevertheless afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness unto
them which are exercised thereby.

3. That men acknowledging the evident truth of these generalities, should
usually fail most grievously in the performance of particulars, is not because
they knew the general, and are ignorant of particulars directly subordinate,
(for that is impossible) but their assent to either being weak, and not well
rooted, what they knew and assented unto as true, yea willed as good, whiles
simply considered in the absence of other good, or temptations to the contrary,
they neither truly know, nor assent unto as good, when they descend to actual
choice, which is never effected but by comparing particulars with particulars
present. Then other desires which before were couched or dormiant begin to
rouse themselves and oppugn the assent of faith, which at the first like a
wise and, lawful but an impotent Monarch may exhort, not able to command
them, at length rather yielding to their importunate demands then continuing
resolute to control their outrages, least the soul in which both are seated
be rent and torn with civil wars. That which the Apostle in the process of
the former discourse so much commends in the Patriarchs was, not so much the
quality or heavenly progeny, as the strength and valor of their assent unto
Gods word and promises, able to command all contrary affections of fear,
hope, joy and love. Noah did not differ from others of the old world in the
object of his belief; that there was a God which had created the world, and
could at his pleasure bring it to nothing, was a truth ^ manifestly known by
light of nature, and tradition of their Ancestors, which successively had not
been so many but that they might easily derive their pedigree from the
almighty; nor had they any philosophical heresies, or strange paradoxes to
draw back their assent from this part of truth: but that God which had lately
made would in so short a time destroy the earth with all the inhabitants by her
neihhbour element, would hardly be assented unto by drunkards, or glutto^s, or
if the ears of their souls were not closed up in the fatness of their
bellies, yet these like their master the devil fearing least they had but a
short time to reign, would rage the more and belch out these or like
unsavory speeches, Heb. 11, 7
Come let us eat, drink, make merry and enjoy the pleasures of the flesh
whiles we may, for if this scripulous fellows words be true, we must all
shortly die. A present good they felt in such practices; and has the world
learned any such wisdom since, as to forgo what they see and enjoy, upon
uncertain hope of things unseen? No, but rather this hypocrisy, to say: the
truth which he preached was more evident to them of his times, then such as
Gods messengers would enforce upon us; or that Noah was a better Preacher then
any we have now adays. Yet even to this Preacher himself the Revelation had
been as obscure, as most our messages are to this people, had his mind been as
much set on worldly mirth, wealth or iollities. This then was the commendation
of that Faith, by which he became heir of the righteousness we seek by
ours; Heb. 11, 7
that warned by God of things not seen as yet, being wa^y, or (as others read)
moved with fear, (of God no doubt, in fear of whom true religious wariness
consists) he prepared an Arc for the saving of his house, by the which he
condemned the world, and yet saved it too: for an everlasting Covenant was
Eccles. 44, ^8
made with him, that all flesh should perish no more by the sloud. A shadow he
was of that great Redeemer, which has comforted us concerning our hereditarie
curse, and will save his people from that fire which shall destroy the world;
wherein the wicked and worldly minded shall perish without redemption.

4. The difficulties which Abraham's faith in his first trial was to wrestle
with, were much what of the same nature: lands and possessions no doubt he had
plenty, in that place which he knew and was well known in. And who would
leave his fathers house, or lose assurance of his natural inheritance, for
fair promises of a better in a strange land? None well experienced in the
world. Yet such was the strength of Abraham's Assent unto Gods fidelity and
bounty, that no sooner called but he obeyed H^^. ^^, ^
to go out into a place which he should (how long or short while after he
knows not) receive for an inheritance, and he went to it not knowing whither.
Yet com^e to his iournies end he might in wisdom have requested, ei^^er better
assurance, or leave to return whence he came. But the same faith, which moved
him to go he knew not whither, binds him there to expect Gods leisure for the
time, when he or his seed should enjoy the benefit of the bequest; content in
the mean time with what estate the divine providence should allot him. Ver. 9
For by faith he soiourned in the land of promise, as in a strange land
dwelling in Tabernacles: or, as Saint Acts 7 verse 5
Steven more significantly notes; God gave him none inheritance therein, no not
so much as to set his foot in, only he promised that he would give him a
possession for his seed after him, when as yet he had no child. Long delay of
accomplishing this promise, might well occasion Sarahs distrust to prove the
Mother of a mighty nation. The tentations to withdraw her Assent from the
speculatiue truth whereon it was set, Gods power, were not terrible grievous or
painful: yet not so easy to be foiled, because they had got fast hold within
her. Barren she was by natural constitution, and no better then dead, having
so long out-liued the natural time of bearing children: but he that without
her consent or knowledge made her, gave his promise for reviving her dead womb;
and she could not continue doubtful of the event, without distrusting his
fidelity that had promised. Heb. 11. 11
By faith therefore she received strength to bear seed, and was delivered of a
child, when she was past age. The ioifull issue of her belief may serve as an
earnest, to assure us of what Christ has promised; Ioh. 11. 25, 26
I am the resurrection and the life, he that belieueth in me, though he were
dead yet shall he live: and whosoever lives and belieueth in me shall never
die. He that truly judges Christ faithful in this, as Sarah did God in the
former promise, shall see life spring from death. But faithful herein, he
only judges Christ, that esteems the faithful execution of his will deerer
to him then all the pleasures of this life, which is never without the check
of death. By such a faith only, as arms us with constancy in Christ's cause,
against all the terrors that accompany this last enemy we are to deal
withal, shall we receive strength to conceive that immortal seed, whose
fruit is joy, peace and gladness everlasting.

5. Or if we consider the date of Abraham's life, almost expired in it self,
but extraordinarily renewed in young Isaac: how much more welcome had his own
cruel executioner been unto him, then the execution of this commandment Genesis
22, 2
Take now thy son, thine only son Isaac, whom thou love, and get thee
into the land of Moriah, and offer him there for a burnt offering upon one of
the Mountains which I will tell thee of. But some happily will reply; God
never puts any child of Abraham to such a desperate point of service as this;
wherein, notwithstanding, what was required, which some Heathens have not
performed unto their false gods? The manner of training up the father of the
faithful, as it were by degrees unto this, gives us all to understand, that
throughout our whole course of life, we should esteem whatsoever is most
dear and near unto us, as base and vile in respect of Gods favor; of whose
continuance none are capable, but by faithful performance of his will. All his
commandments are Mercy and Truth, just and good unto the party that
undertakes them by lively faith: which cannot rate either declination of any
evil, or execution of good incident to mortality, at so high a price as
obedience; of which in cases wherein it is unquestionably due, it is so rigid
an exacter, as will admit no dispensation, no not in case of grievous
sickness, or extremity of death. So sovereign and high a hand it likewise
has in marshalling and ranking all our affections for Gods service, that for
an aged father to kill his only child at faiths designement, becomes an act of
mercy in the slayer, and an exercise of pity upon the slain: for good it was
to young Isaac to yield up his life in obedience to his Father, willing in
obedience to his God to take it from him. As CHRIST is the Way, the Truth and
Life: so in this act of Abraham's faith, fore-shadowing his future sacrifice, we
see an entrance opened unto the path which must lead us unto this maine way of
life; for thither we come by treading the footsteps of our father Abraham. The
point of whose supportance in these tentations, whereon all the motions of his
will, and other acts of his obedience reuolue as the door upon the hinges, or
the heavens upon the poles, was his firm Assent unto the Article of Gods
omnipotent power. For the holy Ghost assigning the cause, Heb. 118. ^
why he that had received the promises should offer up his only begotten Son,
of whom it is said that in Isaac shall his seed be called: says, he considered
that God was able to raise him up even from the dead, from whence also he
received him in a figure. His belief as has been declared, was of an object
unseen, perhaps unheard of in the world before; but grounded upon an evidence
of the pledge exhibited in Isaacks miraculous birth. We that refer all that
befalls us unto natural causes, or contriuances of our own or others wit,
never sensibly feeling the finger of God in the procurement of our good,
usually fail in the performance of services, conditionally annexed to divine
promises. And albeit we pitch our faith where Abraham did his, yet when storms
of tentations arise, our sensual desires, draw it, (being destitute of firm
grounds) after them, as ships in great winds do their anchors, cast in loose
gravel, or stony channels.

6. Many of our times could discourse more plausibly of Gods omnipotency, more
distinctly unfold the several branches thereof, and bring arguments to convince
deniers of it more forcible then Abraham could; which cannot convince their
own diffidence or distrust in easier trials, because not accustomed to rely
upon Gods providence, or to train their affections to obedience in lesser
matters. Should the practice of some duty nothing so difficult or distasteful
to humane affections, but altogether as subordinate to the divine power, be
enjoined us by express command from heaven: we would not directly deny that
God were able to effect his will, but question rather, whether it were he that
called us; or so persuaded with those in the Po^^, seek a milder
interpretation of the oracle.

-- Aut fallax ait est solertia nobis: Aut pia sunt, nullumque nefas or acula
suadent.

Our cunning fails if oracles should counsel us to ill:
They holy are, and would not we should sacred relics spill.
What should they cast their mothers bones behind their back?

God forbid sure the oracle had some other meaning

Magna parens terra est: lapides in corpore terrae
Ossa reor dici* iacere hos post terga iubemur.
The earth no doubt our mother is, for earth all flesh does feed:

She has her bones, and these are stones, which in her body breed;

These we are backwards bid to throw, as Sowers do their seed. Or as Hercules,
detesting the inhumanity of humane sacrifices, offered up painted instead of
living men, unto his false gods: so some such image of young Isaac, as Michal
made of David attired in his clothes, or some youngling ^ut of the flock
purposely invested with his name; would, to most aged fathers, have been a
sacrifice good enough for their God. This or like conceit being supposed, a
cunning sophister would have found a falacie ^ rebus ad voces; a Critique would
have relieved himself from the etymology of Isaac name, as some heathens in
like case have done, from a difference in the accent. For whereas their gods
had pressed men unto their service, expecting every year (...) for a sacrifice:
these cunning muster-masters by alteration of a prick of tirtle, substituted
(...) candles in their places, fit burnt offerings for the powers of darkness.
Or some doting Sire of our days, wherein ardent zeal to true religion, and
excessive love unto children consort together as man and wife; though forward
to profess as great obedience as Abraham made show of, would have communicated
this secret to the tender hearted mother, and with her joint voice thus have
descanted upon the oracle.

Is God almighty so unconstant or unkind, as to give a jewel and take it
again? Nay sure he meant not Isaac our only son; but as laughter is his name
so since his birth he has been our only joy. Doubtless we have surfeted of
mirth and iollity in his presence: and God, it is likely, will speedily take
him from us, unless we learn to use his blessings better, and redeem him
with some other sacrifice. And what can we offer more acceptable unto our God,
then the sacrifice of a broken and a contrite heart. Let his picture a Gods
name burn to ashes, and all our mirth laughter and pleasure perish with it:
let the rest of our wearisom pilgrimage here on earth consume with sorrow and
mourning for him as if he were dead indeed. Though a son and heir we have,
in whom we may take as much joy and comfort as any of our neighbors can in
theirs: yet we will be as if we had none.

7. Should God by his own immediate voice call such as make most conscience of
obedience in hearing his Word, to offer a Sacrifice that should not cost them
half so dear as Abraham did the examination whether this spirit were from
heaven would be so scrupulous, so long time would be required for better
information of their understandings, that opportunity of doing what was
commanded would slide away, ere their resolution settled. But he whose faith
has got the mastery over his carnal affections in other conflicts, as Abraham's
ere this temtation had done; shall upon the first proposal, know those
warnings to be from God, which others distrust, and so relent in the trial,
albeit he that made them their souls, exact the exercise, or practice only of
their faculties. But former negligence in fulfilling his manifested will, adds
guilt to present ignorance, which cannot excuse subsequent diffidence, or
disobedience. Even where divine precepts are as plain, as peremptory for the
general: if we adventure on their practice, it is for the most part but upon
such terms, as the late mentioned heathen couple did, upon that interpretation
of the oracle which themselves had framed.

Coniugis augurio quamuis Tricenia mota est,
Spes tamen in dubio est: adeo coelestibus ambo
Diffidunt monitis: sed quid tentare nocebit?
Though Pyrrha somewhat moved is, with loving husbands spell;
Yet hope hangs doubtful twixt them both, too weak distrust to quell:
But since no il can come thereof, to try must needs do well.
Were it no harm or loss to try, we could perhaps afford as great pains as
they did and as little hope did the issue depend upon our firm Assent to that
divine oracle, Math. 3. 9
God is able of stones to raise up children unto Abraham But true belief of
matters spiritual, as it presupposes difficulties in attaining the principal
end, whereto it directs us: so it includes a forwardness in the choice,
alacrity in the attempt, constance and confidence in prosecuting the means
that lead us to it. An act it was of true and lively faith in Saint Peter, to
go upon the water unto his master, in whose construction neuerthslesse, to cry
out when a great wave came against him, did argue a defect in the quantity, as
unable to ouermatch the extremity, or utmost degree of natural fear. Why
did thou fear, o thou of little faith? But to prevent, quell, or moderate
the fits, or extremities of passions or affections in like extraordinary
temptations, an extraordinary measure of faith, though sincere and lively, is
required: whereas our purpose in this place only was to show by instances,
that the sovereignty of faith, if it be truly Christian, or such as Saint Paul
commends, and ascribes justification unto, must be absolute and universal in
respect of every habitual desire, or affection that can oppose it, though most
natural in bred or dear unto us.

8. Though the object of Abraham's temptation was more furious, and terrible to
resist in the very brunt; yet that which Moses afterward overcame, was more
likely to seduce unto disloialty: The prosperity he did enjoy, and pleasures he
might have tasted in Pharaohs court, are as apt to bewitch or charm, as death
of dearest friends to terrify the mind of man from going forward in obedience.
The one usually disenables us to follow that in practice, which we acknowledge
for good in speculation: the other so corrupts our judgments, that we cannot
discern true good from false. Abraham resolved to kill his only child, and
Moses as it were to strangle his loving wife, that borne of his flesh, had been
bred in his bones and nursed in his bosom, when he was not master of his own
will or affections. Verse 24
Yet when he came to age (says the text) he refused to be called the son of
Pharaohs daughter; and chose rather to suffer affliction with the people of
God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. Even to rebuke or
reproach for Christ's cause he assented as good to him, yea better then all the
treasures of Egypt: not that rebuke is such in it self, but as it is the
means to attain everlasting life, or grounded upon the internal pledge of
those ioies, which he saw only a far off, we nearer hand; were not the
proverb fulfilled in us, that the nearer Christ's Church comes to us the
farther we go from it. But as the distance to this faith full servant of God
was greater, so his sight was the better* he had a cleared view of the
recompense of the reward promised, which enabled him to endure as well the want
of earthly pleasures and contentments, as the height of that great kings
displeasure, with such constancy as, if he had seen him which is invisible,
and yet was in some sort seen by Moses: so is faith of things to the natural
man vaseen^, but in a manner seen by it.

9. Scarce now one living would do as Moses did; not one that would, but should
be censured, not by worldlings only for a fool, but by forward professors of
truth, for betraying Gods peoples cause; if having such opportunity as he had
of soliciting their good in the Court, he should leave his place to expect Gods
providence, or the private contentment of his conscience elsewhere. But from
commendation of his Faith the indicious reader may resolve, not to troble his
mind with such scrupulous cogitations, as whether the faithful, albeit no such
reward were promised, were to endure as Moses did; or whether (as the Papists
falsely lay to our great Worthies charge, though others of less worth have
spoken somewhat indiscreetly) intuition of reward pollute such works, as would
be otherwise good, if undertaken only because we know them pleasant to our
God. It is a truth most orthodoxall, that the chief end of our best works
should be the fulfilling of Gods will or pleasure. But let not any man hence
take occasion by nice distinctions or curiosities, to separate what God has
conjoined; for his good will and pleasure it is to reward us bountifully for
well doing, and to glorify his name in our felicity: nor can we intend the
accomplishment of his will or glory aright, but as they are linked with his
intention of good to us. For surely he wills our life and happiness more then
our good deeds, which, but for the other he wills not. It was a slanderous
speech of an ungracious servant, to say his master reaped where he had not
sown: for our God looks not for glory, but upon presupposall of good
bestowed; he never punishes, but for ingratitude, neglect, or abuse of his
mercy or bounty. The greatest praise we can procure him is, to suffer our
selves to be saved by the means he has thereto ordained: and this hope of
reward, even by his ordinance, is that which strengthens the faith of his best
servants. Or if thou think that Moses faith was imperfect, thy Saviors
belief, or knowledge of his exaltation as man, doubtless was not so; Yet he
(as the same Apostle says) H^^. 12. 2
for the joy that wa^^et before him endured the cross and despised the shame,
and hence is set at the right hand of God; notwithstanding he did all things
for the glory of his Father, and because he knew it was his will so to do; of
which will likewise he knew it an especial part, that he should propose
heavenly joys as a counterpoise to vvorldly pain, and sure hope of endless
joy, as an antidote against transitory shame or disgrace. Wherefore let us also
look upon CHRIST JESUS, the Author and finisher of our faith, and have
respect unto the reward, that we may endure with patience the race that is set
before us.

10. That the same faith so much commended by this Apostle was, in respect of
some objects, speculatiue, or but an Assent, of foresight of some divine
revelations, as true, according to that difference betwixt Truth and Goodness
before handled is apparent from these instances: [ Heb. 11* 10
By Faith Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau conc erning things to come: By Faith
Jacob when he was a dying blessed both the sons of Joseph, and leaning on the
end of his staff worshipped: By Faith Joseph when he was a dying made mention
of the departing of the children of Israel, and gave commandment of his
bones.] In none of these did their Assent urge them to any difficult, painful,
or dangerous practice; it was to wrestle only with the natural imperfection of
man's understanding, or incredulity arising thence, not from any direct
opposition of sensual or corrupt affection. Greater difficulties there were to
dissuade the people from aduenturing to pass through the red sea, but after
this accomplished without danger, the miraculous fall of Ierich^es walls was
not so hard to be persuaded to their posterity, or unto such as had heard what
the Lord had done for their fathers. Yet by firm Assent unto this divine
truth, as certainly future, the City was destroyed, and Rahab saved. Verse 32
What should we more say? for the time would be too short (and the discourse
too long) to insist upon the like in Gedeon, in Baruc, in Samson, in Iephte, in
David, in Samuel, and in the Prophets. What victory soever these or other
Saints of God obtained over themselves or their passions over the enemies of
God, his laws or their country over men, wild beasts or other creatures; our
Apostle ascribes to faith. Ver. 33
For by Faith they subdued kingdoms; not by believing they had overcome before
they fought, but by becoming valiant in fight from firm belief that all
victory was from the Lord of hosts, to whom it was a like casie to save with
few or with many. By the same faith, but as fixed upon the moral law, or
other means of salvation, they wrought righteousness. By the same faith they
obtained the promises, not by persuading themselves they had them already
sealed, but by practicing the conditions annexed unto them. By the same faith
Ver. 3^, 35
they stopped the mouths of lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the
edge of the sword, of weak were made strong. The weomen received their dead
raised to life: others also were racked, and would not be delivered, that they
might receive a better resurrection. And others have been tried by mockings and
scourgings; yea, moreover by bonds and imprisonment. They were stoned, sawen a
sunder, tempted, and slain with the sword: they wandered about in sheepskins,
and goat skins being destitute, afflicted, tormented.

11. These last passages of the Apostle warrant the canonical truth of what an
author not canonical relates, concerning these heroical sons, and that more
heroical mother; whose reolution best exemplifies the nature of faith,
hitherto described by S. Paul, to be such as we have defined, an Assent unto
every part of Gods service, or every divine promise, not only as true and good
simply considered, but as much better to the party assenting, than the fairest
profers supreme earthly powers can make, either for auoidance of pain or
torments present, or speediest advancement to greatest dignities. The first
resolutely professes in the name of all the rest, Ma ^ 7, ^
we are ready to die rather then to transgress the laws of our fathers. Nor
did his soul draw back, or shrink at such savage and unmerciful usage, as
would move pity to see it practiced upon a beast. Even to behold a flourishing
tree first bereft of bark, then of all the naked branches* yet (...) standing,
lastly the green trunk down, and cast full of sap into the fire, would be an
vnpleasa^t spectacle to such, as delighted in setting, pruning, or nourishing
plants. But that is but a weak resemblance of this man's torture, first stripped
of his skin, having afterward all the utmost parts of his body lopped off;
lastly his raw bulk broiled or carbonadoed quick. Yet the second sprig of the
sameroot, made spectator of all this misery, to cause him abhor like butchery
practices upon himself, constantly pitching the fear of God higher then any
present rack or torture could raise or improve his natural fear of tyrants
rage, with his mortal life breathes out that everlasting truth, which his
Redeemer afterward gave in charge to his disciples. Ver. 9
For when he was at the last gasp he said: Thou like a fury take us out of
this present life, but the king of the world shall raise us up, who have dyed
for his laws unto ever lasting life. The third, after like derision and
torments as his brothers had suffered, willingly yields his tongue unto the
tormentour; but first consecrates therewith his other members as an acceptable
sacrifice unto his God, esteeming their loss as gain for the keeping of his
law. Ver. 10, 11
For stretching forth his hands with boldness he spoke courageously, these
have I had from heaven, but now for the love of God I despise them, and trust
that I shall receive them of him again. Nor could like torments wrest any
other confession from the fowrth: ^^r when he was ready to die he said thus;
Verse 14
It is better that we should change this which we might hope for of men, and
wait for our hope from God, that we may be raised up again by him, as for
thee thou shall have no resurrection to life. The fifth again less fears the
torments which he suffered, than the scandal which might redound to Gods
Church from relation of their grieuousnesse, unless the error were prevented.
Verse 16
Thou have power o king among men, and though thou be a mortal man, thou do
what thou will; but think not that God has for saken our nation. The fixed
likewise at the point of death charitably instructs the tyrant as our Luke 14.
ver. ^
Savior afterward did the Jews concerning them whose blood Pilate had
mingled with their own sacrifice. * Deceive not thy self foolishly, for we
suffer those things which are worthy to be wondered at for our own sakes,
because we 2. Match. 7, 18, 19
have offended our God: but think not thou, which undertake to fight against
God, that thou shall be unpunished. But the mother (says this Author) was
marvelous above all other, and worthy of honorable memory. For if by faith
the Elders obtained honor, and good report: the weakness of her sex does
witness the admirable strength of her faith; Ver. 20
that seeing her seven sons slain within the space of one day, suffered it
with a good will, because of the hope that she had in the Lord. That which
enspired her breast with this hope, her hopes with wisdom, and her womanly
affections with such manly courage, was her firm Assent unto the Articles of
the creation and the resurrection: for with these arguments she wisely arms
them against the terrors of death, or torture; b I cannot tell how you came
into my womb, for I neither gave my breath nor life, neither was it I that
formed the members of every one of you. But doubtless the Creator of the
world, who found the generation of man, and found out the beginning of all
things, will also of his own mercy give you breath and life again, as you
now regard not your own selves for his laws sake. The seventh, whom
Antiochus had tempted to disloialty as well by hopes of honor, as threats of
tortures, she thus entreats in particular; Ver. 27, 28, 29
O my son have pity upon me that bare thee nine months in my womb and gave
thee suck 3 years, and nourished thee and brought thee up unto this age, and
endured the troubles of education: I beseech thee my son l^oke upon the
heaven and the earth and all that is therein, and consider that God made them
of things th^^ were not, and so was mankind made likewise. Fear not this
tormentor; but being worthy of thy brethren, take thy death that I may receive
thee again in mercy with thy bretlren. Nor did her words want effect: for
this also esteemed obedience much better then honor or preferment; yea, as much
dearer then sacrifice, though of himself: For he said, Verse 37
I as my brethren have done, offer my body and life for the laws of our
fathers, beseeching God that he will soon be merciful unto our notton; and that
thou, O Tyrant, by torment and punishment may confess that he is the only
God: And that in me and my brethren the wrath of the Almighty, which is
righteously fallen upon our nation, may cease; so he also dyed holily, and put
his whole trust in the Lord. Illud insuper nunquam ^^edid^^^es, quod videns
obstu^es^^s mori^^^^m matrem c^^ tulorum quo^ Anatomi^us ab vtero ^ius
abstraxi^ maiorem ^uram gerere, quam suimet. Nam si coram ipsa ^^lium laedis,
latr^^ v^ciseratur: sin illum ^ri illius ad* ^oues, silet, atque magna pietate
la^bit. Quod si aliud, non cat^ll^^ ori ^ius, quam se^as, ma^ris a^cedat, rabie
percita mordet, quem naturae (...), atque adeo paremu^ in liberos in^redibil^m
charitatem in publicis theatris maxima spectatorum admiratio^e s^pius ostendi,
Pataui praesertim, cum (...) mus ac reuerendis^^mus Rainutius F^tne^^us, tunt
Venetiar^^ Prior* nune Cardinalu S. Angelinuncupatus etc. Colum. lib. ^^.
^^vi^^ sect.
That a dumb creature shall gently and quietly lick her young ones, newly ripped
out of herbelly, even while the Anatomists knife did lance and dissecate her
living members, seemed to me, when first I read it in an Author of this
profession and practice, a wondrous effect of natures force, euincing the truth
of our Apostles saying; that love, which thus excludes all sense of pain,
would if perfect, expel all fear: but doubtless, more then natural was this
woman's love, or rather great was her faith, that Gods love unto her sons and
her was greater, then the love of mothers to their children; which could thus
out of pity and compassion, expose them to such savage cruelty, and patiently
behold their live Anatomy, afterward content her self to be a subject of like
practices. For last of all, after the sons the mother dyed.

12. So consonant to the grounds of our Apostles discourse, and these late
mentioned resolutions, is that excellent exhortation Mattathias made unto his
sons before his death; that we may without presumption presume, one and the
same spirit did set the several parts of this lesson, and tune their hearts to
this consort, albeit he did not pen these latter ditties. Macc. 2, 49, 50
Now has pride and rebuke gotten strength, and the time of destruction and the
wrath of indignation: now therefore, my sons, be ye zealous for the law, and
give your lives for the covenant of your fathers. Call to remembrance what our
fathers did in their time, so shall ye receive great honor and an everlasting
name* Was not Abraham found faithful in temptation, and it was imputed unto
him for righteousness? Joseph's chastity, Phineas and Eliahs zeal, Iosuahs
valor, and Calebs fidelity, David's mercy and Daniels innocence, are all
ascribed to faith by him, as well as Ananias, Azarias, and M^saels safety; or
Abraham's late mentioned acts? for after an enumeration of these particulars, he
thus concludes: Verse 6^
And this consider ye in all ages, that none that put their trust in him shall
be overcome. All that was commendable in these ancient Worthies, was from
their trust in the Lord; and that from their firm Assent unto his power, his
bounty, and fidelity: nor can the nature of faith be better notified by the
effect or property, then if we define it to be a fidelity in all the service of
God, raised from a firm Assent unto the former transcendent truths [ of his
bountiful rewarding all that diligently seek him, that it is always better to
obey him then man] as shall further appear from the discourses following. And
it is already partly showed in our meditations upon Jeremy, that prayers thus
made in faith are still effectual, for obtaining private remission of our sin,
comfort in the day of trouble, or for auerting Gods heavy plagues or curses
from any land or people; if both the suppliants thus qualified hold due
proportion with notorious delinquents for number, and the frequency or feruency
of their supplications, with the continuance or stubbornness of the other
sins. But he alone truly prays in faith, that can with constancy prosecute
the right choice of means which faith does make, and faithfully practice such
duties as it prescribes, for attaining the end, whereto it directs.

13. If any of you lack wisdom, (says Saint Ja^^^s 1 ver, 5
James) let him ask of God, that gives to all men liberally and vpbraideth
not: and it shall be given him. But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering,
for be that wauereth is like a wave of the sea, driven with the wind and
tossed. For let not that man think he shall receive any thing of the Lord.
Why? Because he prays not in faith, but is double minded and unstable in all
his ways. In this doublnesse of mind, or distraction of the soul, as the word
imports, does hypocrisy in his language that knows the heart and mind,
properly consist. For to pretend or promise one thing, and wittingly and
expressly, though in the secrets of our own hearts to intend another, is, in
scripture phrase an act of Atheism, or infidelity. An hypocrite he is in the
same dialect, that assents unto the means of man's salvation as truly good,
whiles simply considered; but disesteemes them in the actual choice, wherein
contrary desires, or affections vnrenounced, usurp a negative voice or rather
make a mayor part of his own soul against him, so as he cannot make good his
former promise with his whole Assent. From this competition between belief of
spiritual truths, and carnal delights or pleasure, both challenging full
interest in one and the same soul, does that doubleness whereof S. James
speak arise. And the inconstancy or wavering of an hypocrite, may best be
resembled by a Polypragmaticall temper, desirous to hold good correspondencie
with contrary factions; hence often enforced to shuffle from such promises as
he meant to perform when he made them, but considered not how far he had
been engaged by former obligements or protestations; from which, being
challenged by the adverse party, he cannot ^^inch without greater shame or
grief.

14. Flattery, lying, and dissimulation, of which hypocrisy is but the brood,
in the phrase of Gods spirit which searches the reins, is not to profess one
thing with the tongue, and purpose another in the heart; but rather to protest,
what for the time present we truly think, without due examination of the soul
or inward parts, or resolution to renounce all contrary desires, or really to
disclaim all interest any creature has in our minds, or affections to the
prejudice of the Creator; as the Psalmist excellently expresses this point.
Psalm, ^^ verse 31, 32, ^3 etc.
The wrath of God came upon them, and slew the fattest of them, and smote down
the chosen men of Israel. For all this they sinned still: and believed not his
wondrous works. Therefore their days did he consume in vanity, and their
years in trouble. When he slew them then they sought him: and they returned
and enquired early after God. And they remembered that God was their Rock, and
the high God their Redeemer. This conversion questionless was not in ^est, or
pretended only for the present, but in their apprehension that made it sincere:
yet in his judgment that was greater then their hearts or consciences, false
and deceitful, because imperfect and irresolute, as the Psalmist in the next
words instructs us. Vers^ 3^
Nevertheless they did but flatter him with their mouth: and they lied unto
him with their tongues. The height of their dissimulation, as follows was,
that their heart was not right with him; neither were they steadfast (believing,
or faithful) in his covenant: but as their Fathers had been, ^ reflectary and
rebellious generation: a generation that prepared not their hearts, and whose
spirit was not faithful with God. Nor did this want of preparation, or their
unfaithfulness proceed from want of purpose to do God service, whiles
tentations did not assault them; but herein rather, that like the children of
Ephraim being armed and bearing bows, they turned back in the day of
battle, that they kept not the covenant of God, and refused to walk in his
law (when the law of the flesh did oppose it) they for gate ( i. they did not
esteem) his works and his wonders that he had showed them. These divine
characters of hypocrisy, or dissimulation approues his opinion, as well
befitting the author that said, it was impossible for a Coward to be either an
honest man, or a true friend. For seeing honesty is but a stem of truth, or
fidelity his observation differs only in the subject, from that of the wise
son of Sirach. (...) 14
Woe be to fearful hearts and faint hands, and the sinner that goes two
ways: woe unto him that is faint hearted, for he belieueth not, therefore
shall he not be defended: woe be unto you that have lost patience, and what
will ye do when the Lord shall visit you? More exactly paralelled, as well to
the occasion and grounds of our Apostles discourse in Hebrews chap. 10. and
11. are these divine sentences of the same Author immediately following. (...)
They that fear the Lord will not disobey his word; and they that love him
will keep his laws. They that fear the Lord will seek that which is well
pleasing unto him, and they that love him shall be filled with the law. They
that fear the Lord will prepare their hearts, and humble their souls in his
sight, saying: we will fall into the hands of the Lord, and not into the hands
of men; for as his Maiesly is sors his mercy. From our last resolutions in the
former Chapter, the Reader will easily conceive the reason, why the same acts,
operations, or practices are sometimes ascribed unto faith, as the chief
steward, or dispenser of spiritual grace, sometimes unto the affection or
disposition which it moderates. For as faint-heartednesse argues want of faith:
so patience in adversity, fear of God, and constant relying upon his mercies,
though springing immediately from their proper or peculiar habits, or
affections, are enspired and strengthened by faith, as blood in the veins is
by the blood arteriall.

15. If we compare the several growth of sted fast faith, and hypocrisy, they
much resemble the order of composition and resolution in sciences or works of
nature, or of addition and substraction in Arithmetique, or of laying, or
reducting sums in accounts. As young David first encountered Bears and Lions,
or other enemies of his flock, and afterward ouercomes the great Goliath, that
had defied the whole host of Israel: so true and lively faith first begins
with petty desires, or such temptations as are incident to our present state or
calling, always so much less grievous in themselves, as our places are
meaner; Talis est natu a sidei, qua^to magis ve tatur tanto magis accenditur.
Virtus fidei in periculis secura est, in securitate periclu^^ur. Quia enim
alied ita laxat vigorem fidei, s^c^t longa tranquilitas. Chris^^^. in Math. 20
and having gotten mastery over them, still increases, as difficulties or
oppositions multiply, until at length it become victorious over the devil,
world and flesh, by a sincere discharge of particulars contained in the view of
Baptism. Hypocrisy acknowledges the same sum of Christian duties or
practices, and subscribes unto it, not only in gross, but unto most
particulars therein contained: yet still reducts, or exonerates as much, as
well displeasing humors disallow, until it finally dissolve what true faith
does build even unto the first foundation, if the opposition between it and
carnal fears, hopes, love or hate come once to be direct and eager: What
protestation could any true professor, either conceive in terms more decent
or submissiue, or tender in more serious and ample form, then that
supplication which the remnant of Judah and Jerusalem presented unto the
Prophet Jeremy, after the captivity of their brethren, Ier. 42, 1, 2, 3
Then all the Captains of the host, and Iehonan the son of Kareah, and
Iezaniah the son of Hoshaiah, and all the people from the least unto the
most, came and said unto Jeremiah the Prophet: Hear our prayer we beseech
thee, and pray for us unto the Lord thy God, even for all this remnant (for we
are left but a few of many, as thine eyes do behold,) that the Lord thy God
may show us the way wherein we may walk, and the thing that we may do. After
he had undertaken this sacred business, and past his word for his integrity in
translating it: they more pathetically oblige themselves to whatsoever
obedience God by his mouth shall enioine them. Then they said to Jeremiah; Ver.
5, 6*
The Lord be a witness of truth and faith between us, if we do not even
according to all things, for the which the Lord thy God shall send thee unto
us: whether it be good or be euili, we will obey the voice of the Lord God to
whom we send thee; that it may be well with us, when we obey the voice of the
Lord our God. A man would think the proposal of Gods commandment, by a
Prophet so well known unto this people, one whom they had chosen for this
purpose, should have enforced them to performance of their promise. Yet
Jeremiah foreseeing the hypocrisy of their hearts, though hidden from their
own eyes, returns his message in such a form, as if he had used artificial
invention to persuade obedience. Having called some of the parties that had
late made this serious protestation, he tells them: Verse 9, 10, 11 12.
Thus says the Lord God of Israel, vntowhom ye sent me to present your
prayers before him, if ye will dwellin this land, then I will build you and
not destroy you, and I will plant you and not root you out: for I repent me of
the evil that I have done unto you. Fear not for the king of Babed, of whom
ye are afraid, be not afraid of him, says the Lord: For, I am with you, to
save you, and to deliver you from his hand: And I will grant you mercy that he
may have compassion upon you; and he shall cause you to dwellin your land. But
if ye say, we will not dwell in this land, neither hear the voice of the Lord
your God; saying: Nay, but we will go into the land of Egypt, where we shall
see no war, nor hear the sound of the trumpet, nor have hunger of bread, and
there we will dwell; and now therefore hear the word of the Lord, ye remnant
of Judah, thus says the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; If ye set your
forces to enter into Egypt, and go to dvve^l there: then the sword that ye
feared shall take you there in the Land of Egypt, and the famine for which you
care shall there hang upon you in Egypt, and there shall ye die. And all the
men that set their forces to enter into Egypt to dwell there shall die by the
sword, by the famine and by the pestilence, and none of them shall remain, or
escape from the plague that I will bring upon them. For thus says the Lord of
hosts, the God of Israel; As mine anger and my wrath has been poured out
upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem: so shall my wrath be poured out upon you
when you enter into Egypt; and ye shallbe a detestation and an astonishment,
and a curse, and a reproach, and ye shall see this place no more. O ye remnant
of Judah: the Lord has said concerning you; Go ye not into Egypt, know
certainly that I have admonished you this day. And as See Ioshuah 24 verse 15,
19, 22, 24
Iosuah at his last farewell unto his people, suspecting their pronenesse to
idolatry, did by a seeming provocation of them to the practice and profession
of it, wisely wrest from them more serious protestation to the contrary, and a
stricter obligement to the service of the only true God, then otherwise they
would have conceived: so Jeremiah, instructed by his God that the hypocrisy of
this peoples heart now secretly began to work, gives them notice of it, most
desirous to be disapproued by them in the event. Ier. 42. 20, 21, 22
Surely ye dissembled in your hearts when you sent me unto the Lord your God,
saying: pray for us unto the Lord our God, and according unto all that the Lord
our God shall say, so declare unto us, and we will do it. And now I have this
day declared it to you, but ye have not obeyed the voice of the Lord your God,
nor any thing for which he has sent me unto you. Now therefore know
certainly that ye shall die by the sword, by famine and by the pestilence, in
the place whither ye desire to go and soiourne. Ierusalems ruins, and the
Temples ashes did witness the severity and justice of their God, against the
obstinate and disobedient. The Babylonians themselves knew Jeremiah for a
Prophet; even this people, to whom he brings this message, were well persuaded
of his familiarity with their God; and he himself had past his word for
acquainting them fully with his will. Ier. 42, 4
Then Jeremiah the Prophet said unto them, I have heard you; behold I will pray
unto the Lord your God according unto your words; and it shall come to pass*
that whatsoever thing the Lord shall answer you I will declare unto you: I
will keep nothing back from you. And was it possible the same men should be
so dislike themselves, as to forget their late protestations, and refuse to do
Gods will so fully made known unto them by his Prophet? To do the will of
God, if so they knew it to be his will directly, they deny not: for this
general truth was not as yet directly contradicted by their present passions.
But now ten days had past, since Jeremiah and they had mutually pledged
their faith; the one for notifying, the other for executing Gods commandment,
concerning this present case: their former jealous fears of Nebuchadnezzars
ill affection toward them had increased in the interim, they had entertained
some politic hopes of shelter in Egypt from the storm that threatened Judah.
Both these with the natural stubbornness of their wills, accustomed to long
after things forbidden, concur to impair and withdraw their former Assent;
causing them, though not absolutely to distrust Gods power or goodness toward
them nor altogether to disclaim Jeremiah for a Prophet, yet to suspect his
fidelity in this particular business. Ierem. 43. 3
For when he had made an end of speaking unto them all the words which the Lord
had recorded, for the which the Lord their God had sent him unto them, even all
these words: then spoke Azariah the son of Hoshaiah, and Iohanan the son of
Kareah, and all the proud men, saying unto Jeremiah, thou speak falsely; the
Lord our God has not sent thee to say, Go not into Egypt to soiourne there:
But Baruch the son of Neriah sets thee on against us, for to deliver us
into the hands of the Chaldeans, that they might put us to death, and carry us
away captive into Babylon. So Iohanan the son of Kareah, and all the
Captains of the forces, took all the remnant of Judah, that were returned
from all nations, vvhither they had been driven, to dwell in the land of Judah.
After they had thus shuffeled from their promise, disobeyed Gods word, abused
his Prophet, and provoked him unto wrath with the works of their hands,
Ierem. 44. ^^.
polluting their souls by burning incense unto other gods in the land of
Egypt, vvhither they were gone to dwell: threatened with consummation of Gods
wrath, which had overtaken their forefathers, and had almost devoured their
native country, they begin directly calcitrare contra stimulos, and utterly
recall their former Assent unto the general truth, so fully acknowledged
before, that Gods Commandments ought to be obeyed. For these, we must
consider, were most peremptory against idolatry, on which their hearts and
affections were now fully let: so as the opposition betwixt Gods word and their
resolutions, becomes immediate and diametrall. Nor was there any coactiue power
to bridle the unruly bent of their untamed affections, now at liberty to run
riot, and acquaint their hearts with what they had secretly wrought before: No
face of civil government, professing true religion, to discountenance and
ouerawe their audacious and whorish for-heads, from open auowing of what they
purposed; rather the sight of like practices authorized in Egypt, did tempt
their hearts to conceive, and their mouths to profess greater abomination,
then in their own land they could have thought on. And as that excess of
insolency, which moved the Israelite to wrong his brother, made him withal
more impatient of Moses reproof: So such of this remnant, as were most
conscious of former disobedience to Gods laws, were most forward and petulant
to disclaim his present will, expressly revealed for their safety, and like the
old serpent to accuse his inhibitions in like case of false-hood, or envy. For
when Jeremiah had made an end of all his threatenings: Ierem. 44. 15
then all the men which knew that their wives had burnt incense to other gods,
and all the weomen that stood by, a great multitude, even all the people that
dwelt in the land of Egypt, in Pathros, answered Jeremiah, saying: As for the
word that thou have spoken unto us in the name of the Lord, we will not hearken
unto thee: but we will certainly do whatsoever thing goes forth of our own
mouth, to burn incense to the Queen of Heaven, and to power out drink
offerings unto her as we have done, we and our Fathers, our Kings and our
Princes in the City of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem. For then had
we plenty of victuals, and saw no evil: But since we left off to burn
incense to the Queen of heaven, and to power ont drink offerings unto her,
we have vvanted all things, and have been consumed by the sword, and by
famine. And when we burnt incense to the Queen of heaven, and powered out our
drink offerings unto her, did we make our cakes to vvorshippe her, and power
out drink offerings unto her without our men?

16. This last instance of these hypocrites, will yield somewhat to euince a
conclusion, hereafter to be inferred: That no affection vnrenounced, not such
as procure greatest applause and admiration amongst men, but continually
exposes our souls to Satan's check: That this cunning gamester, by
extraordinary skill to play upon like advantages, can drive men into any point
of infidelity, heresy, idolatry, atheism or blasphemy against the holy
Ghost, as shall be fittest for his purpose, or as the opposition betwixt men's
resolutions and truths revealed shall fall out. From the former examples,
whereby the Elders obtained good report, we have gained thus much, for
confirmation of our last assertion. That the faith whereby Abraham was
accounted righteous, and by which the sons of Abraham must live, is a
steadfast Assent to whatsoever God shall say, as much truer then ought can be
said against it, to whatsoever he shall command, as much better, then either
the accomplishment of our own desires or hopes, or obedience to contrary
commandment of earthly powers, whether accompanied with seuerest threats of
any evil, or surest promises of any good, they or their instruments can procure
us.

CHAP. VIII. That knowledge of moral objects in sacred dialect includes the
affections concomitant: The exact conformity, or correspondencie betwixt the
Assent or adherence (resulting from such knowledge) and the proper object
whereto it is applied.
1. WHether right or no, be it in the judicious Readers power to examine and
determine; such choice as is too late for us to recall is already made of
Assent, as the fittest thread to follow, for vnwinding those perplexities which
some late intricate disputes of adverse parties have wouen unawares in this
argument, which we after them labor to unfold. Now seeing every Assent,
especially of the intellectiue nature, so necessarily presupposes knowledge,
that the certainty (as has been observed) of the one, can hardly spring but
from the cleerenesse, ^^ perspicuity of the other, it will be a matter
altogether impossible to give the Reader a distinct and full view of the nature
and essence of that Assent, whose differencies and properties we out of
Scripture seek, unless we first acquaint him with the true force and value
of knowledge, understanding, or other terms of use, equivalent in the dialect
of the sanctuary.

2. That words expressing the acts of sense, or understanding in the holy
Ghost, or his language that had not only the form of wholesome doctrine, but
the very words of eternal life, usually include affections concomitant, is a
rule so often inculcated by best expositors of sacred writ, that to be curious
in recapitulation of several instances, would seem but truantly pains, to
such as are conversant in their writings: Yet, because we write not so much for
theirs, as for others use to omit them altogether we may not. And seeing
remembrance is but an act of knowledge reiterated; or a second agitation of the
mind toward that point, whereat it had arrived before: we shall more fully
conceive what it is to know, if we first know what it is to remember. And that
in the language of Canaan, is so to be affected with matters called to mind,
as the nature of them does require. Some things of belief and credence
undoubted, because related in Scriptures, are in themselves of such little use,
or consequence to our salvation; that barely to remember them suffices, to be
in heart affected with them is not required. Thus Jacobs making his son a
party colored coat, will, amongst other stories, present it self to their
memory, that have read through the book of Genesis. But whom does the
remembrance hereof ought affect? unless perhaps such little children, as are
desirous their Parents should follow this example. But not to be touched with
the affliction of Joseph, or old Jacobs sorrow, when his dearlings spangled
coat was presented unto his aged eyes, all besprinkled with blood; would argue
hard heartedness in an old father of so young and lovely a child. For
christian souls not to be yet more deeply touched, with solemn remembrance
of their Saviors agony, his barbarous usage at his arraignement, his
ignominious and cruel death: were to stain themselves with guilt of that
blood, which must wash them from all their other sins. Nor does the perfect
remembrance of what the head has suffered, affect the members with sympathy
only of his sorrow: but quell and crucify all carnal lust and concupiscences
that fight against the spirit, as in that article is to be declared. The
heathen it seems suspected Christian sacraments had been instituted, as bonds
of dangerous combinations, or conspiracies in mischief* but Adfirma^an^ autem
hanc fuisse summam, vel culpae suae, vel errcris, quod essent soliti stato die
ante luce^ conueni^^, carme^que Christo qua^^ deo dicere secu^ inuicem, seque
sacramento non in sc^lus aliquod obstringere; sed ne f^^^^, ne latrocinia, ne
adulteria committerent ne fidem fallerent, ne depo^itum appellat^ abneg^rent:
quibus pera^^^^, more sibi ^^scede^d fuisse (...) c^e^n^i ad capiendum cibum,
promiscuum tamen el innoxiu^. P^in. lib* 10. Epist. 100.
Plinies exemption of them from that imputation may instruct us, what use the
ancient made in remembering CHRIST'S death and passion. For thereby they
solemnly renewed the league of baptism, and settled their former resolutions
not to commit theft or adultery, not to falsify their words, or any way
defraud their neighbors.

3. The true force of this speech, to remember, whilst applied to matters of
morality, the Psalmist excellently expresses in the hundred thirty seventh
Psalm. Such as had brought desolation and woe upon their native country,
exacted mirth of them and his countrymen in their captivity. To these their
demands of the pleasant songs of Syon, he answers with indignation: Psalm.
137. 4
How shall we sing the Lords song in a strange land? If I forget thee ^
Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning. Jerusalem we must consider
was, at this time, in her widow-hood, forsaken of the Lord her husband, and
deprived of all her dearest children: Sion her head, sometimes decked with
majesty and honor, was now covered with dust and ashes, as with a mourning
vail^; and for her sons to have consorted with the idolatrous Babylonians in
their riotous mirth, had been more then to forget Her, whom they could not
rightly remember but with sorrow. Whence, in the next place heads; If I
remember not thee o Jerusalem, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth:
which words imply as much as this imprecation, Let this be the last song I ever
shall sing, the last words I ever shall speak: If I be iocound, either in
heart or speech, whilst thou art sad: Thus to prefer sorrow and grief for her
misery, before all the joy and pleasance Babylon could afford him, was truly
to remember the ruins of Jerusalem. By the same dialect, whiles he beseeches
his God to remember Edom, he implicitly wished as ill to it, as he expressly
did to Babylon, such de^olations upon the Cities and inhabitants thereof, as the
Babylonians, by the Edomites instigatio^ had brought upon Jerusalem; that the
whole land might be wasted with misery, that the enemy might take the children
from their mothers breasts, and dash their brains against the stones. So when
Artaxerxes thought it strange to see Nehemiah, as who would not to see a
Courtier, not sick, and yet sad, when his sovereign Lord looked cheerfully
upon him: the good man replies Nehem. 2. 3
Let the king live for ever, as if he had said, God grant he never know cause
of sorrow: but why should not my countenance be sad, when the city and place of
the sepul^her's of my fathers lies waste, and the gates thereof are consumed
with fire? so deeply did there cogitatio^ of what he had not seen, but only
heard, sink into this true Patria^kes heart. So likewise that prayer of his;
Nehem 13. 29
Remember them o my God, that defile the Priest ho^d, and break the covenant
of the Priesthood, and of Leu^ includes a desire that God should plague them
according to their deserts. And he else where upon like occasion expresses:
Nehem, 6. ^4
My God remember thou Tobiah and Sanballat, according unto those their works,
and Noadiah the Prophetess also, and the rest of the Prophets that would have
put me in fear. But when he desires God to remember himself, he supposes
this remembrance should bring a gracious reward of his good service, as ^^
interprets himself: Noh. 13. 14*
Remember me, o my God, concerning this; and wipe not out the good deeds that I
have done for the house of my God, and for the offices thereof. The like use of
this phrase we have in common speech: for when we promise to remember a good
turn done us: we imply not a bare recognition only of what this or that man
has done for us, upon this or that day: but a like hearty affection toward
him, and a readiness to requite his kindness, whenever occasion shall be
offered.

So when we threaten to remember our enemies, or such as wrong us: every man
knows the meaning of this speech to be as much, as if we had promised to be
even with them, or to do them as shrewd a turn, as they have done us. But
this is a remembrance which amongst Christians should be forgotten: yet as well
the phrase it self, as the practice of it may serve, to notify the right use
of the like in Scripture. Then we are truly said to remember Gods
Commandments, when our hearts are as firmly set on their practice, as the
natural, or unregenerate man's is upon requital of injuries offered. In this
sense (says God himself,) Exodus 20. ^
remember thou keep holy the Sabba^th day; as if not to fanctifie it, were to
forget it: and the Apostle, Heb. 13
remember such as are i^ bonds, not as scoffers do, to whom their misery is
ofttimes matter of mirth, but as if you were in bonds with them. So currantly
did like speeches go for as much as we have set down in Salomons reign; that
he deemed us sufficiently charged with thankfulness to our Creator, in that
we were enioined to remember him: and upon this consideration he exhorts us, to
take the inuentory of what we received from him in our creation, in those days
wherein we most delight, in which the characters of his blessings bestowed upon
us, and their true worth, are most fresh and sensible in all our faculties;
well knowing, that if we deferred this survey til old age come upon us, in
which life it self becomes a burden, our return of thanks for fruition of it,
and the unpleasant appertinencies, would be but wearyish. Eccles. 12. 1, 2
Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil days come
not; nor the years draw nigh, when thou shall say, I have no pleasure in
them: While the sun, or the light, or the moon, or the stars be not darkened,
nor the clouds return after the rain, etc.

4 In like sort, as well in sacred as common, though less in the school
language, (the greater the schoole-mens folly;) to know or believe, include,
not only a logical conceit of the things we know, or of their truth considered
in themselves, but withal a right esteem of their worth, or consequence in
respect of us. The original of these scholastique solecismes in moral or
sacred arguments, i^ I mistake nor, arises hence; that intentionall, or
abstract truths, whereunto in younger days we are most accustomed, being most
comprehensible and best known: we use our apprehension, or conceit of them,
because definite and unvariable, as the fittest scale to measure matters of
morality; not considering, that these require more dimensions, then objects
merely speculatiue, that their degrees are of another size, and oft-times
asymmetrall with the former, that our souls for the exact discernment of their
quality, require a more peculiar touch, then that light tincture, or impression
they have taken from matters logical, mathematical, or merely secular: albeit
all true knowledge, even of these must be commensurable to the subject we
profess to know, and rightly prop^^^tionate, or rather actually reaching to
that end, where at it le^els. Even in matters secular, or most abstract, if we
well observe that conceit or knowledge, which in respect of one object, or some
subordinate end thereof, is exact and perfect, applied either to an object
altogether different, or to an other end of the same, will appear to be mere
ignorance or knowledge, either imperfect or impertinent.

5 Know we may the length, or circumference of some plot of ground to an
haire-breadth; and this abundantly suffices even curiosity it self, in him
that has no other intent then to course, or exercise in it. In iour^ying or
shooting we examine not how wide, but how long the country is, through which
we roue or trau^il; but the exact knowledge of this dimension would little
avail a surueier, unless he have skill withal to gather the just quantity of
the whole surface from the breadth, as accurately known as the length: or he
that could from these two dimensions curiously calculate thus much, should be
accounted merely ignorant in measuring timber or other solids, unless he knew
th(...)icknesse of them, and from the distinct knowledge of all three
dimensions, to notify the just quantity of the whole mass or substance, the
most accurate knowledge whereof were little pertinent to him, that stands more
upon their weight then magnitude, both which only to know (unto a scruple)
would argue ignorance in him, unto whose purpose or profession, the
notification of their qualities, use, or operation, were only or principally
necessary.

6. Such a difference as I have specified between knowledge of lines and
plain figures, between them and solids, or between the quantity of such
bodies, as their weight or quality we must imagine between the knowledge of
truths speculatiue and moral, or between merely moral and divine concerning
our own salvation. The conceit or knowledge of these last, how exact soever it
be, if it be only in the brain, and imprint not the true character of it self
upon the affection, is no better to a Christian, then it would be for a
Carpenter to know the length o^ breadth of a piece of timber without the
thickness, or all three dimensions without any judgment whether it were sound
or faulty, whether rightly seasoned, or unto what use it would best serve in
building. It would be all one, as if a Physician or Apothecary should know the
picture, shape, or color of any herb in Mathiolus, or other Herbalist,
ignorant of its virtue or operation, or how it should be prepared for medicine.
Or, as if a Merchant, or Auditor should be able to display all the perfections
nature has bestowed on go^d (...) other metals, not acquainted with the worth
of it (...)ents, or in what countries it is most current. Briefly, seeing all
knowledge must be measured by the use or end, and this in the subject we treat
of, is the salvation of our souls, whereunto we grow by newness of life: our
knowledge cannot be perfect, unless terminated to a right structure of
affections in the heart, answerable to the Idea, or model of truth in our
brains; unless it bring forth readiness or promptitude in every faculty to
put such precepts as require their service, in execution. Of these two parts of
Christian knowledge, the one in the head, the other in the heart: much better
the former were defective, then the latter. He that knows rightly to husband
the ground he enioyes, what part is good for meadow, what for pasture, what for
corn, what for this kind of grain, what for that, how every parcel may be
employed to the best commodity of the owner, may be ignorant in suruaying, or
drawing a right plat-forme of it, with less loss, then he that could survey
it most exactly, but has no experimental skill at all in tillage, or
husbandry. Now seeing our Savior tells us his father is an husbandman, and is
best glorified by such fruits as we shall bring forth unto salvation, (the
true end of Christian knowledge:) he may be truly said to know more, at least
better then others do, that can improve whatsoever he hears or reads to the
benefit of his own soul, and employ those faculties God has given him to his
service. It shall be little or no prejudice to such a man, albeit he cannot
draw a map, or perfect systeme of divinity, or deduce one divine attribute from
another. Albeit he that can do this, and leave not the other undone, shall
receive his reward according to the measure of his talent rightly employed. But
if his chief knowledge consist in distinct conceiving of the deity, or
methodicall discoursing of divinity; this glorifies God but as the Painter does
the party, whose picture he has exactly taken; whereas our Creators glory
must shine, not in liuelesse and painted words, but in our works patternized
to his image, renewed in our minds; as towardly children express their noble
ancestors worth, by lively resemblance of their personages, and real imitation
of their virtues. It is a kind of cunning I must confess, to be able
accurately to paint God, or his goodness; but as little pertinent to true
Christian knowledge, as an artificial picture of a great feast, is to a poor
soul almost starued for hunger, unless it make us not painted images, but
true and live sons of the everlasting God. For, our light must so shine
before men, that they seeing our good works may glorify our Father which is
in heaven. That such a father there is, and that we are his sons, we must make
known to others by imitating his perfections.

7. Maldonat, seeking occasion to expound those words of Daniel. (Cap. 12. ver.
3.) Quiautem docti fuerint, id est, qui been sapienter que vitam suam
gube^narint, hos enim scriptura vocare sole^ ((...)) babentes intellectum,
sicut Galli, non eos qui docti sunt, sed eos qui moderati, s^pientes appellant:
Hi ergo (inquit Daniel) fulgebunt, quasi splendour firmamenti, and qui ad
iustitiam erudi^nt plurimo^, quasi stellae nper^etu^^ ^ternitates.
To these, or like points, do sacred writers usually extend words importing
knowledge; whether they speak of our knowing God, or his knowing us. Psalm 1.
6.
The Lord knows the way of the righteous (says the Psalmist.) And if he know
it, will he not reward it? Yes, with life, for the way of the wicked, because
as well known to him, shall perish. Answerable hereto men are said to know
Gods ways, when their demeanure is such as if they expected he should
presently take notice of theirs, either to reward or punish them. Psalm 9. 5.
verse 10.
It is a people that do err in their hearts, Maldonat in 13. Math. ver. 43.
(says the Lord:) for they have not known my ways. As they did err in their
hearts: so did they not know Gods ways in their hearts, for such a knowledge
of them, as is confined within the brain, or such as a man that never
traveled may have of a strange country by a map, no doubt they had. But as
beaten ways, and vulgar directions of the inhabitants, are better guides in
unknown coasts, then most accurate geographicall descriptions; so is it not
this superficial knowledge of Gods ways, that can conduct us to his rest;
whither none come but such as can tread in the steps of holy and religious men,
that have gone them, and learn that by experience, which others paint out and
decipher. John ^7. 3.
This is life eternal (says our Savior,) that they might know thee the only
true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent: equivalent hereto is that; Ioh.
3. 15
Whosoever belieueth in him shall not perish, but have ever lasting life. Can
faith and knowledge then reach to heaven, unless they be lengthened by love
and other Christian virtues? He that is warned to receive a Prince or man of
state, will make account of his necessary train, albeit no man's coming
besides be specified: Nor is it needful sacred writers should mention love, or
other attendants of those queens of virtues, Wisdom, faith, or knowledge; if
these be present the rest will certainly accompany them. He that says 1. Ioh.
2. 4
I know Christ and keeps not his commandments is a liar, and the truth is not
in him. Faith or knowledge without love, is not Christian, but hypocritical:
for only he that has Ioh. 14. 21*
Christ's commandments, and 1. Job. 5. 20
keeps them, is he that loves him. We know that the son of God is come,
and has given us an understanding, that we may know him that is true; and we
are in him that is true, even in his son Jesus Christ. This is the true God
and eternallife. Many were the peoples sins in the wilderness. Yet Saint
Jude comprehends all in this one, that they believed not. Jude 5
This ye know, how that the Lord having saved the people out of the land of
Egypt, afterward destroyed them that believed not. So does the Psaimist
attribute all the disobediences and rebellions of his forefathers, unto this:
Psalm. 78. 8
That their spirit was not tied by faith unto God; yea, Verse 23
the fire was kindled in Jacob, and also wrath came upon Israel, because they
believed not in God, and the error of the Israelites, that knew not the way
unto Gods rest, was in the Apostles construction) Heb. 4. ^. 3
unbelief. The word that they heard profited not them, because it was not
mixed with faith; for we which have believed do enter into that Rest. The
greatest praise we read given to the Israelites in the wilderness was, that
they believed God, and his servant Moses. As long as they thus continued, they
were not overcome by temptations of the world or flesh. And by what means do
all such, as are borne of God, overcome the world? Is not this victory from
faith? 1. John 5. 5
Who is it that overcomes the world, but he which belieueth that JESUS is
the son of God? The same dialect was well known in Iewry in his time that
said: Eccles. 9 19. 20.
The knowledge of the commandment of the Lord is the doctrine of life: that
all wisdom was contained in the fear of the Lord, performance of the Law,
and knowledge of his almighty power; Eccles. 3^ 24.
that to believe the Lord was to keep his commandments. Which last testimony
is very useful in the examination of faith, further to be insisted upon in
Re^d. Sect. 2. c. 5
that treatise.

8. It was but an effect of such men's folly as spend the best of their days
and spirits in coining second intentions, or terms of art; and after they have
gotten the skill to draw solid learning by this device into plain tables,
mistake these types or shadows for the bodies or substances; which first did
sever belief, and knowledge of divine matters, from practice; whereunto they
are as naturally linked, as the nerve is to the part which it moves. Nature
herself, not stretched awry by art, or misled by passion, (from whose
attraction or impulsion she is most free in matters of ordinary and common use)
always frames her language fully parallel to the former rules of sacred
speech. Into whose heart, beside the hypocrites, would it sink, that affection
should not increase according to the degrees of worth in the object, though no
better known then others are? Is not the quantity or perfection of goodness
as intelligible, as the bare essence or quality? Or can we in part be moved
with some few degrees of goodness known, and not as much more moved by equal
knowledge of far more? or can we rightly value the consequence of divine
truths in respect of our selves, and not frame desires of them proportionally?
Does any man not much affect him, whose excellent parts he highly esteems,
aib^it he expect no real favor or commodity from him? To say we know a man,
in ordinary speech imports a demeanor, or respect toward him, answerable to
that quality we know in him. To know him for a sweet companion includes a
desire of his company, or acquaintance, an unwillingness to fall out with him,
or to be estranged from him. To conceive of one as an odd, and unsociable
wrangling mate, implies a care to eschew all occasions of intercourse, dealing
or familiarity with him. If an inferior should say he knew his lawful
Magistrate to be a most impartial, severe Iusticer, he need not specify his
unwillingness to be justly accused before him of any crime. Or if we say we
know, or believe one to be a marvelous wise, honest, friendly man, who would
not gather, that whilst this persuasion lasted, we would be readier to commit
any matter of moment to his care and trust, then unto others, whom we know as
well or perhaps better, yet not to be so wise, so honest or well affected
toward us. Speak we of what knowledge we list, sensitive or intellectual, to
know any object, and not to be affected with such attributes, or qualities of
it, as are dissonant or agreeable to our natures, is indeed to know it, and not
them. To know that which in it self is terrible, and not to be terrified with
it, is not to know the terror of it. The Bear and Lion know the wolf by
sight, as well as the seely lamb; which no sooner sees him but is affrighted:
for of these three, this poor soul only knows him as terrible, and an enemy
to his nature. Rattes know that bait which is their bane; but as sweet, not as
poisonous: for, were it as bitter in their mouth at the first tasting, as it
afterward proves in their bellies, they would avoid it. James 2. 19
The devils (says S. James) believe that there is a God and tremble: whether
he speak of belief properly so called, or of some greater knowledge, certain
it is, they tremble, because they believe, and know him to be a terrible and
powerful Judge. Did they as firmly believe, or know he had mercy for them in
store: would they not love him and seek to avoid his displeasure? If our
knowledge, both of his justice to the wicked and disobedient, and of his mercy
to the penitent amongst the sons of men, whose nature his son has taken
upon him, were but such, as these infernal spirits have of his severity
toward them; it would command all our affections, of love, of fear, of
thankfulness, and bring forth entire: fidelity in his service. Though they say
the Lord lives, (says the Ierem. 5. 2
Prophet,) yet they swear falsely. Yet what truth more undoubted, then that the
Lord lives? But swearing this, they professed a belief or knowledge of it,
which they had not: otherwise, Ver 1 23
they had executed judgment, and sought the truth; they had sorrowed when the
Lord had smitten them, and received correction when he had consumed them. Ver.
23
But this people (as the Prophet ads) had an unfaithful, and rebellious heart:
they are departed and gone. For, they say not in their heart, let us now fear
the Lord our God, that gives rain both early and late in due season: he
reserueth unto us the appointed weeks of the harvest.

9. Why supernatural concourse, seeing it is as necessary as divine revelation
to produce the acts. should not as properly belong to the object of belief?
some schoolmen give this reason; because of these two the divine revelation
only is the ideall, or exemplary cause of our faith, and this ideal casualty
herein consists: That as the truth and revelation divine is in it self, so must
our Assent unto it, be most infallible. That they extend this conformity,
betwixt the object believed and our belief of it, no further; is not
disagreeable to their intentionall, or superficial conceit of this celestial
virtue. But constantly to our former declarations of that indissoluble
combination, betwixt truth and goodness in moralities, and the intrinsecall
identity of the will and understanding: we make not only truth, but
goodness also divine, with the several branches of it, the exemplary cause of
our Assent.

The former conformity between the infallible veracitie of the Godhead, and
our belief of whatsoever it shall say or teach, we take as transcendent, and
included in every Assent we give unto other particular attributes. This
mutual infallibility is as the authentic instrument, or legal form of our
assurance; but renewing of Gods image, communication of his goodness and mercy
in Christ is the patrimony or legacy conu^ied unto us. This is as a wrest or
screw, to fasten our souls unto his other attributes, all as apt, if closely
applied, to imprint their figure upon them as the former. Betwixt every object
assented unto, whether as good or true, and the faculties of our souls which
it concerns, there must be such a correspondencie, as is between the
Character and the letter enstamped. Our Assent unto Gods long suffering, and
forbearance of obstinate sinners, will quell unadvised anger against our
brethren: our infallible belief of his mercy toward our selves, and his
readiness to forgive our trespasses, though in number infinite against his
most infinite Majesty, will cause us forgive our fellow servants their offenses
against us; not until seven times only, but unto seauenty times seven times.
Our infallible belief that he is good and bountiful as well to the unjust as
just, will imprint a like desire in us of doing good, though to ungrateful
persons. This is our Saviors inference upon the explication of this attribute.
Math. ^. ver. 44 45. ^6. ^^.
But I say unto you, love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to
them that hate you, and pray for them which despightefully use you, and
persecute you: that ye may be the So it is said L^k. 6. 3^. Ye shall be the
ch^^d ^ of the most high, for he is kind unto the (...) and to the evil. Our
Savior in this place deduceth that precept from the divine na^u^e or
attribute, which the son of S^rach does from Gods will revealed; for to no
other end were his commandments given, save only to make v^ like him in his
(...) attributes or per^ect^ons. Many have refused to lend for other men's i^^
dealing*^ fea^^n^ to ^e defrauded. Yet have thou patience with a man in poor
estate, and delay not to* show him mercy, Help the poor for the
Commandments sake, and turn him not away because of his poverty. Eccles. 2^.
7. 8. 9
children of your Father which is in heaven, for he makes his sun to rise on
the evil and on the good, and sends rain on the just and on the unjust. For
if ye love them which love you, what reward have ye? Do not even the
Publicanes the same? And if ye salute your brethren only, what do ye more
then others? Do not even the Publicanes so? Be ye therefore perfect even as
your father which is in heaven is persect: not in some only but in all parts
of his goodness, revealed or proposed to our imitations. His incommunicable
attributes of majesty, honor, and glory, we are with reverence to adore, not
to imitate. Albeit, even unto these, his infallible veracity is as the handle
by which firmly apprehended, they have their peculiar weight, and force upon
our souls and affections, imprinting on them a general disposition to receive
the stamp of his perfections, imitable or communicable, an universal
inclination to performance of his will revealed. Thus in the language of
Canaan, he is said to ascribe praise and glory unto God, that euacuates his
heart of pride and vaine-boasting, in such perfections as he has received from
his immensity, whence every good gift does flow, and whither in thankfulness
it must return: he ascribes strength and majesty, that renounceth all
confidence in man, or other creature, and humbles himself under his mighty
hand.

Ethnici putan^ plures esse Deo^, and hoc tibi videris perfectus Christianus,
quod persua sum ^abes vnu^esse Deum? Quid magni facis? Idem er^dunt Iudaei, qui
quotidie blasphemant filium Dei in Synagog^ suis: idem credunt Daemones and
contremiscunt. Si vere credis in Deum, creed iustum and veracem: iustu^ in
remunerandis p^j^, and pu^iendis impijs: and veracem in promissis. Creed non
esse sp^m salutis, nisi per filium eius, quem pro nobis omnibus ^radidit in
mortem: creed nihil accidere mali posse ijs qui se totos illius voluntati
tradiderunt, et in illo perseueran^. Hoc est credere in Deum Patrem, hoc est
credere in filium eius, hoc est credere in Spiritum Sanctum, vnii Deum, and
Ecclesiam sanctam, mysticum Christi corpus, extra quam non est salus, et in quo
non est pern^cies. Quisquis in ^ali pe^ra pedes animi sixerit, aduersus omnes
temptationum incursus stabit immobilis. Cypr. de dupl. Martyr.
And seeing we must not only believe the Essence but the attributes of the
Godhead, and all belief presupposes knowledge, consonant to the language of
nature late mentioned (in matters, wherein she is ^est seen, and least
corrupt) is the dialect of grace. He is said to believe or know God, as just,
that seares him as a Judge most impartial and vncorrupt, and is afraid, to be
unjust least he take vengeance. He rightly belieues his power, that honors him
as a king most omnipotent, he his tender mercy and compassion, that
reuerenceth him as a most loving Father: he his providence, that commends his
soul unto him as to a faithful Creator; he, whose chief care is to cast all
his care on him, as on a Guardian most tenderly respecting the welfare of all
such, as with prayers unfeigned commend themselves to his tuition. That these
are the immediate and proper effects of Christian belief, or Assent unto the
divine providence our Savior enstructs us, where he attributes carking care,
or worldly solicitude, to Gentilisme or Infidelity. Math. 6. 31. 32. 33. Their
distrust, or rather want of apprehension of Gods care and providence over them,
is attributed to defect of faith. Math. 6. 30 Luke 12. 28
Take no thought, saying, what shall we eat? or what shall we drink? or
wherewithal shall we be clothed? (for after all these things do the Gentiles
seek) for your heavenly Father knows that ye have need of all these things:
But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all these
things shall be added unto you. A lively emblem of this correspondency
between the divine attributes and our Assent, or between the characters of
Gods will and ours the holy Ghost has purposely set forth unto us in the story
of Abraham. The prime and fundamental object of Christian belief, was that
most illustrious act of Gods mercy in offering his only son, in whom he was
vvellpleased, for the sins of the world. Now to show what manner of Assent is
on our parts required, for right acceptance of this inestimable favor; he will
have the like mind in Abraham, that was in himself: ready he must be to
sacrifice his son, his only son Isaac, whom he loved, ere the covenant
be concluded with him. Finally, seeing the man CHRIST JESUS (as has been
observed) is as the abridgement, or visible Vide lib. 3 Sect 3 cap. ^0. parag.
1. 2.
model of his fathers goodness, which is incomprehensible; his heavenly
disposition, the idaeall pattern, after whose similitude a Christians life
must be framed: we are then rightly said to believe his incarnation, life,
death, and passion, when (as the P^il ^. ver. 5
Apostle speaks) the same mind is in us, that was in him: when we are not
only willing to lay down our lives for the brethren, as he did his for us,
but when our lives and conuersations entirely express the true proportion of
that absolute perfection, which shined in his humane nature, as it did in the
Glory of the Godhead. His fathers love to him brought forth the like affection
in him toward us, and to his laws; so must his love to us work love in us to
our brethren, and to all his commandments. John 15. ver. 8. 9. 10.
Herein (says he) is my father glorified that ye bear much fruit, and be
made my Disciples. As the father has loved me, so have I loved you; continue
ye in my love. If ye shall keep my Commandments, ye shall abide in my love;
as I have kept my fathers Commandments, and abide in his love. Thus made
conformable to him, not in one, or few, but in all points of obedience and
Christian virtues we are rightly said to be edified in faith, and to have him
fashioned in us. Nor is there any Article in this creed, whose steadfast belief
does not in one point or other, work this conformity; as in their
explications (God willing) shall be manifested.

10. The whole platform of divinity, or Theology, we may hence gather, cannot
better be defined, or limited, then between these two lines or borders: A
distinct explication, first of the objects to be believed, and their certainty:
secondly, of the means, whereby their image or Characters may be engraven upon
our souls. This now may suffice, that, unto that assent of faith, or belief
in Christ, whereby the just must live; such a knowledge of him, and his
attributes is required, as shall enstampe our w^^ and affections with the ^iue
image of his goodness, and imitable perfections, as truly as matte^s merely
speculatiue imprint their shape upon the understanding, or objects visible
theirs upon the eye. For seeing all knowledge must be commensurable to the
objects known; in such an impression of whose entire similitude as the seal
leaves in the wax, the perfection of it consists: Our knowledge of moral
objects, divine especially, which are as essentially good as true, is
imperfect, v^lesse it include a solid impression of their goodness, as well as
a superfi^iall resemblance of their truth. From this indivisible union betwixt
truth and goodness in matters divine, their names in phrase of scripture are
often times used promiscnously. And it is a Maxim undoubted in Divinity, That
Christ Jesus must dwell in us by the same bond and knot we dwell in him. Now it
is impossible that any part of him, or (which is all one) of his live image,
should be fashioned in us, by any other means, then by knowledge or
apprehension of his incarnation, life, death and passion, with their
consequences in respect of us; impossible that he should abide in us, or we in
him by any other link or bond, besides firm and steadfast a^sent, or adherence
unto these, and other truths concerning him, reu ealed and known.

CHAP. IX. What manner of knowledge it is whence the last and proper difference
of that assent wherein Christian faith consists does result: the complete
definition of such faith.
1. SEeing the word in a general, the Lord of life, in a sense more peculiar,
is not only the object of our belief, but the true food of our souls; and all
food essentially includes a relation unto taste: the true nature of that faith,
or knowledge by which we live, cannot better be notified, then by such a
proportion between our mind, and the food of life, as is between the
symbol, or organicall faculty of bodily taste, and the quality of the meat it
relisheth. As our bodily taste though the same in respect of all, is not alike
affected with all meats, but relisheth every one according to their several
qualities, or degrees of proportion or disproportion with it self: so though
by one and the same faith we assent unto all matters revealed in Scripture as
true and good, yet our souls find not the like comfort or refreshing in all;
but some, albeit presented a far off to their sense they apprehend with
horror as the dregs of that cup which is in the hands of the Lord, whereof all
the ungodly must be enforced to drink: Others, though they come but within
smell, they entertain with admiration, yet feed not on them; as we lightly
essay strong waters or quintescences, but use them not as ordinary drink; such
are the inscrutable mysteries of the Trinity, the glory and majesty of the
Godhead: Others are continually longed after as their only food, more or less
according to the several degrees of their goodness in respect of us.

2. No man that drinks old wine straightway desires new, for Luke 5. ver. 39.
he says, the old is better. And in this case it is as easy to do as to say,
because one and the same faculty enclines him to like of both; and the
apprehension of ones relish or sweetness being as proper and natural as the
others, that which is so indeed will be esteemed better. For where the
constitution of the faculty is vniformaly e^clined to all, it is always most
forcibly moved by such of it proper objects as are most potent, or apt to move
it; as a just balance is always farthest cast by the greatest weight; But
though when temptations are a far off, and our corrupt. humors not stirred,
we say with Peter, Verba vi^ae aeternae habes: Lord, thou have the words of
eternal life, and what pleasures of this transitory life should we affect in
comparision of them; yet we cannot always approve our sayings by actual
choice when both are offered to our taste. And no marvel, seeing our sense of
the one is of all others the most quick, our conceit of it distinct and
proper, of the other most men in this life have no semblable apprehension, no
true or lively taste, but rather a smell, some hearsay conceit or imaginary
representation. Besides, the pleasures of that bodily sense by which we live,
and other desires of the flesh too deeply incorporated in our corrupt nature,
often lust so vehemently against the spirit inclining us to a liking of the
sood of life* that we cannot do as we would, nor continue our assent unto it
as better for the time being, then prosecution of some sensual good coming in
actual competition with it, lately ad^^dged of far better worth, whilst
contrary inclinations were not swared with present opportunity of enjoying their
proper objects. The immediate cause of this back starting* with the remedy*
comes most fi^ly to be discussed ced in the article of everlasting life. But
albeit even the best are sometimes, yea often overtaken with this fault: the
habitual constitution of every faithful soul must be much better; and our
faith howsoever defective in degrees, must be for essence or quality a true
taste; for as a learned interpreter of sacred writ has well observed out of
Plato, Om^is vita gustu ducitur, without taste there is no life. The degrees of
perfection which our spiritual taste wants, in respect of that bodily sense,
whereto it answers in proportion, is recompensed, even in this life, by the
greatness of the good it apprehends, or penury of eternal comfort or
refreshing; wherewith, who so will seriously look into the state of his own
soul, shall find it pinched even in the abundance of worldly contentments.

3. This true taste of Gods word, revealed for our good, alone it is, which can
sweeten affliction to us; and make us courageous to adventure upon all
difficulties that can be objected to deter us from entering into the land of
promise. Such speculatiue conceits of this food of life, as we may find in the
subtle disputes of greatest Schoolmen, are of as little force to inflame our
hearts with longing after that heavenly kingdom, as poetical descriptions of
some far Countries pleasures o^ commodities are to make us undertake their
Conquest: yea as much less available to this purpose, as their style is less
apt to move affection, then the others. No imperial Law I think did ever
prohibit any province to have maps of the imperial seat or homericall
descriptions of the Emperor and his Nobles banquets: though Ad Barbaricum
tran^f^rendi vi i ^le and l q^^^i^is (...) quisquam babeat facultat^m, ^ec
g^^^^s quidem ca^se, ^^t ^su^ com(...)o. r(...). ^. ^ qu^ res ^^p^rtari non
deb^^^.
some (to my remembrance) have strictly restrained all transportation of grapes,
or other pleasant commodities into barbarous countries, least barbarians having
experience of their sweetness, might out of love to the Land wherein they grow,
be tempted to work some mischief to the inhabitants; as the Gals are said to
have been drawn over the Alps upon the like temptation. Generally every
object ( caeterisparibus) moves the object to which it belongs so much the
more, and breeds an assent so much the firmer and more steadfast, as the
conceit of it is more proper, distinct or homogeneall. Sight of beauty, decent
gestures, or comely motion more deeply wounds the hearts of lovers then the
most hyperbolicall sonets that can be made in praise of feature unseen. Smell
of meats is more forcible then sight to stir the appetite, because this
sense has greater affinity then the other with taste, which alone can rightly
judge of meats and drinks, because the temper of it only rightly symbolizeth
with their qualities.

4. Every child of Adam is an old man from his birth, just of Barzillahs
temper, without all taste of such dainties as the great King has provided for
him. All of us by nature herein worse then his decrepit age, that we never had
any true relish of them: but soit is with us (until regenerated) as if we
should imagine one grievously distempered from his cradle; to whom others may
truly commend sundry meats for sweet and wholesome, which notwithstanding
prove distasteful and bitter to his palate, albeit, from a good opinion of
their love and honesty, that upon experience commend them to him, still
retaining a confused assent to such goodness in them as he cannot perceive but
guesses at; as many well disposed natural men do at the sweetness of the
bread of life, not distrusting the reports of others that so much magnify it,
yet erring as much in their conceit of it, as he, that had never seen house
or town better built then the thatched cottages of that poor village wherein
he was borne, should in his imaginations of London, Venice, or some like
famous City: whose error best appears when he comes to compare his former
fancies with the distinct view or sight of their greatness, their stately and
magnificent buildings. Now as our natural life begins and is maintained by
bodily taste: so is the new man framed and nourished in us by this taste
spiritual; which only rightly apprehends the nature, worth and qualities of
heavenly mysteries, it self consisting in a temper of mind symbolizing with
divine goodness, or with the heavenly mind of the second Adam. Our souls and
affections thus affected, have the same proportion to the several branches of
Gods will revealed, that every sense or faculty has to it proper object; and
this apprehension of our spiritual food by a proper, distinct, symbolicall
conceit of it goodness, is the last, and most essential difference wherein
the nature of faith, as Christian consists* which cannot possibly be wrought
but by the spirit of God. For as the object is, such must the assent be,
supernatural; otherwise it cannot have that proportion to food spiritual,
that bodily taste has to natural. The particular manner of the spirits working
this alteration in our souls, is a mystery, at the least to my simplicity,
inscrutable. To the capacity of the vulgar we may resemble his working in
general to a Physician, that restores one desperately sick, and utterly
destitute of taste, to a right relish and appetite of his meat; partly by
removing the distempered humors, wherein that sense of life lay buried, partly
by reviving his dead spirits, by insusing of some precious water. Answerable to
one of these means is the infusion of supernatural grace, which quickens us
unto life, making us new men in CHRIST JESUS; answearable to the other is
practice of ordinary means, appointed by God for mortification of the old man;
all which without the operation of the spirit are nothing available. What is
required on our parts that are patients, is handled in the third section of
this Book. Whether ability by nature we have any, or any cooperatiue with Gods
spirit in this cure, shall (by the divine assistance) be disputed at large in
the seventh Book of these Commentaries. Here at length we may define, the
faith by which the just does live, to be a firm and constant assent or
adherence, unto the mercies and loving kindness of the Lord, or generally to the
spiritual food exhibited in his sacred word, as much better then this life it
self and all the contentments it is capable of, grounded upon a taste (or
relish) of the sweetness, wrought in the soul or heart of man by the Spirit
of Christ. The terms for the most part are the Psalm. 63. 1. etc. My soul
thirsts for thee because thy loving kindness is better then life: my lips
shall praise thee, my soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatnes, etc.
Prophet David's, not metaphorical, as some may fancy, much less aequiuocall,
but proper and homogeneall to the subject defined. For whatsoever internal
affinity or real identity of conceit, there is or can be betwixt life
temporal and mortal, (which no man I think denies to be univocal;) the same
may be found betwixt food spiritual and corporal; if we consider not so much
the physical matter or corpulency of the later, as the metaphisicall
quintessence, which is one and the same in both, save only that it is pure and
extracted in the one but mixed and incorporated or in a sort buried in the
other, but of this analogy betwixt food corporal and spiritual in the
treatise of Christ's presence in the sacrament.

5 Whether this Assent be virtuall, or habitual, I will not so much as
question. Be it whether the Reader list to make it, question there can be none,
but that it admits many interruptions in acts or operations. Nor does this
argue the means or pledges of salvation should be less evident then matters
scientificall, so long as this habit or constitution of mind is not eclipsed by
interposition of carnal lusts, or earthly thoughts; whereunto our evidence of
spiritual matters is more obnoxious, then our speculatiue persuasions of
abstract entities: so is our bodily taste oftener corrupted then the sight, and
yet that Assent we give in perfect health unto the distinct quality of
wholesome food, no less evident or certain, then that we give unto the true
differences of things seen. The mind once thus illuminated with grace, and
renewed by faith, whiles not darkened by exhalations from our natural
corruptions, whiles free from passion or motion of bad affection, actually
moved and assisted by the spirit; has the same proportion to truth
supernatural of this inferior rank, that the understanding without
supernatural concourse, or illumination of grace, has to Objects merely
natural; nor can it dissent from the truth, whiles this temper or constitution
lasts, as the Jesuit imagines. Howbeit, so great evidence of matters
spiritual, as others have of humane sciences, is not required in all. Only
this I dare affirm, that although it be in some as great, or in some greater:
this does not exempt their knowledge from the former definition of faith. For
who would question whether S. John, S. Peter and S. Paul had not as great
evidence of mysteries, as either Aristotle had of philosophical, or Euclide of
mathematical principles or conclusions. And yet what they so evidently knew,
they believed and assented unto by the supernatural guifte or habit of faith:
and it was the greater evidence of things believed, which made their belief
more firm and strong then ours is, and enflamed their hearts with love of God,
and zeal of his glory, more ardent, then our weak faith is capable of.

CHAP. X. Of the general consequences or properties of true Faith, Love,
Fidelity and Confidence, with the manner of their resultance from it.
1. THat the goodness of whatsoever we enjoy is better perceived by
vicissitude of want, then continual fruition, is a maxim whereof none can want
experience. Hence the Poetical Philosopher has wittily feigned penury and
indigence, to be the Mother of Love: with which conceit the vulgar proverb;
Hunger of all sauces is the best, has great affinity. For this first
affection, or prime symptom of sense, being but a perception of want or
indigence, causes a more quick taste or relish then full stomachs can have
of their meat. But nature, without further alteration or qualification of any
other faculty, immediately teaches us to like that best, which best we relish
and find most good in. Nor skils it whether this love, or liking of meats
best relished, reside in the sense of taste it self, or from approbation of it
immediately result in some other faculty by way of sympathy: both ways this
internal sense or apprehension of want, or indigence of carnal nutriment, is
still the only Mother of love to bodily meats. Thus has the folly of man,
which wilfully deprived himself of celestial food, set forth the love and
wisdom of God, who has made this want or indigence of spiritual meat,
whose apprehension is the first root of our spiritual sense, a mean to
quicken our taste or relish of his mercies, and loving kindness, which is the
principal object of that faith, by which we live. But our taste once sharpened
to relish his mercies, aright, (without any peculiar reformation of the will,
or new infusion of other grace into any part of the humane soul, then what is
either included in faith, or concomitant with it,) cannot but pierce our hearts
with love of his infinite goodness, whence this sweetness distills. Even love
natural or civil, if unfeigned, between equals, brings forth unity and
consent of mind, mutually to will and nill the same things; between parties
in condition of life, or measure of judgment, or discretion, unequal, a
conformity of the inferiors will to the superiors direction. Much more does
this spiritual love of God, thus conceived, from a true and lively taste of
his love and goodness toward us, kindle an ardent desire of doing what he
likes best: whence unto us, as to our Savior, it becomes ^ Ioh. 4. 34
meat and drink to do our fathers will, and finish his work. For, seeing ^
Deuteronomy. 8. 3
man lives not by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the
mouth of God: thus to do must needs be part of our spiritual food.

2. From faith thus working through love, arises that most general property,
whose affinity with faith is such as it takes the same name, fidelity, or
faithfulness in all the service of God, without respect to the fulfilling of
our own particular resolutions or desires. For once assenting unto every part
of his will known, as good and fit to be done by us, as if to do it were meat
and drink unto our souls, we forthwith abandon all sloth and negligence,
much more deceit and fraudulencie in his imploiments. Of this general fidelity
practice of charitable offices to our neighbors is but a part or branch,
though a principal one, as having more immediate reference to the love and
goodness we apprehend in God toward us: the taste whereof is then sincere and
lively, when we feel a present benefit redounding to our selves from the good
we do to others, as if we actually perceived the cooperatiue co^currence of
divine goodness in these works of charity. As well this love of God as of our
neighbors, are, though in different manner, effects or properties of lively
faith, or of that grace whereof faith it self is the principal stem, as it
illuminates the mind or supreme faculty of the soul. Our love of God may well
seem to be an effect immane^t, or residing in the same faculty with faith:
Love to our neighbor an effect transient, as having a distinct In this sense
only did we mean, Faith and Charity coeuall ste^s of the same Grace lib. 2
sect. 1. chap. 7. Parag. 3
root, or original whence it springs, and takes it proper substance, though
quickened and moved to every good work by faith; as the moon has a distinct
body of it own, more capable of light then others are, but illuminated by the
sun. The substance or body of love to our neighbors, is natural humanity or
kindness; whose illumination, perfection and guidance is from faith
apprehending the goodness of God, whom we immediately love above all for
himself, as the only Creator and preserver of all, the only procurer of all
good to all, others in him, and for him, as our fellow creatures, and joint
objects with us of his vnrecompensable love.

3. The same dependence on faith have trust and confidence, or that affection
which in latin we call Fiducia Confidence, in their language of whom we borrow
the name, implies a boldness, or hopeful assurance of good success in the
business we go about; and naturally springs from a persuasion, either of our
own, or others sufficiency, of whose help or furtherance we may presume.
Thus the strong are usually confident in matters of strength; wise men, or well
experienced; in matters to be tried by wit or worldly policy; the wealthy, in
causes that may be swaied with bribery; men well allied, in businesses that may
be carried best by multitude of friends. But all these branches of confidence
have the cursed fig trees hap, Iere. 17. v. 5.
Cursed be the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, and
with-draweth his heart from the Lord. For he shall be like the heath in the
wilderness, and shall not see when any good comes, but shall inhabit the
parched places in the wilderness, in a salt land, and not inhabited. The
stock notwithstanding whence they grow, being purified and seasoned by grace,
these lopt off, and the true knowledge of God ingrafted in their steed, bears
fruit unto salvation. For blessed is the man that Ver. 7. 8.
trusts in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is. For he shall be as a tree
that is planted by the water, which spreads out her roots by the water, and
shall not feel when the heat comes, but her lease shall be green, and
shall not care for the year of drought, neither shall cease from yielding
fruit. The points toward which this natural affection, whereof all
participate more or less, must be set, ere it grow up into such confidence as
spreads it self throughout all the ways that God has appointed us to walk
in; are the articles of Gods power and wisdom over all the works of his
hands, and his favor toward us. The manner how faith does raise it, the
Reader may more easily perceive, if it please him call to mind, or hereafter
observe, that as well in the dialect of sacred writers, whether Canonical, or
Apochriphall, as other moral Authors, or common speech, there is a twofold
faith One passive, or obiectiue, which in English we usually call fidelity, or
faithfulness, whereunto we may safely trust: another active, or apprehensiue,
by which we assent unto the former, and rely upon it as far as our needful
occasions shall require. Of this reliance or reposall, confidence is but a
further degree, presupposing a firmer apprehension, or experience of more then
ordinary sufficiency, and favor toward us in the party to whose trust we
commit our selves, or our affairs. Fidelity, or faith passive, he well
notified in part, that told us, Quando fit quod dicitur tunc est fides.
Faithful he is in his sayings, that has good ground for what he speaks: or,
called to an account, is able to make such proof of his assertions, as the
nature of the business shall require. Faithful in his doing he is, that
approues the truth of his promises by performance; whom we cannot better
describe then the Psalmist has done, Psalm 15
One that walks uprightly, works righteousness, and speaks the truth in
his heart; or, as we say, one whose heart goes with his mouth, and changes not
his oath or promise, albeit the performance of it be to his greater hinderance,
then he conceived when he made it. Always the better opinion we retain of
this passive fidelity, or faithfulness, the greater is our active faith, trust,
or reposall in it; but trust or confidence in fallible, or absolute, we cannot
have in any mortal man. For besides that his heart or intention is unknown to
us, such abilities as now he has are obnoxions to change, so is his purpose
and resolution. Not the honestest man on earth but is mutably honest, at least
in respect of us; and where all other conditions be equal, we trust him
better, whose means are whole and sound, then one of a broken or crased
estate. For few there be, but sore pinched with poverty, will shrink from what
they promised upon presupposed hopes of better ability. And most men perhaps
out of a consciousnesse of their own mutabilitie, upon like change of
fortunes, or new discovery of dangers before unknown, seem to grant a
general pardon or dispensation to others in like cases: at the least, if
abilities upon such casualties be wanting, ingenuous creditors do not expect
performance of promises made, howsoever their debtors minds were affected when
they made them; whence (as I said) confidence in such men, if other conditions
be equal, are less safe: yet the more we trust them, upon less probable
means of ability, or upon external appearances of danger, or suspicions cast
by others of their likelihood to break; the greater eredite and honor we do
them. For as love (unless it proceed from a party odious and unlovely,) is
usually repaid with like affection, according to the old saying. V is vt
ameris? ama: so ipsa Liuit.
fides habita obligat fidem, Men often times become more trusty then otherwise
they would be, by the trust or credence we give unto them. God (in whom only
this fidelity, or faith obiectiue, according to the most absolute idea or
perfection of it, is immutable) is always more favorable to such, as
faithfully commend themselves and their affairs unto this care and trust. And
unto faithful reliance and reposall on his promises, we are tied by a triple
bond of faith, which cannot possibly break or untwine, once surely fastened.
If we fully assent to his veracitie, we cannot question whether he purpose
whatsoever he promised: if to his omnipotency, we cannot doubt of his
allsufficiencie to perform. For this cause, when the blessed Virgin only
demanded concerning Christ's incarnation, Luke 1. v. 34.
how shall this be seeing I know not a man, the Angel mildly instructs her,
Genes. 18. v. 14.
in the same terms he checked her mother Sarah, there is nothing impossible
with God? of whose veracitie or allsufficiencie she never conceived positive
doubt, only her actual consideration of his fidelity, or other attributes
before mentioned, was outstart by the vnusualnesse of the effect, or sudden
apprehension of her own integrity, never acquainted with the only known
means until that time of producing it. Lastly of Gods favor toward us we
can less doubt, seeing his mercy is over all his works, and he that gave his
only Son for us before we knew him, what can he deny us which we faithfully
ask in his name? Far more be the promises of his fatherly love, then are
the declarations of his power: fail we cannot in our hopes but only through
unbelief; which though it befell the people to whom his promises were first
directed, Romans 3. v. 3.
Yet cannot the faith of God (as the Apostle terms it) be without effect; for
they fell by unbelief, that we might be raised by faith. Though conscious we
be of our fra^^ie, often assaulted with others violence: yet the Lord is
faithful, and will establish us, and keep us from evil; or as the same
Apostle else where speaks, 1. Cor. 1. v. 9.
God is faithful by whom we are called unto the fellowship of his son Christ
Jesus our Lord, who will also confirm us to the end, that we may be acquitted
in the day of his appearance. These were the sure fests of Saint Barnards
faith, and in these meditations or articles his hope did safely ancher in the
midst of greatest storms: Tria considero in qu(...)pes mea con^^^t^^,
cha^^atem adopti(...) prom(...) pote^^^te re^d^^um^. M^rmuretiam, quan. ^^m
vo^^^rit ^n ipi ^s cogitatio mea dicens, Q^^ enim ^stu, et qua^ a est illa
gloria, quibus^^ m^ritu hanc obtinere speras? Et ego fi^u^^aliter respondebo,
scio cui credidi, and certus sum, quia in charitate nimia adoptanis me, quia
verax in promissime quia potens in exhibitione, licet enim e^ facere quod
voluerit. Hic est funi^ulus ^riplex, qui difficulter rumpitur, quem nobis e
patria nostra, in hunc ca^cerem vs^* demiss^^, firm^ter obse^r^ teneamus and
ipse nos suble^et, ipse nos trabat and pertrab^t vsq^e ad conspectum gloriae
magni Dei: qui est benedictus in secula. Born. d^ Euang. 7. pan. sermon. 3.
Three things (says he) I consider in which my hope wholly consists: Gods love
whereby he adopted me; the truth of his promise; his power to perform. Let my
foolish thoughts murmr as much as they list, and say: How mean art thou? How
great is that glory? by what doserts do thou hope to obtain it? But I will
confidently answer, I know whom I have trusted, and am certain that he has
adopted me in the abundance of his love, that he is true in his promises, and
powerful in accomplishment; for he can do whatsoeu^r he will. This is that
triple cord which is not easily broken, on which I beseech you let us hold
fast, being let down to us into this dungeon from that country which we
seek, that by it we may be raised, that by it we may be drawn within view of
the glory of the great God.

4. Seeing reposall or trust naturally increases according to the several
degrees of their ability, fidelity and favor toward us, on whom we rely,
rightly apprehended; and all these in God (as faith assures us) are infinite
and incomprehensible: our confidence of good success in all the ways he has
appointed us, should be without all mixture of diffidence, suspicion or
distrust. But as faith it self, though often failing in the exercise, must in
the habit, or for the most part be an Assent unto divine precepts as good and
elegible (at the instant of proposal,) before either auoidance of such dangers
as accompany their execution or profession, or retention of such pleasures or
commodities as must be made of, ere we can effect the purchase, or be capable
of the reward annexed: so must the confidence hence growing be habitually sure
and firm; albeit the whole world, the devil, or our own flesh conspire to
defeat the hopes we have grounded upon faithful prosecution of such means as
God has promised to bless. Such confidence was in the Psalmist, whilst
assaulted with the fury and violence of mighty foreign enemies: Psalm 46. 1, 2
God is our refuge and strength; a very present help in trouble. Therefore
will not we fear though the earth be moved; and though the Mountains be
carried into the midst of the sea. Though the waters thereof roar and be
troubled, though the Mountains shake with the swelling thereof. Psalm. 138. 7.
8
Though I walk in the midst of trouble (says another) yet shall thou
refresh me: thou shall stretch forth thine hand upon the furiousness of mine
enemies, and thy right hand shall save me. The Lord shall make good his loving
kindness toward me: yea, thy mercy, O Lord endures for ever, despise not then
the works of thine own hands. The like was in David, when the wise men of the
world, such as had learned the policy to bless with their mouths, and cursed
inwardly, had consulted to east him down from his dignity. Psalm. 62. 5, 6
My soul (says he) wait thou only upon God: for my expectation is from him.
He is only my Rock and my salvation he is my defense, I shall not be moved.
In God is my salvation and my glory: the Rock of my strength and my refuge is
in God. Nor was this any act of supererogation, or extraordinary affection
singular to him; but he exhorts the people vt to the like. Verse 8
Trust in him at all times, ye people, pour out your hearts before him: God
is a refuge for us. This is a point wherewith would God our Preachers would
pierce the hearts of their hearers by continual pressing it. For want of
confidence in good: courses is that, which will condemn this whole generation
of hypocrisy or infidelity. Nor could we distrust our doom, did we but
understand the meaning of those words following in the same Psalm: Trust not
in oppression, nor in robbery; if riches increase Verse 10
set not thy heart upon them: or those in another, Psalm. 146. 3
put not your trust in Princes, nor in the son of man, for there is no help in
them. In these he trusts and not in God, that uses the help of his wealth, or
countenance of mighty friends, either to abet himself in bad causes, or
ouer-beare others in good, as shall hereafter be showed. Now I will conclude
with the Psalmist last cited: Happy is he that has the God of Jacob for his
help, whose hope is in the Lord his God; which made heaven and earth, the sea
and all that therein is, which keeps his fidelity for ever; which executes
judgment for the oppressed, which gives food to the hungry: the Lord loses
the prisoners: the Lord opens the eyes of the blind; the Lord raises up
them that are bowed down: the Lord loves the righteous: the Lord preserves
the strangers, he relieueth the fatherless and widow: but the way of the
wicked he turns vpside down.

5. These being the live characters of divine goodness, and best motives to
breed confident hope of good success in imitation of him, in works like to
those here expressed: no marvel if our Savior so grievously tax the Scribes
and Pharisees for non conformity unto them. Math. 23. 23
Woe be unto you Scribes and Pharisees hypocrites; for ye tith the mint, and
the rue, and all manner herbs, and leave the weightier matters of the law,
as judgment, and mercy and fidelity; these ought ye to have done, and not to
have left the other undone. Confident persuasions they had of Gods
extraordinary favor; which notwithstanding, because it proceeded not from
faith fructifying in deeds conformable to his goodness, made them presumptuous
and open rebels against his Son, the only image of his glory, for doing the
works here prophesied by this Psalmist. Luke 13. 14
They despised him as a sinner, once, for raising up a poor creature, not
bowed down only, but together so as she could not raise her self* another
time for giving Job. 9. 24
sight unto the blind upon a Sabbath day: Often for the like works, here
ascribed to that God, whose name they were to sanctify by hallowing the
Sabbath day; all lively documents, that he which visibly wrought them was the
Lord, to whom this Psalm of praise and thanksgiving was dedicated. Such
confidence, as they, whiles thus affected, boasted in, was the very way of the
wicked, which the Lord turns vpside down. His sentence is already pronounced
upon it. Luke 18. 9. 14
Every one that exalts himself shall be brought low, which words he spoke
of the proud Pharisee, and such as trusted in themselves that they were just
despising others. Notwithstanding even this Pharisee himself, whom he makes
the pattern of hypocrisy, gave God thanks for his conceited righteousness;
acknowledging that whatsoever he had, he had received: but in that he gloried
in it, as if he had not received it, the holy Ghost taxes him for trusting in
it, not in the Lord, whom he intended to glorify for this gift amongst others.
And were we so wise, that a word, though from the spirits own mouth, might
suffice for our admonishment; this one place alone would instruct us, that he
trusts not in the Lord, but in his wealth, or dignity, that contemnes his
brother for his mean gifts, whether of Art or Nature, or disparageth his
worth only for the lowness of his fortunes.

6. Thus much of confidence, fiducia, or trust; so nearely allied to faith,
that some include it in the essence, or formal signification of the word in
the learned tongues: which opinion may seem to have some countenance from the
book of Homilies. But what there is said of faith to this purpose, is a
popular description not an accurate or artificial definition, like as also we
may not think the Author of those Homilies, meant formally and essentially to
define faith, when he says that faith is a firm hope, for so in the same
place does he describe it. And to speak the truth, he that puts fiducia in the
essential definition of faith, and leaves hope out, had need of as much
cunning, as he that should undertake to make payment of ten pounds, and
substract seven. For confidence, or this trust, in their form of doctrine
whose authority for the right use of such words is most authentic, is the
period or complement of Hope; contemnenda est omnis iniuria malorum
praesentium, fiducia futurorum bonorum, says Saint Cyprian. And again, Cypr.
^o mortalis
Laus est fides, fiducia futurorum mundi Idem de zelo and liuo^e. Tully to my
remembrance defines confidentia ^^ b^ sp^s perduc^n^i ad ex^tum vem i^c^^atam.
aduersa tolerare: It is the commendation of Faith to support our selves under
such grieuances as the world lays upon us, with sure hope of future good. In
this godly fathers orthodoxall conceit of this chain of christian virtues, we
may behold patience springing from faith, but presupposing trust, or
confidence, at least if perfect: parallel herein to the Apostle, Heb. 10. 35
Cast not away your confidence, which has great recompense of revvard for ye
have need of patience, (whose hold-fast he supposes confidence) that after ye
have done the will of God, ye might receive the promise.

The ground or supporter as well of patience, as confidence and fidelity in
doing Gods will, is faith, as is before deduced. Whether such confidence as we
have, that there is a reward laid up for the faithful, reach in the same
strength and tenor unto personal salvation; or bring forth like assurance of
our possessary right in state of grace; or, if so, whether it be proper to all,
as it is doubtless only to such as are endued with saving faith; or whether
equal in all, or at all times, or rather decreasing according to the degrees
of their delinquencie in such duties, as this confident hope of Gods mercy, and
fidelity in rewarding all, without respect of persons that do his will, does
impell and encourage them to: cannot so fitly be disputed, until the tenor of
Gods covenant with mankind, and other difficulties concerning free will and
contingencie, with the articles of Christ's death and resurrection, (from firm
Assent unto which this special confidence or assurance must flow,) be
unfolded. Here I only would commend that place of our Apostle to the religious
Readers private meditation, for rectifying and strengthening his faith in this
point. Heb. 10. 19. 20. etc.
Having therefore, Brethren, boldness to enter into the Holiest by the blood
of JESUS by a new living way, which he has consecrated for us, through the
veil, that is to say, his flesh. And having an high Priest over the house of
God: Let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith, having our
hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure
water. Let us hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering; for he
is faithful that promised. And let us consider one another to provoke unto
love, and to good works. Many other properties of faith there be, and diverse
peculiar branches of these general ones, here touched to be discussed after
the explication of the Articles, out of which they properly spring.

CHAP. XI. Of the diverse acceptions of faith in Scriptures or Fathers: of the
Romanists pernicious error concerning the nature of it, and charity whereby
his imaginary works of merit necessarily become either dead, apish, or
polluted.
1. FRom the several degrees, or differences of Assent unto divine truths,
before assigned, it will be easy for the Reader to derive the diverse
acceptions of belief, whether in writings Canonical, Apochriphall, or of
Fathers, from one head. Albeit I hold it not worth the inquiry, whether the
name of Faith in the Hebrew, Greek and Latin, were propagated from the object
to our apprehension, or Assent; or from these unto the object: for in all three
tongues faith is taken as well for that which deserves credit, as for the
credence we give unto it. More pertinent to our present occasions it is that
belief, even in scriptures is sometimes applied to the very first, and lowest
degree of Assent unto truths divine; and they are said to believe, that
acknowledge any article of faith, or part of Christ's doctrine, as true; albeit
the ground of their Assent were not sincere or sound, but rather humorous. So
it is said in the second of Joh. 2. 24
John, that many when they saw his Miracles believed in him: but JESUS
committed not himself unto their hands; because he knew them all: so did he
their humors to be like theirs, that upon like belief of his power would
have made him king. Others again are said to believe, when they Assent,
perhaps, to all Articles of faith as true, and good, whilst considered only
in themselves, without oppositions of such matters as they much value. So our
Savior tells us, that some, Math. 13. 20
when they have heard, receive the word with joy, and for a while believe; but
in time of tentation depart: and Ioh 12. 32
Saint John, that even amongst the Rulers many believed on him. By true and
lively faith rooted in the heart? So Bellarmine would persuade us: or otherwise
we might make the Scriptures as a nose of wax, or alter the nature of sacred
phrase, as we do counters in accounts. Yet if they Romans 10. 10
had in heart believed unto righteousness, they had confessed with their mouth
unto salvation: but (says the Evangelist) because of the Pharisees they did
not confess him, least they should be put out of the synagogue. And was not
this to be ashamed of him and of his Gospel before men? And whosoever is so
affected, belieueth not in that sense the Prophet speaks, whosoever belieueth
on him shall not be ashamed: for unless he acknowledge them in that day, they
shall not only be ashamed, but confounded with unbelievers: yea, the very
reason the Evangelist gives, why they did not confess him, condemns the
Cardinals gloss, either of great folly, or impiety. For (says he) they loved
the praise of men more then the praise of God: unto which latter they had
assented as much better, had they so believed as our Savior means, when he
demands of the Jews: Ioh. 5. 44
How can ye believe, which receive honor one of another, and seek not the
honor which comes from God only? Ere our faith become such as lays sure
hold on life, (for of such in that place he speaks,) we must Assent unto the
honor that comes from God alone, as so much better then that we receive of
men, that the later must seem as nothing in comparison of the former. The same
word, Quoniam ijs quibus fidem ad^ibemus, vel quae nobis cer^o persuademus vera
esse, si modo bona sint vel v^ili^, veluti si sunt promissiones, off ^^is and
cor accommodare solemus, and eorum spem and fiduciam in nob^^ concipere,
translatum est vocabulum fidei ad significandam fiduciam erga promittentes: In
his significatione ^^pe o^^ium est in sacris literis: Sane Mathaei no^o sic
accip^^ur, vbi ^u^e^ Christus paralyticum illum confidere. Ter^io accipitur
fidei vocabulum vt h^^ omnia complectatur, nempe assensi^^ illum fi ^^ mentis;
quo quis ^^^to persuade at sibi ver (...) esse, quae sacrae l^tter^ doce^^ sieve
promi^^unt, and fiduciam ex Dei omnipotent^^ bo^ita^e* quu^^ Scripturae
reuelant, concep^am, non s^^^ o^e, hoc est exspectatione promissorum. Sic
accepisse videtur Paulus fidem ad Roman 4. and ad Haebr. 11. Explicans enim
illis locis fidei naturam ac vim, passim a fiducia ad credulitatem, ru^sus a
credulitate ^^ fiducia^ delabitur, que fac^^e subindicat se nomine fidei
vtramque complecti. Certe scriptura quam ex Abacu^ ^^tati: Iustus ex fide
vi^i^, spem and fiduciam complectitur. Sasbout. in cap. 1. ad Romans
belief, oft-times is taken, not only as it includes these last degrees, or
proper differences of Assent unto divine truths, but as it is accompanied with
it essential properties, or with such works as impulsiuely are from it, though
proper acts or exercises of other virtues, faculties or affections, whence they
spring as from their natural root, wherein they reside as in their native
subject. The places are obuious to every one conversant in Scriptures. The
like latitude of perfection, whether from difference of essence, or diversity
only in degrees: knowledge, or understanding, in the use of sacred writers
admits. Nor did Saint John in that speech: [ He that says he knows God, and
keeps not his Commandments is a lyar] contradict our Savior, where he
supposes, that many know their masters will and do it not. For the disciple
speaks of true and perfect knowledge; the Lord of knowledge external, or
imperfect. The same analogy the Fathers retain in the use of belief or
faith. That the Pontificians can allege their testimonies, to prove faith may
be separated from works or charity; is as little pertinent to the point in
question betwixt us and them, as it would be in the schools to urge the
authority of late Philosophers, that stones and metals did not grow, or that
trees and plants had no local motion, against him that out of Aristotle did
maintain, all bodies endued with life were capable of growth and diminution,
or all with sense, of local motion. He that holds the former conclusions,
would account stones and metals amongst bodies inanimate, and trees and plants
amongst vnsensitiue. Now our question is not of every sort, or degree of faith,
but of that by which the Just do live. That no Father did affirm it should be
without fruits, or works of holiness, is more then my small reading in them
can secure me to affirm; albeit reason I have none to think otherwise: but
just cause so to presume, by the places our adversaries allege, so idle they
are and impertinent. Howsoever, I dare undertake for our assertion to bring
three Fathers for one, or testimonies thrice as many out of the best approved,
as any Jesuit shall do for his. And because some of them scramble at some
scattered sentences in Cyprians works, or others fathered upon him, I will
instance at this time in him especially; the rather because he sealed the truth
of his profession with his blood, and had least reason to be partial for
Faith against Charity, of whose abundance in his heart every letter in his
writings almost is a character: yea, so he esteemed of it, that he thought it
impossible for him to prove a true witness of Christ, though dying in his
cause, if he had lived without brotherly love. Credere se in (...) quomodo
dicit, qui non facit quod Christus facere pr^ce^it? aut vnde per^eni^t ad
pr^^ium fidei, qui fidem non ^^lt ^er^^re manda^^? Cyprian de Eccles. unit.
How does he say, he belieues in Christ, that does not what Christ has given
him in charge to do? Or how shall he ataine to the reward of faith, which
will not faithfully keep his Commandments? And again: Cum ergo Chris^^^
videre, gaude^^ fit, nec passi^ esse ga^d ^^ (...) nisi cum v^a^r^mus Christum,
quae c^ti^as ^ni^^i, (...) m^nt^a est, am^re pressuras and p^na^, and lachrymas
mundi, and non f^st^nare potius ad gaudium, quod nunquam possit at f^ri? Ho^
autem fit, fratres dilect ^^mi, quio fides d^^st, quid ^em^ credit vera esse
qua promi^^^t Deus, (...) est, cuius sermo credentibus ^ter^us and firmus est.
Si t^^^ v^r grauis and (...) aliquid ^o^b^ne^^r, haberes (...): nec te fall^
aut decipi ab eo crederes, quem stare in (...) atque in act^bus suis scires:
Nunc Deus ^^cem loquitur, and tu mente incredu^a perfidus ^^^ctuas? Deus tibi
de^^c mundo recedenti immortalitatem atque ^^ern^ta^em pollicitur, and tu
dubitas? hoc est Deum omnino non ne^^e, hoc est, Christum credentium magistrum,
peccato incredulitatis offendere: hoc est, in Ecclesia constitutum, fidem in
domo fidei non habere. Cyprian de Mortalit. ^e.
Seeing to see Christ is our joy, nor can our joy have being until we see him,
what blindness of heart what mad nesse is this, to love the grieuances, the
pains and miseries of this world, and not rather to make have unto that joy
which never can be taken from us? Yet all this, beloved brethren, comes to
pass, because we have no faith; because none belieues the truth of what God
has promised, who is true; whose word is eternally sure to belieuers. If a
grave man, and of good note should promise thee any thing, thou would rely
upon his promise, thou would not believe thou should be deceived or
disappointed by him, whom thou know to be constant in his words and deeds.
Behold, God speaks to thee, and ^ost thou perfidiously waver through
incredulity of mind? God has promised thee at thy departure out of this
world, immortality and eternity, and do thou doubt? This is to be altogether
without the knowledge of God, this is to offend Christ the master of the
faithful with the sin of incredulity, this is to have a place in the Church,
and to be without faith in the house of faith. The like has Bernard; who
speaking of the victory that is by faith, thus resolves flesh and blood moving
doubts to the contrary, Perchance it may tempt some, in that they see so many
acknowledging Christ to be the Son of God, still entangled with the lusts of
this world. How says the Apostle then, who is he that over comes the world,
but he which belieues that JESUS is the Son of God, when as the world it
self belieues this truth? yea do not the very devils believe as much and
tremble? but I reioine; Do thou imagine that he reputes CHRIST for the son
of God, whosoever he be, that is not terrified Ver^ntamen p^test forte mouer^
quid tam multos vi^emus credentes IESVM f^lium Dei esse, adhuc tamen mund^
(...) cupid ^tatibus i^^e^i^os. Q^i^i ergo ait: quis est qui (...) mundum, nisi
qui cred^, quia Jes^^ est filius Dei, ^um and ipse iam mundus id credat? An non
ipsi quo^^^ Damon^^ and credunt and ^ontrem^cum? Sed dico: Puta^ne filium Dei
IESVM reputat, quisquis ille est ho^o, qui^ ^^^ nec t^^retur ^^n mi^^^ienibus,
nec ^^^rahitur from ssionibus, ^^t praeceptis obtem perat, nec consil^j, a^
quies^it? Nun ^^ etiam si (...) se n^sse^ Deum ^actis tamen negat? Bernard in
Act Pas. de (...) Tes^^^^ in C^^^ e^ t^^* (...) 1.
with his threats, that is not allured with his promises, which obeies not his
commandments, and rests not satisfied with his advise? does not such a one,
albeit he profess he knows God, deny him by his deeds?

Ad sextum argumentum respondeo, Patres, cum dicunt fidem sine operibus non
esse veram fidem, tantum velle significare quod non sit viua and perfecta,
qualis reuera deberet esse. Nam and hic loqu^endi modus est vsitatus, vt rem,
quae in aliquo genere imperfecta est, dicamus non esse veram in eo genere,
sicut gaudium aut dolor (verhi gratia) imperfectum, aut non ita magnum, dicere
solemus non esse verum gaudium aut dolorem, lametsi aliquod gaudium sit aut
dolor. Mark (...). verse 16.
Valentian notwithstanding would persuade us, that the Fathers, when they say
faith without works is dead; would only give us to understand, that it is not
lively and perfect, such as indeed it should be: (He means they deny it not
to be numerically the same without works and with them, as the body (in his
conceit) is one and the same without the soul, and with it.) And it is a
manner of speech (in his observation) usual, to account that which is
imperfect in any kind, not to be true in the same kind. As for example, we
use to say joy or grief imperfect, or little, is no true joy or grief:
although it be some joy or grief. Who uses to say so but dunces? or who but
haeretickes, would deny the least degree of spiritual joy to be true joy, the
least sting of conscience to be true grief? Things little in any kind,
actually compared with others incomparably greater, we use to reckon as none;
so we might say the joy of the godly in this life is as none, in respect of
that which shall be revealed: But yet the least measure of our internal joy
truly denominates us joyful, if we speak absolutely, as the Fathers do when
they deny faith without works to be true faith. For they deny withal that
it then denominates as truly faithful, or belieuers, as is evident from that
observation of Fortasse vnusquisque apud semetipsum dicat: Egoiam credidi
salv^s ero, verum dicit, si fidem operibus tenet, vera etenim fides est, quae
in hoc quod verbis dicit, moribus non contradicit. Hinc est etenim quod de
quibusda^ falsis fiaelibus Paulus dicit qui confitentur se nesse Deum, sactis
autem negant. Hinc Ioannes ait: Qui dicit se nosse Deum and ma^data eius non
eustodit, meadax est. Quod cum ita sit fide inostrae veritatem in vitae nostrae
considerationem debemus agnossere. Tunc enim veraciter fideles sumus si quod
verbis promittimus opev^bus complemus, In die quippe Baptismatis omnibus nos
antiqui hostis operibus atque omnibus pompis abrenunciare promisimus. Itaque
^ausquisque vestrum ad confiderationem suam mentis oculos reducat^ and fi
seruat post Baptismum, quod ante Baptismum spopon^it, certus iam quia fidelis
est gaudeat. Sed ecce si quod promisit minime serua^it, si ad excercendu prau^^
opera, ad concupiscendas mundi pompas dilapsus est, videa^us fi^^m scit
plangere quod errauit. Apud miscricordem ^^mnamque iudicem, nec ille fallax
habetur, qui ad veritatem reuerti: tur, etiam postquam mentiturquia omnipotens
Deus dum libeter paenitentiam nostram suscipi^, ipse suo iudicio hoc quod
erranimus al scondit, Greg. Hom 29. in Ascen. Demmi.
Gregory upon those words of our Savior. He that shall believe and be
baptized shall be saved.] It is likely every one of you will say within
himself: I have believed, therefore I shall be saved: He speaks the truth, if
he have faith with works. For that is true faith, which in manners or deeds
contradicts not what it thus professes in words. Hence it is that Paul says
of certain false believers. They confess they know God, but deny him by
their works: Hence says John. He that says he believes God, and keeps not
his commandments is a liar. This should teach us to acknowledge the truth of
faith in examination of our life. For then we are truly faithful (or
belieuers) when we fulfull in deed what we promised in word. For in the day of
baptism we promised utterly to forsake all works, and pomps of the old
enemy. Therefore let every one of you turn the eyes of his mind unto the
former examination: and if after baptism he have kept his promise made before,
then let him rejoice, being thus assured that he is faithful. He ads with all,
that he which knows to bewail his offenses past, shall have them covered in
the day of judgment.

2. This last testimony will direct the reader to gather the like in other
Fathers, from their expositions of those passages wherein mention is made of
that faith, whereunto our Savior ascribes eternal life, or his Apostles
righteousness. The evidence of which places is in it self, to such as weigh
the circumstances co(...)nt and praecedent, or compare one place with another,
so forsible, that it often times extorts confessions from pontifician expositors
against the most received Tenants of their Church, first hatched by the
schoolmen, which never saw the light of heaven, but through the dark painted
glasses of the Cells wherein they were imprisoned, and hence imagine our
Saviors form of doctrine to be of the same hew with midnight Dunsery, or
grossest ignorance of sacred dialects.

Hiac accepisse videtur Paulus illud ad Rom Iu^stificati ex fide pacem habemus
erga Deum, nam and hic sequitur, Cultus Iustiuae quies and siducin, ^d est,
cul^us, seruitium seu obsequium ad iustitiam consequendam est nos, ^ostiaque
omnia Deo committere tanquam patri am^n^issimo; cui fidem dedimu^, quem pro De*
oa^cepimus* cui obtemperare, cu^^^^legem exanimo s^^uare promissimus; quiq^os
in suam fidem suscepit* quibus etiam, nisi in obedientes esse ^ellemus; se
nunquam des^tu^um ^ic^ssim pol icitus est. Haec omnia includ^t fides Paulina,
cui iustitiam tribuit ipsc. Forer* in 32. cap Iesatae verse 17.
One, upon these words of the Prophet [ The work of righteousness shall be
peace, and the effects of righteousness, quietness and assurance for ever,] says
that faith whereto S. Paul ascribes righteousness, includes all these branches;
to commit our selves and all our ways unto God as to a most loving father to
whom we have plight our faith, whom we accept for our God: sincerely promising
to obey him, and observe his laws. He thinks withal, that the Apostle did
borrow this speech, Romans 5 ver. 1.
Being justified by faith we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus
Christ, from the former place of the Prophet. Yet this Commentator stiffely
denies justification by such faith alone; how inconsequently to this
observation shall hereafter be examined. It well fits our present purpose, that
the righteousness herespoken of by the Prophet, is included in Saint Paul's
faith.

3. Quid sit credere in hac disputatione, ex alijs locis scripturae
discendumest, praecipue cap. 7. Johann^. Qui credit in me, sicutdicit
scriptura, flumina de ve^tre eius fluant aequae viuae. Scriptura quam co loc^
respicit s^luat^, habetur, 2. Paralip. cap. 16. vbi sic scriptum est. Oculi
Domim contemplantur vniuersam terram, and prebent fortitudinem ij^ qui cord^
perfecto credunt in cum. Cord autem perfecto credunt, qui non solu^s fidem
adhibent illis quae dicuntur in scripturis, vel alias diuinitus reuelantur, sed
praeterea omnes animae vires accomodant, vt faciant quod habes fides. vel quod
^a prescribit. Atque hoc modo accipitur a Paulo credere, videlicet vt sit
edauditum verbum commoneri, and tota an^mi adhaesione complecti, id quod
dicitur. Sasbout in verse. 17. 1. ad. Romans
Another upon those words of the same Apostle. The Gospel of Christ is the
power of God unto salvation, counsels us to learn the right signification of
this term to believe, as it is used in Saint Paul's disputes, from other
places of Scripture, especially from that speech of our Savior. He that
belieueth on me, as the Scripture has said, out of his belly shall slow rivers
of living water. The scripture (says this judicious pontifician expositor)
whereto our Savior had respect, is in the sixteenth Chapter of the second of
Chronicles. Th^^^ies of the Lord behold the whole earth, and give strength to
such as believe on him with a perfect heart. Now they believe with a perfect
heart, which do not only give credence to what the Scripture says, or is
otherwise revealed from above; but further address all the faculties of their
souls to do what faith requires, or praescribes. And in this sense does Saint
Paul use this word believe; as if it were to be moved at the hearing of the
word, and to embrace what is said with an entire adhaerence of the soul.
Very fitly to this purpose does our English translation, in the book of common
prayer, render that place of the Psalmist, Psa. 78. ver. 9.
whose spirit cleaves not steadfastly unto God. Which the vulgar latin,
seeking to express the hebrew, word by word, has rudely expressed non est
creditus cum Deo spiritus eius.

4. Two places of Scripture only there be, with whose difficulty or obscurity
the Jesuit, or other of the Trent Councels vassailes, hope to extinguish the
light and evidence of all the rest, so pregnant for us. The first is that of
Saint Paul [ 1. Cor. ^^*
though I speak with the tongues of men and Angels, and have not charity, I
am become as sounding brass, or as a tinckling cymball.] He that supposes all
faith may be without charity, (says Valentian) excepteth none. But our writers
reply; That the faith by which miracles (of what kind soever) are wrought, is
here only mentioned: and such faith, though never so entire and perfect, may
be, as in these Corinthians it was, without true love. The truth of which
answer, most probable from the circumstances of the place, as it needs
perhaps no further confirmation* so for the fuller illustration of it,
impertinent it will not be for the reader to observe, that of all the Churches
which Saint Paul had planted, of all he wrote unto, or vouchsafed any mention,
this of Corinth did most abound in all those extraordinary gifts of the spirit,
which might set forth the glory of Christ and his gospel before heathen and
unregenerate men, especially such as these Corinthians by nature and education
weere, earnestly addicted to humane arts and sciences, wherewith that City at
this time flourished most, for which reason the Lord in his wisdom would have
the messengers of his truth unto that place, 1. Cor. 1. v. 5.
rich in all kind of speech, and in all kind of knowledge, not destitute of any
gift wherewith they might foil their adversaries at their own weapons, as
Moses had done the Egyptians in working such wonders as they most admired in
their inchaunters. But though all these gifts were from one and the same
spirit, from which nothing can proceed but good; yet brought they forth such
bad effects in these men's souls, not purified from relics of heathenisme, as
excellency of secular learning usually does in the unregenerate. Every one was
given to magnify the gifts wherein he excelled, whence (as the orator says
of Aristotle and Socrates) each delighted in his own faculty, despised, or
which was worse, hated and envied his brother, as appears from the first and
twelfth chapters of that epistle. To men thus affected what duty more necessary
to be inculcated, then love and unity of souls and spirits? which for this
reason the Apostle so forcibly presses upon them, from the unity of that
spirit, whence they had received their several graces. Their faith was
fruitful enough in wondrous works, in healing, in excellency of speeches,
diueisitie of tongues and learned displaies of divine mysteries. What was the
reason? Because they were desirous of fame and glory, by manifestation of their
skill in these* and faith, though of it self but weak, works strongly when it
has conjunction with strong natural affections, or is stirred up by vehement
desires:

5. But that their faith was not fitly quallified for the attainment of life
and saving health, not such as could justify them in the sight of God, though
able to magnify his name before the heathen, and declare his wonderful power,
is evident, in that it did not command, but rather serve their vainglorious
desires or hopes of praise amongst men. The stronger it was the prouder were
they, and more ambitious, and the more such, the more dissentious, so as the
strength of faith, whiles it swaied this way; did ouerbeare the natural
inclination to brotherly love and kindness: the virtue and praise whereof not
with men only, but with God, had they known or rightly valued, it would have
enflamed their hearts with greater love of it, then of that popular ostentation
they sought after. But what should have taught them to have valued it aright?
Only faith, for by it alone we ^ightly discern good from evil; and amongst
good things which is best. But by what faith should these Corinthians have come
to the knowledge of brotherly love? The same by which they wrought wonders, or
some other? If by some other, the Apostle in all congruity should first have
exhorted them to embrace it; otherwise he had commended the beauty of Christian
love but unto blind men. For this was a disposition so well resembling the
nature of God, and such a peculiar gift of his spirit, as the natural man
could not possibly discern the virtue of it. If by the same faith that they
already had; then the same faith which with love does justify, did really
exist without love in these Corinthians until this time; which no protestant
must grant. This difficulty Bellarmine presses out of Saint Augustines words
upon the forecited place of John; ye see how the Evangelist reprooues
certain, whom not with standing he tear^es belieuers, who, had they held on
as they were well entered* had overcome the love of humane glory by their
proficiencie. I had reason to think any pontifician should have been afraid to
give us notice of this place, least we hence infer, that faith alone
overcomes all humane glory, and subjects it to the love of God, and of his
praises and by this reason it was to perfect love, not love it in these
Corinthians. For it was the love of humane glory, which alienated their love
from God, and from their neighbor. But as his manner is, he wrests this good
Fathers meaning to his present purpose: Add vltimo etia^ comentarium S.
Augustini, vt ali^s interim pretermittam Nam tractat 53. in Iobannem: Vidite,
inquit Augustinus, quemadmodum notauerit. Euangelista, and improbaue^it
quosdam, quos tamen in eum ^^^did sse dixit, qui in hoc ingressu fidei, si
proficerent, amorem quoque humanae gloriae proficiendo superarent. Quod ^^
fides ista proficere poterat and amorem humanae gloriae proficiendo superare,
certe vera fide^ erat ^ad^m e^im est fide^ (...), (...) and perf^^^^, sed ^o^
^^mper ^que magna* (...) ^^ fid^^ (...) non^^t ^adem, qu^ (...) no^ ^^^e (...)*
de (...)*
If proficiencie in such faith could thus overcome the love of humane glory, it
was certainly true faith even in the Jewish rulers. For faith is the same in
the beginning, in the progress, and in the period or perfection, though not
always alike strong: otherwise, when faith increases it remains not the same
it was before, but rather vanish, and another spring up in it place. This
objection goes wide of the mark he was to aim at unless we hold (what we
need not) that faith does justify by the bare essence or quality, without any
competent degree or measure. For though we affirm. [That faith which iustifies
cannot possibly be without charity,] we may interpret our selves thus; faith,
if it be in such a degree as is required for justification, or right
apprehension of Gods mercies in Christ, is always necessarily attended upon
with a correspondent measure of Christian love, yet If the Reader well observe
the nature and properties of faith before explicated he cannot possibly be
ignorant that every least degree of faith brings forth a correspondent degree
of love, that it is as impossible love should increase without a corresponde^t
increase of faith precedent, as that inequality betwixt two subjects should
grow greater without any variation of their quantities*
so atte^ded, not love but it alone lays immediate hold on life eternal. But
howsoever the objection it self is idle, and more sophistical then
theological. For may not he be said to profit in learning, that brings his
opinions to perfect science: albeit the essences of opinion and sciences be
distinct? Or who would deny him to be a good proficient in moralities, that
brings the seed of chastity unto continency, continency unto the habit of
temperance. The matter in all is but one, the progress most direct, yet not
without some rests or stations, by which the natural inclination or affection
remains neither so altogether the same, nor so quite different: but the old
distinction of materially and formaly might resolve the doubt. Every new
addition of unities to numbers, or of Angles to figures, alters their forms,
but abolisheth not the unities or Angles prae existent. So might the belief,
whereof Saint Austen speaks, be materially the same in beginners and
proficients, but formally diverse, as getting some alteration in the quality,
or better consistence, then before it had: and become, not only stronger, but
more lively, and active. In beginners, because not able to ouersway self-love,
or foolish desires of humane praises, it might be without Christian charity
toward God, or their neighbors in proficients, or such as by it had conquered
love of the world, or humane glory, it could not be without the love of God and
of his children. But most consonantly to the form of doctrine used by our
Savior in this argument, we may (in my judgment) answer to the question
above propounded concerning these Corinthians, by considering faith; first
according to the essence, or specificall quality of it, as it was sown in
their souls by the spirit: secondly according to the radication or taking of
it in their hearts, or seat of affections, which was to be wrought by the
spirit, but necessarily required not any infusion of new spiritual grace
numerically much less specifically, distinct from that they had. The quallity
or essence of faith (if we consider it preciselie, as the formal term of
creation taken as the schoolmen do it for a momentary act, not as Creation
applied unto this subject more properly (in Scripture phrase) includes the
renouation it self wrought in our hearts then the grace or quality infused by
which it is wrought, for whether that be of one* and the same nature in all,
God only knows: bound we are to believe that he is able to c^eate new hearts
in diverse persons by means, whether external or internal and infused, in
nature and quality much different. See section 3. chap. 1. and^.
Scriptures do for the whole work of regeneration,) may be one and the same
in such as perish, and those that are saved; so cannot the radication or
working of it be: so the seed which fell by the high way side, in stony ground
among thorns, and in good soil, is supposed by our Savior one and the same:
but the radication of it was in some none, in others too shallow, in others it
failed in the settling or taking. Thus charity was to be raised in these
Corinthians hearts by faith, for essence and quality, one and the same with
that whereby they wrought miracles: but by the same faith rightly set,
firm^lier rooted, and better taken in their hearts, or center wherein natural
desires concur; so as it might spread it self uniformly with them,
directing them unto objects spiritual and good, and fix them fastest upon such
as it adjudged best, and most effectual for edifying themselves and others.
For 1. Cor. 3.
had these Disciples, by Saint Paul's example, a affected no knowledge so much,
as to know Jesus Christ and him crucified; had they Galas. 6. ver. 14.
gloried in nothing, save in the cross of the Lord Jesus Christ, cructfying
them unto the world, and the world unto them: (both which were principal
lessons of faith,) or had their Assent, or adhaerence unto Gods love and
mercies in Christ been as firm and sure, as their persuasions of his power to
produce effects beyond the course of nature: it had wrought as great miracles
in themselves, as it did in others, even the same mind which was in Christ
Jesus; such love to all his members, (though their corriuals in spiritual
gifts,) as he bare to them when they were his enemies; and that was a love
truly wondrous. The arguments brought by Pontificians, to prove the faith
which works miracles, and iustifies us to be the same, make in my judgment
most against themselves: if we consider that these ministerial effects wrought
upon others, were but emblemes of those internal miracles, which faith once
rooted in the heart, and set upon it proper and more principal objects,
always works in the belieuers themselves. To cast out devils, was but a sign
of that conquest which true faith in Christ always obtained over hell and
death: to speak with new tongues, but a pledge of that renouation which true
faith always works in the heart and conscience: to take away serpents a
document of the virtue of faith in resisting, or deading such temptations, as
made way for death into the world; the drinking of deadly poison without hurt,
a sensible token of that soueraign antidote which true faith affords against
all the infections our ears are often enforced to suck from others
pestiferous persuasions; health restored to others by laying on of hands, an
irreuocable earnest of that eternal salvation, which Faith, if firm and
rightly set, never fails to take sure hold of: as Gregory excellently expounds
that saying of our Mark 16. 17. 18
Savior; And these signs shall follow them that believe: In my name shall
they cast out Devils, they shall speak with new tongues, they shall take up
serpents, and if they drink any deadly thing it shall not hurt them: they shall
lay hands on the sick and they shall recover.

6. Howsoever, upon these reasons the Apostle grounds that exhortation in his
very entrance into that discourse, 1. Cor. 1^. 31
covet ye earnestly the gifts, and yet show I unto you a more excellent wa^e:
Love he meant, wherein they might eagerly strive to excel each other, without
any danger of dissension. Many admirable commendations he bestows upon it in
the words following, to kindle a desire of it in their hearts; as well knowing
their faith to be strong enough in matters they much affected, but not
qualified for justification because not rightly planted, no^ set on such
objects as would bring forth Christian love, and true humility, but rather
pride and contention. Far was it from his thoughts, that the ardour of this
sweet affection could otherwise kindle, then from a firm belief, and full
adhere^ce to the love of God. [ 1. Io^. 4 19.
For we love him because he loved us first; yea because d we have known and
believed the love that God has to us, for God is love:] nor can we faithfully
apprehend this attribute in him, but it will prod^ce the like affection in us.
And yet for the right planting and radication, as well of faith, as love
spiritual thence springing, the exercise of brotherly kindness, or nourishing
of good natural affection is always available, and was peculiarly necessary
unto this people; whose contentious spirits did hinder the right growth, and
pervert the use of that faith which God had given them. Generally, the ordinary
means appointed by God for the right fashioning of Christ in our hearts, is
the precedent practice of those duties which the doctrine of faith enioines us,
as shall hereafter be showed.

7. To such as weigh the circumstances above expressed, Saint Paul's meaning in
the words late cited may best be gathered from the like speech of S. James:
James ^. 10.
He that keeps the whole la^e, and yet fails in one point, is guilty of
all: seeing his failing in the one (as shall appear) witnesses he keeps none
aright. The ground of this inference presupposed these words, [ If I had all
faith, so that I could move Mountains, and had not love, I were nothing,]
sound, as if the Apostle had said, though I had faith of force enough to
produce variety of miracles, and all other effects whatsoever, and yet not
effectual to bring forth Christianloue, neither I nor it were any thing
vvorth. For in that it works not love, it is apparently dead in it self,
unable to give life to any: but once firmly believing Christ loved us, it is
impossible we should not love him again, and for him our neighbors, not
believing this truth aright, we cannot believe any other point as we should,
nor by that faith which rooted, as our Savior speaks, L k. 8. 15
in an honest heart, brings forth fruit with patience to salvation. Is there
any Jesuit that will, or dare affirm that faith the Corinthians had was
altogether such as Saint Paul ascribes righteousness unto, such as the Prophet
speaks of, when he says, the just shall live by his faith? For of that faith
( Paul being witness) the performance of Gods will, and patient expectation of
his promises, or as Romish writers confess, fear of God, entire submission of
our minds unto his will, and steadfast reliance upon his providence, are
infallible consequences.

8. The Schoole-mens collections from the former place of Saint Paul, that
charity is as it were the soul and perfection of faith are of as little
validity; as if from this of Saint James late cited, I should infer some one
Commandment to be the form, or soul of all the rest, because if we
transgress one, (that, for example, Thou shall do no murder) our observation
of all the rest should profit us nothing to salvation. Or if the Reader will
remember the definition, or proprieties of faith, last set Chap. 6. 10
down; this conceit is as preposterous, as if we should make love to our meat,
the soul or form of a See Chap. 6. 16
perfect taste. For meat, wholesome and pleasant, we cannot perfectly relish,
but we must love it, howbeit we live not by loving it but by tasting, eating,
and digesting it. No more can we rightly believe Christ's death and passion, but
we must love him and his members: yet live we not by loving them, but by
tasting Gods love and favor to us, or (as I need not be afraid to speak) by
eating Christ's flesh, and drinking his blood. For though by faith, one and the
same, we Assent unto every article in our creed: yet, this faith does not
justify, but as it respects Christ's body given for our sins, or as it
cleaues unto Gods mercies manifested in that eternal sacrifice, always
breathing out life to men, renot neing all trust and confidence even in such
graces as we have received from him. All this notwithstanding, if we compare
love and faith together, as parts of that righteousness which is in us, not
considering the necessary dependence Love has of Faith in nature: to love is
more then to believe, because it necessarily includes belief: so is it more to
love our meat then to taste it; because love supposes taste: howbeit in
respect of life, to taste our meat is of more use then to love it. So is it
more to move then to live; for all vicall motion includes in it acts of life:
yet is not motion simply better then life, or the sensitive sacultie whence it
proceeds, because it wholly depends on them, not they on it.

9. The second principal place of Scripture they usually allege, does utterly
discredit themselves; but breeds no difficulty to us in this present argument:
for that the faith whereof Saint James speaks, does differ as much from that
whereto S. Paul ascribes righteousness, as a live man does from a dead or a
body endued with life and motion from a statue or painted image; no heathen
artist, that could but understand the very terms of their seeming
contradictory propositions, would deny: albeit some Romish writers, of no mean
rank, have been given over unto such Jewish blindness, as to abuse Saint
James authority, not only to hold justification by works as well as faith,
whereto his words incline, (as the thing it self in his sense, though not in
that construction they make of it, is most true:) but to persuade the ignorant,
that such faith as S. Paul commends, may be without works, or christian love.
But their folly herein will work shame in such of their successors, as shall
comment upon these two Apostles writings, (as in some of their predecessors it
has done:) if they consider that those very works, without which faith in
Saint James construction suffices not unto salvation, are expressly
comprehended in that faith, whereby S. Paul tells us the Just do live. James 2. 21
Was not Abraham our father justified through works, when he offered his son
Isaac upon the altar? he meant no more (nor was more pertinentto his intended
conclusion) then if he had thus spoken: If Abraham had said (as they did whose
empty faith he disapproues) I have faith but had not proved his sayings true by
his deeds, or readiness to offer up his only Son when God commanded him,
(for actually he did not offer him:) he had not been justified before God.
Why? because he had not believed in such sort as Saint Paul meant, when he
says, by faith Abraham offered up Isaac when he was tried. But it may be this
faith was informed, perfected, or instigated to this act by love? of whom? not
of Isaac; for that was the maine obstacle to work distrust, the chief
antagonist of his faith: Not of Sarah, or any other friends or neighbors; all
which doubtless had dissuaded him, had he acquainted them with his purpose.
Was it then the love of God? Him indeed he loved above all, because he firmly
believed his mercy and loving kindness toward him: but this love supposed, it
was his Assent unto Gods omnipotent power, which as the Apostle expressly tells
us, moved him to this act. Heb. 11. 19
For he considered that God was able to raise him from the dead, from whence
also he received him in a figure.

This consideration or inducement was a work, yet a proper act of faith, no
way of love. But love perhaps did make it meritorious? The love indeed
wherewith God loved him, made his working faith acceptable in his sight: but
that it was strength of faith, not the quality of love, which God imputed unto
him for righteousness; the same Apostle, (for doubtless the same hand it was
which penned the eleventh to the Hebr^es, and the fowrth unto the Romans) puts
it out of doubt; Romans 4. 19 20
being not weak in faith, he considered not his body now dead, when he was
now a hundred year old; neither yet the deadness of Sarahs womb. He
staggered not at the promise of God through unbelief: but was strong in
faith, giving glory to God. And being fully persuaded that what he had promised
he was also able to perform. And therefore it was imputed unto him for
righteousness. One and the same faith it was, and standing at the same bent,
unless by continuance of like trial increased in strength, which wrought in
him a readines^^ of mind to sactifice his only son, in hope of a joyful
resurrection, and to expect his birth from the dead womb of Sarah. The object
likewise whereto his Assent did adhere, was one and the same, ( his fidelity
which had promised:) on which faithfully still relying, it was impossible his
other faculties or affections should not subscribe to whatsoever his Assent of
faith should enioine them: and that remaining in wonted strength, it could not
but bring forth perfect love, and good works; which may be said in such a sense
to perfect it, as we are said to bless God, that is to declare his
blessedness. For as Gods love to us was most apparent in offering his only
Son: So Abraham's love to God was best manifested by sacrificing his son
Isaac, whom he loved; yet he sacrificed him by faith. wherefore his love did
result from firm Assent to Gods covenant, and mercy, made to mankind in him:
in the faithful acceptance whereof, and full acquiescence therein, his
righteousness (as in due place shall be showed) did consist.

10. This comment upon the Apostles words concerning Abraham's works, gives us
the true meaning of the like concerning Rahab. James 2. 25
Likewise also was not Rahab the harlot justified by works, when she
recei^ed the messengers, and had sent them out another way? If she had said
unto these messengers only thus: I believe the God of heaven and earth has
given you this whole land for a possession; yet I dare not show you any
kindness in this city: her belief had bin as dead, as a body without breath or
motion But what man or woman living is there of common sense, which once firmly
persuaded, that God in justice had given his native country unto foreign
people whom he loved, but would seek to merit their favor by grateful
offices? It was extraordinary in this woman firmly to believe, as she told the
messengers: but resting so persuaded, a work of no perfection to make her
peace with the Israelites*^ad she doubted, whether their title unto the land
of Canaan had been just; or suspected Gods donation of it unto Abraham to have
been forged by his successors, as Constantines is by the baser Roman clergy:
she might without any just imputation, for want of love or other good works,
have adventured her life amongst her neighbors in defense of her country. Or
had she upon the Israelites misdemeanors, distrusted their success: she might
at last in worldly policy, have rather hazarded their future displeasure, then
incurred present danger of death, or torture of her Citizens for harboring
spies. But whiles she firmly belieues, both that the Israelites donation was
from God, and that they would certainly prevail against her people; though her
entertainment and concealment of them were acts of kindness, prudence and
humanity; yet their omission had been properly not of faith; because
impulsiuely they were from faith, nor could they have been omitted but through
unbelief, or distrust unto Gods promises. Worldlings would have condemned her,
not for want of charity, but for excess and folly rather, had she not done
as she was persuaded. By faith then those works become righteous, which
without it had been traitorous. And if we respect not the cause of our
knowledge, but the thing known, faith did perfect the works, the works only
made the perfection of faith known to men. In this sense it is most true of
faith, what some misapply to justification of men's persons: works justify and
perfect faith, not in the nature of the thing, but in the sight of man, to whom
they witness the liuelihood and perfection of faith, no^ as causes, but
effects and signs: of our iustifiattion* they are not only signs, but
conditions concomitant or precedent. In the same sense are these other words of
the Apostle to be understood: As the body without the spirit is dead; so faith
without works is dead also. For if a humane body want spirit, breath or
motion, we rightly gather it wants life: yet are breath and motion rather
effects then causes of life. But the schoolmen, dreaming the holy Ghost had
been scholar to Aquinas, or some chief masters of their profession, take the
sprit in this place for actus primus, as the soul by which we live and
breath; and hence they conceived that gross error, (which the Romanist now
makes an article of his belief,) to wit, that works animate, or at least
casually perfect faith, as the soul of man does his body. And whereas Calvin
most acutely and orthodoxally infers, that if faith without works or charity
bedead, it is not properly, but equiuocally called faith: Ad quartum argumentum
respond^^. D^plic^t^^ al^q^^^ posse dici mortuum; vno modo p^^ defectum animae,
quae est forma intri^seca hominis. Et quod st^ ^o^^ mortuum dicitur, non est
a^pl^us vere tale; vt homo mortuu^ non est ^ere homo. Altero modo dicitur
aliquid mortuu^ per defectum formae extrinsecae, sicut corpus quod dicitur
mortuum per defectum animae viuae, quae est quid extrinsecum corpor^, vt corpus
est. Et quod ist^ modo dicitur mortuum, nihilominus est; vt corpus mortuum vere
nihilominus est corpus, quamuis non vivum corpus Valent. Tom. 3. dis. 1.
quaest. 4. punct. 4. The same answer has Bellarmine lib. 1. de
iustificatione. cap. 15.
They reply, works or charity do not inform faith intrinsecally, as the
reasonable soul does man; for so it would follow, that as he is not a man but
a dead trunk which has no soul; so it should not be true faith, but an image
or dead picture of faith, which wants works or charity. How then do they
perfect faith? Extrinsecally: as the soul does the body, or other half of
man, which remains a true body though no true man, after the souls departure.
For application of this distinction they adioine, when Saint James affirms
faith to be dead without works, he terms it dead in such a sense, as we say
a body is dead by the souls absence, and yet remains a true body. Whence
says Valentian, the sectaries have furnished us with an argument against
themselves. Rather this answer is contrary to Valentians, and his fellows
assertions: for were his illustration true and pertinent, works or faith
should constitute one grace and quality, as the body and soul make one man,
which no Papist dare affirm of the habit of faith and charity, being graces
in their judgments specifically distinct. And Non se^tiunt, quod tharit^^
proprie si^ forma sides, aut essentialis, vt anima dicitur forma ^ominis, aut
accidetalis aut extrinseca vt al^id^ c^rpor^s* Hoc ^^^m falsum esse ex ^^
perspicuum est, quod (...) and ^i^es s^nt du^ virtutes sp^cied (...), quae duas
d^^c sas potent^^^ (...). Solum igitur vol^^t T^^^l^g^, Charitatem quon^^^
p^^^ect an^m aliquam ad^^^ fides, metaphorice dici posse formam ipsius;
secundum Analogiam videlicet ad formam proprie dict^^ quae suo modo subiectum
perficit. Valent. Tom. 3. disp. 1. qu^st. 4. puncto 3.
Valentian, who stands most upon the former illustration, expressly denies that
charity (much less works) can be any proper form of faith; either
intrinsecall, as the reasonable soul is of man; or extrinsecall as whiteness
is of the body. Some perfection notwithstanding Charity gives to Faith; in
which respect it may, by analogy to true and proper forms, be metaphorically
said to inform says. The perfection it gives, he so expresses, that the
Latin Reader, by his words Sed quaerat aliquis, quae^am sit illa perfectio,
quam charitas tribuit fidei. Respondeo duplicem esse: vna est quod per
charitatem valet ad ^eatitudinem consequendam id est ad meritum sicut disput^ui
Tom. 2. disp. 8. quaest. v^t. Et quidem quod hanc perfectionem sides ex
charitate accipiat, certum est ex fide: Altera perfectio est quod qua^e^ us
fidei actus per imperium charitatis refertur ad vltimum finem id est quat^nus
credat aliquis propter Deum vt summum bonum, pertinet actus fidei ad ^and^m
specie rectitudinem ad quam ipsa charitas, atque adeo est eiusdem speciei cuius
est ips^ charitas. Hoc autem est discrimen, quod rectitudo haec est essentialis
ipsi charitat^, vt quae secundum sua^ rationem non habet ^^^m la^dem, quam quod
respicit in summum, quod est Deus. Fidei vero non est haec rectitudo nisi
accidentalis, quate^us fidei accidit, vt ipsius actus voluntary per charitatem
referatur in summum bonum. Valent. ibid. punct. 3.
cited at full in the margin, (for I will not trouble the text with them) may
plainly perceive he was desirous to say somewhat, but he knew not what. Ipsum
viuere est ipsum operari, ^i^nt Philosoph^, operatio autem vitalis non a
corpore profic^scitur, sed a coniunctione spiritus cum idone^ corpore. Nec ver^
Apost^l^ ^pera fidei spiritum esse dicit; sed de vitae appellatione ac nomine
tantum ^g^t. Tam, inquit, verum est fidem si^e operibus mortuam dici, quaem
verum est de corpore sine spirit^, esse dicique mortuum. Ar* Most. ^n verse 26.
^^^. 2. Epist. D. Iacobi.
Arias Montanus, who better understood Saint James his phrase, by the analogy
of faith, and form of wholesome doctrine, then Valentian did himself, or this
fictitious analogy betwixt Charity and natural forms: interprets the former
place in part to our purpose: To live as Philosophers say, is to operate; and
vital operation proceeds not from the body, but from the spirit; nor does
^^e Apostle say, works are the spirit of faith, where he speaks only of the
appellation or name of life. His meaning is, that faith without works is as
truly reputed dead, as the body without the spirit is rightly said (as it
truly is) dead. But if we will not wrest the letter against the Apostles
meaning, but rather gently apply his words to his intent: the word (...)
implies only breath, or motion enspired from the soul, for works in their
nature are operations, and are more fitly compared to breathings, or motions,
then to the substantial spirit or soul, or the faculty whence these flow;
which last in proportion best answers to faith. Now as the readiest way to
^et breath in one fallen in a swound, or raise one up out of a dead ^it, is to
revive the spirits, by which vital motions are inspired and managed, so the
only way to bring forth living works or fruits of righteousness, is to
quicken or strengthen faith, which lively in it self, and able to perform it
proper acts, as firmly to apprehend Gods power, justice, and mercy; will
undoubtedly give life to all other powers and affections, and impell them to
their proper functions. The Romanist as ignorant as the Jew of this
righteousness which is by faith, preposterously seeks to make us new men in
Christ, not by reviving faith, which is as the animal spirit, by whose
influence works become vital: but as if one from this principle in nature; man
is dead without breath and motion, should seek to bring men out of swounds or
dead fits, by blowing breath into them with a quill, or making them move by
devises; so he grosely mistaking that saying of S. James, as the body without
the spirit, so faith without works is dead also, hence seeks to raise up such
as die in Adam, after the same manner we have seen them raised which fall
down dead in an anticke, first by wagging one arm, then another, until the
whole body move. The anticke tricks of Monckes and Friars to cosen the
people, by making images wagge or seem to speak, may serve as an emblem of
that imposture, or Gull which Satan by Gods just judgment has put upon their
subtilest wits in this argument. These Couseners made the people ofttimes
think some Saint had moved or spoken, when a knave did stir the image, or
vent his own unhallowed breath through it or about it: and Satan makes them
believe they are moved by the spirit of God, in such actions as are not
enspired by faith, but thrust upon them by his wicked Angels. Works of charity
they esteem all such as outwardly resemble the actions of Christ or his
Saints, though conceived not by faith but upon other motives; as motion infused
by art may to the eye of man exactly counterfeit motion natural. This is a
maine branch of that great mystery of iniquity; For by this error, as their
faith is never revived, so their works though fair and pompous in outward
show, and such as would be most pleasant unto their God, did they spring from
minds and affections renewed by lively faith, being superadded only to this
dead faith, neither can perfect it nor receive perfection from it, but become
like sweet flowers, usually put upon dead corpse, the sent of whose corruptions,
hinder they may for a time, but surer at length to participate thereof then
communicate their fragrancieto it.

10 It is a contemplation very profitable, to mark what troops of errors may
issue from one place of scripture mistaken, and how private opinions conceived
through ignorance and conceived by negligence, are oftimes established by
wilfulness of public authority, for who but a schooleman, that considers
moral propositions in scriptures, as if they were mathematical definitions or
indemonstrable principles, no whit dependent of what went before or comes
after, could not at first perusal have observed, that Saint See Sec. 2. Cha. 5.
James had a purpose in that Chapter to tax his pupils, as well for want of
true faith, as of good works? yea the works they did to be nothing worth,
becouse not wrought by faith, had without all respect of persons or partiality
in the Law of God. But the Romanist not observing what is a point most clear,
that uniform fidelity, or faithfulness in all commandments of God, is the
very formal effect of that faith which was in Abraham, and Saint Paul so much
commends. First takes that dead and vain faith Saint James disproues, to be
the same with that Saint Paul so much commends; and consequently to this error,
denies justification by faith, but as it is informed with charity, which is as
much as to say we are justified by charity and not by faith: and unto these two
errors annexeth a third most pernicious concerning the nature of works: which
either not conceived by such uniformity of faith as Paul requires, or not
managed by a parallel uniformity become altogether Jewish, and their best
righteousness that practice them like the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees. Lastly, to rear up a roof every way answerable to the foundation,
they lead us from the Gospel unto the Law, and make the eternal covenant
made unto mankind in Christ, subseruiant to the covenant made with our first
parents, as shall be demonstrated against them in the Article of the last
judgment: And what other consequence could one expect of this error, (whereto
noe other could be parallel) which makes Charity the ^ See sect. 2. Cha. 6.
toward the latter end. Si quis dixerit, amissaper peccatum gratia, simul and
fidem semper ^mitti, aut fidem, quae remanet, non esse veram fide^, licet no^
sit viua, aut eum qui fidem fine charitate haebet, non esse Christianum,
anathema sit Council. Trident s^ssi^^e sexta de justice. c^^. 28.
form, or works the spirit of faith, yet that not only their best private
writers, but their Church representative is tainted with this stupide heresy;
this decree of the Trent Counsel will serve as a testimony upon record: If any
man shall avouch, that as often as grace is lost through sin, faith is always
lost together with it, or that faith which remains after loss of grace, to be
no true faith, although no living faith, or the man that has faith without
charity to be no Christian: Let him be accursed.

11. If these curses could hurt any, Saint Paul should have the fulles measure
of them, for questionless he never thought such faith as he commended could
remain without grace, or integrity of conscience. Saint James I think should
hardly escape, unless he would subscribe to this conclusion; that the Devil
was a Christian. And were Scotus, Ockain, or Swisset now alive, they would find
all the Jesuits in the world play for these hundred years, to hold the
contrary, and defend the Trent Council in this decree. For such faith as the
Council requires to make a Christian, may be, yea is in the worst kind of
Devils: albeit Valentian has labored to find this difference, [That faith
without works, or grace, is in men the gift of God, so is not the faith of
Devils.] No more was this answer of his suggested by Gods spirit, or the
spirit of truth. For, not to question whether such dead faith as Saint James
speaks of be the gift of God or no, but rather supposing it were; this argues
a difference only in the cause, none in the essence, nature or quality. That
God created wants in the beginning, does not argue they were of a more
excellent nature then ordinary Lions not created, but propagated by nature, are
now of. And if the quality of faith be the same in the Trent Councels,
Christians and in Devils; Valentian does rather wrong the Almighty in making
him the Author of it in the one, then prove either it or his own cause to be
the better, by saying it is the gift of God. For though it be his gift, and yet
may be without grace or charity, and without these of necessity as unfruitful
as the faith of Devils, (both which Valentian grants:) it is no more available
to make a Christian, then the faith of Devils is. Nay in that it may be without
works, theirs is more fruitful then it: for, as Saint James tells us, theirs
works fear and trembling in them: were that faith, which the Trent Council
makes the form of a Christian so operative in it nature: it could not be (as
is observed Chap. 8. parag. 8.
before) without works or charity. For if it wrought a trembling fear of his
power, it would work a reioicing love of his mercy: and impell them, as to
avoid the stroke of the one so to embrace the gentle strokings of the other.
Maldonat upon these words of our Savior ( Math. 15. v. 19.) In vain do they
worship me, well observes that the Greek ((...)) well expresses the
original. His reason is. Nam apud Hebraeos, timere deum est deum colere.
Their own writers observe, that to fear God, in the language of Canaan, is
to worship him: and is it less to believe in him, then to fear him? To
conclude, what ancient father is there which should not be accursed, if God did
not bless where these Trent Fathers curse? For though their charity would not
suffer them to deprive any professing true religion, of that title wherein he
ioied, the name of a Christian; because they knew not what faith they had in
their hearts: yet few of them but indefinitely avouch thus much; That he
falsely, vsurps the glorious name of a Christian, or faithful man, which is not
faithful in Gods commandment, which does not in heart approve the works
Christ commands; though who in particular are so, who otherwise affected, they
leave for him that only knows the hearts of all, to judge.

12. How gricuously would subscription to this decree have gone against Saint
Cyprians conscience; who accounted it a solaecisme, worthy of indignation, to
call him a Christian, that was afraid least the fountain of his liberality
(his patrimony) should be exhausted, by continual refreshing his naked hungry
and thirsty brethren, unto whom our bowels of compassion should never be shut,
seeing in feeding them we feast the Lord, who will not take so much as a cup of
cold water at our hands, but with purpose even in this life to requite it, and
bless the residue, as Elias did the poor widows meal and oil; which had
showed no less hospitality in such extreme scarcity of provision, then that
other in the Volutres Deus pascit, and passeribus alimenta diurna praestantur,
and quibus nullus diuinae rei sensus est eu nec cibus, nec potus deest: ^u
Christiano, tu Dei scruo, tu operibus ^o^is dedito, tu domino suo ch^ro aliquid
existimas d^futurum? nisi si putas, quia qui Christum pascit, a Christo ipse
non pascitur: aut e^^terrena d^erunt, quibus caelestia and diuina tribuuntur,
vnde hae^ incredula cogitatio? and vnd^ i^pia and sacrilega ista meditatio?
quid facit in domo ^idei perfidum pectus? quid qui Christo omnino non credit,
appellatur and dicitur Christianus? Pharisaei tibi magis congruit nomen. Nom
cum dominus in euangelio de ele^mosynis disputaret, and vt nobis ami^es de
terrestribus lucris prouida operatione faceremus, qui nos postmodum in
tabernacula aeterna susciperant, fideliter and salubriter praemoner^^, addidit
post haec scriptura dicens, Audiebant aute^ haec omnia Pharisaei qui erant
cupidissimi and irridebant Cypr. d^ ^pere and ^l^^mos.
Gospel did her liberality by casting a mite into the treasury, with such as
doubted whether our Saviors promise did assure them of like blessings, so they
would be as bountifully minded as this poor woman was, the zealous father thus
expostulates; a whence should this incredulous thought proceed? whence is this
impious and sacrilegious meditation? what does a faithless breast in the house
of faith? what shall he that belieues not Christ be enstiled a Christian? The
name of Pharisee better befits thee, for when the Lord disputed of alms, and
advised us to gain friends with charitable expenses of earthly treasures; the
Scripture adds: All these things heard the Pharisees, which were covetous, and
they mocked him. So consonant were these collections to his orthodoxall
conceit of faith, that they whose works go in his name, consort with him in
like passages, as they do in that maine ground of religion, the nature of
faith. Christianus nem^ recte dicitur, u^s^ qui Christo moribus coaequatur.
Ecce Christus non contendit neque clamauit, and tu simorum Christ's
similitudinem tenere cupis, ne contend^s, ne abu^i^^^ in ecclesia Christianus
exis^as Cypr. de Abus. sec.
A Christian he is not truly called, (says the author of the twelve abuses)
that is not conformable to Christ in conversation. And Quisquis igitur ore
dicit, credo in vnum Deum, and seruit auaritiae, aut libidin^, au^ luxui, sibi
men^itur, sibique re^ug^at, aliud lingua sonans, aliud animo celans, voce
tantum testimonium perhibens Deo, cum vita satanam colat Cypr. de dupl. Martyr.
he that left us the learned and religious treatise of twofold martyrdom,
universally avouches, whosoever says with his mouth, I believe in one God,
and serves couetuousnesse, lust or luxury lies to himself, contradicts
himself in this profession. And is it possible for any without belief in one
God, truly to believe in Christ, or to be truly called a Christian without
belief in Christ? That the former bolt was shot by blind men, which could not
see where it would light; it further persuades me, in that it can hit none more
fully then it does His words are cited parag. 1.
Gregory the great, sometimes Pope, both in the fall, and at the rebound. For
he makes correspondency between profession and conversation, the true property
of faith. And least any sophister should except, this might agree not to all
true faith, though to such alone; or to true live faith, not to faith only
dead; as to be seen in arts is proper to men, yet not to all, but to the
learned only: he expressly terms such as deny in deeds, what they confess in
words, false belieuers: yet as the belieuer is, such is his faith; the one
being false, the other cannot possibly be true. Nor would Saint Gregory have
thought it any slander, to deny false belieuers the title of true Christians.
Or have we the warrant of Fathers only to secure us from the former curse,
albeit we teach not indefinitely, that a man without lively faith is no
Christian? Does not the Scripture say the same? yes. Romans 9. v. 6.
All are not Israel that are called Israel: Galat. 3. v. 7.
but such as do the works of Abraham they are the children of Abraham. Romans
2. v. 28. 29.
For he is not a Jew, which is one outwardly in the flesh: but he is a Jew,
which is one inwardly (a Confessor in deeds not merely in name, one
circumcised in heart:) for circumcision is that of the heart in the spirit, and
not in the letter, whose praise is not of men but of God. Is the Gospel more
indulgent to hypocrisy, then the Law? Is it so much more addicted to the
letter which kills, then to the spirit of life; that a faith, as dead as
Jewish ceremonies, should be more effectual to make a Christian, then outward
circumcision to make a Jew? Or what does the Council mean by a Christian; a
dead man, or one alive in Christ? one in whom Christ is not yet fully
fashioned, but ready to conceive life? This had been more tolerable. But one
they mean which had life, and has lost it: one as improperly termed a member
of Christ, as the body called a Man after the spirit is departed from it.

13 Of these, and many like inconveniences, which no man though of the acutest
wit, and most audacious understanding living, durst in an indifferent auditory
maintain against any ordinary Artist, that had the leisure for to stretch
them: had the Trent Fathers been aware, happily they would have been more
sparing in their curses. But this strange advantage Romish Prelates have of
ours, and all the world besides; that be they in matters of learning and
religion never so blind, or out of their blindness so bold, as to run
headlong against the Analogy of faith, all rules of Philosophy, moral or
natural, Grammar or whatsoever else can be named: yet shall they never want
store of excellent wits, but mercenary consciences, which like some people of
the old world (Aethiopians or Aegiptians I now remember not,) but more devout
and apt to supererogate, will be content to put out, not the right eye of
nature only, but that other of art, least the rarity of the spectacle might
make then superiors seem, either monstrous or deformed. What artist is there
with us, who to be araied in scarlet, to have retinue, fare, revenues and
whatsoever else correspondent, or befitting a Cardinals state, would but for
some few hours adventure to have his face so deeply died with shame, as
needs it must be, though armed with all the furniture of Art and Nature, if in
an audience not kept under by tyrannical and servile awe, either ^ The first
that faith should be dead and yet true: the second that faith truly dead
whilst so remaining should give life unto a Christian. I think it would be a
matter very hard for the Jesuit to find more gross absurdities in so few
words in the simplest writer of this age.
for speaking what he thinks, or thinking ought becomes a free man in Christ,
he should mainetaine such base shuffling apologies, as Valentian and Bellarmine
have made for the former illiterate decree, (which sought to cover one For by
the litterall and ordinary sense of the words faith should be no part of grace.
absurdity in speech with * two impious ouersights in religion) but as
probable. The Apology before alleged was [That faith might be true though
dead, as a body though deprived of life is a true body,) a carcass rather; no
body organicall, or apt to be informed in the sensitive soul, though really
present. No more does this faith whereof they speak contain life, or grace
potentially in it, both must be created a new, ere the party in whom it is
found be a true member of Christ's mystical body. For such is the nature of
that faith, which the Roman Catholic makes the ground of his best hopes, that
a Friars hood, though vnlined, would do his body more good in his sickness,
then it can do his soul at the hour of death. Thus much of true faith and
the errors concerning the Nature of it. It remains we entreat of
misperswasions concerning the possession or presence of it, with the right use
of it and other spiritual graces that attend it.

SECTION 2. Of immature persuasions concerning men's present estate in grace,
with the means to rectify or prevent them.
CHAP. I. The general heads or springs of hypocritical persuasions, with
brief rules for their prevention.
1. HHappy were we whom God has appointed to sow good seed in others hearts,
because not altogether without hope to see some fruits of our labors, if this
censorious age would permit us to strike as freely at the roots of Atheism,
infidelity or hypocrisy, as it is ready to censure Atheists, Infidels,
Heretics, or Hypocrites. To me it has often seemed a question very doubtful
but far above my capacity to determine, whether such as revolt from the
orthodoxall Church, upon observation of monstrous dissonancy between the
truths professed in it and the professors lives or resolutions, be in case
better or worse then such as embrace true religion upon no better grounds then
they or their confederates oppugn it. Thus much the word of God will warrant,
that the portion of hypocrites shall be the bitterest in the life to come. And
yet hypocrisy, if it be of that stamp which our Savior so much condemns, is
always molded in that deep notice, or strong persuasion which men have of
their own love, and others opposition unto divine truths; of their own
diligence, and others negligence in performance of sundry duties expressly
required by Gods law. And this is a misery of miseries peculiar to the
hypocrite; that, whereas the height of others impiety arises from their
opposing the way of truth and godliness; this monster the more he detests
falsehood and error, or the impiety, whether of others practices or opinions,
the more still he increases his own corruption, and wars unwittingly
against his own soul. For seeing love to himself, indulgence to his dear
affections, or carnal glorying in prerogatives, perhaps spiritual, is the
common root, as well of his imaginary love unto such points of truth as have
some kind of conjunction with his humors, as of the detestation he bears to
others obliquities, that in life or profession ill consort with him; the
oftener he looks, either on their known transgressions, or his own precise
observance of such duties as by nature he is addicted, or otherwise accustomed
to, by both means he more pampers and nourishes that vicious habit, whence the
forementioned bad fruits did grow. And thus at length by using the help of
strong, but impure, unruly affections, to abandon particular errors, he
overthrows his own soul, as the ancient inhabitants of this land did their
state, by using the Saxons aid to drive out the Picts.

2. After this manner the Jew by nursing a loathsome conceit of Publicanes and
open sinners dissolu^nessesse, not tied unto so much as any solemn
acknowledgement of their misdeeds, or set form of repentance, took a surfeit
of those outward ceremonies which God had ordained as sauees to sharpen, not as
food to satiate his appetite of saving health. Other-whiles fiercely bending
his indignation against the idolatry of the heathen, by too much depression or
debasement of their folly, he sublimated his own natural inclination unto
pride and haughtiness, into presumptuous boasting in the purity of that law
which God had given him by Moses. Whence in the fullness of time sprung an
irreconcilable hatred of the long expected Messiah, desperate contempt of his
Gospel, and wilful refusal of salvation preached in his name. But howsoever
the deadliness of this disease was most conspicuous in the fall of Gods chosen
people, whom we may without suspicion of slander (seeing the holy Ghost has
written the observation) safely charge with the infection: yet the danger of
it, amongst all professors of true religion throughout every age and nation,
continues the same, as having a perpetual cause in nature. For whether we
speak of contraries moral, or physical, the enmities of the extremes is
always greater, then betwixt them and the mean; from which they always so
much further decline, as they more eagerly entend their force each against
other. The greater strength heat and cold from their vicinity gather, (whether
by mutual irritation, or a secret kind of daring each other to combat, or by
a stricter unition of the material parts wherein their forces lodge) the more
both disagree with the lukewarm temper. The more likewise the prodigal
detests the niggards manners, or the niggard his, the farther both roaue, (the
one over, the other short) from that mark whereat they aim, but which truly
liberality only hits. And as the mutual discord of extremes, grows greater by
the increase of their several strengths; so the hasty, or violent introduction
of the one into a subject capable of both, makes way for the others
entertainment, and excludes the mean, which finds no entrance but where it is
vshered by moderation. So water, too much, or too violently heated is more apt
to freeze then to retain the middle temper. Young prodigalls we often see
turn old niggards, seldom liberal, unless their education have been
exceeding good, their natural discretion extraordinary, or the seeds of virtue
in them very strong. And what more usual, then for a niggards feast (because
not agreeable to his ordinary disposition) to smell of waste and prodigality?
Buzzards, by natural constitution, through extremity enforced to take heart
and turn again, ouerrunning valor, boisterously rush into fury. And
desperate hotshots, once made to feel the smart of their folly, become
afterward basely timorous. The Cynicke could spurn at his fellow Philosophers
pride, but so, as his scornful heels did bewray his preposterously proud
ambitious heart.

3. Are these observations true in works of nature, or moral affections
only, and not in persuasions of religion? Yes, even in these also, for has
not the untimely heat of indiscreete preciseness, disposed sundry in our days
to freeze the sooner in the dregs of Popery? Have not others mounted so high
in groundless and presumptuous confidence, that their sudden fall has made
them sink (for any help man could afford) without recovery into the very
suds of melancholy and desperation? Others, upon a dislike of their former hot
enforced zeal, have changed their wonted confidence into carelessness, and
become open professors of licentiousness, like the possessed child in the
Mat. 1^. 15
Gospel, falling sometimes into the fire, sometimes into the contrary element.
And experience proves it so common a thing for young Saints (such I mean as
affect to be ripe in holiness, ere well grown in ordinary discretion or
common honesty) to prove old devils, that the bent of nature unseasonable or
too much curbed in the parents, oftentimes burst out in the unbridled
affections of their children.

4. The reason of the experiments, whether in nature, moralities, or religion,
is as perspicuous, as they are true. For contrary exstreames always spring
from one root, and though the natures, wherein they are, be much different in
respect of their mass or substance; yet the form of contrariety is the same,
even in material and immateriall entities, consisting in an incompetiblenesse
between the actual motions of two opposite inclinations, both in a subject
capable of both, so fastened in one center, that the depression of the one is
the elevation of the other. Whence it is, that the violent, or intensiue
agitation of the one, once come to the point of reflection, breeds a like
motion in the other, as the sharper frost by night makes more slippery ways by
day; softest ways in moist winters surbeate the sorest in dry Summers: the
farther or swifter we move one part of a balance one way, the farther and
swifter it moves it self toward the opposite point at the rebound. Thus many
by an eager depulsion of known errors or impieties, loosing their natural
station, are carried about by their violent revolution and as it were cast
round moturaptus unto the point from which they sought, and at the first seemed
directly to fly, as the sun by speedy course unto the West, comes quicklier
back unto the East, from which it diuerted. Instances to this purpose, in
other meditations, were taken from such in our times, as from a passionate
humorous, Cynicall spurning at monkish practices, and Popish customs, have
thrown themselves off the shore into the whirlepoole which finally sinkes
them in the very dregs of that error wherein the others are drowned. The
very self same superstitious or magical conceit the one has of his beads
and crosses, the other feeds by praecise hearing sermons, and loathsome abuse
of the word of life upon every secular or triuiall occasion, as if he were
bound to utter a set number of sentences in Scripture phrase every day. This
circular course errors continually keep in moralities, unless our desires be
kept under by reason, in divinity, unless directed and moderated by faith, not
only in the right choice of objects, but also in the manner of their
prosecution. For where affections, which always either ebb and flow as the
Sea, or change as the Moon, are chief managers of either business, the
humane soul, which should be compact within it self and exactly sphaericall,
becomes exorbitant in it inclinations, and is turned round by alteration of
objects, as the wheel is by the stream; sometimes held as it were in a back
water by a reciprocal check of unconstant turbulent passions or exestuations.
Or though the same affection should continue still praedominant, yet is it apt
to be impelled, and impell the soul contrary ways, from contrariety of
objects presented, or diverse references unto objects in themselves the same.

5. The rules these observations yield for rectifying our persuasions in
matters of religion, or trying the sincerity or strength of our faith, are
especially two. The first; To be as obseruant upon what motive we dislike or
hate any opinion or practice, as what the opinion or practice is which we judge
worthy of hate; always assured that the extremity of hatred to heresy,
impiety, or infidelity can afford us no better assurance of our piety,
soundness or true zeal unto the truth, then these or like collections do of
certainty unto right examiners of arguments. [ This man detests niggardnesse,
and that cowardice, therefore the one is liber all, the other valourous.] Our
hate to falsehood o^ impieties may as well spring from corrupt affection, as
from sincere love to truth or goodness. The second rule is, as diligently to
examine our consciences, upon what grounds we embrace a truth known, as we are
desirous to know it, that we measure not our assent unto the Gospel by our
affection to some one or few points contained in it, or some degrees of truth
contained in them. For the mean, in that it is contrary unto all, must needs
have some affinity with every extreme, warmth could not disagree from cold,
but by agreeing in part with heat. The prodigal is like the liberal in that
he is bountiful, so is the niggard in that he is not lavish. Both of them
would well agree with him in discourse, so long as he added no definite
quantity to his rules or propositions, but indefinitely commended bounty to
the one, and thrift to the other. The truth which in it self is but one, if we
apply it to several parts or diverse degrees of the same object indefinitely
taken; may have partial agreement with any affection. And so again may one
and the same temper or constitution of mind include a love or good affection
to truth indefinitely considered, and an hate unto it as entire, or as it is
referred unto the end whereto both it and our desires should be proportioned, So
the Jews, seeing our Savior feed five thousand men with five barley loaves
and two fishes, Ioh 16.
said, of a truth this is the Prophet that should come into *See lib. 3. Sect.
3. chap. 8. parag. 3.
the world. The confession it self was orthodoxall and good, but conceived
from a false and dangerous motive, they expected that great Prophet should be a
glorious King, able to wreake their malice upon the nations. And from this
present document they rightly gathered, our Savior was able to maintain an
army with less cost, then any* earthly Prince or Monarch could. For he that
of late with five barley loaves and two fishes, had fully satisfied five
thousand men, might as casily feed five hundred thousand, if every one that had
tasted of these should but bring his loaf with him. Their next illation,
wherein they ouershot the truth* unto which indefinitely considered they had
subscribed, was to elect him for their King, which he perceiving John 6. v. 14.
15.
departed again into a mountain himself alone. Though in a lo^t they
believed in his name, yet he thought it not safe to commit himself into their
hands, whose forwardness once crossed in this project, he knew would prove the
same his Countrymens of Nazareth had been, to attempt some mischief against
his person. The more gloriously they conceived of him whilst apprehended as a
furtherer of these proud hopes, the more despitefully they had entreated him
after manifestation of his dislike unto their purpose. And this very temper,
which was the only ground of their assent unto the former truth, was in his
sight the maine obstacle to all true belief; because in this, they sought but
to honor him and be honored by him with that honor which one man may bestow
upon another, not with that which comes of God alone. He that would have
pusht these ambitious propensions forward, or undertaken their conduct against
the nations, might have commanded them to have thrown themselves headlong
from the top of that steep hill from which the Nazarites would have cast him;
for unto Vide Socrate^ De Iudeis Creta^ in co^entibus. Lib. 6. ca. 3^.
such practices, false Prophets, that come in their own name, giving and
taking honor one of another, did after his death persuade this people. Even
whiles the act of their imaginary love unto the great Prophet seemed most
fervent, their temper was as hateful to him as theirs that wished his blood
might be upon them: for it was but one and the same in both, only with these
men's affections mentioned in the sixth of John, the apprehension of his
miracles had conjunction for a time, but opposition with all at his passion,
when they saw all his works and doctrine tend to an end quite contrary unto
that whereupon their desires were set even to the utter debasement of their
lofty proud imaginations.

6, As well those Jews that crucified our Lord and Savior as the heathens
that persecuted his followers unto death, we often accuse of deadly malice and
indite of murder more then wilful; unto which crimes every Christian must by
his faith acknowledge them guilty in the highest degree. But our hate to such
as hated our Redeemer may (as the Psalmist speaks) be perfect and vnsaigned,
and yet not prove our love toward him to be such; albeit the only measure most
men use for notifying the fullness of their belief, is this supposed love they
bear unto their Savior, which if in many it be but imaginary or swim only
in the brain, whilst real hatred of his will revealed, no less offensive to
him then the despite of Jews or heathens, lodge in their hearts or bear rule
in their affections their faith must needs be but a fancy, only serving to
leaven their natural infidelity with pharisaicall hypocrisy. To begin with
the gentile.

CHAP. II. That our Assent unto the first principles of christianity, by
profession of which, the faith of ancient Christians was usually tried, may
be, to our own apprehension, exceeding strong and yet our belief in Christ no
better then the heathens that oppugned them: that it is a matter of more
difficulty to be a true Christian now, then in the Primitive Church; did we
rightly examine the strength of our faith not by such points as theirs was
tried, but by resisting popular customs or resolutions of our times, as fully
opposite to the most essential and utmost, as Idolatry is to the remote or
general differences of Christian faith.
1. TAke no thought (says our Savior) saying, what shall we eat? or what
shall we drink? or wherewith ^a^. 5. 31. 32.
shall we be clothed? (for after all these things seek the Gentiles) for your
heavenly father knows that ye have need of all these things. To think the
vvisdome of God should in these words Oratourlike make use of his auditors
detestable hatred toward the uncircumcised, as an argument to dissuade them
from such heathenish resolutions as were disagreeable to their calling, would
be a gloss plausible perhaps to flesh and blood easy in this case to be thus
far persuaded. But who so is better acquainted with his Masters usual method,
will quickly observe his further purpose to give us in this short instance
these or the like maxims of life: That profession of truth without conformable
practice, though in matters most difficult, makes circumcision become
uncircumcision: That to put on the name or title of his Disciples, not shaking
off such resolutions as heathen, that is men without knowledge of the true God
or reliance on his providence, is but to cloth our selves with the leaves and
bark of the true Vine, being full within of such sap as at the best can bring
forth but wild grapes. And if most of them which had been continual auditors
of Moses law, trained up in Jewish discipline, were, until they learned to
live according to this rule, altogether as bad as the Gentiles: what reason
have we to hope the careless education of modern Christians should make them
better? Besides outward appearance (which without internal integrity
correspondent is mere hypocrisy) ods we shall find none at all between our
selves and the Gentiles of whom our Savior speaks, if we impartially consider
[The usual grounds and motives whereupon we embrace his Gospel] or [The
vnconsonant practices or resolutions wherewith we continually match the
profession of it] or lastly, which is the very life and spirit of Gentilisme
[Our diffidence unto Gods providence for redressing the disorders of his
Church].

2. What were the reasons, may we think, which so long withheld the ancient
heathen from profession of Christianity? Was the doctrine of the Gospel less
probale in their time then in ours? No, as God, so his word is still the same,
always alike true, because always most true. Were the people of those
Countries, wherein it was first preached, less docile by nature then we are?
Rather generally more witty and capable of any other lore; such especially, as
were most auerse from the truth we now profess. The consonancy of their
moral precepts with the sacred rules of the law, the Prophets, and
Evangelists, was such, that had they conuersed with our Savior, and seen his
doctrine so truly acted in his life, they could not, without contradiction of
their own principles, but have admired his wisdom and magnified his constant
unaffected contempt of all applause from men, or of such vain fashions or
customs, as the gentry of that world highly esteemed, but these Philosophers
usually derided; not without just suspicion of sinister or preposterous desires
of catching that glory at the rebound, which they seemed to neglect whiles it
naturally fell into their hands, or moved it self directly toward them; as
if they had held the stelth or underhand receipt of it more lawful or pleasant,
then the purchase of it in the open market. Was his Gospel less powerfully
preached in their days then now it is? No, his Apostles and their associates
were endued with far more excellent giufts (of tongues, of miracles, of
prophesying etc.) for manifesting the power of it to natural men, then any
Preacher this day living is. And what then could prejudice either them or their
doctrine. First, and principally, their low estate, whose poverty, according
to the fashion then most followed, did ill beseem any attempt of innovation,
or alteration; especially of such rites and practices as had been first
authorized by men of gravity, place, and great judgment, countenanced by
antiquity, confirmed by joint consent of all, and custom never interrupted.
Philosophers thought it a disparagement to their wit, statesmen and
magistrates to their wisdom and experience, inferior professors, loss of
their studies, corporations disaduantageable to their trades or private
labors; to receive new laws from forrainers of presence and estate so mean.
And albeit the integrity of Christians lives and conversation was such, that
no penalties inflicted, or statutes enacted against offenders for public
good, could take hold of them; yet because their sacred rites and profession
were incompatible with authorized idolatrous practices, and held as cases
omitted by their law-giuers; the great Pharohs of those times invented new
exactions and oppressions to stint the increase of Gods children, and make the
profession of Christianity ignominious and odious even to babes and sucklings;
who nuzzeled up in this prejudice, conceived hatred against CHRIST ere they
knew what manner of man he had been, and detested the very name of his Gospel,
altogether ignorant what i^ meant. That the cause of Christians had never come
to indifferent hearing, that their persons were condemned for their profession,
ere their lives were examined, is too apparent, in that, such of the heathen as
had just reason to have noted a manifest difference or opposition, had observed
none between them and the Jews, but adjudged the one liable to the others
faults (if faults they were, they so much disliked in the Jew:) as honest and
religious men; especially if poor, even all that make a conscience of their
ways, have in these days much ado, to be absolved from disgraceful censures
of Puritanisme, or Anabaptisme, as if because they share with the favorers or
authors of these sects in zealous profession of the truth, they should
therefore with loss of their estimation help to pay such arrerages as the
Christian world may justly exact of the other for their hypocrisy.

But since Kings and Queens have vouchsafed to be nursing fathers and nursing
mothers, to the Church: since the titles of custos vtriusque tabulae, defeusor
fidei, Rex christianis simus or catholicus have been accounted as fairest
imbellishments in the inscriptions of greatest Caesar's, like precious pearls in
their crowns, or costly jewels in their diadems, Gods messengers, have by
public authority, been not only permitted, but enjoined to preach, and the
people with reverence, to hear the glad tidings of the Gospel, as the royal
embassage of the King of kings; Pastors strictly commanded to exhibit, the
flock to receive Christian Sacraments in honorable memory of CHRIST their
Institutour, and sign of loyal submission to his royal hests. So have the
laws of every Christian nation, since this change inflicted disgraceful
punishments, on such as shall vili^ie and contemn these or other sacred rites.
Whence the very name of an Atheist or Infidel is become as odious unto
Christian children, as the name of a Christian was amongst the heathen, or a
Coward at this day amongst soldiers. Hence, as every one almost is willing to
persuade himself he is as good a man as the best, because it is a foul
disgrace to be reputed a dastard; so most believe they love Christ, and rightly
believe in his name, because it is so great a shame and ignominy amongst men,
at least of better sort in Christian states, to be ranked amongst Atheists,
Infidels or Apostataes. Thus, from one and the same secret working of corrupted
nature, seeing to expel the poison of secular disgrace at contrary or
opposite emunctories, the ancient heathens were brought to hate, we love
Christ and his Gospel before we knew them: and yet it is certain, that he,
which either hates or loves any man's person, manners, or doctrine before he
know them, does love or hate he knows not whom nor upon what occasions.

4. Many resolute spirits there be in this kingdom, who if they should in
places of indifferency hear a Turk prefer Mahomet, and the Musselman
before Christ and the Christian religion, would swagger with him as sternly, as
if he had spoken against Tobacco, given him the lie, or called him Coward; and
yet perhaps more offend CHRIST in maintaining, then the other in occasioning
the quarrel. To such as look upon the professors themselves, or measure their
goodness by their local vicinity unto truth, there is great difference in
show, none in substance to such as observe the identitie of their motives to
embrace opposite religions. He that should a far off see three men of equal
stature walking together, the first in the ordinary path, the second on a
bench twelve inches higher, the third in an alley as much below it, not
acquainted with the advantage or disadvantage of ground which one had of
another, would think there were great difference in their height, which
notwithstanding would be the same if they changed walks, or none at all if
they stood all upon one leuel. If we thus compare the Turk, and the
Newtralist, and such as profess great zeal to Christian religion, considered
only in the general, negligent in performance of particular necessary
duties, one seems to come much nearer Christ then the other: yet, the Turk,
though destitute of any inherent grace, without any renouation of mind, only
brought up according to our country laws, altogether ignorant of his fathers
house or profession, would show as great love to Christian religion as the
former prosesser did: and he, though christened in our Church brought up in
Turkey, knowing nor suspecting nothing to the contrary, but that he was by
descent and progeny a Turk, would be as peremptory for the defense of Mahomet,
or both brought up in places permitting Newtralitie, or free choice of
religion, would be as indifferent for the one as for the other. All the
differences betwixt them, is in the laws or customs of their countries, none
in the internal constitution or qualification of their souls, which, though
one and the same, may incline the heart of the Jew, the Turk, the Papist and
the Protestant, alike firmly to embrace the religion wherein each has been
brought up, and prosecute contrary objects with equal strength of the same
corrupt desires. Nor does the truth or excellency of the object justify, but
rather condemn such as prosesse it of hypocrisy, unless it imprint a lively
character of it goodness upon his heart, unless the force and virtue of it be
diffused through his best faculties, and manifest it self in his life and
conversation. To be brought up in a Princes court, daily conuersing with men of
excellent behavior, speech and complement, and still to retain a ^lownish
language, rude affections, and servile conditions, does argue a nature more
agrest, then the same qualities would in such as had all their life time
followed the plough. But for a professed Christian to six such base or
slothful desires on these objects of life as the Turk does on Mahomet, or
worldlings on their commodities, is just as if a Husbandman should offer a
Ieweller as many grains of barley as his jewel weighed. This rule is general
without exception, that whosoever loves Christ, either for fear of disgrace,
love of honor, neighborhood, or desire of conformity with others, would
revolt from him, if his country laws, or custom should change; for he loves
these commodities, or contentments, not him. From these deductions we may
gather, the hate which most Heathens, Turks and Infidels, and the love which
vulgar Christians bear to Christ, to be of value equal, were both impartially
weighed. For which of us will give a pin to choose betwixt this enmity, that
hates to day, as ready to love to morrow; and his friendship that loves to day,
but would be as forward to have to morrow, if any new occasions or prouocations
should be presented. Seeing then, general or confused notions of great
affection unto Christ, can be no argument of true faith, but rather usual
introductions to hypocrisio; it remains we ^eeke some trian.

5. And for our better speed, let us begin this search with serious deprecation
of such bewitching thoughts as are apt to surprise souls much addicted to
their case, and make them dream the first professors of Christianity were so
long to wrostle with flesh and blood, and to endure a war so lingering and
terrible with powers and principalities; that we, their successors might enjoy
such peace and ease as their persecutors did, or to be able to hold such a hard
hand over Christ's enemies, as these have done over his friends, as if the
former contention had bin only for earthly sovereignty, security from danger,
or immunity from voxation. Christ came not to send such peace into the would;
but rather to continue the war, then kindled to the would end. And every
faithful soul must in one kind of service or other make account to abide her
fiery trial, and approve her self a true consort to the Bridegroom her head,
in the afflictions he sustained on earth, ere her nuptial triumphs be
celebrated in heaven. The exiled Poets words unto his trusty wife ( commutatis
commu^andis) may be a fit poesy for the Spouses, wedding ring:

Ouidius lib. 5. Tristium E. ^g. 14.
Esse bonum facile est, vbi quod vetat esse remotum est,
Et nihil officiss, nupta quod obstat habet.
Cum Deus intonuit, non esse subducere nimb^,
Hoc demum est probitas, hoc socialis amor.
An easy matter to be good,
whiles will thereto is not withstood;
Whilst no temptation does befall,
which from her charge my Spouse might call;
But Souldier-like to bide the shower,
while Caesar's frown and heavens do loure;
Lo this is that true sociall love,
which best becomest my fairest Dove.
The perpetuity of these truths [That the world, as it is usually taken for
the greater part of men, or for the wealthier, or more potent, is continually
set on wickedness, growing rather worse then better by long continuance: that
the reward prepared for the faithful now living, and such as have been
persecuted in former times, is one and the same: That God is no acceptor of
persons, times, or nations] might give us the reason of that conclusion, whose
truth experience will easily teach the obseruant, [That it is a matter at al
times much what alike hard, to be a Christian in sincerity of heart; although
by alterations of laws and customs, change of earthly powers, aspects, and
other innouations, which the reuolutions of time bring forth; such points of
Christianity as unto the ancient have been most hard and dangerous, become to
others most safe and easy, and contrariwise such as were to them most easy,
become most hard and dangerous unto us.

To be a Christian in heart and conscience, was more safe and easy in the
primitive Church then to be one in name or profession. The same strength of
faith which armed them with resolution to break through the very first
ranckes, did fully enable them to pass through all the pikes the devil, the
world or flesh could pitch against them. The very name of a Christian was
charged with all the odious imputations or disgraces others could invent, as
most distasteful to flesh and blood: it exposed the good name of true
professors to reproach and infamy, it marked their bodies unto butcherie, and
signed their lands and possessions to confiscation and spoil: and what is it
besides the fear of these inconveniences, or love of contrary contentments,
that unto this day hinders any man from being entirely such in all his deeds
and actions, as he makes show of in profession? But now the front of that maine
battle which only was terrible unto them, is wholly turned in show for us. To
be a Christian outwardly is not only a matter of no difficulty, but not to be
one, so far at least, is both dangerous and disgrace full Yet such is the
cunning of the worlds great General, that even in this respect to be entire
Christians inwardly and in syncerity of heart, becomes ofttimes altogether as
hard for us as it was for our predecessors to make profession of Christianity,
they were placed before the pikes, and we betwixt them. For the title becoming
once generally glorious and common to all; the wise men after the flesh, the
mighty and noble, which before oppugned our calling, will now be principal
sharers in the glory of it, and think it no small disparagement to their
dignities, not to be arbitrators of others demeanures or resolutions in
particular businesses or duties subordinate to the general fundamental
principles of this royal profession. Hence many of us, the seek to be
Christians in truth and deed, become obnoxious to that distraction of mind,
from which the primitive professors were free. They suspected the customs or
fashions of the world, were not tempted with them to do ought that might seem
prejudicial to practice of duties enjoined by Gods law, or unto any particular
rule or precept of their Savior. If any doubt did arise about matters of
opinion in religion, they used the judgments of such as were most spiritually
minded, and of known skill in such businesses. 1. Cor. 6. 1. 2. etc.
Even matters of civil wrong they might not try before the wicked and ungodly.
But now to repute any professing the name of Christ, enjoying great place in
Church or common wealth for such is a slander, and may bring even Gods
messengers themselves within the compass of Scandalum Magnatum: to dissent from
them in opinions, or disallow their pactise by profession, of contrary
resolution is though in alower degree very dangerous. Whence with most modern
Christians it is often so in cases of conscience, as it would be with those
Artists, that having learned Philosophical rudiments, or some natural
experiments of others, should still be subject to their authority for deduction
of particular conclusions or Corallaries, whereto perhaps their skill in
logical argumentations does better enable themselves. The examples of great
men often allure and embolden us, their exhortations or injunctions often
impell us to go, though not expressly against our conscience, (for these
usually yield unwittingly to temptations) yet directly against such sacred
rules as should command our consciences and would easily have won our Assent
unto them, before any authority or power of man, had we lived in those times
wherein James ^. 5.
the rich did blaspheme the worthy name after which we were named, and drew the
professors of it before the seats of judgment. It is always more easy for a
resolute spirit, to resist the despitefull oppositions of open though potent
enemies; then for an ingenuous mind to avoid the snares of seeming friends,
especially if set by his betters in the same profession: and yet ingenuous
resolution in all causes good and honest, is the true edge and temper of a
faithful Christian. None thus qualified but will more fear the censure of
such as are by his country laws and Christian constitutions his lawful
superiors, then the curses or Anathemaes of an Aliant, though a Monarch, and
able to do him greater bodily mischief. To give others warning of the
particular snares wherein they are most likely to fall, is above my capascity,
without my experience, and ill bese^ming my place: God grant I may anoid^ such
as are most incident to my calling: it must suffice to touch the most general
or transcendent.

6. The original of most temptations in this kind, is a secret presumption,
which in some breeds an express opinion, in others only practices thereto
consequent, that the received laws or customs of commonweals aunciently
Christian, are rather grounded upon the law of God then contradictorie to any
part thereof, or apt to undermine it. This presumption indefinitely taken, is
most true, but universally, false and dangerous; howbeit many upon this
implicit persuasion, that as their country Laws and ordinances, so their
obedience unto them are warranted by Gods word, think it sufficient to examine
their lives and actions by the consequent, not nec^essarie to compare them
immediately with particular rules of life, and thus by taking an universal
liberty from an indefinite warrant become often nonconformitants to Christ by
fashioning themselves continually to the Christian world. He that will
obseruantly peruse ancient records concerning the manner how profession of
Christianity was first authorized, or the Gospel publicly planted in these
Nations, in which it now especially flourishes, will quickly inform himself,
that the strength of secular powers before predominant, was always readier to
root out see Chapter 6. Sect. 1.
heresies, or quell errors in speculatiue points of Religion, then to infringe
any popular custom or repeal Laws beneficial to public treasurers or
private coffers, albeit they suck the blood of the poor, or to abandon rites
or fashions much applauded by brave spirits, or in themselves pleasant to flesh
and blood, though deadly as poison to new men in Christ, though apt to blast
the fruits of faith and obstupefie all sense or motion of the spirit: the
religious and learned Viues out of Saint Austine has observed that customs
permitted or authorized by the papacy, did argue that religion to be but an
imperfect mixture of Gentilisme and Christianity. His words are; Nam concubinae
et pellices non sunt prohibitae. quemadmodis ex legibus de Concubinarijs
ostenditur libro, Digestorum. 25. Satis aperte Augustinus testatur esseiure
civil vetere, Romano multa permissa quae sunt contraria legibus diuinis. Hoc
isti nolunt, qui dum gentilitatem coniungere et coaptare Christianismo
laborant, corrupto ulroque and et alterius impatiente nec gentilitatem nec
Christianissimum retinent. L. viues in haec verba August de Ciuitate Dei ad
Marcell. lib. 14. ca. 18. vsum scortorum terrena civitas licitam turpitudinem
fecit.
Austines verdict is plain enough, that many things are permitted by the
ancient. civil Roman Law, which are contrary to the Laws of God: This
notwithstanding they admit not, who whilst they labor to wed Gentilisme with
Christianity, both being corrupted, neither able to brook the other as
consort, retain neither Gentilisme nor Christianisme.

7 No commonwealth almost in Europe, but more or less participates of this
sault. No kingdom wherein either laws or customs, received by ^acite consent
aequiualent to laws do not either allow or not discountenance such practices
and resolutions as flesh and blood are apt to follow, yea to glory in, though
as directly opposite to the nature and complete essence of Christian faith, as
it has been out of Scripture explicated as heathenish rites or laws enacted
by Roman Emperors against Christians were to the general heads or articles of
belief, or to the profession of Christianity; though to abandon fellowship
with these unfruitful works of darkness, much more to reprove the offenders,
or men in authority, through whose negligence or conniuence these snares lie
open to catch the simple, would certainly procure disgrace from the one, if not
danger from the other, as great as the first propagators of the Gospel amongst
the Gentiles were exposed unto, by dissuading from Idolatry. Notwithstanding
if we would not content our selves with the bare name or title of Christianity,
either not regarding the principal duties thereto belonging, or not
considering how faith by revolution of times, alteration of public
constitutions, and customs (like epidemicall diseases) praeualent by course or
turns, does change it aspect from such points as it was sometimes most
immediately and directly set upon, unto others of greater use for keeeping our
hearts upright in the midst of the crooked generation wherein we live; a little
observation would serve to rectify our irregular thoughts, and fully
instructvs, that our trial whether we beashamed of Christ and his Gospel
before men does as immediately lie upon our approbation or reproouing such
popular fashions or practices of our times (whether by speech or other
significations of our affection public or private, according as our calling
is) as the ancient professors did upon their consenting or denying to burn
incese to heathen Idols, to adore Caesar's image to revile Christ, or revoke
their calling. I speak not of customs or prescriptions in cases of lands,
goods, or worldly commodities. For though these and the like unwritten
traditions be like nets which may be opened or drawn at some men's pleasures
to others great loss and grieuances, yet these, if borne with pat^e^^e make a
man never a whit the poorer but rather richer in faith. Albeit he that
resolves to use all advantage of humane Laws he can take in such matters
against his brother, might as well forswear the Gospel. But my purpose is
briefly to touch some few resolutions, either approved by joint consent of men
(as the world enstiles them, because her children) of best fashion, for noble
and heroical, or practices patronized by the multitude of practitioners, or
example of some men famous in civil estimation.

8. To begin with Gentillitie taken according to the vulgar and most plausible
notion, it retains the substance of Gentilisme with a light tincture of
Christianity, (To omit unnecessary cost in apparel whereby forraigners are
enriched, our native country impouerished, and the poor in it oppressed): To
spend more in one feast or banquet, then would relieve the necessities of many
miserable, pined, impotent creatures (daily presented to their eyes) for more
months then the parties entertained are in number, is an ordinary practice of
this profession, much affected by many, such as have lived sometimes of alms,
but are desirous to transform themselves into another shape by following
fashions most applauded of their betters, yet what resolution could be more
flatly contradictorie then this is to that precept of our Savior, Luke 14 ver.
12. 13 14.
When thou make a dinner, or a supper call not thy friends, nor thy brethren,
neither thy kinsmen, nor thy rich neighbors, least they also bid thee again,
and a recompense be made thee. But when thou make a feast, call the poor,
the maimed, the lame, the blind. And thou shall be blessed, for they cannot
recompense thee: for thou shall be recompensed at the resurrection of the
just. Here then is one especial point of trying their faith whom God has
blessed with store and plenty, if they can assent to this commandment as true
and good, and delight in the practice of it, whiles it comes in competition
with the contrary custom so much followed and applanded by men of best place
and reckoning in the worlds judgment. Forseeing the good we have done or
left undone to such seely ones, as Christ here commends unto our care, must be
the measure of our faith or infidelity, of our love or neglect of him in that
day of final accounts, indulgent or remorcelesse continuance of contrary
practices will then argue as formal a denial of him, and as damnable shame of
his Gospel, as if with Peter we had said we know not the man, or we like the
Alcaron better then his testament because Mahomet was a good fellow and loved
feasting.

9. Not to be sensible of every wrong, or not forward to wipe of the least
aspertion of disgrace, though with their own or others blood, is held the
only badge of a brave and resolute mind. On the contrary, to seek or tender
Christian submission for wrongs done privately or publicly, before the Priest,
or in the Church or congregation, is held as base and odious, as it a Soldier
should seek the peace of an old impotent woman, or as if a married man should
proclaim himself ^uckould at the market cross. Yet what resolution could any
heathen maintain worse consorting with these precepts of our Savior, without
whose observance his death and passion nothing profit us, even our prayers for
mercy become prouocatiue of his fathers vengeance, Pro. 28. ver. 9.
for be that turns away his ears from hearing the Law, even his prayer
shall be abominable. Now it is a law for ever to be observed by every
Christian. Math. 18. ver. 15 16. 17.
If thy brother trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between
thee, and him alone. if he hear thee thou have won thy brother. But if he
hear thee not, take yet with thee one or two, that by the mouth of two or
three witnesses every word may be confirmed. And if he will not vouchsafe to
hear them tell it unto the Church; and if he refuse to hear the Church also,
let him be unto thee as an heathen man, and a Publicane. So is that also else
where delivered, even where our assurance for obtaining what we pray for,
seems most ample; d What things soever ye desire when ye pray, believe that
ye receive them, and ye shall have them. And when ye stand praying, forgive,
if ye have ought against any: that your father also which is in heaven may
forgive you your trespasses.

The consideration of these and like injunctions of our Savior, has often
made me wonder in what form their prayers, which present themselves in open
field with purpose to revenge, or be the objects of revenge by killing or
being killed, are conceived, or through whose meditation presented to their
heavenly Father. But blessed be the Lord our God, whose hand has led our
Sovereigns pen to dash the bloody lines of desperate challenges, for which
even Dracoes laws had been too mild, and Rhadamanthus too meek a Judge. Lord
let thy spirit always enspire the heart of thine anointed with like wisdom to
discern, thy Angels assist him with power and courage to execute thy righteous
judgments upon the proud and scorn full sinner, that measures the greatness
of his spirit by his strength to breath out blasphemies, or seeks by clamorous
noise of his audacious associates in unhallowed Ethnicke resolutions, to drown
the soft and pleasant voice of thy beloved Son, to outcountenance or ouer-aw
his placide and gentle inuitations to peace, humility, and meekness of
spirit, by haughty, fierce, disdainful looks, or any ways to crush and
choke the virtue and efficacy of his Gospel by multitude of riches, friends
or whatsoever other sinews of earthly potencie.

10. The best apology most can make, either for indulgence to insatiable vaste
desires of gain or honor, or dispensing with themselves for the use of
sinister means for their accomplishment, is it not some branch of these
generals? Others have so done before us and will do after us, more are for us
then against us, and these of better place and judgment: Why should we be
precise or singular to the prejudice of our betters? Yet if a man, without
reference to this their present resolution, or further notification whereto his
speeches tended, should directly ask them what way they thought those many
wise, mighty, or noble men after the flesh did make choice of, or finally
took: I am persuaded it would not be replied they strove to enter in at the
straight gate, being thus laden with sollicitous thoughts, or encumbered with
vain desires of earthly dignities, but rather held on the broad beaten way;
and did not all the Gentiles run the same race? Hoc ad crimina nostra addimus,
vt c^m ^^ omnibus rei simus, ^tia^ bonos nos et sanc^o^ esse credamus, ac si^^
nobis ^umuleatur iniquita^^ (...), etiam praes^^ti^ne i^sti^^ae. Sal^^^nu^ lib.
3.
Wherein then do they glorify God more then these Heathen did? By taking his
sons names upon them? Rather God herein glorifies them more then the other,
and they must have their portion with the incredulous Jew, unless in works,
in lives and conversation they render praise, glory, and honor to their God,
according to these prerogatives of their calling. What Law or statute, though
either so good and commendable in it self, as to win voluntary observance of
the well disposed, or exacting obedience of all subject to it upon the most
strict and forcible terms the Lawgiver could devise, as under penalty of
perjury, supplications in the bowels of Christ, adiurations by his body and
blood, or by our plea of mercy through them at his fathers hands, but may be
fowlly prejudiced, if not inuerted, by the oversight of predecessors, or long
custom; first usually in these cases begun either upon mere negligence in
searching the truth, or conniuence upon extraordinary and special occasions
at some particulars, (perhaps conceived as cases more then half omitted)
afterward continued through ignorance of successors, but finally maintained
for private advantages by wicked cunning, or worldly policy, always vigilant
to defeat all solicitations for rectifying what has been long amiss, or
reexamining late practices by the Law-giuers principal intent or meaning. The advice would either seem too bitter or too light, if I should counsel the
authors or chief abettors of these abuses, whether committed in Church, or
Commonweal, to prefer a supplication with joint consent unto the almighty,
that he would grant them his grace or continuance of his wonted favors non
obstante praecepto de votis Deo per soluendis, or conceive such a formal
Palinodie of their protestation made in baptism, as Stesicorus did of his
dispraise of Helen, turning every affirmative promise into a negative. And yet
I dare not avouch ought to the contrary, but that it were much better finally
to renounce the profession of Christianity, then to retain it without
absolute renouncing such resolutions. It is therefore our Saviors advice, not
mine; Mat. 12. 33.
either make the tree good, and his fruit good, or else make the tree evil,
and the fruit evil. Thus to profess CHRIST, entertaining strong conceits, and
making proffers of great love and loyal affection toward him, bent in the
mean time to do as most do, and follow the fashions of the world, is to walk
with a heart and a heart, even that crookedness of heart, which cannot be
squared unto the straight rule of life. Many enormities like to these mentioned
there be, sometimes secretly or unwittingly practiced only, otherwhiles openly
auowed and maintained as lawful, whose discovery or prosecution with such
indignity as befits them, I leave to the better experienced and more eloquent
Pastors; only of this I would admonish them, that seeing the diseases are
grievous and the Patients strong, it is not a mild and gentle medicine can
work their cure. Much better they endured the smart of our reproves, though
unpleasant for the present, then that they themselves when it shall come into
their minds to compare their resolutions and practices with their professions,
either made in Baptism, or renewed upon receiving the Sacrament of Christ's body
and blood, should out of the anguish of their soul, and grief of conscience,
take up more bitter complaints then Job or Jeremy ever uttered, even to detst
the memory of that day wherein it was said, a soul is added to the Church, to
curse the hands that brought them to this sacred lauer, or lips which there
did promise or vow on their behalf; to wish hot scalding oil had been powered
upon their heads, instead of the water wherewith they were besprinckled, or
that their foreheads had been branded with some stigmaticall mark when signed
they were with the Cross, in token they should never be ashamed to fight under
Christ's banner, from whose tents notwithstanding, their consciences witness
they have been continual fugitives. Doubtless the water which puts away
the filth of the flesh, and is powered on us as a pledge of Gods special
favor, unless by it the conscience, which makes request to God, be purified
from these and the like dead works of heathenisme, will be a sore witness
against us Christians and solicit our deliverance over to the everlasting
flame, wherein the hypocrite and the perjured shall above others be always
melted, never purified.

11. 2. Tim. ^. 21.
But if any man shall in this life purge himself from these, he shall be a
vessel unto honor fit for every good work. And God forbid we should take
either any of these last mentioned, or fowler practices for sure marks or
signs of reprobation, into which estate men are not drawn so much by
multitude of sins past, as by resolution to continue in them still; which
oft-times might be broken off and saving Faith ingraffed in it place, did not
the Physicions of men's souls or others in charity bound to attend their
brethren in their sickness, give them for dead or past recovery before their
time. In many appointed over seers of others, well reformed in life and
conversation themselves, there is a branch of Ethnicke incredulity or distrust
of Gods providence, under whole shelter the former weeds grow and prosper in
inferiors. For whether from a positive error in opinion, that whatsoever comes
not to pass, it was Gods will it should not come to pass, we gather, it is
not his pleasure, things long amiss should be amended, or that the christian
world should grow better then it has bin, but rather worse and worse; or
whether from a want of consideration, or apprehension of his peculiar
assistance promised to such as are gathered together in his sons name; or
perhaps by both means, so it usually comes to pass, that good motions, for
reformation of whatsoever is amiss, are no sooner proposed, but the wiser or
better experienced in the world men are, or would be thought, the readier they
are to except, that the same or like has been before attempted by men of
far greater place, wisdom, and experience; and for us to seek the
establishment of what they upon better opportunity have given for lost and
desperate, were to disparage their sufficiency, and arrogate too much to our
own. Duties very acceptable unto God, and most necessary for time and place, I
have known altogether neglected upon like suggestions, when as the voices of
such as out of this politic humor did dash the motion without any trouble,
loss, aad danger in the world, unto themselves, without any contradiction or
disturbance of other suffragants, might with the general applause of all
indifferently affected and the best contentment of the greater part to be
reformed, have fully ratified what was proposed.

Thus partly from a willingness to conform our selves unto the world, partly
from a persuasion that it is sufficient to reform our selves, not necessary to
seek the reformation of others, we canuase secretly for the Prince of
darkness, and strengthen the faction of the world and flesh, seeking, as it
were, a mayor part to disanull the Apostles Canon as out of date in our days,
^. John 4. v 3.
Greater is he that is in us; then he that is in the world. But had our
predecessors been daunted with such politic surmises or suspicions,
Christianity had never prevailed against Heathenisme, whose objections against
it were the self same our worldly wise men now bring against all attempts of
reformation; and because they are of the world, the world ^eareth them; and
being Professors in show deceive many honestly minded.

12. Finally let the Christian Magistrates and Ministers pretend what other
cause they list; from their ignorance of Gods mercy and goodness, and want of
faith it is (for the most part,) that the people are so bad; Neither have that
confidence in their God they ought; but from an opinion in it self most true,
that God in these days usually works by ordinary means or second causes, we
come to rely more on the appearances we see in them then on his fidelity and
truth that is invisible. Were we but as well acquainted with the fundamental
points of our profession, as other professors are with theirs we mighted
escrie, it was the politician that foolishly dreams he can mould states in
his brain, and Paracelcus-like give life immortal to humane bodies
polliticke, which still spoils the fashion of the Christian world by taking
upon him to be a grand Physician where he should be but Gods Apothecary, or to
be architect or chief plotter of those edifices, wherein he should be but a
labourer or handworker, continually expecting the direction and instruction of
that Master builder, which laid the foundation in Sion. We our selves often
know the matter or staff whereon, as also the tools wherewith we see
Artificers work, yet cannot learn their skill or cunning, but should be ill
fauouredly served if we took upon us to make those vtensiles our selves,
which they do for us. Thus albeit the instruments or inferior agents God
uses to effect his will be conspicuous and apparent; his wisdom
notwithstanding in their disposal or contriuance is incomprehensible to flesh
and blood, and it is a madness to think the like secondary means should
always produce the same effects. But did the present dressers of Christ's
vineyard, first sincerely renouncing their own, as firmly assent to the
wisdom of God, as the first planters did unto his power in producing miracles,
they might see, though not so quickly, yet as certainly, fruits of their
faith, not properly miraculous, but to the wisdom of the world, until the
event did work the truth, altogether as strange and incredulous, as the others
did. This part of the world, wherein we live with others adioining, should in
good time as much wonder at it self made Christian in heart and sincerity, not
in name or title only, as it did at the sudden change of long rooted
Gentilisme into profession of Christianity. But it is not every assent unto
the wisdom of God, not every acknowledgement of his providence, or reliance
thereon, which can draw down these blessings from above upon our labors or
consultations. Nor is it (as some have either erroniously taught, or others
conceived from their writings) the goodness of the end whereon our intentions
or desires are set, but the semblable grounds or like proportion thereunto,
which rightly distinguishes them from heathen, natural or merely moral, and
denominates them truly good and religious. Vide Sect. 3. ca. 2. parag. 2. and
cap 8. parag. 40.
All wisdom or policy employed in Christ's cause or with intention of good unto
his Church, is not truly Christian, but that only which begins in the
unfeigned fear of God, and is vertually moved in the strength and feruency of
faithful prayers for his direction and assistance, who thus sued unto, never
fails to prosper the endeauours of men otherwise weak and simple; not at all
or negligently consulted, always delights to confound the wisdom of the wise,
and bring to naught the Counsel of the crafty Politician, or mighty
statesman. And these following are first principles or maxims of that faith,
which primarily distinguishes Christians inwardly from Christians outwardly,
the children of faithful Abraham from the sons of the Gentiles amongst whom
they live; That God often times suffers not matters of greatest use and public
consequence to be established by men of greatest place, wisdom, or authority,
least the glory should be reputed theirs, not his; That he often times hears
not the fervent public prayers of his servants at the first, second, third,
or fourth time, to train them unto constancy in praying, to teach them (as our
Savior intimates in the Luke 18. v. 2. 3.
parable of the unrighteous judge) to be importunate and constantly to expect
the accomplishment of their desires, when means to effect it seem most weak,
the manner most strange, or incredulous to the world. These likewise are rules
of everlasting truth, not proper to times primitive only, that God chooses
the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, and the weak to
overthrow the mighty; that he will not fail to make his name known amongst
the Gentiles that put their whole trust in him, unto the worlds end, by such
extraordinary manifestation of his handworking in their enterprises, as he
uses not amongst Jews, Turks, or Infidels, unless to their harm for
Christians good. The former of these rules urge not, as any way desirous men of
little experience or mean natural parts should be managers of public
businesses, or agents in reformation of Church or Commonwealth: for the wiser
such are, the more every way shall they glorify God, as well in the issue as
the act, if they sincerely renounce their own, and faithfully rely upon his
wisdom, or as Saint Paul says, if they become fools that they may attain
wisdom, or as our Savior, if they first become little children, and
afterward seek the kingdom of Heaven, or propagation of the Gospel; or
finally, if they used their natural wisdom, learning, or experience, or other
worldly means whatsoever, as if they used them not, or to no other end, then
by making-off all glory or trust in them, to make themselves fitter for the
purchase of Gods favor. This is the true fruit of that faith which alters and
sublimates the natural temper of our hearts, and fully assures us that
Christianity is rightly engraffed, and well taken in the stock of Gentilisme.

13. But to be either as solicetous in forecasting or as much devoted to
prosecute any secondary means of man's invention for procurement of public or
private good, or as apt or peremptory to prognosticate of the event, one way or
other, out of the survey of them so forecast or working, as the heathen were,
is in heart and resolution, to deny the power and wisdom of the only wise
invisible omipotent God, which with our lips we acknowledge; even to be as much
without God in this present world, as those that were led with dumb idols. Nor
is it reason but fancy only which persuades us we have renounced the worship
or service our forefathers performed to Bacous, Mars, or Venus, if we be as
much addicted to luxury, wantonness or quarreling as they were; these were
the real services which these internal powers, mistaken for Gods, required:
the outward rites or ceremonies were but badges or formalitie; if the substance
of these misorders remain the same, it is a sign we have learned to practice
that idolatry by heart which the heathen doby rule or pattern. The truth of
both collections will better appear in their proper places; of the one in the
Article of the Godhead, of the other in the Treatise of divine providence.

CHAP. III. That we modern Christians may hate Christ as much as we do the
memory of such jews as crucified him, albeit ready, if we were called to
formal trial rather to die, then openly to deny him or his Gospel. What
means are surest for just trial, whether we be better affected toward him
then these jews were.
1. PErhaps our indignation against the Jews, whose personal hatred to our
Savior was more malicious, more direct and inexcusable, will more provoke us
to amend our manners wherein they are too like theirs, and bring forth greater
carfulness hereafter to avoid that fearful judgment we often pronounce
against them, whereunto notwithstanding the most of us might well be accounted
as liable, would we either charge our selves aright, or make them such
allowances, as we take. Do we from our hearts detest the memory of Annas,
Caiphas, or such others, as conspired to take the Lord of life from out the
land of the living? so did they the mention of Core, Dathan, and Abiram, of all
that had rebelled against Moses. Not the name of Judas more odious and
despicable in our sight, then Iehoas, Ahab, Iehoiakim, or others, though their
Princes which did kill the Prophets, were to them. Which of us either has made
greater show, or thereto called, could make better proof of our love and
loialtie to the Mediator of the new Covenant, then they did to the
transanctors, messengers, or interpreters of the old: much sooner would most of
them have denied the supremacy of any earthly power, or sustained the height
of humane displeasure, then not have continued profession of loyal affection
unto Abraham, more ready always to triumph in torture, and glory in extreme
disgrace, then to be ashamed of Moses and the Prophets. And though they have
been a generation long time hateful to God and man, yet he that will rightly
weigh the grievous mispence of so great love and zeal as they bare toward such
as proved their chief accusers, shall find more matter of pity in this
people then of despite. For who would not esteem the loss of his affection
toward Christ (were it but half as great as theirs was to Moses, or to his
apprehension as likely to be as far misguided) more lamentable then all the
grieuances and afflictions they sustain? What then was the original of their
miscariage? Their zeal was like the rude modern Papists, misshapen from the
womb because not conceived by knowledge. Their love polluted in the root,
because it was no fruit of faith, nor sprang it from hearts so qualified as
their had bin on whom, or rather on whose true prases and deserved ^ame it was
stubbornely set. Creatures soul and most deformed are ost-times d^epliest
stricken with love of external beauty, as if the more imperfect nature were in
them, the more greedily she sought to satisfy or cover her wants by linking
them with the abundance of that perfection she espies in others. Thus the
sorer this viperous brood was tainted with hypocrisy, the more they magnified
the integrity and sanctity of their forefathers; as if to have descended from
them, and thus to admire these graces in them, which themselves wanted, had set
them above all degree of comparison, in respect of any others that lived in the
same age with them. Now this foolish pride and inbred desire of praeeminence,
was the only ground as of their love to Gods Saints deceased so of their
malice against his son manifested in their flesh and substance.

2. The memory of Abraham they could not choose but naturally reverence, he
being the first Author of that glorious covenant God made with mankind,
wherein they had the privileges of the first borne, and in their own opinion
sole entire interest. And this first Doner being now dead, did not either by
speech or action exasperate their envious, fretfull impatient minds, whereby
the strength of their imaginary love might have been abated. Moses likewise
they could not but have in greatest honor, as one that had talked face to face
with God, and had given them such a law from his mouth, as the like was never
heard of before, or after; Psalm. 147. 20
for he that had not so gloriously dealt with any nations, neither had the best
amongst the heathen any knowledge of his laws. The religious respect they had
of it, made them abhor all idols, yet (as S. Paul intimates) none more prone
to rob God of his honor then they, always desirous to array themselves with
his glory, and make his praises theirs by participation. With reference, though
not expressly, intended to this humor, they honored the memory of the
Prophets, adorned their sepulchers, and sounded their commendations amongst the
people. For that their country in times past had brought forth men to whom the
Almighty had communicated his secret counsels, was the fairest evidence they
had to show for that prerogative they still challenged above the Nations, the
principal rest they could rely upon for out-vying the Gentiles in vain
boasting of their ancient worthies. Besides the extraordinary gifts these
Prophets had in foreshewing alterations in states, or other events to come:
they could not but seem honorable in this peoples sight as being the
Ambassadors of the great Messiah, in whose expectation the meanest of them
gloried more then ordinary children could in sure hope of their fathers
exaltation to the lawful crown of the kingdom wherein they live. Every
child of Abraham they supposed in his days should be like one of Judge. 8. 18
Gedeons brethren, in fashion like the children of Kings, heirs of the
everlasting kingdom. To have up braided the softest spirit in that rebellious
people with treachery or disloyalty against the Messiah, when he should be
revealed, would as much have moved his choler as to tell some forward
professor amongst us, he would be tray his Lord, were he now in earth, for
half the money Judas did. Notwithstanding all this great show of love unto
their Ancestors, or fidelity in Gods covenant, these Jews proved
banckrupts in every point of their account. They brake first in their love to
Abraham, which was no small part of their reckoning; so our Savior rels them;
If you were ABRAHAM'S children ye would do the works of ABRAHAM: And again,
Luke 18. 28 Math. 8. 11
Ye shall see ABRAHAM, and ISAAC and JACOB, and all the Prohets in the
kingdom of God, and you your selves thrust out. The tender and loving respect
they pretended to have of these deceased Patriarchs estimation would have
seemed to them, (could they have known it) but as if a desperate quarreling
ruf^ian, (whose dissolute and ungracious courses more grieves his virtuous
fathers spirit, then all the opposition of his bitterest enemies,) should be
ready to fight with every one that did but speak a suspicious word against him.
They brake again in their account of their fidelity toward Moses; for so our
Savior tells them John 5
had you believed Moses, you would have believed me, for he vvrote of me; and
Moses in whom you trust, is he that accuses you to my Father. They failed
likewise most grievously in their imaginations of extraordinary love unto the
Prophets: the very roots and poison of that spite and enmity their fathers
bare them, while they lived, were propagated to posterity, still increasing
their malignitie in the descent as Rivers do their streams in their course;
the childrens cruelty against our Savior was but the fulfilling of their
fathers iniquity against the Prophets: his blood shed by them upon the cross
was as the Ocean whereinto that stream of blood which had run thorough their
generations from Abels to Zacharias death, and so downwards was exonerated.

The disposition, though varying it references to several persons, did after
so many descents no more differ then does the humor of amad dog running
through a long lane or row of people, always shat^hing not at the same
parties, but at such as are next unto him. Thus Saint Act 7. 51. 52
Steven makes but one chain of all iniquities continued from Moses unto
Christ; ye stiff-necked, and of uncircumcised hearts, and ears, ye have
always resisted the holy Ghost, as your fathers did, so do you; which of the
Prophets have not your fathers persecuted? and they have slain them which
showed before, the coming of that just one, of whom ye are now the betraiers,
and murderers; which have received the Law by the ordinance of Angels, and
have not kept it. For had they kept it, or faithfully believed Moses which
wrote it, they had neither distrusted ou^ Saviors doctrine, nor despised his
person; but their natural disposition was most contrary to Moses meekness,
and therefore could not be agreeable to that just ones, and yet their imaginary
love to this their Law given, or rather their over ^^^ning conceit of their
own worth, in that they were his Disciples, imboldens them to despise his
Master, for they reviled the blind man which asked them, if they would be his
Disciples, John 9. v. 28. 29.
thou art his Disciple, but we are Moses Disciples, we know that God spoke unto
Moses, as for this fellow, we know not whence he is. Their cruelty against him
was conceived and prosecuted upon the same ground, Caines was against his
brother Abell: for they slew him because their own works were evil and his
good, as their fathers had done the Prophets, to whom this ungracious seed did
seek to testify their love, as being now out of sight and no eye-fore to
their purposes, no way offensive to their ears, because their speeches were
not personally directed to them, and what might be as fitly applied to others,
they had the wit not to apply to themselves. But whiles virtue and piety
breath in the presence of the ungodly, they are still desirous to break the
vessel wherein this treasure lies, yet what was the reason or what does the
event protend to us, that the children should still delight to build stately
mansions for their dead bones, whose glorious souls the fathers envied
imprisonment in these brittle cabbins of clay, until the time of Messiahs
death, unto whose memory the relics of that ungracious seed performs no like
solemnity, gives no signification either of love to him, or sorrow for their
fathers sin, but rather openly profess oh, had we lived in the days of our
fathers, we would have been pertakers with them in that prayer, His blood be
upon us and upon our children. This doubtless bears record, that Gods wrath
according to their wish, is come upon 1. These. 2. v. 16.
them to the utmost, Mat. 23. v. 32.
that the measure of the fathers iniquity and theirs was then fulfilled: that
until Christ's death there were means left to know those things Luke 19 v. 42.
which were for their peace, time for repentance: but since they have resembled
the state of the damned in Hell, continually blaspheming that holy name which
brought salvation to the world. Now seeing their conceipted swelling love unto
his forerunners deceased, did in the fullness of time wherein it should have
brought forth life, prove but dead and abortiue; this should stir us up to a
more exquisite examination of our faith, to make sure trial, whether our love
to Christ, whom they slew, be not conceived from the same grounds theirs was
unto the Prophets, whom their fathers had slain; least ours also become as
fruitles or rather bring forth death, in that day wherein Christ shall be
manifested again, after which shall be no time for repentance, no means to
amend what is then found amiss.

3. Admit our affection to CHRIST JESUS the son of Mary, borne in Bethlehem,
and crucified at Jerusalem by the Jew, were more fervent then the Scribes and
P^^arises love to Abraham; to Moses, and the Prophets; our zeal to his Gospel
more ardent then theirs to the law: such prouocations or allurements as flesh
and blood may suggest, either to begin or continue these embracements or our
imaginations of them, are on our part more in number and more potent. First by
Nature, fashions of the time, and education, we are more prone, because more
ingenuous then they were, to conceive well of men deceased, especially of men
whose good fame has bin propagated to us with applause, though no^ of all, but
of some great or better part of our predecessors. The praises given to Pompey
and Caesar by their followers, often times draw young scholars into faction, as
the several characters of those two great peers lives and dispositions suit
with the different idaeall notions they have framed unto themselves of brave
minds, of noble generals, or good patriots. Amongst Critiques some canuase for
one Poet or classique Author, some for another, as they find them most
commended by writers whose judgments they best approve or are most beholden
to, or as they apprehend their skill in that kind of learning they most affect,
To make comparison of any living with the dead, especially in whose works those
men have much labored, would seem odious: and this great affection they bear
unto their writings they would have apprehended as no mean argument of their
own like skill and judgment, though not blessed with like invention. Many
scarce honestly minded themselves will esteem of their great benefactors as of
Saints, ready to apologize (as is fit) for such actions, as men in their own
times unto whom the censure of such matters belonged, might justly have taxed.

All these motives of love unto men deceased may in their nature and substance
be but carnal, and yet all concur as the usual grounds of most men's
affection* or love to Christ. For whilst we read the legend of his life, we
cannot but approve the peoples verdict of him, Mark 7. v. 37.
he has done all things well, nothing idly, nothing vainly, nothing rashly,
much less maliciously to the hurt or prejudice of any; his deserts toward us
we cannot apprehend, by the lowest kind of hystoricall belief as true, but we
must conceive them withal, as infinitely greater then Abraham's were to the
Jews. Abraham did but see the promise a far off, and gave a copy of the
assurance to posterity: CHRIST seals it with his blood and insta^^s us in the
inheritance bequeathed. Moses delivered Abraham's seed out of Egypt, CHRIST us*
from the land of darkness. Moses freed them from the tyranny of Pharach, and
from working in the furnace, CHRIST us from the futie of those everlasting
flames, for which out souls and bodies had served for such matter as the
brick was to the other. Ioshuah placed them in the land of Canaan, CHRIST us
in the heavenly places; the benefits already bestowed by him upon his people
are much greater then all theirs that have gone before. Abraham was ignorant of
these Jews, Isaac knew them not, nor could Moses hear their prayers. Psalm.
113. 5 6.
who is like unto the Lord our God who dwells on high, who humbles himself
to behold the things that are in heaven, and in the earth, he that raises up
the poor out of the dust, and lifts the needy out of the dunghill that he
may set him with Princes, even with the Princes of his people. But so il does
the natural crookedness of man's corrupted heart and preposterousnesse of his
desires parallel with the righteousness of his Savior, that even the humility
wherein the first appeared which chiefly exasperated the proud Jew to contemn
and despise him, does eleuate the minds of many seely and impotent dejected
creatures amongst Christians unto a kind of carnal glory, whereunto otherwise
they could hardly aspire. For many such, as defect of nature, want of art, good
education or fortunes have made altogether incapable of comparison with others
for wit, strength of body, wealth or other endowments in the custom of the
present world used, for measures of men's worth, or serving to notify the
degrees of betterhood in any kind, will often times glory in this comparison,
that they owe as good souls to God as the best, and think themselves as great
men in our Saviors books as greatest kings* because their estate is, as his
was on earth low and base in the sight of men. This their rejoicing were not in
vain, did they use the low esteem ^ Vile Sect. 3. cap. 4. pa^ag.
that others make of them as an advantage for more easy descent to true
humility, and lowly conceit of themselves not as a step to pride or
stubbernenesse, contrary to their Saviors disposition, who being in glory
equal with God, did abase himself lower then Moses, through his whole life
and conversation, framing his speech more familiar to the meanest, his
exhortations to all that would come unto him more courteous, more kind, more
loving and comfortable then any other of his messengers ever used. And what
heart so dull, so stupid, or hard as not to be pierced with love of such
humility, not to be stricken with awful reverence of that majesty, whereto it
is now exalted? who would not here charge his persecutors with a greater
blindness, hatred, malice and uncharitableness toward him, then is incident
to any professing Christian religion to any as firmly assenting to the truth
of his Gospel as the Jews did unto the writings of Moses and the Prophets.

4 The allowance we are to make the Jews for righting the seeming odds
betwixt us and them, must be taken from the personal offenses or prouocations
man nature corrupted; as in them, so in us, took at our Saviors life, his
carriage, conversation and manner of preaching. Imagine he were now present in
our land in the form of a servant in which he appeared to them, what
entertainment could we expect most of our nobility, or gentry would give him,
should he openly disallow the account they make of their antiquity or descents,
drawing them such a pettig^ee of their minds as he did of the Jews, Ioh. 8. 44
You are of your father the Devil, and the lust of your father you will
fulfill: or would his miracles move any potentate more? It was not his fathers
pleasure he should work wonders in Herod's sight, or such great ones as were
not qualified for the kingdom of God, rather more like to have hardened their
hearts with Pharaoh then become like litttle children. The report or fame of
such miracles as he has wrought amongst the common people, would have moved
many rulers in this our Israel to have said as the Jews did, that he was a
coniourer, or one of Cornelius Agrippas consorts, had he in earnest or solemn
sort avouched as Cornelius does in his satyricall survey of vanities, that
Caine was the first author of nobility, or such generosity as the world, now
magnifies, which makes but a sport or recreation of shedding blood. Nor would
honorable persons be more like to charge him with these or the like
imputations then Lawyers to accuse him or plead against him, or to indite him,
over and above as a sedicious fellow, as a disturber of peace; or divines of
all sorts to censure him for an heretic, an author of sects and factions, a
pestilent schismatique, should he in an open assembly say to the one sort as
sometimes he did to men of their profession amongst the Jews, Luke 11. 46
Woe be unto you the interpreters of the Law, for ye lade men with burdens
grievous to be borne, and ye your selves touch not the burden with one of your
fingers, or proclaim as many woes against the other, with the superscription
of hypocrites, comparing their green affection and grave weeds to Mat. 23. 27.
painted tombs which appear beautiful outward but within are full of dead
men's bones, and all filthiness. What passions would it stir up in all
professions, in Christians of all degrees, should he accuse them of such
villainies and impieties, as in their own persuasions they are least obnoxious
unto, yea whose practice they bitterly lament even in their ancestors, or
threaten us as he did the Mat. 23. 25
Jews, that the plagues of our forefathers sins should fall upon this
present generation, as more wicked then any that went before it? And yet God
knows, how mild these or like speeches, as they are related by our
Evangelists, are in respect of his entire reproves of the Jews, were they
extant as he spoke them, or of such as he would now use, did he converse with
us, and daily behold the cruel oppression of many great ones, the fraud and
cozenage of inferiors, the dissoluteness of others, and the hypocrisy of
such as seem least culpable in the sight of men.

5. These are points which every man may dilate upon, or exemplify
proportionably to his several occasions; mine in this treatise it suffices to
have set down the bare terms of that golden rule of reciprocal proportions,
by which most men may take an account in what state they stand. The first
term is the extraordinary zeal the Jews bare to Moses, the Prophets and
their writings; the second, our parallel affection toward Christ and his
Cospell; the third, the vain issue or empty product of Jewish imaginary zeal
manifested in their destruction and mraiseble estate, since our Saviors first
coming in the flesh; The fourth must needs be a like fruitelesse issue of our
zeal to Christ at his last coming unto judgment, unless we build our faith
and love upon better grounds then they did, and frame our lives and manners to
the mean from which they swerued. One most general, yet an especial rule to
try our faith, must be from experience of good affections contrary to those
which made the Jews to distaste our Savior. What these were, the Reader may
find noted by the Evangelist, and some of them come to be discussed in the
ordinary means we must use for the planting of faith. The surest measure we
can take from any particular duty of our love to Christ, or belief in his
word, must be from our patient sufferance of his messengers to reprove such
enormities in us as he sharply taxed in his hearers, to beat down open and
out crying sins with such fearful threatenings and denuntiations of grievous
woes as he used against hypocrisy, and other predominant vices in his time, as
also to lance and rip their auditors consciences that they may be touched with
a sense of such corruptions as they feel not and scarce know to be hurtful; as
our not sorrowing at others miseries with whom we live, our insulting and
reioicing at others falls, as if we did more joy to grieve them, then sorrow
they have offended God, as if we could be content to purchase our mirth by
crucifying Christ afresh, or by persecuting them for whose sake he died. But if
we repine, stomach or malign his Ambassadors taxing this or like crimes,
though in sharpest terms, or neglect to examine our hearts and consciences at
their request or instance, it is a sure token our persuasions of faith and love
unto him are but sancies, that we are still in the gall of bitterness, enemies
as cruel to him as these Jews were, and would have done to him as they did,
had our occasions or opportunities been the like. To what extraordinary
service he would appoint us were he on earth again, we cannot divine, but the
duties he has enjoined all, without exception, as obedience to the word
known, and reverent attention to the messengers of his will, we certainly
know. Let not then hypocrisy deceip^ us by suggesting these or the like
suppositions. [If we should be urged by the Turk or Jew to deny him, we
would sooner die the death he did, then do it, or were he present in person to
exhort us to such duties as his messengers enioine us, we should sure be as
forward as any man living to do them] these or the like imaginations do but
foretoken our need of that apology, and argues our inclination to use it,
though alas it cannot steed any in that day of trial, Mat. 25 44
Lord when saw we thee naked or anhungred* in the Pulpit or preaching in our
streets, deterring us from evil and exhorting us unto good? if not to relieve
our brothers wants be to suffer him to starve, then questionless to despise
his messengers is to despise him, to revile them is to revile him, and he that
will not believe them, neither would he have believed him more then the Jews
did.

6. For conclusion (because this point may come elsewhere to be handled at
large) if respective, or according to our several vocations, we be generally
either as proud, or as covetous as ambitious or vain glorious in our
prerogatives, as merciless or jealous of disparagement in our places, or as
impatient of just though sharp reproof, as these Jews were: we would have
been altogether both as prone to take, and as earnest in prosecuting any
offense taken at our Saviors doctrine, person, life or manner of preaching, as
his most malicious enemies were and are as liable to their plagues, for God
judges not as man judges, by the actual event, but by the internal habit or
constitution of the heart: Nor did our Sauiors presence his conversation, or
other cyrcumstances, make, but only manifest the malicious enmity of the Jew
against all goodness, to the world, and their odiousness in the sight of God
and man, should teach us to be more careful to avoid the inward disease then
the event or outbarsting, which cannot be so apparent in us until Christ
appear again in person. Or if it be as backward in performance of those
positive duties exacted by him of his Disciples, as were the ordinary, or
less harmefull sort of unbelieving Jews; we may not expect any better hire or
reward then they had, but rather a greater portion with the hypocrite for our
profession of love and loialty to him. For as we may give perfect proof to God
of our malice or spite against Christ only by our internal corrupt desires,
without any positive outward act: so can we make no proof of true love toward
him, either unto God or our selves but our deeds albeit even in doing his
commandments we are apt to deceive our selves, and without due examination to
admit false witnesses of our own sincerity; amischiefe in the next place to be
prevented.

CHAP. IIII. That the fruits of righteousness, if but of one or few kinds
argue the stock whence they spring to be either imperfect or unsound: of the
danger that may come by partiality in the practice of precepts alike divine or
from difformitie of zeal: that our Assent to generalities ofttimes appears
greater to our selves then indeed it is from our pronenesse or eager desires
to transgress in some particulars.
1. NOthing more natural to our affections, when they abound or swell, then to
seek objects whereon to bestow themselves, and after the fashion of the world
to make choice of the fairest from whole beauty they usually receive strength
and vigor. For this cause as in the last discourse was observed, that good
affection which men of disposition candide and ingenuous always bear unto the
memorable virtues of men deceased or far absent, well deserving of the world
or them, administering no occasion of dislike, does presently seek upon the
first sight of his legend to fasten it self upon our Savior, in whom nothing
truly admirable or praise worthy, but is ideally absolute and perfect. And
strange it is not, if in practical persuasions that error steal on most,
which has overtaken many inretired speculations, that the object qualifies the
desire; as indeed it does, but not always; not when the will outstarts the
understanding or reason. For where the affection or passion is violent and
unrelenting, we presently believe what we eagerly desire. From the concurrence
of these three decliuities or facile descents into error, we often mistake
carnal love for spiritual, and belief merely natural or scarce worth the
title of hystoricall, for supernatural, because set perhaps strongly on
objects spiritual or supernatural. The remedy is to let reason work first,
and take the true portrature of that spiritual beauty whereto it directs our
desires or affections. Nor do faith and love truly Christian arise from every
reference or extremission of our faculties or apprehensions unto CHRIST but
from an intromission of his image or shape into our souls.

The right esteem or ponderation of his virtues and perfections must inspire
our hearts with resolution and zeal to imitate him in his goodness, to be
faithful doers, not hearers only of his precepts, and that not of some one or
few, but of all. Seeing love, as has been observed, is the necessary
consequent of lively faith, and faith it self a firm and constant Assent unto
divine revelations, without indulgence or dispensation: it is a sure argument,
the one never kindly takes, unless it equally spread it self, (as the Sun
does his beams, or centers their lines), to every object within the sphere of
divine truth; that the other never kindls aright unless it uniformly inflame
every faculty of our souls with desire of executing that part of Gods service
whereto it is ordained, or with a delight of such practices as the Scripture
proposes to our imitation in the Law, the Prophets or Evangelical history of
our Saviors life and death,

2. Not observing this uniformity, the partial practice of duties in
themselves very necessary, help to thrust us headlong into the former error.
For the earnest prosecution of our natural desires lighting in with our feeble
Assent unto some particular divine truths or slender liking of some duties
commanded suitable to them, makes us attribute the delight or love we bear to
the internal object of our corrupt desires, unto the truth or precept divine;
as by the like error many looking upon the Sun in a foggy morning imagine
that redness to be in the body of this glorious star, which is in the
vapor directly lying betwixt their eyes and it. Howbeit this groundless
conceit we hence entertain of our Assent, or love unto any object of Faith,
increases the strength of our carnal desires or delights natural, and that
inordinately increased in respect of some one or few points vrterly disenables
us for prosecuting others oft-times more necessary and much better. And as
els^where I have observed, that which casts men into the forementioned Jewish
disease of ouerreckoning themselves in their ^^compts of faith and loialty
toward God and his anointed, is the sufferance of their imaginations to run
too much, or too long on some one or few good qualities or practices of such
duties as our natural affections out of particular affinity or alliance
impell us unto, not counterpoising these persuasions with proposal of contrary
difficulties, or trying their strength by performance of such other Christian
exercises as are most contrary to their natural inclinations. As what man is
there by nature free and bountiful, but will thoroughly Assent unto our Saviors
saying as true and good, Acts 20. 35
beatius est dare quam accipere? it is more blessed to give then to receive.
Yet many by too much applauding their obedience in this particular, come at
length to give more then is their own, or so much of their own, as others
cannot get from them what is theirs, and so excessive diligence in this breeds
extreme negligence, or rather manifest breach of that other rule altogether as
necessary, Romans 13. 10
owe nothing unto any man but love: and yet whiles they compare themselves and
their good deeds, with the miserable and hard hearted, these seem as Jews
unto them and they again unto these as worse then Infidels 1. Tim. 5. 8
being not more careful to provide for their wife, children, and other
committed by nature to their charge. Many again by wedding their thoughts unto
this, perpetually divorce themselves from the former of our Savior, utterly
abandoning all deeds of charity as the bastard brood of popery and
superstition.

3. Not one almost by nature fair conditioned, or of a a plausible behavior
by education, desirous to gain the love of all, without giving just offense to
any, but will admire the humility, the meekness, the placide and sweet
affection of our Savior; his gentle tollerance of his Disciples long
ignorance, the mild entreaty and kind inuitations of grievous and open
sinners. And yet many, I have observed, and some far above the usual pitch
of vulgar Christians, many times from too much congratulating this affinity
betwixt their natural disposition and our Saviors, degenerate into old Elies
facility, or the contrary Stoicall apathie, demeaning themselves as if all
sins were alike; as little moved with foul and grievous offenses against
Christ, contempt of his Sacraments, wilful and affcted breach of sacred laws,
flouting at professed observance of fundamental precepts of Christianity,
open auowing wretchlesse neglect of oaths, as if they were but matters of
ordinary pass, some light ierke or gibe, or hadnsome exchange of words in
table-talke, not worthy to be stood upon amongst friends or mutual welwillers.
This is a defect of faith so common to such, as, for their esteem and
experience in the world, are held to be fittest censurers of Christian manners;
that if one should be put to give a physical definition of discretion,
according to the use or application of the word in such men's language, he could
not better express the nature of it, than by a temper apt to be much moved
with nothing, but what directly crosses their maine purposes or may defeat
them of their principal ends, as gain, preferment, honor, applause of the
multitude, or favor with men, whose persons they hold in admiration for some
advantage. But were our hearts enspired with true and lively faith, it would
teach our affections, as to hold one strain or tenor in matters of course,
indifference, or wordly consequence, so to rise and fall, to swell and assuage,
whether in admiration or detestation, according to the different worth or
indignity of objects presented to them. Not thus qualified we cannot hold
consort with the sweet harmony of our Lord and Saviors affections, whose
indignation at indulgence to such open sins* as directly dishonored his
father, did raise it self above the strain of princely wrath and displeasure:
witness his whipping the buiers and sellers, without respect of persons, out
of the temple; yet buying and selling of temples with the appertinences is the
readiest means with us to compass greatest places in the Church, and and often
times because we see no means of prevailing against the wolves, we hope to
have some share or offals of the prey, or for our silence to be at length
admitted into the association: but, O my soul, come not thou into their
secrets, unto their assembly mine Honor (though honor should be thy reward)
be not thou united; In their ambition they slay and murder souls, and in
their self will they ruinate the walls of Christ's Church. Here were a fit place
to admonish some most detesting Idols or images in Churches, that the
sacrilege, they commit continually, is a sin no less detested of their God.
But it would require a larger comment then in this place I may insert to
persuade that truth unto the belly, which every true Divine comparing the
Jeremy 7. v. 11.
Prophets word with the Math. ^^. 13.
Evangelists will conceive, that the abuses committed by these marchandizing
Jews in the Temple w^^ more offensive to the pure eyes of the Lord then their
forefathers walking after other Gods and burning incense unto Baall.

4 The holy Ghost I am persuaded would not so pathetically have deciphered the
sweet amity of David and Jonathan, but with purpose to commend it as an
especial ornament of heroical minds, or as a virtue to be imitated by every
faithful professor of the truth. And yet in men far otherwise qualified then
these woorthies were, and aiming at contrary ends, first linked in friendship
upon dislike occasions, for the most part upon mutual consciousnesse of foul
crimes or combination in evils, and continuing the bond upon worldly or carnal
considerations; the imitation of like love is adulterous. It may be Achitophell
was as firm and constant unto Absalom against David, as Jonathan was to David
against the commandment of his father Saul. Notwithstanding that Ionathans
reference unto Saul was nearer, then Achitophels unto David; the same affection
in the one was like the love of the bridegroom and the spouse, chaste and
loiall; in the other praeposterous and abominable, like the unclean lusts of
Sodom. This is a wild plant of barbarous Gentilisme so deeply rooted in most
professed Christians hearts that the extirpation of it requires a peculiar
volume, for scarce can we find any love amongst men which is not deadly enmity
against Christ. So mightily is the poison of it diffused throughout all our
faculties and affections, that close sticking to a friend though in matters
neither justifiable by the law of God or man, is held such an extraordinary act
of charity, as may serve to cover a millian of other unchristian practices.
Most out of consciousnesse of such performances, will not spare to censure
others most maliciously, if they will not accord with them to forswear
themselves for their friend, forsake their God and deny their Redeemer; for so
he does that resolves to patronage or bear his brother out in wrongs or foul
offenses, and rather seeks not first to work him unto true repentance, to sue
for mercy at Gods hands and christian reconcilement with his brother whom he
offends. Math. 10. v. 37.
Whosoever loves father or mother, brother or sister (much more a friend) more
then Christ, is not worthy of him. Yea he forsakes him in not disclaiming them
in unjust courses. Even amongst men to profess greatest love to one, and take
part with another, in causes which equally concern both, and both alike affect
is, (in the mildest censure it can admit) a breach of friendship, or forsaking
of his friend. Yet who can be so near a friend to us as our Redeemer is to
truth? what, can they whom we love best on earth so much affect, as he does
equity and righteous dealing? Is it then hyperbolicall to affirm, or rather
hypocrisy either in heart or word to deny, that he which for love to his
friend p^ru^rts equity, transgresses the common rule of charity, and
overthrows judgment, especially of the sons of affliction, openly denies
Christ, who is always the principal in every controversy of right or wrong,
always more offended with unjust grieuances then the parties grieved are; ever
better pleased with doing right then he to whom right is done.

5 Others again through heat of blood or greatness of spirit aduenturous, or
otherwise prodigal of life for purchase of fame, can with joy embrace such
dangers in Christ's cause as would much daunt many good professors. In
persuasions of zeal hence grounded they might perhaps die in battle against
the Infidels, or in the Romish inquisition, and yet do no more for the Savior
of their souls then they would for a strumpet or some consort of bodily lust,
or then malefactors have done one for another. And it is a miserable kind of
martyrdom to sacrifice a stout body to a stabborne mind; yet besides the
vanity of the conceit or over esteem of their own faith or uncharitable
censures of others frailties in like difficulties, the very nursing of this
resolution upon these motives disenables them either for the right fruition, or
resignation of life upon others more acceptable to the Lord and giver of life.
Few thus bravely minded but are more impatient of life or death attended on
with disgrace of the most or such as they expect should be propagators of their
fame, more impotent then others, to resist contempt or set light of public
scorn. Howbeit the strength of faith rightly Christian is better tried by
valor passive, such as appeared in our Savior when he willingly submitted
himself to the taunts, mockes, and abuses of his enemies, then by valor
active, such as Peter showed when he smote of the high Prists servants ear;
the cause in general was most just, and the resolution bold, having not one
for three to mainetaine the quarrel; but Peter at this time was more fit to
make a soldier then a martyr; for which service secular soldiers are for the
most part meaneliest qualified. All the circumstances of the story
notwithstanding, persuade me it was resolution truly noble and Christianly
valourous, as proceeding from lively faith in that Cum ad supplicium
ducerentur, vna quoque Lud. Marsacus home militaris sed qui in sacris libris
legendis multum temporis contriuerat, productus est, minime revincto collo, v^i
fieri assolet, sic enim iudex, quod ille regi militasset, iusserat* cumque
videret sociis indutum collo a carnifice laqueum quaesiuit a praetore eorum
potior quam sua causa existeret? cur enim inquit, non me simili torque donq^,
and tam illustris ac praestantis ordinis me quoque equitem creas. Thuanus. lib.
11. anno 1553.
French Soldier who for his zealous profession of reformed religion adjudged
with others to the fire, and in lieu of all his good service to the King and
state, having this grace bestowed upon him that he should go to the stake
gentleman-like without a with, demands the reason why he might not be
permitted to wear such a chain as his fellows did, esteeming this rebuke of
Christ more glorious then the ensigns of Saint Michaels order.

Such vncorrupt witnesses of Christ were these Aluigeans, mentioned in the
Sect. 3. chap. 3. parag. 8. 9. 10.
second book, which neither out of stubborn humor of contradiction nor hope
of celebritie amongst men, but out of sincere love unto the truth gave evidence
for the recovery of Christ's Gospel concealed and prescribed against by the
iniquity of former times. But in Saint Cyprians time the solemn memorial of
former martyrs, and that high account which Christians made of Confessors that
had escaped, did bribe others to give testimony unto Christ's name, desirous to
die the death of the righteous, out of love indeed, but not of that just one,
but of fame and vain glory. Against this poison that religious Father, and
holy Martyr, prepared this antidote following, which I esteem so much the more
because of the good effect it wrought in himself. Pacem nobis Christus dedit:
concordes atque vnanimes esse praecepit: dilectionis and charitatis fadera
incorrupta atque inuiolata seruari mandauit: exhibere se non posse martyrem qui
fraternam non tene^ charitatem. Docet hoc and contestatur Paulus Apostotus
d^cens, Et si habuer^ fidem etc. Cyprianus de vnitate ecclesia.
Christ bequeathed peace unto us, enioyning us to be of one heart, and one
mind; the league of love and charity he commanded should be inuiolately kept.
He cannot approve himself a Martyr, that holds not the band of brotherly love;
and again.

He is a confessor, but after confession the Confessor est, sed post
confessionem periculis maius est, quia plus aduersarius prouocatus est.
Confessor est, hoc m^gis stare debet cum domini euangelio, per euangelium
gloriam consequ^tus a domino All eium diceus cui multum datur, multum quae^u^ur
ab co, and cui plus dignitatis ad scribitur, plus de illo exigitur ser^^tutis.
Nemo per confessoris exe^^^l^ pe^^at, nemo iniusticia^ nemo insolen^^a nemo
perfidia^ de cofessoris moribus discat. Confessor est, ^u humilis et quietus,
sit in ^ct^ suo c^ disciplin^ modestu^^t qu. Christi confessor dicitur,
Christum qu^m confi^etur imitetur. Nam cum dicat ille, quise extoll^t,
humili^bitur, and qui se humiliat ex ^^abitur: et ipse a patre exaltatus sit,
qui a se in terris sermo and virtus et sapientia Dei patris hum^l^auit, quomodo
potest extolle^tiam d^l^g^r, q^i et nobis ^umilitatem sua lege mandauit et ipse
a patie, amplissi n^n nome^ prae^^o humilitatis accepit. Cyp^tanus Ibid.
danger is greater, because the adversary is more provoked. He is a confessor;
in this respect, he is more stricktly bound to stand for the Gospel, as having
through the Gospel obtained greater glory of the Lord. For the Lord has said
it, to whom much is given, of him much shall be required and more service shall
be exacted of him on whom more dignity has been bestowed. Let no man perish
through the confessors example, let no man learn injustice, insolence, or
perfideousnesse from his manners. He is a confessor; let him be humble and
meek, let him be modest in his carriage, that as he is entitled a confessor of
Christ, so he may imitate Christ whom he consesseth; for he has said, He that
exalts himself shall be brought low, and his father has exalted him because
he humbled himself here on earth, albeit he were the word, the power and
wisdom of his father; and how can he love arrogancy which has enjoined
humility by his law, and has obtained a name above all names of his Father, as
a reward of his humility.

6. Non sanguis sed causa facit Martyrem. It is not the blood but the cause
that makes a Martyr, was a saying subscribed unto by orthodoxall antiquity, and
since approved by the joint consent of all truly religious. I may add, it is
not the cause or profession of whose truth and goodness men rest strongly
persuaded, but the grounds whereupon they embrace it, or motives inducing them
to give testimony to it, which makes their death acceptable unto God. Christ
requires we keep our bodies without blemish, or purify them by repentance, if
they have been spotted with the world, ere we offer them up in sacrifice unto
him. Contentus Deus noster est, vt ei pax nostra seruiat, vt sola ei
immaculatorum actum puritate and vi^ae in contaminabilis sanctitate placeamus
Quo plus ei ^id^s and d^u^^^o nostra debel, quia mi^ora a nobis exigit and
maiora co^^essi^. Et ideo cum and principes Christiani sint and persecutio
nulla sit, and religio non i^qumetur, qui ad probandum fidem experimentis
d^^^ribus non compellimur inferioribus ^^^em ^ffici^, domino plu^ placere
de^emus. Probat enim e^ia^^ in ma oribus* sires ^^iga^, executorem se idoneum
sore, a quo mino^a complent^r, sal^ianus lib. 3.
He that truly Assents to the greater and more terrible of worldly evils as
good and fit to be sustained in his cause, will questionless suffer and
sustain grieuances of less weight at his request. Now he that commands us to
deny our selves rather then him, before men, exacts of us that we confess him
by integrity and fidelity in his service, by abstinence from unlawful
pleasures of what kind soever, none of which can be so dear to us as is
life, which he that for his sake renounceth by faith, would by the same,
renounce all pleasures incident to it. For he that faithfully obaies in the
greater and more difficult, will doubtless perform like obedience in the
less. 1. John 3 v. 14.
We know (says Saint John) that we have passed from death to life, because we
love the brethren; he that loves not his brother abides in death: unless out
of this love, as jointly respecting our brethren, we lay down our lives in
love or testimony of the truth, we do not rightly confess CHRIST, nor die in
faith; Ibidem v. 15.
for whosoever hates his brother, is a murderer. And as he adds, V. 16.
hereby perceive we the love of God, because he laid down his life for us. but
whereby shall we perceive our love to him? if we do as we ought, and we ought
(as it follows) to lay down our lives for the brethren. v. 16.
Not only to redeem many of them (if that were possible) from a bodily death
by dying for them, but rather to encourage every one by our examples to embrace
the truth and confess CHRIST before men, whether by life or death; whether by
profession of truth, or practice of works commanded, as occasion shall be
offered. He that requires us to lay down our lives for their souls, will
look we should distribute our goods to relieve their bodies; otherwise to die
for them is no true testimony of our love to CHRIST; 1. John 3. v. 17.
for who so has this worlds goods and sees his brother has need, and
shuts up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in
him. Again, 1. Cor. 13. v. 3. 4. 5
though we feed the poor with all our goods, and yet have not this love [ to
lay down our lives for the brethren,] it profits nothing, and though we give
our bodies to be burned for them, and have not this other part of love to feed
them, or those attributes of it in the same place expressed by the Apostle, as
long sufferance, kindness, without envy, without boasting, without pride,
without disdain, without exaction of our own, with placide affections,
neither provoking, nor easy to be provoked, but reioscing in truth, and
detesting iniquity, with viformity of faith, hope and conscience, it profits
nothing. For as has been observed before, consideration of what CHRIST has
done for us must bring forth in us the same mind that was in him, a mind to
do his fathers will in every point alike sincerely, but with greater
intentions or alacrity, as the occasions or exigence of seasons shall require.
Sometimes we may more faithfully confess his name by standing for some branch
of truth (no general point of salvation) in opposition to men of contrary
minds with whom we live, (whose proiects tending to the dishonor of Gods
name, and prejudice of his dearest children we may hinder) then by professing
all the articles of true religion upon the enemies rack, or witnessing some
principal truth before the faggot.

7. Besides the obhomination of the causes they maintain, great presumptions,
or rather strong evidences, there be many of their corrupt minds, whom the
Romish Church in latter years sets footh for Martyrs to the world. First, the
Diuifications ascribed unto them as their enrolements in the catalogue of
former Saints, inuocations, adorations of their relics and the like, would
have moved most heathen Romans or Egyptians to have adventured on greater
dangers or indignities then they are put to for one of their foolish Gods, an
ape, a serpent, or a crocodile. Yet these men not inconsequently, I must
confess, unto their magical conceit of faith and holiness, imagined by them
in dead works, think, their blood shed in the Catholic cause, shall wipe
away their actual sins, as clearly as the water of baptism by their
doctrine does original. And as that sweet relator of his fruitful
observations in matters of religion, has ascertained us, that Italians are
usually imboldned to sin, because they must have matter to confess; so men
of great place and authority in this land would not suffer us retired students
to be ignorant, that some seminary priests have purpoposely given the raines to
fleshly lusts upon confidence the executioners knife should work a perfect
circumcision, or the fire purify their polluted members at the day of
execution. Or in case they never felt the severe stroke of justice, yet their
constant resolution to suffer, and daily expectation of being called unto this
fiery trial, should serve as a cloak to cover those impuri^es which the
purity of CHRIST'S blood shed upon the Cross (such is the abomination of their
hypocrisy) without perfect inherent righteousness, cannot hide. So far too
many of them are from sobriety, meeknes and humility, and those other
qualifications required by Saint Cyprian in true Martyrs, that the gift of
impudence, scurrility and disdain, serves no homebred malefactors half so
well in the time of their durance, or whilst they are brought before the face
of authority, or arraigned at the bar of justice, as it does them; as if they
would give us to understand that the mark of the beast, spoken of by S. John,
had some such especial virtue, as these characters traitorous Gowry brought
out of Italy, which stopped his blood from running out, after his body was
run through, as this does theirs from appearing in their foreheads (for only
to blush they are ashamed) even whilst they pierce through their own souls
and pollute their country air with hideous foreign blasphemies; but in re
mala, animo s^vtare bono i^uat; a good face put upon a bad matter, ofttimes
avails much; yet with men, not with God, unto whose mercy I leave such, as
affect to be Pseudo-martyres, beseeching him of his infinite goodness to
alighten their hearts, that they may see at length the abominable filth of
that Idol to which so many parents in this land are desirous to sacrifice
their dearest children, and these men their very souls. But, oh Lord, stop the
infection, that it spread not from the dead unto the living.

8. But leaving this huge lake: two, no small sinckes of hypocrisy, I have
espied, from whose noisomeness many, otherwise well affected, scarce are free,
but into which Lord let not my soul descend, for their eu^cation is into the
bottomless pit: The one, an opinion, there can be no fit matter of
martyrdom in a state authorizing the free profession of that religion which
amongst many we like best, and left to our selves would make choice of. The
other, which in part feeds this, is a persuasion, that mere errors in doctrine
or opinion, are more pernicious, then affected indulgence to lewd practices, or
continuance in sinful courses, or open breaches of Gods commandments. These
are teliques of Romish sorcery, which puts an abstract sanctity in the
mathematical form or superficial draught of orthodoxal doctrine, as it is in
the brain, though deuoide of true holiness in life and conversation, or good
affection in the heart, and hence accompteth heresy (that is every opinion
different from the tenants, or contrary to the practices of their Church) a
sin more deadly then any other, and which in their judgment does utterly
deprive us of such faith as they maintain, though that no better, if not worse
then devils.

But if we recall what has been hitherto discussed: First, [That Christian
faith is an Assent unto divine revelations, not only as true in themselves, but
as good to us in the practice, as much better then avoiding the displeasure or
gaining the favors of any earthly powers] Secondly, [That this Assent must be
uniform, and a like sincere to every truth, a like strong to every practice,
always increasing according to the several degrees of truth or goodness
apprehended in the object, or different exigence of times and place wherein we
liue]: these points are most clear; That Christian faith is more directly
oppugned by wilful neglect, or auowed violations of moral, or Evangelical
precepts, then by bare errors in opinion, or such heresy; as directly include
not blasphemy against the blessed Trinity; for the chief evil of all others
consists in reference to wicked practices whereunto they lead or incline men:
That the Ministers of the Gospel, may deny CHRIST, or manifest their
ashamednesse of his Gospel as directly by not laying his Law as closely to
the great Herod's of the world, as John Baptist did (suppose the case be as
notorious and as well known unto them) as if they had been afraid to confess
him for fear of being put out of the synagogue, or ^ayd with those other
Jews, we know that God spoke with Mose and gave authority unto Magistrates,
but this man we know not whence he is, nor do we care for his Counsels. Yet,
were John Baptists kind of preaching used in many kingdoms, though by such as
profess the same Religion with the Potentates, they should offend with their
boldness, I think it would prove matter of martyrdom in the end. That any
age, since Christian Religion was first propagated, has wanted store of
Martyrs, is more to be attributed unto the negligence, ignorance, and
hypocrisy, or want of courage in Christ's ambassadors, or appointed Pastors,
then unto the sincerity, mildness, or fidelity of the flock; especially of the
bell-weathers or chief ringleaders. Or if Satan had not abated the edge of
primitive zeal and resolution by that dishonorable peace concluded between
Christianity and Gentilisme, after the settling of Goths and Vandalls in these
parts of Christendom; had he not utterly benumbed mankind by locking up
their spiritual senses in midnight darkness; and fettering their souls in
superstition, since the time he himself was let loose; Rome Christian had
seen more Martyrs, even of such as did not much dissent from her in most
opinions held within six hundred years of CHRIST, in one year, then Rome
heathen at any time had known in ten. Even in Churches best reformed it would
be much easier, I think, to find store of just matter for Martyrdom, than of
men fit to make Martyrs. And he that has lived any long time in these quiet
mansions and seats of Muses, secure from Mars his broiles, or external
violence, has great cause either to magnify the tender mercies of his
gracious God, or suspect himself for an hypocrite, if he have not suffered
some degrees of Martyrdom: Heb. 12. 11.
But unto such as have been exercised therein, it brings the quiet fruit of
righteousness; and ought to encourage rather then daunt them whilst they live
in these Paradises free (God be praised) from boisterous blasts, as taint
other plants of the same nursery removed abroad, to use this calm and happy
season they enjoy for setting their faith and love aright, that they may spread
themselves equally to every point of that compass by which they are to direct
their course in this troublesome sea of uncertainties: that their strength in
practice and profession may jointly increase, without all respect to persons or
particular duties, save what arises from the excess of worth in the things
themselves believed or loved; or of necessity, or special occasions of
performances, that they may further, as much as in them lies, by word and deed
the impartial execution of their blessed Founders statutes, of whose
beneficence they daily taste, albeit oft-times with opposition to them or
offense taken by them, in whose arbitrament their estimation in the world or a
great part of the maintenance provided for them, depends. If by framing our
resolutions and affections by little and little to march on constantly, though
but slowly, in this uniformity and proportion, we can come at length to repel
proffers of Honor, whereunto we cannot ascend but by winding and crooked
steps, or of gain not easily gotten but by unlawful means, or to hold
fleshly pleasures as deadly poisons to our souls, then shall our deaths be
acceptable in the sight of our God, and if it be his heavenly will hereafter to
call us to resistance of iniquity, even unto blood; we have these sure
grounds of hope, that we shall offer up our mortal bodies in sacrifice unto
Him the only true and everliving GOD, not to the sactious humors of these
corrupt times, or vain Idols or our foolish fancies.

9. This uniformity of growth in faith and want of partiality in our zeal, I
have affected, since I knew what belonged unto either; the rather because (as I
sincerely profess in the sight of God) the first ground of my dislike unto the
chief sollicitors of reformation in our Church, men whose excellent parts and
good labors I then did and ever shall reverence, was the difformity of their
zeal: for had it been uniform, no question but it had moved them to lay down
their lives for redressing known enormities in the Commonweal, as much more
material and more nearly concerning the advancement of the Gospel then those
doubtful controversies (for so I apprehended them) of formalities about which
they strove, as death it self is more terrible then deprivation. The
principal authors or abettors of which enormities, notwithstanding were
imboldened by these encomiasts, in whose language every Cormorant that would
countenance their cause was a sanctified person a son of God. Their
partiality herein toward others, may occasion us to observe a blast of like
temptation naturally rising from like humors, which oftentimes overthrows
faith where it is well-nigh rightly set and ready to take. By nature, if not
prevented by grace and a watchful eye over our persuasions, we seek to make
amends for our delinquency in points, whose practice our affections cannot well
brook, by a supererogation in some other duties, wherein we either naturally
delight, or can inflict upon our selves as an easy penance* because not much
distasteful to our sweet desires, nor contrary to our principal resolutions.
Many gallants of dissolute and debaushed behavior, and sometimes Ministers, of
life scandalous and obnoxious (though neither of there I use as instances for
proof of my assertion) will in their discourses bewray an affected desire of
declaiming against errors in general opinions abstract from use or reformation
of life, or some ancient heretics, whose heresies might oft-times sleep with
their bodies were they not wakened by loud outcries against them. What is the
reason that such men as are most unfurnished in these subtilities are usually
most forward to entertain conflicts with the dead or men far absent? They
are afraid to look upon themselves without a foil, and seeing they can hardly
find others of life and conversation much fowler; they purpose unto themselves
this difformity or disproportion in such opinions as are indifferent inrespect
of their delights, and therefore easy to be embraced with joy, as a salve
unto their sore consciences, apt for to breed such a persuasion of faith or
grace inherent as the Pharisee had, with whom upon this conceit they say ^uk^
18 11 ^
Lord we thank thee that we are not as other men are, not as these proeeuish
Schismatiques, or monstrous, and misshapen Heretics. Others, out of the like
humor again, will bitterly inueigh against uncharitableness, from which
indeed they are free, in respect of their own crimmous consorts, but yet
think it no small point of zeal to censure religious Preachers most
uncharitably for reproouing the unfruitful works of darkness. But, as was
intimated, the form of this temptation is in diverse well minded, the same.
Many, if we respect that great abundance God has either blessed them with, or
permitted them to scrape together, very defective in works of charity or
devotion, albeit Leuyes revenues pay them tribute for this purpose, will be
more forward in frequenting religious assemblies or holy exercises, then such
as fructify more by one hours conference with a true divine, or reading a
religious treatise, than they do by noting twenty sermons. The true reason of
this diformity is not always, perhaps not usually, as some, not so obseruant
of their own temptations as they might be, deem, from actual dissimulation
with the world and themselves, or express purpose to use religion only in
policy for a garment to cover their misshapennesse; but rather from a secret
working of the soul, conscious of it eternal want and penury of works best
pleasing God, which she thus seeks to recompease by extraordinary diligence in
such duties as shall not much displease herself, or prejudice her sweet
delights, or alter her most familiar purposes. Thus did the Jews, from whom
this disease descends, hope to repair their want of mercy with multitude of
sacrifices, no less necessarily required by the law then sermons are by the
Gospel. And the stomach, when it either has no solid food, or is unable to
digest it, will naturally desire to fill it self though with water or such
light meats as breed naught but wind. The like advantage hypocrisy often gains
to strengthen it self by antedating indulgences to unlawful acts, or delights
upon presumption of increasing faith by repentance.

10. Who is he which now truly fears God, but calling his former thoughts to
strict account, will profess he has sometimes been indulgent to natural
desires, or such pleasures as have accompanied him from the cradle, upon hope
his alacrity in doing good should by this relaxation be augmented or repaired?
Or would we be as obseruant of our demeanure toward God, as we are of it
toward men, or their deportment toward us, we could not long remain in
ignorance, that our Assent unto general principles of faith, or future
practices of duties enjoined, do oft-times appear greater, then indeed they
are, from our pronenesse inslantly to transgress in some particulars, which to
prosecute without check or encumbrance we hardly could without making our
selves fair promises of reformation in time to come. For apprehension, or
fear of defection, either final or total, cannot but curb the unruly
appetites of flesh and blood in such as have any touch of conscience or
religion. In these allurements we entreat our consciences, as men intentive
upon weighty business do cumbersome guests or importunate sollicitours (if
such as in ciuility they must respect) making fair proffers they will be for
them against another time, to be quit of them for the present. Nor do they
always make show of more than they mean, albeit when the heat of business
is allaid, they be more loath to be urged with performance of what they
promised, then they were to promise, The reason in this and the former case is
the same: eager desire of prosecuting what they had in hand without
interruption or delay made them more hearty then otherwise they would have been
in their proffers; because the unkindness which might be taken, or uncivil
terms that might grow upon an discourteous dismission, might breed vexation of
mind, or unaptness to dispatch their instant affairs. In like sort, many put
off their Creditors with earnest protestations and serious purposes to give
them contentment ere long; but if contrary occasions in the mean time meet
them, they take up with their promises and recall their purposes: both now are
conditional. They would be as willing as any man living if they had it, and
can heartily wish they had wherewith to give every man full satisfaction. The
same protestations we usually make unto our God, and relent from them upon like
occasions: when new temptations do assault us; we request him, as Naaman did,
to be merciful unto us in some one or all, or if not simply for the sin, yet
for the act at the present, and perhaps vow double diligence in his laws for
times ensuing; yea oftentimes apprehend this experience of our transgression,
and the sting of sin thence arising, as a motive to make us more earnest
solicitors for grace. When as (God knows) by spending the time, allotted us
for repentance, in such trifling pleasures, we cast our selves more and more
behind hand, entering further into Satan that cruel extortioners bands,
always disenabling our selves as much to resist the next temptation, as our
delight has been in yielding to this. At length we come to desperate debtors
last protestations: If we could a base our selves in stooping unto a vulgar
life, or abstain from such pleasures as nature and education has made us more
capable of then others are, we could be as willing to perform any Christian
duty, as the best: that now we are more backward then most are, must not be
thought to proceed from any less esteem of CHRIST and his kingdom, but from
multitude of great and weighty occasions to withdraw us. Some again persuade
themselves they bear great inward affection toward God; but yet whiles they
outwardly transgress his laws, or, at least, show not their love unto him in
the practice, the blame must be laid upon others, which indiscreetly cross
them: let them have their wills, and it shall be made manifest unto the world,
they are both as willing and able to do God any service, as the most forward
professor lluing. This is a temptation incident to brave minds, (so every proud
man thinks his own) parallel to Caesar's protestations of love and loyalty to
Rome, when he came in arms against it, for thus he deifies it amongst the
other gods.

-- -- -- -- Summique o Numinis instar Lucan lib. 1

Roma, ^aue caeptis, non te furialibus armis
Persequor: en adsum victor terraquemarique
Caesar, vhique tuus, liceat modo nunc quoque miles
Ille erit ille nocens, qui me tibi fecerat hostem,
Thine aid, o Rome'mongst greatest gods, I crave my foe to foil:
Nor follow I these furious broiles, with purpose thee to spoil;
Vouchsafe t'accept my service now, I now before thee stand;
Victorious Caesar hitherto, as well by sea as land.
So now I may, thy Soldier true, for ever will I be:
His be the guilt, this bloody breach that caused twixt Thee and Me.
Such allegiance will every Jesuit profess unto his native Sovereign, and
yet dispense with his oath, if he shall in any sort offend the Romish Church.
But the Lord our God is no mean Lord, he accepts not of fealty tendered with
such reseruations as Jesuits use in their oaths of allegiance: served he
will be with the whole heart and affection, and will not be sharer with the
devil, the world of flesh, as in the next place from Apostolical aurhority,
confirming the reasons hitherto alleged, is to be showed.

CHAP. V. That true faith is the soul of good works: That it equally respects
all the Commandments of God, and can admit no dispensation for nonperformance
of necessary duties.
1. THat no man without faith can please God, two reasons there be very
pregnant: the one, because the wrath of God remains on all persons without it,
as being not contained within his covenant: the other more immediate, because,
albeit the party destitute of it, were not prejudiced by his first parents
sin, or his own thence derived, his actions nevertheless could not be
acceptable in Gods sight, not truly good, because not undertaken and managed by
that faith which interests us in Gods covenant, and engrafteth us in his Son.
Whether such faith can be wrought in any without express and actual knowledge
To make our actions acceptable in the sight of God, true and lively faith is
necessary, not only to the persons working, but as concurrent to the work it
self; nor are all the actions of the faithful, but such only as are conceived
and managed by faith truly faithful.
of CHRIST, were perhaps curiosity to examine, and presumption to determine;
yet thus much supposed, the conclusion is undoubted, that their works should
for Christ's sake be accepted of his Father, who better knows the hearts of of
such then they do his son, or we the extent of his decree of mercy in this
case; of this we may be sure, albeit the best deeds of his dearest children are
acceptable only for his Sons sake, yet for his sake he never accepts the
impure or evil deeds (the practice I mean of things forbidden) of such as
actually know his son, and are expressly contained within his covenant, but
those only wherein they truly resemble him. Now every action, whereto that
faith, by which we are engrafted in Christ, is concurrent, is in it self
sincerely and truly, though imperfectly good. Every action without concurse of
such faith, is in it nature bad, though of an object truly good; or, at the
best, but indifferent, if the object be incapable of moral good or evil, and
fall not within the precincts of any diuiuine commandment or prohibition. As
the works of nature deprived of influence from their proper and principal
causes become defective, or, if the material or passive be not subordinate or
fashionable to the formatiue or active causes, monstrous: so are our moral
actions either altogether deficient from the rule of goodness, or preposterous
and contrary to it, unless the faculties, affections, or inclinations, whence
they flow, be inspired directed and moderated by a true and lively faith.

2. It is a Canonical saying which the son of Sirach has to this purpose:
Eccles. 32. 23 Read Sest. 1. chap. 7. Parag. 1. 2
In every work (or as some read In every good work) be of a faithful
heart; or as Drusius, trust thy soul, but most directly to the Authors
meaning, believe with thy soul for this is the keeping of the Commandments.
But what is it he wills us to believe with the soul? that the thing is good
which we intend to work? But unless such it be in it self, before intended
by us, it will sooner make our belief bad, then become any whit the better by
our believing it is good. For to believe or trust our own soul, that should be
good which in its nature is either bad or but indifferent, or not good in such
a degree as we deem, is to believe an untruth. Vide lib. 2. sect. ^ chap. 7.
parag. 7.
To do that, which in its own nature is good, with doubt or scruple that it is
evil, is to sin against our conscience; from which guilt, our full
resolution to the contrary, or sure trust to our own soul (rightly examined)
does acquit us and warrant our actions. And in case our doubt or scruple of
spiritual evil, be not accompanied with equal probability of as great good
that may follow: Saint Romans 14. 5
Paul advises every man to be fully persuaded in his mind ere he adventure
on that which his soul had distrusted as evil. But the recalling of such
distrusts, or raising confidence in our souls, does only warrant us, that
therein we do not sin, it does not make our action good, albeit the object
were such before. Now the son of Syrach praesupposeth the works, he speaks
of, should be good in themselves, and undoubtedly acknowledged for such by all,
as being expressly commanded in the law. But with the first rudiments of
Philosophy moral we have learned, that it is one thing to do that which is
unquestionably right and good; another to do it rightly or well; that it is not
every performance of what virtue enioines or commends to us, but the performing
of it constantly, and discreetly, as knowing it to be good and honest, and
delighting in the practice of it because such, whereby a man becomes, virtutis
veraecustos, rigidusque satelles: so true a friend and faithful obseruer of
virtue, as he may be instiled truly good and honest. Now seeing to keep the
Commandments, does dignifie a man with titles of an higher rank, and
denominates him godly, holy or religious. it is not the bare doing of what is
commanded, or a firm persuasion that it is lawful, but the faithful and
constant doing of it, as perfectly knowing it to be good, because a branch of
his will who is goodness it self, the fountain of whatsoever is called good
in others, in whose service we ought to fix our whole delight, which makes us
keepers or obseruers of the Commandments. The Commandments, in that sense he
takes them, are the total object or complete rule of righteousness, and Faith
being a firm Assent unto the divine nature and attributes (whose shadow and
picture the Law and the Prophets exhibit) has the same place and extent in
divinity that Prudence or universal justice has in moral Philosophy. It
includes the complete and practical knowledge of good and evil, inclining
the faculties of our souls to avoid all commerce with the one, and embrace
every branch of the other. Whence he that advises us, In every good work to
believe with our soul, supposes the same object of this belief, Saint Paul
does in that speech, Romans 10. 10 So Saint John takes belief in Christ, and the
keeping of Gods Commandments as terms reciprocal or mutually inferring and
the other either capable of others properties This is then his Commandment,
That we believe in the name of his Son JESUS CHRIST, and love one another,
as he gave commandment. For he that keeps his Commandments, dwel^e^h in
him, and he in him; and hereby we kn^w that he abides in us, even by the
spirit which he^ has given us 1. Ioh. 4. 23. 24.
with the heart man belieueth unto righteousness, not by believing or
trusting his own heart, but by hearty believing Gods mercy in CHRIST and
unfeigned relying upon them, as is sufficiently expressed by our Apostle, and
was implicitly contained in that speech of Syracid^s, who, perhaps, did not
expressly or actually conceive of CHRIST, as we do, but terminated his belief
unto the general mercy and providence of God, whereof the great mystery of
the incarnation was the principal branch: and CHRIST JESUS in the fullness of
time exhibited in our flesh, the visible fruit of life, which that other JESUS
did but hope for as yet in the root, not distinctly knowing it nor the virtue
of it, but ready actually to embrace it and feed upon it whenever it should
be brought forth. For, as much as I have observed out of this speech, is
implied in the exegeticall repetition of it. He that belieueth the Lord takes
h^ed to the Commandments, and he that trusts in him shall not be hurt,
there shall no evil happen unto him that fears the Lord, but in temptation
even again he will deliver him.

3. That we may practice what is commanded, and yet not keep the
commandment, Saint James has put out of all question. James 2 v. 8. ^. 10.
If ye fulfill the r^iall Law according to the Scripture, thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self, ye do well. But if ye have respect to persons, ye
commit sin, and are convinced of the Law as transgressors. For whosoever
shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, is guilty of all. This
fulfilling of the Law or keeping of the commandments, which, as Ecclesiasti.
12* v. ^3.
Solomon says, is the whole man, or the whole duty whereunto man was ordained,
the complete and perfect Christian virtue, consists of two parts, a body, and
a soul. The body is the doing of what the written Law commands, whether by
acts positive or inhibitiue; the soul, is the reason or internal law of the
mind, which impels several faculties to such acts or works. For to speak
properly, and scholastickely, all performance of good works commanded, or
forbearance of things forbidden, spring not immediately out of faith, as the
truncke out of the root, the branches out of the truncke, or the fruit out of
the branches. But as the fruits of righteousness are of several kinds and
qualities, so have they several faculties or affections, for their proper
stocks, out of which they grow. The auoidance of adultery, fornication, or
whatsoever pollutions of the flesh, with the fruits of holiness contrary to
these vices, spring immediately from the virtues of temperance and chastity.
Abstinence from murder, with the acts of mercy opposite to the several
branches thereof, flourish out of the affection or virtue of humanity,
courtesy, gentleness, or the like. So have the acts of the affirmative
precept contained in that negative, thou shall not steal, as of every other
Commandment, whether positive or inhibitiue, a peculiar habit or
inclination, out of which they bud: yet as all motion is inspired from the
head, albeit we go upon our feet, or move our hands or other member to defend
our selves, or serve the necessities of nature; So, although we are truly said
to walk in Gods ways, to fight his battles, or do him service; when we use
any faculty or affection to his glory, yet is our firm assent unto his good
will and pleasure revealed unto us by the doctrine ^f faith, as the animal
faculty; which impels us to these exercises. Hence as Read Sect. 1. cha. last.
we gather the body is dead if it want spirit or motion, so, as Saint James
implies, the image of God and his goodness (or to use another Apostles words)
the form or fashion of CHRIST JESUS in us, is without life, unless our faith
and assent unto them have this sovereign command to impell and move every
faculty to execute that part of Gods will whereto by the doctrine of faith it
is designed. In what sense good deeds may be said ^o perfec^ faith.
And yet as the exercise of outward members increases internal vigor and
strength, and refreshes the spirits by which we move; so do the acts of every
faculty, virtue, or affection, righly employed perfect faith, not by
communication or imputation of their perfection to it, as the Romanist out of
his doting love to his faithless charity, dreams; but by stirring up,
exercising, or intending its own natural vigor or perfection. Unless every
practique faculty receive this influence from lively faith, or from the image
of God or Christ, which it frames in our minds, and proposes as a visible
pattern for ou^ imitation in all our works, thoughts, and resolutions,
d^cimur vt neruis al^enis mobile lignum: we may be operative, as puppets are
nimble, in outward show; but our seeming works of charity or best other we can
pretend, will be as a pish and counterfeit as their motions; neither in their
kind truly vital. But as puppets are moved wholly at his direction and
bent, that extends or slackes the strings whereon they dance; so are our souls
carried hither and thither, as the devil, the world, and flesh, or our own
foolish affections ^osse them; usually excessive, where they should be sparing,
and there most sparing where they should exceed. This difformity was most
apparent in their works whose reformation Saint James seeks; for destitute of
all good works most of them were not, but only of uniformity in working. They
had learned to give honor, not verbal but real, where honor was due, duty
and good respect to whom such offices belonged. The rich, and men of better
place and fashion, they did friendly and lovingly entertain, which was a work
in it nature good and commendable, but their abundant kindness toward equals
or superiors became as a wen to intercept that nutriment which should have
descended to other inferior members of CHRIST'S body, and by these outward
exercises of magnificence their internal bowels of compassion become cold
toward their poor brethren, whom principally they should have warmed and
refreshed. Yet such defects or difformities in their actions these half
Christians, half gentiles, true hypocrites, hoped to cover with the mantle of
faith, whose nature, use, and properties they quite mistook. That they were
not without works the world might witness; and no question, but these
enterteinments were intended as feasts of charity, and with purpose to win
the favor of the great ones with whom they lived to their profession; in which
respect their kindnesses might well seem unto themselves exercises of
religion, as the like do to many of the best sort amongst us, when there is
any ground of hope for gaining furtherance and countenance to good purposes, as
indeed with such references they are, if done in fath: That their defect of
works whom St. James reprooues did spring from a defect of faith.
but that this difformity in these men's works did proceed from a precedent
defect in faith, is manifestly implied in that the Apostle seeks their
reformation by reducing them to such an uniformity in working as can proceed
only from such true and lively faith, as has been described. For the
rectifying of faith it self, he expresses unto them the exemplary form or
pattern, first of the imitable perfection of the godhead, then of that which
is in CHRIST of both which, as has been observed, true faith in the mind, is
the live operative image, and must imprint the like character upon inferior
faculties or affections, ere their operation become spiritually vital. James
1. v. 21.
Lay apart all filthiness, and superfluity of naughtiness, and receive with
meekness the ingrafted word which is able to save your souls. This was the
word of faith which was to fructify in their deeds; wherefore he says, V. 22.
Be ye doers of the word, not hearers only, deceiving your own selves. And
doers of it many of them were in part, whence they grounded a conceit of
holiness, brings forth (as it seems) either contemptuous, or uncharitable
censures of others. To this disease he applies that medicine, V: 26.
If any man among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, but
deceives his own heart, this man's religion is vain. And seeing they held
such intertainements, as we speak of before, because glorious in the worlds
eye, good and acceptable in the sight of God; of whose glory and good liking
they conceived according to the customs best approved amongst men, he further
gives them these imitable characters of his goodness: v. 27.
Pure religion and undefiled before God and the father is this, to visit the
fatherless, and the widows in their afflictions, and to keep himself
unspotted from the world. My brethren have not the faith of our Lord JESUS
CHRIST, the Lord of glory, with respect of persons. This pattern Moses long
before had drawn from Gods own presence, for his people to work by; Deuteronomy 10.
v. 16.
circumcise therefore the foreskinne of your hearts (that was to be unspotted
of the world,) For the Lord your God is God of Gods and Lord of Lords ( the
Lord of glory) a great God, and a mighty, and a terrible, which accepts no
person, nor takes reward, which does right unto the fatherless and widow, and
loves the stranger in giving him food and raiment; love ye therefore the
stranger for ye were all strangers in the land of Egypt.

4. Want of conformity to this rule abundantly argues the leuity of their
belief unto such general truths as they acknowledged. The old Roman proverb
of faith passive or fidelity, Seneca.
fidem nemo perdit nisi qui non habet, is more appliable to faith active or
truly Christian. No man can have the faith of Jesus, the Lord of glory with
respect of persons, but he that has not the faith of Christ Jesus. For he that
says he belieues CHRIT and keeps not his commandments, or rather altogether
inuerts them by costly inuitations of the rich and mighty without due respect
of the poor and needy, is by Saint 1. John 2. v. 4.
John's rule a liar. Yet this preposterous respect of persons which is so
incompatible with true faith in CHRIST, as formally contrary to it pattern, it
was, as our Apostle tells us, that made them transgressors of the Law, even
whilst they did things commanded by the Law. James 2. v. 9
But if ye have respect of persons ye commit sin, and are convinced by the
Law as transgressors. The head or first fountain as well of these erroneous
persuasions, as of difformities in their works, was want of firm assent unto
the divine attributes, or unto the sovereign will and pleasure of the
Lawgiuer. For the Apostle to prove that assertion which contains the reason
of the former. [ V. 10.
Whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offends in one point he is guilty
of all,] gives us that golden and metaphisicall rule, by which this whole
discourse has been framed, v. 11.
He that said, thou shall not commit adultery, said also, thou shall not kill;
now if thou commit no adultery, yet if thou kill, thou art become a
transgressor of the Law; a positive or actual transgressor by this act of
murder; Si pro arbi^rio suo serui Dominis obtemperant, ne in ijs quidem in
quibus*obtem perauerint obsequuatur, Saluianus loco inserius citato.
a negative transgressor or non obseruer of the Law in his abstinence from
adultery. Nor could his supposed chastity or restraint of lust, be a Christian
action or truly vital; because not inspired by faith or firm assent unto
Gods will or commandment; whose sovereignty once faithfully acknowledged and
established in his thougths, would have been a like potent to have restrained
natural inclination to murder or bloodshed, acts altogether as displeasing
and contrary to the will of God. Sa luianus lib 3. de Gub: r^. Dei.
Quando ser^us ex domini sui just ^^ ea facit tantummodo quae vult facere, non
dominicam voluntatem implet, sed suam, says Saluianus. That a servant goes
cheerfully to the fair when he is bid, or to supply his Masters room at a
feast, is no good argument of his fidelity, trust, or diligence to do his
Masters will Many forward enough upon these or like occasions, commanded to go
a shorter errand upon more weighty business when he had as good a desire or
opportunity to sport or feast themselves at home, would by their backewardnesse
or grumbling bewray, they had not learned to submit their wills unto their
masters, or to prefer his business before their sport; without which the
doing ^ Ecclesiastici 19. ^. 21.
of what is enioined, is but an impotent and lame obedience. f If a servant say
unto his Master, I will not do as it pleases thee, though afterward he do
it, he shall displease him that nourishes him. Knaves, and catchpoles, often
do what the Law requires should be done, yet are no true obseruers of the Law,
because this service they perform, not out of faith and loialty to the Prince
or Lawgiuer, but in desire of gain or some private respect, always as
powerful to make some observe, as others to transgress paenall statutes. If
an Ambassador should transact such points of his instructions as make jointly
for his own advancement, neglecting others as necessary for the state; his
negligence in the latter would impeach his fidelity in the former; albeit he
did that which his Prince would have done. For he did it not because it was the
Princes will it should be done, but because his own will was to have some good
done to him. And perhaps one and the same humor of ambition, fear, or the
like, might cause his diligence in the one and negligence in the other: and so
may one and the same affection cause a man to observe one commandment and
transgress another. But he alone obeyes Gods commandments that wholly
submits his will to Gods will; that does what God commands, because he
belieues he did command it, that auoids what God forbids out of belief that
God forbids it, or because he knows it to be displeasant to his goodness. God
commands all without exception to glorify his name both in body and spirit, as
well as to honor father and mother, or to abstain from stealth. Many can
stand at open defiance with the world for any touch of disobedience in these
latter, which yet if out of faith they did observe, they would be as chaste of
their bodies, as honest of their hands, and equalize their diligence in duties
toward their parents with devotion toward Gods, unto whom zealous and
religious prayers from out a chaste and pure mind, are more pleasant then
honoring of father and mother, then abstinance from theft and coozenage.
Faultiness or negligence in the former argues a faulty diligence in the
latter; that honor so given to parents though in abundance, was but the fruit
either of such goodness of nature as has been in many heathen* which neither
knew God nor his laws, or of some carnal hopes to get a better portion by
pleasing them: that such abstinence from theft or performance of honest actions
were but the offspring either of secular fear to be disgraced, or of a desire
to be well reputed in the world. And whosoever is either kept back from evil,
or drawn to good upon no better motives then these, will when opportunity
serves, be as much emboldened by them to transgress divine precepts of greater
consequence. As what son is there which much reuerenceth his father out of
any affection or inclination not serviceable to faith, but at his instance
would adventure upon such actions as much dishonor God, and are most
displeasant to his Savior? Or who is he that refraines to defile his fingers
with theft or cozenage only because they are uncleanly sins, and most
obnoxious to shame and disgrace by humane laws, but would pollute his heart
with legitimated sacrilege for maintenance of his credit, or hope of
estimation with them whose applause or savor he must glories in?

5, As there is no surer argument of lively says then this uniformity whereof
we speak, so can there be no token of hypocrisy or crookedness of heart
more co^spicuous or infallible, than to be scrupulously timorous in some points,
and presumptuous or confident in others upon faithful examination as
doubtful, and upon like doubt evidently as dangerous: or to be zealous and
forward in some duties, and negligent, dull or backwards in others as
necessary. Oportet autem and illud considerare quantopere Christiani abbo^rea^
ab idolothytis, and ab ngressu fanorum, atque ab ipsis etia^ simulachri^, cum
beatus Paulus clamet neque idola^ esse aliquid, neque idolothytum: multo minus
fanum ex lapidibus constructu^, est aliquid: et tamen plurim^ru^ ^nimus ea
religione tenetur, us morte^ oppetant citius, quam gustent idol^s immol^tu^,
and inexp^abile piaculum ^sse ducant, si ingrediantur fanu^ Iouis, aut
Apollinis, aut Dianae, seque putent contactu si^^ul^c^rt vehementer
contamtuari. Equide^ prob^taliu^ religionem si sibi constet in omnibus. Nunc
p^oh dolorvidere est, quosdam in bis pene superstiti^se trepidos, in ^lijs v^^
grauior er a^ metuendi causa, nimium esse securos. Per se non inquinat animam
contactus id^li, nec ingress^^ fani, nec esus idolothyti: sed per se polluit
conscien^iam amor pecunie, incestu^, ^apina, hypocrisis, and his similia
monstra, Quam vero congruit, horrere sani ingressum, nec b^rrere in templo
sancto spiritui consecrato victimas imm^^are daemonijs. Clamat sanctus Paulus
scri^e^s Corin^^ijs, Nes^^tis quia templum Dei estis and spiritus Dei habitat
in vobis? Si quis autem templum Dei violauerit, disperdit illum Deus. Rursus in
eadem Epistola, An nescitis quoniam membra vestra templum sunt Sancti Spiritus
qui in vobis est, quem habet^s a Deo and non est is vestri? Quod si
Christianorum pectora sibi consecrauit Deus, vt in illis inhabi^et pe^ spiritum
suum, ill^c d^^c^atur and inambulat, illic amat sibi offerri victima^^ puram in
omni loco. Et qui in hoc templum Deo sacrum, eiecto Sancto Spiritu, ^nducit
abominationes quas in mystica visione conspex^^ Ez^^bi^l, qui illic sedem facit
Mammonae Veneri, Co^o, Ba^cho, alijsque portentis: qui ibi demonibus imm^lat
spurcissimas h^^^ias, veretur ingredi fanum gentiu^ ne contaminetar? Proi^d
nemo sibi frustra ^la^diatur Deus non inride^ur* constet sibi nostrareligio,
nec alios detestemur, ipsi gra^iori^^^ ^^^^ox^j criminibus, vec alibi fimas
religiosi timidi, alibi impudenter impij. Sed Christum semel professi, ^^ta
vita reddamus illi testimonium, and vndique glorificemus illum, obedientes
illius praeceptis vt in hoc cognoscant homines quod vere fidimus illi, quod ex
animodiligim^^ illu^, and quod non simulate ad sacrum la^achrum add^ximus
nosillius militiae. Author de duplici Martyrio. Whether this Treau^e were
written ( as Espe^^^us ^eli^ ^s most in his time thought) by Erasmus desirous
to try whether be could equalize Cyprian or by some other the opinion of
antiquity concerning the nature of true Christian faith is so well and pithil^
expressed by him, as no treatise of like quantity, ancient or modern, will
give better satisfaction to the iuditious impartial Reader.
It is a matter (as the author of the twofold martyrdom tells us) that must
be considered: How mightily do some Christians abhor things sacrificed unto
Idols, going into profane Temples, or the Idols themselves, when as S. Paul
proclaims, that neither is the Idol nor things sacrificed unto Idols ought,
much less is the Temples built of stone ought: and yet the minds of many are
so possessed with a religion of these matters, that sooner would they die than
taste of things sacrificed to Idols, and they deem their offense cannot be
expiated; If they go into the Temple of Jupiter, Apollo, or Diana, or if they
do but touch an Idol they think themselves grievously polluted. The religion
of such men, for mine own part, (I cannot but approve) if it be like it self
in all points. But now adays with grief alas we may behold, some in those
points (if ^ might speak home) superstitiously fearful, and yet in others
which minister iuster cause of fear too too secure. The touching of Idols
going into a Temple, or eating of things sacrificed to Idols, do not in
themselves pollute the soul, but love of money, rauin, hypocrisy, and such
like monsters pollute the soul immediately. His conclusion is, Therefore let no
man flatter himself, God is not mocked: let our religion be uniformly
constant, let us not detest others, being our selves obnoxious to crimes more
grievous; let us not be religiously timorous in this or that point, and in
some others impudently impious. But having taken the profession of CHRIST upon
us: let our whole life give testimony of him, let us every way glorify his
Name by obeying his precepts, that men may hereby know we trust him in that
we love him from our souls, and that we did not dissemblingly consecrate our
selves unto his service at our Baptism. Many like passages of this Author I
leave to the Readers meditations, partly sorry I had not perused him before
this treatise was conceived and otherwise finished, and yet partly glad in that
the Lord had put the like meditations into my heart. To interfert more proofs
of antiquity, would be troublesome unto me, aiming especially, out of Gods
word, to set the w^rpe with what speed I can, and afterward, if God permit, to
weaue such authority of Fathers into it, as his providence shall direct me to.

6. To gather all into a brief sum; True faith first acquaints us with the
nature of God and his attributes, it teaches his will to be the rule of
goodness, and enioines us nothing but what is good to us: that he loves all
good, and hates all evil, without any respect to their persons, in whom they
are found; the greater of either kind the more, and the lesser the less. Here
then is the trial of our faith, if it have taught us wholly to submit our wills
unto his will, to like whatsoever he likes, to hate whatsoever he hates, to
love that best which his word tells us he loves most; and likewise to hate that
most which he most hates, though otherwise either pleasant to our natural
disposition, or not so displeasant or distasteful as many other matters would
be, did we follow the fa^^^ions of the world. Firm Assent to these and other
attributes will uniformly extend that universal precept, It is better to obey
God than man, to our own souls and affections. Nay, it is the very principal
or graund-stemme of faith, to be in heart persuaded and resolved that it is
much better at all times to obey the law of God, than our own affections, the
lusts of the flesh or the law of sin. And then only we pray in faith, when
we say not with our lips alone, but with our hearts and souls, Not our will,
but thy will be fulfilled. By retaining any branch of our own wills or
desires vnrenounced, or not resigned up into Gods hands, we give him hold of
us who never will let hold go, unless we cut off the member which offends
us. For, as one very well observes, so the snare be strong and the hold sure, a
bird though caught but by one clawe shall as certainly be the Fowlers portion,
as if she had been taken by both the wings. The soul which altogether delights
in it own will, not doing any part of what God would have it do, is like a
bird caught in a net, or so entangled in lime-twigs, that it cannot take wing,
or make any show of escape. But the ^oule which observes most, and dispenses
with some one or few branches of Gods will, although for a time she may soar
aloft in Pharisaical persuasions and build her nest above the moon, is but
deluded by Lucifer (who as he lu^ed her thither, can at his pleasure call her
down) as birds are by little children which suffer them oft-time to make some
handsome flight but with a long string about their feet. This is a snare which
men of better place, means, and sufficiency, or of more stayed judgment, had
need with watchful care to avoid: for such commonly therefore abstain from
most other actual sins, because they secretly delight in some one or few,
which out of experience, perhaps of many, they have made choice of, as most
pleasant, either because they are naturally inclined, or have been long
accustomed to them, or because they expose them not to present danger or
disagrace, as not odious in the worlds sight. And many scattered delights,
meeting in one, like a multitude of broad shallow streams falling into one
deep narrow channel, carry the soul with least interruption of speedy
passage, into the bottomless gulf. United force is always strongest, and for
this reason, it is often harder to renounce one sin, wherein we delight much,
then a great many we equally affect. Freedom from many usually breeds secret
presumption; or indulgence to our delight in some one or few and indulgence
brings forth hardness of heart. Of if the worldly wiseman can curb all his
desires from bursting out into known evils, this abundantly contents him, but
so does it not his God, unto whom this permanent lukewarm civil temper,
symbolizing only with true religion in abstinence from actual evil, not in
feruency of devotion, is more abominable then the distemperature of publicanes
and open sinners, accompanied usually with most vices, yet not so firmly
wedded unto any, but discovery of their filthiness, may induce them to be
divorced from all. It is much worse to be at the very entry into the kings
banquet and retire, or not go in, than to stay at home and pretend excuses.
Continens infidelis homo non solu^ minus laudandus est, quia se continet, dum
non credat, verum etiam mult^ magis vituperandus quia non credit, cum se
contineat. August. de ciuit. dei lib 16. ca. 36. Hinc apparet quam parum
momenti sit in rivulis externorum operum, nisi ex puero interiore font manent.
L. Vines in illum locum.
A chaste infidel (says S. Augustine) is not only less prayse-worthy (than
an incontinent belieuer) in that he is continent without belief, but rather
liable to greater reproof, in that being continent he does not believe.

7. Of such uniformity in practicing duties expressly taught by the rule of
faith, as hitherto has been prosecuted, is that most true which the modern
Romanist (in no point destitute of one ape trick or other to mock God and man
with a counterfeit shape of true religion) misapplies to curious points of
speculation: bearing men in hand, that if they believe not every point of
faith alike, they believe none aright. Whence, many things they teach as
necessary to salvation, being intricate and impossible to be conceived, with
such evidence or probability as may ground certainty of faith; seely souls
are brought to distrust the perspicuitie of scriptures, and to repose that
confidence in their instructers which they should do in Gods word, and so for
fear least they should have no faith, but by believing as the Church does,
they believe the Church only, not God, nor any article of faith, as was
delivered in the former book. Nor can their works, if conceived or begotten
by the book or Jesuitical rules of life, be ever acceptable in Gods sight,
because not inspired by true and lively faith, uniformly spreading it self
throughout all their faculties, cherishing and strengthening them as the Sun
does plants to bring forth fruit. To speculatiue points, or our Assent unto
divine revelations as true, the former rule is only then appliable, when
wilful contempt or indulgence to our own affections, does blind our
understanding. He that upon such motives doubts of any principal article, or
dis^ents from it, rightly belieueth none: but, if for want either of natural
capacity or particular illumination of Gods spirit, he cannot so firmly
Assent unto some principal truth as others do, to whom they are more fully
revealed, so he demean himself, during the time of his dissent or doubt,
according to that measure of knowledge God has given him; his faith may be
sincere and sound, though not so far spread as it is in other men.

8. But some better minded, perhaps, will here demand, how far this
uniformity in practice is to be extended? as, whether a man may not be more
prone to one sin then another, or more apt to conform his will and desires
unto Gods will in some points of his service, then in others, without prejudice
to the sincerity or liueli-hood of his faith? If this pronenesse to evil and
negligence in good, proceed from strength of natural inclination, or long
custom: his relapse into the one, or holding off from the other, does not
disprove his obedience in those points wherein faith has gotten full conquest
over his desires; if his inclinations to his beloved or bewitching sins
proportionably decrease or wane, as his zeal or devotion in the points of duty
are augmented. But every member of the old man must be mortified, ere our faith
be every way such, as that whereby the Just do live.

The manner of whose life by Faith is now necessarily to be discussed more
fully then in these present meditations was intended, least from some passages
in the former discourses the vnobseruant Reader happily suspect the difference
betwixt us and the Romish Church in this controversy to be but small, or to
consist rather in words than in substance; especially if works be so
necessarily included, as we suppose, in that faith which iustifies. Nor seems
it easy to reject our adversaries form of doctrine without some prejudice to
Saint James in whose terms their assertions for the most part are conceived.
This last prejudice notvvithstanding first removed, we are to manifest their
dissent from us, and from the form of wholesome doctrine which Gods Word
prescribes to be as great in this question as in any. For admitting their
Faith were sound and their works (which is before refuted) lively; they
utterly inuert the right use of both, and by artificial sleights, or tricks of
wit not discouerable by every eye, draw poor souls from CHRIST the only end
of the Law as well moral as ceremonial, the sole load star of Faith, and
all other sanctifying graces.

CHAP. VI. Of difficulties arising from the former discourses in the
Protestants doctrine of Justification by faith without works. That faith is as
immediately apt to do good works of every kind as to justify. Of the diverse
acceptions of justification. That the justification by works mentioned by
Saint James is presupposed as subordinate to Saint Paul's justification by
faith without works. The true reconcilement of these two Apostles contrary
speeches in appearance from the contrariety of their sever all ends or
intentions.
1. SAint Paul (as is declared at large before) includes works in faith, which
Saint James takes as he found it in unfruitful hearers destitute of good
works. This difference notwithstanding alone considered does no way salve, but
rather remove the seeming contradiction between the one auouching and the
other disclaiming justification by faith without works, and cause it wholly to
settle in Saint Paul's assertion, or in the doctrine of Protestants thence
derived. For whether justified we be by works and faith as Saint James
expressly speaks, or by a working says as Saint Paul implies, this faith
works such righteousness, as Saint James requires not in others but in our
selves. Seeing then both faith and the righteousness it works, are inherent
in us, how are we not justified by inherent righteousness, if justified by such
a working faith as Saint Paul's commands, and we have hitherto described? This
which we conceive by way of doubt, our Saviors doctrine seems to put out of
all controversy Math. 5. 20
Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven. What
righteousness does he here mean? Inherent questionless, for he presses such
an uniform observation of all the Commandments, as Saint James does. The
Scribes and Pharisees did as it even seems then calumniate him, as they
afterward did Saint Paul (and the Pontificians do us still) as a destroier of
the Law because he reproved their confidence in works, and sought to
establish the doctrine of faith which we now reach. Needful in this respect
was that eaueat: Math. 5. 17
Think not that I am come to destroy the Law or the Prophets: I am not come
to destroy but to fulfill them. Verse 19.
Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least commandments, and shall
teach men so, he shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven: but
whosoever shall do and teach them, the same shall be called the greatest.

If by the kingdom of heaven he meant the kingdom of grace, the argument is
more strong then otherwise it would be, howsoever strong it is, and not
impeached by this reply: That such observance of the Commandments, as is here
required is necessary to sanctification or salvation not to justification.
That it should be more necessary to one of these then to another implies a
contradiction in the terms well expressed and equally compared; as it does
unto our Saviors purpose, to say that works are less necessary before
justification then after it. A man in that he is justified is the immedia^e
heir of salvation, at the least acquitted from the sentence of death: now if
we affirm such righteousness more necessary after he is justified, then
before, we should in congruitie grant that works win heaven, and faith only
delivers from hell: or granting justification to be the passage from death to
life eternal, the addition of such works subsequent, as were not precedent,
could be available only to supererogate some excess of glory; for though we
stood still at the same point where justification found us, we should be
infallible heirs of glory. Or if faith without works obtain justification,
having justified us, shall it not much more without them lay sure hold on
salvation, and all the degrees of joy that do accompany it? Suppose a man
should die in the very instant wherein he is justified: none would doubt either
of absolution or salvation. Is he then saved with works or without them? If
without them our Saviors rule does fail us, for this man enters into the
kingdom of heaven without more strict observance of the Commandments then the
Scribes and Pharisees used, without any part of that righteousness, whereof
they in some measure were partakers: If with them, their presence is necessary
to justification, and in order of nature before it, because necessary ere he
can be capable of entrance into the kingdom of heaven; as performance of every
condition is in nature precedent to the accomplishment of what is not promised
without it. Again, no man denies but faith inherent in order of nature goes
defore justification in that sense we take it; yet justifying faith necessarily
includes such works in it as Saint James requires, at the least a preparation
or immediate promptness of mind to do them, and more then so was not in the
work of Abraham which he commends, seeing Isaac was not actually facrificed
but offered up by faith unfeigned to be sacrificed, and this work or rather
thus much of it did go before justification, What manner of casualtie this
speech includes, see 7.
either as the cause does before the effect, or as the means before the end;
for (as Saint James says) he was justified by it. But that perhaps in his
language and intent was no more then to be declared just. So would I answer
were I Aquinas his scholar, and held justification to consist in habitual
righteousness or grace infused. Thus Bellarmine very well expounds the like
speech of Saint 1. Job. 3. 7
John, He that does righteousness is righteous. Because of his deeds or his
works? No, but by them he is known to be righteous. Tertium Iestimonium (Qui
facit iustitiam iustus est) non docet quid facit hominem formaliter iustum, sed
vnde possit cognosci, an aliquis fit iustus. Ille enim iustus est, qui
iustitiam facit, sicut ille vi^ens es^, qui mouetur; and illa est arbor bona,
quia facit fructus bonos, nec tamen ideo est arbor bona, quia facit fructus
bonos, nec ^de^ viuit aliquis, quia monetur, sed contra ideo mouetur, quia
viuit, and ideo facit fructus bonos, quia est arbor bona; Sic igitur qui facit
iustitiam, iustus est; sed non ideo iustus, quia facit iustitiam, sed ideo
iustitiam facit quia iustus est. Belsar. lib. de justice. cap. 16.
For he is said to be righteous that does righteousness, as he that moves is
said to be living, or the tree good that bears good fruit; yet is not the tree
therefore good because it bears good fruit, nor does a man live because he
moves: but contrariwise the one moves because he lives, the other brings forth
good fruit because good; so in like manner he that does righteousness is
righteous, yet not righteous because he does righteousness but he does
righteousness because he is righteous.

This answer shaped by him for Saint John would have better be fitted Saint
James, as the gloze which they put upon S. James would not altogether so il
beseem Saint John. That he had meant the second justification, whereby a man
receives increase of grace and is more just, had been harder for us to
disprooue, though most improbable for them to affirm. But that S. James should
mean this second justification, as the Trent Council, without any show of
probability boldly avouches, is manifestly disprooued by his instance in
Rahab, for the first righteousness she ever wrought, was the receiving of the
messengers and sending them out another way; and yet by this work was she
justified in that sense Saint James meant, not in the sight of men but of God.
For the drift of his dispute is to show that without works no man can be
approved in Gods sight, howsoever he may persuade himself and others,
Abraham's and Rahabs works are but branches of that religion whose practices he
had commended to those his disciples as pure and undefiled; before whom? Man
only? No, before God even the Father. The religion it self he exemplifies by
observance of the affirmative and negative precepts, as James 1. 27.
in visiting the fatherless and widows in their distress, and by keeping
themselves unspotted of the world. Bellarmines instance in Abraham's works
evidently refutes their opinion, that think works only declare us just; his
allegation of Rahabs kindness, or hospitality more forcibly overthrows the
Sess. 6. c. 10.
Trent Counsel, and his own imagination, that Saint James should mean the
second justification, whereby a man of just becomes more just, then which
nothing can be imagined more contradictory to the Apostles meaning. For who can
think he reputed them for just whom he called vain men in that they had
faith without works; the same faith notwithstanding seconded with works had
(as our adversaries contend) made them just, not more just then before, for now
they were first to become just being before unjust and transgressors of the
Law, as the Apostle proves in that they had respect unto persons. The
justification therefore he sought by Rahabs example to bring them unto, was
(if so we distinguish) the first justification, whereby of transgressors they
were to become new men in CHRIST, and inwardly righteous, not in the sight of
man, but of God: for whatsoever this Apostle denies of faith without works, he
attributes to faith with works. Now it is granted by all, that he held faith
without works to be altogether vain and unable to justify in the sight of
God; if with them it were in his judgment not sufficient, he had denied all
justification in Gods sight either by faith alone, or by works and faith; so
as no means of salvation could be left us. More arguments I need not use; for
every obseruant Reader may furnish himself with plenty, all demonstratiue,
that works, taken as Saint James meant, (not for the act or operation only,
but either for the act or promptitude to it) are necessary to justification (
In what sense works are said to justify us in respect of men, not in respect
of God ^ee parag. 6.
not before men but before God) and in order of nature precedent.

2. But the Readers mind, as for a while mine was, may be held in suspense,
that albeit we must be operatrue ere we can be justified, yet the first
operation of that faith which iustifies is always seen in the business of
justification, as that of Saint Austen may necessarily seem to imply, Bona
opera sequuntur iustificatum, non praecedunt iustificandum. If we be not
justified (as all agreed) without some operation or work of faith, and all
other good works (as this Father affirms) are not precedent but subsequent to
justification, those operations of faith which belong to the work of
justification must of necessity in order of nature, if not of time, be of all
others the first. This golden sentence notwithstanding will not abide ihe touch
unless we take justification (as Saint So likewise is it taken in the 12.
Article of our Church. Albeit that good works, which are the fruits of says,
and follow after justification, cannot put away our sins, and endure the
severity of Gods judgment yet are they pleasing and acceptable to God in
Christ, and do spring out neces^arily of a true and lively faith* insomuch
that by them a lively faith may be as evidently known as a tree dis^erned by
the fruit.
Austen does) for the first infusion of that grace whereby we are justified and
enabled to bring forth works truly good. That the habit of grace (whereof
faith is the principal part or foundation) should in order of nature be
precedent to works done in faith (for unless so done they are not truly
good) is a case excluded by it clearenesse from all controversy. But the
works by which as Saint James affirms, we are justified must needs go before
the justification which he speaks of, yet not before the first infusion of
faith unless we affirm (which no protestant must, or any intelligent Papist
does) that we may bring foorh good works ere faith be planted in our souls.
The infallable consequence of these deductions is that between Saint Paul's
faith and Saint James his justification there must be works intermediate of
what kind it skils no^, so they be done in faith. Of works so done, to
question which are in time and nature, first, were as if you should demand
what meats such as after a long sickness have well recovered their taste and
appetite, use first to feed upon: Curiosity of method or nice prescriptions
would in this case be offensive to good stomaches, which should not do much
amiss in falling to such wholesome food as first comes to hand. Thus much in
general is not unfitting to our present purpose; That the internal,
eli^itiue, or formal acts, are in order of nature and time precedent to the
impulsive acts of faith; to wit such operations or exercises of other virtues,
faculties, or affections as are inspired by it, as we most firmly assent to
Gods mercy, wisdom, truth, and justice, before we can be faithfully merciful,
just, or true, or do the works of righteousness, mercy or truth in faith. Of
the internal or proper acts, or exercises of faith, such as flow directly from
it, are before such as are conceived by way of reflection. Such as flow
immediately from the essence, are (at least) in order of nature, before such as
proceed from the properties of it. In both ranks these are before others of
the same kind, which are of more general or abstract points; as we actually
assent unto divine revelations, first as true, then as good, lastly as good to
us: and yet we must so assent unto them, ere we can firmly or confidently
rely upon them, nor can our reliance or trust, whether on Gods providence in
general, or upon his mercies in CHRIST, be more firm and faithful, then is
our precedent denial of our selves and renunciation of all trust in worldly
means: which property as was before Sect. 1. c. 10.
observed, immediately results from our direct assent unto Gods wisdom, power,
and mercy, and unto our own misery, ignorance, and imbecillitie. From assent
to both these and unfeigned denial of our selves thence resulting, as from
joint roots, springs true confidence in Gods providence always in order of
nature precedent to steadfast and inseparable adherence unto CHRIST, which is
the end of all our working, and as it must for this reason be first intended,
so can it hardly be accomplished without some intermediate acts or exercises of
Gods graces in us; unto all which faith necessarily is concurrent. If we shall
then compare the acts or operations of faith amongst themselves according to
the same strength or equal degrees of fidelity in doing Gods will, the
effectual application of CHRIST'S merits is but a branch of the former
uniformity in working required by Saint James, neither necessarily, nor
ordinarily the first, either in order of nature, or time, whether we speak of
application actual and express, or of implicit and potentiall, that faith
which is of strength sufficient for firm and faithful application of Christ's
righteousness or conceiving sure trust in Gods mercy offered in him, is as
immediately operative of other works; as powerful to bring forth deeds of
mercy, always uniformly prompt to Works done in faith are acceptable to God
for the merits of Christ vn^aignnedly a prehended as the only author of
salvation and sole end of faith, with whom our souls seek perfect union, not
from our persuasion of our own salvation on such union already accomplished.
do any part of Gods will; that first whereunto it is first called. It was an
act of that faith by which Abraham lived, an act commendable in the sight of
God, to forsake his Country when God called him; yet an act in time long
precedent to that which was imputed unto him for righteousness: and in his
legend the holy Ghost would instruct us, that the safest way to get full
assurance of our heavenly inheritance is to execute Gods will without delay,
See sect. 3 cha. 3 and 4.
first to renounce the world, father and mother, native Country etc. that we
may be ready when he shall call, and on these foundations surely laid to raise
our confidence in CHRIST, Galat. 3. v. 7.
Know (says the Apohle) they which are of faith, the same are the children of
Abraham but every one is not the son of faith that says or thinks he
belieues as his father Abraham did, unless he have such an operative faith as
Abraham had, well trained to every point of service that shall be enioined.

This speech of Saint Paul is but equivalent to that of our Saviors; Ioh. 8.
39 and 40.
If ye were Abraham's children, ye would do the works of Abraham, what were
these? faithfully to assent unto the truth revealed by God, and lovingly to
entertain his messengers: but now (says our Savior) You go about to kill
me, a man that has told you the truth which I have heard of God; this did not
Abraham. The nature and uniformity of faith supposed such, as has been often
inculcated; Saint Gyprians Eos denique fili^s Abrahe dicit, quos in iu^andis,
alendisque pauperibus operarios cernit. Nam cum Zacchaeus dixisset, Ecce
dimidium ex substantia mea do egenis, and si cui quid fraudaui, quad^uplum
reddo^: respondit JESUS, and dixit, quia salus hodie huic domu^ fecta est,
quoniam and hic filius est Abrahae. Nam si Abraham credidit De^, and reputatum
est ei ad iustitiam: Vtique qui secundum praeceptum Dei elemosynas facit, Deo
credit: and qui habet fidei veritatem, seruat Dei timorem: qui autem Dei
timorem seruat, in miserationibus pauperum Deum cogitat. Operatur enim ideo
quia credit, quia scit vera esse quae praedicta su^^ verbu Dei, ne^ scripturam
sanctam posse mentiri: arbores infructuss^^, id est, steriles homines excidi,
and ^^ ignem mitti, miserecordes autem ad regnum vocari. Quia and in ali^ loco
operarius, and fructuoses fideles appellat, infructuosis vero, and sterilibus
^tdem deregat, dice^s, Si in iniusto mamona fideles non fuistis; quod est verum
quis credet vobis? and si in alieno fideles non fuistis, quod est vestrum quis
dabit vobis? Sivereris and metuis, ne ^^ operariplurimum c^peris, patrimony
tu^ larg^ operatione ^^^^to, ad penuriam forte redigaris, e^^^ in bac part
intrepidus, esto securus. Finiri non potest vnde in vsus Christi impenditur,
vnde opus caleste celebratur. Cyprianus de opere, and eleemosyna. * Quid est
igitur credulitas, aut fides? opinor hominem fideliter Christo credere est
fidelem deo esse, hoc est fideliter Dei mandata seruare ficut enim serui
hominum diuitum ^ut procuratores, quibus vel supellecti^^^ copiosa, vel
cellaria opulenta creduntur, fideles absque dubi^ dici non queunt, si res
tradit^^ deuorarent: sic profecte etiam Christiani homines fideles non sunt, si
bona sibi a Deo assignata corrumperent. Saluianus lib. 30.
collections in this point, are as strong and sound as the point it self is
orthodoxall. Christ calls them Abraham's children, whom he sees operative in
helping and nourishing the poor For when Zacheus said. Lo the one half of my
goods I give to the poor, and if I have defrauded any man I restore it
fourefold. Jesus answered and said. This day is salvation come to this house,
was much as this man also is the son of Abraham. For if Abraham's believing
God were reputed unto him for righteousness, he likewise that gives alms
according to Gods commandment, belieues God: and he that has the truth of
faith, retains the fear of God, and he that retains the fear of God, has
God in his thoughts whiles he shows compassion to the poor. Therefore he
works because he belieues, because he knows all the word of God fore tells is
true, that the sacred scripture cannot lie, that unfruitful trees (i) men
barren of good works must be cut down and cast into the fire, but the
merciful shall be called unto the heavenly kingdom. And in another place he
calls such as are fruitful in works, faithful, denying this title to the
unfruitful and barren. If ye have not been faithful in the unrighteous
Mammon, who will commit the true riches to your trust? And if ye have not been
faithful in that which is another man's, who will give you that which is your
own. Saluianus * words here inserted in the margin imports no less.

3. If the works required by Saint James be not truly good without
presupposall of says nor justification possible without presupposall of such
works; the more opperatiue we make Saint Paul's faith, the more we rather draw
then loose this former knot, whose solution in this respect must be sought by
unfolding the diverse acceptions of justification. Sometimes then it imports
the decree or purpose of God to justify sinful men, as Romans 8
whom he predestined, them also he called, and whom he called them also he
justified, and whom he justified them also he glorified. About justification in
this sense there either is, or need to be no controversy, at least none
pertinent to our present purpose. But as God decreed before all times to create
man, yet did not create him until time had numbered six days: so although his
purpose was from eternity to justify or absolve us from our sins, yet
actually he does not justify or absolve us before we have actual being, nor
does he justify all that have such being but those only which have the seals
or pledges of his calling, of which whosoever are partakers, are in a
secondarie sense accounted justified. How shall we (^aith the Apostle) Rom 6.
2. 3. 4. Non obsetuance of this distinction between justification presumed and
accomplished, or on Gods part proclaimed and sealed to us, has made many
expositors (other wise men of admirable judgment and sagacitie) run counter in
some passages of C. Paul's Epistles.
that are dead to sin live yet therein? Know ye not that all we which have
been baptized into Jesus Christ have been baptized into his death? we are
buried then with him by baptism into his death. All persons baptized may be
accounted justified in the same sense they are dead to sin: and dead all such
are to sin, not really or actually, but by profession, in as much as by
receiving this outward seal of Gods covenant, or other like pledges of his
favor, they bind themselves to abrogate the sovereignty of sin in their
mortal bodies, and to give their members weapons of righteousness unto God.
Thus when the Apostle speaks indefinitely of all their salvation or
justification, to whom he writes, his meaning can be no other then this, that
all of them have received undoubted pledges of Gods mercy and need doubt of
justification actual, or final absolution, so they walk worthy of their
calling. Their error whose rectification Saint James sought, did consist in
holding these outward seals or conspicuous tokens of Gods favor, whereby
their Assent unto his promises as true was confirmed, sufficient to final
approbation or admission into the inheritance of Saints, albeit they did not
consent unto every part of the Law as good in the practice. Concerning
justification thus taken, there is at this day little or no controversy,
vnlesle between the spirit and the flesh, or between our own conscience and
Satan, who still labors to persuade us this kind of justification might
suffice. Thirdly, in as much as God decreed to justify man by faith which even
in such as are saved by it is not ordinarily perfected in a moment, we are said
sometimes to be justified, when the first seeds of that faith, which by taking
firm root by fructification or perfection, added by the immediate hand of God
becomes saluificall, are first sown in our hearts. He that has but a
resolution, for the present, sincere, though variable, to walk in all the
ways of his God, is in scripture often instiled just or righteous, and may by
this resolution or purpose be truly said justified in the sight of God, not
absolutely, but in respect of opposite profaneness or express dissimulation.
Ezech. 18. 24.
If the righteous (says the Lord unto his Prophet) turn away from his
righteousness and commit iniquities; in his transgression that he committed,
and in his finne that he has sinned, in them he shall die. And again, The
righteousness of the righteous shall not deliver him in the day of
transgression, etc. when I shall say unto the righteous that he shall surely
live, if he trust to his own righteousness, and commit iniquity, all his
righteousness shall be no more remembered, but for his iniquity that he has
committed he shall die for the same. And unto such as are here specified though
not unto such alone that speech of Saint John is literally appliable. Revel.
22. 2.
Qui iustus est iustificetur adhuc: he that is righteous let him be righteous
still, or more justified. Nor can that other of S. Paul be restrained to those
that have attained saving faith or final absolution, Romans 2. 13.
The hearers of the law are not righteous before God, but the doers of the Law
shall be instified. That is, God does approve their deeds so far as they are
consonant to his law and accounts the sincere practice of moral dueries,
whereunto light of nature did lead the Gentiles much better then the outward
observance of legal ceremonies or sabhatarian delight in hearing. Thou art not
far from the kingdom of God (says our Mark. 12. 33. 34
Savior to him that that had discreetely acknowledged this truth) to love the
Lord withal the heart and with all the understanding, and withal the soul
and withal the strength, and to love his neighbor as himself, is more then
all burnt offerings and sacrifices. Now if by such works as the heathen or
auditors of the Law not yet sanctified often practiced, much more by those
works which accompany true and lively faith we may in a higher degree of the
same sense be accounted, justified; that is approueable in the sight of God, or
passiuely capable of a final absolution, or effectual justification. And this
was all Saint James meant in that assertion. James 2. 24.
Ye see then how that a man of works is justified and not of faith only,
which words are but equivalent to the like precedent. ver. 14.
what avails it my brethren, though a man say he has faith when he has no
works? can the faith save him? The conclusion intended in both places, as in
that whole discourse, was no more but thus. No man may presume he is already
in the state of justification or salvation, unless he find himself
impartially devoted unto good works of every kind. Or albeit his faith have
once or twice showed it self by his works, or readiness to do (ods will, he
must not here let up his rest or rely on what is past: Abraham had obeyed Gods
will once in Genesis 12. v. 1. 2. etc.
leaving his fathers house, and again in cancelling his own resolution for
making his Genesis 15. v. 3. 4. ^. 6.
servant his heir, upon Gods promise to make his seed like the stars of
heaven: his belief hereof was accounted to him for righteousness: But did he
thus justified by faith cease to work? No, his faith by working became more
perfect, and improued his former approbation, of being reputed righteous, so
far as to be thenceforth called the friend of God. c Genesis 22. v. 1^. James 2.
v. 23.
And this was written for our instruction, vt qui iustus est iustificetur
adhuc, that every one which has attained to moral hope of salvation, should
make his election sure by practice of such works as perfect faith and enapt it
for sure reliance on Gods promises. Did Saint Paul then ever affirm that a man
could be saved or justified without such works? No, he always supposed them
as a qualification most necessary in the party which expected final absolution
or benefit of Gods general pardon. In what sense then does he say we are
justified by faith, not by works? Not by works ceremonial? Not by such as
were the best that Abraham or David ever did. The form of Salomons
interrogation, Pro. 20 9.
[ who can say I have made mine heart clean, I am clean from my sin,]
upposeth his father could never have truly avouched thus much; yea David
himself even in his best days and purest thoughts unfeignedly Psalm. 19. v. 9.
disclaimes all such purity or perfection as this brief demand (to reserve
others and the full handling of this to their proper place) is for the present
proof sufficient; k Who can understand his faults? cleanseme from my secret
sins. This assures us there is another acception of justification yet behind,
most frequent with Saint In this sense is it taken by Saint Paul. Romans 8. ver.
33. 34. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen: It is God that
justifies. Who shall condemn? It is Christ which is dead, yea, or rather
which is risen again, who is also at the right hand of God, and makes request
also for us.
Paul to wit, the actual sentence of the judge acquitting or absoluing or for
final absolution or actual acquittance of the parties so qualified, as Saint
James requires. And as we are not capable of Gods promises of eternal life or
happiness without works, (and yet we apprehend them not by works but by
faith) so this final sentence of joy and comfort is apprehended by faith
alone; although so truly apprehended it cannot be by parties destitute of
works, nor do we only by faith alone apprehend the truth or derive the
benefit of divine promises to our selves, but by it alone (though accompanied
with all other sanctifying graces and attended with the whole train of works
moral or ceremonial) we expect and pray the promises may be fulfilled, not
for our sakes or for any righteousness we have in us, or can hope for in this
life, but only for the merits of CHRIST, by his sole mediation and intercession.

4. The seeming contradiction between these two great Apostles is hence easily
and clearly thus dissolved; Saint James, affirming we are justified by works
and not by faith alone, speaks of the passive qualification in the subject or
party to be justified or made capable of absolute approbation or final
absolution; this qualification supposed, Saint Paul speaks of the application
of the sentence or of the ground of our plea for absolution; the one (by his
doctrine) must be conceived, and the other sought for only by says; the
immediate and only cause of both he still contends not to be in us but
without us, and for this reason when he affirms that we are justified by
faith alone, he considers not faith as it is part of our qualification
inherent, or the foundation of other graces, but as it includes the correlatiue
term or immediate cause of justification whereunto it alone has peculiar
reference, or continual aspect. This is that which in other terms some have
delivered: fides iustificat relative, non effectiue aut formaliter: faith
iustifies relatiuely, not formally or by way of merit or efficiency. To this
purpose he alleges the Prophets testimony; Romans 1. v. 17. Galat. 3. 11.
the just shall live by his faith. Faith then makes him just, and iustifies him
in that sense Saint James meant, as it is operative; but he lives by it as it
unites him to the Lord of life; yea by it alone, in as much as by it alone, not
by it and other parts of grace as joint supporters, he trusts in Gods mercies
offered in CHRIST wholly relying on them, not partly on them, and partly on
righteousness inherent. That the Prophet in faith included this confidence and
reliance upon Gods mercies in CHRIST, was a point unto the judicious Cum hoc
loco propheta nomine sidei and persuasionem sieve assensum firmu^mentis,
(...)fiduciam sieve spem compreheaderit, certum est Apostolum quoque dum ait:
Iustitia Dei in eo reuelatur ex fide in fidem, fic accepisse fidem, vt vtromque
complectatur. Nec detor fill apostolus, sed propris vsus est vaticinio
prophetae, ad suae sententiae confirmationem. Nam licet cortex liter^ proponat
captiuitatem populi Iudoici sub regt Babiloniorum, and liberationem quae facta
est per Cyrum, nontamen ille precipuus sensus est, sed alius quilatet sub
cortice literae, qui est de captiutiate humani generis sub tyrannide Diaboli
and liberationem quae factaest per Cristu^ Sasbout in 1. ad versum. 17.
Sasbout so clear, that if the Apostle in the first to the Romans had
otherwise taken it, he knew not how they could be reconciled. That so much
imports in the tenth and eleventh to the Hebrews, is evident, and will so
appear from the very proposal of his speeches. Heb. 10. v. 35.
Cast not away therefore your confidence; which has great recompense of
reward. For ye have need of patience, that after ye have done the will of God,
ye might receive the promise. For yet a little while, and he that shall come,
will come, and will not tarry. Now the just shall live by faith: but if any man
draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him. But we are not of them who
draw back unto perdition; but of them that believe to the saving of the soul.
That Paul, wheresoever he attributes iustificaion to faith alone, always
includes the principal object of true faith, as the sole immediate cause,
whereby of men justifiable because actually partakers of Gods graces, we become
actually justified or absolved, his coment upon these words of Moses, Romans 4.
v. 3. 4. 5. 6.
Abraham believed God, and it was counted unto him for righteousness, does put
it out of controversy. Was it therefore such righteousness as deserved
absolution or reward? Rather rewarded as such, by gracious acceptance, as is
there implied. Now to him that works is the reward not reckoned of grace but
of debt, but to him that works not: to the loiterer or idle person? No, to
him that faithfully works, as Abraham did, and yet seeks salvation only by
firm belief in him which iustifies the ungodly, his faith or rather his faith
thus set upon it proper objects is imputed to him for righteousnesses. But the
Jesuit demands when is it thus imputed. After grace infused, or whiles it
remains inherent, or at the first infusion only? Not after grace infused, by
which (in his divinity) he cease to be impious. Was Abraham then destitute
of inherent grace, before he believed the promise concerning Isaac? Sosome De
verbis Paulimaior est difficultas, non desunt qui existiment. Abrahamum tunc
primum iustificatum esse a peccatis, cum creddit Deo, promitienti filium and
cum de co dictum est: Credidit Abraham Deo, and reputatum est ei ad iustitiam.
Ita docet Anselmus in comment ad ca. 4. ad. Roman and candem sententiam
indicare videtur S. Augustious praefat. in Psalm. 31. cum a^^ exponens hunc
locum: Ergo ex fide iustificatus est Abrabam, and si opera non praecess runt
tamen sequuta sunt. Et siquidem oaec opinio vera esset, nulla esset in Paulo
difficultas. caeterum non auderem dicere, Abrahaemum non fuisse multo ante
iustificatum, qu^m de eo dictum sit: Credidit Abraham Deo. etc.
Romanists consequently to their Churches erroneous interpretation of scripture
have avouched, whom Bellarmine dares not follow. Of Bellarmine therefore we
demand, why Saint Paul should instance in Abraham, his purpose being, as he
and all his fellows agree, only to show that the first justification is not
attained by works, but by faith? For inferring this conclusion the
justification of Rahab had been more sit: for in Saint Paul's dialect, she
received the messengers by faith; being, as Bellarmine graunts, destitute of
all grace before. But thus he answers. As Paul when he spoke of the first
justification brought the example of Abraham, which belonged to the second to
prove (a maiori) that no unjust Dico igitur P^^lum vsum esse exemplo Abrahae,
non vt significanet, Abrahamum (...)catum fuisse a pecca^^s (...) non just
ficari impi(...) and gratia Dei factis, sed exside side and g^a^a Dei. Nam si
Abraham iust^^s, non est factus iustior, ex ^per^bus s^^e sid; multo magis
impius non pote^^t s^ri iustus ex operibu^ sine side. Igu^r Apostolus ad Romans 4
loquitur de prima iustificatione qua quis ex impio fic iustus: tam et si ad
probandum eam non si^r^ ex op^ri^us, sed ex fide, exem^ pl^m petatase on ^a
iustificatione, qua quis ex iusto sit iustier. Quare Paulus et Iacobus
co^se^^^nt omnino in exemplo Abrahe, and verbis M^^s intelligengdis, quam^is ad
varias conclusiones probandas illis vtantur. Porro sicut Paulus cum loqueretur
de prima iustificatione, attulit exemplum Abrahae, quod erat secundae, vt
probaret, a maior^, non p^sse impi^us iustificari ex operibus sine fide: si
Abraham iustus non est factus iustier ex operibus sine fide: si. Iac^bus cum
loqueretur de sic^da iustificatione, attulit exemplum Rahab, quod est primae
iustifications, et pro^^ret, ^ majors, iustum fieri iustiorem exoperibus, et
non ex side tantum; si Rahab ex meret^^^ facta est iusta ex operious and non ex
fide tantum. Nam probabile est valde. Rahab vsque ad illud tempus, qua^^s^^pit
nan^^^ ^^^ue, s^^^sse non solum meretritem, sed etiam infidee^m: sed ab eo
tempore cr^didisse in Deum and opere ille (...)ae praeparatum fuisse ad
iustificationem, ^^ a vt bonum illud opus ex fide factum non suerit meritorium
simplic(...) sicati^nis, sed imperfecte and de congruo, vt supra diximus de
d^spositionibus ad gratiam. Bella^. lib. 4. d. Just. cap. 18.
man is justified by works without faith, seeing just Abraham was not made
more just by works without faith: so Saint James when he spoke of the second
justification (where by a just man becomes more just) brought in the example of
Rahab which was per tinent to the first justification (where by an impious or
unregenerate man becomes just) to show a maiori, that a just man is made more
just by works, and not of faith only; seeing Rahab of an harlot was made just
by works, not by faith only. For it is very probable she was not only an
harlot, but an infidel, before such time as she received the messengers; but
from that time to have believed in God, as being prepared to justification by
that work of mercy, yet so as that good work done by faith was not simply
meritorious of justification, but imperfectly and by way of congruity.

5. Surely this Authors ill will unto us was greater, then either the love or
reverence he bare unto Saint Paul, upon whose words, least they should seem to
favor our cause too much, he labors to foster a meaning, as ridieulous, as
thwart and contradictory to his purpose, as the Devil himself could have
devised: howbeit to acquit himself from suspicion of partiality or particular
spleen against Saint Paul, he spares not to father a sense and meaning
altogether as foolish upon Saint James, as if the like palpable abuse offered
to him had been a satisfaction sufficient for the wrong done to his fellow
Apostle. The reader in the mean time cannot but hence take notice unto what
miserable plunges our adversaries in this point are put, when the sons are
thus enforced violently to sumble against their mother fallen by dashing
against the stone of offense to men Iewishly minded, but the only sure
foundation of life to such as seek salvation aright; as also how one absurdity
suffered to pass by public authority, imboldens inferiors to forge licenses
for a thousand. The Sess. 6, ca. 8. and 10
Trent Council, ignorant of any better, has given fair hints unto her
children, for reconciling the former seeming contradiction betwixt S. Paul and
Saint James as they expressly do: [That S. Paul when he affirms we are
justified freely by faith without works must be understood of the first
justification whereby we receive grace without any worth or merit precedent:
S. James when he affirms we are justified by works and not by faith alone
implies the increment of grace or righteousness in the godly] But what had
Saint James to do with this second justification when as the parties whom he
proposed to refute had altogether erred from the first? Did he intend they
should accumulate iustifications as we do degrees in schools, and be twice
justified at once? Suppose he did, yet must the second iustifycation go (in
order) before the first. Or admitting he spoke ambiguously or indeterminately
of both, and authorized the Church when any controversy should arise to
dispose of his voice for either as she pleased, yet what instance could worse
be fit the second iustifycation, whereto the Gratis autem iustificari dicamur,
quia nihil little, qua iustificationem praecedunt, sine fides, sine opera, ipsam
iustificationis gratiam promeretur. Si enim gratia est, iam non ex operibus:
alioquin'vt idem Apostolus inquit, gratia iam non est gratia. Council. Trideut
Sess. 6. cap. 8.
Romish Church applies his meaning, then Rahab, who til that time, as
Bellarmine grants, was not only an infidel but an harlot, and therefore an
impious person destitute of grace, and if she were justified or obtained the
grace of iustifycation by this work done in faith without grace, as the same
writer glosses upon this text, how shall we reconcile him to the Romish church
which has peremptorily determined, that the grace of iustifycation is not
obtained by works, and to this purpose cites that of Paul; If it be grace,
then is it not of works, otherwise grace, should be no grace.

Unto this difficulty which thus diuides the tongs of Babell, our answer is
casie and consonant to the perpetual voice of Gods spirit. [ Rahab was
justified according to Saint James his mind (this is presumed as just or
justifiable) as well by works as by faith, because her works were a
necessary part of that inhere ^t righteousness which must be in every one
that lives by faith] for though we live by faith only, yet only the Just so
live. This no way contradicts Saint Paul, because she did not seek salvation
by works, but did therefore work, that she might lay sure hold on Gods
promises only by faith; which is always as unable or unapt to justify, to
sue for grace, or apprehend Gods mercies aright, as it is to work when occasion
is offered. More repugnant is this distinction of justification first and
second to Saint Paul's mind or purpose: or suppose, though he did not entend or
acknowledge it, his discourse notwithstanding might admit of it: there is less
reason why his words should be retracted, as Bellarmine does, to the first
justification, then why those words of S. James [ of works a man is justified
and not of faith onely] should be extended to the second; or if Paul's might in
part be appliable to it, David and Abraham, which he makes the maine ground of
his dispute, are the most unfit instances that could have been chosen in all
the Scriptures: Abraham, our adversaries grant, was just before his belief of
that promise, which was imputed to his for righteousness: yet then reiustified,
not by works, though not without faith, as Bellarmine minceth, but by faith
without works as the Apostle strongly and peremptorily inferres. For to
believe Gods promises concerning the birth of Isaac was the sole act of Faith,
yet by this act was Abraham justified, not the first time as Bellarmine grants:
Wherefore Faith without works did justify him the second time, unless he
take justification otherwise then S. Paul there does. And if this Iame^ 2. 23
very same Scripture which says Abraham believed God concerning Isaacs birth,
and it was imputed unto him for righteousness, were as Saint James avouches
again fulfilled in the offering of Isaac, he was justified the third time
only by believing God, not by his work never accomplished, if we take
belief and justification in the same sense the holy spirit by the mouth of
Paul does in the Epistles to the Hebrews and the Romans. Though to offer up
Isaac in sacrifice were a work, yet did Abraham offer him only by faith,
(because faith only impelled him to this work;) yea by the very same act of
Faith which had been imputed to him for righteousness. He considered (says
S. Paul) that God was able to raise him up even from Heb. 11. 19
the dead, from whence also he received him in a figure. And as he staggered
not at the first promise concerning his birth through unbelief; so neither did
he now dispute with God about the lawfulness of his act, nor reason how he
should be raised again Videtur etiam promissio, quae scribitur cap. 15.
intelligenda deposterirate multiplicanda secundum nam ^rum stellarum, per
semen, in quo benedicendae essent omnes nationes terrae. Quod si contendas,
(cum illi capite non fiat mentio illius seminis quod est Christus) textum
tantum ^oqui ad literam de carnali postericate; praesertim cum Apostolus in
sequentibus tantum ^rgeat, fidem de corporali posteritate, qui contra spem
(inquiens) in spem credidit etc. Respondere licet ad propositam difficul^at^m,
fidem de qua loquitur Genesis, tamet si non esset de Christo, vt de obiecto
innixam tamen faisse fidei vel fiduciae ^e Christo: vel si de ^o nondum
acceperat expressam reuclationem, certe innixam fuisse miserecordiae Dei
paratae hom^il us Et similiter sentiendum est de alijs quibusuis promissionibus
corporal^bus: quod sides quae circa illas versabatur Deo placuit, sed in illis
in quibus erat fides sieve fiducia misericordiae diuinae. Sasbout in cap. 4. a d
Romans
Justified he was at both instants by his belief, not as terminated to his
work, or to the possibility of Isaacks birth and resurrection, but as through
them it found access to his birth death and resurrection, whom Isaac
prefigured. Having performed Gods will in obeying his Command to sacrifice his
only son, he patiently expected the promise concercerning his Redeemer,
whose incarnation, whose sufferings and exaltation are objects of Faith, not of
works, effected by God, and not by man, although to the like application of
their benefits, the right works as were in Abraham be most necessary, seeing
true belief of this promise, as in the first Chap. 8.
section was declared, virtually includes the same mind in us that was in
CHRIST, a readiness to do works of every kind which notwithstanding are no
associates of Faith in the business of iustifycation. Romans 14. 19. 20
Not to be weak in faith, not to doubt of the promise through unbelief, to
be strengthened in faith, to be fully persuaded that be which had promised was
able also to perform, were pure acts of faith (though virtually including
works) as proper thereto, as forcibly excluding all other virtues from sharing
with it in this business, as can possibly be conceived: yet (says the
Apostle) even for these acts late mentioned, it was imputed to him for
righteousness. How preposterous then and basely shuffling are the glosses put
by Bellarmine upon the Apostle in this place as if his purpose had been to show
that the impious and unjust could not be justified by works only, because
Abraham, though just before, was not made more just by mere works without
faith, when as he leuels his whole discourse to the clean contrary point
maintained by us: That seeing righteousness was imputed to Abraham by faith
and not through works, none after him should in this life at any time, whether
before or after the infusion of grace, or inherent righteousness, presume to
seek or hope for like approbation from God, otherwise then only by faith.
Thus much the Apostle has as fully and plainly expressed, as any ingenuous
Reader can desire. Romans 4. 23
Now it was not written for his sake alone that it (to wit the strength and
full assurance of his faith) was imputed to him sorrighteousnesse, but also for
us, to whom it (the like faith) shall be imputed for righteousness, if we
believe in him that raised up JESUS our Lord from the dead. The ground of the
Apostles reason or similitude here mentioned (wherein the force and strength of
our argument is included) supposes all our righteousness, whether actual or
habitual, should be as unapt to attain everlasting life or salvation (which
is the end of all graces bestowed upon us) as Abraham's decrepit body was to
produce so many nations: yet as he only by believing God, who was able to
effect thus much and more, obtained the promise, and was blessed with more
children from Sarahs dead womb, then the most fruitful Parents that lived
before, or should come after them; so we only by like firm belief in the
same God, which raised up our Lord JESUS CHRIST from the dead, shall be
partakers of the promise made in him, heirs of eternal life; whereto seeing
our inherent rightcousnesse has no proportion, it must for this reason still
be sued for, as a mere gift of God, farther exceeding all desert of any
supernatural grace in us, then the mighty increase of Abraham's seed did the
strength of his decayed nature.

6. The first spring of all Romish errors in this argument issues out of their
general ignorance of Saint Paul's phrase, amongst many of whose sayings seeming
hard and incompatible with their school conceits, that This speech of S. Paul
is but paraleld to that of S. John ^. Ioh. 1. 8. If we say that we have no
sin we deceive our selves and the truth is not in us. As the justification
whereof S. Paul speaks consists in the acknowledgement of our sins required
by this Apostle in the words following. If we acknowledge our sins he is
faithful and just to forguie us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
vurighteousnesse.
Romans 4. of Gods justifying the impious and ungodly, ministers greatest offense
and causes them to inuert the course of their divinity quite contrary ^o the
Apostles method^ To pronounce him just, that is, internally impious and unjust,
cannot in their school learning stand with Gods truth: but to make him which
ere while was by nature unjust and impious, inherently and perfectly just, by
plentiful infusion of grace, is an argument, (as they deem) of his goodness;
no disparagement to his justice, as perchance it were not, might we judge of
his purpose to save sinners by the rules of humane reason never consulting the
Canons of life. But if we conceive of Gods grace by his comments, in whom it
dwelt in great abundance, this very conceit of being justified by its
inherence, includes extreme antipathy to the nature, and utterly peruerts the
right use of it; as to restrain th^^ same Apostles speeches to the first
justification or prime infusion of inherent righteousness (which is the
necessary consequent of the former error) is co^tradictiously to contest with
the spirit by which he uttered these divine Oracles. For, if believing him
which iustifies the impious were imputed for righteousness unto Abraham, after
he had been, for a long time, more righteous then the ordinary sort of Gods
Saints or Elect, Abraham all this while unfeignedly believed himself to be a
sinner, no way justified in himself, but seeking to be justified by him, who
if he show not mercy unto sinners, whiles they are sinners, all mankind should
utterly perish. Against this poisonous leaven wherewith the Pharisee first and
the Romanist his successor since has infected the bread of life, and tainted
the first fruits of Gods spirit: S. Paul prescribes that Catholic antidote.
Romans 3. 23
There is no difference, all have sinned, and are deprived of the glory of God,
and are justified freely by his grace, through the redemption which is in
CHRIST JESUS. Abraham was all his life time comprehended in this catalogue, and
is made by the Apostle, as a perpetual, so a principal instance of that
final resolution: Romans 3. 28
Therefore we conclude, that a man is justified by faith without the works of
the Law. Was he then in no sort justified by works? Yes he might boldly
contest, as Job did, and every godly man yet safely may, with others for
integrity of life and plenty of works in which he might justly rejoice or
glory Romans 4. 2
yet with men not with God. In this sense their resolution, which say we are
justified by works before men not before God, is most true and warranted by
that place of Works proceeding from grace inherent justify only in respect
of men, yet thus far they justify us not before men only but before God: Nor
is it possible for any man not thus far justified by working grace, to make
the right plea of faith, whereby justification properly taken, that is, final
absolution is attained.
Saint Paul; let them nothence deny or occasion others to forget that such
integrity or comparatiue rightcousnesse to inherent is necessarily presupposed
to justification in the sight of God, and does not only declare our faith or
justification to men; seeing it implies a contradiction in the unanimous tenent
of all reformed Churches, to admit faith precedent and works only subsequent,
to the justification whereof Paul here speaks. His drift and scope in that
third and fowrth to the Romans, is only this: That although men may be truly
just and holy in respect of others, and rich in all manner of works that are
good, as Abraham was thus far known and approved, not by men only but by
God: yet when they appear before his tribunal, who best knows as well the
imperfection as the truth of their integrity, they must still frame their
supplications sub forma pauper is, yea sub forma impij, always acknowledging
themselves to be unprofitable servants, always praying; Lord forgive us our
sins, and be merciful to us miserable sinners, The only complement of all
inherent righteousness possible in this life is this perpetual unfeigned
acknowledgement of our vnrighteonsnesse, whereby we are made immediately
capable of his righteousness, which alone can cover our sins, as being alone
without all stain or mixture of impiety. The like unfeigned acknowledgement of
their sins or faithful plea for mercy, the hypocrites or men deuoid of faith
or grace inherent cannot possibly make as shall anon be declared. This absolute
necessity and utter insufficiency of works, or righteousness inherent to
justification in the sight of God is as perspicuous from the Apostles instance
in David, who had resolved this doubt, [ Psalm. 15. 1. 2
Lord who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle? who shall rest in thine holy
mountain?] with S. James: ( He that walks uprightly and works
righteousness, and speaks the truth in his heart.) He had pronounced a
blessing Psalm. 1. 1 Psalm. 1. 6
to the man that walks not in the counsel of the wicked, but sets his
delight in the Law of the Lord; shall we imagine such a man to be without
works? The Lord (as he adds) knows the way of the righteous, which is as
much as Saint James meant by justification, as much as was said to Genesis 2^. 1^
Abraham upon that fact by which, as the Apostle says, he was justified. For
that God should know their ways, implies his approbation of their persons for
men upright and entire in respect of hypocrites and fruitless hearers; of
their works, for such as he requires in the parties to be justified by him.
Were they therefore justified or finally acquitted by or for their works? If
finally acquitted then blessed likewise for them. Now in opposition to this
Pharisaicall conceit, S. Paul directed by the Spirit, who best knew the
Psalmists full meaning in every passage, upon what occasions and unto what
point he spoke directly, brings in David himself deriuing the blessedness
usually pronounced in Scriptures to the entire and upright in heart from Gods
mercies, as from it only true and immediate cause, not from their v^rightnesse
or integrity, with which it has connection only final (as being applied only
to parties thus qualified) none original. Romans 4. 5. 6. 7. 8.
To him that works not, but belieueth in him that justifies the ungodly, his
faith is counted for righteousness; even as David declares the blessedness
of the man unto whom God imputes righteousness without works, saying. Psalm.
32. 1. 2
Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven and whose sins are covered.
Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes no finne. The man then in whose
spirit is no guile (for of such the Psalmist speaks) is justified not because
of his sincerity, but because the Lord imputes not that sin unto him which
he still unfeignedly acknowledges to be in him, continually praying, Psalm.
143. 2
Lord enter not into judgment with thy servant, always confessing, Lord in
thy sight no flesh living shall be justified, to wit otherwise then by not
entering into judgment, or by nonimputation of his sins. Thus you see even
the best of Gods saints seek justification only by faith with Saint Paul, and
yet require thereto with Saint James Pure Religion and undefiled in the sight
of God even the Father.

7. This reconcilement of the seeming contradiction between these two Apostles
hitherto prosecuted, does voluntarily present it self to such as consider the
several occasions of their writings, and take not their speeches as they now
lie most commodiously for application unto modern oppositions: For one and the
same Physician to prescribe medicines much different to diseases altogether
diverse or quite contrary, would neither impeach him of unskillfulness or
inconstancy. The very contrariety of their errors, with whom these two
Apostles had to deal, would draw speeches from any one of us that should
severally entend their refutation, in form as contradictorie as theirs be, yet
both fully consonant to the truth, because rightly proportioned to their
opposite ends.

The Jew, whose heresy S. Paul labors to auert from the Romans, and to ^oot
out of the Galathians, looked for a Messiah immediately to crown the conceited
perfection of their works with honor on earth and glory in heaven, not one
that should be the end and perfection of the Law, to free them from the curse
it had brought upon them, or to reconcile them unto God by his righteousness.
To beat down this pride there was no remedy possible besides faith in CHRIST,
no method so available as that he uses; first setting forth the
haynousnesse of sin and necessity of it inherence, whose consideration might
deiect them; afterward pr^ssing Gods mercies in CHRIST offered to all that
would deny themselves, confess their sins, and by faith vnsaigned rely on
their Redeemers satisfaction. Saint James disputes against the opposite error
of the Libertines, who presumed the merits and perpetual mediation of CHRIST
to be not only most necessary, but in themselves sufficient to save all that
did apprehend them as true, although destitute of such works, as their calling
required, and as Gods decree exacted for the effectual application of Christ's
allsufficient merits; which for this reason are scarce mentioned by this
Apostle, because magnified they were, though not too much, yet amiss by the
parties whom he refutes. Their contempt or wanton inuerting of Gods graces
offered, or in part received was no less heinous or preposterous, then if
Bartimeus, or others in his case called by our Savior, in hope to recover
their sight, should have desired Him rather to have made such a new sun as
might make blind men see, without any internal light in the eye, or alteration
in the organ of sight. Not by any necessity of nature but by the will and
purpose of the Almighty, grace and righteousness inherent, though imperfect
are as necessary for effectual adherence or union to CHRIST as the Crystal
humor of the eye or right constitution of the whole organ is for perception of
colors or light external. Hence is the seeming inconvenience arising from
Saint James his causall form of speech ((...)) easily answered. For the
immediate and principal cause presupposed, it is usual to attribute a kind
of causality to the qualification of the subject, though requisite only as a
mere passive disposition, without which the principal or sole agent should
want his efficacy. To one demanding why the Moon^ should be ecclipsed, when
the earth is directly interposed between it and the body of the sun, this
form of speech would neither be improper nor impertinent, ( because the Moon
has no light, but what she borrowes from the sun.) Yet if the question were
absolutely proposed why the Moon were ecclipsed, as no other answer would
serve, so this alone were sufficient, because the body of the earth, (which is
not transpenetrable by any light) is directly interposed between the sun and
the Moon. Or if it be questioned how the Israelites being stung with serpents
were saved, the reply is good and formal by the sign of salvation, which God
had erected. But some we may suppose died after it was erected; what was the
reason? they did not steadfastly look upon it, shall we then absolutely say the
Israelites were saved not only by this sign of salvation, which God has
given them, but by their eyesight, as it was a faculty or quality inherent?
This was a qualification indeed so requisite in the subject to be healed, that
such as were without it, were deprived of ordinary means of preservation, yet
none* to speak properly and absolutely, were saved by their eyesight, but
only by the object of their sight, or rather by both as they had relation to
him whose victory over the great serpent and graund enemy of mankind the manner
of the brazen serpents erection represented. This last instance will apply it
self unto the point in h^nd. Works or righteousness inherent include no
other causal^^^ of justification or salvation, then the Israelites eiesight
dido* (...)ety, their presence notwithstanding and precedence is in the same
rank or order necessary. Christ only is the true and immediate cause of
healing us from the sting of death, as the brazen serpent was of the Israelites
temporal recovery from the sting of deadly serpents. Thus much of the
agreement between Saint Paul and Saint James, now of the agreements and
difference betwixt the Romish Church and ours.

CHAP. VII. Of the differences betwixt us and the Romish Church concerning
justification, or the right use or measure of grace or righteousness inherent.
1. BOth grant Gods decree or purpose to justify sinful man to be an act of
mere mercy. Final absolution or approbation they make no act of mercy but
rather of justice in God, because it presupposes absolute righteousness in
us. Both grant Christ to be the sole meritorious and proper efficient cause of
that grace which is first infused: whose reparation or increase is by their
doctrine partly of grace (because the foundation of it was mere grace
precedent) partly of Si quis dixerit, hominus iustificati bona opera ita esse
dona Dei, vt ^^^ sint etiam bona ip^^^^ iustificati merita; aut ipsum iust^^^
atum bon^^ operibus, quae ab eo per Dei gratiam, and Jesus Christi meritum,
cuius viv^m me^b^^m est, siunt, non v^re m^r^ri (...) grat^^, vi^^m aeternam,
and (...) vitae aeterae, si (...) ^^ gratia decess^r^t, consecut^^n^^, atq^e
etiam gloriae augme^^^m; ^^^them^ sit (...)* Tride^t* sess^ ^. Ca^ non^ 32.
debt because they merit these additions by right use of their free will. Whence
they cannot without contradiction hold Christ to be the sole meritorious
efficient cause of their second justification, or that grace whereby they
become more in (...) better approved in the sight of God. But about the use or
in^^^tance of this term justification in Saint Paul's writings, we ^^^^ent.
They contend it it implies as much as to be inherently just or righteous. Many
learned Protestants have copiously showed it to be a Law phrase equivalent to
absolution from the sentence of justice, acquitall, or the like. To their
allegations notwithstanding a wayward Papist will not yield; because it is
sometimes taken in that sense their writers allege, as may appear by our
late instances; or albeit we could by evidence of circumstance or otherwise
convince their understandings that it has the same value with Saint Paul as
with modern Protestants: yet subtle wits (whereof the Romish Church has
plenty) would redeem the disadvantage and recover their former footing by
producing more instances of men absolved through the uprightness of their
cause, then we bring pl^ces wherein the word justification is taken for
absolution or free pardon of men otherwise obnoxious to condemnation. Number. 25.
8.
Phinehas resolute and zealous fact was imputed to him for righteousness and
did justify or absolve both himself and the host of Israel from the
abomination committed by one of his brethren with the Midianitish woman not by
non-imputation but by positive depulsion of the crime or guilt whose infection
would otherwise have seized on him through conniuence or neutrality. Let the
Romanist therefore be as way ward as he list, or take justification in what
sense he pleases, that every son of Adam is by nature the son of wrath,
destitute of the glory of God, and liable to the sentence of condemnation, he
neither does nor can deny; that every son of wrath must by his Almighty
Judge be absolved from the sentence of death before he can be admitted unto
life eternal he must upon the same necessity grant. The point then in which
will he, nill he, we must join issue is (What should be the true immediate and
next cause of this final absolution,) ought within us or somewhat without us?
By the immediate and next cause we understand such a cause as is necessarily
accompanied by this effect, and without whose participation this effect neither
does nor can befall any; such a cause as whosoever is partaker of, is by
participation of it, forthwith absolved; such a cause as who so can probably
hope to be partaker of, may upon the same degrees of probability hope for
final absolution. Such a cause as who so doubts or fears least he shall never
be partaker of in this life must upon the same terms doubt or despair of his
absolution or salvation. We deny, he affirms righteousness inherent to be
such an absolute cause (as has been notified) of absolution or remission of
sins, of justification howsoever taken. Here it will not be amiss to advise
the Reader of a schoole-tricke which one that comes fresh from the arts would
easily ^e use, though put upon some grave Divines by the Romanist. The question
(says Bellarmine) should be proposed not as Chenitius does of the cause for
which, seeing that implies the efficient, but of the cause by which we are
justified or absolved, that is of the formal cause of justification or
absolution. CHRIST'S righteousness they grant to be the efficient or meritorious
cause for which, not the formal by which our sin are remitted or we just
fied. They are indeed bound to assign a formal cause by which we are truly
just, because they hold us formally just in the sight of God; and seeing they
teach remission of sins to consist in the extirpation or expulsion of them
they may in congruitie affirm that sin is formally, at least immediately,
remitted by habitual grace or righteousness inherent, and remitted by CHRIST
only as the efficient cause which meriteth this measure of grace, in the same
form of speech that the schools tell us that cold is expelled out of the
water by the fire as by the efficient, but formally or immediately by the heat
which the fire produces in the water. Although perhaps it may be a question
whether the expulsion of cold out of the water or of sin out of our bodies
(consonantly to their doctrine) can have any proper formal cause or only an
efficient by resultance; but to demand of us what is the formal cause of
justification by which our sins are formally remitted, is as if we should
ask one of their young pupils what were Latin for manus. Justification taken,
(as we do it) for remission of sins not by inherent righteousness or ought
within us immediately incompetible with them, but by the external merits of
Christ, is a form or entity as simple as any formal cause can be, and simple
or uncompounded entities can neither have formal causes or ought in proportion
answearing to them. Wherefore as I said it is either the folly or knavery of
our adversaries to demand a formal cause of their justification that deny
themselves to beformallie just in the sight of God. For so to be just and to
be just only by acceptance or non-imputation of injustice are terms as
opposite as can be imagined. He alone is formallie just which has that form
inherent in himself by which he is denominated just and so accepted with God;
as Philosophers deny the same to be formally hot because it has no form of
heat inherent in it but only produces heat in other bodies. To be formally
just we for these reasons attribute only unto Christ who alone has such
righteousness inherent in himself as by the interposition of it between Gods
justice and sinful flesh does stop the proceeding of his judgments, as
Phinehas zeal did stay the plague, otherwise ready to devour the host of
Israel. Our adversaries in that they acknowledge inherent righteousness to be
the sole formal cause of justification do by the same assertion necessarily
grant it to be the sole true immediate cause of remission of sins, of
absolution from death and admis^ion to life. This is the only point from which
they cannot start at which nevertheless whiles they stand, they may
acknowledge Christ come in the flesh, crucified, dead, and buried, or perhaps
ascended into heaven but deny they do the power of his sitting at the right
hand of God, the virtue of his mediation or intercession, and more then half
euacuate the eternity of his Priesthood as shallbe showed after this brief
explication of our assertion.

2. When we teach justification by faith and not by works, our meaning is, by
the doctrine of faith we are bound to acknowledge and confess that CHRIST
JESUS by his eternal Priesthood (whose offices in their several places shall
be expressed) is not only the sole meritorious cause of all graces or
righteousness inherent, requisite to final absolution but these supposed in
the party to be absolved he is likewise the sole immediate cause of final
absolution or justification. The latter part of this assertion may admit this
ilustration. Suppose a man not destitute of other senses yet ready every moment
to droupe or fall into some deadly fit unless his spirits were refreshed by
pleasant music, we might truly say, one in this case did live by the sense
of hearing (for deaf he should quickly die) yet were music the sole
immediate cause of his preservation, without actual application of whose sound
even this sense it self, by whose means his spirits refreshed better enable
his other senses to their proper functions, would forthwith fail him. In this
sort do sinful men draw life from CHRIST by faith alone, by which likewise
and not by works, we are said to abide in him as being united in spirit to
him, albeit by abiding so united our other faculties are strengthened and
viuificated to bring forth the fruits of righteousness. The former instance,
notwithstanding, does not exemplify the first part of our Assertion, for
music only continues life natural which is supposed to have another
original. But if we speak of life spiritual maintained by says (and of
which faith it self is a part) it was originally and wholly derived from
CHRIST, on whom faith and all other graces whatsoever, tam in fieri quam
infacto, as well in the first production as during the time of their
continuance and preservation, depend as essentially and perpetually as the
light of the moon, or other participated or reflected splendour, does on the
brightness of the Sun. Nor may we imagine that this borrowed and variable
righteousness in us, though thus depending on the Son of righteousness, is
or can be, even whiles it remains without eclipse, or in such fullness as in
this life the best men at any time are capable of, sufficient for the time
being to acquit or absolve us, if God should enter into judgment with us. This
strict dependence of such righteousness as we have on CHRIST'S righteousness
presupposed, faith is said to justify us not by any effects in us derived from
him, but by its transeunt acts reciprocally lifting up our hearts to the
fountain whence grace and spiritual life does flow, and reflecting the beams
or rays of our minds thus illuminated unto our mystical head, still de^iuing
virtue from his crucified body to stint the deadly issues of sin not utterly
to expel all relics of unrighteousness. For when we take the eyes of faith
of him, albeit the habit of faith and other graces remain as entire in us as
ever they were, the very memory of transgressions past, or the sight of sins
inherent, whilst we look on them deiect us. According to this disferent aspect
even the best men living whilst this brittle glass of mortality and
mutability is in running, may be subject to the like subalternation of hopes
and fear the exiled Po^t has expressed:

Spes mihi magna subest dum te, mitissime Caesar, Ovid.

Spes mihi, respicio dum mea facta, cadit.
Strength to my hopes does still accrewe,
whilst Caesar's mildness I do vie we:
But mine own facts whilst I behold,
my heart does fail, my hopes grow cold.
But though sin may often sting us by fits, and bring us almost to deaths
door by vicissitude of despair or disma^, yet we recover as presently by
faithful looking on the glorious author, as the Israelites did by beholding
the visible sign of salvation.

3. The controversy hitherto proposed and declared in as scholasticke form as
our English tongue well can bear, may be reduced in fewest terms and fittest
for popular instruction unto the right use and immediate end of faith, and
other sanctifying graces. We of reformed Churches with unanimous consent of
heart and mind believe and teach (and thou O CHRIST our Lord our life and
strength give judgment out of thy throne of Majesty whether not more
agreeable to thy mind then she which sits as Queen of heaven and brags as if
she were thy best beloved Spouse or her children do) That our Faith, our Hope
and Charity, or whatsoever pledges of thy fathers love, and favor toward us,
we through thy merits have obtained, were given us not to alter, but to better
that plea we made before we had them. Being by nature the sons of wrath, and
groaning under the heavy burden of our sins, with tears and sighs, by thy
precious blood by thy death and passion, we daily besought Him for them: and
shall his goodness in giving them, flake the feruency of our wonted desires or
supplications, when as we seek grace, only to the end we may find and truly
taste his mercy? Thou have taught us Mat. 7. 21
Not every one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven,
but such as do the will of thy Father which is in heaven, and his will as the
Apostle witnesses, they only do, which obey it in all things, omitting no
commandment when occasion is given, taking no occasion to break or violate
any. Shall we then enter into the kingdom of heaven because we thus far do
thy fathers will, and in some measure observe his Commandments? Rather
without such observance we shall not, we cannot enter therein; yet when we have
done all this, we are still unprofitable servants. To what use then does our
inherent righteousness or observance of Gods Commandments serve us? If
sincere that have been and unfeigned, though imperfect, yet the faith which
brought it forth will make a sincere and faithful plea for mercy in the day of
trial, in which he that has been an hearer only and no doer of the law, or
has done in part what God would have done, but not sincerely nor faithfully,
because it was his will and pleasure, but out of humor, natural affection or
hypocrisy, shall cry Lord, Lord, and show many tokens of Gods love and favor
toward him in hope to better this present suit for mercy, yet shall not be
heard. Why? Either because he never had any true pledge of Gods favor, or did
not use such as he had aright; because as his works have been, such now are
his prayers, presumptuous, unfaithful, or hypocritical; such as cannot
obtain any other answer of God then that, depart from me I never knew thee.
It shall not boot him to make proof that he has given his goods to the
poor, or his body to the fire; that he has healed the sick, cast out devils,
and wrought other wonders in CHRIST'S name, vnsesse his faith have quelled all
trust, all pride or glory in these gracings, wholly set on Gods mercies in
CHRIST; from whose apprehension unless these other acts or exercises (though
of mercy) sprung, they are not truly done in faith; but springing thence, we
cannot be so ready to do them as having done them to renounce all trust or
confidence in them. For whiles we compare these slender, yet sincere effects of
our love and thankfulness to him, with his infinite love and mercy toward
us, (whereon true faith always looks whiles it conceiues them) the sight of
them causes greater humility for the present, and more hearty sorrow for
sins past, then we could have conceived, if we had not done them; as the
sight of Zorobabels temple finished did make the auntients of Israel weep,
because the perfection and glory of the former was more lively represented to
their senses by this visible and semblable model, then by the ruins, mere
absence, or imperfect reparations of it. To be able to sound the depth of many
conclusions better then others can, gives stayed and settled judgments a more
distinct and complete measure of the knowledge they wanted, then fantastic or
shallow wits can have. For this cause solid learning always contracts, verbal
knowledge and superficial skill in any faculty dilates men's estimates of
themselves, and puffes them up with prejudicial conceits of their own worth.
And seeing all our knowledge in this life, though of matters natural and near
at and, is every way imperfect; the increase of it is always unnatural and
monstrous unless the more we know the better we know our imperfectious, and be
humbled with a more sensible feeling of our wants Now in as much as the fruits
of life do never take so kindly, as the fruits of knowledge in any son of
Adam, since he made that impious and crroneous choice, and every man's own
experience can teach him, that his practique faculties or performances come
still short of his speculatiue notions or apprehensions of what is good and fit
to be done: we are by this twofold reason enforced to take the unfeigned
acknowledgement of our imperfection in working, and serious distrust both to
our works and our selves as no way justifiable or approueable in the sight of
God, but for the perfect and complete righteousness of CHRIST JESUS for an
essential branch of that uniformity before required in true and saving faith.
The growth of these particulars is like the growth of twins: the more firm and
lively faith we have, the better and more sincerely we work: the bettter and
more sincerely we work, the more unfeignedly and faithfully we renounce all
confidence in our works and our selves: the more faithfully we renounce all
confidence in these, the more ca^tiestly we seek after salvation only by
CHRIST; of whose allsufficient sacrifice, and righteousuesse fully satisfactory
of Gods law and meritorious of mercy our righteousness inherent though imperfect
gives us a truer taste then unbelievers can have. Thus the weaker we are in our
selves the stronger we are in Him.

4. The former question about the use of grace depends upon another betwixt the
Romanist and us about the measure of inherent righteousness. They make the
increase and growth of grace not to perfect but utterly to abolish the nature
of it, by converting it into righteousness inherent as well for quantity as
quality acceptable of it self to God without his favor or indulgence. We (as
the name imports) make it always subordinate unto gracious acceptance, and
seeing we take it only as a pledge of divine favor, whereof we stand
perpetually in need as it is first given, so we desire it may be increased
only to the end we may more constantly and faithfully sue for mercy, and
seek divine approbation aright. Of our edification in CHRIST, faith is not the
foundation only but the roof, unto which all other graces have the same
reference that Hur and Aaron had unto Moses. The best service even charity it
self can perform is to underprop the hands of faith lifted up unto the throne
of grace from which the sentence of absolution must proceed. Directly
contradictory to this declaration (says the Romanist) faith iustifies only as
it disposes us to the attainment of charity, which is the formal cause of
justification, the complete form of such perfect righteousness inherent as is
the only immediate cause of salvation. Charity though given for CHRIST is to
him the Crown of faith reaching heaven by it own perfection, to us not
charity only but faith it self, as it is part of our imperfect righteousness
inherent, is footstool to it self in the act of justification or whiles it
pleads for mercy. Nor vas any son of Adam for the least moment of time ever
so righteous, but the actual mediation of Christ or interposition of his
sacrifice secluded from his trial at the tribunail of Gods justice, he might
besides all his other sins justly have been condemned for not stirring up
the gifts and graces of the spirit, or not right using them to his glory that
gave them. Thus much every conscience that has tasted of Gods mercy and
goodness in Christ will be ready to confess; and this truth now delivered by
us was in effect the doctrine of the learned and religious Bucer, Etsi it qui
iustificatur iustitiam a^^ pit and habet per Christum etiam inhaerentem, tamen
anima fidelis huic non in^itit^, sed so^^ inst^^^e Christi nobis donalae, side
qui n^lla om^i^o est, nece^^^ potest Iestit^a, B^cer ^^ (and si q(...)) in
li^^ll^ ablata (...) Ratisbone, and in colloquin Actisb^^: (...) coll^q^in
R(...)nsi) eum ob^^t^ ^ss^nt ei pro(...) quae^^mq as author (...)q^ij ap^^llat
am^^^^as. and in^er quas p(...), sidem i^st^^^ation^ i^^tium elle, sic
respendit: ^ioc si intellt^^tur de iustitia incho^^a, quae side, sp^, and
charitate, cetaerisque virrutibus hic comprehensis constat, recipimus: hanc
enim i^stitia(...) donum esse, and nouam in Christ Serca^ur^m, qua ^^fide ^^^^
pertipimus, pr(...) part^m esse fidem ipsam, cum n^que am^re D^um, neque been
de eo spe^^re possimus, ^^si fide euedem cogn^^erimus. H(...) inchoatam
institiam non ess(...) qua iusti s^^^^ apud Deum, ita vt propter illam vita
aere^na nobis debeatur: cum ex part tantum, and impe ^ecta sit^nec legi d(...)
dum hic viuimus, (...) in nobis, nempe Dei iustiti ^^ esse, qua Christ Domin
^c^nfidamus, and fi^ucia faluris con firme^^ r. Valques in 1, ^, ^om^ 2.
disput. 20 2. cap. 2. Et in coll^q^^^ timo ^atisponensi post prop^sit^^^e.
(...)se ^uc^^us adue^ s^^ ^^^abat, folio ^^ pag^^ ^^ in collo^^o, quod habuit
cum M(...)lmp. (...): ponu^tur ^^^^erbt ipsius. ^den Co non (...) iustitia
(...) fide, spe, ^^^^titate conster, ne^ iustificari iustosque esse: quia
imperficta est; nec legi Dei (...)cit Vas (...).
in his conference at Ratisbone with our adversaries. Although he that is
justified has righteousness through Christ inherent, the faithful soul
notwithstanding does not rely on it, but only on the righteousness of Christ
wherewith we are endowed; without which there neither is nor can be any
righteousness.

A more full declaration of his opinion in this controversy vasquez * out of
the same conference has ready gathered to our hands. When certain
propositions which the Author of that conference calls ambiguous, were brought
unto him, amongst which this was the first, [ faith is the beginning of
justification,] his answer was, if this speech be meant of inchoated
righteousness (renouation of the mind) which consists in faith, hope, and
charity with other virtues, we admit it: for such righteousness we grant to
be a gift, yea a new creature in Christ, of which we participate by faith; yea
faith is the first part of it, seeing we can neither love God, nor conceive
true hope in Him, unless we first know him by faith. This righteousness of
renouation notwithstanding is not that by which we become so righteous in the
sight of God, as life eternal should be due unto us for it, seeing it is
imperfect and cannot satisfy the Law of God during the time of this mortal
life; another righteousness is required, to wit, the rightousnesse of God,
through which we have confidence in our Lord CHRIST and are established in the
assurance of salvation.

The like resolution or state rather of this controversy, he gathers out of
Chemnitius words, as they are related by his adversary Tiletan. Excipio eti^m
Kemnitium vt est apud Tiletan in apologia pro Council. Tridi^. de iusticia, qua
iustificamur, vbiresert haec verba illius. Non docemus eredentes sine iustitia
iustisicari, quia talem iustificationem Deus pronuntiat esse abominationem
Proverb: 17. and Isaiae 5. sed dicimus necesse esse vt in iustificatione
intercedat, and interu^niat iustitia, non quidem qualiscunque sed talis, quae
in iudicio Dei sufficiens, and digna sit, vt iusta pronuntientur ad vitam
aeternam. Quia igitur nostra interioris renouationis iustitia propter
adhaerentem carnis imperfectionem, and immun^itiem non est talis, oportet aliam
esse iustitiam, qua interueniente, and intercedente iustificemur coram Deo. vbi
hic Haereticus fate^ur iustitiam nostram immundam ^sse atque ideo do^et esse
minus sufficientem, o^ per se poss^t immunditiem peccatitollere, and pargare.
Quaesane sententia Haeretici huius valde notanda est, pro his, quae disp. 204.
contra aliquos viros Catholicos dicemus, qui admissa iustitia inhaerente
remissionem peccati, and offensae Dei infauorem ipsius Dei, tanquam in proximam
c^^sa^ to ^^^^al ^^ reuocaent. Conabimur enim ostendere hanc opinionem a
sententia Re^nity parum vid^r^ diuersem. Va^quezeodem To^o. disp 102. cap. 101.
We teach not that believers are justified without righteousness, for such
justification God himself has pronounced to be an abomination in his sight
(Prou. ^^. ver. 15. Isa. 5. ver. 23.) but we think it necessary that in
justification righteousness should interceed or interpose, and that not every
sort of righteousness, but such as is sufficient in the judgment of God, such
as is worthy of eternal life. Now seeing that righteousness which consists in
the internal renouation of our minds, by reason of carnal imperfection and
uncleanness adherent is not such, necessary it is there should be another
righteousness, through whose interuention or intercession we are justified in
the sight of God.

5. From this learned writer, the Divines of Iustificamur a Deo iustitia
duplici, ^^n quam per causas formales, and essentiales. Quarum vna and prior
est consummata Christ^ institia: non quidem quomodo extra nos in ipso est, sed
sicut and quando eadem nobis (dum tamen fide apprehenditur) ad iustitia^
imputatur. Haec ipsa ita nobis imputata ^ustitia Christi, praecipua est and
summa iustificationis nostrae causa cu^ principaliter initi and fid^re
deb^amus. A^^ter vero iustificam^^ formaliter, per iustitiam inhaere^tem: quae
remissione peccato^um simul cum renouatione Spiritus Sancti, and di^^^sion^
charitatis in corda nostra, secundum mensuram fidei vnius^^^usque nobis
donatur, infunditur, and ^u propria; atque ita per fructus spiritus exercetur,
essi i^u^q, nobis propria quadam iustitia, qua assi^tamur. Cui tamen inherenti
iustitiae (quod sit imperfecta) non i^^itimur principaliter: sed ea tanquam
interieri quodam experimento certificamur, nobis (qui talem renouationem
spiritus nostri in nobis sentimus, and exper^mur) remissionem peccatorum
factam, and Christi consu^ma a^ iustitiam nobis imp^tari, atque (...) Christam
per fidem in nobis h(...)are. Antididarma Colon: de iustificatione ^om^^is cap.
per quas causas in ^^^emur. Hereunto they adioi^e another decla^a^^o^ so well
consorting with our Chu^ches doctrine, as no man not desirous of contention can
dissent either for the matter or manner of it. N^h l(...)nus hoc loquendi modo,
non a scrilim^^, neque ^ider, neque charitati, (...)tia. ^ustificationis quae
compe^^ s^l. Deo(...) etiam me i^^m eius, quod soli debetur Christo, non fidei
^u^ char^tati, au^^ll alierum (...)tutum, tame^si omnes gr(...) quae ^^m Dei
dona sunt. Sedem. fi^em^^ haec ess^ media quaedim, quibus operetur Deus in
nobis suam iustificationem* Colonibilem.
Colen, and many Schoolmen, acknowledged by the Romish Church for her children
in other points, did but a little dissent, as the Jesuit grants, and their
words are so plain that every one may see, might these men have been chief
delegates in this cause, the controversy had bin quickly ended. The only
difference can be picked by this curious inquisitor is but this; Chemnitius and
Bucer made our inherent righteousness (as he wrongfully charges them) a sin,
the divines of Colen made it only imperfect or no righteousness without the
merits of CHRIST, to which it served but as an instrument; by their confession,
CHRIST righteousness was not only the efficient or meritorious cause for whose
sake this righteousness innerent was bestowed upon us, but the sorme which did
so consummate it, that is our justification was accomplished by addition of his
righteousness unto ours. Unto this opinion amongst the rest even Vid^ Vasqu^z
Tom 2 in. 2. Quaest 113. Art. 2. Disp^^. 204 p. 2.
Pighius himself, who made so light account of original sin, did subscribe,
not induced thereto (as is pretended) with the sweet discourses of his
adversaries, but with the evidence of the truth they taught. Indeed Pighius
consequently to his error concerning the nature of original sin, did hold
our righteousness inherent imperfectionly for the quantity, whereas Chemnitius
and Bucer did hold it insufficient besides for the quality, not that it was a
sin, but that it had sin so adherent, as it could not make us clean and pure
though but in imperfect measure in Gods sight. We will be content to take these
Divines mentioned with that troop of most famous schoolmen as well ancient as
modern expressly yielded us by Vasquez, as more then fully sufficient, either
for worth or number, to ouersway the authority of such later Pontificians, as
in the conference at Ratisbone, or Auspurge, or in that book exhibited unto
Charles the fifth before the Trent Council, maintained the contrary opinion
now established. Unto the Trent Councels authority, because it has determined
for these later and obscurer against the former Schoolmen and us; we will
oppose the authority of Scripture, and principles of faith directly
acknowledged by all, but indirectly overthrown by the Councels decree. In
examining of which it may excuse our boldness, that so many of their writers
should, without censure, before, and some (I take it) sinte the promulgation of
it teach the contrary. De^um vnica formalis causa est iustitia Dei; non qua
ipse ius^us est, sed qua nos iustos facit, qua videlicet ab eo donati,
renouamur spiritu metis nostrae, and non modo reputamur, sedvere
iustinominamur; and sumus, iustitiam in nobis recipientes, vnusquisque suam
secundum mensuram, quam spiritus sanctus partitur singulis prout v^^t, and
secundum propriam cuiusque dispositionem, and cooperationem. Quanquam enim nemo
possit esse iustus, nisi ^ui merita passionis Domini nostri IESV CHRISTI
communicantur: id tamen in hac impij just ficatione fit, dum eiusdem
sanctissimae passionis merito per spiritum sanctu^ charitas Dei diffunditur in
cordibus eorum, qui iustificantur, atque ipsis inhae^et, vnde in ipsa
iustificatione cum remissione peccatiorum haec omnia simul (...)sa accipit homo
per ILSVM CHRISTVM, cui inseritur, Fidem, Spem, and Charitatem. Nam fides, nisi
ad ^am sp^s accedat and charitas, neque vn^^ perfect ^um Christ^^, neque
corporis ^ius viv^m membrum eff^^t. Conc. Trid. Sess. 6. cap. 7.
The sole formal cause of justification is the righteousness of God not by
which he is righteous, but whereby he makes us righteous, to wit, that
wherewith once endued we are renewed in the spirit of our mind, and are not
only reputed just, but truly denominated just, as indeed we are by receiving
righteousness every one according to that measure which the holy Spirit
imparts unto us as he pleases, and according to our several proper
dispositions or cooperations.

The formal cause, or if that be not enough the sole formal cause of our
justification is righteousness inherent, which as the Roman Est autem gratiae,
quemad^odum Tridentina synodus ab omnibus creden. u^ paena Anathematis
proposita, de^r^uit, non solum per quam peccatoru^ ^it remissio sed diuina
qualitas in anima inherens, ac v^luti splen d^^ quidem, and lux, quae an marum
nostrar^ ma^^^as omnes delet, ipsasque animas pul^hriores splendidiore^ reddit.
Catech. Trid part^ de Baptis. ca. 2.. 8 vide Conc. Trid. cap. 7. Sess. 6. sub.
finem.
Catechism, set out by the authority of the same Council, in plain terms
avouches, must be so perfect as to leave no stain or blot of sin inherent
in us, able to present our souls (if I mistake not the meaning of it) truly
glorious, at least splendent and beautiful in the sight of God. Whatsoever
else I have charged their doctrine with, they willingly grant to be necessary
consequences of the Councels determination, and condemn us as Heretics for
contradicting them. And least we should suspect it might be a matter not
altogether impossible for the Trent fathers to err in that peremptory decree;
late Iesuties would persuade us it were a matter altogether impossible for God
almighty, although he should use his absolute power, to justify us by any
other means then the Council has defined.

Some in their Chuch of no meaner note then the famous victoria and Melchior
Canus, with other of Aquinas followers (public professors too) were not
ashamed or afraid to teach, that grace inherent did not make us just or
acceptable in the sight of God by it mere entity or quallity, that the value
or estimate of it did depend upon the will and pleasure of him that gave it,
content to accept or pronounce us once partakers of it as just and holy, though
not such in our selves, or though the inherent virtue of it, as money is
valuable, not for the nature, physical properties, or the quantity of the
metal, but for the princes estimate, whose image and superscription it
bears. One corallarie of this conclusion, gathered by these authors
themselves, was, that the entitie, or quality of grace might increase without
any necessary increase of the value or estimate of it with God, as the kings
majesty if it should please him, might make the same portion of silver which
now goes for a shilling, to be current but for nine pence, or rather make that
piece as large as the shilling, though retaining the same value and inscription
it now bears. We shall perchance no way cross these professors tenent, but
only better illustrate our own, if we say: As it is not the legal instrument
(though bearing the s^ale or inscription royal) but the princes will and
pleasure thereby authentiquely testified, which frees the malefactor from
sentence of condemnation: so neither is it grace or righteousness inherent,
(though these be the image and character of our righteous Judge) but the mercy
and free pardon of our God proclaimed indefinitely to all the penitent, but
sealed to every faithful soul in particular by those pledges of the spirit,
which finally absolues us from the curse laid upon us by the Law, and enstates
us in the promises of the Gospel. In both pleas the sanctified soul uses
says and all other graces or parts of righteousness inherent, no otherwise then
a penitent malefactor would do the instrument wherein the princes pleasure is
contained, if he were to plead his cause before the prince himself, in whose
presence (though with ordinary Judges they will sometimes be too bold) I
presume no malefactor would stand upon terms of integrity or present
innocence because he had his pardon under seal, seeing that was given him to
plead for mercy not for justice. Not altogether different from these
exemplifications of our assertion some schoolmen, though seeking to come as
near the Romish Church present tenants as they could, thought it no
inconvenience to hold, that the grace whereby men become truly and inherently
just, was not of it own nature absolutely incompatible with all degrees, or
relics of sin; in respect of which we might stand in need of Gods favor and
mercy after communication of grace. But this and the like opinions are utterly
destroyed root and branch by the thunderbolt of the former decree, and their
authors and followers censured by Vasquez Hoe pr^miss^, co^tra praedicta^
sententiam rationibus agenda^ est: prima autem ratio sit. Si gratia and
iustitia nobis inhaerens possentesse simul cum peccato, etiam p^r potentiam Dei
absolutam, sequeretur quitquid eiusmodi nobis inhaeret, non esseveram
iustitia^, nec tale nomen mereri. Nam si quidquid nobis inhaeret secum sinit
esseiustitiam, and sordes peccati, efficitur illud ex se non esse munditiam, et
innocentiam animi: nam munditia, and immunditia nec per potentiam absolutam Dei
simul esse possunt: vera etenim iustitia talis esse debet, vt ipsa sit animi
munditia, and innocentia vilae, eo quod suapte natura reddere debet
immaculatos, and innocents eos qui antea maculati, et nocen^es erant; quumque
vt pradicta opinio fert, nostra iustitia id non effi ^al sine extrinseco
fauore, and acceptatione Dei; consequitur ex ^eipsa ^^blant^ emni fauore, and
acceptatione Dei non esse veram iustitiam, and sanctitatem. Quae enim iustitia,
and sanctitas excogitari potest, quae non sit ipsa anim^ m^^d^ties, and
innocentia? aut quit iustus, et sanctus, qui hoc ipso non ^it innocens, and
imm^^u^a^us? hanc autem ^ep^gnantiam iustitiae inhaerentis cum peccato, and
macula illius videtur ostendisse Joan. 1. canonicae cap. 3. illis verbis Omnis,
qui in eo manet, non peccat et infra, omnis, qui natu^ est ex Deo, non peccat,
quia semen Dei mane^ in illo (nempe iustitia) and non potest peccare, quoniam
ex Deo natus est, videlicet quamdiu gratia De; ma^e^ in ill^. Vasquez. in
Primam Secundae, Tom. 2. disp. 204. cap. 4.
for holding it but as possible to the absolute power of the Almighty, to
replenish our souls with grace and not take away all stain of sin; for
that any relics of the one should lodge in the same breast with the other,
implies a contradiction in his divinity; which vain surmise shall be refuted
when we come to handle the nature of sin, and the necessity of grace. How
friuolously he alleges that of Saint John [ whosoever is borne of God,
sins not] to this purpose the Reader may perceive by the true interpretation
of that place in the Chapter following.

6. For the time I would request as many as fear the shipwreck of faith and
conscience to rest contented with this short discovery of two rocks, against
which all that follow the Trent Councels direction ineuitably dash. The first,
an cuacuation of Christ's priesthood: for, by their doctrine, after grace is
infused and remains inherent, a man may be justified, saved, and glorified,
without any more reference to Him, then Adam in the state of integrity had.
Christ (say Itaque v^r^m, et Christianum iusticiam acciptences, came, scilicet
prima^ stalam pro ^lla, quam Adam sua inobedientia sibi et nobis per did^^, per
Christum Iesum illis dona^am, candidam, et immacu^atam iubentur statim renati
coaseruare, vt came perferant ance tribunal Domini nostr^ Jesus Christ et habea^t
v^am ^ternam. Council. Trident. sess. 6. cap. 7.
they) has restored unto us what we lost in Adam. What was that? Inherent
righteousness, so we grant with the Ancient. But in what measure? In as full
and perfect as Adam had it before his fall, or without admixture of corruption
drawn from his loins? So far the Romanists seeks to extend the authority
of some Fathers. The best use and end then of grace in his construction, is, to
pass ocuer the everlasting Covenant of grace in Christ, that we may recoue
the state which our first Parents forfeited. This is the most immediate and
necessary consequence of the Trent Fathers determination: for if habitual
grace be (as they decree) the sole formal cause of justification that once
gotten will exclude all necessity or use of any other cause or means of
reconciliation or acceptance with God. Agreeable hereto as Si dicant adversary
ideo peccatu^ non remitti solae iustitia inherente sine fauore, et
condonatione, quia sine illa non habet veram, et completam rationem iustitiae,
praeter absurda, quae capile praecedente contra illorum opinionem intulimus,
alia etiam non minora sequntur. Primu^ est imputationem seu applicationem
merisorum Christi ad nostram iustificationem, et remiss^^nem peccatorum non
solum fieri in ipsa donorum infusione, and auxiliorum commu^^catione, sed et^^
post ipsam infusionem iustitiae ad hoc vt peccata remittantur. Hoc autem
absurdum esse probari potest prime ex Council: Trid. Ses. 6. cap. 7. vbi cum
dixisset vnica^ formalem Causam nostrae iustificationis esse iustitiam nobis
inbaerentem secundum propriam cuiusque dispositionem and causam meritoriam esse
ipsum Christum, ne videretur excludere a nostra iustificatione applicationem
meritorum eius, sed debitum ei locum assignaret; cum passim dici solea^, no^
iustificari meritis Christi, inquit, Quanquam enim nemo possit esse iustus:
nisi cui merita passi^^s Domini nostri Jesu Christi communicantur, idtamen
(nempe quod applicentur merita Christi) in hac impij iustificatione fit, dum
^ius sanctissim^ passionis m^^^^o per spiritum sanctum Charitas Dei ^^ffunditur
in cordi^^^ little, qui iustificantur, atque ipsis inhaeret. Docet igitur
Council. applicationem meritorum Christi, fieri ^o ipso, quod ex meritu eius
nobis dona tribu^ntur, quae infusione recipimus, and cum non dicat al^ mod^, et
momento, n^mpe post infusione^ fier^ hanc applicationem; planc ostendit, tunc
solum, et eo solo modo fi^r^. Vasquez. Tom. 2. ^^. 1. 2. quaest. 113. Art. 2.
disput, 204. cap. 3. 10.
Vasquez disputes at large they admit no application of Christ's merits, but
only in the collation of gifts inherent or infusion of Charity. Admitting then
one of their Church should remain in the state of habitual grace, a week or
two before his death: let us suppose (as for disputation sake, or sure trial
of a true formal cause, it is lawful, by their rules given to this purpose,
to suppose any impossibility) that Christ had never been incarnate, crucified,
raised from the dead, or set at the right hand of God; the former party
notwithstanding should be as certainly saved, as he can be by belief of all
these Articles, and become heir infallible of as great glory and felicity as
we hope for, by incorporation into Christ's body. Nor does Christ (if their
opinion may stand) sit at the right hand of his Father to make intercession for
us after grace is infused, or whiles we retain it, but that it may be infused
and recovered if it should chance to be lost. Now what heresy was there
broached more blasphemous against Christ than this, which abolisheth the
principal part of his mediation? what could more directly cuacuate that great
mystery of the true and real union betwixt the head of the Church and the
members?

By this doctrine neither are our persons in this life reconciled to God, nor
our nature exalted to dignity in the life to come, by being united to Christ,
but immediately by our inherent righteousness, without any intermediation of
his person, his sacrifice, merits or other benefit of his passion, as any
cause at all or bond of our union, or acceptance with God after the infusion of
grace, which is the only formal link betwixt the divine nature and ours:
whence it necessarily follows that our humane nature must (though by another
kind of union, and less measure of an inferior grace) be as immediately
united to God, as immediately approved for just, as immediately meritorious of
glory, as immediately capable of Gods presence, as Christ was. Might not that
great Iugenue s^leor denominationem iusti fieri posse a iustitia extrinseca
ipsius Dei, quamu^ denom inatio omnipotent^ non possit fieri, nisi ab
intrinseca forma, qualis est potentia ipsius, qui omnipotens vocatur: vtor
autemratione proposita, nempe quia denominatio iusti, et qualibet alia
denominatio extriaseca non potest fieri ab extrinseca forma sine effi^itate
aliqua, et connexione, is quod supra probatum est* hanc autem esse non posse
inter iustitiam ^^i, et omnes homines, nisi per vnionem hypostati^am, facile
inductione monst^a^o V^lquez. Tom. 2. in. Primam second. d^sp. 2. cap. 3. Many
arguments he brings, Which conclude very probable against O^ianders opinion, or
such as* den^ any measure of in^eren^ righteousness requisite to
justification, whose error i^ ficiently re^u^es it (...), unless the sauourers
of it will affirm that w^^a^e justified before we receive any fruits of the
spirit, for the will not (I am sure) deny quod exso^i (...) est spiritus est,
whatsoever the spirit works in v^is righteousness, though not able to make
us perfectly righteous in the sight of God, so long as we are in the flesh,
which is never altogether barren, albeit the best fruits thereof be sin.
Schooleman (for such I have ever accounted Vasquez) with less danger to his
soul, or repugnancie to this great mystery (^hole truth directly to deny he
durst not) or other tenants maintained by him, have granted, that as Christ is
truly reputed holy, not only from the Holiness formally inherent in his
humane nature, but from the unction of the deity or uncreated holiness,
whereto he is hypostatically united: so might all partakers of such faith as
Saint Paul ascribes righteousness unto, be truly and properly called and
reputed righteous in the sight of God, from the absolute righteousness of
Christ as man; to whom they are by the same faith, though not hypostatically,
yet truly united by such a mystical but real union, as may without solecisme
ground as well this denomination, as our title or interest in Gods favor. More
consequently, by much to his own positions might Bellarmine likewise have
granted, that as we are truly the sons of wrath by nature, albeit every
lineament of Gods image in us be not quite razed, but rather all or most, much
defared by Adams sin made ours partly by real propagation but more
principally (in his doctrine) by imputation, so we become the sons of God, by
the spirit of adoption, though not so powerful in us as utterly to extirpate
all relickes of sin, yet able so to dead the force or operation of it, as it
did the remainder of Gods image in us before we were renewed by Christ. Thus
walking not after the flesh though in the flesh, nor working sin though sin
work in us, we may through grace or this earnest of the spirit, but only for
the righteousness of Christ, whereto we are by it united, have a more real
title to be enstiled his brethren, sons of our heavenly father, then He can
have (as Si per institiam Christi nobis imputata^, vere dici possumus visti et
fil^y Dei, ergo poterit etiam Christus, per iniustitia^ nostram sihi imputata^,
dici vere peccator et quod h^rret animus cogitare filius Diabolt. Na^
aduersarij concedunt, ita Christo imputatum fuisse peccatu^, vt nobis iustitia
imputatur. Bellar. de Justif. lib. 2. c. 7 The argument is frivolous against
the doctrine we maintain, because Christ took no symbol of our sin as we do
of his righteousness, though not therefore righteus (not our selves but as we
are united to him,) of force enough against such as think we are formally just
by Christ's imputed righteousness without righteousness inherent. ^2. Cor. 5.
ver. 21
Bellarmine objects by our doctrine he has) to be called the son of him that
is the father of lies and Jesuitical equivocation. Albeit there was no guile
in him yet he bare the punishment due to our rebellions; and was not this
commutation of punishment ^herby the servants of sin are acquitted and the Lord
of righteousness condemned, sufficient to make such as are in part willing to
do for others as he has done for them, immediately capable of absolution by
his innocence, of reward by his righteousness? The a Apostle doubtless meant
no less when he said, He has made him to be sin for us which knew no sin,
that we should be made the righteousness of God in Him.

7. The second point against which our adversaries dash, does so evidently
bewray their greatest pilots unskillfulness in this haven of salvation, as
every child that can repeat his Pater noster may easily perceive the Trent
Fathers themselves did not understand it. Nor can the subscribers to this
decree, use that celestial prayer without plain mocking of God and Christ. This
imputation needs no other proof then the clear proposal of such positions as
they now all hold de fide. Take we then one of their Catechumenies (whether
destitute of faith or no it skils not) that has not as yet attained to the
first justification (as they distinguish) that is, one destitute of habitual
grace or inherent righteousness; such a man by their Churches discipline, is
^^^mitted or rather commanded to use this petition amongst the rest, forgive us
our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us. What sins or
trespasses does he request should be forgiven him? Mortal especially, for
their remission only is necessary to the first justification. But how must God
remit them? Immediately by pardoning or forgiving them. No, they are
immediately remitted by actual introduction of the contrary former grace
inherent, which formally expels them out of the soul as light (to use
Bellarmines own illustration of their positions in this point) does darkness
out of the air. Nor is there any possibility of remitting sins by other
means left to omnipotence it self, since the publication of Jesuitical
Comments upon the Trent Counsels decree. What then is the full meaning or
final resolution of this petition whilst uttered by men as yet not justified?
Lord forgive us our trespasses or mortal sins? This verily and no other,
Lord by infusion of thy grace, make us such as shall not need of thy pardon or
forgiveness. For to hold, that over and above the infusion of that grace* by
which the stain of sin being clearly wiped out we are made just, Gods
favor or condonation Non possum non mirari ^ntiqu^s scholasticos quos ^act^nus
memora^i, quod de iustitia nobis inhaerente ita ^biecte senserint, vt veram ei
adscribere formidauerint rationem iustitiae et sanctitatis inhaerentis, quae
suapte n^tura Deo necessario placeat. Recentiores vero Theologos multo magis
miratus sum, quod post praeclaram Concilij Tridentini definitionem, quam
inferius explicabo, tam exilem iustitiam inhaerentem justice concesserint, vt ex
se non h^beat virtutem tergendi maculas peccatorum, nec ^a^ pu^gare valeat,
nisi ^au^^e, and condonatione Dei relaxentur. Vasq. Tom. 2 in primam secundae
quaest. 113 Art. 2. Disp. 204. cap. 2*
(to use their Latin word with addition of one English letter) is any way
requisite for our acceptance or approbation with him, is, in formal terms,
the very opinion which Vasquez so peremptorily condemns in Canus, Nedina,
Victoria, Gabriel, Richardus, Ariminensis, Scotus, and others, as
contradictorie to the Trent Counsels often mentioned decree; and so indeed it
is: for by that decree being made formally just by grace alone, we become the
immediate or formal objects of Gods justice or fidelity (now strictly bound to
render us quid pro quo, eternal life for grace inherent) utterly exempted from
all dependence on his mercy and favor. And whereas some of their late Writers,
desirous to give the Church all possible satisfaction; yet partly fearing
openly to wrong God, or flatly to contradict his word, had granted that grace
infused did quite extirpate all sin, and make us absolutely just in our
selves, but yet could not, by it nature or sole entitie, obliterate all
relation of trespass, or offense committed against God before we had it, as
being unable to make full recompense or satisfaction for them, even this
opinion is now rejected as heretical and contrary to the Counsels meaning. It
remains therefore that the true and full meaning of that petition in the Lords
prayer forgive us our trespasses, according to our adversaries construction is,
Lord grant that we stand not in need of thy forgiveness: if we suppose this
petition to be conceived either by men destitute of perfect inherent
righteousness, or such as distrust or doubt whether they have it or no. But
imagine a man could be (as I think few Papists are) more then morally certain
he were in the state of perfect grace; his use of the same request would be
superfluous, or requisite only in respect of venial sins; albeit even
these, if they imprint any uncomely mark, or aspersion never so light on their
souls, must be taken away by introduction of the contrary form, as by acts of
penitency, or the like, whereunto Gods concourse or aid of grace is
necessary: so that his desiring God to forgive him them; is but to request his
help, that he may not need his favor. And though in their esteem but a light
one, yet a pretty mockery of God it is, that, after infusion of grace, they
should not stand in need of his mercy, or imputation of their Redeemers
righteousness, either for remitting or taking away of the stain of mortal
sins, or the punishment due unto them, and yet after God has done all, and
Christ's mediation, as far as concerns them fully accomplished: most of them
must be highly beholden to the Pope, not only in this life, but after death,
for releasing the punishment due to venial and petty sins.

8 Some part of the first difficulty Q^int^ obiectio, Christus mediator est
non solum in prima reconciliatione, sed etiam postea in toto vitae nostrae
tempore, ergo semper egemus intercessione Christi, ac per hoc semper peccamus,
legemque transgredimur, alioqui post primam reconciliationem Christus ^tios^^
esset. Hoc argumentum commune est Calui^^, Philippo, Kemnitio, et al^^s, qui
inde concludunt si qua est in nobis legis impletio, illam non tam esse operum,
qua respondea^t perfectioni legis, quam fidei, quae perpetuo apprehendit
remissionem. Bellar. lib. 4. de Iustif. cap. 14. Respondeo, Christus semper
nobis mediator est, nec vnquam ess, otiosus idque dupliciratione, Primo,
quonia^ semper nobis vires et gratiam subministrat, per quam bona opera
faciamus. Ideo siquide^ recte comparauit se ipse viti et nos palmitibus. Vt
enim palms non potest ^erre fructum, nisi man^^ri^ in vite, et succum trax^rit
a vite, sic nec nos nisi mans^rimus in Christo, et spiritum hauserimus ex ips^.
Secundo, quoniam peccata nostra, quamuis l^uia et quotidiana, ipsa purgat, e^
sanguis eti^ emundat nos ab omni peccato. Et si forte legem praeuaricando a
iustitia excidamus, ipse nibilominus propitiatio est pro peccatis nostris, et
non septies, sed sup^^gies septies nos patri reconciliat, si per eius gratiam
conuersi serio ^^nitentiam agere incipiamus. Itaque non facimus no^, qui legem
impleri posse diximus, Christum Med^^torem o^io^um, sed vere faciunt Aduersarii
Christi merita inefficacia, cum docent Christum tam insigni obedientia id
e^^^^ere non potuisse, vt iustificatio legis impleretur in nobis. Bellarminus
ibidem.
Bellarmine (from what place of Calvin, Melancthon, and Chemnitius I remember
not, he expresses not) has thus proposed, CHRIST is our mediator, not only
in our first reconciliation, but during the whole time of our life, in which
regard we always stand in need of his intercession, and consequently always
sin and transgress the Law, otherwise CHRIST after our first reconciliation
should be idle, but so he is not (says Bellarmine) First, because he always
ministers strength and grace by which we do good works. Secondly, he purges
our daily and lighter sins, and his blood cleanses us from all sins. Or if
through transgression of the law, we fall away from our state of righteousness;
he never thelesse is still the propitiation for our sins, and reconciles us not
only seven times but seue^ty times seven times to his father; if converted by
his grace, we address our selves to serious repentance. Therefore we make not
CHRIST an idle mediator, in saying the Law may be fulfilled; but our
adversaries truly make his benefits ineffectual, when they teach that the
excellency of his obedience, could not effect that the justification which is
by the Law should be fulfilled in us. Whatsoever he thought, it was safest for
him to profess as he has written, because the Si qui^ dixerit per ban^
doctrina^ catholicam de iustificatione a sancta synodo hoc praesenti decreto
express^m, aliqua ex part gloriae Dei vel meritis Jesus Christi Domini
nostriderogari, et non potius veritatem fidei nostrae, Dei denique ac Christi
^esu gloriam illustrari Anathema sit Council. Trident. sess. 6. Can. vlt. Such
peremtorinesse is usual with them, when partiality or proud affection,
ouerbeares the secret working of their conscience, laboring to reclaim their
error. Vide lib. 3. Sect. 2 ^ap. 4. parag. 22.
Trent Fathers for conclusion of that session, accurse all that should say
their resolutions in this point, did rather disparage then set forth the
excellency of CHRIST'S sacrifice, or the true worth of his merits. But the
more merciful Bellarmine makes his God, the readier to forgive our frequent
trespasses, the greater still is their former mockery; seeing every time they
repeat that petition, they implicitly, yet necessarily include the
appurtenances, Lord make us such as we shall not need of thy forgiveness. The
excess of divine Majesty, in respect of princely dignity presupposed, their
mockery of God in suing for restoration of grace, after relapses into mortal
sin, may for the quality be resembled by imagination of some great favorite
in the Court, after many bountiful rewards for little or no service falling to
rob or steal, and lastly craving pardon in these or like terms: I have
grievously offended against your Crown and dignity, but by your wonted grace I
beseech you, bestow as good preferment on me, as before I had, and amends shall
quickly be made, for all the wrongs I have done unto my fellow subjects: you
shall not find matter of death in me again, so long as your bounty toward me
lasts; that I shall not commit some petty sins of wantonness, quarrelling,
drinking, swearing, I hope your highness will not expect, for these are not
against your Law but besides it. The insolency of this imagination in a
malefactor, (could an earthly Prince know the heart whence it issued) would
make his former offense, in it self and course of common justice, meritorious
of death, altogether incapable of mercy, otherwise easy to have been
obtained. And is it either less exclusive from Gods favor, or more
prouocatiue of his severity to beg such grace at his hands, as shall wipe out
all former reckonings where with he could charge us, or having promised sincere
obedience to the Law, to elude the Lawgiuer with that distinction, without
which Quar^a obiectio. Nemo potest vitare omnia peccat^, cum scriptum sit
Jacobi 2. In multis offendimns omnes. Et 1. Joan 1. Si dixerimus quia peccatum
non habemus, nos ipsos seducimus. At qui legem omnem impleret, nullum haberet
omnino peccatum: igitur fieri non potest, vtlex omn^^ a nobis, etia^ cum fide
et gratia, impleatur. Respondeo, Ab ho^ argument^, quod valde Kem^^tius v^get,
nonta^ facile se expediunt qui con^ed^nt peccatum veniale esse proprie contra
legem, vt Vega lib. 11. ^n Concilium cap. 20. coguntur enim dicere, legem non
esse impossibilem, non quod tota simul seruari possit, sed quod seruari possit
mayor eius pars, et a me^iori part fiat denominatio. Sed viden^^^ est illis
quid respondeant Apostolo Iacobo dicenti. Quiqunque totam ^e gem ^erua^erit,
offendat aurem in vno, factus est omnium ^eus. Solida igitur responsio est,
peccata venalia, sine quibus non vi^^mu^, non esse peccata simpliciter, sed
imperfecte, et secundum quid, neque ess^ con^ra legem sed praeter legem vt S.
Thomas recte docet ^n 1. 2. quaest. 88. art. 1, hinc enim omnia coh^rent. Na^
qui offendit in vno, preuarica^s videlic^t vnum praeceptum, factus est omni^m
^e^^, et iniu^^us simpliciter constituitur, ^^ tamenia multis offendimus omnes,
quia ^ame^^^ nihil facimus contra lige^, tamen multa ^acimus praeter legem. Et
qui notus est ex Deo non peccat, transgrediendo legem, et tamen si dixerimu^,
quia peccatum non bab^mus, nihil videlicet praeter legem faci^ndo, no^ ipsos s^
^^cimu^, et ve^itas in nobis non est. Bellar. lib. 4 de Just. f. cap. 14.
Bellarmine thinks our Writers arguments to prove the fulfilling of the Law
impossible, can hardly be answered. They (says he) which grant (as Vega does)
venial sins to be against the Law, are enforced to hold that to keep the
Law is only possible, in as much as only the greater part of it may be kept,
whence the denomination is indefinitely attributed to the whole; But what can
they say to that of James. He that keeps the whole Law, and offends in one
point is guilty of all. The solid answer therefore (in his judgment) is,
that venial sins without which we do not live, are not sins simply, but
imperfectly, and in a sort; neither are they against the Law, but besides the
Law. Such as first did apply this distinction, to that purpose for which the
modern Romanist now misuseth it, might perhaps be in part excused by the
barbarousnesse of the times wherein they lived, and their ignorance in
Scriptures. But we have cause to fear, that Bellarmines general skill and
knowledge in them, was punished by GOD with particular gross, and palpable
ignorance, or blindness rather, in thinking this qui^ke of wit should glue
together such Oracles of the Apostles, as without it would mightily jar and
start asunder. As that of James late cited [ He that offends in one (mortally)
is guilty of all, and this other, In many things we al offend (1.) venially.]
or these two of S. John [ He that is borne of God sins not: If we say we
have no sin we deceive our selves.] So doubtless they do, and mightily mistake
both these great Apostles meaning, that think any in this should be so
righteous, as not to stand in need of Gods favor for absolution from sins
committed against his Law; but of their meaning in the Chapter following.

9. These discussions may inform the Reader that Bellarmines conclusion of
this controversy, wherein he may seem unto the vnobseruant to attribute
somewhat to Gods mercies, in the business of justification after grace
infused, was but like the first inuitation of an Italian, only for fashion
sake. For if Sit tertia propositio* propter in^ertitudinem proprie ^ustitiae,
and periculum manis glori^ ^u^^ssi^um est, sidu^^^m totam in ^ola Dei
misericordia, and benignitate reponere. Explic^ propositionem, non enim ita
accipienda est quasi non sit homi^^ totis viribus studendum operibus bo^is, aut
non sit in eis confidendum quasi non sint ver^ iustitia, aut iudicium Dei
sustine^e non possint, sed hoc solum dicimus tutius esse, mer eorum iam
part^ru^, quodammodo obli^^s^i, and in solam misericordiam Dei respicere, Tu^
quia nemo absque reuetatione certo scire potest s^ habere vera merita, aut in
e^s in finem vsque perseueraturu^; Tum quia nihil est ^ac^lius in hoc loco
tentationis, quam superbiam ex confideratione bonoru^ operum gigni. Probatur
igitur propositio testimoniis illis, quae aduersarij contra merita operum
afferre ^olent. Nam quod ait Daniel cap. 9. Non in iustificationibus n^stru
proste^nimus prece^ nostras, ant^ faciem tuam, sed in miserationibus ^^is
multis. Et quodipse Dominus admon^t Lucae. 17. Cum ^^ceritis h^c omnia quae
precepta sunt vobis, dici^e, serui invtiles sumus, hoc solum probant, quod nos
dicimus, tutum esse in sol^ misericordia Dei, et non in operibus nostris
^iduciam collocare. Quod etiam testantur public^ precet, quat Ecclesia
Catholica ad altar fundere solet. Nam is collecta Domimicae quae Sex^gess^m^
dicitur, ^ic ^rat Ecclesia: Deus qui conspicis qui^ ex nulla nostra action
confidimus, etc. Bellar. ^^. 3. de iustificatione. Cap. 7.
his authority could have moved any of his profession, after fullness of grace,
to have tasted the loving kindness of the Lord, he could not be ignorant that
the Trent Council had shut the door upon them. It is the safest way (says he
*) to put our whole trust in Gods mercies. Why so? because there is no trust
or confidence to be put in our own good works or fruits of grace? No, rather
because it is more easy to grow proud of our deeds, then to be assured of our
sincerity in doing them. But if neither safe it be to trust in them; nor, by
his doctrine, to any purpose without them to trust in Gods mercies; he has
left his Roman Catholics in a miserable case. What is it then they can hope
or desire Gods mercies should do for them? To remit their sins? How? By not
imputing them? this is all they can condemn in us. What then? to set heaven
open unto them without remission of sins or justification? This is more then
can be laid to any heritickes charge: none ever lived but granted justification
to be a necessary gate, through which all that have sinned must enter into
heaven. It remains then the only ground of all hope or trust a Romanist can
have of any good from Gods mercies, must be his precedent persuasion or belief
of absolute and perfect righteousness, either now inhabiting his soul, or
hereafter to be obtained: That is, he must trust, God one time or other, will
be so merciful to him, as he shall not stand in need of his mercy at the
hour of death.

10. He that would clearly convince the Romish church, or her children of a
capital crime usually objected by our writers should begin with the vertual
intention of the priest, by rigid positions of their late writers most
necessarily required to the effectual working of the Sacraments: for that
evidently breeds doubt; whereunto if we adioyne this absolute necessity of
complete habitual grace, inherent for remission of sins, it openly condemns
the Trent Council it self for nursing despair of salvation. In that they
make such grace the sole formal cause of justification, without which, as all
grant, there is no entrance into Gods rest. a Romanists trust, hope, or belief
of life eternal, as possible to him must first be terminated in the same
degrees, unto so full a measure of grace or righteousness as they require,
either as present or possibly future. He that doubts (as Bellarmine confesses,
^ll m^st have just cause to doubt) whether he be perfectly righteous or no,
must of necessity conceive equal doubt of his estate in grace. He that knows
(as who thoroughly examining his own heart for any space together but may know)
he is not able to plead for his cause with God in justice, is bound to believe
his present want of saving grace. He that cannot raise his heart (through
consciousnesse of his often transgressions much dejected) to these magnanimous
hopes of ever being able to fulfill the Law of God, is (this distrust
remaining) by his blind belief of the Churches infalibility in this decree
bound finally to despair of salvation, or any good, Gods mercies, or his
Redeemers blood can do him. We are content to take Bellarmines testimony as
authentic against his fellows, that our arguments prove his former
conclusion [ It is safest to put our whole trust and confidence in Gods
mercies] the undoubted consequence whereof is, that the Trent Council did err
perniciously in so resolving this principal point of salvation, as has been
declared. But it is a wonder to behold what miraculous reconciliations, the
imaginary unity of the Roman Church, can work in Jesuitical brains.
Bellarmine, whether out of fear of sharper censure, enforced to use this
miserable shelter, or so dazzled with the mystical unity of the inerrable
Church, that he could discern no difference betwixt the Trent Counsels
decree and his own conclusion, takes it as approved by the Roman Church,
because that Church allows the same collect we do upon Sexagessima Sunday.
As if because he now had captiuated, his understanding to think the Church is
always the same and cannot err, therefore the author of that collect must
needs be of the same mind the Trent Council was; when as a greater part of
their best Scholars, about the time it was celebrated, did in this point
better accord with the Auspurge confession then with it. Had the doctrine
contained in that collect, been exhibited to the Council by reformed Churches,
it had bin as peremtorily condemned as any Article of Wikliffe or Luthers
doctrine, but now seeing it has slept so long in their liturgy, that the
sufferance of it may seem to argue a tacit consent or approbation of that
Church, into whose thoughts it never came, the author of it though for ought
they know, a man as obnoxious to error as we are, and out of all question of
our opinion in the point of justification, must be thought not to have erred,
in co^ceiuing that prayer which the Church allows; his meaning rather shall
be quite contradictory to his words. More then miraculous must the composition
of that body have been, which but one in it self, should exactly have
symbolized with every ingredient in old chaos: yet no less strange may the
Jesuits temper seem (were he not homo (...) or (...)) which can infallibly
believe every opinion, held for this thousand years by that Church, which in
respect of faith and doctrine, is but one, after the same manner chaos was; one
huge mass of contrarieties and confusions, in this respect better consorting
with Jesuitical faith, which is but a prime matter or indeficient seminary of
various treachery, as the whole body of his religion, is but a mere hogepoge
of dictinctions.

CHAP. VIII. How far the Law must be fulfilled in this life: of the regiment
of grace: of the permanencie of justification, what interruptions it may admit,
how these must be repaired, or in what sense it may be said to be reiterated:
That every sin is against Gods Law, though not incompatible with the state of
grace.
1. SEeing that justification, which is by faith in Christ, so much pressed by
S. Paul, presupposes that state of integrity or qualification for acceptance
with God, whereunto S. James requires works; or (to use his words) the
fulfilling of the royal Law of liberty, without respect of persons, or
reserved indulgence to our desire; it will be necessary briefly to examine, how
far the Law may be fulfilled by us in this life, or (which is all one) with what
measure of inherent righteousness or sanctifying grace, that faith which only
iustifies must be accompanied. Now seeing the Law is but the image of Gods
will, or of that internal Law of righteousness which was in Christ, whereunto
faith, as has been said includes a conformity: such a fulfilling of the Law
in this life as may witness our true imitation of divine goodness, no^ in
good will or mind only, but in good works is in this life not only possible
but requisite. Math. 5. 48
We must be perfect as our heavenly father is perfect, which speech of our
Savior cannot be understood according to the measure of perfection, (nor was
he himself as man so holy and perfect as God his father) but according to the
truth of the proposition: for vero nihil verius, we must be as truly perfect
and holy according to that imperfect measure which our polluted nature is
capable of, as God is, according to the infinite or absolute perfection of
holiness: yet are we not holy after the same manner Christ was holy, or Adam
in the state of his integrity: It is a very fit distinction used by divines in
this argument, that there is a twofolde perfection one of parts another of
degrees, whereof the former is as necessary as the other impossible to all in
this life. The perfection of parts may in general be illustrated by a child
or infant, which though wanting the strength and agility, has the true life
and right proportion of man in every part, and able in some sort to move every
member it has, though not by perfect motion. Strong and sound men in Christ
Jesus we cannot be in this life, yet altogether dead, monstrous or misshapen we
may not be. Howbeit if we apply this resemblance to the point in question, it
better fits that opinion of the Divines of Colen, which held men's righteousness
inherent to be imperfect only in respect of the quantity, then the doctrine
of reformed Churches, which with our best righteousness admit a mixture of sin
inherent: so as this perfection of parts, according to their tene^ts, may more
aptly be compared unto a child endued with life, and rightly proportioned,
yet subject to some dis^a^e, or infirmity; able to walk, but depraved in all
his motions, always p^one to stumble or fall. The manner as well of sins
inherence in our nature after infusion of grace, as of its concurrence in our
actions, shall be declared (by Gods assistance) in the seventh book; here we
suppose (what there shall be proved) that while we are in the flesh we have
sin in us more or less, but deprived of rule or soueraignety where faith, or
grace has gotten possession in the heart.

2. Man as he is rightly called a little world, so has he a true regiment in
himself. His form of government in the state of integrity may be parralelled
by the imaginary model of Platoes weal public or the vtopia; his disordered
state of nature before grace infused by an Anarchy or some outcountry infested
by outlawes, wherein the best are most exposed to spoil his state of grace by
a civil or well governed kingdom or Aristocracie. The best and worst Bodies
politic, anarchies, and right ordered states, do not differ in that the one
has thieves and malefactors, and the other none, but rather (as some dialects
in this land distinguish) in that the one has re^uers, the other only plain
thieues, or briefly in that malefactors cannot so bear themselves out in
mischief, ouersway the Laws, or ouerrunne honest men in the one, as in the
other they may. The times have bin, not long since, wherein, if any poor man
in some quarters of this land, should have followed such rauinous creatures, as
lived by night spoils, to their dens* he should have had more to take part
against him, then join with him: others knowing where there goods were, and
who stole them durst not own them, least they should seem to challenge the
felon of theft, which would sooner have endangered their lives then his, or
procured the burning of their houses over their heads, or some like mischief.
The honester man and more obseruant of his Princes laws, the harder in those
days was his case; the ordinary course which the more crafty or politic
could take for their safety, was when they saw a thief to consent unto him,
either outputting their neighbors goods for him to drive, or harboring such as
they could not but know to be bootehailers. But these misorders (God be
praised) are much amended; their memory though yet fresh, fitly serves to set
forth the state of the vnregerate, or mere natural man, in whom sin is
always insolent and audacious, even openly to wound the soul and waste the
conscience, and persecuted by the Law of God or nature, rages the more, and
raises rebellion in the affections; seeking as it were to set all the
faculties of the sonie in combustion, rather then it should be restrained of it
wonted course. The only peace and security the carnally minded thus assaulted,
finds, is to suffer his conscience to sleep, and the eye of reason (which I
may term faith natural) to wink at these disorders of inferior faculties,
or tacitly consent unto them. But so it is not in the state of grace, which
not withstanding never wants sinful adherents; not only in habit or
affection, but oftimes bursting out into action, to hurt both soul and
conscience; as there always have been and ever will be thefts and robberies,
with other outrages, committed even in the most civil and best governed parts
in the land. But as in them the mean^st subject that can make proof of his
wrongs or who did them, may have enough to take his part for prosecuting or
attaching, and safely use the benefit of known laws, for repressing or
cutting of the stoutest or proudest malefactors; so the faithful heart and
conscience is always resolute and bold to challenge his dearest affections of
every least transgression, to repress, arraigne, and conde^n them. And as
Carthages often provocation of Rome cost it dearer in the setting on, then
other Cities vanquished by the Romans; so such delights or pleasures as have
most wronged our souls, or done greatest despite unto the spirit of grace,
are kept under with greatest care, and in the end throughliest mo^tified by the
law of faith. Even in the regiment of this little world that axiom has it due
force Ex malis moribus bonae leges nascu^tur. Every man inuents peculiar laws,
secret vows, or the like, against such practices or affections as have most
seduced him to transgress the laws of his God.

3. Now as the state or public government is not to be scandalized with the
infamy of thieues and robbers, which harbor in it, so long as the magistracy
is vigilant to enact and execute severe laws for their repression: so neither
are we accounted by our gracious God amongst the unjust, for these sins which
often make head against us, so long as faith thus fights against them, and
keeps them vnderable to hold such a hand over them manifested and known, as
governors in a well ordered body politic, do over notorious and open
malefactors: Not that such sins are not in their nature meritorious of eternal
death, or not sufficient if God should deal in justice to condemn us, but that
in mercy he does not impute them, whiles thus qualified in the habit, we sue
for pardon in the name and mediation of our Savior. Thus I dare boldly say,
that not the least sin against the Law of God, committed after regeneration,
but (were it possible for the regenerate to give indulgence to it) would (at
the least) exclude them from life eternal. Nor does this argue, as some
captious reader will perhaps imagine, that a man may fall either finally or
totally from the state of grace, but rather that all impossibility he has of
not so falling, essentially depends upon a like impossibility of not continuing
his indulgence to known offenses, or negligence in repeating or bewailing his
secret sins. Even after the infusion of faith most perfect, faithful
repentance for sins committed, is as absolutely necessary to salvation, as the
first iususion was. Nor is this heavenly pledge, while dormant, though truly
dwelling in our souls, immediately apt to justify: their conceit of these
great mysteries is to ieiune and triuiall, which make justification but one
indivisible transitory act, or mutatum esse, from the state of nature to the
state of grace. In St. Paul's divinity sure I am, ^^ has a permanent duration,
and it is but the next step unto hypocrisy, a mere perverting of the use of
grace, thus to infer ( I have true faith, therefore I shall always use it
aright) A wise man would rather argue thus ( I have the right use and exercise
of grace, therefore my faith is true and such as will justify) As the first
infusion of it fully remits our sins past, and is to us a sure pledge of GODs
perpetual favor, so in no case may we take it as an absolute antedated
pardon for sins to come, as if they were forgiven of God before committed by
us; for they are forgiven by the right use or exercise, not by the bare habit
or inhabitation of faith in our souls. Into the contrary errors men are often
led, by a jealousy of coming to near the Papists, if they should admit of
more iustifications then one. And it is true, that justification, in some
sense, excludes plurality or reiteration; but we are not to deny that of all,
which is incompatible only with some.

We are therefore to consider there is a threefold justification, one radical
or fundamental, which is the infusion of habitual grace, or faith; and this
is never but one another actual which I account actual supplications made in
faith, for the remission of sins committed either before the infusion of
faith or after. What it is to pray in faith, is partly intimated S Chap 5. We
then pray in faith when we faithfully submit our will unto Gods will,
unfeignedly ren^u^ciag all our former sins or evil customs, truly denying
our selves, the world etc. Thus affected we may be^ in the actual state of
grace, albeit through natural constitution some disease of body of distemper
of the br^m, no^ without fear of death or doubt of saluatio. If such
submission of our will to Gods will, have been pr^i^diced or interrupted by
entertaining some unlawful desire, or b^ grievous actual offenses: ^n former
temper o^ resolution must be re^umed or (...)d, and by r(...)ns we may be
truly said ^o be actually reiusti^^.
before, partly in the end of this Chapter, elsewhere more fully and purposely
handled. The third is, justification vertuall, which consists in the
performance of that and the like precepts watch and pray continually, which
cannot be meant of actual prayers, for he that so prays continually shall
continually use much babbling. In this perpetuity of vertuall prayer consists
the permanent duration of justification, which yet has many interruptions. A
man may have the habit of faith and yet not always pray in faith, either
actually or vertually; as he may be out of charity with his brother, or
unlawfully deteine goods wrongfully gotten, without present forfeiture of his
estate in grace, though to pray in faith, it is impossible in the one case,
until he be reconciled to his brother, or have freely forgiven him; in the
other until he has made restitution of those things his conscience condemned
him for keeping. The perpetuity of this vertuall prayer or justification
therein consisting, depends upon the continuance of some former resolution or
intention made in faith, which is not always prejudiced by minding other
matters, but only by doing things forbidden by the law of God; or (as S. Paul
speaks) not of Faith. A man intending to go a journey, vertually continues his
former intent, so he keep on his way without digression; albeit he actually
mind not the business he goes about, but entertain such other thoughts or
discourse as way or company shall afford. But if through too much minding
company or other matters, he should chance to wander, or for slow opportunities
of dispatching his intended businesses; his vertuall intention is interrupted,
and time lost must be redeemed with double diligence: So must such ruptures as
actual sins, or omission of necessary duties make in the perpetuity of
vertuall praying or permanency of justification thence depending, be repaired
with actual prayers made in faith. But here we may descry the idle curiosity
of some wits more acute then subtle, at least then sound, and rather apt
through multiplying entities without necessity to obscure Of the distinction
betwixt Faith and Repentance
matters in themselves distinct and clear, then to clear difficulties or
obscurities. For some there be which speak of Faith and Repentance as of two
spiritual habits or graces really, or at least essentially distinct. It is one
thing indeed to rise, another to walk, yet both immediate and proper acts of
one and the same motive faculty: so is it one thing to believe, and another to
repent, yet both formal acts of one and the same habit; only the later
includes a peculiar reference to a slip or fall, whence it receives a distinct
name from the former, which specially imports a direct progress in the way of
godliness without interruption. Better we cannot notify the nature of true
repentance then by restoration of faith to it wonted throne, out of which it
had for a time bin iustled by sinful affections, though not deposed from it
sovereignty; as David was prejudiced by his sons rebellion, and for a time
enforced to forsake the Hill of Sion, though not deprived of his kingdom. Even
such repentance as usually goes before regeneration has a correspondent faith
annexed; the difference betwixt them only such, as is between heat and
calefaction, which as some good Philosophers resolve us, is heat, not acquired
or consistent, but only in the motion or acquisition. Or briefly to speak
more fully, Faith always moves unto repentance, which, generally taken, may,
in few words, not unfitly be defined to be a sorrow for sin, conceived and
moderated by faith, and as the faith is, such is the sorrow, either merely
moral or truly spiritual.

4. The sum of all we have delivered in these two chapters is briefly, but
most divinely set down by Saint John, who though he use not the formal
terms of justification, yet expresses by nature of it; howsoever taken, by
words equivalent, or rather more theological or significant, as Job. 1. 3. 6, 7
by fellowship with God the Father his Son CHRIST, and his members, and by
the fruits of it, fullness of joy. For being justified by says (as Saint Romans
5. 1
Paul says) we have peace with God, through our Lord JESUS CHRIST, and rejoice
in hope of his glory. 1. Job. 1. 3.
This then is the message (says Saint John) which we have heard of him, and
declare unto you, that God is light, and in him is no darkness at all. If we
say we have fellowship with him and walk in darkness, we lie and do not the
truth. But if we walk in the light as he is in the light, we have fellowship
one with another. This walking in the light as God is in the light, is that
justification or qualification whereof S James speaks, whereby we become
immediately capable of Christ's righteousness, or actual participants of his
propitiation, which is the sole immediate cause of our justification taken, as
S. Paul does it, for remission of sins or actual approbation with God. The
truth of which doctrine Saint John likewise ratifies in terms equivalent in
the words immediately following: And the blood of CHRIST cleanses us (walking
in the light as God is in the light) from all sin: not from such only as were
committed before the infusion of that grace, which is the ground of our
fellowship with God and amongst our selves, the very lamp by whose light we
walk, but from all subsequent transgressions of what kind soever. Now if we
say that we (such as S. John then was, regenerate and in the state of grace)
have no sin, we deceive our selves and the truth is not in us. Even such then
as walk in the light are sinners and not just in themselves, but only as they
are besprinkled with CHRIST'S righteous blood. Nevertheless if we confess our
sins (faithfully) he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to
cleanse us from all unrighteousness, not from sins venial only. And is
there any circumstance either in the matter or manner of his discourse which
may occasion us to suspect the same word ( sin) should not be of equal
importance in both these places last cited, and that third following; These
things write I unto you that you sin not. What, venially only? No
questionless, he was more desirous that they should not sin mortally; nor do
the authors of this distinction deny that men regenerate may sin so
grievously, as to fall both totally and finally from grace: yet says S. John,
If any man sin (as there is no man that sins not both mortally and venially
by our adversaries grant) 1. John 2.
we have an Advocate with the Father, JESUS CHRIST the righteous and he is
the propitiation for our sins. In what manner? only as he is the meritorious
cause or fountain of grace whereby we are immediately and thoroughly cleansed?
No, rather as he is This is his title as he is our advocate. 1 John. 2. 1.
righteous and by interposition of his eternal sacrifice even till this day,
as immediate a cause of our pardon from all sins whether past or present, as
it was of our general reconcilement while it was offered. Nor did he die to
procure us grace whereby we might become righteous and pure in his fathers
sight, but gave us grace that we might be purified by his death and passion:
yet if sins mortal, as well as venial (to use our adversaries language) be
comprehended in the saying last cited; Bellarmines 1. John 3 9.
reconciliation ^ Cap. 6 Para. 15.
of the former words [ if we say that we have no sinne] with this other [ 1.
John 3 4.
whosoever is borne of God sins not] is palpably false.

5. But if his be amiss it will be expected we reconcile them a right; and so
we may with as great ease as perspicuity. In the latter then he speaks of
habitual sin, or such indulgence to transgressions, as S. James makes liable
to breach of the whole law: for by sin it is evident he includes as much as
he had said in the beginning of that discourse, The distinction of mortal and
venial sins, or of sins besides the law and against the law has no ground
either in Saint John or Saint James but was cor ceiued by mere ignorance of
sacred dialect.
whosoever commits sin transgresses also the Law. Why, is there any
sin which in the Protestants doctrine is not a transgression of the law? or
is it possible a man should go against the commandment and not transgress
it? But if some sins there be, as Roman Catholics teach, only besides the
law, in doing them, we do not transgress the Law, but rather pretergresse,
or go besides it. Yet seeing the Law-giuers will was, that we should do the
law, not only hear it, much less go besides it, there is no pretergression
of it, but is directly against the Law giuers will, otherwise a servants
negligence should not be against his masters will but besides it. For tell
me; O ye fools and blind, whether is more? only to omit the good deeds of
the law or to commit such as your selves acknowledge to be besides it? Though
the matter of omission may be ^arre greater, yet for the form of the action,
whence the denomination of opposition must be taken, no sin of omission can
be so properly said to be against the Law, as the least positive sin or
transgression we can imagine. He that commits any thing disagreeable to the
Law, does omit what is commanded by the law and somewhat more, and therefore
does more properly go against the law, then he which only omits what is
commanded.

But it is usually the nature of hypocrisy to place either sanctity, or
impiety rather in the matter, or outward act, than in the heart or affection.
Far otherwise are we taught by the spirit of truth that it is the heart which
God requires. No matter of sin can be so light, but is, if the heart be set
upon it, in the issue, deadly, and excludes from mercy: scarce any object so
bad as that the bare assent unto it, without delight or custom, is utterly
incompatible with the habit of grace. Nor does Saint John in the former places
seeming contrary, suppose any difference in the act or matter of sin but
only in the heart or habit of the sinner. Every one transgresses the law in
what sin soever, but every transgression makes not a man a law-breaker or
transgressour: this denomination is not absolutely given but from a greater
inclination or delight in doing evil then doing good. And it is clear that
Saint John when he says 1. Ish. 3. 9
he that is borne of God sins not, uses the selfsame syllogisticall term
he had done before in that phrase, (...) he that commits Verse 4
sin. Now the word (...) according to the Hebraisme which he follows,
imports not the act or operation only, but the habit, or rather more then
habit: and the whole phrase (...) is as much as the Latin, operarius
iniquitatis, one that makes a trade of sin or professes iniquity, whose
service is altogether incompatible with the profession or hope of a Christian.
And this was the conclusion, our Apostle was in both places to infer, as
having taught immediately before, Verse ^
every one that has this hope (of being the Son of God) does purge himself
as he is pure, and in habit becomes like unto him; as on the contrary (which
is the Apostles inference likewise) he that Verse ^
committes sin, (...) resembles his father the devil, whose chief delight
is in doing mischief. It may be a Roman Catholic, will sooner believe if we
send him unto Maldonat; who commenting upon the like Mittet filius hominis
Angelos su^s, and colligent de regno huius omnia scandala and eos qui facinnt
iniquitatem. Mat. 13. v 41 Maldon. in haec verha omnes qui iniquitatem
exercent, and, vt ita dicam iniquitatis artem factitant, magis enim habitus
quam actus, Hebraica phrai^i significatur.
speech (...) thus far bears witness unto the truth we teach, that the
hebrew phrase aims rather at the habit then the act; that to work or do
iniquity is as much as to be an artificer or craftesmaster of iniquity.

2. But we receive not the record of man, there is another that bears
witness of it even our Savior, from whose mouth Saint John learned both the
matter and phrase of that discourse. John 8. 34.
Verily (says he to the Jews) whosoever commits sin is the servant of
sin: and the servant abides not in the house for ever; but the son abides
for ever. If the son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed,
from the reign of sin, not from all acts of sin. Hence did Saint John take
that lesson, 1. Ioh. 3. ^.
You know that he was manifested to take away our sins, and in him is no
sin: To be altogether without sin then was his peculiar; but, Ver. 6.
Whosoever abides in him, sins not. Not at all? So he should not need any
aduocation: but he is no worker of iniquity, nor does he sin as Devils do, for
whose sins CHRIST was no propitiation. That so the Apostle meant is apparent
from the parallel use of the same words immediately after reciprocally changed;
He that commits sin is of the devil: V. 8.
for the devil sins from the beginning, (that is, has continued his
apostasy or trade of sin ever since his fall.) For this purpose the son of
God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of the devil. What were
these? Delight in sin, wilful indulgence to transgressions and such
unrelenting opposition to the truth proposed as did convince the Jews, by our
Saviors verdict in the place last cited, to be the sons of the devil: John
8. 44. 45.
ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do:
he was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because
there is no truth in him. When he speaks a lie he speaks of his own: for
he is a lier and the father of lies. And because I tell you the truth ye
believe me not, yet which of you can rebuke me of sin. His disciples they
might, because the sons of men: but in that there was no sin in him, had
they been of God they might have known him to be his son. Ver 47.
For he that is of God hears Gods word, but they therefore heard them not
because they were not of God. 1. John 3. 10.
In this (says Saint John) the children of God are manifest, and the children
of the devil: whosoever does not (...)
righteousness is not of God, neither he that loves not his brother. As this
phrase to do righteousness (...) evidently imports not the bare acts but
habitual practice of righteousness: so needs must the like phrase (...) to
commit sin, include an habitual practice or trade of sin; and yet to
commit sin, and to sin, are used promiscuously as terms altogether
equivalent in this chapter by Saint John. Our former conclusion therefore is
most firm, that the difference supposed by the same Apostle in these two
places. 1. John 1. ^.
[ If we say that we have no sin we deceive cur selues] and [ whosoever
abides in him sins not] consists not in the act or object of sin, but in
the habit or affection of him that sins. The same answer fully reconciles
the like speeches of Saint Iam. 2. 10.
James. He that offends in one (to wit habitually or indulgently) is guilty of
all, and yet [ in many things we all offend] actually not habitually, or out of
infirmity, not with delight. But every offense, whether actual or habitual,
whether of infirmity or of purpose, is directly against the Law or ^ Iam. 3. ^.
will of the Lawgiuer, (for never was woman, I think, so wilful or pettish as
to be offended unless her will were thwarted or contradicted;) only cases
altogether omitted (which can have no place in God) or matters in their nature
merely indifferent, can truly be said to be besides the Law, or his mind
that made it.

7. But perhaps that passage of scripture which first instructed, and since
confirmed me in the truth hitherto delivered, will give best satisfaction to
the Reader. Concerning that exclamation of Saint Paul. Romans 7. 24.
O wretched man that I am: who shall deliver me from the body of this death,
some make question: but no learned Divine, I think, will demand whether David
uttered that complaint of himself, or of some other; Psalm. 19. 1^.
Who can understand his errors? cleanse me from my secret sins, yet was he
then borne of God: for unto him the statutes of the Lord were V. 9. 10.
right, even the joy of his heart; the commandments pare, and delightful
unto his eyes, his fear able to cleanse the heart, his judgments true and
righteous altogether, all more to be desired then gold, yea then much fine
gold; so lively and quick was the apprehension of his faith, and yet
uniformly inclined to practice. V. 11.
For by the command ements he was warned to* beware of sin, and in keeping
them he found great reward. But was he enabled exactly to fulfill the
perfection of the Law, which had converted his soul? or did he ever hope to
attain to such perfection as the Romanist must ere he can have any hope of
life? to be altogether without any sin deserning death? No, this is the
height of his desire: This is that which (...) says 15 v. 1^. ^e that is
begotten of (...) d^^^ as it were (...) a watch over (...), and the wicked
touches him not; that is, he comes not within him to endaunger or overthrow
him, as he does the world, which as the Apostle says (...) heth in wickedness,
or is, as it were surrounded with evil. ^ V. 13.
Keep back thy servant from presumptuous sins, let them not have dominion
over me: then shall I be upright, and I shall be innocent from much
transgression, or (as the Gospel expounds his meaning) from the reign of
sin. But freed there from, did he not stand in need of Gods favor or mercy
for remitting the seattered forces, or vanquished relics of the host of
sin? Rather thus qualified he had sure hope, his prayers for mercy should be
heard, yet through the mediation of the Messiah that was to come. For so he
concludes, Let the words of my mouth, or as the inter line ary well expresses
the prophetical dialect, Then shall the words of my mouth (being thus freed
from the reign of sin) and the meditation of my heart be acceptable in thy
sight, O Lord, my Rock, and my Redeemer. Thus did he of whom CHRIST according
to the flesh was to come, after his conversion unto God, and long continuance
in the state of habitual grace, expect redemption, not by infusion of inherent
righteousness in so full measure as should make him immediately and formally
just in the sight of God, but by favorable acceptance of his prayers,
directed, not to the throne of justice, but to the Lord his Rock and Redeemer.
That such qualification as here he speaks of is a necessary condition of
prayers made in faith; that prayers so made whether for private or public good
are never rejected by God, is elsewhere partly, and shall (God willing) more at
large be showed. The like qualification for effectual prayers another
Psalmist has expressed; Psalm 66. 18. 19. 1. John chap. 3. 22. Whatsoever we
ask we receive of him, because we keep his commandments, and do these
things which are pleasing (...) sight.
If I regard iniquity in my heart; the Lord will not hear me; But verily God
has heard me, he has attended to the voice of my prayer. In the perpetuity of
prayers or meditations thus conceived or uttered by hearts free from the reign
of sin or guilt of indulgence to secret unlawful desires, have we, without
dissension doubtless from these Prophets and holy men of God, placed the
permanencie of justification actual or vertuall, which are the fruits or
Crown of justification radical or fundamental, the only right use and end
of all grace inherent. For though faith or grace at their first infusion may
assure us our sins are remitted; yet may we not take these or other pledges
of Gods love and favor as a full discharge or final acquittance of all
reckonings betwixt Him and us, but rather as a stock bestowed upon us to
begin the new world with, for which with the increase we must still think
our selves accomprable. Though it be a truth (not unquestionable) that a man
once actually justified or truly sanctified, cannot finally use Gods graces
amiss; yet is it very doubtful whether one may not either abuse, or not use,
such gifts of God as rightly used, or employed to his glory, might have been
means infallible of justification. But this is a rule as unquestionable as
true, that were it possible for a man to use any extraordinary measure of
inhaerent grace amiss; he were to be called to a strict account, as well for
all his former sins, as this abuse of his talent. The irresiagable
consequence of which unquestionable truth is this doctrine we now maintain. [
The immediate qualification for remission of sins, is not the habit or
inherence, but the right use of grace or perseverance in prayers conceived by
that faith which unites us unto CHRIST,]. If this vertuall in tention or
resolution either by contrary acts or mere negligence be remitted, our sins
past whether committed before the infusion of grace or after, recover their
wonted strength according to the degrees of this remission, and their several
weight, until we repair our slackenesse, by fervent zeal and intensiue
devotion, jointly incline the mind to distrust of Gods present favor or our
sure estate in grace.

8. Pertinent to this observation is that place. Revel. 8. v. 3. If by the
Angel their offering odours with the prayers of all Saints upon the golden
alt^r, we understand Christ, as most interpreters do, but (upon what grounds
I know not) Ribera and Brightma^ differ from the rest, in the interpretation of
that place.
What we have set down more at large, was exactly figured in the sacrifices of
the Law, daily offered, even for such as by the Law were clean, and observed
Gods commandments with as great constancy and devotion as any now living do.
This might instruct us that our persons become not immediately capable of
divine presence or approbation by infusion of habitual grace, or freedom from
the tyranny of sin; these are the internal characters of our royal
Priesthoood whose function is continually to offer up the sweet incense of
prayers from hearts in part thus purified by faith: For by such sacrifices are
we made actual partakers of that eternal sacrifice whose virtue and efficacy
remains yesterday, to day the same for ever. Per omnia sibi pater in filio
cumplacuit, nec vlla in eo serpemis sunt reperta vestigia, nec sacerdotij eius
paenituit Deum, quoniam sacrificium quod in cruce obtulit, sic in been placito
Dei constat acceptabile, and per petu^ virtute consistit, vt non minus body in
conspectu patria oblatio illa sit efficax, quam ea die qua de saucio lateris
sanguis and aqua exiuit, and semper reseruatae ^n corpore plagae salutis
humanae exigant pretium, and obedientiae donativum requirant. Cypr. five author
De Baptis and s. Trinit.
It being so perfect and all sufficient could not be offered more then once,
but through the virtue of it, the offerings of our Priesthood must be
continually presented unto our God. This man because he endures ever, has an
everlasting priesthood, wherefore, he is able also perfectly to save them that
come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives, to make intercession for them.
Heb. 7. v. 11.
Nor can we so often lift up our hearts toward heaven, but the voice of
CHRIST'S blood, never ceasing to speak better things then that of Abels, still
ioines with our prayers and distinctly articulates our imperfect sighs or
mutterings, always crying: father forgive them, father receive them to thy
mercy, seeing they are content to be partakers of my sufferings, and seek to
be finally healed only by my wounds. As the Apostle teaches us, Acts 4. v.
12.
that there is given no other name under heaven besides CHRIST whereby we may
be saved, so was it foretold by the Prophet that Joel 2. v. 32.
this salvation must be by calling upon his name: not by mediation of grace or
other fruits of the spirit obtained by invocation, but by invocation of it in
truth and spirit, seeing his spirit was poured out upon all flesh to this end
that all should call upon his name, and by so calling be saved. This though
usually expressed in other terms, is the opinion of orthodoxall antiquity in
this point; and if my conjecture fail me not, the dreaming fancies of a daily
propitiatory sacrifice in the Mass was first occasioned from dunsticall or
drowsy apprehensions of the primitive dialect, wherein (as all the^^ speeches
of the ancient are full of life) Christ's body and blood are said to be often
offered, not in scholastique propriety of speech, but in a rhetorical
figurative, or exhortatory sense, because our daily sacrifices become
acceptable to God throught it, because the benefits of it are as effectually
applied unto us by our faithful representations of it, as if it were daily
offered in our sight.

The error of modern Romanists hence occasioned, is the same with that of the
old Heathens, which dreamed of as many Gods; as they had several blessings
from the Author of all goodness, who is but one.

Quanquam enim sacrificium illud in ea forma qua in cruce offerebatur, semel
tantum oblatum sit, and semel tantum senguis effusus, vt ita repeti iterumque
offerri non possit: nihilominus tamex consistit and manet tale sacrificium
coram Deo perpetuo in suae virtute and efficacia acceptum, ita vt sacrificium
illud semel in cruce oblatum, non minus hodiern^ die in conspectu patris sit
efficax ae vigent, quam eo die quode saucio latere sanguis ex ^^^^ and aqua.
Sic beatus Cyprianus in sermon de Baptismo and manifest. Trinitat. testatur.
Quapropter cum vulnerati corporis nostri plag^ pretio redemptionis semper opus
habeat; Ecclesia proponit Deo Patri pretium illud, in vera fide and deuotione
iterum, (sed figurative and spiritualiter) ad consequendam remissionem
peccatorum. Non quod bui^ operi suo (quo videlicet commemora^ and repraesentat
sacrificium illius) meritum adscrihat remission is peccatorum, vt quam solus
Christus crue^ta sua oblatione in cruce nobis promeruit. Verum tali suo
commemoratius and mystice fidei sacrificio, in quo repraesentat Ecclesia, and
sistit in conspectum patris verum corpus and sanguin^m eius vnigeniti applicat
sibi and accommoda^ magnum and inaestimabit^ illud donati^^m remissionis
peccatorum quod Christus impetrauit: Cum accipiat remissionem peccatorum, per
nomen cius qui creditin eum Act^um 10. Antididagma Colon^. de Sacrif. Miss. de
CONSECRATION^ Eucharist^^, and tertio Missae Sacrificio.
The Prebendes of Colen notwithstanding have made a declaration of the third
sacrifice in their mass much what to our purpose: so much of it as I have here
set down, needs little correction in favorable construction: Howsoever it
suits very well with their forecited opinion concerning justification: How
far dissonant or consonant that is unto the truth, I leave it to the Readers
censure. As for the Jesuits resolution of the same controversy by the Trent
Councels determination it is but a further document of his Magical faith, and
that he finally uses the grace of God but as a charm or Amulet able to
expel death by the full measure of it only worn or carried about, not by
actual operation or right use. But what marueill if he openly renounce CHRIST
for his Mediator in the principal act of redemption, when as he has chosen
the Pope for the Lord, his Rock, and Redemer, even for that Rock whereon that
Church against which the gates of hell shall never prevail must be founded.

CHAP. IX. That firmly to believe Gods mercies in CHRIST is the hardest point
of service in christian warfare: That our confidence in them can be no greater
than our fidelity in practice of his Commandments: That meditation upon
CHRIST'S last appearance is the surest method for grounding true confidence in
him.
1. LEast the end of this discourse should miss the end and scope whereto the
whole was purposely directed; I must entreat the Christian Reader, to pardon
my fear and jealousy (which from the reasons mentioned in the first chapter
of this section too well experienced in the temper of this present age is
always great) least disputation against Romish heresy, cast us into a relapse
of that natural carelessness or hypocrisy whereof all, more or less, have
participated. But for whose auoidance hereafter, if thine heart be affected as
mine now is, and I wish it always may continue, let this meditation never slip
out of thy memory: That seeing the last and principal end of all graces
bestowed upon us in this life, is rightly to believe in CHRIST this cannot be,
as the drowsy worldling dreams, the easiest, but rather the most difficult
point of Christianity. The true reason why unto many not otherwise misaffected,
it seems not such, is, because in this time of his absence from earth, our
imaginary love of his goodness, wanting direct opposition Read chap. 3
of any strong desire or resolution to manifest the leuitie or vanity of it,
fancieth a like affection in him toward us. And seeing love is not suspicious,
but where it is perfect 1. Ioh. 4. 18.
excludes all fear, the very conceit of great mutual love betwixt CHRIST and
us not interrupted, expels all conceit of fear or diffidence. Hence we
usually rest persuaded, our assent unto Gods mercies in Him is more strong then
unto most other objects of Faith, when as indeed these being the highest it
would appear to be in respect of them the weakest; had it as many daily
temptations to encounter it, as we find in practices of other duties whose
habitual performance is the necessary subordinate mean to support it. All the
difficulties we daily struggle with, are but straglers of that maine army,
with whose entire joint force we are to have the last conflict about this very
point which until the hour of death, or other extraordinary time of trial,
is seldom directly or earnestly assaulted. But then, whatsoever breach of Gods
commandments, love either to the world or flesh has wrought in our souls,
will afford Satan advantage and opportunity for more facile oppugnation of
our confidence. For as every least sin in it own nature deserves death, so
does the consciousnesse of it more or less, impell the mind to distrust of
life. Yet even the greatest will be content in these days of peace and
security to sleep with us, and lie quiet in hope to prevent us in the waking,
and with the joint force of lesser to surprise the soul or gain the start or
first sway of the spirit, an advantage much prejudicial to strength otherwise
more then equal.

Much harder it is to retract a body after actual motion begun, then to
restrain propensions or inclinations from bursting out into actual motions.
Our often yielding upon fore^ warning of their assaults in many petty
temptations, or strong ones which come single, might instruct us how dangerous
the conflict will be with all, which our memories, once thoroughly stirred, can
muster to affright our consciences. Yet if we did duly consider the
uniformity of strength between the several branches of faith, or as it
respects diverse objects; the very consciousnesse of any one sin whereunto
we have been indulgent will be of like force to withdraw our assent from Gods
mercies, as the delight or pleasure we took in the object of it, was to cause
us transgress any part of his will revealed. The same strength beauty had to
allure unto adultery, will that foul sin unrepented of have to divorce our
souls from CHRIST. Nor could we fail in practice of this or other
commandment without a precedent defect of that faith which only can firmly
unite us unto CHRIST, whereby likewise, were it firm it self, we would assent
unto every precept of God as much better then any incompatible good. And seeing
our present faith or trust in God is but commensurable to our fidelity in his
commandments, (then which, through scrupulositie of conscience or Christian
modesty, it may be less, but cannot be greater without hypocrisy or
presumption) it must needs want strength to lay sure hold on CHRIST'S merits,
until it be able to subdue those desires of the flesh to which it yielded in
the former temptations. To say, Lord, Lord, cannot suffice, ere we can truly
resume our woonted confidence, if any we had, or make a faithful plea for
mercy; Gods will neglected must be executed either in the act, if the object be
present, and may be prosecuted, or in sincere and constant resolution, if
abilities or opportunities, required to execution of what we resolve upon, be
altogether wanting or our endeavors upon inevitable occasions hindered.

2. For our better preparation against this last and terrible conflict with the
world, the devil and flesh; let us imagine the next thunderclap or uncouth
sound we hear did summon us to final judgment; or if our imaginations be so
quick and lively as to awake themselves without external noise or clamor, or
able as of matters secular, so of divine that certainly shall be, to frame
representations as if they were already present: let us contemplate CHRIST; not
as far absent or soliciting our cause before his father, but now appearing in
majesty and great glory, accompanied with infinite legions of holy Angels for
his Assessors, or attended by Satan and in his infernal troops desirous to be
employed in the execution of his sentence. Were the eyes of all our faith as
firmly set upon this sight as some men's are upon his merits and personal love
to them, so as the objects of terrors yet unseen, but which we steadfastly
believe shall be manifested, might have as full a stroke upon our inclinations
unto dread of that last day (which in this life no man can want unless his
righteousness be angelically perfect) as daily cogitations of Gods mercies and
favor to us in particular have upon our hopeful apprehensions or desires of
glory: all vicissitude of fear and trembling in our souls thus equally
poised, by contrary impulsions, would not be taken for signs of infidelirie
or hypocrisy. Nay my conscience assures me (but herein I prejudice no man's
persuasions in particular) that a multitude of such as condemn all without
exception which cannot apprehend the truth of their own salvation (though alas
who is he that desires not so to do?) as surely as any other article believed,
would bewray tokens of fear and dread more evident to others then their former
apprehensions were unto themselves.

3. Or were we in CHRIST'S presence, though not so terrible as in that day it
shall be, but rather as amiable and familiar as his Apostles did enjoy it, set
to compare either his precepts general to all Christians, or peculiar to our
several vocations, with our daily practices or performances: who is he that
would not more shame at his own nakedness, then joy in his Redeemers
righteousness? who is he that would not be more ready to convey himself out
of his sight, then with confidence to approach his presence? who is he would
not wish his former service might pass without account, or any certain hope
of reward eternal, rather then adventure to take his final sentence without
some respite for amendment? Yet thou O CHRIST, my Redeemer and Judge most
righteous, best knows, I propose not these scruples to diminish, but rather
with purpose to increase and fortify all true confidence in thy merits and thy
Fathers mercies: but that (I know and thou much better know) it oft-times
weakens it self by shooting up before it time, or too fast, and in this forward
age had much need to be lopped, that it may grow as well in breadth and
thickness, as in length; seeing growth in height without soliditie
correspondent, is but a mounting in presumption, the period of whose ascent is
pronenesse to fall headlong in despair.

4. Or if any man can draw the inference here intended from other premises
more commodious, I shall be willing to relinquish mine. But the best method,
as yet I know, for establishing of true confidence will be this: As often as we
think upon that fundamental oracle of life Romans 10 ^1 Esaias 28. 16
Whosoever belieues in him shall not be ashamed, to Read chap. 7. 7. lib. 3.
with the marginall notes.
consider withal that the true crisis of such a constitution as the Prophet
there speaks of will not be till the day of CHRIST'S appearance. Whence least
we should ouer-reach our selves in confident persuasions, by suffering our
minds to run too much upon the former promise without a counterpoise to try
their strength, let us balance our apprehensions of it with meditation upon
this truth, He only belieues aright in CHRIST that will not be ashamed at his
appearance. The inference hence naturally issuing, is, our Saviors and not
mine; Luke 21. 36.
Watch therefore and pray always that ye may be accounted worthy to escape
all these things, that shall come to pass and to stand before the Son of
man. From this conclusion we may resume our former assertion as a necessary
corolary, That besides justification habitual there is a justification
vertuall which has a permanent duration, and consists in the perpetuity of
watchfulness and prayer, that the foundation of it as of our confidence is
union with CHRIST, by a faith fructifying in Herein is the love perfect in us,
that we should have boldness in the day of judgment: for as he is, even so
are we in this world. 2. John 4. 1^.
conversation and works conformable to him; as the Disciple whom he loved
most divinely has instructed us: 1. John. 28. 29.
And now, little children, abide in him, that when he shall appear, we may
have confidence, and not be ashamed before him at his coming. If ye know that
he is righteous, know ye, that whosoever does righteousness is borne of him

5. Beloved Reader, I am the bolder to put thee in mind of such strictness as
the profession of Christianity binds thee unto; the rather because I purpose
not otherwise to affright thee with any marks of reprobation. Few I know so
well affected but without repentance and greater constancy in performing these
duties than hitherto they have given proof of, may justly fear as not
altogether without the reach of possible danger; for even the righteous hardly
shall be saved. Altogether so bad I know none but may have hope to escape, so
they will not wilfully neglect repentance, or somnolently put off the evil
day. The gate of life as it is strait, so is it continually open and wide
enough to receive all, so every one would watch his special opportunities or
attend Gods particular callings, and all of us cast off that but then of sin
and superfluous cares wherewith we are laden and encumbred: fewer I am
certain pass through it than it is capable of, some because they strive not
at all to enter in, but carelessly expect God, without any endeavors of their
own, should draw them through it: others because they strive amiss,
presuming they are able to press in by their own strength with a little help
of divine attraction, or some small courtesy of the spirit to stir them up,
or give some notice when the door were open, or God at best leisure to admit
them. Betwixt these two erroneous extremes there is a golden mean, for whose
invention we are in the next place briefly to admonish.

SECTION. 3. Of the right plantation of Faith.
WEre it absolutely true without restraint, that consultation is only of
matters which are in our power, or may by our care and industry be procured*
the very title of this discourse might justly seem to proclaim our
inconsiderateness in undertaking these pains altogether bootlesse, in respect
of men, seeing faith is a gift altogether free no way procurable by their
endeavors, if not presumptuous, in as much as it is planted by the holy Ghost;
and what need has he of our methodicall discourse or direction? These and the
like objections may well be thought to have grounds inexpugnable in the
Protestants doctrine, which wholly ascribes as well the Will as the Deed to the
operation of Gods spirit. Unto what purpose then can it be to direct men how to
work in matters wherein they do not work at all? Some countenance the same
suggestions may have from a distinction, common to the Romish and reformed
Churches, of Faith infused and acquired. For unless the faith, for whose right
plantation we rather seek then give direction, may by method be acquired, to
what use can methodicall direction serve?

Those reasons notwithstanding persuade us rather to say little then nothing at
all in this argument, until the difficulties about free will or man's ability
wherewith it is linked be discussed. The maine objection, if it could justly
prejudice any man's labors addressed to the same end, to which these present
are, might have hindered his most, that gave us the rule of life whereon it is
grounded: Phil. 2. 13
It is God that works in us both the will and the deed. But why should this
deter us from working in matters of our salvation? rather it ought to
encourage all to work, some as Artificers and Directors, others as laborers:
but both as the Apostle wills them) with fear and trembling. Even of Verse 12.
says infuted, Paul was a planter, and Apollos was a waterer, though God alone
did give increase.

CHAP. I. That Christian Faith, although immediately infused by God without
any cooperation of man does not exclude, but rather more necessarily require
precedent humane endeavors for the attaining of it.
1. THat faith is the sole gift of God, wholly infused, not partly acquired by
us, should rather excite then any way abate our endeavors for attaining it,
would we conceive or speak of those heavenly mysteries according to the
language of the holy Ghost which wrote them, not out of the schoole-phrase of
Aristotle or Aquinas, both ofttimes alike full of solecisines in divinity. Such
is Zabarells collectio^ against Scotus, to prove that the matter could not be
created before the form, but only concreated with perfect cre tures. Alio
quoque, argumento idem confirmari potest agens enim potens totum aliquem
effectu^ producere, nisi impediatur, producit perfectissimum qua^tum producere
potest; hane maiorem propositione^ negare Scotus non potest, quum lape ea
vtatur: at Deus a nullo potest impediri, ne quamlibet rem perfectissimam in
genere suo producat; quamlibet igig^tur perfecta^ produxit, ergo non materia^
nuda^ quia materia est imperfecte res omnes quare mat^eria^ primonudam creare,
and i^li postea f^^mam impon^re, repu^nat perfectioni diunae, quae
imm^^ueretur, si Deus prius imperfecte ^es creasset, postea vero formas
imponendo perfec^onem indidisset: resigitur primu absolutissimas ac
perfectissimas produxit* proinde materiam non informe^, sed sub formis.
Zabarella de prima rerum (...). lib. 2. cap. 2. ^yhes. 1. 11.
It is a persuasion will easily intrude it self into minds apt to entertain
philosophical rules, that the power of God seeing it is infinite, and (if we
may so speak) incapable of resistance, should introduce forms or qualities
into subjects in an instant, without preuiall alteration or disposition: which
indeed would be most true did God work after the manner of natural agents,
always according to the utmost of his power. But as the Apostle tells us, he
does all things according to the counsel of his own will, which is fully
commensureable to his power and does modifie it in working. Some things then he
creates in an instant, not because his power is infinite and admits no
impediment, but because his will is it should so work: others though as
immediately created by him are accomplished by little and little after many
interpositions or delays, not that either his will or power can be crossed,
but that his pleasure is to have them so wrought. Such is the creation of true
and lively faith in our souls. For who is he living that can assign me the
very instant yea the set hour, day, week or month wherein his regeneration
was fully wrought? As life spiritual is better then temporal, so for the most
part it is longer in conceiving. Nor does regeneration consist only in the
first infusion of grace or seed immortal; but also in the rooting or taking
of it: both are the immediate works of God, both in Scripture phrase
essential branches of creation.

2. Notwithstanding, if wholly both be his sole works, the former difficulty
still remains, and may be increased by a position of Protestants in it self
most true, but too much, unless more watily pressed, or more skilfully applied
then a man shall usually find it. For what is more often inculcated in popular
Sermons, or in that controversy about free will, then that man is altogether
as dead to spiritual life, as Laza^us was to life natural, till the same
power of God raise him up? But what hence follows? that God before the
infusion of grace requires no actions or operations at our hands, more then
CHRIST did of Lazarus before he restored his soul unto him? then let such as
are destitute of the robes of righteousness cloth themselves with the image
of death, and spend their lives in a perpetual slumber, or get themselves
down into the grave, until God cry unto them by his powerful voice, as
CHRIST did to Lazarus, come forth, or, awake thou that sleep, for CHRIST is
now made thine everlasting light. I marvel not if vulgar auditors make such
inferences to countenance their sloth and negligences, when as many impartial
scholars can hardly conceive what other can be made of many zealous Pastors
doctrine, wresting the meaning of the Spirit by too much wringing the lettet,
or misapplying the former proportion betwixt such as are naturally and
spiritually dead; whose ^earmes, if set aright stand thus. As God required no
vital motion or operation, of such as his Son did raise from natural death:
so does he require no operation or assent spiritual, before he infuse the
life of grace. But in as much as we enjoy the benefit of life natural, or
merely moral, some passive capacities are equired in us, wherewith they whom
CHRIST raised were not qualified, whiles naturally dead: nor were they capable
of renouation in life spiritual, but by reassuming life natural with it
properties. Nor does it imply any show of contradiction, that the actual
endeavors of life natural, or merely moral in us, or the qualification
resulting from them, should be as merely passive in respect of life truly
spiritual, as the state of death, or utter deprivation of all sense or motion
in such as CHRIST raised up, was in regard of life natural: The proportion
then will hold best thus. As CHRIST infused not humane life into trees,
stocks, and stones, but into bodies passiuely organized and figured for the fit
habitation of the humane soul: so neither does he ordinarily bestow
supernatural grace on every one that has a reasonable soul, but on such
only as are passiuely prepared for it. Wherein this preparation consists, or
what our endeauours can add unto it, is the point now in question; partly to
be disputed in this present, more fully in discourses following. To the
assertion last mentioned this observation well suits, that in the first works
of creation the omnipotent power did observe the orderly progress afterward
appointed unto nature, and proceeded not per saltum, but first created a common
mass out of which he made the heaven and earth, not trees, plants or living
creatures immediately. For though these received life from their maker, after
another manner then indiuiduals of the same kind now do, yet the earth and sea
affoorded their matter and substance merely passive. Man he made of the earth,
but first, as is probable, externally figured or proportioned: the woman
likewise was his immediate workmanship, but had her bodily or passive beginning
from the man. Thus even the most immediate works of God presuppose
(ordinarily) such a sub-ordination of passive capacities as is usually seen in
matters producible by humane labor, wit or industry.

3 That grace then is not generated, or educed out of the soul, but properly
created in it, ought not in any congruitie of reason to exclude all active,
though but humane endeavors precedent, for the better attainment of it. Nor
have I ever read of any Protestant or Papist, which held marriage, as either
unnecessary, or superfluous for the propagation of mankind, albeit the most
and best Divines in both religions be of opinion, that the reasonable soul is
not generated, but immediately created by God.

And notwithstanding the supposed truth of this opinion, unless the parents of
our bodies had been as careful for our bringing forth, as brute beasts are
over their brood, few of us this day living had ever enioied the light. Now
for the avoiding of Pelagianisme, or just imputation of popery in this point,
it is enough to disclaim all such dispositions, preparations or endeauours, as
actually cooperate or concur to the production of faith, as temperate
carriage or behavior do for producing the habit of temperance, or natural
qualities of moisture heat and cold do in the education of forms merely
natural, or constitution of bodies totally generable. So shall he never be
able to acquit himself from the error of the Stoics or Manichees, that
accounts it indifferent what works we do, or how we demean our selves before
regeneration. For as God creates not the reasonable soul in every matter, so
does he not create grace in every soul. And, as this inference is good
[vnlesse the Fathers of our bodies had been before us, God had not created us
these souls; in whose creation our fathers had no finger:] so likewise in this
[vnlesse before our regeneration we so demean our selves as God in his word
prescribes, he ordinarily creates not grace in us,] to whose creation
nevertheless our best endeauours confer no more, then our parents do to the
creation of our souls, or the redd earth did to the making of Adam. This fully
remoues the former difficulty, which seemed to dull our endeavors; and from
this instance of the reasonable souls creation I would rather commend this
meditation to the Reader. As greater care is to be had of a woman with
children, of Queens and Princely mothers especially; then of brute beasts
great with young, albeit the fruit of their wombes be the more immediate work
or blessing of God: so should our care and industry for conceiving faith, even
in that it is the sole gift of God, be much greater, then we use for the
attainement of whatsoever can by means natural or ordinary be immediately
achieved.

CHAP. II. That circumspect following the rules of Scripture is more available
for attaining of true faith, then the practice of moral precepts for producing
moral habits: That there may be natural persuasions of spiritual truths and
moral desires, of spiritual good, both right in their kind, though nothing
worth in themselves, but only capable of better, because not hypocritical.
1. IN that it has pleased the spirit to write so much for men's directions in
the way of life, (yet not so much to instruct the faithful what they should
do after their regeneration fully wrought, as the unregenerate what he should
do that it might be wrought in him:) to conceive it but as doubtful, whether
his sacred rules were not more sufficient effectual and complete for attaining
true and lively faith, then any Philosophical methods for planting moral
virtues, were to derogate as much from Gods wisdom, as he should do from his
power that maintained man without direction or assistance supernatural might
work out his own salvation. Yet shall he much wrong both himself and me that
stretches this similitude further then thus, As he that duly observes
philosophical praecepts of morality shall certainly produce moral habits,
and become truly just and honest by often practicing acts of justice,
temperance and sobriety: so he that circumspectly follows rules given by the
spirit of God for attaining faith, shall have it more assuredly produced in
him, even because it is not produced by him but by his God, who is more able to
create new hearts in us, then the natural or unregenerate man to work any
moral reformation in himself or others. All that is required of us is only
to submit our knowledge to our Creators wisdom, our natural desires to his
most holy will, our weak abilities to his omnipotent power. But is it not a
work of the spirit to be thus persuaded or resolved?

2. That the natural man should rightly perceive the things of the spirit of
God implies as evident a contradiction, as to say a blind man should be able to
see things visible. For as things in themselves most visible cannot be seen
without the visiue faculty; so is it impossible matters spiritual should
otherwise then spiritually be discerned. Notwithstanding I scarce have known
any man so blind but might easily have been persuaded that he could not see,
or induced heartily to wish he were as other men are, though in what state they
were, or what pleasures there were in sight he were altogether blind and
ignorant. And I think it would be hard for any man to prove that all such as
our Savior restored to sight had saving faith before he opened their eyes; or
that Naamans condescending to his servants counsel [ 2. Kings 5. 12
my father if the Prophet had bid thee do some great thing would thou not
have done it? how much more when he says to thee wash and beclean,] was an
assent of justifying faith* yet were all these cures as immediate works of
Gods power as is the illumination of the mind by faith. What God has wrought
in them we know, but if Naaman had been so wilful as not to have washed
himself seven times in lorden* or those blind men so wayward, as upon the
constant fame of former miracles not to have besought CHRIST to work the like
in them: all of them, for ought we know or can imagine to the contrary, had
remained still in their former misery. Thus if we grant that a man altogether
unregenerate, upon the hearing of Gods word, or the report that others, whom he
has no reason to distrust, do make of the virtue thereof; may have a natural
apprehension of his natural misery, and a desire (merely natural) to be
like them whose estate he knows no better then he that is borne blind does
the light; or, that as well his apprehension as desire is but a qualification
merely passive, tending only to this purpose, that ascribing the work of
faith to Gods power alone, he may be a subject not incapable of this creation;
we shall avouch nothing contrary to reason natural or supernatural. For
knowledge natural and spiritual differ not in respect of the material
objects known, but in the manner of apprehending their truth and properties.
What subject is there whereof we may not logically dispute? albeit
demonstration, or scientificall conclusions, we can have none but from the
proper principles of that science whereto it belongs, first distinctlie and
infallibly apprehended. And what does hinder us to conceive a natural or
moral assent unto truths divine, as not impossible, though to have a true taste
or homogeniall apprehension of them be the sole and proper effect of faith
infused or supernatural? Of the same Divine truths or rather of the goodness
annexed to them, there may be a natural or moral desire right in it kind,
though not such as Gods law requires, or can immediately please the lawgiuer,
yet such as he requires that we may be capable of better. None, I think, but
would persuade a man whom he knew to be as yet unregenerate, to confess his
sins, to cry for mercy? how, spiritually? so to persuade him were a mockery:
but rather to sue for grace that hereafter he might spiritually desire what
now he naturally does. Nor does he amiss in praying thus, albeit his prayers
in respect of the fountain whence they spring, be merely natural polluted
with the poison of sin. Absolutely he prays not aright, but in his kind; in
as much as his desires are set upon right objects, though not so symbolized or
proportioned to them as they should be. This rectitude of natural desires or
endeauours which arises from the rectitude of the objects whereon they are
imperfectly set, not in respect of degrees or circumstances only, but for the
very essence or substance of the act, is the point whereunto this discourse is
directed. Whether this right use of faculties as yet unsanctified, be, in some
degree possible to all that hear the word* or whether, if possible to all, any
are absolutely excluded from salvation without presupposall of some neglect or
abuse of natural faculties, is to be disputed in the seventh book. From our
assertion thus explicated we may infer the true mean between Pelagianisme
and Stoicisme to be this; [Albeit man before regeneration has no ability of
doing any thing in it self not deserving Hell; yet is there a true and real
possibility left him of doing that, which being done makes him capable of
grace to be created in him, but which not done by him, he shall remain
incapable of such creation.]

3. Upon these plain grounds we hope now to proceed without offense to God or
man: It was the mere good will and pleasure of God to ordain, his mere
wisdom to reveal those means of man's salvation, unto which now revealed the
natural man may so far assent, as to make some trial of their truth as
Naaman did of the Prophets words. The deeper apprehension, though but natural,
man has of his natural misery, or want of ability to raise himself, the more
apt he is, not to lay but to have the sure foundation of faith laid in his
heart by CHRIST JESUS (who is the foundation and chief corner stone in the
spiritual Temple,) so he will but frame his life by his masters precepts and
example.

CHAP. III. Of the fundamental rule of Christianity, to forsake all and deny
our selves: That the sincere practice thereof is a method more admirable and
compendious for the attainment of faith then any Artist could prescribe, the
principles of Christianity being supposed: That the want partly of instruction
in the duties contained in it, partly of solemn and public personal
protestation for their performance, is the principal cause of hypocrisy and
infidelity.
1. THat CHRIST the Son of God should suffer so many indignities of the
Elders, and be killed, seemed a doctrine so strange to his Apostles, that one
of them begins to check him for abooding so ill of himself; Mat. 16. 22.
Be it far from thee, Lord: this shall not come unto thee. What was the
reason? touching this particular they were not as yet spiritual. Thus much at
the least our Saviors reply to Peter imports; Get thee behind me Satan, thou
art an offense unto me: for thou sauourest not the things that be of God, but
those that be of men. This truth the Prophets long before had delivered, though
not so plainly as it could easily be apprehended without any expositor. Our
Savior therefore upon this dialogue between him and Peter shows, not only
his own willingness to undergo all the calamities the Prophet had foretold,
but withal that unless his followers, which had confessed him for the
Messiah, were made conformable to him in this point, they could not be his
Disciples, not capable of any other lesson of saving health* V. 14.
If any man will follow me let him forsake himself, and take up his cross
and follow me. Necessary it was the wisdom of God should thus plainly reveal
this fundamental principle of Christianity, unto whose necessity
notwithstanding, men in some sort may assent without the spirit of
sanctification, or any branch of supernatural inherent grace Ordinarily it is
as true of the first as of the second resurrection; 1. Cor. 15. 46.
First is that which is natural, then that which is spiritual. Many have
assented unto this rule as true, which did never spiritually assent unto it as
good in the choice, albeit they have desired so to do. Now that they obtained
not what they desired, was because they sought it amiss, yet not spiritually
amiss (for spiritually they could not seek it), but amiss in their kind.
For it is a point to be considered, that as there is a natural desire of
spiritual good, so there may be, and usually is, a resolution natural, or
only moral, to undertake the course prescribed for attaining that
qualification which is ordinarily required ere faith be infused or grace
created. This resolution without transgressing the limits of it own kind may
admit many degrees, as well in the feruency of the attempt, as in the
constancy of the pursuit. As the spiritual good we assent unto is
apprehended, though but morally or confusedly, as infinitely greater then any
temporary pleasure or commodity: so the resolution to suffer all the
grieuances wherewith the expectance of it can be charged, though but moral
must every way far exceed all purposes of like nature (all springing from
the same vnsanctifyed root) that are set on objects of another rank:
otherwise all that profess they seek, make, or as the Apostle Act* 13 ^^.
says of the Jews, judge themselves unworthy of eternal life.

2. Unto what tolerance would not that flagrant speech of Cato, when he was to
conduct the relics of Pompeius forces through the scorched sands of Libia,
have almost impelled any resolute Soldier, that should have seen so grave a
Senator act so hard and mean a part as he professed to make choice of? Unto
far greater certainly then we Christians in these days either conceive as
necessary, or would resolve to adventure upon, for attaining unto Gods rest.

Lucan. lib. 9
O quibus vna salus placuit mea castra secatis
Ind^mita ceruice mori; componite mentes
Ad magnum virtutis opus, summosque labores.
Vadimus in campos steriles, exustaque mundi,
Qua nimius Titan, and rarae in fontibus vndae,
Siccaque letiferis squalent serpentibus arua;
Durum iter, ad leges, patriaeque ruentis amorem,
Per mediam Libyen veniant, atque inuia tentent,
Si quibus in nullo positum est euadere voto,
Si quibus ire sat est, neque enim mihi fallere quenqua^
Est animus, tectoque metu perducere vulgus.
Ii mihi sunt comites, quos ipsa pericula ducent,
Qui me test, pati, vel que tristissima pulchrum,
Romanumque putant, at qui sponsore salutis
Miles eget, capiturque animae dulcedine, vadat
Ad dominum meliore via, dum primus arenas
Ingrediar, primusque gradus in puluere ponam,
Mecalor aethereus feriat, mihi plena veneno
Occurrat serpens* fatoque pericula vestra
Praetentate meo: sitiat, quicunque bibentem
Viderit: aut vmbras nemorum quicunque petentem,
Astuet: aut equitem peditum praecedere turmas,
Deficiat, si quo fuerit discrimine notum
Dux, an miles eam, serpens, sitis, ardor, arenae,
Dulcia virtuti: gaudet patientia duris.
Laetius est quoties magno sibi constat honestum.
Sola potest Libye turbam praestare malorum,
Vt deceat fugisse viros. -- -- -- --
Sweet mates, whose wished end of life is death deuoid of thral,
Address your minds to service heard; but valor does you call.
We enter now on sterill plains, where Titans rays do sting,
Where too much heat makes water scant, even in the very Spring:
On coasts where Bacchus nere was set, nor Ceres ever sown;
On dry fields destitute of grass with Serpents ouer-growne.
A woeful way; but to their laws and ruined countries love
Through mids of Lybia let them march, and way-lesse wanderings prove,
As many as have no mind to escape, but safety set at naught
Content for pay to take their pains, nor came't ere in my thought
With guile to train the simple on, by covering present dread,
The fittest mates for me they are whom dangers seen shall lead:
Who, to have me spectator, parts most tragic wilaffect,
As Souldier-like and Roman worth; my camp he must reject
That hostage for his safety craves or life accounts sweet,
Let such go choose some safer way his master for to meet,
Whilst I first foot it in the dust and tread you paths in sand,
Let heat from heaven me first assail, let Serpents against me band,
Full charged with venom: it is all one, resolved I am to die,
That ye your danger by my fates more safely may foretrie.
Let him cry out I am a thirst that me shall spy to drink,
Or him complain of sultring heat to shade, that sees me shrink:
Let him lie down and rest himself, that first shall see me ride,
Or take my place, by any ods, if ere it be descried:
Whether I as vulgar soldier march, of general to the rest,
This Serpent, sands, and scorching heat content true valor best:
From hardness patience reapeth joy: that honor is most worth
Which dearest costs, and breeds most pain, whilst it is in bringing forth;
No land but Lybia could afford such store, of toil and pain,
That even your flight through it, may th'fame of hardy Soldiers gain.
3 The resolution although unto the worldly wise, or secular gallant, it may
seem truly noble, yet rightly examined will prove but turbulent or humorous;
because his patience to endure such hardness, were it as great as he
himself, o^ perhaps the Poet for him makes profession of, was but equal to
his impatience of civil ^e^uitude: his light regard of venomous Serpents but
answerable to his sear of being beholden to Caesar's courtesy. And what marvel
if one or more impotent desires having gotten absolute command over the soul,
do impell it to such difficulties, as none f^ce from the like tyranny of
affections would adventure on. To have esteemed captivity of body where was no
remedy, a lighter burden then such misery as he now voluntarily exposed
himself and others unto, had bin a better document of true liberty. Thus
enabled to brook every condition of life which disesteem could lay upon him,
had been entirely to possess his soul with patience, which is the best
inheritance whereunto mortality can be entitled; whereas now he did but strive
to cast out one potent enemy, by arming a band of insolent incorrigible slaves
against him. More heroical, yea most divine was the generositie of our
Saviors mind, that being heir of all things, Lord and maker of all mankind,
could entertain servitude, contempt and scorn of baser enemies with greater
peace and quietness then Cato did his free censorship: that he could suffer
grieuances, not of one or few kinds, whereunto peculiar desires of pleasing
himself in the auoidance of some much abhorred evils, or in the assequ^tion of
any higher prized good, might impell or sway his mind: but that he could with
such constancy determine in no kind to please himself, resoluiug to fulfill
what the Prophet had said, (...). 15* 3* ps 69. 3
The reproaches of them that reproched thee fell on me. Nothing distasteful to
flesh and blood, whereof the meanest of Gods servants had tasted, which he
swallowed not. Now he being our pattern and guide, to be found in him, or
like him, is the end which first and principally must be intended. The next
point whereto his endeavors, that desires to be a Christian inwardly, should be
addressed is seriously to cast up his reckonings what will be required at his
hands: impartially and thoroughly to examine his heart whether willing to forgo
all such hopes or contentments natural as are incompatible with the life he
seeks, or to endure such worldly crosses or calamities as the hope of it at
any time has been, or may be charged with.

The sum of this reckoning is, that the sufferance, whereto every true
follower of CHRIST must be trained, is more entire and complete then that which
Cato exacted of his Soldiers; and herein harder, specially to brave minds,
that it must proceed not from spleen or hate to any man's person, not from
greatness of stomach or haughty indignation, but from a mild and placide
disesteeme of mortal life, and whatsoever one way or other may affect it,
whilst these are weighed with that eternal weight of glory, or the doubtful
consequences of our estate after death. For this reason happily it is that the
feruencie of prophetical spirit is so much allaied in Evangelical relators of
our Saviors speeches, men otherwise enspired with a greater measure of divine
knowledge in heavenly mysteries then the Prophets were: which knowledge
notwithstanding they were to express in a more languishing style, that so the
characters of their discourses might be an emblem of such calm resolution,
long suffering, and mortification, as the Gospel of CHRIST requires. As our
qualification is more hard, or rather requires greater time, more serious
meditations and settled judgment then is necessary for framing the former
temper of Caton^an Soldiers, or a brave Roman resolution* so is the example of
our leader, as more eminent and conspicuous, so more efficacious to work the
like in his followers; partly because his dignity in respect of us is
infinitely greater, then was Catoes in respect of those that betook themselves
to his conduct, partly in that 1 Ioh. (...)
greater is he which is in us, than ^e that is in the world, so we show our
selves not unworthy the participation of his spirit.

4. Of the former qualification one branch most distasteful to flesh and blood,
or to natures most ingenuous, is constancy to endure the hate and opposition
though of dearest friends, the reproaches and reuilings of men, who for any
endowments either of art or nature are most abject in respect of them whom they
revile* did not these willingly count all such prerogatives well lost for
gaining CHRIST. But to this yoke we are to submit our necks before we take
upon us to be accounted servants of CHRIST; of whom in every age it is true,
Mark ^3. ^^
ye shall be hated of all men for my Names sake: of all that seek not to be
his servants* ^or, whatsoever the event may be, the constancy to undergo this
heavy task is absolutely necessary; Mat. ^0. ^^*
For the disciple is not above his master, nor the servant above his Lord: It
is enough for the disciple that he be as his master is, and the servant as his
Lord: if they have called the master of the house Beelzebub, how much more
shall they call them of his household? And again, He that loves father or
mother more then me, is not worthy of me: and he that loves son or daughter
more then me, is not worthy of me; He that takes V. 27.
not his cross even the whole body of afflictions is not worthy of me.
(...)ert part. 2. chap. 31. ^ Mat. 16. v 24. ^^ any man will (...).
His mistake was exceeding gross that took these or the b like passages for
evangelical counsels, or admonitions useful for some few aiming at more
perfection then most are capable of; not precepts necessary to all that seek
after glory and immortality, or that holiness without which none shall see
God. For elsewhere our Savior directs the same lesson to the great multitudes
that followed him, least any man should deceive himself in thinking it an
easier matter then indeed it was to be his follower; Lake ^^^ v. 2^. 26. 27.
Mal^ma^^s own exposition of this place is orthodoxall albeit he propose it
somewhat timorously and wa^isy as ^ea^ing ^east it might be censured.
And there went great multitudes with him: and the turned and said unto them,
Vide Luke 9 23. ^4. Mark 8 34.
If any man come to me, and hate not his father, and mother, and wife, and
children, and brethren, and sisters, yea and his own self also he cannot be my
disciple. And whosoever does not bear his cross and come after me cannot be
my disciple.

5. The necessity of this resolution he there more fully sets out unto us in
two parables; he that will build must first be able to calculate the charges
and his means to defray them. Otherwise to begin, being unable to make an end,
were but to lay the foundation of his disgrace, and scorn, in the loss of his
cost and pains. A Prince likewise that will undertake a war must have sure
trial of his own, and skill to discover his enemies strength, otherwise to
bid him battle were but to incense him the more, and thrust a title into his
hands to defeat him of all he has. The conclusion of these inductions our
Savior repeates again, Ver. 33.
So likewise whosoever denies not himself, and for saketh all, he cannot be
my disciple. In which short speech we have this account made to our hands,
that, ere we can hope to be edified in faith, or safely proclaim war unto
Satan, we must make over all our interest in our lives, or whatsoever is
dear unto us. Not thus prepared we shall but lay foundations which cannot hold
siege, sure to be surprised in the day of battle, after we have exasperated
the venom and rancour of the old serpent, our sworn enemy, by professing our
selves to be CHRIST'S soldiers, and proffering to fight under his banners. For
as Prou. 25. v. 28.
Solomon says, He that has no rule over his own spirit (or as others read)
he that refraineth not his appetite, is like a City broken down and without
walls. In this regard he that sets his hand unto this sacred plough should first
begin to sound the depth of the former rule, what it is to deny our selves,
and forsake all we have, for in this furrow must the seed of life be sown. And
of this, as of most other divine precepts, there may be persuasions either
natural, yet right in their kind; or hypocritical and erroneous, or truly
spiritual. Here no^ices in religion commonly begin to balke, and no wonder;
seeing few are called to any strict personal account, of that which others
have undertaken for them at their first admission into the bedrole of
Christians. But if the contents of that triple vow were distinctly and fully
unfolded unto us, as soon as we had any knowledge of good and evil; and all
the several branches of Gods covenant with as great care and solemnity as
often inculcated, as Moses commanded the Law should be to the Read lib. 3.
sect. 3. chap. 7.
Israelites children; and lastly the vow it self confirmed and ratified by our
personal protestation in the sight of the congregation; the fear as well of
God as of shame before men, in who^e presence we made this good profession,
would bind many of us to more Christian behavior then the best of us, as the
world goes, dare make show of; as also restrain us from many deadly
enormities, which now admonished of, we will not account any sins. Thus
prepared to receive it, it would be overmuch infidelity to distrust the
plentiful infusion of inherent sanctifying grace at our solemnities of
confirmations, were these first sanctified with public prayers, or performed
with such Christian care and diligence as they ought. A religious duty in the
Christian Church, which it were to be wished, might be performed more often,
more solemnly, and more religiously then it uses to be. But this negligence
is usually seconded by a positive oversight of many religious, and otherwise
learned Preachets, which I take it, enter young scholars in Christianity
amiss, laboring in the first place to increase or fortify their persuasions
of belief in CHRIST, and actual remission of their sins in particular;
which indeed is the end and best fruit of faith, not usually growing unless
our hearts be thus ploughed up and the strength of every carnal desire broken.
Impossible it is our persuasions in these points should be more sincere or
sound, then our precedent denial of our selves and forsaking of all that we
have.

6. He (says the Roman Philosopher) that will be rich must not so much seek
to fill his coffers with coin as to empty his breast of superfluous or greedy
thoughts. More certain it is (because the precept of a wiser teacher) that the
readiest way to be rich in says is, not directly to increase, or intend our
persuasions, or assent unto the former, or like points, but first to diminish
or weaken inbred desires of what contentments soever the devil, the world, or
flesh can present unto us. This is the true meaning of the former advice which
our Savior delivered plainly, and as his manner is to the capacity of the
vulgar, yet not vulgarly: for in that, as in all the rest, he spoke more
metaphisically then ever man spoke. And though the spirit alone work faith in
our hearts, yet the rules given for our direction how to demean our selves as
true patients in this cure, are more methodicall and compendious, then any art
under the sun, the principles of Christianity supposed, could invent; but
such as every true artist must of necessity admire, the more he meditates upon
them. The fundamental and most necessary principles of arts are commonly far
distant from the utmost end whereto they direct, though that in comparison but
at hand and within the reach of reason. But the roof of this edefice though
higher then the highest heavens rises not, as natural buildings do, by
degrees or laying one stone upon another, but springs immediately out of this
foundation once rightly laid. That the strength, or excessive eagerness of our
inbred appetites, or gross desires make those transitory contentments, whereon
they are set, seem much greater, and better then in their own nature they
are; is a conclusion whereto reason and experience, not ouerborne or perverted
by sensual inclinations, will subscribe. Meats in themselves but loathsome or
course, by extreme hunger become more pleasant then choice of delicates; so
does grieuousnesse of thirst make ordinary water relish much better then best
wines after sweet meats, or a banquet; and unto men of meaner fortunes but
ambitious, a little court holy water is more acceptable then a real favor to
a contented mind. Many Philosophers have been copious in this argument, unto
whose labou^s I remit the Reader. Now seeing Christian faith (as from the maine
current of Scriptures the nature of it heretofore has been derived,) is a
firm assent unto divine revelations, especially Gods mercies in CHRIST, as
much better then life it self, or all the contentments that can attend it:
impossible it is such faith should ever be rightly planted, much less finally
prosper in our hearts, until the strength of those intoxicating desires, which
make molehi^s seem like mountains, be either broken, or they extirpated; or
to use our Saviors words, until we learn to deny our selves, and prize
this brittle life as not worth the anxious or solicitous care of keeping, much
less of pampering. If true it be which Necesse est Honestum sit ei vile, cui
corpus charum est. Seneca.
Seneca says: He that holds his body dear must needs count honesty little
worth: so it is impossible a man should rightly value divine truths, or
constantly fix his thoughts on things which are above, unless he first waine
them from the world, and set all below the heavens at naught. This lesson once
truly learned, the former impartial assent unto the truth and goodness of
revelations supernatuall, will without further artificial direction uniformly
result; and this resultance fitly qualifies for following CHRIST, and makes us
passiuely apt for every good work, as having no headstrong desire or affection
to resist the impulsions of faith, Read Sect. 2. chap. 4. and 5.
whose property most natural is to incline the soul unto every kind of true
goodness.

7. But here the hypocrite always perverting the practical as the heretic
does the theoricall rules of Scripture to his destruction, from the common
error before intimated, never ^ounds this maine depth of Christianity, but
passes it over as if it were some Philosophical shallow: holding such
resolute and exact contempt of the world and all vanities or superfluities of
life, as many Philosophers discovered for the only ground of moral quietness or
content of mind, to be more superstitious then necessary for obtaining that
peace of conscience which passes all understanding natural, but is the sure
fruit of supernatural faith. And after he has once thus lost the right way,
and wandered a while in uncertain blind persuasions of his private favor with
God, takes a course quite contrary to all godliness. For where our Savior lays
it down as one of the first and most necessary rudiments of Christianity, that
we must forsake all and deny our selves, otherwise we cannot truly follow
him: the hypocrite persuades himself he has forsaken father and mother,
sister and brother, even all he has any secular reference unto, because he so
devoutly follows CHRIST. As in what? In worshipping images, in adoring or
kissing the Crucifix, in fasting, in whipping himself, or the like bodily
exercises, if his hypocrisy be papisticall: or if an hypocritical protestant
he be, in hearing sermons, po^ting places of scripture upon every occasion in
common talk, or in precise observance of some precepts whose practice is very
compatible with his principal desires, apt to support his reputation otherwise
defective and lame, or perhaps consort as well with his sower affections, his
niggardly or scraping disposition, as vanity or prodigality with the humor of
youth or gallantry. Zeal in reading and hearing Gods word I ever admire when
it is accompanied with practice conformable: but to be more precise in
persuasions, then in actions, more strict in sanctifying the saboath, then open
handed toward the poor, or more zealous in performance of duties toward God
no way chargeable, then lowly, courteous, and really loving toward their
neighbors, is a fearful sign that worldly affection has got the start of
faith in the spring, and will hardly be ouertopped in the growth; Vide sect. 2.
chap. 4. parag. 9.
that the mind thus affected is sickely and faint, yet willing to stay the
working of conscience with these repasts. And were it not the nature of this
disease to put out the eye of reason, and rely wholly upon forced persuasions,
it were impossible such palpable contradictions betwixt most men's ordinary
resolutions, and fundamental principles of faith, (as any heathen that could
but understand what the words of Scripture meant, would upon the first view of
both clearly descry) should go so long, often times for ought we can perceive
the whole course of their lives, without control or check, and without notice
of their danger. He is in worse case questionless then the mere natural or
reasonable man, even blinded by Gods just judgment for his hypocrisy, that
can suffer himself to be persuaded he has truly denied himself, taken up
his Cross, forsaken all, and made fit to follow Christ, when as the world
sees, and his practice proclaims he minds nothing either so intensiuely, or
continually, as the increasing of his wealth, or raising his own, or his
childrens fortunes already greater, then they are Christianly capable of.

8. For this again is a fundamental rule, whereof there may be persuasions,
either right only in their kind, and but natural; or truly spiritual; That
great estates, worldly dignities, or plentiful matter of carnal contentments,
can never be rightly managed or morally well used without great moral wisdom,
good education, sobriety of life and discretion. Much more necessary, (as
natural reason rightly persuaded of Scriptures truth will acknowledge) is an
abundant measure of faith to use abundance in any kind, or such prerogatives
as flesh and blood are prone to delight in, to the glory of God, the good of
his Church, and salvation of our own souls. Hence as we rightlier reckon men's
wealth, or competence of estate, by the overplus of their certain incomes,
compared with their necessary outlayings, then by the largeness of annual
revenues without such allocations, or deductions: so must we measure the
strength or efficacy of true faith, not by the multitude of degrees, or the
intensiue perfection of the persuasion, or assent in it self considered, or
with reference to it positive object, but by the excess which it has in
respect of contrary desires, or temptations incident to our course of life. If
the assent of faith be as twelve, and any natural delight in prerogatives
though spiritual, such as the Corinthians had, be as thirteen; that man's
faith is worse then nothing: whereas if six degrees of the same assent should
in some other match with three or four of the like natural delight, or
affection, the sovereignty of his faith is much greater then the formers,
because better able to quell all contrary motions or rebellions of the flesh.
Though faith we had of force sufficient to move mountains, yet were it
possible Achans vast desires might harbor with it in the same breast, a wedge
of gold would ouersway it, or wrest it out of it place, and hale the soul
wherein it lodged, maugre all it force and strength, to hell. But he that had
no mind of earth, nor longed not after this bright clay might easily be
advanced to heaven by faith; not able to work any external effects half so
wondrous. Lucifer and his wicked confederates have persuasions of some divine
truths so firm and strong as would almost enforce any man living unto
goodness, which notwithstanding no way benefit but rather exasperate them to
mischief, because ouermatched with malicious hellish inclinations. That
excellent knowledge which was the ground of their first station, though more
firm by much then the faith whereby we stand, was ouerturned by delight or
pride in this their proper excellency. The name of grace or faith in scriptures
includes besides the quality infused, this relation of excess, or soueraignety
over the desires of the flesh. But whether it be possible that grace should be
the same, as well for quallity as degrees, in the carnally minded, and truly
sanctified I dispute not. Howsoever, let the nature or entitatiue perfection of
it be never so great, unless it can thus conquer affection and bring the body
in subjection to the spirit, it is not the grace we are finally to pray for,
nor has it that faith, whose right plantation we seek, for it associate. In
this sense we may safely admit the Cited Sect. 2. chap. 6. parag.
opinion of Canus and Victoria, [ That the entity or quality of grace may
increase without any increase of Gods favor or good acceptance] not only as
approueable and free from Vasquez censure, but as necessary and unquestionable,
unless our love unto the world and flesh, or estimate of all delights and
proffers they can present, uniformly decay as the entity of this infused
quality, or our habitual assent unto divine truth, increases. This decrease
of carnal affection, may (as we said of other persuasions and resolutions,) be
either natural or truly spiritual; the later kind only pleases God and is
the immediate object of divine approbation, but through the righteousness of
CHRIST, of which because it is wrought in faith, it is capable, so is not our
natural resolution to abandon such delights and pleasures as others follow,
though morally sincere and purposely intended to the end we may be fitly
qualified for Christ's service.

CHAP. IIII. That the observance of the former rule is most easy unto men of
meaner gifts, unto whom in this respect Gods mercy is greater then if their
gifts were better, and yet his mercy justly to be esteemed greatest of such as
have most excellent gifts by nature.
1. GOds unspeakable wisdom, in recovering the sons of Adam his forlorn
patients, by bringing them low, manifested in the absolute necessity of the
former precepts, being duly waighed; the eunuch can have no reason to say
Therefore the barren is blessed which is v^de filed, and knows not the
sinful bed: she shall have fru^t in the visitation of the souls. And the
eunuch, which with his hands has not wrought iniquity, nor imagined wicked
things against God: for unto him shall be given the special gift of faith and
an acceptable portien in the temple of the Lord Wis. 3. v. 13. 14. Esaias 56. 3.
4.
I am a dry tree, nor the siliest catife that creepes on earth any just cause
to complain of his wretched estate. Indeed were good natural parts, (whether
of body or mind) with such ornaments as art can put upon them, or other
external graces of wealth, authority, or birth, bestowed on man for his own
sake, or that he might rely or trust in them: he that excels in any or many
of these might have whereof to rejoice amongst his brethren; so had they just
cause to be dejected that were conscious of their wants. But if we consider the
pronenesse of man's heart to wax proud of good qualities, and the direct
opposition betwixt all pride, and the fundamental qualification before
expressed for the receiving of faith and grace, that the renouncing all delight
in these or other natural dignities is but an appertenance of that precept to
deny our selves, and forsake all we have: we would quickly subscribe unto our
2. Cor. 12. 5.
Apostles resolution, that if we must needs boast or glory we would boast in
that wherein we have most reason to rejoice, in our defects or infirmities;
seeing the less temptations we have to glory in wealth, strength, or wit, or
whatsoever men call their own: the better opportunities we have to glory in
him who is the Lord of life and strength the author of wealth and only giver
of these and every good gift. To keep mirth though actual and externally
occasioned within the bounds of wisdom, or mingle much laughter with
discretion, is a skill whereof many natures are not capable: much harder it is
to retain such strong natural inclination as are the fountains of our
internal and habitual delight, the chief pillars of our glory, and
principal roots of our reioicing, within the compass of natures pollitique
Laws. Hence, as the Philosopher observes, excellency of beauty, of bodily
strength, of birth, or abundant wealth will hardly be subdued unto reason.
With what difficulty then will such glorious prerogatives of flesh and blood
be drawn to yield loiall obedience unto the humility and simplicity of faith;
when as that subjection which (...) Aristot. politic. lib. 4. cap. 11.
Aristotle requires in his moral patriot, is but a formality in respect of
that absolute deiection, or prostration which true faith requires, ere our
souls be capable of it presence: the best service which our inferior
faculties owe to reason moral, or merely natural, being but as dead and
liuelesse in regard of that alacrity in performances, wherewith grace expects
to be entertained.

2. The Lib. 11. epigram. 57 Hanc tibi virtutem ^racta ^acit vrseusansa. Et
tristis nullo qui ^epe^ ^gne focus Et teges and Cimex and ^ud^ sponda grabali,
et breuis atque ^adem no^te dieque toga.
Epigramatist acutely imputes the stoickes contempt of death unto the slender
appertenances of his poor life, in whose loss there could be no great harm.
For who would much desire to see himself, without change of apparel, basely
clad, to lodge in a sordid cabin, and go to a hard bedsted hungry and cold?
but had he been a while accustomed to those pleasures of which Rome till that
time had never scarc^tie, and Domitians present Court greatest variety; he
would have wished (unless the Epigrammatist rashly or uncharitably censure his
disposition) that his life had been lengthened as far beyond the ordinary
course of nature, as Philoxenus did his wesand might be above the usual size
of other men's. Yet howsoever it be for the particular, the indefinite truth of
his conjecture is confirmed by the known experiment of Antigonus soldier,
who, after the perfect recovery of his health, became as tenderly respectfull
as any of his fellow soldiers were of life, whereof whilst his body was
troubled with such a loathsome disease as made his soul desire to be divorced
from it, he had been so prodigal as made his general admire his valor. It
may be both of these were willing to make a virtue of necessity; or if the
stoickes resolution were rather out of choice, yet it comes short of that true
valor, which the censurer by light of nature saw to be truly commendable,
and divinity teaches to be absolutely necessary to a Christian soldier.

Rebus in angustis facile est contemnere vitam,
Fortiter ille facit qui miser esse potest.
A sorry life's soon set at naught; to leave want is no loss:
His soul has marched valiantly that sinks not vnder's Cross.
What the soldier did out of humor, or constraint, a wise man may do out of
deliberation or choice: and without controversy great is the liberty they
gain of others in good causes, that from a serious forecast and view of a
better end then these men did apprehend, can prize both the present possession
and all future hopes of life, as low as these did their bodies in their
calamities.

3. Some critickes willing to show they were able to epsy a fault where there
were one indeed; have taxed it as an indecorum in Homer, which was none, to
bring old Chryses into Agamemnons presence, never daunted with sight of the
Grecian army, when as men of his age are usually timorous. And it is no
marvel if that courage which springs from heat of blood, and makes men
aduenturous in boisterous encounters, do cool, as the roots of their bodily
strength and agility decay. Notwithstanding, the short remnant of a feeble life
is easily ouerswaied with calm and quiet apprehensions of an honorable death,
wherewith the strong hopes, which fresh spirits minis^^ unto young men of long
life, are seldom stirred. For unto them the fight of death is always ghastly,
unless it be presented in troubled blood; nor can they, usually, be drawn to
meet it but upon confidence of victory, or at least of making others die
before them. Thus unless there be some other defect, the less way old me^
have to run the farther start they have of youth for freedom of speech, or
resolution, before such as can put them to death without resistance. Hence
another (...)
Poet, bringing in an aged sire more sharply expostulating his co^tryes cause
with a Prince of fiercer disposition then Agamemnon, as if ^ec had purposely
sought to preoccupate all captious or critical censures, expresses the reason
of his boldness.

Vnde ea libertas? iuxta illi finis and aetas
Tota retro, saeraeque velit decus addere morti
What freedoms this? A private man to take a Tyrant down?
His race being run? it was now fit time the end with praise to crown?
Could we out of mature deliberation rest persuaded, of what the doctrine of
faith delivers as a truth undoubted, that promotio^ comes neither from the East
nor from the West, that length or shortness of life depend not on the course
of nature, but on his will and pleasure, who has every member of our bodies
written in his book, able to deface all instantly with one dash of his pen;
that if we spare to speak before others in his cause, we may want breath to
plead our own before him: How easy would it be for us to confess Christ, by
professing the truth before the mightiest amongst the sons of men: when as
now our servile dependence on such as our Christian freedom and resolution
might bring in subiecton to the truths they scorn; on such as have not power
to hurt our bodies, or deprive us of food and raiment, or other necessaries of
private life; but only to repel us perhaps from ascending higher then any
opportunity of doing good service to our Lord and Master calls us* makes us
daily and howerly ashamed of him and his Gospel, which the great ones of this
present world confess in words* mightily oppugn in deeds, as we do
scandalize the power and virtue of it by our silence. Great were the materials
of the contentments, which Hester enjoyed in Ahashuerus Court, so were her
hopes of having them continued or enlarged: Mordecay said that they should
answer Ester that, Think not with thy self, that thou shall escape in the
Kings house, more then all the Jews, for if thou hold thy peace at this
time, comfort and deliverance shall appear to the Jews out of another place,
but thou and thy fathers house shall perish and who knows whether thou art
come to the Kingdom, for such a time. Ester 4. 14. 15
Mordecays admonition notwithstanding, grounded upon the considerations before
mentioned, moved her to hazard all, and to adventure on her gracious Kings
extreme displeasure, rather then prejudice the cause of Gods people by
forbearance of petitioning on their behalf. Many of undaunted courage in the
open field would hardly have pressed into the kings presence against the Law,
for though the danger could not be greater then they often exposed themselves
unto against the enemy; yet fear of disgrace which might ensue, would in this
case assuage that boldness whereunto hope of honor, usually animates greatest
spirits. Cato then, and other such resolute Romans, as gave Caesar to
understand they had less dread of death then of his pardon, would have proved
but dastards in the camp of CHRIST, for many principal points of whose
service, he that is more afraid of a miserable or disgraced life, then of a
violent or bloody death, is very unfit. Now faith if it be uniformly set,
equally enclines us to make choice of either station, as the disposition of our
lot shall fall. The best ground of our qualification for undergoing either,
will be with deliberate vnpartiality to rate, as well the calamities or
encumbrances, as the prosperities or pleasures incident to this mortal life,
no higher then in nature they are, for quality vain, and for durance
momentary; still weakening our natural desires of the one, and fortifying our
feebleness or peculiar indispositions to sustain the other. Some are more
easily dejected with fear of ignominy others of want or poverty, most are apt
to be much moved with bodily pain, but all most with that which is most
contrary to the inclinations or accustomances, in whose exercise o^ practice
they most delight. And seeing the abundance of our desires, or affectiors,
usually brings forth a conceited greatness of the sensual objects whereon
they are set; the enfeebling or pining of internal appetites will be the
readiest way to erect our spirits, and ruinate all drowsy imaginations of
greater terror, then can really be presented to resolute and vigilant thoughts.
The best means again to enfeeble inbred appetites, or impair the strength of
natural or customary inclinations, is substraction of their fuel, as much
familiarity with their proper objects, or affectation of what we see most
followed by others, which usually have wit enough to accomplish their chief
desires, but want grace to account the inconveniences, that without great
circumspection always attend on their accomplishment. What though our means
be so short as will not permit us to fare deliciouslie, our presence not so
gracious as to win their favor that behold us, our countenances not so armed
with authority as to imprint awe in our inferiors, our wits not so nimble as
may enable us to lead a faction, our experience not so great as to compass
preferment, or wind our selves out of intricate perplexed businesses: yet all
these defects have this comfort annexed, That although we had Dives fare, and
Cressus wealth, Tullyes eloquence and Caesar's fortune, Aristotle's subtilty, and
Achitophels policy, Sampsons strength, and Absolons beauty, Salomons wisdom,
with all, and all his roialty; yet were we bound to use all these blessings as
if we used them not, to employ them not to our own but to his praise that gave
them, in whom without these we may more truly delight then any can do in
their abundance. Luke 12. v. 48.
For to whom much is given of him much shall be required. This in the first
place, not to rejoice though in miraculous effects of graces bestowed upon him,
but rather in that his name is written in the book of life, in whose golden
lines none are enfraunchised but such as in poverty of spirit have served an
apprentiship to humility. Thus may the brother of lowest degree, so he will not
be wilfully proud, nor stretch his desires beyond the measure God has
distributed to him, stoop without straining to that pitch, whereto even such
as are of gifts most eminent, or in highest dignity must of necessity descend,
but by many degrees and with great difficulty, seldom without some grievous
fall, or imminent danger of precipitation.

4. But is not this to calumniate our Creators goodness, as if he did bait his
hooks with seeming blessings, or set golden snares to entangle the souls of
his servants? No, reason taught the heathen to think more charitably of their
supposed Goddess Nature, on whom they fathered that truth, which faith
instructs us to ascribe unto our heavenly Father. Cl^^dian who notwithstanding
was in part a Christian but vt^ered this rather as a dictate of nature then as
an oracle of faith


Natura beatis Omnibus esse dedit: si quis cognouerit vti

If from true bliss thou chance to stray, do not the blame on nature lay:
Enough she gave thereto t'attaine: but gifts without good use are vain.
The gifts mean or great, bestowed on every man by his maker, are best for
him; so he would faithfully implore the assistance of his spirit wholly
submitting himself to his direction for their usage. His mercy is many times
greatest to such as he endowes with least blessings of art or nature, in that
as their spirits are usually slow, their capacities shallow and abilities
weak, so their conquest over delight or pride in their own good parts, in
which the strength and virtue of faith consists especially, is the easiest,
their aptitude to delight in spiritual goodness the greatest, and their
alliance to true humility most immediate. His mercies again many ways appear
most toward such as excel in gifts of nature. First, if they seriously
address their best faculties to contemplate the fountain whence they slow, or
to esteem of their Creators goodness by his good blessings bestowed on
themselves; they have a perpetual spur to stir up their alacrity in good
courses, a curb to restrain them from falling into ordinary and vulgar
sins, whereinto others usually slide through deiection of mind, or
opportunity of their obscure place, and low esteem with others. The best
lesson I remember in old Chaucer, and for ought I can perceive the only right
use can be made of a man's notice of his own worth is, to think every offense
of like nature more grievous in himself, then in others whom he accounts his
inferiors. Again, as eminency of natural or acquired worth exposes men to
more then ordinary spiritual danger, so, no question, rightly employed it
makes them capable of great reward; and few of this temper if free choice were
left unto themselves, but would rather desire to get honor though with
adventure of an auoidable danger, then to be assured of ordinary recompense for
safe emploiments Briefly as their stock or talent is greater, and through
indiscreet or unthrifty courses may bring them into great arrerages at their
final accounts: so watily and faithfully employed, it always yields greater
increase to Gods glory, who will not suffer the least excess of good service
done, to pass without an overplus of reward. That which turns all his
blessings into curses is an ouerweening conceit of our own worth, and a
persuasion thence arising that we are sit for any fortunes whereunto
industrious practices authorized by humane Law can raise us; and inwardly
furnished for sustaining any place, for which the dispensers of civil honor
can be wrought outwardly to grace, or qualify us. As the disease it self is
deadly, so is it usually accompanied with a phreneticall symptom: for like
wandering Knights that seek adventures in unknown Countries, we apprehend no
danger in those courses of life wherewith we are altogether unacquainted, but
rather wish to meet with temptations new and uncouth, because it is more
glorious to conquer them, then not to be assaulted by them. But how can this
resolution stand with that daily petition, Lord lead us not into temptation?
much easier it is to avoid their danger, by refraining all trial of such
deceiptfull contentments as make way for them, then not to yield unto them
after accustomed experience of their pleasant insinuations. To be able not to
affect their pleasures is a point of Christian valor, highly commendable
amongst the wiser sort of men, and immediately approueable with God: nor is
there any that much desires to taste them, but is obnoxious with all to be so
bewitched by them, that he shall think himself free enough from their
entisements, when his heart and soul are indissolubly betroathed to them.

CHAP. V. Our Saviors parables especially those (Mat. 13. Mark 4. Luke 8.)
most sovereign rules for the plantation and growth of faith: Of unfruitful
hearers resembled by the high way side and stony ground, with brief caueats
for altering their disposition.
1. LEt others esteem of them as they list, our Saviors parables in that they
contain the secret mysteries of the heavenly kingdom, shall ever as they
always have done, seem to me the most sovereign rules for planting faith,
and the matters contained in them the most precious objects for a Christians
choicer thoughts to work upon in his selected hours. In that it has further
pleased my gracious God to make known unto me, not only the parables
themselves which were communicated to the multitudes, but our Saviors divine
expositions Read Mat 13. v. 10. d Mark 4. v. 11
of them, privately imparted to his disciples; I cannot think either my self
or others who are partakers of this favor, and not wilfully indulgent to such
desires as brought blindness upon the Jew; to be of their number that are
without, but rather of theirs to whom it is given to know the secrets of the
Kingdom of Heaven Yet even his most perspicuous expositions shall become
parables unto us, if seeing we do not, or will not see, Mat. 13. v. 13.
if hearing we do not or will not hear, neither understand; for in all such
unto the worlds end the prophecy of Isai 6. 9. ^
I saias must be fulfilled, By hearing ye shall hear and shall not
understand, and seeing ye shall see and shall not perceive. This blindness or
dullness in hearing, which God lays upon us as well as them, supposes a
winking or closing of eyes, a shutting of ears unto the word manifested or
revealed. For whosoever has (eyes or ears, though Mat. 13 v. 1^
but natural, open) to him shall be given, clearer sight, and quickenesse of
hearing more of every kind in abundance. But whosoever has not, from him
shall be taken away, even that which he has; What it is that is taken away
from him that has not.
Rather what he seemed to have, for how can ought be taken from him that has
not? yes, even he that understands not the word which he hears, has
somewhat, until it be taken from him. So our Savior instructs us, Mat. ^3. v.
19.
When one hears the word of the kingdom, and understand that not, then
comes the wicked one, and catches away that which was sown in his heart.
Because he had not the heart or courage to set his mind unto it, when
opportunity was offered; for this actual and wilful neglect of such a talent
as he had, he shall be deprived as well of internal abilities, as external
occasions serving to that passive capacity or qualification which we seek.
Wherefore let him that hears take heed how he hears; least by admission of
every vain and idle thought he bring such a brawne or callum upon his heart,
as shall make it like the high way side or a beaten path, into which the seed
sown finds no entrance, but lies exposed to those infernal Harpeyes; which
as the lamentable experience of our times has taught us, are still ready to
snateh it out of men's mouths as fast as it enters in at their ears, causing
them as it were to belch up the word received in unsavory talk, to vent it in
unseemly jests or secular meriments. This ill retention of what is heard
argues the heart was not well prepared to hear: for which malady the wise
Kings prescription is the best. s Take heed to thy foot, when thou go to the
house of God; and Ecclesiast. 4. v. 17^
be more ready to hear then to give the sacrifice of fools: for they consider
not that they do evil. Even the best wisdom of the world is foolishness
with God; unto whom he sacrifices folly, whosoever empties not his soul
thereof, when he comes to stand before the Lord, who accepts of no sacrifice to
the contrite and broken heart, full only o^ ^o^row for sins committed, or
thanksgiving for their remission. To bring earthly thoughts into his
sanctuary, is to tread on holy ground with unhallowed feet, which Moses the man
of God was forbidden to do, and we are commanded to have ours shod with the
preparation of the Gospel. How great soever our other cares or businesses be,
we should at our entrance into the Church wind up our thoughts as men do
their watches, that they beat not on any wordly matter, till the time allotted
for hearing and ruminating upon the word received be past. The bell which calls
us thither should warn all secular cogitations to absent themselves from our
hearts; otherwise by often hearing we do but increase our dullness in hearing,
for the confused sound of the letter, without distinct articulation or
impression made by the spirit, causes deafness in the sense of sacred
discipline.

2. But of ordinary hearers whom these admonitions most concern, a great part
do not mingle seeds but receive the pure word with gladness, minding no
earthly matters whiles it is in setting; who notwithstanding mightily ouersee
in prognosticating of a ioifull harvest, by this gladsome or forward spring.
Such hearts our Savior compares to stony ground, wherein seed cast shootes up
a pace, but withers as fast for want of root. Roots, though of trees, can go
no deeper then the rock or stone, nor can the word of life sink deeper into
the heart of man, then unto the roots of his natural desires or affections;
these vnrenounced either stifle it in the growth, or prohibit the spreading of
it any farther, then where it can be no annoyance unto their propagations. Such
as apprehend the tidings of peace with joy whilst they are uttered, but
forthwith relent when the profession of their truth, exposes them to bodily
grief or sorrow, are so affected to it, as rich men or good housekeepers to
pleasant companions, whom they lovingly entertain at their tables, not willing
to enter bonds for bettering their fortunes, or any way to endanger the
diminishing of their own estates, for releasing these men from hard durance.
And such wariness is a point of wisdom, whilst practiced toward such as we
are tied unto only in the common bond of ordinary courtesy, or humanity, or
of whom we expect no greater good then usual delight: but it should be odious
and detestable, if it were showed toward such as have engaged their lives,
lands or goods for us, or unto them in whose defense or maintenance our very
lives and substance are due; as to our Prince, our parents or country. But for
the everlasting kingdom what can be too dear? Not the whole world if we had
it, and all the holdfasts it can lay upon us. The passive incapacity or bad
quality of the unregenerate, which in proportion answers to stony ground, is
in general impatiency of adversity, and that but a vein or seame of man's hard
and stony heart, before it be rightly enstamped with that fundamental precept
of denying himself, and loosing life for CHRIST'S sake, which in effect
contains as much as Moses tables and the Prophets. The branches of this
general adversity, which, though in the purchase of so glorious a Kingdom,
does offend us, are of diverse kinds, not all alike apt to endanger every nature
or disposition. To be crossed in suites of honor or preferment, is unto some as
bitter as death: but many there be who have wained their thoughts from great
matters, and yet can hardly brook a broken estate or places far below their
education, or merits in men's esteem that be indifferent. Others not greedy of
glory, or far spreading fame, are jealous of their reputation within it
precincts, and very impatient of disgrace amongst their equals or acquaintance*
whereof notwithstanding we should be sorry only to give just occasion, but
glad to suffer it unjustly laid upon us for truths sake. All of us have some or
other tender parts of our souls, which we cannot endure should be ungently
touched: every man must be his own methodist to find them out, and to
accustom them by little and little to more familiarity with those grieuances
whose assaults if sudden, were like to daunt them, when they should fight the
good fight of faith. All of us have many secret concomitants of life from which
we cannot willingly part: our safest course would be gently to cut the strings,
or loose the ligaments one after another, which tie us unto this present world,
that we may be drawn out of it (as our teeth by this method are out of our
laws) with less dfficulty when God shall call us. Ecclesi. 41. 1.
O death how bitter is the remembrance of thee to a man that lives at rest in
his possessions, unto the man that has nothing to vex him, and that has
prosperity in all things: yea unto him that is yet able to receive meat? To
like purpose, if I mistake not the circumstances, was his meaning.

Illi mors grauis incubat,
Qui notus nimis omnibus,
Ignotus moritur sibi.
That knowledge only count thine own, ^one^^ in Thyest.

Which to thy self thy self makes known:
The life men live by fame is light:
Death always sad without foresight.
CHAP. VI. Of that temper of heart which in proportion answers to thornie
ground: of the deceitfullnesse of riches: how difficult a matter it is to have
them and not to trust in them. The reason why most rich men of our times never
mistrust themselves of putting this trust in Mammon.
_1. But many as was intimated in the former parable, that can hold the armor
of faith close about them in storms of adversity, are often enticed to put it
off by fair countenance of the world, or smiling graces of blind fortune,
wooing them to follow the unlawful fashions of her Court. Many Confessors in
time of persecutions, have proved apostataes and factious schismatickes after
long peace and prosperity. Now it would be, I think, less grievous for a
traveler to die in a far Country in his setting forth, then to be drowned
within ken of shore at his return; a misfortune more full of misery then can be
expressed, to have escaped Sylla and Charibdis rage, or safely to have passed
the streights of Magellan, and afterward through carelessness to cast away
both ship and passenger upon the golden sands of Tagus, Orinoque, or Riodel
plato. Much harder notwithstanding is their mishap which begin in the spirit
and end in the flesh, not that they were at any time actual participants of
the sanctifying spirit, but that they had a resolution in it kind truly
answerable to his prescriptions, until some aduentitious contagion of the
flesh did pollute and corrupt it. The imperfection of these men's constitution
our Savior exemplifies by ground in it self not bad, but wherein good seed
well sown comes to no proof, by reason of thorns, brakes or such other
weeds, or trash as usually grow up in the fields of sluggards, or men so
detained with other businesses that they cannot intend their husbandry. The
means whereby weeds hurt the corn, are especially two; either by stealing
away the strength and vigor of the soil, which should nourish it, (for which
reason trees too closely set cannot thrive,) or by a kind of antipathy, or
secret enmity, which may be either in the essential properties of the very
seeds or roots, or in the cumbersome vicinitie of the blades or stalks, each
according to their strength apt to stifle other. That which in respect of our
spiritual growth in faith answers in proportion to thorns or tares amongst
corn, is in general worldly care, or solicitude, especially the
deceiptfulnesse of riches, or voluptuous life. It is hard to handle pitch and
not to be defiled with it, it is harder for the soul of man to be much
conversant in any matter, and not take some touch or tincture from it; whence
all acquired inclinations, good or bad, usually spring according to the
different qualities of the objects whereto we are much accustomed. From this
aptitude of the soul to receive impression from externals, it falls out, that
as men set to woo or deal for others, take often opportunity to bespeed
themselves: so these things which are first sought for only as ordinary
means for attaining some good end, usually intercept the desire or love we
bear unto the goodness of it; which is successively infinite. For things in
themselves good, admit no stint of desire, but the more we possess of them the
more we seek, which desire or inclination, once alienated from the end unto
the means, makes us exorbitant in all ou^ courses. This miscarriage of our
intentions is the sourse of all idolatry, of superstition, of hypocrisy, of
all inordinatenesse in moralities: and is hardest to be prevented in the most
ordinary or necessary means of life, as in meats and drinks, in gathering
riches and worldly substance. The reason is obuious, in as much as our souls
are as apt to receive impression from these objects, as from others, and yet
must of necessity be most conversant in these.

2. Sport or bodily exercise is meat and drink to youth of better metal; of
which, who is careful for the belly, save only to satisfy present appetite,
or to enable their bodies to actiuitie? yet by eating well upon such occasions,
or prouocations, the stomach will come in time to prescribe, or plead a
custom; and plenty of food, though first sought for necessity or increasing
of ability, is afterward necessarily desired, though to the ouercharging or
disenabling of nature. To be enamoured with the sight of money is more natural
to young choughes then children; unto whom notwithstanding once comen to years
of discretion, and left to their own care or provision, the use of this
metal, as the world has now decreed, is very necessary for supplies of life
in every kind: and men's desires to have it for this end, often multiplied or
reiterated, ^et over the soul to love it self for it self; as too much
familiarity, or frequent conversation with creatures not so amiable, entice
men, otherwise fit watches for more comely personages, to folly and unlawful
lust. And this is the mischief of mischiefs that the fruition of money or
coin being permanent, the inordinate inclination to it still increases with
the acquisition of it, though lawful. This the Heathen had observed as an
axiom almost without exception amongst those that knew not God.

a Crescit amor nummi quantum ipsa pecunia crescit.

Our love to pelf does always grow, as fast as pelf it self does flow.

And from notice of the danger whereto increase of wealth expose men's souls,
the Psalmist thought that admonition necessary, Psalm. 61. 10.
If riches increase set not thy heart upon them. Every vice is a kind of
madness, in respect of that uniformity which accompanies faith and Christian
sobriety: yet many vices there be; very foul in the act, which leave a sting
behind them, and by scourging the mind procure dilucida interualla, wherein
the doctrine of life may be clearly represented, and make some impression upon
their soul. But such is not the nature of avarice or ambition: of men polluted
with which diseases what one in another case has said is most true, Qui
nunquam delirat semper erit fatuus: as they bewray no spice of frantickenesse
in the actual prosecution of what they entend, so they remain perpetual
idiotes in continuing their sinister choice.

3. It would be a matter very difficult to find a man in this age, in whom
the word of God, as far as the eye of man's observation can pierce, had taken
better root, or more uniformly branched it self into every commandment of
the Law, then in that rich man (or as Saint Luk^ 18. 18.
Luke entitles him that ruler) Mark 10. 17.
which came running, yet not forgetful of good respect, unto our Savior: for
kneeling he tenders this petition, Good Master what shall I do that I may
possess eternal life. That as well the appellation as his desire was sinccre,
and not pretended, is manifested by our Saviors love, which was never set on
outward feature or external complement, but on internal integrity and
ingenuitie. His profession of observing all the commandments from his youth,
had his own heart been a competent judge of his demeanor, was not
hypocritical but true; for such had his care and resolution been. But he that
was greater then his heart, perceived some thorns or weeds, already taken,
which would o^ertop the good seed sown in it, and keep down his thoughts from
growing up to heaven, whereunto our Savior would have exalted him, could ye
have suffered the extirpation of these weeds. Mark 10. v. 21.
One thing is yet lacking to thee, go and sell all that thou have, and give to
the poor, and thou shall have treasures in heaven, and come follow me, taking
up thy cross. But he was sad at this saying, and went away sorrowful. What
was the reason? his heart was with his treasure; and care of keeping it, or
secret delight in inioying it, being crept into the same room, did suck away
that virtue and influence, whereby the word sown should have received strength
and increase, alienating part of his soul from God, whom he was to love with
all his soul, with all his heart and all his strength. The reason of his heavy
and sorrowful departure, as it is expressed by Mark 10. v. 22. Luke 18. v. 23*
two Evangelists, was not any insatiable desire of riches, or unconscionable
means to get them: his chief fault was, that he was marvelous rich; or as S.
Mark says, that he had great possessions. For to have these but in competent
measure, and not to trust in them, is a more extraordinary blessing of God then
their greatest abundance, though gotten without extortion, fraud or coosenage.
Nor is it the deceitful and fraudulent means commonly used in gathering
wealth, but the deceitfulness of it howsoever gathered, which choakes the
word, and makes the heart wherein it is sown unfruitful. If we rightly
observe the bounds or limits whereby the several parts of this parable are
distinguished, and their peculiar disposition whom our Savior represents unto
us by thorny ground; his phrase does intimate that the very presence of riches
and large possessions, though never sought for, though scarce expected, will
inchant minds, otherwise free and liberal with a secret delight in their
fruition, and a desire to retain if not to increase them, and so by degrees
vnobseruable breed such distempers in the soul as will be ready to bring forth
death ere they can be discovered; as bad humors often times gather in strong
bodies, never descried but by some strain, causing them to settle or make head
against nature on a sudden, without due observance of our temperature,
whether natural, customarie or accidental, right choice of seasonable
exercise, and moderation of cares in our studies or businesses, such grievous
maladies as were now mentioned may grow ripe when we least think; albeit we
had Physicians more skillful then Hypocrates, Galen or Celsus, to appoint the
set times of all our r^p^sts* ^o approve as well the quality as quantity of
what we eat or drink, or to ouersee us sleeping or waking, perpetually
directing us from the right use of other means ordained for preservation of
life and health. More secret by much, and more insensible is the gathering of
this spiritual disease, for whose auoidance we now advise, even in men that
make great conscience by what means they increase their wealth, and will not
adventure on any bargain though never so good, without particular warrant from
the word of life, or some peculiar prescriptions from the learned Physicians of
their souls. Nor is there any means to prevent the danger save only by
continual exercise of good works, alms, and other deeds of charity, by
prudent carfulness to improoue their substance gotten as far as may be to
Gods glory; and often times by voluntary abstinence from lawful gain, which by
their forbearance might befall the poor brethren. For a rich man to know how
well he loves his riches, that is, to discover the instant danger of his
disease, is otherwise impossible, unless he were put to such a plunge as this
young man was, urged to forsake them utterly all at once: which he doubtless
that uses not such charitable exercises as are here mentioned, would not have
done, though our Savior in person should have charged him so to do: Easier it
is by this assiduous carfulness and religious practice to weed all roots of
love, or trust in riches by little and little out of the heart, then to be
plucked from them upon a sudden: albeit utterly to extirpate all trust in
them, where they abound, is only possible to the omnipotent power, and a rare
document of divine mercy as that dialogue betwixt our Savior and his
Disciples, begun upon the former young man's sorrowful departure at the
mention of such qualification as he exacted of his followers, does necessarily
implie. JESUS (says the Mark 10. v. ^3.
Evangelist) looked round about and said unto his Disciples, How hardly do
they that have riches enter into the Kingdom of God? His manner of vttring it,
or other circumstances not expressed, did intimate greater difficulty to his
Disciples at the first hearing, then this short speech does unto us. For V. 24.
they were asto^ied at his words. Did they then mistake him? or was he willing
to make the difficulty les^e then they conceived it? No, he answered again;
children how hard it is for them that trust in riches to enter into the
Kingdom of heaven? V. 25.
It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, then for, whom?
he that trusts in riches? No, for a rich man, to enter into the kingdom of
God. Well might this reassumption of the former difficulty increase their
astonishment, and extort that demand, who then (what rich man at least) can be
saved? with men it is impossible any should, but not with God. Howbeit to make
entrance into the kingdom of God for him that trusts in riches, while he
trusts in them, is no act of his omnipotent power; seeing no man can trust in
him and in riches too: for this were to serve him and Mammon: nor is it
possible by the divine decree, that any should enter into that kingdom,
without trust in God. The matter therefore which seemed altogether impossible
to the conceit of CHRIST'S disciples was for a rich man not to trust in riches,
as much as this young man did: this is an extraordinary gift of God to be
sought with greater care, with greater diligence and frequency of prayers, of
fastings and practices of charity, then either wealth, preferment, health, life
or whatsoever may befall it, ^ti^. 31. 8. etc.
Blessed is the rich which is found without blemish, and has not gone after
gold, nor hoped in money and treasure. Who is he, and we will commend him? for
wonderful things has he done among his people. Who has been tried thereby,
and found perfect? let him be an example of glory, who might offend, and has
not offended, or do evil, and has not done it. Therefore shall his goods be
established, and the congregation shall declare his alms.

4. But as in most other points, so in this, we usually fill up the measure of
our iniquity unto the brimme ere we think Gods judgments can approach us,
by a general oversight (elsewhere discovered) in using the seculiar phrase of
our corrupt times, rather then the gage of the sanctuary for notifying the
capacity of that body of sin, which we bear about us, or the greatness of
our actual transgressions. Who will not confess that it is very hard to have
riches and not to trust in them, and impossible for him that trusts in them to
enter into the kingdom of God: But who is he will thus assume, [It is very
likely that I trust in riches:] what is it blindes us but the gross language
whereto we are accustomed? as if to trust in them, were to say unto them, ye
shall deliver me, to pray or offer sacrifice unto them? yet so our hearts say
though we perceive it not, unless we be more careful and vigilant to make us
friends of the unrighteous Mammon, then either to get or keep treasures though
lawful, unless more delighted in employing them to charitable uses, then in
watching or entertaining oportunities for increasing them. In them we trust,
not in our God, unless the inclinations of our hearts to get, or forgo them,
be so justly poised that any occasion of doing good do cast our resolution as
readily one way as the other; that their loss, if by Gods appointment they
take wing, do not so depresse our souls, but that they may instantly return
as Jobs did unto their wonted station, Job 1.
The Lord has given and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the name of the
Lord. So prepared we should be that our joy should flow as well when our
earthly store does ebb, as when it swells, James 1. 9 and 10.
Let the brother of low degree (says Saint James) rejoice in that he is
exalted, but the rich in that he is made low, for as the flower of the grass
he passes away. Thus whiles wealth increases it should occasion us to trust in
God, because he gives it: but more whiles it fails, because it is then more
manifest there is no trust to be reposed in it.

CHAP. VII. Of the antipathy between true Faith and ambition or
selfe-exaltation: That the one resembles our Saviors, the other Satan's
disposition: Brief admonitions for avoiding such dangers as grow from other
branches of voluptuous life.
1. SEeing desire of riches draws us into so many snates, and intangles us
with so many noisome lusts: the reader happily will condemn the covetous as
the man whom God abhors most. Howbeit besides covetousness, or love of
riches, another root of evil there is, whose antipathy with the seed of life
is like the enmity betwixt the woman's and the serpents seed^. And no marvel
seeing true and lively faith is the express image of that humble, meek and
lowly mind which was in Christ, as this wild tare, whose extirpation we seek,
is but the offspring of the great serpents venomous pride. Riches choke or
sti^le the word of life in the growth, and make the passage into the kingdom
of God so hard and narrow for the rich man, as is declared: but aspiring
thoughts perish the very first seeds and roots of faith, and cast down the
ambitious man headlong from approaching ^ Luke 14. v 11.
the gate whereat the righteous enter; for a every one that exalts himself
shall be brought low. Could we rightly measure the nature of ambition, or
exaltation of man's self, by the true rule of the sanctuary, and not by the
popular notions or conceits that men this way very faulty have of this
infernal sin, we might find a more compendious ascent unto the holy mount,
then most do take or care to enquire after. The root whence this mischief
springs as all agree, is a desire of civil power or greatenes; which then
only (in vulgar esteem) brancheth it self into ambition, when this greatness
is sought for by unlawful means: but this is a mist of error or hypocrisy in
the mind, which rises from foggy desires of this gross humor in the heart.
For we may, as often we do, use lawful means for compassing most unlawful
ends; so may the end which we earnestly intend be exceeding good, and yet the
intention of it very naught. Though Atheism be the usual fruit of ambition
come to full growth, or thoroughly ripe, yet many in a lower degree ambitiously
minded often seek after good places in Churches or Commonweal, with earnest
desire to do more good in them then others would; howbeit the very
accomplishment of these seeming good desires, or intentions, makes them worse
men then they were before; and their Country can never gain much by such
exchanges; as that Emperor intimated to his soldiers, bonum militem
perdidistis, imperatorem pessimum creastis, by loosing a good pastor for a
corrupt prelate, or a tolerable private man for a naughty Magistrate. Admit the
party thus advanced might empty the Commonweal of many enormities wherewith
it had been, and without him might be continually p^stered: yet the usual
cousequences of high aduancements upon so bad foundations, which like eclipses
have not their far spreading effects till many years after, add much to the
fulfilling of their iniquity with whom they live, and cause Gods secret
judgments to hasten their pace. Did we not look more on the visible means
whereby good or evil seems to be wrought, then on his invisible power that
can contriue our final happiness by misfortunes, and dispose advantages to
our utter undoing: his will revealed against selfe-exaltation and ambition
would warrant the oxthodoxall truth of this paradox, that how sincere socuer
men's purposes may seem unto themselves, or how successful soever their
proiects may be held in politic guess, yet whosoever he be that shall affect
higher dignities in Churhc or common weal before he have fully conquered all
temptations whereto these lower mansions are exposed, does seek a certain
mischief to himself and others. But for a positive rule to secure our hears
from all contagion of this hellish weed, it suffices, not that our consciences
can give us full assurance we have been most vigilant, trusty and careful in
our former callings ere we look after greater matters: for though this rule
hold negatiuely true [none can be fashioned for greater honor, but by
faithful discharge of lesser offices,] many notwithstanding may be fitly
qualified for the one, and yet very unapt for the other; as diverse plants well
taken, and likely to thrive every day better then other in the soil wherein
they have been first set, would hardly prosper in another more commodious for
better purposes. Besides this perfection of sincerity, or hopes of it increase
in our accustomed calling: unto such a qualification for an higher as shall not
endanger the growth of faith, to compare as well the quality as the strength of
our present inclinations with the several impulsions or allurements of that
promotion we desire is very requisite. Even after we be secured, upon
calculation most exact, of our force and skill to resist or prevent these, the
very desire of rising higher, unless suggested by the concurrence of Gods
providence, or some peculiar instinct free from all suspicious attendants, or
rather accompanied with good thoughts or other pledges of internal comfort, is
very dangerous. To follow the natural or usual working of our will
forecasting means of our advancement, is to exalt our selves, and that in the
issue is to desire to be brought low. The Jews pressing for the highest places
at feasts was but a symptom or manifestation of this inward distemper of
heart, unto which our Savior applies this medicine, Luke 14. 8. 9 etc. vide
prob. 25 7.
When thou art bidden of any man to a wedding sit not down in the highest
room, lest a more honorable man then thou, be bidden of him. And he that bade
thee and him, come, and say unto thee, Give this man place, and thou begin
with shame to take the lowest room. But when thou art bidden go and sit down
in the lowest room, that when he that hade thee comes, he may say unto
thee, friend go up higher: then shall thou have worship in the presence of
them that sit at meat with thee. For whosoever exalts himself shall be
abased: and he that humbles himself, shall be exalted. It was not his purpose
at this or other time to give any rules for civil complement, or fashionable
behavior amongst strangers at the table, but such as were parabolicall, and
had especial reference to the internal frame or composall of men's
resolutiens. The true meaning of the former parable is this, that seeing here
we have no abiding City, but continues as Pilgrims, Gods Hospitals or
Almesmen; the meanest estate furnished with a tolerable supply of necessaries,
should best content our private choice; always referring our advancement to
the sweet disposition or imitation of the divine prouidene. Our Savior
himself, though exactly accomplished for the right governance of more worlds
then this world has provinces, did not take unto himself the honor to be made
high Priest, but he Heb. ^. 9.
that said unto him, this day have I begotten thee, did thereto call him. And
seeing to simbolize with the imitable perfections of his humane nature in the
days of his humiliation, is the most immediate and formail effect of faith; he
that desires to have it prosper in his heart should first seek to frame the
like mind in himself that was in CHRIST, even to euacuate his breast, though
not of all hopes, yet of all present desires or actual addressements to raise
his estate or fortunes, grounding his expectation of future glory in true
humility and content^dnesse with the lowest place amongst Gods people, not
taking honor to himself until he be called of God as was Aaron.

2. But to speak of an inward or particular calling to any course of life
seems but as a relation of some dream, or fancy in these wretched times,
wherein of such as would be thought religious, and bear the names of Divines,
the most are more ready to impeach their own loyalty toward CHRIST, and make
wilful forfeiture of faith and honesty by open profession of ambitious, and
unconscionable aspiring resolutions, then to disparage their wit or sufficiency
(as they conceit it) in the worlds judgment, by renouncing their slender
uncertain hopes, or remote interest in promotion, which cannot be sought for
without excessive pains and trouble, and these always great, with pining care
how to maintain or keep it gotten, before they can be sure to get it. John 8.
44.
Ye are of your Father the devil, says our Savior to the Jews, and his
works you fulfill, for he was a murderer from the beginning; yet was his
rebellious pride and ambition the Mother of his murtherous mind. The lowest
rank of his fellow Angles, never affecting to climb higher then the places
first appointed them, remain to this day loyal toward God, loving one
toward another, and kind to man their neighbor though inferior creature.
But for Lucifer to shine as the morning star amongst his brethren did not
suffice unless he far exceed the Moon, and become like the midday Sun in
glory. According to the exorbitancie of this desire, and height of his fall
thereby procured has the maliciousness of his dejected pride, and deep
dissimulation for bringing his murtherous plots about, continued since. Whose
sons then may we suppose they are who never contented with their natural
station, much bettered by many casual accessions, and daily additions of Gods
temporal blessings, searce give themselves respite to think how well God has
done by them already; so eagerly are they set to soar higher and higher
without fixing any period to their towering thoughts; as if they had said in
their hearts, Esaias 14.
We will ascend above the height of the clouds, and we will be like the most
high. Besides their participation of this hereditary quality, or first sin
of Satan, the preposterous devises of men ambitious to effect their wills,
rightly blazened proclaim their pedigree. For as Lucifer since ^^^ fall,
albeit still like himself, not the son but the father or Prince of
darkness, does outwardly transform himself into an Angel of light: So this
painted Helen, the mistress of modern thoughts, ambition, though always in
travel with raven, murder and cruelty, is notwithstanding for outward
resemblance (as one well observes) the most exquisite ape of that Angelical
virtue, Christian charity; 1. Cor. 13. 7.
It suffers all things, it endures all things, it belieueth all things, it
does not behave it self unseemly, it is kind, not with respect to Gods glory
or any spiritual end, but to the recompense of present reward, or in hope of
gaining their favor which may advantage it. Not late experience of our own
misery can make us poor men more compassionate to our miserable brethren, then
one ambitious man is courteous or kind unto another, or ready to further him
in causes that do not cross his own preferment. And happy were they in
their mutual kindnesses, were not these full of cruelty toward the poor, and
needy. From a general consideration how mightily that golden rule, Mat. 7. 12.
[ Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, even so do unto them,]
is violated by the mighty of our times, I was moved some years ago to utter
publicly, what no experiments which I could since observe, as yet occasion me
to recall; that if all the calamities either immediately laid upon men of
meaner rank by God, or procured by their own folly and oversight, were laid
together in one balance; all would not equalize the grieuances which befall
them by the mutual gratifications of great ones, who either spare not to
sacrifice the life and substance of the needy, (with whose miseries the huge
distance of their places will not suffer them to be affected,) unto others
luxury or superfluous pleasures, with whose unnecessary wants through the
vicinity of their estates, and like conditions they easily and exactly
sympathize; or else to ease themselves of some light care in preferring their
dependants, respect not what heavy burdens fall upon inferiors by these
unnecessary aduancements of their favorites. Again, unto what mean services,
and base emploiments for satisfying bodily lust, or desires of revenge will
these infernal sons of pride prostitute themselves, to gain some present
interest with hope of future sovereignty in seely impotent and discontented
souls? And did he not well characterize the ambitious man, that said, vt
dominetur aliis prius seruit: curuatur obsequie vt honor donetur? How many in
our times would be willing, so God would grant it, to take Chams curse upon
them for their present blessing, even to be serui seruorum, slaves to great
men's servants, so they might hope at length to dominere in the tents of Sem, or
bear rule over the tribe of Leui? Lastly there is a property wherein the
hellish fiend, the bewitched love and the ambitious mind are univocal
communicants. For though all of them daily complain of their vexations, as
being howerly tortured with those things which they most affect: yet can no
inducement draw them to desist, still as it were striving to entangle
themselves faster in the cords or bonds of their cruel rackes.

3. Or if the troubles of mind wherewith the ambitious man's suites are still
solicited, and their accomplishment perpetually attended, did want that sting
whereby even his sweetest delights become too dear: he were to be thought very
unwise, or wise in his generation only, that would forgo the pleasant
opportunities of a private life for the right setting of his faith, for the
increase of his devotion, or gaining greater frequencie of more familiar and
secret conference with the spirit of truth; albeit he were sure to gain a
kingdom by employing his wits another way. For Mark 8. 3. 6*
what does it advantage a man to gain the whole world with danger of loosing
his own soul: yet is he very likely to loose it that has but small time to
seek it; and as Seneca.
one says, nemo occupatus bonam mentem inuenit, he that is much busied in
other matters, whereunto God particularly has not called him, can hardly be at
leisure to search much less to find, in what terms his own soul stands
with her Creator, or faithfully to make up those accounts our Savior exacts at
our hands ere we can be worthy of his service. Yet of all businesses ambitious
emploiments most hinder the true knowledge of our selves, whose first elements
are, Dust thou art and unto dust shall thou return. Dust then being our native
foil, and last home, to which we must by a decree most certain one time or
other, but uncertain whether sooner or later, repair, by soa^ing aloft we do
but make our wearisome way the longer and crookedder, and our fall especially
if sudden more grievous. And seeing such aspiring thoughts as we harbor, did
ouerturne the great tempter himself; that which a religious father observed of
pride in general, is most proper to this branch at whose roots we strike,
untimely desire of promotion, such as are ouergrown herewith need not tempter:
the devil cannot wish them more harm then they are ready to do themselves by
zealous following that course, which brought him to his fall. Cease I shall to
wonder hereafter what spirit should move such young and tender olive plants, as
scarce thrive under the walls of Gods house, or such vines as hardly bear
fruit in the warm and welfenced vale, to affect remoouall to the cold and
open mountains, exposed to blasts of noisome winds. Is it their glory to be
above others of their own rank and education? This might be purchased with
less danger to themselves, and more good to Gods Church if they sought to
ouertop them more by their own proper height, or seasonable well furnished
growth then by mere advantage of ground. For Isai 40. 5.
when every valley shall be exalted and every hill and mountain made low,
until the crooked become straight and the uneven places plain: the fruit which
has grown in the vale will appear, both higher and better then the ordinary
offspring of the mountains. O that men were so wise as in heart to consider,
that the lower their place, so not exposed to floods of violence, the apter it
is to suck in the deaw of Gods blessing in greatest plenty.

4. The poor Galilean, or vulgar Jew, had liberty to follow CHRIST every
hour, not ashamed to be seen at midday in his company. But the conspicuous
eminency of John 3. 1. 2. etc.
Nicodemus place compels him to repair unto his Lord, like a thief by night,
an ill aboodance, that those heavenly mysteries wherewith he sought to
enlighten his mind should seem obscure. This man was grown so great in
Israel that he could hardly be taken down to the pitch of childhood, or
infancy, into which mould of necessity he must be cast, ere he can be borne
anew, or receive the kingdom of heaven aright. Men in our times of far
greater place then Nicodemus was, may safely profess themselves CHRIST'S
disciples; for not to be such in profession, or not to show themselves
sometimes openly in the assembly of his Saints is their greatest shame and
ignominy: but so to strippe themselves of the flesh of the world, of all
prerogatives of birth or secular emmency, as they must ere they can be
regenerated by the spirit, or become new men in CHRIST JESUS, would utterly
spoil their goodly fashion in the worlds eye; in which if we might examine
their hearts by their practice, or auowed resolutions, they only glory:
Confess CHRIST then in speech they may, but how is it possible they should
truly believe in him when they love the praise of men more then rebuke for his
sake, and receive honor one of another not seeking that honor which comes
of God alone. To believe CHRIST in ordinary phrase is less then to believe in
him; yet he that seeks, but in the lowest degree, to believe him must abandon
that humor, which he has discovered, as the principal root of Jewish
unbelief or denial of him. Was that then such gross ambition as our corrupt
language only takes notice of? was it immoderate desire of greater places then
they enioied? or rather only fear least they should no longer enjoy these?
The John 12. 42.
sight of his miracles, and evidence of his divine predictions had won the
assent of some, even amongst the Rulers, unto his doctrine as true, whilst
simply considered, or compared only with the speculatiue arguments brought
against it by his adversaries. But what they believed in part as true, they did
not assent unto as good, or not as better then the praise of men; For (says
the Evangelist) they loved the praise of men more then the praise of God. Did
they then expect to have their praises sounded out by some panegyricall
encomiast in solemn assemblies, or unworthily to gain an honorable report
amongst posterity? No, these are rewards of resolution in speech, and action,
not of silence. Just suspicion we can gather none of any such haughty
conceit, or desire so far exorbitant, seeing all they could expect for not
confessing CHRIST, was, not to have their good names or fame called in
question, or to speak as it is written, because of the Pharisees they did not
confess him, least they should be cast out of the sinagogue. Liable they were
unto the former verdict of loving the praise of men more then the praise of
God, in as much as they feared the loss of their places or reputation which
they enioied, more then CHRIST'S censure of such as are ashamed of him, or his
words before men. Ashamed of him most of us in our own judgment are not: for,
in that gross construction which hypocrisy suggests of this speech, in deed
we cannot, as being brought up in a state, which as it acknowledges him for
the Redeemer and Judge of the world, so is it able to disgrace us and our
acquaintance enduring life, and both our posterities after death, if we should
deny him openly before the Jew or Turk. But the John 12. 47. and 4^.
words which he spoke, and must judge the Jew for refusing him, will in that
last day condemn us also, if we receive not them. Such as receive not him
receive not God that sent him, and he that receives not his words receives
not him. He that is ashamed of the one is upon the same terms ashamed of the
other; and whilst we have his Gospel and other Apostolical writings, not
believing them better then these Jews late mentioned did him, it were
hypocritical, even Jewish credulity to think we should have believed him,
though we had been eyewitnesses of his miracles, or resurrection from the
dead. How many then, of higher fortunes especially, can we without breach of
charity toward our Savior, and the truth of his Gospel, suppose this day
living that can justly say their hearts are free from such roots, or seeds of
ambition, as have been discovered in these Jewish rulers, yet these such as
admit no compossibilitie with the seed of faith. What cause so good, what
truth so manifest, or so highly concerning the honor of God, what persons so
dear unto his son, in whose furtherance or just defense, either fear of
sharp censure in a civil, or of excommunication in an ecclesiastique court,
loss of their places, or deiection from such rule or dignity as in Church or
Commonweal they bear, will not make most men either afraid or ashamed to
speak, (at least) openly to oppose their superiors in honor only, not in
knowledge of CHRIST'S laws or precepts? Is not this to love the praise of men
more then the praise of God, to have the James 2. 2.
faith of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, the Lord of glory, with respect of persons? Or
if the objects of our usual fear be in themselves of less force to withdraw
us from confessing Christ before men, then the temptations which these Jews
had (for what to them more terrible then to be cast out of the synagogue?) our
faith musts needs be less then theirs was, though theirs no better then none,
because it vanishes as fast upon the first approach, or rather conceit of
persecution, as the morning deaw does at the suns appearance. But if the
Pharisees, whose censure they feared, would have countenanced our Saviors
doctrine, they had been as forward Confessors as the best of us, and
Christians altogether as good as any that love the applause, or fear the
check of men in authority, when truth disgraced or destitute of assistance
requires their testimony.

5. If the least spice of this disease be so dangerous, what mischief may the
heat of it procure unto the soul of man? It may as it often does inflame the
heart in which it kindles, with ardent desires of false martyrdom, but fears
the conscience that is can never become truly Christian until every sparkle
of this strange fire be extinguished, and the sore it bred moistened with
tears, or mollified with true humility. Minds tainted with other corruptions
seldom shrink in defense of the truth whereto they assent, until assaulted
by violence, or pinched with some real persecution. Ambition only though in
the lowest degree, or but kindling, in tickling love of applause, or iealousies
of ill report, is danted with shadows, and made to fly the field for fear of
being lashed with absent tongues. And no marvel, when as the reproachful
censure of the multitude, or of men on whose voice and sentence it mosts
depends (though bequeathed by our Savior as an especial blessing, descending
by inheritance to his chosen from their fathers the true Prophets,) is
apprehended by the ambitious, or popular minded, as the most grievous curse,
that can be fall them. Luke 6. 22. 23.
Blessed are ye (says our Savior) when men hate you, and when they separate
you, and revile you, and put out your name as evil, for the Son of man's
sake. Rejoice ye in that day and be glad, for behold, your reward is great in
heaven: for after this manner their fathers did to the Prophets. On the
contrary what he denounced as a woe is made chief matter of their joy, that
affect an universal esteem of honest discreet men. Ver. 26.
Woe be to you when all men speak well of you, for so did their Fathers to the
false Prophets. Thus much of this poisonous weed, whose fertile growth in the
Clergy seems to be provoked by covetousness in the Laity. For the more
conscionable Patrons be, and the more worldly or troublesome Parishioners be;
the more insatiable are many Ministers desires of dignities, or pluralities, as
if they sought to beat their adversaries at their own weapons, to outweary
the minor sort insuites of law, to outuie the greater in secular pomp or
bravery. Many other branches there be of voluptuous life, through whose
deceitfulness the word of life is secretly choakt, or stifled in minds
otherwise well affected, and by good husbandry apt to fructify: but their
particular discussion I must refer to the Readers private meditations;
contenting my self only to touch the generality.

6. The course of a Christians life may most fitly be compared to a navigations,
his body is as the bark, the humane soul the owner, and the spirit of God the
Pilot. As there is no seafaring man that can be secured of continual calm;
but must resolve, as to meet with storms and with rough or growneseas, so to
redeem himself, and his passengers from their rage sometimes with loss of
fraughtage, sometimes of tackling or (in desperate extremities) of the vessel
with her burden: so is there no Christian that can expect, or may desire a
general exemption from temptations; but must be contentto prevent the
shipwreck of faith and conscience, one while with loss of goods, or other
appertinences of mortal life, otherwhiles with loss of some bodily part, (for
if either hand or foot shall offend us, it must be cut off, rather then Christ
should be forsaken,) sometimes with loosing all feasts of friendship or
dependence, (for he that loves father or mother, brother or sister, kith or
l^in, superior or inferior more then Christ, is not worthy of him,) sometimes
with dissolution of body and soul; for, Math. 10. 39.
whosoever will save his life (when Christ's cause shall demand the adventure
of it) shall loose it, and he that will loose it shall save it. Now where the
fraughtage or furniture of life is precious, as if our fare be delicate, our
other pleasures or contentments in their kind, rare and delectable; our
alliance or acquaintance choice and amiable; our revenues ample, or authority
great; the flesh once tempted to forsake these for preserving conscience
upright, and confessing Christ, is ready to wrangle with the spirit; as a
greedy or jealous owner would do with a skillful Pilot, aduising in atempest
to lessen the danger by lightening the ship. If the commodities be gross or
base the owner perhaps can be well content to have some part cast ouerboord,
but it costly and dear, or such as his heart is much set upon, he had rather
adventure to perish with them under hatches, then to see them cast into the
sea: for to part from them is death. Some Christians, when blasts of temptation
arise, rather then they will break with their dear friends and acquaintance,
do finally sink with them, as ships are sometimes cast away, through the
owners unwillingness to cut the cables, or loose the anchors: some, when
storms of persecution begin to rage, rather then they will hazard loss of
body, lands, or goods in Truths defense, drown both body and soul in
perdition. Seeing the wisest of us as we are by nature, or left to our own
directions, are more cunning Merchants then Mariners, and for the most part as
ignorant of the voiages we undertake, as skillful in the commodities we
traffic for: the best resolution for our safety would be to load our selves
with no greater quantity of riches, honor, or other nutriment of voluptuous
life, then shall be appointed us by the peculiar instruction of Gods spirit,
which best knows the true burden of those brittle barks, how well or ill
they are able to abide rough seas, or such storms as he alone foresees are
likely to assault us. And seeing we are all, by profession, lastly bound for a
City which is above, whose commodities cannot be purchased with gold or silver
or precious stones; much less may we trucke for them, with our unclean
worldly pleasures or delights, which may not be so much as admitted within the
walls or gates: our wi^est resolution in the second place is, to account eue^
the choicest commodities that sea or land or this inferior world can See chap.
4. parag. 3.
afford, but as trash or luggage, serving only for balance in the passage:
so shall we be ready to part with it when any tempest shall arise, and if
extremity urge us, like Saint Ac^. 27. 38. etc.
Paul, and his company, to save our souls with loss of the bark that bears
us, and of all the whole burden besides.

7. But this advise may seem like their philosophical fancy, who would
persuade us that splendent metal, which is enstamped with Caesar's image and
superscription, and furnishes us with all things necessary, were but a piece
of purified clay, or earth and water close compacted. Shall we, whom none makes
reckoning of, bring down the price of these things, which men in authority,
and the common consent of nations, would have raised unto the skies? Shall we
believe our selves, before our betters, that bodily pleasures, great
preferment, or other contentments, which almost all account worthy of their
daily and best emploiment are nothing worth? Sure the Heathen thought this very
argument no better.

Persius Sa^. 2.
Nugae, non si quid turbida Roma.
Elcuet, accedas, examenveimprobum in illa
Castiges trutina: nec te quaesiuer is extra.
Deem not all naught vnsteedy Rome accompteth light;
Her seals are false and cannot way men's worth aright;
But naught without can him that is well within affright:
Let us ask counsel of our own hearts, and they will better inform us* then
ten thousand bystanders, that live but by hearesay and see only others
outsides, not what is within themselves. Though we have riches and all other
materials of worldly solace in greatest abundance; yet our lives consist not in
them, much less does our felicity. Now as in all men's judgments he lives
much better that is able to live of his own, then he which has the same
supplies of life in more competent measure from his friends benevolence: so
much happier is that soul, which has delight and contentment competent within
it self, then that which has them heaped upon it from without; seeing all the
delights or pleasures these can beget, suppose a precedent pain or sorrow,
bred from desires unnecessary in themselves, but such as lay a necessity upon
us to satisfy them whiles we have them. It is pleasant no doubt to a woman
with child, to have what she longs for, but much more pleasant to a manlike
mind never to be troubled with such longings. Not to need honor, wealth,
bodily pleasures, or other branches of voluptuous life is a better ground of
true peace and joy, then full satisfaction of our eager desires, whilst they
are fixed on these or other transitories. The strength of our spirits, (by
whose united force our union with the spirit of truth, must be ratified) is
much dissipated by the distractions which their very presence or entertainment
necessarily require: so does the life and relish of all true delight internal
(into which the true peace of conscience must be engrafted,) exhale, by
continual thinking on things without us. Finally whiles we trouble our selves
about many things, it is impossible we should ever entirely possess our own
souls with patience, or make the best of them for purchasing that vnum
necessarium, that one thing which is only necessary. But these are points
which require more full peculiar treatises, to which many Philosophers
especially, Plato, Aristotle, Seneca, Plutarch, and Epictetus have spoken much
very pertinent to true divinity; as shall (by Gods grace,) appear in the
Article of everlasting life; As in some other particular discourses framed some
years ago for mine own private resolution. The counsel I here commend unto
the reader is no way dissonant unto Saint Paul's advice unto his dearest son,
2. Tim. 6. 6. etc.
Godliness with contentment is great gain, for we brought nothing into this
world, and it is certain we can carry nothing out: and having food and raiment
let us therewith be content. But they that will be rich fall into temptation
and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in
destruction and perdition. For the love of money is the root of all evil,
which while some coueted after, they have erred from the faith, and pierced
themselves thorough with many sorrows. But thou O man of God, fly these
things; and follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience,
meekness. Fight the good fight of faith.

CHAP. VIII. Of the goodness or honesty of heart required by our Savior in
fruitful hearers: of the ordinary progress from faith natural to spiritual,
and the different esteem of divine truths or precepts in the regenerate man
and him that is not, but sincerely desires to be such: vacancie to attend all
intimations of the spirit to be sought after by all means possible. That
alienation of our chief desires from their corrupt objects is much available
for purchase of the inestimable pearl.
1. IF riches, love of honor, or voluptuous life, make the soul so
unfruitful: that temper which in proportion answeares to good soil well
husbanded, presupposes a vacuity of these desires. The positive qualification
whereto these negative properties are annexed, is more particularly described
by our Savior (as Saint Luke relates) in his exposition of this parable, Luk*
8. 15.
Eut that which fell in good ground are they, which with an honest and good
heart hear the Word, and keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience. Unto
such honesty or goodness of heart, apt thus to receive and retain the word of
faith heard, is required; first a sincerity of intention or choice, which
presupposes a distinct and vncorrupt notion of good and evil; secondly, a
constant resolution of prosecuting the right choice made* which presupposes a
greater freedom or liberty of practique faculties then can be found in the
covetous ambitious or voluptuous. For their desires, as all concupiscences of
the flesh, prejudice the sincerity of the intention or choice, by corrupting
the notions of good and evil, and maime our resolutions withal, to follow what
is evidently best, by counterswaying or resisting our inclinations unto
goodness. The point most likely to trouble a curious inquisitor in this
argument is, whether unto the bearing of fruit with patience there be required
a goodness or honesty of heart, precedent to the infusion of sanctifying
grace, or that faith by which the just does live; as unto a fair croppe there
is a goodness of soil requisite, besides the goodness of the seed sown in
it. To my capacity he should much wrest our Saviors words, and offer violence
to his spirit, that should deny the truth, or proportion of this similitude.
Nor can I perceive any inconvenience not easily auoidable by application of the
former distinction of a twofold goodness or honesty; one commendable only in
it kind, or by way of mere passive qualification in it self, of no more
worth then a field ploughed, but vn^own, another acceptable in the sight of
God, as the croppe or fruit is to the husbandman. The former is ordinarily
precedent, the later always subsequent to true and lively faith. All soiles
(at least in this our land) are, though ploughed and man^red alike, unapt to
bring forth good wheat, sweet grapes, or other precious fruit, without seeds
precedent, yet not all alike apt to bring forth fruit sown or planted in them,
supposing their ^illage or husbandry were equal. It is alike true of all the
sons of Adam, that all by nature are the sons of wrath, all destitute of
the grace of God, all alike unapt to do any thing truly good* yet the degrees
or measure of their a^ersion from God and goodness not perhaps alike in all,
albeit we consider them as they are by birth, without difference of education,
or as they are by mere civil education, without any natural knowledge of
Gods written Law. That such as hear the word, and are pertakers of outward
Christian discipline, though not inwardly sanctified, are not equally
indisposed to bring forth fruit, is necessarily included in the difference of
unfruitful hearers resembled by the high way side, and by stony and thorny
grounds. The framing notwithstanding of this dispotition supposed precedent to
the infusion of lively faith, may not be ascribed to our abilities, but to the
spirit of God, directing our thoughts, and enabling us for conceiving a kind
of preuiall faith more then natural, by some external or inferior grace, so
proportioned to these effects, as sanctifying grace is to the fruits of true
holiness. Probable it is might we speak out of experience, that as Bees first
make their Cells, then fill them with honey* or as the formatiue virtue first
like an artisicer frames the organs or instruments of life and sense, and makes
the body a sit shop or receptacle for the humane soul (which comes
afterward) to exercise all her functions and operations in: so does the spirit
usually preorganize the heart for lively and divine faith to work the works of
God in it aright. But as these works are wrought immediately by faith, though
principally by the spirit which infuseth it: so likewise is the heart organized
by such moral or imperfect faith as they sometimes that had afterward sin
against the holy Ghost, but by it as the spirits instrument, usually
preexistent to the faith which never fails, or unto the life of grace.
Whatsoever may be rightly ascribed unto the man already regenerate in
production of true fruits of the spirit, as much I think we may give without
offense to our endeauours in framing this passive capacity or disposition. In
the former (after our regeneration) we are by consent of most divines
coworkers with the spirit of God, albeit the works be of a supernatural
quaility; and so whatsoever we are, we may without inconvenience be thought in
the other, it being of a nature as far inferior to the former works, as the
grace whereby it is wrought is to the spirit of sanctification. But in what
sense we are said to cooperate with God, by Gods assistance in it proper
place; where, notwithstanding any captious or preiudicate surmise of this
assertion, it shall be made clear that I give as little to man's abilities in
either work, as he that in reformed Churches gives the least. But to our
present purpose.

2 The mere natural man, whether Infidel, or careless liver (the excess of
his indocility supposed) is so affected to the word of faith; as a Barbatian
that neither knows letter of book, nor other nurture, is to ingenuous arts or
liberal scienences. Such as submit themselves to sacred discipline, and hear
the Word preached with intention, though but morrally sincere, to profit by
it: are in this like little children, or nouices in good literature; that, as
these abstain from sport or play for fear of chiding or whipping, and follow
their books sometimes only for like motives, sometimes for shame least their
equals should outstrippe them, sometimes in hope of commendation or other
childish reward: so he that is not yet, but desires to be regenerated,
eschews what Gods Law forbids, but with difficulty and reluctance, often times
for fear of ecclesiastique or humane censure, sometimes upon suspicion, rather
then religious dread of plagues from Heaven: he addresseth himself likewise
to the practice of affirmative precepts, but vncheerefully and with
distraction, moved thereto, either because he would not be unlike those men
whose vprightnes his conscience cannot but commend, or from some surmise rather
then sure hope of divine reward for so doing; never from uniform and sincere
delight in the good it self enjoined, or in the fountain of goodness, whence
the iniunction was derived. Yet thus to be held in compass, and as it were
bound to good outward abearance, much auailes for bringing us to our right
minds, or for our recovery from hereditary madness; from which our souls in
some measure freed, still take some tincture from the goodness of the objects
whereunto they are applied: and this restraint of desires, or interposed
abstinence from lusts of the flesh, yield opportunities or fit seasons for
heavenly medicines to work upon us; which otherwise would prove but as good
physic to full stomachs, leaving no more impression of their sweetness in
our minds, then wholesome food does in distempered or infected pallates. The
temper of the heart once seasoned with habitual grace, is, in respect of the
word of faith, like to a mind come to maturity in choicer learning, and
reaping fruits more sweet then honey or the pleasantest grape, from seeds as
bitter as the birch or willow: so as now no bodily pain or grief, not gout,
or stone, or other disease can withdraw him from those studies, unto which
smart of the rod in his younger days could hardly drive him. To enforce or
allure him to them upon any other respects, then only for their native
sweetness, were as superfluous and impertinent, as to threaten an ambitious
man with honor, or hiring a miser to fill his bags with gold. The fruits
precedent and subsequent to true faith, are in shape or outward form (as often
heretofore has been employed) the same, but different in their taste or relish,
as also in their manner of production. To abstain from wrongs personal or
real, from all pollution of the flesh, to abjure ambitious proiects, to
mislike reuengefull, wanton, or covetous thoughts, are fruits that may
uniformly spring from that honesty and goodness of heart, usually precedent,
as we suppose, to the internal renouation of the mind, but must be enforced
as it were by art or external culture. The contrary positive practices which
^esemble the works of true sanctity, notwithstanding all outward helps or
enforcements of discipline, good example, or the like, are seldom brought
forth without such testiness or morosity, as we see in children breeding
teeth, whereas true faith always brings forth her fruit with joy. Abstinence
from evil, to the mind once purified by it, is as a perpetual pleasant
banquet; to mortify all bodily members more sweet then life, accompanied with
perfect health, or then the liuelihood of youth: the choicest pleasures the
world or flesh can proffer, though lawful or freed from the sting of
conscience, seem but as dregs, to be able to repress them, or intir^ly to
enjoy our souls without them, is the pure quintesence of that delight or joy
which others take in them. But this is a peace which is not usually gotten
without long war, and many combats* ^o* thus composed we are in actual
league with Go^, full conquerors over sin and Satan. In the conflicts that
procure it, or rather are precedent to the procurement of it the flesh I take
it has not always the sanctifying spirit for it antagonist: these are
sorrows which usually go before the conception of true faith; of which
likewise such as are actual participants do not always fight the good fight
of faith; but even these sometimes, whiles this general sleeepes, as they that
have not as yet taken any earnest or pressed money of him, always, before
regeneration, offer battle to the world, devil and flesh out of such
resolutions to renounce them as have been observed to be right in their kind,
and suggested by the spirit as only assistant, not as inhabitant in the heart.
But howsoever our final victory over the flesh cannot be gotten but by the
spirit dwelling in us; yet to entertain these skirmishes or conflicts, though
out of resolutions not inherently spiritual, is to very good purpose. For
seeeing we cannot assign the very mathematical point, how far reason directed
by scripture, or ecclesiastike discipline, or externally guided by the spirit,
but not yet quickened by sanctifying grace, or faith apt to justify, can reach;
nor know the very instant wherein such grace or faith is created in our souls;
we are therefore more strictly bound to perpetual vigilance, to stand
continually upon our guard, using such weapons as we have, always imploring
Gods favor to furnish us with better, and his assistance in the use of these,
still expecting his leisure for accomplishing his work in us, or for notifying
the accomplishment.

3. But before the light of the heavenly kingdom be incorporated in our souls
(though after the habituation of greater resolutions right and good in their
kind) we have usually many transient gleames, or illuminations, which inspire
our hearts with secret joy, and ravish our spirits, whose representations
notwithstanding as quickly vanish, as the sight of our own bodily shape in a
glass: Here then is a point of true wisdom, accurately to observe the
circumstances, or means used by the divine providence for their introduction,
and upon notice of them to estrange our selves from all other occasions, for
purchasing the like opportunities as were then affoorded us. Some man's heart
perhaps has been thus illuminated, in his retired thoughts or vacancy from
secular disturbances: vacancy then is to him the field wherein this treasure
lies hid, which he must compass though with loss of gainefull clients, or
multiplicity of businesses in humane esteem very honorable and commodious.
Others, it may be have felt like motions upon visitation of the sick, or some
kind office performed to the afflicted: such it behooves to consecrate their
time, before sacrificed to sport and merriment, to purchase the continuance of
this inward joy, by taking all occasions to visit the house of mourning. The
spirit sometimes instills some drops of this gladsome ointment into our solues
by soft insusurrations in silent night. It well befits such as have been
invited to these divine co^ferences to alienate some hours allotted for quiet
rest, to beg his return with sighs and groans, to entreat his presence with
fervent prayers, and entertain his aboade with hymns and spiritual songs.
Upon what occasions soever the least earnest of our enheritance is proffered,
it stands us upon out of hand to make use of that above all other, for better
entertaining the like, or speedier going through with offers made. Seeing by
grace we can do all things, and without it nothing, or to no purpose: our
hearts should be always ready, as to watch when the Lord does knock, or give
any sign of his presence; so to be doing what he commands upon the first
signification of his will, for then we may be sure the Lord, who is our
strength, is with us, how long to continue, we cannot tell, Et semper nocuit
differ paratis: especially, when as well the preparation or furniture, as the
oportunities are not ours, but wholly at an others disposal, who upon just
contempt or dislike may retract or withold them at his pleasure. Now to
foreslowe the purchase of a pearl so inestimable as this we seek, upon what
terms soever proffered, is not only niggardly or foolish, but so
demeritorious and merely swinish, as makes us incapable of like proffers,
which yet are always irreuocable pledges of more real perpetual favors,
(...)ey be respectfully accepted in due season. Wisd. 6. 12. 13. etc.
Wisdom (says the wise man) is glorious, and never fades away: yea she is
easily seen of them that love her, and found of such as seek her. She
preuenteth them that desire her, in making her self first known unto them*
Who so seeks her early shall have no great travel: for he shall find her
sitting at his doors. To think therefore upon her is perfection of wisdom:
and whos^ watches for her, shall quickly be without care. For she goes
about seeking such as are worthy of her, shows her self favorably unto them
in the ways, and meets them in every thought.

4. It may be doubted, but not fit in this place to be discussed nor is it
possible (perhaps) to be finally resolved, in respect of all or most men,
whether these precedent representations or excitements be of the same nature
with the never fading fruits of the spirit, differing only in degrees of
permanency, or consistence, or rather (to borrow a similitude from the
Mineralist) resemble some lighter metal lying nearer the day, serving to
encourage us to go on with the work begun, and withal directing us to the
place where the true treasure lies, until we have some sight or experience of
the one or other, our denial of our selves, and for saking all (though right
in it kind) is very imperfect, and as it were only by way of sequestration,
appointed by order of authority, which in secular matters such as have
possession are afraid to disobey though very willing it might not interpose.
Thus we before our regeneration, renounce the use or fruition of such
contentments, as nature, civil merit, or custom have entitled us unto,
because we fear their actual usurpation, at least in such measure as we are
capable of, might defeat us of greater hopes, or cause us incur dangerous
contempts: but we retain our right or interest in them still, often desirous
we might safely reap such fruits of them as others do, always prone either
to be tempted with oportunities of enjoying them, or secretly or warily to
encroach upon the bounds of prohibition, prefixed by the interpreters of Gods
Law, whom out of this longing humor we supect to be more scrupulous then they
needed. But after we come once to view the seame or vein, wherein this hidden
treasure lies, if we be marchantly minded, and not of pedling dispositions, we
account all we possess besides as dross* or (as the Apostle speaks)
Philipp. 3. 8.
dung, in respect of our proffered title to it; for whose further assurance we
alienate all our interest in the world, the flesh, with all their
appertinences, with as great willingness as good husbands do base tenements, or
hard rented leases to compass some goodly royalty, offered them more then
half for nothing. Of wisdom says the wise man in the person of Solomon,
Wisd. 7. 8. 9. 10.
I preferred her before Scepters, and thrones, and esteemed riches nothing in
comparison of her, neither compared I unto her any precious stone, because all
gold in respect of her is as a little sand, and silver shall be counted as clay
before her. I loved her above health and beauty, and chose to have her in stead
of light: for the light that comes from her never goes out.

5. Now as e wisdom, so much more grace (whereof wisdom Ver. 27
is but a branch) being but one, can do all things, or rather contains all
goodness in it, (and for this reason is set forth unto us in sundry names of
things most precious; sometimes of treasure, pearl, hidden manna, of the food
of life; most usually under the title of the kingdom of heaven:) so is there
scarce an inclination or affection to any transitory good or contentment, but
simbolizeth in some part with the right desire of this inestimable goodness,
and the industry used for procuring the one (the desire or affection it self
being sublimated or refined as the transmutation between simbolizing natures,
is easy,) may well be assumed into the search of the other. To instance first
in such as our Savior proposes to our imitation.

Impiger extremos currit mercator ad Indos,
Per mare pauperiem fugiens, per saxa, per ignes.
In hope of gain to utmost Indes the merchant hies,
And from hard need, through Seas, through fire and flint he flies.
Could he conceive of grace as of a jewel inualuable, converting his toilesome
cares for transitory wealth into industrious desires of everlasting treasure:
none more fitly qualified for the purchase of it then he. If thou criest after
knowledge, and liftest up thy f Pro. 2. 3 4. 5. 6.
voice for understanding: if thou seek her as silver, and searchest for her
as for hid treasures: then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and
find the knowledge of God. For the Lord gives wisdom: out of his mouth
comes knowledge, and understanding. But he shall show himself as unfit to
traffic for this or other spiritua^ gifts, as Aesops cock to be a Ieweller,
that will wrangle for them as for ordinary ware, indenting before hand what he
shall pay, seeking to beat down their price; or so houer, when God shall call
him, as Pharaoh did with Moses, Go and serve the Lord Exodus 10. 8.
your God; but who are they that shall go? will ye go with your young and
old, with your sons and your daughters, with your sheep, and your cattle?
Nay, let the Lord be so with you, as I will let you go and your children yet
this is too much, it shall not be so; go now ye that are men and serve the
Lord, for that was your desire; yet after two more plagues sent, his mind was
a little altered. Go Verse 24.
ye serve the Lord, only let your flocks and your herds be staid: but let
your little ones also go with you. But Moses his resolute answer shows what
God requires of us; Verse 25.
Thou must give us also sacrifices, and burnt offerings that we may do
sacrifice unto the Lord our God. Therefore our cattle also shall go with us,
there shall not an hoof be left, for thereof must we take to serve the Lord
our God: neither do we know how we shall serve the Lord until we come
thither. Nor do we know when God calls us first out of this world, what
peculiar services may afterward be enjoined us; as whether to sacrifice our
lands, our goods, our bodies, our honor or reputation in testimony of CHRIST
and his Gospel. For this reason once called we must resolve to forsake Egypt,
wherein we have been brought up, and seek after the promised land with all our
heart, with all our soul, as well the brutish part, as the reasonable, with
all our faculties and affections, intellectual as well as sensual; otherwise
by secret reservation of special desires for other purposes we make our selus
liable to Pharaohs plagues, or to the judgments wherewith Ananias and Saphira
were overtaken. Now although to abjure our accustomed delights, or waine our
desires from choicest matter of wonted contentments, may see me very
distastefull to flesh and blood before trial made: yet did we consider that
the desires or affections themselves were not to be utterly extirpated, but
only transplanted, and that such as yielded greatest store of choicest secular
were by this transmutation apt to bring forth most pleasant spiritual fruit in
gretest plenty; it would much animate us to take the same pains in a better
soil. The ambitious man will patiently watch his opportunities to bow and
crouch and give all significations possible of good respect, toward such as
may further his suits which he graceth with seemly complement and decent
behavior for the present, with deep protestation of future endeauours to
deserve any favor that shall be showed him. Could he but inwardly fit his
soul to these outward characters of humility, and bow his spirit unto the
almighty, pouring forth prayers and supplications with vows of fidelity in his
service, no man more fit then he to sue for grace, the least drop whereof,
suffered to sink into his heart, to make representation of these joys,
whereof it is the earnest, in that form, in which the scripture sets them
forth, as under the title of a most glorious Kingdom; would sublimate his
aspiring thoughts (once alienated from their wonted object) into undefatigable
devotion: whose gracious respect with God would much better content his soul,
then any reflexed splendour from the favorable aspect of earthly Majesty. Our
first inclinations unto love (which is but a distillation or liquefaction of
the soul) before they become polluted with the dregs of unclean lusts, or
other Sacraments of unhallowed combinations, or extracted from these with
penitent tears and true contrition, are very transmutable into Christian
charity, by the infusion of Christ's blood, once shed in love to us, but
continualle able to season the bitter fountain of this and other corrupt
affections; so entrance were made for it thereinto, by assiduous and sober
meditation of the sorrows that pierced his heart for our redemption, and no man
Vide Luc. 7. 4^
more apt to delight more in his love, then he to whom much mispence of love
has been forgiven. If that inbred delight, or mirth, whose abundance impels
all sociable and good natures especially, to hunt after objects or occasions
that may stir up exhilerant motions, if this deligh, or mirth were but drawn
from those corrupt issues, which excess of wine or strong drink usually
provoke; (as profane or wanton ditties, exchange of unseemly and offensive
jests) it might yield matter for more sacred melody, and vent it self with
greater joy in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual songs. Thus much in my
understanding our Ephe. 5. 18, 19
Apostle supposes in that exhortation, Be not drunk with wine, wherein is
excess: but fulfilled with the spirit; speaking unto your selves in psalms,
and hymns, and spiritual songs, singing and making melody unto the Lord in
your hearts. And none in my conceit more likely to bear his part better in
the quire of Saints, whether in hearty reioicing with such as have just cause
to joy, or unfeigned sorrowing with such as mourn, then a sweet nature, prone
to company, but prevented by grace, before he fall into the sink of good
fellowship, or else thoroughly cleanled from the filth he has caught by
wallowing therein, before the stain incorporate in his soul. Of this
alteration of inclinations natural into spiritual, hereafter or else where
more particularly, by the assistance of that grace whose infusion alone must
work the sublimation. Here I thought good to signify to the penitent sinner
by the way, that there is no plant which has given good proof or sign of
fertility in Egypt, but removed in time, is apt to fructify accordingly in
Canaan. Now seeing in this first resurrection to newness of life, our
corruptible affections do not die but only put on incorruption: why should it
seem grievous unto our Souls to for sake the world and flesh, with all their
pleasures or preferrements, our friends, our kindred or acquaintance, when as
the realitie of the contentment we took in these, or whatsoever is naturally
most dear unto us, is even in this life more then fully recompensed, yea many
times doubled in the sublimation of the desires or inclinations, which for
substance remain numerically the same, but with gain of reference to more
excellent objects, besides the increase of their native strength and vigor thus
inwardly purified and adorned with inherent beautifications? That in renouncing
all wherewith nature custom or our own industry had invested us, there can be
no loss, but happy change (seeing our internal faculties still remain
entire, much bettered for the present in themselves, as also in their
dependence for future hopes,) our Savior most divinely * Mar. 10. 29. 30.
implies in that promise of comfort, Verily I say unto you, there is no man
that has left house, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife,
or children, or lands, for my sake and the Gospels, but be shall receive an
hundred fold now in this time, houses, and brethren, and sisters, and mothers,
and children, and lands, with persecutions, and in the world to come eternal
life. To speak philosophically, as health or right habit of body, so much more
the welfare of soul and mind, even all the delight or joy we can truly say
is our own, must be from within us; externals may only help to raise or
ripen it. Now as there can be no want of fire unless to creeples or
chimney-corner sluggards, whilst the same heat or warmth which it yields, may
be as good cheap borrowed from the Sun, or better procured from proper
motion or agitation of our blood and spirits: so can it be no loss to be
deprived of friends, wealth, or honor, solong as the flower and quintessence
of all the contentments which these could occasion, may be more plentifully
reaped from the peaceable fruition add free exercises of our own souls, or
right emploiments of their best faculties, especially from the excitation of
Gods gifts in us, whereby we are united to CHRIST, who is more to every
faithful soul then was Elkanah unto Hannah not only much better then many
sons, but one in whom, though we had nothing besides, we may by just title
of dominion possess all things.

6. But if we must affect the former change with all our hearts, with all our
souls, with our whole intention and resolution, no man, it seems, may intend
any other matters, secular especially. Yes, even such secular businesses as we
are said wholly or solely to intend or mind, absolutely exclude not all, but
only incompatible cogitations of others matters, though of like kind. The
mutual compossibilitie of actual particular cogitations with vertuall
continuance of some maine purpose or intention, was Sect. 2. chip. 7. parag. 3.
before exemplified in a man holding on a journey upon some weighty business,
yet not always thinking whither or about what he was going, but often
occasioning or entertaining ordinary way faring confabulations. Our whole
delight then, not every particular delectation; our habitual final or
principal intention or resolution, not every particular purpose, must be set
upon the former purchase. Our desires of it should be as the maine bulcke or
truncke, out of which first well grown, and thoroughly set, other intentions or
resolutions may spring as twigges or branches, or be engrafted in it without
annoyance. Such a principality or integrity of intention our Savior enioines
in that precept; Math. 6. 32.
First seek the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all these things
(which the world principally cares for) shall accrue unto you. An experiment of
this gracious promise we have in Solomon, into whose sincere and hearty
prayers for true wisdom no intensions or desires of wealth or honor did
insinuate or intrude themselves: howbeit both wealth and honor, though vnaskt
did in great abundance attend wisdom once obtained. All good things (says the
wise man, Wisd. 7 11. 12.
paraphrasing upon this grant, p else where specified in Canonical Scripture)
together came to me with her, and innumerable ^ 1. Kings 3. 13.
riches in her hands. And I reioiced in them all, because wisdom goes before
them: and I knew not that she was the mother of them. Her growth in him,
though sudden, was very great, and able to bear extraordinary fortunes:
notwithstanding when grievous blasts of temptations arose, the exceeding height
of these accessory branches had almost overthrown the stock wherein they were
engrafted. This should teach us always to increase our desires of grace, and
moderate our delight in transitories: howsoever, continuing so affected as
Solomon in his first choice was, we may possess all things in the Lord, and
the abundance of riches, honor or other worldly blessings shall be truly
sanctified unto us. For not the possession of them, or delight in them, but
their possession or delight with prejudice or interruption of our maine
intention or resolution, is unlawful. Ordinary vinteners have more wine then
most noble men in their cellars; so have apothecaries greater choice of
delicates in their shops, then can be found in Princes palaces: yet are neither
usually more pestered then other men of their rank or means, with such
diseases, as excess of wine or sweet meats engender, because to fare
deliciously every day was no part of their intention at their assignement to
these trades, but rather to increase their stock, and gain some perpetuity of
Lands or lease for themselves and their posterity, by abstinence and wary
dealing with these commodities, whereof others either surfeit or are too
licorish. Were the kingdom of grace thus primarily and wholly intended, and
the practice of means ordained for our salvation constantly and fully resolved
upon, the increase of Riches, honor, or other materials of voluptuous life
would breed small prejudice to our faith or calling; rather their abundance
caused more by Gods mere blessing, or disposition of his providence then by
our sollicitous care or affectation, would bring forth a more heroical
contempt of them then their want can nourish, and, as it usually comes to pass
in like cases, quite take away all delight or pleasure in them: Use them with
their excrescence men thus affected might, yet not as usurers do their money
for their own increase, but rathor as a stock to traffic with, for the
final purchase of an enheritance not subject to such change or chance as the
greatest and surest worldly possessions are. So our Savior advises; Luke 12.
33. 34.
Sell that ye have, and give alms, provide your selves bags which wax not old,
a treasure in the heavens that fails not, where no thief approaches,
neither moth corrupts. For where your treasure is there will your heart be
also. This last caveat may inform us that God requires not always an actual
alienation of our right or interest in his temporal blessings, but rather an
appropriation of our hearts, (alienated from them) unto hm, who ^. Cor. 8. 1^.
9.
is able to make all grace to abound toward us, that we always having all
sufficiency in all things may abound in every good work. For seeing the
ministration of this service not only supplieth the necessities of the Saints,
but also is abundant by the thanksgiving of many unto God; he that finds
seed unto the sower, will multiply the seed which we thus sow, and increase
the fruits of our benevolence, that it may redound more and more unto his
glory. As it is extreme vanity without special occasions or pecular necessity
of extraordinary times, to give or make away the root whence such fruit does
grow: so is it a point of spiritual folly or infidelity, to imagine the stock
should perish or not prosper by often lopping; or that we should forset our
hold of what we enjoy, by due payment of rent or tribute unto the Lord and
owner.

CHAP. IX. That faith cannot exercise it soueraignety ever our affections or
desires until it be seated in the heart, with brief admonitions for bringing
it into this throne.
1. FRom the former and like parables put forth by the Author and finisher of
our faith, we are taught that faith, if perfect, must be seated in the heart
or fountain of man's vain imaginations, whence evil thoughts still issue in
great abundance, until it be cleansed by infusion of this purifying grace.
Most fitly does that parable of the leaven exemplify as well the use of faith,
as the truth of this observation. Thus much at least it directly and
necessarily implies, That our assent unto the Gospel of the kingdom must be
in such a part as the virtue of it may be diffused thence unto the whole mass
which it is ordained to sanctify: For it must season our inbred affections,
alter the taste of every appetite, qualify and strengthen our natural
inclinations unto good. Now if we consult true Philosophy, no other member in
the body besides the heart, can be a fit seat for such absolute command. But
whether it be possible for Assent, every way the same with that which thus
renewes the mind, and has such sovereignty over all our faculties, to lodge
else where then in this palace or chief mansion of the soul, were curiosity to
dispute. Yet admit the same faith should else where reside, it could not
exercise the like souerainty as there it does: for every desire or
concupiscence deeply rooted would in temptations ouerbeare it. Nor is it the
greatness of the good proposed, if our conceit of it be but superficial, or
our desires of it admitted only into the confines of our souls, that can
ouersway such natural propensions to a far less, as spring from the heart
or center. The reason whereof as of many other assertions in this short
treatise, shall (God willing) at large appear in the article of everlasting
life, where just occasion likewise will be offered to rescue the heartlesse
imaginations of some late divines more then half yielded to the authority of
Galen (though forsaken in that point by the most exquisite modern professors
of the noble science he taught) that the head is the principal member; as if
Solomon or our Savior had spoken more vulgarly then accurately or
philosophically, when they ascribe this principallity to the heart: How be it
the very ground of their arguments suppose this vulgar opinion (if so men will
have it) to be an undoubted truth in nature. But referring philosophical or
scholastique disputes of this point or the like, to their proper place, the
Gymnosophists device to represent the peace and quiet state of a temporal
monarchy by the Monarchs presence in the Metropolis, and the disturbance
likely to ensue his absence may serve as a vulgar or popular illustration of
that soueraignety, which faith once seated as has been said, may exercise
over every, affection at it pleasure, but not so seated shall ever want;
whilst he trod the corners or utmost parts of his bulls hide, the depression
of one did raise an other, but, standing once still in the middle, all lay
quiet. Thus while our assent unto precepts divine floats only in the brain,
or keeps residence in the borders or suburbs of the soul, it may perhaps
suppress some one or few exorbitant passions, but the expulsive or
expugnatiue force which in this case it uses, being unwieldy, neither uniform,
nor well planted, will occasion others as bad to stir or mutinee. Usually
whiles men strive to beat folly or vanity of youth by the strength of Gods
Word (not well rooted) out of the fancy, they let in covetousness into the
heart; often times seeking to keep out couetrousnesse, popularity, ambition, or
other affection, whose help faith w^^^^e and unsettled commonly uses in such
expugnations, will find occasion to insinuate themselves, or though ^^i^i^ not
yet well s^^ed, were able it self alone to root out covetousness, restrain
l^uishnesse or prodigallity, or loppe off l^^^riant branches of ambition: yet
there is a seceet pride which usually springs out of these stocks* for many
grow inwardly ambitious of their conquest over ambition, or rather of
restraining the out-breakings of this or other unfruitful plant. Now these
inward swellings though in themselves less, are yet commonly most dangerous,
because they come near the heart, and will never be assuaged until true
faith be enthronized there, as in the Fort or Castle of the soul, where it
has every affection or desire as it were vndershot, or at such command as
they dare not stir to it prejudice, but by stealth, or some secret advantage,
eipyed by the flesh unable to stand out against it. For as motion beginning at
the Center, diffuseth it self equally throughout the whole sphere, shaking every
part unto the circumference, and from this advantage of it original deades the
force of contrary impressions whose impulsive causes are but equally strong: so
faith possessed once of the heart, having it force united by close reposall
therein, commands every affection, delight or pleasure of our souls, and
breaks the impetuousnes of every inclination or propension contrary to such
motion as it suggests; seeing no hopes can be equal to the reward which it
proposes to the constant and resolute; no fears comparable to the terrors
which it represents to the negligent or ^loathfull followers of such courses as
it prescribes. And the equality of hopes and fears even of the same rank
(though set upon like objects) equally interrested in the principal ^^an^ion
of the soul, do equally sway or move us either to undertake any good, or
eschew any of more evils, in themselves equivalent, being proposed to our
choice. Now though God alone give the victory, only able to make entrance for
his graces into the heart, we may not in this respect fore^low the siege
until he set the gates open. He, and none but He did place David in the Hill
Sion, and gave Gedeon victory over the Midia^ites, as they hoth well knew and
firmly believed* (but their belief h^^reof did not (as Machiauell
cal^^^^^tes Christian Religion) emasculate their minds, or the their hands
from using such natural strength and valor as they had; their personal
endeauours in fight, were answearable to their devotion in prayer for divine
assistance. Others after God had given them full assurance of most
extraordinary victories, did use the ordinary stratagems of war. In
imitation of them we should remember that albeit our affections will never be
loyal until faith and sanctifying grace by the sole operation of his Spirit
be seated amongst them: yet even such of these as most resist their admission
may be much enfeebled or pined, and so made more willing to yield when God
shall call the soul to parley, if we use such means as have been See cahp.
3. pa r^g. 3.
prescribed for cutting off that relief or provision they have from without.
Nor can the veriest freshwater Soldier in Christ's Camp, be altogether
ignorant how the external object nourishes inbred desires or affections,
which, by sufferance to range abroad, increase their strength and confederacy.
But in all these endeavors we must include prayer as a chief associate, for
God ordinaryly lets in sanctifying grace at the same gate, at which honest
hearty prayers go out.

2. More particulars concerning subordinate means to be used for bringing
faith into it throne, must be referred to the place often mentioned: only one
admonition remains for such as would be fit Auditors of these divine oracles,
often intimated by our Savior, but too seldom urged by his messengers in
these days especially, To hide or lay up Gods word in our hearts, which to my
capacity implies our secret meditation should farte exceed our table talk
discourses of these great mysteries, at least while we are but scholars no
professors of divinity. And if I err, it is rather charitable fear least
others wrong their own souls, then any jealousy least they should disparage
our profession by proouing Prophets, that makes me think one principal
reason why the word of faith does not fructify or take better root in the
hearts of many indefatigable hearers, is because it shootes out too fast in
their mouths: they are commonly as swift to speak as to hear: which kind of
humor James 1. 19.
Saint James in his time much disliked, as knowing perhaps this luxuriant
flourish of words did partly hinder the fructification of his hearers faith in
deeds and works. But to conclude, seeing faith comes by hearing and must be
hidden in the heart, the surest and most compendious method for settling it
therein, would be (besides due preparation for ordinary bearing the general
form of Christian doctrine publicly and solemnly delivered) to watch all
opportunities when our hearts are thoroughly affected with unexpected matter of
sorrow, joy, grief, Vide Luk 1. 65, 66 Luke 2. 51.
fear, admiration, or the like, and forthwith to apply such passages of
Scriptures, as suit best to the present affection. The words, though of God,
whilst uttered by man, usually want weight to make entrance for themselves
into hearts not well wrought in tender years by good discipline: but yet might
easily sink even into such, being first thus pierced and as it were ploughed
up by real accidents, especially by strange and sad occasions, as sickness of
body, or other grievous cross or calamity, without which neither the threats
of the Law, nor sweet promises of the Gospel, make any great impression upon
many in our days. A faithful pastor should have his wits vacant to attend
these or such like extraordinary occurrences, that happen to his flock, always
ready in matter of sorrow to pour in salve whiles the wound is open, or in
occasion of godly mirth or moderate joy to clap on the seal while the wax is
warm and well wrought. One short lesson well applied in such season will work
more upon the conscience and practique faculties of the soul, then a solemn
discourse of some hours length, though containing much sound doctrine and many
very profitable uses, without the concurrence of some such internal
disposition to receive them. And as the very naming of London, Paris, or some
other great City, does stir up a more lively representation of them in his
fantasy that has been in them, then a geographicall lecture could do in his
that never looked upon them but in a Map: so the least after touch or
remembrance of the same or like points as have been thus seasonably instilled,
will imprint a more live working sense of Gods word in the experienced heart,
then a long elaborate, and well pressed exhortation will do in others.

Thus much at this time of that faith whereby the just does live, and of the
qualification required in all fit auditors of the mysteries contained in the
Apostles Creed, for whose right explication the Lord of his mercy so qualify
my heart and soul that I may be able as to discern so to deliver the truth
without all respect to mine own or other persons, and so guide every Christian
Readers affections that he neither be unwilling to embrace any truth, nor
willing to entertain any error for my sake.

FINIS.

